Naked Tropics
New World in the Atlantic World
Jack P. Greene and Amy Turner Bushnell, Series Editors

Tropical Versailles: Empire, Monarchy, and the Portuguese Royal Court
In Rio de Janeiro, 1808-1821
By Kirsten Schultz

Creole Gentlemen: The Maryland Elite, 1691-1776
By Trevor Burnard

Within Her Power: Propertied Women in Colonial Virginia
By Linda L. Sturtz

Naked Tropics: Essays on Empire and Other Rogues
By Kenneth Maxwell
              Naked Tropics
Essays on Empire and Other Rogues


                   Kenneth Maxwell




                   ~l Routledge
                   ~ ~ Taylor & Francis Group
                         New York London
First published in 2003 by
Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017

Published in Great Britain by
Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN

Routledge is an imprint ofthe Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business


Copyright © 2003 by Taylor & Francis Books, Inc.


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publishers.


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Maxwell, Kenneth, 1941-
 Naked tropics: essays on empire and other rogues / by Kenneth Maxwell.
    p. em. - (New World in the Atlantic world)
 Includes index.
 ISBN 0-415-94576-3 (hb) - ISBN 0-415-94577-1 (pbk.)
   1. Brazil-History. 2. Portuguese-Foreign countries. 3. Portugal-Relations-
 Foreign countries. I. Title. II. Series.

  F2521.M495 2003
  981-dc21
                                                                                2003043129
For Stanley J. Stein and Barbara Hadley Stein
      The empires ofour time were short lived, but they have altered
the world forever; their passing away is their least significant feature.
                                       V. S. Naipaul, The Mimic Men
                                                               Contents



Map                                                                   IX

Foreword by Fouad Ajami-Blame It on Rio                               Xl
                The Historical Vocation ofKenneth Maxwell
Acknowledgments                                                      XIX

Illustrations                                                        XXI

Chapter 1       First Encounters                                       1

Chapter 2       iAdi6s Columbus!                                     13

Chapter 3       Chocolate                                            37

Chapter 4       Pirate Democracy                                     47

Chapter 5       Hegemonies Old and New                               61

Chapter 6   The Spark                                                91
                The Amazon and the Suppression ofthe Jesuits
Chapter 7   The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire                   109

Chapter 8   Why Was Brazil Different?                               145
                The Contexts ofIndependence
Chapter 9   The Odd Couple                                          171
            Jefferson and the Abbe


                                      vii
viii • Contents

Chapter lOA Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon   187

Chapter 11 The Tragedy of the Amazon            199
Chapter 12 Chico Mendes                         219
Chapter 13 The Two Brazils                      243
Chapter 14 Macao                                257
           Shadow Land
Chapter 15 Heroes and Traitors                  291
Chapter 16 Orfeu                                305

Sources of Publications                         311
Abbreviations                                   313
Index                                           315
                                                                                                                                        A       SS       1I      A
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                              fi Antwerp
         NORTH        ^                                                                           EUROPE
                                                                                   »«V

                                                                           Lisbon#;
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CSafan
          AMERICA                                                        ro C T M i1^
                                                               Madeira ■>                                                                                CHI NA
                                                           Canan listed 5                                                                                 jl / >     Sfcmehai*          hiaeacufci
                     Havana)       A ( t a n t i                                                                                  Horeiui
                                                                                                                       l Red                   IN D IA   j   c R r t— i*pS'*J6
                                  m m ismw Dan f irt                                                                   ,7 -Sro
       ME XI C O                                       Oc e an )                         *A Fr Rf I C A                                                                          f ) n i 1i j r n v B
                                                            c" ' v - , V a i« u
                                                                        \       BFINIS                           mitort*                                                                                 . :.
                                                             wxm iJDoraV _
                                                                                         El Mina 'j                              I n d i a n
                                                                                        c PruKripe    \
                                            AZIL                                                                                     O c e a n
                           r u i ■L^ \ _B R(«r detail)                                       LuMdajp                                                             Dttiaii btfo*
;c.      P a c i j i c                      \ Brasilia /
                                                                                                                                   J <        C H I N A                  ~7~
                                                                 J r\l              M                     trf'G«ld %                                          Canion y    nTAVmMtifrnmmu*
                                                                    if      j-s-J                           Hk>pC/
                   Juan Fernandez j1 ,?*£. .ir                                                                                     %                             HJong Kong
                         Islands / b Plata *
                                                                                                                                   v * I,            \ \y        t u z oi^M
                                                                                                                                                                         n ani la
                                                                                    ? ( /S lo L u S X ™ ^ ,
                                                                 Jy                    'i uahanh X o '|BBB>                                              ; South ^^^rvm jrriN ss
           O ce a n                                                       { c x ii /       f ■ - - ; _          fB B H
                                                             r                                                                          \ \                   Sea r            ftUtHDAHAO
                                ripe Horn                        Sfe B R A Z I L '■** ,nAJLim*m \
                                                                                        «■ •j' ■            I
                                                                         1 -a       Gnesiha* /              ^                         V V ^L                                        J! « V > '

                                                                            I       ^ /'G £JM /S
                                                                                {        i.     V m o de
                                                                                Unf *MJr° '-.■*££-1AX t w o
      Travels and                                                                                                                     D t l a , / ____________ * t S T B * L t *                   <?
                                                             Detail                 )         j
               Sojourns
KN TRAN CK   TO TH K   H A R B O R O F R IO
                              Foreword-Blame It on Rio
                  The Historical Vocation ofKenneth Maxwell


In one of his arresting and subtle works, Finding the Center (1984), V. S.
Naipaul writes of the promptings of his craft and offers a narrative of his
literary beginnings-a narrative intended to "admit the reader to the pro-
cess of writing." By now we know the themes and the methods of that
writer: the journey from his small birthplace in Trinidad to the metropoli-
tan center, the panic of arrival, the wanderlust that took him to distant
lands in a world beginning to shake off its colonial heritage. There was
glamour in the travel, and knowledge, the gathering together of the strands
of a man's life and background. In these pages by the gifted historian Ken-
neth Maxwell, we are «admitted" into the process of writing as well. A his-
torian of great talent, working at the peak of his powers, takes us into the
promptings of his own vocation. Piece by exquisite piece in this book, we
see the historian's method and the concerns that have been the driving pas-
sions of his life for four decades now: the peopling of the Americas, the
shaking up of continents, the spirit that took a «precocious" Portugal into
its imperial venture, the play between Portugal's extensive imperial reach
into Africa and Asia and the Americas, and the limits of its own demogra-
phy and abilities, the rise of Brazil and its tumultuous history.
    The direction of Professor Maxwell's journey reverses Naipaul's,
though. With the historian, it is the pushing outward of a child of the em-
pire, a young man at Cambridge venturing into the tropics. Born in 1941,
Maxwell belonged to a generation that was hanging on with its fingernails
to the old imperial order. On a «misty, cold, damp, and dreary East Anglian
evening," in an old picture palace that had reinvented itself as an «art the-



                                     xi
xii • Foreword

ater;' Maxwell had seen Marcel Camus's film Black Orpheus. It "could not
have been a greater revelation;' he writes. The ancient story set against the
tropical background, the color and the vibrancy of that background,
hooked him. "I determined immediately that Brazil, and above all, Rio de
Janeiro, was somewhere I had to go." He went there via Lisbon, and in that
great Luso-Brazilian world he was to find his material, and his range, and
they are on full display here. This "material" could have supplied great fic-
tion or travel writing: Maxwell himself, as these beautiful pieces demon-
strate, with their love of color, with their ability to conjure up a forlorn
colonial outpost on the South China Sea (Macao), or the teeming streets of
Brazil's cities, or the life and murder of a rubber tapper, a union activist, in
the hinterland of Brazil by a violent clan of ranchers, could have pulled it
off and produced that sort of literary work. But he is a historian of ideas,
and of social and economic life, and his insatiable, boundless curiosity in-
fuses this work with an energy and a life all its own.
    Edward Gibbon, as we learn from the late historian John Clive's loving
tribute to the reading and writing of history, Not by FactAlone (1989), once
called the historian's first person "the most disgusting of pronouns:' Gib-
bon was giving voice to an ambivalence, for the historian's "I" was there in
his work, in his footnotes, in the text itself, the writer's personality and atti-
tudes toward the subjects at hand. Macaulay, too, used his first person to
convey to his readers a sense of immediacy, of places seen and oral histories
he had collected. So did Tocqueville who had his own way of taking the
reader into his confidence, of letting the reader know what that liberal aris-
tocratic historian thought of revolutionary violence and pretensions, Clive
tells us. The narrator's "I" gives this work by Maxwell its unique place in
what this prolific historian has produced. We saw precious little (directly,
that is) of Maxwell when he produced his seminal biography of Portugal's
leading eighteenth-century statesman, Marques de Pombal, and his at-
tempt at a revolution from above, Pombal: Paradox of the Enlightenment
(1995). Nor would we have surmised much about the historian had we
read his definitive accounts of the Portuguese Revolution of 1974, or of the
political traffic between Portugal and Brazil in the second half of the eigh-
teenth century. This work is different: we are truly taken into the narrator's
confidence, admitted into the craft of writing. The personal pronoun is
never intrusive though. There is a kind of trust between historian and
reader, an illicit pact of sorts.
    We know and trust this historian: we are eager to travel with him to
Macao or the Amazon forests; we are eager for him to tell us about other
historians and chroniclers. We pick up his trail-and his likes and dislikes,
for that matter. When he writes that Carlos Fuentes is "never one to use
                                                             Foreword • xiii

two words if more will do," and that that Mexican writer in one of his
works throws at the reader "every stereotype of hispanidad propaganda
 (Bulls, Virgins, Tangos, Gauchos, Don Quixote)," he gives voice to his read-
ers'verdict (most of them, I hazard to guess) on that exhibitionist writer.
"My Portuguese was the swallowed nasal Portuguese of Lisbon, and I was
utterly unprepared for the musicality, rhythm, and softness of Brazilian
speech:' he writes on the occasion of meeting his first Brazilian in his aca-
demic supervisor's office at Princeton. Until then his Brazil had been "en-
tirely phantasmogorical," he adds, the stuff of books and films. The
historian's trail, and the anxiety of the first probings of an alien world: they
come together for us in that episode. And we don't have to search for the
historian's pride in the world he had come to adopt in the Americas. It is
there in Maxwell's sense of exasperation with the "provincialism" of Eu-
rope. The Old World may have "discovered" and disrupted the New World,
but the latter remade the Old Continent, he reminds us. The educated
Europeans may have been fixated on classical literature and Renaissance
cosmology. But they did so, he adds, while "drinking their American-
produced coffee, smoking American-produced tobacco, binding their texts
between American leather hides, and enjoying the leisure that the divi-
dends from overseas investments made possible."
   At the heart of this book, its binding if you will, is of course Portugal's
imperial journey: it is the historian's beat and his pride. It was the Por-
tuguese, he reminds us, who linked the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, who
mapped the coastline of Asia, and explored the African coastline from
Cape Verde in the West to the mouth of the Red Sea in the East. In one of
those mysterious spurts that enable a particular people to do stunning,
surprising feats, the Portuguese recast and revisioned the world. Their ad-
vantage, we learn, was less navigational than conceptual: their cartography
enabled them to arrive at a "new graphic conception of global space." The
Portuguese broke the monopoly of the trans-Saharan trade route between
West Africa and the southern shores of the Mediterranean. In less than two
decades after Vasco da Gama's voyage of discovery of 1497-1498, Portugal
had claimed a vast dominion: Brazil in 1500, Goa in 1510, Malacca in 1511,
Hormuz in 1515, and so on. Portugal aimed for the passageways of trade,
the "choke points" of international trade: Hormuz at the mouth of the Per-
sian Gulf, Mombassa and Mozambique, Malacca, the Azores, Macao at the
mouth of the Pearl River in China, Cape Verde. The Portuguese must have
intuited their own weakness. Portugal, Maxwell reminds us, was after all, a
"small country with a large empire." No wonder the Portuguese hugged the
coasts-and stayed aloof from the interior of the worlds they probed and
ventured into.
xiv • Foreword

    Weakness-and backwardness-stalked the imperial push. The neme-
sis was not far behind. In the span of a few decades after that remarkable
spurt, Portugal itself slipped under Castilian hegemony in 1580. A de-
ranged monarch had taken the country and its nobility on a quixotic cru-
sade into North Africa; the venture had issued in tragedy and the
decimation of the country's nobility. Philip II had offered a traumatized
Portugal rescue. But an absentee, semi-alien monarch would not do. Por-
tugal was to recover its independence in 1640, but the imperial thrust was
broken. There would be no Portuguese empire in the Orient. The very na-
tional epic of Portugal's voyages of discovery, The Lusiads, by the great poet
Luis Vaz de Camoes, published in 1572, was a lament for what might have
been. There was patriotism aplel1ty in Camoes, and there was national
pride, to be sure. The poet, who had spent seventeen of his adult years as a
sailor and soldier in Goa, Cochin, and Macao, praised Portugal's urge to
"discover the sun's very cradle in the East." But Camoes himself was a child
of disappointment. The trajectory of his country-the early success, then
the steady retreat from progress, and Castilian rule-brackets his life. He
was born the year Vasco da Gama died, in 1524; he died in 1580, right as his
country was slipping under the Castilian noose. Portugal succumbed to
despondency, and the sorrow is there in The Lusiads, and a knowledge of
the heartache that came with the imperial temptation. In Canto IV, a wise
old man comes to the shore to bid farewell to the voyagers and to weep for
his country, and for the sorrow that imperial appetite heaped upon her:

        Oh craving of command! Oh vain Desire!
        Oh vainest vanity man miscalleth Fame!
        Oh fraudulent gust, so easy fanned to fire
        By breath of vulgar, aping Honour's name!
        What just and dreadful judgement deals
             thine ire,
        To seely souls who overlove thy claim!
        What deaths, what direful risks, what
             agonies
        Wherewith thou guerdonest them, thy
             fitting prize!

        What new disaster dost thou here design?
        What horror of our realm and race invent?
        What unheard dangers or what deaths
             condign,
        Veiled by some name that soundeth
             excellent?
                                                              Foreword • xv

         What bribe of gorgeous reign, and golden
            mine,
         Whose ready offer is so rarely meant?
         What fame hast promised them? What
            pride of story?
         What palms? What triumphs? What
            victorious glory?
    That sorrow and despondency of Portugal-and the urge for reform
and repair-are caught in Maxwell's pages. But that despondency that
until recent years hovered over Portugal, a steady shadow and companion,
did not travel to Brazil. The tropics worked their will here. Indeed, it is
doubtful, I would think, that a child of an empire in decline (Britain) of
Maxwell's temperament would have been hooked on another somber land.
There may have been troubles in Brazil, but the history was one of tumult
and possibilities. In that Luso-Brazilian encounter, the issue, the child of
the encounter, bounced with greater freedom, had less burden to carry
than the motherland. In its passage from colony to imperial center (the
monarchy had quit Portugal for Brazil in the wake of Napoleon Bona-
parte's armies' invasion of Portugal in 1807) to independent nationhood in
1822, Brazil charted its own course; Portugal had for all practical purposes
become a dependency of Brazil.
    A central theme of Brazil's history, and a theme that Maxwell handles
with amazing skill, concerns the tension between liberty and order in
Brazilian history. In a land where the whites constituted a distinct minor-
ity, the revolution that held the attention of the oligarchs and the elite of
the land was not the American Revolution in 1776 but the Haitian slave re-
volt. In Haiti's fire, in the success of its rebels, the Brazilian elite saw the
specter of its own undoing. There was fear of revolutionary «contagion"
and a recognition that a society that would give unfettered run to the idea
of «equality" in a land «ordered by racial as much as by social hierarchy"
would be torn asunder. Progress in this outwardly flamboyant land was
tethered to order.
    Nor was the American republic, for that matter, so keen on seeing its lib-
erty replicated in the South American landscape. In a characteristic bit of
homage to liberty's reach, Thomas Jefferson, in 1820, had written to a Por-
tuguese-born friend, Abbe Correa da Serra, in praise of a new world in the
Americas free of the curse of Europe's wars, of a day over the horizon when
the fleets of Brazil and the United States would ride together "as brethren
of the same family and pursuing the same object." Jefferson was in retire-
ment in Monticello then. As Maxwell reminds us, the decisive American
voice on the independent nations of South America belonged to John
xvi • Foreword

Quincy Adams both as secretary of state between 1817 and 1825 and as
president in the four crucial years that followed. Adams was bereft of trop-
ical romance. "He saw South Americans as irredeemably corrupted by the
Roman Catholic religion, Iberian tradition, and the tropical climate."
Brazil had to find its own mix of liberty and racial assimilation. Maxwell
allows Brazil its final flourish and vindication, a signature of its own on
this great quest: the seminal, great figure of its independence, Jose Bonifa-
cio, was a metallurgist. He aimed for a Brazilian race that would «amalga-
mate" all the diverse "metals" of Brazil, blend them into a common
national identity.

                                    ***

   Now a word about the "introducer's" personal pronoun. My knowledge
of the Americas is rather scant, of the Iberian world a bit better. My au-
thority for writing these brief pages of appreciation lowe to Kenneth
Maxwell's flattering and surprising invitation. I couldn't have declined the
honor, though undeserved. Circles are closed and connections are made in
these pages. It was at Princeton where Maxwell met his first Brazilian, as we
were told. It was there, on the same campus, a decade later, where I met
Professor Maxwell. We are roughly the same age; he had grabbed the colo-
nial drama of the time, Portugal's struggle with its last African colonies
and Portugal's struggle at home with its rebellious young officers who had
had their fill with imperial burden. It was with excitement that I can still
call up that I read his magnificent depiction of the Portuguese Revolution
of 1974, and my admiration of his craft has never ceased.
   My second claim is given me by the work itself. Maxwell writes of bro-
ken worlds and "hollow empires." A child and a chronicler of matters and
lands Islamic and Arab, I know something of that malady and of the trajec-
tory of civilizations that rise on impulse, draw on mysterious energy, and
then succumb to despondency. I may be unfamiliar with the settings of
Professor Maxwell's work, but the themes are innately, painfully, familiar.
The very first time I came upon fado music and songs, I understood not a
word, but I intuitively, readily, caught the themes and the mood-love and
loss and lament. I had no difficulty «entering" the haunting songs of the
great Amalia Rodrigues: we have her peer in the legendary Egyptian
woman singer Umm Kulthum, who must be reckoned the twentieth cen-
tury's greatest Arabic singer, and whose themes and tone were evocations
of loss and sorrow. The "fado" in the Portuguese fragments by Maxwell is
familiar to me in the same way. Of all of Maxwell's work, this work is
meant for the general reader (hence my casting) who wants to know about
                                                             Foreword • xvii

the history of chocolate, or the voyages of discovery that have remade our
world, or the true historical sociology of pirates and piracy.
    Our towering historians are few and far between. In the age of the 24/7
cable channels and the gabfest and the instant analysts, those historians are
sure to become rarer still. Attribution, rigor, fidelity to sources, once the as-
sumed tools and ways of the craft, are flung on the sidelines. Behold in
these pages this distinguished historian, the (younger) peer of Bernard
Lewis on Islam and C. Vann Woodward on Southern history and Arthur
Schlesinger on the American experience and David Landes on economic
history. In these pages we are in the hands of a guide who truly owns his
field, and roams its expanses with easy authority and a genuine wonder at
the ways of our world.

                                                                  FouadAjami
This page intentionally left blank
                                               Acknowledgments


First my thanks to Tomas Amorim who is a valued colleague at the Council
on Foreign Relations and as my research associate from 1999 to 2002 has
been instrumental to seeing this selection of essays prepared for publica-
tion. I am grateful to him for his care and attention to detail and for his pa-
tience with my endless reworkings of the texts. The Council has provided
me with a stimulating environment for work, and I appreciate the great
latitude they have allowed me over the years to pursue my interests in his-
tory as well as public policy. lowe much to its president, Leslie H. Gelb, for
his encouragement and support, and not least appointing me in 1995 as
first holder of the Nelson and David Rockefeller Chair. Peter Tarnoff and
Nicholas X. Rizopoulos invited me to join the Council in 1989, and for this
I am much in their debt. I have had the great privilege of working with fine
editors such as Bob Silvers of the New York Review of Books, James Chace
and Linda Wrigley of the World Policy Journal, Helder Macedo and Toni
Huberman of Portuguese Studies, and Steven Lagerfeld of the Wilson Quar-
terly, as well as Dauril Alden, Marcos Sa Correa, Flavio Pinheiro, Pedro
Doria, Adriano Schwartz, and Marcos Flaminio Peres. All held me to the
highest standards. It is a special pleasure to appear in the Routledge Series
New World in the Atlantic World, edited by Jack Greene and Amy Bushnell.
Both have been pioneers in the field of cross-cultural Atlantic studies, long
an orphan, but now at long last receiving due attention by their colleagues,
and they have always understood the interconnectedness of the Americas
and the value of comparative approaches to histories which remain too
often parochial and compartmentalized. I am especially grateful to Jack
since he has long kept me linked to the historical profession despite my


                                     xix
xx • Acknowledgments

wanderings (or, as Albert Hirschman calls it, «trespassing") between vari-
ous disciplinary fields. For this I am ever grateful. John Coatsworth, direc-
tor of the David Rockefeller Center at Harvard, and James Dunkerley,
director of the Institute of Latin American Studies at the University of
London, read the whole manuscript, and I was encouraged to go forth with
their support. And not least, my thanks to Fouad Ajami for his splendid if
undeserved foreword.

                                                        Kenneth Maxwell
                                                New York City, March 2003
                                                       Illustrations



All illustrations are from The Boy Travellers in South America: Adventures of
Two Youths in a Journey through Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay,
Argentine Republic, and Chili, with Descriptions ofPatagonia and Tierra del
Fuego, and Voyages upon the Amazon and La Plata Rivers, by Thomas W.
Knox (New York: Harper & Brothers, Franklin Square, 1886).
  Foreword-Entrance to the harbor of Rio
  Chapter I-Surveying under difficulties
  Chapter 2-Marching through the forest
  Chapter 3-Cacao
  Chapter 4-Buccaneers embarking on an expedition
  Chapter S-Bay of Panama, from the southeastern rampart
  Chapter 6-Ruins of church of San Domingo
  Chapter 7-View of Rio from Boa Vista
  Chapter 8-Statue of Pedro I
  Chapter 9-Pair of toucans and their nest
  Chapter 10-In the fields
  Chapter 11-A Brazilian forest, with characteristic mammalia
  Chapter 12-In the rainy season
  Chapter 13-Sedan chair
  Chapter 14-Scene on a coolie ship
  Chapter IS-Looking across the bridge
  Chapter 16-Rio de Janeiro: The aqueduct




                                    xxi
UR   . I G U D 'R D1 FICUL 1 .•
                                                        CHAPTER             1
                                          First Encounters
                                                    "Brazil is not for beginners."
                                                      -Antonio Carlos Jobim




I do not remember exactly when I became conscious of Brazil, but I dis-
tinctly remember how and where. I was in my second or third year as an
undergraduate at Cambridge. At the time, diversions were limited. The
curriculum in history never seemed to get beyond the Tudors and Stuarts,
and I was heartily tired of them. The continent of Europe appeared rarely
in it; the Americas never. The wider world was pretty much limited to the
gaudy Indian and Chinese restaurants in town, which compensated for the
dreary food and very formal dining in the grand old sixteenth-century col-
lege hall. Life for a twenty-year-old at Cambridge was then still recogniz-
ably monastic. Undergraduates in the early sixties were required to dress in
academic gowns at all times, and toward the end of my period at Cam-
bridge in 1963 the dean of my college, the Reverend Doctor Bessant, mum-
bled his displeasure one evening, after the interminable Latin grace was
concluded and before we could sit down, that a young gentleman had been
observed dressed in workmen's clothes. This, the dean admonished us, was
a shocking offense to the decency at the college, which he hoped would not
be repeated. He was referring to the first appearance of blue jeans in that
hallowed place.
   The Indian restaurants in Cambridge were infamous for notes on the
tables which read: "plates only come with meals." At first sight it was an
odd statement of the obvious, but was intended to intimidate undergradu-
ates who might request four plates for one meal which they would then
share, not an economical outcome as far as the restaurant owner was con-
cerned. In Rio I learned that Brazilian students were well ahead in this
                                     1
2 • NakedTropics

game. They took care to strategically seat themselves toward the periphery
of an open-air cafe. After enjoying a churrasco (steak) and batatas fritas
(french fries) and several excellent chopes (draft beer), on a signal they
would all rise en masse and run away at great speed before the bill could be
presented. I am not sure that such guerrilla tactics would have worked in a
small town like Cambridge, though Cambridge did have its own form of
genteel robbery. Aspiring aristocrats at the time still believed it good form
to run up bills they had no intention of paying with the local haberdashers
and tailors. But like so much else of that epoch in Britain-the somewhat
threadbare tail end of an old world kept alive well beyond its useful life-
this was all for show. Unbeknownst to the debtors the merchants had ex-
tended credit in the full knowledge that fathers would eventually honor
their sons' debts, just as their own fathers had honored theirs with the
same tailors and haberdashers a generation before; thus the artifice of aris-
tocratic nonchalance and merchant thrift could both be safeguarded with-
out loss of face.
   The expedition to the "flicks» was the real highlight each week. We bicy-
cled out, gowns and all, to a vast barnlike and decrepit old picture palace
on the outskirts of town which had kept in business by reinventing itself as
an ((art theater." It was there I saw Marcel Camus's Black Orpheus. Set
against a spectacular tropical landscape, this ancient story erupted from
the screen magnificently with drama, color, and extraordinary music. At
least that is how it hit me at the time. On a misty, cold, damp, and dreary
East Anglian evening it could not have been a greater revelation. I deter-
mined immediately that Brazil, and above all Rio de Janeiro, was some-
where I had to go.


                                       I
The route to Brazil, however, took me on a detour through Lisbon and
Princeton. I suppose it was typical of my generation that we did not see ed-
ucation as leading to anything in particular, or ever gave much thought to
the fact that at the end of it all we might need to get a job. So I graduated
from Cambridge in 1963 without any real sense of what I wanted to do. I
had traveled a lot as a student; by train from Berlin to Warsaw, Moscow,
and on to Leningrad, today once more known as St. Petersburg, a turn of
history which in 1961 seemed totally impossible. Later I took the sad rem-
nant of the Orient Express (by then basically a third-class carriage attached
at each frontier to other trains) as it made its way down the Rhine Valley
through Austria and the Balkans into Greece. I crossed the Mediterranean
to Crete and Cyprus by ship and worked on an Israeli kibbutz north of the
sea of Galilee. I spent a lazy marvelous summer in Florence where Harold
Acton, the last of the eccentric 1920s esthetes, took me around the haunts
                                                      First Encounters • 3

of Byron and his friends; and then in Normandy where my host had the
only Lagonda in the region in which we raced around shouting, "Vive de
Gaulle;' between the Basilica of Our Lady of Lisieux, the beaches and race-
tracks of Dauville, Camembert factories and illegal calvados stills where the
red-nosed proprietor would proudly display the helmets of the German
soldiers he had killed (he said) during the Allied Normandy landing.
    So to take a year off in Europe seemed a sensible thing to do when noth-
ing else very attractive beckoned. I went to Madrid for six months where I
lived just off the Puerta del Sol and attended lectures I barely understood
at the university, and then took the Lusitanian Express to Lisbon. I did
think travel should have a purpose, so mine was to learn the languages. I fi-
nanced my stay by writing articles for a regional English newspaper, the
 Western Morning News, on such topics as "Galicia: Spain's Forgotten Cor-
ner" and «Lisbon: City Built on an Earthquake's Ruins" and a comparison
of Spain and Portugal which came down to the fact that in Spain the
women were beautiful and men ugly whereas in Portugal the opposite was
true, and for these articles I received five guineas a time, enough then to
live in a modest pensao (boarding house) for a month.
    Unbeknownst to me, my tutor at Cambridge had written to the Gul-
benkian Foundation in Lisbon to say I was there, and I was called in one day
to see the head of the International Division, Dr. Ayala Monteiro. He said that
Gulbenkian would like to help me in my studies and I should submit a bud-
get to him. I did so by itemizing what I was actually spending. Ayala Mon-
teiro laughed uproariously on seeing it-no one could survive on such a sum
he said-and he wrote the budget for me. For the rest of my time in Lisbon, I
received a very welcome check each month from Gulbenkian. Lisbon was
then full of conscripted soldiers on their way to fight in Africa, and I found
the absence of Brazil from the discourse on colonies very odd. After all Brazil
had gained independence from Portugal over a century before, yet Brazil was
held up as the origin of the ideology of Luso-tropicalism by which the
Salazar regime sought to perpetuate its colonies in Africa, not liberate them.
   Of course my Brazil was still entirely phantasmogorical. I had yet to
meet a real Brazilian. England at the time offered very few prospects as far
as Latin American studies was concerned. The two or three British "Latin
Americanists" had not been to Latin America at all, and they had written
their books entirely based on the archives in London. They looked across
the Atlantic "by spyglass;' it was said. The best of them, John Parry, had
written a report for the government recommending a major investment in
the field but had then himself taken off immediately for Harvard. So I
looked at what the various American universities might offer, and came
across a marvelous book by Stanley Stein on the Brazilian coffee-produc-
ing town of Vassouras in the Paraiba Valley, a rich microstudy that de-
scribed intimately a whole community in transition. I applied to Princeton
4 • NakedTropics

where Stanley Stein taught, and much to my delight was accepted with a
modest stipend. Stein was a marvelous tutor; he accepted few doctoral stu-
dents but gave them demanding attention. I was not of course then aware
of how peculiar a place Princeton was, with its mock English architecture
and odd self-contained provincialism, or fully aware of how lucky I was to
have landed fortuitously at a university where students mattered. I loved
the place and was only slightly disoriented by the bits of Oxford and Cam-
bridge Colleges which appeared juxtaposed in the wrong order.
    Stein called me in one day to meet my first Brazilian. It was Sergio Buar-
que de Holanda traveling with his teenage son; I assumed later on that it
must have been the young Chico, a radiantly beautiful youth who sat qui-
etly in the corner. l My Portuguese was the swallowed nasal Portuguese of
Lisbon, and I was utterly unprepared for the musicality, rhythm, and soft-
ness of Brazilian speech. I barely caught most of the pearls of wisdom the
great Sergio launched forth over the next two hours in Stanley Stein's office
that afternoon.
    Professor Stein recommended I apply without delay to the metropolitan
graduate training program which was administered by Columbia Univer-
sity. It would take me to Brazil for the long summer vacation. It seemed too
good to be true. I had only just stepped foot in the United States and here I
was being sent to Brazil with all expenses paid. Actually Columbia, I gath-
ered later, was only too glad to have someone from Princeton among the fif-
teen or so graduate students sent out to Latin America that summer because
the program was intended to be both interuniversity and interdisciplinary,
but in fact was dominated by Columbia anthropologists. So I suppose I was
a shoo-in, even if most Columbia students regarded Princeton as irre-
deemably snobbish, waspish, and worst of all "southern"-a code word for
racist, anti-Semitic, and such bad things. In fact when I first went up to Co-
lumbia and was asked where I was from and said Princeton, I was immedi-
ately ostracized. My Columbia classmates assumed my accent was affected. I
should have just said that I came from England and left it at that.
    The program had a Brazilian coordinator, the anthropologist Thales de
Azevedo in Bahia, and we were given very few coordinates, none at all in
fact that I can remember now. It was intimated that it might be a good idea
to check in with Professor Azevedo on our arrival. Mr. Brazil of the Prince-


ISergio Buarque de Holanda was one of Brazil's foremost historians. His works,
however, have still not been translated into English. See especially: Raizes do Brasil
(Rio de Janeiro: J. Olympia, 1936); Caminhos e fronteiras (Rio de Janeiro: J. Olym-
pia, 1957); and Visao do paraiso: os motivos edenicos no descobrimento e colonizafaO
do Brasil (Rio de Janeiro: J. Olympia, 1959). His then young son Chico Buarque
went on to be an early star of Brazilian pop music, or MPB (musica popular
brasileira). He remains a renowned figure in Brazilian music and is one of the
country's greatest singer-songwriters.
                                                       First Encounters • 5

ton travel agency-his real name strange as it may seem-was contracted
by the Columbia program to make my travel arrangements. He booked me
on a flight from Miami to Belem. Then I was to pick up a plane there for
Sao Luiz, Fortaleza, Natal, Recife, and Salvador da Bahia. Mr. Brazil appar-
ently knew little of Brazil, but his itinerary had the advantage of making
my first landfall in Brazil an Amazonian one; not that I got to see much of
Belem. I was, it turned out, the only international passenger to deplane at
Belem Airport on what was intended to be a refueling stop. The airport au-
thorities, or rather "the" authority, a sallow air force officer much put out
at having to deal with such unexpected business in the middle of the night
when no immigration or customs officials were present, decided I was "in
transit" and confined me to the airport until my connecting flight arrived
whenever that might be (no one seemed sure). So I settled down more or
less alone in what looked to me at the time like a large tin hanger in the
middle of the jungle.
   Daylight arrived coincidentally with a small rotund figure furiously mop-
ping his bald head with a large red handkerchief and carrying a battered suit-
case. He was not as I first thought a fellow traveler, but the concessionaire of
the airport newsstand. Very carefully and very very slowly he took out twelve
or so dog-eared foreign magazines (perhaps he had heard I was there and
they were intended for me) which he arranged with great delicacy as though
they were diamonds on his counter. This took him an hour at least before he
was satisfied. While I was there, which was most of that day, I saw no one so
much as look at them, so I assume he packed them all away again in their
suitcase that evening as carefully as he had unpacked them that morning.
   By midday at the far end of the terminal a shutter rolled up to reveal a
cafe. An enormous figure (in girth, that is, for certainly he was wide as he
was tall, chest puffed forward in self-importance, dressed in a white suit
and sporting a large white hat, and whose skin was the palest pink I had
ever seen) appeared from nowhere and made his way toward the cafe. Be-
hind him followed a diminutive Indian, head bowed, who was pulling a
two-handled trolley-type conveyance on which lay the smallest carpetbag I
had ever seen. Later on in Rio, I came across a picture by the early nine-
teenth-century artist Jean-Baptiste Debret with a scene that was strikingly
reminiscent. But the plane did arrive, a French-built Caravelle, an appro-
priate name I thought for a traveler to Brazil, and eventually with my entry
permit stamped into my passport, and now "officially" admitted into
Brazil, I was ushered onto it and up front as befitted the only international
passenger. As the Caravelle made its way around the Brazilian coastline, at
each stop a new crowd of passengers surged on board, and a new round of
drinks and meals was proffered-including to the pilots, I noted from my
front seat vantage point, who became, as I did, increasingly jolly as we ap-
proached our destination of Bahia.
6 • NakedTropics

   I had no idea where in Salvador, capital of the state of Bahia, I might
stay, so I followed some passengers onto the Volkswagen kombi minivan
for the trip into the city, having decided I would go wherever they went
since presumably they knew where they were going if I did not. We seemed
to glide along the edge of a moonlit beach which stretched effortlessly into
a deep purple sea. Clumps of tall palm trees and the occasional small shack
stood at the beach's edge. Lovers sat together embracing and looking out at
the ocean. Perhaps I was drunk, but it was a magical arrival. We bumped
up a cobbled street into the city, and I followed my fellow passengers into
their hotel and checked in. The next morning I awoke in darkness and
made my way over to the windows and threw open the shutters. Below me
was an astonishing city, colonial church towers, yellow and green peeling
walls, squares bustling with people of all colors, and, just at that moment,
appearing on the far horizon of a great shining bay, small white sails, a few
of them at first, then it seemed hundreds, coming slowly toward me into
the port below.
   At lunch the waiters at the hotel seemed to think I was Portuguese and
insisted that I eat codfish. When I tried to protest by pointing out a picture
of the Beatles in the local newspaper and insisting they and not Camoes
were my fellow countrymen it got me nowhere; but when I asked for a
garoto (in Lisbon a coffee with milk, but also in Portuguese the word for a
boy) they knew at once where I was from, and said I should go next time to
the restaurant in the square down the block where such requests might be
more discreetly accommodated. I did in fact eat out after that, and my first
real Bahian shrimp was so spicy that I had to drink four large old-fash-
ioned Antarctica bottles of beer to get through it.
   Since I had come to Bahia to call on Professor Azevedo and find out
what it was I was supposed to do, I set out to visit him. I remember the
brightness of the day, the glorious colors of the foliage in the gardens along
the way and the odd little white painted moats around the plants to protect
them from insects. But my arrival caused great consternation. I was ush-
ered quickly into the kitchen where three large black ladies in white aprons
busied themselves with pots while eyeing me curiously. It was some years
before I realized how significant it was to be ushered into the kitchen. I as-
sumed this is where Brazilians always received their visitors.
    I suppose the metropolitan training program role was just another
emolument for Professor Azevedo unconnected to any duties, and that
students stood somewhere with household servants in the anthropological
order of things. I waited, but Professor Azevedo never received me. I think
it was this experience which led me later on very rarely to call on Brazilian
professors and instead get on with my own thing. I was used to this from
Portugal, and in any case, with the political police and informers every-
                                                       First Encounters • 7

where, it was never wise to say exactly what one was studying. Strangely I
returned that day to my hotel to find the honorary British consul waiting
to take me out for a drink. News about strangers spread quickly in those
days. He looked as if he had stepped out of a Graham Greene novel. I most
vividly remember his very bloodshot eyes and rumpled linen suit. But he
was more than gracious and wanted me very much to meet an Oxford stu-
dent in town, a John Russell-Wood. 2 But I never got to see Russell-Wood
either. Perhaps the honorary consul should have known that the last thing
most Englishmen want to do is to meet other Englishmen in tropical
places. But as Professor Azevedo apparently had no instructions for me,
and it seemed I was on my own, I made for Rio, which was where, ever
since seeing Black Orpheus on that misty night in Cambridge, I most
wanted to be.
   I arrived in Rio at the Santos Dumont Airport and asked the airline
clerk if he could recommend a hotel. He looked at several cards in his
pocket and sent me off to a hotel on Rua Riachuelo, up beyond the old
eighteenth-century aqueduct over which the ancient trams so prominently
featured in Black Orpheus rumbled to and fro, and beyond the jumble of
shops and houses that then crowded the area. The hotel seemed fine until I
tried to sleep that night, only to find myself attacked by bedbugs and dis-
turbed by prowling rats, while on the corner outside the local prostitutes
chatted noisily. So the next day, I took myself off to the British Embassy
and asked a somewhat bemused official if he had a better recommenda-
tion. He did; it was the «Grande Hotel of Copacabana" as the embassy
called it, in fact the apartment of one Maite Bertrand, situated on the street
beside the Copacabana Palace Hotel. Maite Bertrand had apparently at
some point in her long life helped the British in some way by hiding some-
thing or someone somewhere; it was never made clear where or when
(Shanghai was mentioned), but for this service she had earned the grati-
tude of the British diplomatic service, and any respectable person seeking a
respectable place to stay was directed by the embassy to Maite.
   Her apartment was on the top floor, it was close to the beach, and I
found it quite delightful. Maite ran a sort of informal pensao (boarding
house) with several long-term residents, among them an ancient Greek
who had fled from Alexandria when King Farouk was overthrown and
Gamal Abdel Nasser took over the Egyptian government, two somewhat
prim English lady teachers at the Cultura Inglesa (which was and remains a
redoubtable bastion of British language instruction), a mechanic for Air

2A. J. R. Russell-Wood was to become a prolific scholar on things Brazilian and
Luso-Brazilian. His most recent book is The Portuguese Empire, 1415-1808: A
World on the Move (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998).
8 • NakedTropics

France who supervised the maintenance of the Air France jet that came
through every other week on the round-trip between Paris and Santiago,
Chile, and the French pilots, who also stayed at regular intervals but dined
separately from us so as not to have to eat at the same table as the me-
chanic, or so he claimed vociferously each time when they were gone. The
Air France crowd, however, was Maite's bread and butter. She charged the
rest of us a very modest fee which for me included a small room with its
own external door, a bathroom, and dinner each evening. We ate as a group
unless Maite was entertaining her own friends, or the Air France pilots
were in town, in which case she had a special table set up for herself and her
guests by the window.


                                      II
And Rio? Well Rio was breathtaking to me. More than my mind and eyes
had anticipated. In those days the native cariocas sometimes made fun of
the wan Europeans standing spellbound before Rio's sheer natural majesty.
I surely must have been one such. I would walk early each morning from
one end of the Avenida Atlantica to the other and back along the Avenida
Nossa Senhora de Copacabana, stopping at the coffee stands for a cafezinho
(espresso-sized dark coffee) every few blocks, it seemed, joining the after-
noon sunbathers on the beach outside the Copacabana Hotel, taking the
funicular up the Sugar Loaf Mountain and to the top of Corcovado, and
eventually getting my identity card for the National Library and starting to
explore its books and archival holdings, while escaping across the road to
the weird and wonderful world of "Cinelandia" for a queijo quente (grilled
cheese sandwhich) and chope each lunchtime.
    Two of Maite's guests each week at the special table by the window were
a silver-haired Swiss businessman, probably somewhere in his early sixties,
and a very beautiful Brazilian student, Julio, who must have been about my
own age. I was more than intrigued by this couple, and I guess they must
have been fascinated, Julio certainly, by me. In any case, one evening after
dinner Maite invited me to stay for a coffee and cognac so that Julio could
then take me off to a movie in the neighborhood of Flamengo. I was not
prepared for the directness of Brazilian sexuality. The supposed condition-
ing of English boarding schools in such matters is much exaggerated. I was
entirely naive. Poor Julio must have thought he had made a terrible mis-
judgment, but we became the best of friends, never out of each other's
sight if we could help it, and while our relationship remained almost en-
tirely platonic, we fell deeply and obsessively in love.
    Julio was a student, though he never seemed to attend classes or study
that I could see. Ralph, the Swiss businessman, had a penthouse apartment
                                                      First Encounters • 9

at the far end of Copacabana at Posto 6 with panoramic views over the
beach and the Forte de Copacabana. And as Ralph spent much of the time
traveling, this became our base. Arpoador beach was a short distance. At
the corner of his block were the early studios of TV Globo, the doors open
so we could drop in to see the strange variety of shows that Globo then
broadcast. We went twice a week to join a escola de samba (samba school)
where after some hesitation and amid much hilarity I shed my inhibitions
and began to dance. We went out to sit quietly and reverently at Macumba
ceremonies. We dropped in at the Teatro Jovem where Francisco Pereira da
Silva's 0 Chao dos Penitentes (The penitents' ground) was playing and
drank beer at the cafe in Ipanema where Tom Jobim and various luminar-
ies of the Cinema Novo held court. I would go back to Maite's for dinner,
get a couple of hours' sleep, and then slip out at midnight so Julio and I
could spend the nights in the boates (night clubs) of Copacabana where
with grand political neutrality we would sip Cuba libres while listening to
"Hello Dolly," walking home along the Avenida Atlantica as the sun was
rising over the mouth of Guanabara Bay.
    A week before I was due to return to Princeton, all hell broke loose at
Maite Bertrand's. The Air France pilots, it turned out, had been using
Maite's as a safe house for smuggling something or other. The mechanic
had disappeared. Maite had been tipped off she was about to be raided.
Since her «Grande Hotel" was entirely unauthorized and she paid no taxes
on her earnings from her guests, we were all required to leave that very
evening. Fortunately the two prim English teachers at the Cultura Inglesa,
or at least one of them, had fallen in love with a Brazilian journalist and she
was finding Maite's quarters more restrictive than I had as a base for my
nocturnal wanderings. She had just taken an apartment overlooking
Leblon, and was happy to have me stay there over my few last days in Rio.
We never saw Maite again, or the old Greek, and we were strictly enjoined
not to go near the Copacabana Palace Hotel again until the crisis, whatever
the crisis was, wound down.
    I arrived in Princeton that September, brown as a berry and with some
work accomplished. I had not ceased to go to the National Library each day
despite my other perambulations, and had accumulated a formidable stack
of index cards full of notations. I was intending at the time to write a dis-
sertation on Brazilian decolonization in the early nineteenth century, an
idea inspired in part by my Lisbon sojourn. But academic work was not my
preeminent Brazilian experience of that first encounter. In early November
1965, the Columbia organizers of the training program called us up to
New York to report on our summer accomplishments. I was loath to be en-
tirely honest and said to Professor Charles Wagley, the director of the pro-
gram, that although I had indeed done some work, I had also had a very
10 • NakedTropics

good time at the beach. I was really not sure what if anything had been ex-
pected of me because in effect I had been dropped in Brazil without any
real orientation and with no one much concerned about what if anything I
did there. "But that was the whole point," he said, smiling. "We want to
hook people to Brazil. It is cheaper for us to throw you out with a sum-
mer's support to sink or swim, rather than to commit ourselves for three
years' dissertation work only to find you hate the country and cannot cope
with living there." It was a marvelous revelation, and it was a strategy that
had certainly worked with me. I did not sink. I had fallen in love. I was
hooked. More so perhaps than Charles Wagley realized, though he proba-
bly guessed, wise old man that he was. I could not wait to get back. 3




3The historian Istvan Jancs6 felt I had been disrespectful to Professor Thales de
Azevedo (1915-1995) and responded in a subsequent edition of Folha's MAIS!
where this chapter first appeared. See Istvan Jancs6, «0 professor Azevedo e as an-
dan<ras do jovem Maxwell" (Professor Azevedo and the journeys of young
Maxwell), Folha de sao Paulo (January 25,1998), MAIS!
This page intentionally left blank
CHI'   THllOCGH THE FORE T.
                                                                  CHAPTER             2
                                                iAdi6s Columbus!
             ((Plausible impossibilities should be preferred to unconvincing possibilities."
                                                                    -Aristotle, Poetics 24




Columbus was mugged on the way to his own party. The American quin-
centennial year of 1992 drew to a close with barely a mention of the Admi-
ral of the Ocean Sea and would-be "Viceroy of India." Even the advertising
agencies found him too hot a potato (the potato of course being one of Eu-
rope's more useful American acquisitions resulting from Spain's conquests
in the New World). By October Columbus had become what advertisers
dislike most, especially when they are promoting department store sales on
family holidays: he had become controversial.


                                           II
Kirkpatrick Sale made a preemptive strike against Columbus as a destruc-
tive colonizer in The Conquest ofParadise, and in spite of criticism of Sale
for tendentiousness, the wave of subsequent publications could not erase
the initial tone he had set. l The great birthday therefore passed with barely
a murmur of national celebration. Two multimillion-dollar movies about
                                        II
Columbus came and went, largely unattended. Carlos Fuentes presented
several hours of televised historical travelogue in Europe arid the Ameri-
cas, ending predictably at the U.S.-Mexican border, where he asserted (at
least culturally speaking) Mexico's claim to the lost northern territories, an

Kirkpatrick Sale, The Conquest of Paradise: Christopher Columbus and the
1
Columbian Legacy (New York: Knopf, 1990).



                                          13
14 • NakedTropics

irredentism President Salinas must have found singularly ill timed as the
debate over NAFTA heated up.
   Fuentes's book The Buried Mirror, like much of its bibliography, in fact
appears firmly stuck in the 1960s. 2 His presence seemed intrusive in the
otherwise well-filmed and constructed television series with the same title,
which would have been much better had it made more use of the origina-
tor of the idea, Peggy Liss, a distinguished historian of Spain and Spanish
America and author of an excellent new biography of Columbus's sponsor,
Queen Isabella. Fuentes, never one to use two words if more will do, throws
in virtually every stereotype of hispanidad propaganda (Bulls, Virgins,
Tangos, Gauchos, Don Quixote) while adding little that is distinctive of his
own. Latin America, mired in disaster, is somehow to be "rescued by cul-
ture." His book looks attractive, as do parts of the television series in which
he appeared, and we are given good views of the crossing of the Andes by
San Martin, of the baroque churches of Mexico and Peru, and of paintings
by Velazquez and Goya. Such skillful and expensive packaging is not an un-
common characteristic of the quincentennial year, where the wine is often
less impressive than its container.
   The Spanish government had earlier set store by the quincentennial
(and had subsidized the Fuentes undertaking along with the many other
projects, books, and exhibitions in the quincentennial cause); but it virtu-
ally banished Columbus's name from the great Seville exposition as soon
as the organizers began to realize that Spain risked alienating Jews, Mus-
lims, and much of Latin America by too direct a celebration of Columbus's
accomplishments. As for the pope, in the arranging of his long-planned
visit to Hispaniola in commemoration of the evangelization of the New
World, some last-minute rescheduling was needed so that he might avoid
the controversy surrounding the inauguration of the giant "lighthouse"
constructed in Columbus's memory by the Dominican Republic's blind
president to illuminate the evening sky with an ethereal cross.
   What remains of this curious, diverse, and singularly unenlightening
year? The most curious thing about the mountain of books the quincen-
tennial produced is how little they tell us about the significance of what
Columbus did in his own time, and how little they reflect the rich scholar-
ship on Latin America of the past two decades. Some of the better books
published during the quincentennial year, like Anthony Grafton's New
Worlds, Ancient Texts, deal more with the intellectual imagining of Amer-



2Carlos Fuentes, The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992).
                                                   iAdi6s Columbusl • 15

ica than with its social reality.3 Grafton's book has in fact a much broader
scope than its quincentennial timing would imply, and Columbus himself
is disposed of in a few brief if instructive pages.
    Grafton's intention is to look at the long, convoluted, and contradictory
process by which European scholars absorbed and dealt with the experi-
ences forced on them by the existence of a New World unforeseen in the in-
tellectual tradition they had inherited. "Ancient texts did rise like revenants
around them," Professor Grafton writes in his epilogue,
    paradoxically providing the language and images that enabled them
    to explain away a fact unknown to the classical writers they revered.
    A potentially revolutionary discovery was given a noble name, a
    biblical pedigree, a place in existing geographies and ethnogra-
    phies; much of its sting was thus removed.
    Grafton follows the revisionist argument of J. H. Elliott's brilliant book
The Old World and the New, that the European discovery of the New World
had very little impact on European thought (or at least much less impact
than had been claimed by the Enlightenment).4 This is all very well so far
as it goes, but unlike Elliott, who never lost sight of the wider world,
Grafton takes a view that at times seems antiquarian, and tells us very little
about the real consequences for most people outside the print shop or the
academic cloister of Columbus's arrival in the Caribbean. Grafton says lit-
tle about the establishment of European hegemony over large parts of the
globe, which was the most lasting result of Columbus's stumbling into the
New World in 1492; and he gives no clear sense of the broader movement
of the European overseas expansion, of which the Columbus voyages were
part. Visitors to the 1992 New York Public Library exhibition which was
the occasion for Grafton's book hardly appreciated the vast shaking up of
the world that occurred as a result of the voyage of 1492, with conse-
quences that deeply affect the life of New York City today.


                                       II
A major point that was largely ignored in 1992, although it has been dem-
onstrated by a quarter century of historical research, is that the European
discovery of America in 1492 was not an isolated event. This is very well

3Anthony Grafton, with April Shelford and Nancy Siraisi, New Worlds, Ancient
Texts: The Power ofTradition and the Shock ofDiscovery (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1992).
4J. H. (John Huxtable) Elliott, The Old World and the New, 1492-1650 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1970).
16 • NakedTropics

demonstrated in the excellent Times Atlas ofWorld Exploration, edited by a
group of scholars under the direction of Felipe Fernandez-Armesto. 5 The
voyage of Christopher Columbus was in many respects an offshoot of an
oceanic system of commerce and navigation which preceded and outlived
the epoch of Columbus; the speed and success with which Spanish rule
was imposed in the Caribbean and later on the mainland are in large part
explained by this broader process.
    It was the great innovation of the fifteenth-century mariners and entre-
preneurs, among whom the Portuguese were the most precocious, to learn
how the winds and currents of the Atlantic Ocean could be used to make
travel among the continents possible. They perfected navigational instru-
ments, in particular the astrolabe and the quadrant, which enabled them to
take accurate readings on the celestial bodies in order to find their latitude
when on the high seas.
    The Portuguese also made their audacious Atlantic explorations a prof-
itable enterprise. As with all great revolutions, the discovery of how the
ocean could be conquered by sail was a revolution of perception: the
recognition of patterns of nature which before had been only imperfectly
comprehended. For centuries European sailors had seen only the edges of
an oceanic world; in a mere two decades, they were able to discern its total-
ity. Hence, quite suddenly and with spectacular consequences, the Atlantic
Ocean, which for millennia had been the great divider between continents,
became the means of intercontinental contact, the pathway to new conti-
nents in the West and to empires in the East.
    The Atlantic commercial system evolved around two intersecting ellipses
of seaborne communications, one in the North Atlantic and the other in the
South Atlantic. The trajectory of each was governed by the prevailing winds
and ocean currents. These two Atlantic ellipses could finally be traced and
mastered because of the collective experience gained from the voyages of
oceanic exploration. Bartolomeu Dias in 1488, encountering contrary
winds and currents on the southwest African coast, had swung out in a wide
circle to round the Cape of Good Hope, thus demonstrating the possibility
of sailing from the Atlantic into the Indian Ocean. By reaching the greater
Antilles in 1492, Christopher Columbus showed the outbound and the in-
bound route between America and Europe.
    Five years later, Vasco da Gama, leaving Portugal in 1497, was the first to
trace the wide arc of wind systems of the South Atlantic (he was ninety-
three days out of sight of land compared with the thirty-three days of

SFelipe Fernandez-Armesto, ed., The Times Atlas of World Exploration: 3,000 Years
of Exploring, Explorers, and Mapmaking (New York: HarperCollins Publishers,
1991).
                                                     iAdi6s Columbusl • 17

Columbus), thereby making it possible to sail into the Indian Ocean,
where he was able to draw upon Arab navigational experience to reach
Calicut in 1498 and return to Lisbon in 1499. The elliptical routes, and
hence the trajectory of all subsequent wind power navigation, were discov-
ered during a remarkably short period between 1492 and 1500.
   Skillful navigation meant very little in itself. The North Atlantic had been
crossed before 1492 by the Vikings, who had established colonies in Iceland
and Greenland. In the early fourteenth century, merchant adventurers from
Barcelona had gone at least as far as the Canary Islands. These achieve-
ments, however, had little long-term effect. What mattered was the ability to
take advantage of the opportunities oceanic exploration opened up and to
sustain them within a network of commerce and regular communications.
   The second great achievement of the fifteenth century was to make sail-
ing on the Atlantic routes profitable for many years to come. 6 The first
steps, again, had been taken by the Portuguese when they established the
maritime connection between Europe and the West African coast. Their
principal aim had been to tap the supply of African gold which had previ-
ously reached Europe by means of the camel caravans that provided a
trans-Saharan trade connection between West Africa and the southern
shore of the Mediterranean. Beginning in 1443, the Portuguese broke the
monopoly of the Saharan land route and established a string of trading
posts (their so-called feitorias) along the West African coast, at Argium,
then Sierra Leone, Cantor, and, eventually, in 1482, at the great fort of Sao
Jorge da Mina on the Gold Coast.
   By outflanking the long-established Arabic trans-Saharan trade con-
nections between Guinea and North Africa, the Portuguese succeeded in
capturing a part of the landborne commerce of West Africa for the new
European-dominated sea route. The caravel-a fast, small ship adapted by
the Portuguese from the Arab and Mediterranean vessels and used for voy-
ages to West Africa-effectively competed with camel caravans. The Por-
tuguese exchanged cloth, carpets, silks, brassware, and trinkets for gold,
slaves, and "grains of paradise" (malaguetta pepper), sometimes through
intermediaries or by direct bargaining at the fairs in the West African inte-
rior. Portuguese domination of the African coast, such as it was, remained
essentially commercial. They never became involved directly in West


6Fundamental to the reinterpretation of early Atlantic history are the three great
works by Pierre Chaunu, Vitorino Magalhaes Godinho, and Frederic Mauro;
Pierre Chaunu, Seville et l'Atlantique, 1504-1650, 12 vols. (Paris: SEVPEN,
1955-1960); Vitorino Magalhaes Godinho, L'economie de l'empire Portugais aux
XVe et XVle siecles (Paris: SEVPEN, 1969); and Frederic Mauro, Le Portugal et
I'Atlantique au XVlle siecle, 1570-1670; etude economique (Paris: SEVPEN, 1960).
18 • NakedTropics

African gold mining. All this is clearly and beautifully laid out in The Times
Atlas ofWorld Exploration.
   With a prosperous seagoing link established between West Africa and
Lisbon, control of the offshore archipelagoes, of the Canary Islands, of
Madeira, and the Azores became the next and inevitable order of business.
Incorporating these Atlantic islands into the expanding network of com-
merce, initially as sources of water and supplies, coincided with the estab-
lishment of the seaborne routes between West Africa and Europe. But the
islands soon produced valuable return cargoes in their own right. The set-
tlement by Portugal of the uninhabited archipelagoes of Madeira (1420-
1425) and the Azores (1427-1439) and the gradual decimation and
enslavement by Spain of the Guanches-settlers probably of Berber ori-
gin-who inhabited the Canaries (1483-1500) were followed by the intro-
duction into the islands, by the early European settlers, of sugarcane from
the Mediterranean.
   The sugarcane from the Atlantic islands soon found ready markets from
the Baltic to the Italian port cities, and the wide distribution of Atlantic is-
land sugar in Europe dramatically brought down its price. Sugar con-
sumption was also apparently stimulated, for sugarcane production
expanded quickly in the Cape Verde archipelago and later, by 1490, to the
islands of Sao Tome e Principe in the Gulf of Guinea off the African coast.
The tropical soils and climate of Sao Tome e Principe in particular pro-
vided an ideal environment. African slave labor was soon imported from
the nearby mainland. 7
   The experience in Madeira, Porto Santo, and the Canaries was impor-
tant for other reasons. As Professor Alfred Crosby has shown in several
original and fascinating books, particularly Ecological Imperialism: The Bi-
ological Expansion ofEurope, 900-1900, the Europeans tried to make use of
the landscape, flora, and fauna. 8 Bartolomeu Perestrello, future father-in-
law of Columbus, set loose a female rabbit and her offspring in Porto
Santo, the latter born on the voyage from Europe. The rabbits reproduced
so rapidly as to "overspread the land, so that our men could sow nothing

7For the Atlantic islands, see Luis de Albuquerque and Alberto Vieira, The Archipel-
ago ofMadeira in the Fifteenth Century (Madeira: Centro de Estudos de Hist6ria do
Atlantica, 1984); Virginia Rau and Jorge de Macedo, a arucar da Madeira nos fins
do seculo XV: Problemas de produruo e comercio (Madeira: Junta-Geral do Distrito
Aut6nomo do Funchal, 1962); Felipe Fernandez-Armesto, Before Columbus: Explo-
ration and Colonization from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic, 1229-1492 (Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1987); and Alberto Vieira, a comercio
inter-insular nos seculos XV e XVI: Madeira, Arores e Canarias (Madeira: Centro de
Estudos de Hist6ria do Atlantica, 1987).
8Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe,
900-1900 (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
                                                      iAdi6s Columbusl • 19

that was not destroyed by them." The settlers in fact were forced to retreat
to the larger island of Madeira nearby. They returned, but rabbits re-
mained a problem for crop growers, not to mention for the indigenous
plants and animals.
   Madeira and Porto Santo had been previously uninhabited by human
beings. The Canaries had not; and as Professor Crosby demonstrates, the
fate of the Guanches there also prefigured later experience. In particular,
the Europeans brought with them "their extended family of plants, ani-
mals, and microlife," as Crosby puts it. He observes, "Very few experiences
are as dangerous to a people's survival as the passage from isolation to
membership in the worldwide community that included European sailors,
soldiers, and settlers"-carriers of parasites and pathogens to which iso-
lated people would be susceptible. The experiences of the Atlantic islands
thus taught two lessons: that Europeans, and their plants and animals,
could do quite well in new lands; and the indigenous population, though
numerous and brave, could be conquered, and could indeed disappear, to
be replaced by laborers imported from Europe and Africa.
   The evolving Atlantic commercial and maritime complex was also
linked to a broader network. 9 The Portuguese, by developing the seaborne
route between Europe and West Africa, were establishing new connections
between known sources of supply for products such as sugar and existing
markets.
   Lisbon and Seville both benefited from the new oceanic commerce and
seaborne traffic. These ancient Atlantic port cities possessed long-standing
trading connections with the Muslim world, especially in North Africa, and
their traders had long been aware of the existence of West African spices
and gold. Their ports were favorably placed geographically for the mariners
using them to take advantage of the currents and winds for the run to the
Canary Islands, Madeira, and the African coast. Both Lisbon and Seville
were situated at the edge of fertile valleys, rich in olives, vines, and fruit,
with access to nearby salt pans, vital for the preservation of meat and fish.
   But, above all, Lisbon and Seville had attracted large colonies of Italian
traders who used both ports as way stations in their commercial dealings in
the Iberian Peninsula and as ports of call for their shipping between the East-
ern Mediterranean and northwestern Europe. Genoese merchants, in partic-
ular, contributed their commercial sophistication. They were skilled at bills

9S ee Charles Verlinden, The Beginnings ofModern Colonization (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor-
nell University Press, 1970); Herman Van der Wee, The Growth ofthe Antwerp Mar-
ket and the European Economy, Fourteenth to Sixteenth Centuries, 3 vols. (The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1963); and Ruth Pike, Enterprise and Adventure: The Ge-
noese in Seville and the Opening of the New World (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1966).
20 • NakedTropics

of exchange and credit, and knew how to raise large amounts of capital
needed to deal with the risks and delays of long-range oceanic commerce.
    Between 1450 and 1500 the number of Genoese in Seville almost dou-
bled. Great Italian merchant banking families originally from Genoa, such
as the Spinoli, Grimaldi, and Centurioni, acted as contractors supplying
naval stores or, often, as dealers in regional agricultural products and im-
ported grain; they at once became involved in the new Atlantic Ocean
trades. In Lisbon, a major port of call for Genoese and Venetian galleys en
route for England and Flanders, Italian merchants such as Lomellini, Affai-
tati, Giraldi, and Marchione were bankers and moneylenders to the court
and its envoys; they too invested in the new Atlantic island sugar produc-
tion and in the slave trade. In association with the great south German
bankers, the Welsers and Fuggers, these experienced Italian entrepreneurs
supplied, through Antwerp, German silver and copper in return for olive
oil, wine, fruit, Setubal salt, and African spices and gold.
    Thus when within a very few years of one another Bartolomeu Dias
reached the Indian Ocean (1488), Christopher Columbus reached the An-
tilles (1492), and Vasco da Gama arrived on the coast of India (1498), they
did so against the background of a preexisting and thriving system of At-
lantic commerce. Based on sugar, slaves, and gold, it was firmly supported
by a strong if largely informal partnership between the Spaniards and Por-
tuguese who contributed their political and navigational skills and the
foremost Italian and German bankers and merchants who were able to
raise capital and sell the goods throughout Europe. Oceanic expansion at
the end of the fifteenth century therefore succeeded largely because Span-
ish and Portuguese oceanic commerce could feed into a receptive network
of European commerce; the two combined to stimulate and underwrite
further expansion.
    Once the Portuguese established trade with India after 1498, they also
found it profitable to pay for Asian spices with silver, which was valued
more highly in India than in Europe. In consequence, traders in south Ger-
man silver found Lisbon an even more attractive market. The south Ger-
man capitalists who controlled the production of Central European and
Hungarian precious metals took advantage of the possibilities for com-
mercial and financial expansion in the new overseas enterprises. The
Imhoff merchant banking family of Nuremberg doubled their profits be-
tween 1503 and 1508 while taking part in the Asian spice trade. The Fug-
gers and Welsers from Augsburg invested heavily in the Portuguese Indian
fleet of 1505 among other ventures. The vast fortunes of the participating
merchant capitalists had other consequences, for example, loans to states;
the dramatic expansion of commerce and the money market made
Antwerp an important source for short-term loans used by both Spain and
                                                 iAdi6s Columbus! • 21

Portugal to support their expensive courts and pay for their even more
costly wars.
    Christopher Columbus himself was a very typical product of this early
Atlantic commercial system. Genoese by birth and an experienced sea-
man, he had worked as an agent for the Centurioni firm, which did busi-
ness in Spain and Portugal. Linked to the sugar interests of Madeira by his
first wife, he had also traded along the Guinea coast (ca. 1482-1485) and
gained much practical knowledge of Portuguese navigation and especially
the Atlantic wind system in the Portuguese-controlled Atlantic archipela-
goes. The vessels for his transatlantic crossing (like those of Vasco da
Gama for his Indian voyage) were filled with the cheap trinkets, beads,
and brass utensils used by the Portuguese in their West African trade. Re-
cent research shows that the approximately 1,300 Spanish ducats which
Columbus contributed to the venture (the Catholic monarchs con-
tributed about 3,000 ducats) were borrowed from Italian merchants, espe-
cially the Florentine Juanoto Berardi, a slave trader since 1486 who
remained a close associate of Columbus until his death in 1495. The in-
stinctive reaction of Columbus to the economic possibilities of the
Caribbean was conditioned by his previous experience. His obsession
with gold and slaves was not a personal foible; it was built into the system
of which he had long been a part.


                                    III
But if recent scholarship has helped to explain the setting within which
Columbus made his voyages, the second great contribution of the past two
decades has been to explain why Columbus's arrival in the Caribbean had
effects throughout the world. The European intrusion into the fringe of
the New World in 1492 had a devastating impact on the indigenous inhab-
itants quite unlike that arising from the simultaneous contacts between
Europeans and the populations of Africa and Asia. The Caribbean experi-
ence, moreover, was to prefigure the widespread death that took place else-
where in the Americas-most especially in the lowland tropical and
subtropical regions, but also in the highlands. Why did this happen?
   The early relations of Spaniards and native populations in the
Caribbean were dominated by the Spanish desire to extract gold. Unlike
the Portuguese in Africa, whose gold trade depended on African interme-
diaries, Columbus and his agents and successors found shallow gold de-
posits on several of the islands. To work the placer mines of Cibao and San
Cristobal in Hispaniola, and later the gold-rich streams of Puerto Rico
(1508), the Isthmus of Panama (1509), and the arroyos of the central
mountains of Cuba (1511), the Spaniards organized large gangs of
22 • NakedTropics

Amerindians. To secure European domination over the Caribbean popula-
tions and thus obtain the labor needed to exploit the gold deposits, they
quickly asserted direct control over the Indians' lives.
    By contrast, in Africa and Asia the European intruders rarely were able
to establish direct administration over the local population beyond a few
fortified enclaves. The methods used to draft labor in the Caribbean varied
and passed from the loose per capita tribute system devised by Columbus
himself and administered through the local Amerindian caciques (chief-
tains) to a period when Indian communities were given over to individual
Spaniards by Adelantado Bartolomeu Columbus, and then to the more
systematic mobilizing of labor imposed by Governor Nicolas de Ovando
(1502-1509). Governor Ovando linked the use of encomiendas (grants of
Indian labor) to the building of an economic base for the new villas
(towns) he intended to settle with Europeans; he wanted to provide a
source of income for their European vecinos (residents), who would either
hire out the Indians for use in the gold mines or directly exploit the Indian
labor themselves. The governor added an incentive to gold mining by low-
ering the share of the gold demanded by the Crown from one-half to one-
fifth. Nicolas de Ovando also acted with great brutality. Soon after his
arrival, the Higuey Indians rebelled to avenge the killing of one of their
chiefs by a Spanish attack dog. Irving Rouse describes the consequences:
    Ovando rounded up six or seven hundred of them, put them in a
    chief's bohio, or house, and had them knifed to death. He then or-
    dered the bodies to be dragged into the adjoining plaza and publicly
    counted. In the fall of 1503 he paid another formal visit to Xaragua,
    where he was well received by Chief Anacaona, whose brother Be-
    hecchio had died. She convened a meeting of some eighty district
    chiefs in her bohio, whereuponI Ovando ordered his soldiers to
    block the door and burn them alive. Anacaona herself was hanged
    in deference to her rank.
   Carl Sauer's brilliant pioneering book on the early Spanish Main, origi-
nally published in 1966 and reissued for the quicentennial, as well as the
work of the recent generation of demographic historians, showed that at
the time of the arrival of Columbus in 1492, the island of Hispaniola sup-
ported a very substantial native population. 10 There is a very heated debate
over the numbers, with low estimates in the 100,OOO-to-200,OOO range
(Angel Rosenblat) to figures as high as 8 million (Woodrow Borah and
Sherburne F. Cook). The consensus seems to point to a figure of over a mil-

lOCar! o. Sauer, The Early Spanish Main (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1992).
                                                   iAdi6s Columbusl • 23

lion while Las Casas's estimate of three and one-half million is within the
range of possibility. The various estimates are well summarized in the new
edition of William Denevan's The Native Population of the Americas in
1492, which contains contributions by Woodrow Borah and William
Sanders and others who have revolutionized demographic history.II The
latest archaeological evidence is clearly described in the Smithsonian Insti-
tution's Disease and Demography in the Americas. 12
   The Caribbean islands, unlike Europe, enjoyed a continuous growing
season. Indian agriculture, Sauer shows, was highly productive, depending
on root crops, which were planted in forest clearings that had been previ-
ously burned over and dug up with pointed flattened sticks. The Indians
constructed montones (earth mounds) that were knee-high and several feet
wide. This planted area, called a conuco, provided well-aerated soils, was ef-
fective against erosion, and could be used on hill slopes; the root crops
could be cultivated without greatly diminishing the fertility of the soil. In
the montones the Indians planted bitter yuca, the roots of which were
grated, drained of their poisonous juices, and baked into starchy unleav-
ened bread (cassava) capable of being stored for long periods without de-
teriorating. Maize, beans, and squash, planted in the same montones, were
grown from seed, and together with the abundant fish, salt, and turtles of
the coastal waters provided the diet of the indigenous islanders. Bartolome
de las Casas, who arrived during 1502 with Ovando's expedition, estimated
that twenty men working six hours a day for one month could plant suffi-
cient yuca to provide enough bread for three hundred people for two years.
   Irving Rouse's book The Tainos: Rise and Decline of the People Who
Greeted Columbus is a model of clarity and lightly worn erudition, and it
contains the best and most straightforward description of the four Colum-
bus voyages and their implications for the Amerindians I have seen. I3 In it
Rouse summarizes with great fairness the arguments for and against each
position he takes. Columbus had found large, permanent villages of Taino
Indians in Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, each governed by a chief, or
cacique, and each containing an average of two thousand people. Rouse
vividly describes their everyday life. The Spaniards were particularly
amazed by their ball games, which they played in specially constructed
courts using a bouncing ball made of rubber, whose elasticity the
Spaniards had never seen before.

llWilliam Denevan, The Native Population of the Americas in 1492 (Madison: Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press, 1976).
12John W. Verano and Douglas H. Ubelaker, eds., Disease and Demography in the
Americas (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992).
13Irving Rouse, The Tainos: Rise and Decline of the People Who Greeted Columbus
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
24 • NakedTropics

   By 1530, however, only thirty-eight years after the arrival of Columbus,
the original inhabitants of the islands had been reduced to a mere handful.
The ecological base of their existence had been severely disrupted. By the
third decade of the sixteenth century, the Indians of Jamaica and Puerto
Rico were almost extinct, and the Bahamas had none at all. The European
incursion into the Caribbean unquestionably had produced a holocaust
with few parallels in world history.
   The primary cause of the demographic catastrophe that befell the
Amerindians of the Caribbean islands was certainly virulent epidemic dis-
ease. Isolated as they were, the people of the islands had little capacity for
resisting imported diseases, even less so than the people of the Canary Is-
lands when the Spanish had arrived. The introduction of temperate and
tropical infections, including, probably, malaria, yellow fever, sleeping
sickness, yaws, bilharzia, influenza, typhus, smallpox, and plague, brought
havoc.
   But many of the diseases were no less lethal to Europeans and Africans,
and the catastrophe of the islands was compounded by other factors. The
pre-Columbian population maintained a fragile equilibrium in an envi-
ronment peculiarly rich in vegetable products, and without animals that
would compete with human beings for food. The Europeans not only in-
troduced disease, they also brought the first livestock, including cattle,
horses, pigs, and dogs, all of which increased with phenomenal rapidity.
The consequences for the Amerindians were disastrous. Feral hogs rooted
up the conucos and disrupted the base of the Indian food supply. A lethal
competition for food and land took place between the native population
and the newly introduced animals. The European animals won. Indian
plantings were replaced by pasture or reverted to forest land. The ecologi-
cal transformation of the islands, which occurred within little more than
half a century, contributed to the deep psychological shock that resulted
from the arrival of Europeans. The Amerindians' physical environment
was shattered.
   Harsh labor in the gold fields also contributed to the decline of the is-
land population. The crowded and unsanitary conditions of the mining
camps encouraged the rapid spread of disease. According to Bartolome de
las Casas, during the labor draft (demora), which lasted from six to eight
months, a quarter to one-third of the work gangs died. Many of the Indi-
ans in the camps suffered from malnutrition; although they were amply
supplied with starch in the form of cassava bread, they were unable to ac-
quire the necessary protein and fats, since hunting and fishing were pro-
hibited by the Spaniards, who feared the Indians would flee. Sauer argues
that the indiscriminate use of female workers in effect transformed the low
fertility of Indian women into de facto sterility. Certainly the population
                                                 iAdi6s Columbusl • 25

had little chance of reproducing itself. By 1514, on the royal estates of
Santo Domingo, where the working conditions of Indian workers were
probably better than elsewhere, there was not even an average of one child
to a couple. There was, however, a parallel process taking place: the census
of 1514 found 40 percent of the officially recognized wives of the Euro-
peans were Indian.
   The equanimity with which most Spaniards accepted the huge loss of
Indian lives did not result from mere callousness, though there was plenty
of that. Monstrous death rates were commonplace in Europe. Recovery
from the plague, which during the fourteenth century had killed at least 20
percent of the European population, had been painfully slow. Nor was the
behavior of the early adventurers and its consequences in devastation and
disease unprecedented. Many of the soldiers who went with Pedrarias
Davila to the Isthmus of Panama in 1514 were veterans of recent bar-
barous military campaigns in Italy, where they ravaged the countryside,
causing even the insensitive King Ferdinand of Aragon to complain about
their behavior.
   The loss of life among the Europeans in the Antilles was staggering as
well. Of the 2,500 colonists who arrived with Ovando in Hispaniola in
1502, 1,000 died within a short time. Without constant immigration, all
the early European settlements in the Americas would have suffered the
fate of the settlers who died after Columbus left them at La Navidad on
the northern shore of Hispaniola. Continuous immigration to maintain
the European population, let alone to achieve growth, was no less essential
for the early transatlantic colonies than it was for the urban populations in
Europe, where city death rates consistently surpassed birthrates and it was
only the inflow of rural immigrants that kept numbers from declining.
   Among the few voices raised to protest the extermination of the native
population of the Caribbean and the Panamanian isthmus, the Dominican
Antonio de Montesinos (1511), Bartolome de las Casas (1515), and Licen-
ciado Alonso Zuazo (1518) often proposed solutions no less destructive
than the situation they sought to remedy. The reforming Hieronymite
Fathers, governors of the Indies between 1518 and 1519, attempted to pre-
serve the remaining population by establishing pueblos (villages) of four
hundred to five hundred people, each with its own plantings and livestock,
only to find the newly concentrated Indians were immediately infected
with smallpox. It was fortunate for Europe that the New World did not ex-
port the virulent epidemic to Africa and Europe. The origin of syphilis,
long claimed to be a New World importation into Europe, is still unclear.
Grafton's book provides a lengthy description of the reaction to morbus
gallicus in sixteenth-century Europe, but next to nothing about the demo-
graphic collapse of the populations Columbus called «Indians."
26 • NakedTropics

                                        IV
The ravages of disease in the Americas, especially in the Caribbean islands
and the lowland zones of the mainland, had a very direct, rapid, and per-
manent impact on the history of three continents. Catastrophe for some,
as always, brought profit and opportunities for others. The elimination of
the Caribbean island Indians left some of the best agricultural land in the
tropics without workers to farm it. Columbus had envisioned a profitable
slave trade in American Indians to supply "Castile, Portugal, Aragon, Italy,
Sicily, the islands of Portugal, and the Canaries," and as early as 1495 a
cargo of five hundred Indians had been sent to Seville. The extermination
of the Indians in the Antilles put an end to this prospect. Local entrepre-
neurs seeking replacements for the diminishing supply of local laborers
raided other Caribbean islands for Indian slaves and then captured the In-
dians who lived on the South American coast. But the supply of labor soon
proved insufficient to meet the demands, even on the island of Hispaniola.
By 1524 there were more slaves than Tainos, and by 1540 the former had al-
most completely replaced the latter.
   The suggestion of a different source of labor came ironically from the
"protectors" of the Indians. Both Licenciado Zuazo and Las Casas sug-
gested that African slaves could be substituted for Indian labor, and, except
for the temporary suspension of the African slave trade between 1516 and
1518 initiated by Cardinal Regent Cisneros, enslaved Africans were im-
ported to help exploit the economic potentialities of the New World from
the beginning of the sixteenth century onward.
   The expanding demand for African slaves coincided with a significant
shift of Portuguese interests in Africa. By the end of the first decade of the
sixteenth century, the village of Mpinda at the mouth of the Congo River
had developed into a major slave port, initially for the dispatch of slaves to
Lisbon and the Algarve. 14 Mpinda also exported slaves to Sao Tome. By the
1530s some four thousand to five thousand slaves per year were exported
from the Congo, and as the decade progressed an increasing number of
slaves were also obtained from the region near the mouth of the Kwanza in
Angola. ls By 1550, Lisbon had a slave population of almost ten thousand
out of a total urban population of one hundred thousand.
   Philip Curtin estimated that during the sixteenth century some 50,000
enslaved Africans were sent to Europe, some 25,000 to the Atlantic islands

14David Birmingham, Trade and Conflict in Angola: The Mbundu and Their Neigh-
bors under the Influence of the Portuguese, 1483-1790 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1966),21-41.
15A. C. de C. M. Saunders, A Social History ofBlack Slaves and Freedmen in Portugal,
1441-1551 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).
                                                      iAdi6s Columbusl • 27

of Cape Verde, Madeira, and the Canaries, and 100,000 to Sao Tome. I6 As
in the Portuguese-controlled islands in the Gulf of Guinea, the African
slaves were shipped in mainly to work in the sugarcane fields. (The gold of
Cibao and San Cristobal in Hispaniola had given out within twenty-five
years and that of Cuba and Puerto Rico in half that time.) Island-based en-
trepreneurs, among them lawyers, military functionaries, and agents of the
great Italian merchant families of Seville, turned quickly to sugar produc-
tion. By 1528 there were some twenty water-powered mills (ingenios) on
Hispaniola, mostly near the town of Santo Domingo, and in 1520 a Ge-
noese-financed mill was producing commercial sugar in Puerto Rico.
    It may seem illogical today that labor should have been transported
across the Atlantic from Africa to the Americas rather than used locally,
and that plantation economies did not arise in West Africa, which was ap-
parently closer to European markets. I? But linear distances in the sixteenth
century bore little relation to distances as measured by time and difficul-
ties of transport. The route from West Africa to Europe was, so far as the
time and difficulty of travel were concerned, no shorter than from the An-
tilles. Ships from West Africa were obliged to sail near the equator, catch
the southeast trade winds and westerly current and consequently join, at
the Azores, the same route as ships inbound from North and South Amer-
ica. In fact for a sailing ship the coast of South America below the equator
was often nearer to Europe in sailing time than the coast of Africa.
    In addition, the diseases of West Africa caused intolerable losses of Eu-
ropean lives, and made permanent settlement hazardous. Even in the early
nineteenth century, the death rates for British troops on the Gold Coast
ran as high as 668 per thousand each year. The tsetse fly prevented draft
animals and livestock from surviving in the West African tropical forest
zones. The West African coast, moreover, lacked safe anchorage except near
the mouth of the Niger River, which was dominated by Benin, the most
formidable of the West African states. Ships sailing on the West African
grain and ivory coasts had to anchor in open roadsteads, with little protec-
tion against the wind. Hence in Africa, the threat of disease worked in favor
of the native inhabitants and against the outsiders.

16Philip D. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census (Madison: University ofWis-
consin Press, 1969), 17-28,268.
17See J. D. Fage, A History ofWest Africa: An Introductory Survey (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1969),52-68; M. A. Havinden, "The History of Crop Cul-
tivation in West Africa, a Bibliographic Guide;' Economic History Review 23, 2d
series (1970): 532-553; Richard B. Sheridan, "Africa and the Caribbean in the At-
lantic Slave Trade," American Historical Review 77, no. 1 (February 1972): 15-35; F.
Guerra, "The Influence of Disease on Race, Logistics, and Colonization in the An-
tilles;' Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 69 (1966): 23-35.
28 • NakedTropics

   In the Caribbean islands as in the Canaries, the opposite was the case,
and the demographic collapse of the local population of Taino Indians
opened up land for the taking. Tainos ironically played a great role in the
distribution of food to tropical zones in the Eastern Hemisphere. Slave
traders carried the Tainos' principal crop, cassava, to sub-Saharan Africa.
And they also contributed many products to what Professor Crosby has
defined as the «Columbian exchange," including the sweet potato, bean,
squash, and peanut, fruits such as guava, marney, and pineapple, and rub-
ber and tobacco.
   The rise of sugar production and the slave trade in the islands of the
greater Antilles (Hispaniola, Cuba, Puerto Rico) placed them, together
with the Canary Islands, Madeira, Cape Verde, and Sao Tome, firmly
within a new commercial system stretching from the African coast to the
Atlantic. Economic organization throughout these various archipelagoes,
despite different chronologies of development, was remarkably similar. Al-
most always the distribution and marketing of sugar were in the hands of
the Italians, who also predominated as slave traders, often working
through Portuguese subcontractors. Production, on the other hand, was
invariably controlled by Spanish and Portuguese settlers, sometimes on a
small scale, as in Madeira. Often non-Iberian capital financed the sugar
mills, which required substantial investment in machinery and tools.
Transfer of expertise and skilled workers between sugar-producing regions
was common, from Sicily to Madeira, for example, or from the Canaries to
Hispaniola.
   The sugar technician was, in fact, among the more mobile and success-
ful artisans of this early Atlantic world, and was capable of accumulating
capital on his own behalf, for he received in most cases a percentage (often
one-tenth) of the sugar processed under his supervision. Sugar made an
ideal freight. In the Canary Islands, in the period from 1508 to 1510, its
value per pound was four to five times as much as the same quantity of
wheat. Freight costs were relatively low, some 4 to 6 percent of market
value as compared with 12 percent for wheat. It was therefore possible to
transport sugar advantageously across the Atlantic to a profitable market
in Europe. I8
   The connection between the sugar trade and the slave trade was a direct
one, and it turned out to be a compact of death. Most of the slaves sent to


18Jose-Gentil da Silva, «Echanges et troc: l' exernple des Canaries au debut du XVI-
Ierne siecle;' Annales ESC 16e annee (1961), 1004-1011; Rau and Macedo, 0 ap1car
da Madeira, 20; Robert S. Lopez, «Market Expansion: The Case of Genoa;' Journal
of Economic History 24 (1954): 460-461; Chaunu, Seville et ['Atlantique 7, no. 1,
527; Pike, Enterprise and Adventure, 50.
                                                 iAdi6s Columbusl • 29

Hispaniola between 1530 and 1540 by Vazques, Forne and Vivaldo, a Ge-
noese company in Seville, were exchanged for sugar. Slaves, purchased in
Africa with European barter goods of low intrinsic value, fetched high
prices in the markets of the New World, where the price ofAfrican slaves in
Hispaniola rose from forty-five ducats to one hundred between 1528 and
1556. Human beings shipped as a commodity provided the slave traders
with a cargo of high value in relation to the space they took up. Slaves once
landed were highly perishable, and required constant replacement, since
they failed to reproduce themselves owing to the rigors of plantation labor,
the low proportion of women imported, and the lack of incentive to pro-
create in conditions of forced labor and captivity. The more prosperous the
sugar trade became, the higher were the death rates of slaves and the lower
the proportion of women imported. Just as lands had been made available
for sugar production in the first place by the extermination of the original
inhabitants, the death rate of the imported labor force helped to guarantee
the continuance of the slave trade, especially during the early years.
   The planter did not have a strong incentive to encourage reproduction
among slaves, for the return on investment of slaves was relatively rapid
(between two years and thirty months, the period also required to recoup
the purchase price of work animals such as oxen). The same capitalists who
financed the slave trade would also sell the sugar produced on the islands,
and insure the ships at staggering rates (under the terms of sea loans the
merchant bankers accepted the risk of safe arrival of 80 to 90 percent of
ships and 56 to 60 percent of the slaves on board); they would also sell to
the new colonies most of the basic foodstuffs, clothing, and domestic ani-
mals they needed. The main profits of the early years in fact seem to have
accrued more to the large foreign bankers than the Spanish or Portuguese
shipowners and settlers.
   The incorporation of Hispaniola into the Afro-Atlantic system was of
great importance for the future development of the Caribbean and of
many of the lowland coastal regions of the Americas. In their broad out-
lines the patterns established in the early years were to be repeated else-
where. First, there was the headlong greed in the unscrupulous search for
precious metals. Then there was the collapse of the indigenous population,
followed by the exhaustion of the mineral wealth and the introduction of
cash crops worked by slave labor imported from Africa. For three and one-
half centuries the experience of the first thirty years was reproduced, and
the resulting patterns of ethnic composition, economic possibilities, and
social structure, and deeply rooted attitudes of resentment and resigna-
tion, made the Americas what they are today. Here indeed was the "shock
of discovery," to use the title of Anthony Grafton's book, although the edu-
cated Europeans whose works he analyzed remained more concerned with
30 • NakedTropics

classical and Renaissance literature and cosmology. But it should be kept in
mind that they often did so while drinking their American-produced cof-
fee, smoking American-produced tobacco, binding their texts between
American leather hides, and enjoying the leisure that the dividends from
overseas investments made possible.
   V. S. Naipaul's comment in The Mimic Men almost a quarter of a cen-
tury still holds:

    It was my hope to give expression to the restlessness, the deep disor-
    der, which the great explorations, the overthrow in three continents
    of established social organizations, the unnatural bringing together
    of peoples who could achieve fulfillment only within the security of
    their own societies and the landscapes hymned by their ancestors, it
    was my hope to give partial expression to the restlessness which this
    great upheaval has brought about. The empires of our time were
    short-lived, but they have altered the world forever; their passing
    away is their least significant feature. It was my hope to sketch a
    subject which, fifty years hence, a great historian might pursue. For
    there is no such thing as history nowadays; there are only mani-
    festoes and antiquarian research; and on the subject of empire there
    is only the pamphleteering of churls. 19

The outpouring during the quincentennial year has only demonstrated
once again how right Naipaul was, and how the task he sketched out re-
mains to be done.



                                     V
Strangely missing among the books provoked by the quincentenary of the
first Columbian voyage is adequate recognition of the importance of
Spain's main competitors, the Portuguese. In this respect their absence
from Professor Grafton's book is striking and means he does not discuss
the experience of the first Europeans, mainly Portuguese, to explore
around the African coastline from Cape Verde in the West to the mouth of
the Red Sea in the East; and he does not describe how the Portuguese
linked the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean through a maritime route and
mapped virtually the whole coastline of Asia, including Japan. No Por-
tuguese book is discussed or even listed in Grafton's work-which is some-
thing like writing about the space age while ignoring the American space

19V. S. (Vidiadhar Surajprasad) Naipaul, The Mimic Men (New York: Macmillan,
1967).
                                                       iAdi6s Columbus! • 31

program. Luis de Matos's encyclopedic discussion of the impact of the Por-
tuguese on Renaissance literature at least deserved some notice here. 20
    Few historians in 1992 seemed to realize that while the Portuguese won
the race to the East, Columbus lost it-even ifhe was never to admit to the
fact; and the more bizarre and desperate his claims to have done so, the
more recourse he had to the biblical and phantasmagorical allusions schol-
ars like Professor Grafton take as confirming their arguments that surpris-
ingly little had changed in the thinking of Europeans about the rest of the
world.
    Curiously, the only mention of Portugal in New Worlds, Ancient Texts
concerns Prince Henry and the school for the study of geography and nav-
igation that he allegedly established at Sagres in southwest Portugal during
the early fifteenth century. The school's existence has long been dismissed
as a nineteenth-century myth but is a very enduring myth nevertheless. In
fact, Professor Charles Boxer, in his notes to the catalog of a 1990 exhibi-
tion at the New York Public Library, which is cited by Professor Grafton in
his bibliography, succinctly demolished it. 21 Younger Portuguese scholars
like Professor Alfredo Pinheiro Marques are especially irritated at the
myth's persistence since it ignores a long and subtle process by which
knowledge was in fact acquired. Despite the patient work of experts such
as the late professor Luis de Albuquerque, doyen of the Portuguese carto-
graphical historians, the myth was revived by Daniel Boorstin, just when
they thought it was finally buried, in The Discoverers; and it is now here
once more repeated, which only goes to prove Professor Grafton's point, I
suppose, that "text" outlives "experience."
   There is much to be said for detailed analysis of texts in their own right,
certainly by an erudite scholar like Professor Grafton. Valerie Flint's book
The Imaginative Landscape of Christopher Columbus is a good example of
how revealing that type of careful exegesis can be. 22 Through a meticulous
examination of Columbus's reading, annotations, and expressed religious
beliefs, Professor Flint very skillfully shows us "not the New World Colum-
bus found, but the Old World, which he carried with him in his head."
   But not all scholars today have Flint's and Grafton's skills. In fact, most
scholars today lack mastery of Greek and Latin and are less well prepared

20Luls de Matos, L'expansion Portugaise dans la litterature latine de la renaissance
(Lisbon: Funda<;ao Calouste Gulbenkian, Servi<;o de Educa<;ao, 1991).
21C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, "The Politics of the Discoveries," in Portugal-Brazil:
The Age ofAtlantic Discoveries (Lisbon: Bertrand Editora, 1990),264-267; Profes-
sor LUIS de Albuquerque outlined his reasons for dismissing the idea of the "School
of Sagres" in his "Portuguese Navigation: Its Historical Development;' in Circa
1492: Art in the Age ofExploration (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992),35-39.
22Valerie I. J. Flint, The Imaginative Landscape ofChristopher Columbus (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1992).
32 • NakedTropics

for these tasks than they were a century ago. The curious consequence of
the surge of interest in literary analysis in the quincentennial year has been
to revive a great deal of Columbus's most outrageous claims, and by doing
so give emphasis to a resilient medievalism that emphasizes the continu-
ities rather than the innovations of this period. Columbus, of course, paid
dearly for his misapprehension of the territories he reached. Las Casas later
complained bitterly that Amerigo Vespucci had stolen Columbus's prize.
But as Garry Wills points out in his preface to the Vespucci Letters from a
New World, "Columbus had named what he had reached-the Indies. It
was not a new name because he did not think he had found anything new.
And his misnomer stuck."23
    One also suspects that a closer examination of the Spanish background
might have unraveled some of the enigmas in Columbus's professions of
orthodoxy. As Peggy Liss shows in her readable and comprehensive Isabel
the Queen, this was the period in which the Inquisition was converted into
a terrifying organ of state power, the Muslim inhabitants of Malaga were
conquered, enslaved, and sold, the concept of"purity of blood" was used to
humiliate and destroy thousands, homosexuality was declared to be high
treason, and the Jews were expelled. 24
    The books of the quincentennial year have also demonstrated how nar-
row and self-contained much contemporary scholarship has become. Few
of these books appreciate how the Portuguese and the Spaniards acted on a
great leap of global geographical perception at the turn of the fifteenth
century. It was the translation of this new geographical perception of the
world into European commercial and military domination and, in the
Caribbean and elsewhere, racial hegemony, which set the pattern for the ex-
plosive "encounter of civilizations" that the quincentennial used as an in-
cantation but rarely examined.
    It is therefore worth recalling that precisely during the long hiatus while
the Catholic monarchs sought to confirm Columbus's claims to have
reached Asia, the Portuguese, in fact, reached India, and King Manuel of
Portugal (1495-1521) wrote in 1499 to inform his Castilian colleagues of
his claims to the "suzerainty and dominion of the navigation, and com-
merce, of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India."25 This was of course hyper-
bole-but it demonstrated that the Portuguese had done in fact what
Columbus claimed to have done-reach Asia by sea. And as Professor

23Luciano Formisano, ed., Letters from a New World: Amerigo Vespucci's Discovery of
America (New York: Marsilio, 1992).
24Peggy K. Liss, Isabel the Queen: Life and Times (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992).
25C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825 (Lon-
don: Hutchinson, 1969),37.
                                                         iAdi6s Columbusl • 33

Alfredo Pinheiro Marques argues in Portugal and the Discovery ofAmerica,
it was no coincidence that Columbus was soon after recalled in chains from
his "Indies."26
    While Columbus and his travels cannot be fully explained without ref-
erence to the evolution of the fifteenth-century Atlantic system, their sig-
nificance is even less understandable if we do not also take account of the
global expansion by Europeans that took place early in the sixteenth cen-
tury within an extraordinary period of no more than fifteen years, in
which the Portuguese reached the Seychelles, Socotra, and the coast of
Arabia (1503), Ceylon and the Bay of Bengal (1509). In the Pacific they ex-
plored the coast of Southeast Asia and reached China in 1513. Contact
with Japan came during the 1540s. And even in the Americas, Portugal
claimed Brazil in 1500.
    Professor Marques provides an instructive comparison of the first im-
ages of the New World by juxtaposing two maps of the world as it was
known in the first years of the sixteenth century-the planisphere made by
the Spaniard Juan de la Cosa (ca. 1501-1506) from the Museu Naval in
Madrid, and the anonymous Portuguese planisphere of 1502 known as the
Cantino after the Italian agent who smuggled it out of Portugal, and which
comes from the Biblioteca Estense in Modena. Here the imprecise con-
tours of the Spanish map stand in striking contrast to the impressive accu-
racy of Portuguese cartography. And the Portuguese did not intend that
the point should be missed. With the famous embassy of Tristao da Cunha
to Pope Leo X in 1514, King Manuel planned to dazzle Rome with Portu-
gal's Asian exploits. Here, Angela Delaforce describes the spectacle:

     a theatrical display of figures dressed in exotic Indian and African
     costumes, Persian horses and the first living elephant seen there
     since antiquity was paraded on the streets of the eternal city [and]
     captured the popular and artistic imagination of Rome. 27


26Alfredo Pinheiro Marques, Portugal and the Discovery of America: Christopher
Columbus and the Portuguese (Lisbon: Portuguese State Mint, 1992).
27Angela Delaforce, "The Baixela da Victoria: Its Context and Iconography in the
Art of Portugal;' in Portugal's Silver Service: A Victory Gift to the Duke ofWellington,
ed. Angela Delaforce and James Yorke (London: Victoria and Albert Museum,
1992), 75-79. Essential background to the rich cultural connections between Flan-
ders, Italy, and Portugal during this period can be found in the two brilliant books
by Sylvie Deswarte: Les enluminures de fa Leitura Nova 1504-1552: Etude sur fa cul-
ture artistique au Portugal au temps de l'humanisme, preface by Andre Chastel
(Paris: Fundac;ao Calouste Gulbenkian, 1977) and II Perfetto Cortegiano: D. Miguel
da Silva (Rome: Bulzoni Editore, 1989). D. Miguel da Silva was Portuguese ambas-
sador to the Holy See, and it was to him that Baldassare Castiglione dedicated his
Cortegiano (Venice, 1528).
34 • NakedTropics

    The most dramatic result of Portugal's voyages and the explorations of
Bartolomeu Dias, Diego Cao, Vasco da Gama, and Pedro Alvares Cabral
was not the territorial empire they tried to claim in Asia and Africa and the
Americas. By and large they lacked the resources for imperial dominance
and power. What they did do, however, was establish connections: when we
talk of relations among China, Japan, or India, or Europe for that matter,
we are really talking about contacts established on their peripheries. The
seventeenth-century Brazilian historian Father Vicente de Salvador
tellingly compared the Portuguese to crabs crawling along a coastline. And
if this was true of Brazil until well into the eighteenth century, it was even
more true of China or of Japan.
    With this first period of oceanic contact an entirely new way of viewing
the world emerged and the Portuguese were in large part responsible for it.
They established an oceanic dominion that linked strategically placed
trading posts in a worldwide imperial system.
    In this accomplishment, the rapid evolution of Portuguese cartography
during this period was particularly important; a new graphic conception
of global space gave the Portuguese, and later Europe, a decided advantage.
It permitted, for instance, a very rapid conversion of navigational knowl-
edge to strategic and commercial (one might say protoimperial) advan-
tage. The political and economic aspects of the Portuguese intrusion into
Asia and the subsequent vicissitudes of their presence there are well cap-
tured in Sanjay Subrahmanyam's fascinating The Portuguese Empire in
Asia. 28 Synthesizing a generation of research, his book is an indispensable
starting point for comprehending the Portuguese exploits both in Asia and
Europe. He casts new light, for example, on the ways in which the Por-
tuguese, by opening the oceanic routes, displaced the Venetians in import-
ing spices, especially pepper, into Europe.
    All the Portuguese outposts established while the Spaniards remained
largely confined to the Caribbean were located at key strategic connections
between seas and oceans, the key passageways for trade and naval control,
for example, Hormuz at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, Mombasa and
Mozambique at the Malagasy Strait, Malacca for the passage between the
Bay of Bengal and the South China Sea, the Azores on the sea routes back
from the North and South Atlantic to Europe, Macao at the mouth of the
Pearl River in China, and Cape Verde, which could monitor movements
across the Atlantic to the African coast. These places are still identified by
naval strategists as "choke points." Their importance for control of naviga-
tion had been known, of course, to those who had used them for centuries

28Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia 1500-1700: A Political and
Economic History (London: Longman, 1993).
                                                 iAdi6s Columbus! • 35

before the Portuguese arrived, but they had never before been seen as af-
fecting movements across the globe.
    With extraordinary rapidity at the beginning of the sixteenth century
the Portuguese turned their geographical knowledge into a global system.
Only at the mouth of the Red Sea, when they attempted to seize and hold
Aden, did they fail. What is surprising in view of this record is how long it
took Spaniards to reach Mexico, almost thirty years after Columbus's land-
fall in 1492. It was after all not until 1513 that Vasco Nufiez de Balboa
crossed the Isthmus of Panama to see the Pacific Ocean. And the first cir-
cumnavigation of the globe (which achieved of course what Columbus
had wanted to do-sail west to arrive in the East) was made possible when
Fernao de Magalhaes (Ferdinand Magellan), a Portuguese navigator in the
service of the Castilian Crown, set sail in 1519 to discover the straits that
now bear his name and crossed the Pacific to the Philippines, in the same
year in fact that Hernan Cortes arrived in Tenochtitlan.
    The capacity of the Portuguese to see the big picture is one of the more
remarkable perceptual innovations of the early sixteenth century. This was
a leap of imagination that Columbus, despite his great voyages, singularly
failed to make-at least in part because he had deluded himself, as, it
seems, he still deludes some historians.
C CAO.
                                                            CHAPTER           3
                                                           Chocolate
                                "Give me chastity and continence, but not just now."
                                                -Saint Augustine, Confessions 8.7




In 1544 Dominican friars took a delegation of Maya nobles to visit Prince
Philip of Spain. Among the presents they brought to his courts, together
with various kinds of chilies, beans, sarsparilla, maize, liquidambar (a
plant of the witch hazel family), and two thousand quetzal feathers, their
most precious offering, were receptacles of beaten chocolate. This was, ac-
cording to Sophie Coe and Michael Coe, the first appearance of chocolate
in Europe. The future Philip II, however, seemed more concerned about
his visitors' nakedness than their gifts, and may not have been aware of the
historic event. 1
   The Coes return to the Mayas at the end of their story. Inhabitants of
the clouded, forested mountains and the fertile valleys bordering the Peten
lowlands, called Verapaz ("True Peace") by the Spaniards, the Kekchi Maya
people were for the Dominicans a striking example of how kindness and
understanding could bring greater rewards than violence. It was here, in
what is now Guatemala and southern Mexico, that Bartolome de las Casas
began his locally successful, but ultimately doomed, efforts to counter the
rapacious destruction he sawall around him in the ancient worlds the Eu-
ropeans had stumbled onto in 1492, with devastating consequences for the
indigenous populations.



lSophie D. Cae and Michael D. Cae, The True History of Chocolate (New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1996).


                                     37
38 • NakedTropics

                                        I
The title of the Coes' book is an allusion to The True History ofthe Conquest
ofMexico, completed in 1572 in Guatemala's capital by the old, poor, and
partially blind conquistador Bernal Diaz del Castillo, a warrior who
wished to get the facts straight, free from "lofty rhetoric;' about the fate of
the Aztecs. The Coes seek to do the same for chocolate and also to bring se-
riousness to the study of the history of food and drink. "Although food,
sex, and mortality are the three great givens of human existence;' they
note, "earlier generations of academics generally avoided these topics as
not quite respectable." This is not entirely true: Gilberto Freyre's trilogy on
Brazil is full of sex and accounts of exotic and erotic sugary delicacies of
one sort or another. 2 Nevertheless, what the Coes have achieved is to strip
away, as Bernal Diaz del Castillo tried to do, the myths and misunderstand-
ings, and to reconstruct from often very obscure sources, with some excit-
ing archaeological fieldwork and hieroglyphic deciphering, the remarkable
passage of chocolate from its origins in the lowland jungles of southern
Mexico to "Hershey's Kisses" and Cadbury's "chocolate box," and to
reestablish its genealogy over three millennia.
   Chocolate for nine-tenths of its long history was drunk, not eaten, and
only one-fifth of that history postdates the fall of the Aztec capital in 1521.
The dark brown, pleasantly bitter, chemically complex substance bears lit-
tle resemblance to the pulp-surrounded seeds of the cacao plants from
which it is produced. The European invaders had to name many of the
plants and plant derivatives, new to them, that they encountered in the
Western Hemisphere, and to fit them into their own schemes of classifica-
tion, as well as within the health theories of classical authors, who had been
totally unaware of the existence of the New World but whose ideas domi-
nated medicine until the eighteenth century.
   Chocolate was first used in Europe as a curative. The scientific name
given to the cacao tree in 1753 by Carl von Linne, more commonly known
as Linnaeus, in Latinized form, was based on the binomial system he in-
vented. As a chocolate lover, Linnaeus named the cacao tree Theobroma
cacao; the first part, the name of the genus to which the cacao belongs, he
took from the Greek meaning "food of the gods." The New World name
cacao he found barbaric, and put in the second place as the specific name.
Yet as the Coes demonstrate in fascinating detail, it is the word cacao that
provides the clue to the unraveling of chocolate's earliest history.


2Gilberto Freyre, The Masters and the Slaves (Casa-Grande & Senzala): A Study in
the Development of Brazilian Civilization, trans. Samuel Putnam (New York:
Knopf, 1946); New World in the Tropics; The Culture of Modern Brazil (New York:
Knopf, 1959); and The Mansions and the Shanties: The Making of Modern Brazil,
trans. Harriet de Onis (New York: Knopf, 1963).
                                                          Chocolate • 39

    The cacao tree itself is a spindly shade tree. Exceedingly difficult to
grow, it will not bear fruit outside the region from 20 degrees north to 20
degrees south of the equator. Even then it will not grow in the tropical
highlands, where the temperature falls below 60 degrees Fahrenheit. It re-
quires year-round moisture. There are two major varieties of cacao tree:
the criollo, native to Central America, and the forastero, originally from
South America. The flavor and the aroma of the seeds of criollo are supe-
rior to the more hardy and now more widely cultivated forastero. Like
other tropical fruit trees, the cacao tree produces flowers from small nodes
on the trunk and on the larger branches. Europeans could not at first be-
lieve this, and their illustrations moved the cacao pods out to the smaller
branches, assuming the indigenous watercolorists whose work they were
engraving had not accurately observed the plants.
    In the damp, shaded depths of the tropical forest the five-petaled flow-
ers are pollinated by midges and, once pollinated, each flower produces a
large pod of thirty or so almond-shaped seeds, or "beans;' surrounded by a
sweet, juicy pulp. The cacao pods, which cannot open on their own, are
cracked in the wild by monkeys seeking the pulp. It was the pulp, the Coes
believe, that first attracted human beings as well. Once the pods are opened
and the pulp extracted, four steps are necessary to produce cacao "nibs;' or
kernels, which are ground into chocolate. Whatever the technology em-
ployed, from that of the earliest forest dwellers to the modern factory, the
steps are: first fermentation, then drying, roasting, and winnowing.
   The cacao plant was first domesticated by the Olmecs, the complex cul-
ture of the Mexican Gulf Coast, around 1500 B.C. The Maya took the word
"cacao" from these distant ancestors and, at some time between 400 B.C.
and 100 A.D., began using the word to mean, as it still does, the domesti-
cated Theobroma cacao. The Coes provide a brilliant excursion through the
pre-Conquest Mesoamerican city-states in the forests of northern Guate-
mala and southern Yucatan, with their towering temple pyramids of stucco
masonry, their palaces, stone relief carvings, and delicately painted and
carved ceramic vases. Archaeological evidence and some remarkable hi-
eroglyphic deciphering have brought to light the central role of the pro-
duction and consumption of chocolate in Maya society, and this
extraordinary detective work is beautifully described by the authors. From
a tomb in a medium-sized Maya city at Rio Azul in Guatemala, a trove of
the paraphernalia of chocolate consumption was discovered in 1984, in-
cluding a chocolate jar with a screw-on lid. Among the many fine illustra-
tions the Coes include in their book is a scene from an eighth-century A.D.
vase from the Nakbe area of north-central Peten, now in the Princeton
University Art Museum, depicting a Maya woman carefully pouring a dark
substance from a cylindrical jar into a larger one-the first known picture
of a chocolate drink being made.
40 • NakedTropics

   The Aztecs, too, were great chocolate drinkers. Chocolate was much fa-
vored by warriors as well as the nobility because the drink was, among its
other attributes, nonalcoholic, and the Aztecs, whatever else they may have
been, were notably abstemious. Cacao beans served as money as well as for
making chocolate and became objects of long-distance trade. Huge store-
houses of cacao beans were kept by the Aztec rulers.
   Columbus during his disastrous fourth voyage met with a huge Maya
dugout canoe in 1502 near the Bay Islands off the Honduran coast. With
typical alacrity, Columbus had the canoe seized and stripped of its trading
goods, including a cargo of "almonds" which, the Spaniards were very sur-
prised to see, the Maya traders valued highly. Also typically, Columbus did
not comprehend what he had seen. The inventor of the phrase "New
World," the Milanese chronicler Peter Martyr, knew better. He called cacao
beans "happie money ... which I call happy, because ... the bowelles of
the earth are not rent a sunder ... For this groweth upon trees."
   For the Aztecs, chocolate, which they called cacahuatI,was apparently a
cool drink prepared in much the same way the Maya did. The cacao beans
were crushed, pulverized, soaked, and steeped. Water was added sparingly,
followed by aeration, filtration, and straining. The liquid was then poured
back and forth from one vessel to another to produce a head of foam. All
pre-Conquest chocolate drinks were made by this method.
   By the late sixteenth century the bitter, usually unsweetened cold liquid
had become transformed in the early colonial kitchens where conquered
and conqueror met. In the same period cacao also met, again in the colo-
nial kitchen, a product of another domesticated crop. Sugar arrived by way
of the long process of continental and transoceanic transplantation that
brought sugarcane to the Americas-from Asia, through the Mediter-
ranean and the Atlantic islands, to Santo Domingo, and finally to the es-
tates established by the family of Hernan Cortes in colonial Mexico. The
Coes make too little, perhaps, of this momentous encounter between cacao
and sugar; but it was a mix that made chocolate sweet and hot.
   The Spanish conquerors suspected, perhaps hoped, that chocolate had
aphrodisiac properties. But this, according to the Coes, was a Spanish ob-
session, "as was the chronic constipation" caused by their diet of meat and
lard and few fresh vegetables. "The conquistadors searched for native Mex-
ican laxatives as avidly as they did for aphrodisiacs," the Coes observe.
   The authors' ingenious explanation for the transformation of the word
for the drink from cacahuatl to chocolate is not unrelated to these particu-
lar Spanish concerns. The Spaniards, the Coes suggest, were uncomfort-
able with a noun beginning with caca to describe the thick, dark-brown
drain they were increasingly appreciating. In Latin and most Romance lan-
guages caca, as in cacahuatl, is a vulgar word for feces. Chocolatl and choco-
                                                           Chocolate • 41

 late, a neologism derived from a Maya and Aztec mix, had a more re-
spectable sound. Philologists will doubtlessly argue over such derivations,
but it is an explanation that would have been much appreciated by the
Marquis de Sade, a chocoholic who became grotesquely obese during his
long captivity, when, denied other outlets, he spent his time overindulging
in all manner of chocolate delicacies, of which he was always demanding
more from his loyal and long-suffering wife. «I asked ... for a cake with
icing, but I want it to be chocolate:' he demanded in 1779, «and black in-
side from chocolate as the devil's ass is black from smoke. And the icing is
to be the same."
    Chocolate had become well established as an elite drink in Europe and
Spanish America by the mid-seventeenth century. In all cases the dried
chocolate mass in the form of cakes, rolls, or bricks was placed in hot water
in a special jug or chocolate pot fitted with a lid pursed in the middle to
hold the handle of the molinillo (swizzle stick) and beaten to produce a
froth. Initially, the Spaniards sipped their foamy chocolate the Mesoameri-
can way, from gourds or small open clay bowls called jicaras; but the
viceroy of Peru, the Marques de Mancera, in the 1640s was concerned
about the ladies-in-waiting at his reception spilling chocolate on their
court dresses. He had Lima silversmiths make up a plate or saucer with a
collarlike ring in the middle in which a small cup could sit without slip-
ping. This mancerina soon became ubiquitous, and was the progenitor of
the magnificent eighteenth-century Viennese porcelain cups and saucers
called trembleuses. At the French court the silver chocolatiere was intro-
duced with the lid adapted to hold a moussoir directly borrowed from
Spanish and Mesoamerican prototypes. The French added a straight angle
to the spout; because it unscrewed clockwise, the handle remained tight
while the liquid was poured in a counterclockwise motion.
    The profligate Cosimo de' Medici became addicted to chocolate on a
visit to Spain and on becoming Cosimo III, grand duke of Tuscany, was
one of the great chocoholics of all time. Francesco Redi (1626-1697), the
grand duke's renowned physician and apothecary, invented the novel per-
fume flavors introduced into chocolate for the Tuscan court, most fa-
mouslya delicate jasmine aroma. The jealously guarded secret formula for
this most baroque of chocolate drinks is printed by the Coes for those who
would like to re-create it, along with many other recipes and methods of
chocolate preparation scattered throughout their book.
    The Italians, in fact, were lyrical about chocolate. For Geronimo
Piperni: «Chocolate is a divine, celestial drink, the sweat of the stars, the
vital seed, divine nectar, the drink of the gods, panacea and universal med-
icine." Another Florentine, Marcello Malaspina (1689-1757), composed a
curious dithyramb called «Bacchus in Tuscany," set on the coast of
42 • NakedTropics

Guatemala, where shipwrecked Tuscans, finding themselves in a grove of
cacao trees, sing out:
                Che il CIOCCOLATTA d'ogni Beva eil Re.
                  [That chocolate is the king of drinks.]
   Chocolate, it was soon learned, could also effectively disguise poisons.
Horace Walpole's old friend, Sir Horace Mann, believed that Pope Clement
XIV, who had suppressed the Jesuits in 1773, had been poisoned by them.
The Jesuits were great drinkers and producers of chocolate. Their cacao
trade from the Amazon was one of their most profitable enterprises until
the Marques de Pombal expelled them from the region. The pope, Mann
told Walpole, persisted in drinking his chocolate despite fears of assassina-
tion and was slowly poisoned through his "dish of chocolate last Holy
Thursday at the Vatican."
   By the late eighteenth century, chocolate was indelibly associated with
decadence, aristocracy, and the Catholic Church, especially with the Je-
suits, all of which made it suspect to the philosophes, enlightened thinkers,
enterprising Protestant businessmen, and aspiring radical politicians who
preferred coffee. Nor had the technology employed in chocolate's prepara-
tion changed much since the time of the Olmecs, despite the invention of
better pots, nonslip saucers, and exotic aromas. The plate dedicated to
chocolate making in the Encyclopedie of Denis Diderot and Jean d'Alem-
bert shows a worker toasting cacao in a cauldron, another breaking them
in a heated mortar, and another grinding them on a heated surface-all
steps familiar to the Maya and the Aztecs. In this as in so much else, the En-
cyclopedie was a compendium of things past rather than of things to come.


                                      II
Yet the nineteenth century also saw chocolate go down-market. Chocolate
became a product worked on by chemists and promoted by billboards. No
longer a drink favored by gluttonous grand dukes, villainous Jesuits, and
notorious marquises with specialized tastes, it became the respectable
snack food of virtuous Quakers, of Royal Navy sailors weaned from grog,
and of the unromantic Swiss. The leap into the modern era came in 1828
when the Dutch chemist Coenraad Van Houten took out a patent on a pro-
cess for the manufacture of a new kind of powdered chocolate with a very
low fat content. He had developed a very efficient filtering process which
reduced the cocoa butter content, leaving a cake that could be pulverized
into a fine powder. This powder he treated with alkaline salts so that it
would mix well with water.
   Van Houten's defatting and alkalizing process made possible large-scale
manufacture of cheap chocolate in powdered or solid form. From then on,
                                                           Chocolate • 43

it was no longer necessary to stir and beat the heavy liquid to make a palat-
able drink, and the chocolate pot fell out of use. In Bristol, Joseph Fry &
Sons developed a method for casting chocolate into a mold and in 1849 ex-
hibited the first hard eating chocolate. Fry later became the sole supplier to
the Royal Navy. The Cadburys of Birmingham, using Van Houten's
method, introduced cocoa powder and the first "chocolate box." The
Rowntrees of York developed similar lines of merchandise. The Frys, Cad-
burys, and Rowntrees were all Quakers with a social conscience. Cadbury
and Rowntree developed model towns for their workers, whom they ex-
pected to be God-fearing and sober. The Frys refused to accept cacao from
Portuguese plantations on the island of Sao Tome, off the West African
coast, whose working conditions they regarded as unacceptable.
    In Switzerland, Henri Nestle invented a process for making powdered
milk by evaporation, and Daniel Peter used Nestle's powder to make milk
chocolate by drying out the moisture in the mix and replacing it with cacao
butter. Another Swiss, Rudolph Lindt, devised a machine to make choco-
late smoother, a process which became universal. And in Pennsylvania, a
pious Mennonite, Milton Snavely Hershey, the "Henry Ford of Chocolate
Makers," brought mass production to the chocolate business, constructing
around his factory his own chocolate kingdom and an oversized imitation
of George Washington's Mount Vernon to house himself. With Hershey,
everything was mechanized. By the 1980s, 25 million Hershey's Kisses, lit-
tle bite-sized, flat-bottomed drops of milk chocolate, dropped off Her-
shey's conveyor belts daily into their waiting boxes. Even the streetlights of
Hershey's "Chocolate Town" are in the shape of Kisses.
   Hard chocolate was an eminently respectable product-it was sold in
corner shops, not drinking houses, and advertised in campaigns that in-
vented the idea of"family values" by using wholesome little girls and neatly
dressed Victorian schoolboys to promote it. But there was a darker side.
Chocolate's profitability brought adulteration and, to counter it, the first
consumer protection legislation.
   Chocolate's popularity among the expanding middle classes in Europe
and North America also made for expanded opportunities for colonial en-
terprise overseas. In 1824 the Portuguese had transplanted forastero cut-
tings from Brazil to Sao Tome. By 1850, cacao cuttings were taken to
Equatorial Guinea. By 1900 Theobroma cacao reached Ghana, Nigeria, and
the Ivory Coast, and then went on to Sri Lanka, Java, Sumatra, and Ocea-
nia. By 1991, Africa was the source of 55 percent of the world's cacao; Mex-
ico' where chocolate was born and cacao originated, accounted for only 1.5
percent.
   Yet mass production and mass marketing have brought their own his-
torical antidote. While the criollo beans are now the source of a mere 2 per-
cent of the world cacao crop, the premier chocolatiers have returned to the
44 • NakedTropics

variety of those beans once enjoyed by Maya nobles, Aztec warriors, and
European aristocrats. With this remarkable full circle the Coes bring their
book to conclusion. The Kekchi Maya of Belize, who first brought their
precious beans to Europe as a gift to Prince Philip four hundred and fifty
years ago, are today, through the good offices of the Fairtrade Foundation,
an organization established by Oxfam, once again producing cacao beans
in traditional three-acre forest plots where the Theobroma cacao is polli-
nated by midges safe from pesticides. From these cacao beans, Maya Gold,
a new, expensive, ecologically friendly chocolate bar, is produced by the
Green and Black's Company.
   I was visiting the U.K. while writing this piece and was pleased to find
that my brother-in-law stocked Maya Gold in his natural-foods store in
Tiverton, Devonshire. The town has a street called Gold and many old
schoolhouses, almshouses, and chantries built and endowed in the six-
teenth century by local merchants, some of whom engaged in overseas
trade and, on occasion, piracy (at least the Spanish considered it such). The
parish church of St. Peter bears on its outer walls some of the finest stone
carvings of the sixteenth-century armed merchant vessels in England,
commissioned by one of the town's richest merchant adventurers. Devon
privateers were the most notorious raiders along the Spanish Main. But
they did not always know that cacao beans were "happie money" and to the
Central Americans as good as gold. In 1579, after seizing a Spanish ship off
the Isthmus of Panama, they burned the whole cargo in frustrated anger,
thinking the cacao beans were sheep droppings placed there to deceive
them. Now the descendants of these sixteenth-century mariners are buy-
ing Maya Gold, which seems to me as delicious as the Coes say it is.
   Sophie Coe was a pioneer of culinary history, author of America's First
Cuisines. 3 She was struck down suddenly by incurable cancer while she was
working on her True Story of Chocolate. Michael Coe, her husband and a
distinguished Yale anthropologist, completed her work. The book was con-
ceived out of a fascination with chocolate, and completed out of the love
for a partner lost. Sophie Cae has given us, and Michael Coe has delivered
to us, a splendid treat.




3Sophie D. Coe, America's First Cuisines (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994).
This page intentionally left blank
B U CC AN E ER S E M B A R K IN G   ON   AN   E X P E D IT IO N .
                                                                CHAPTER             4
                                             Pirate Democracy
                    ((They change their climate, not their soul, who rush across the sea."
                                                              -Horace, Epistles 1.11.27




The first books about pirates appeared surprisingly soon after the piracy
they described. The most successful of all the early pirates, Henry Morgan,
who sacked the Spanish colonial city of Panama in 1671, was portrayed as a
monster of depravity and cruelty in Alexander Exquemelin's best-selling
Buccaneers ofAmerica, first published in Dutch in 1678, and in English in
1684. 1 Morgan brought suit for defamation of character. He strongly ob-
jected to a passage which said that he had first gone to the V\Test Indies as an
indentured servant and argued that because the governor of Jamaica, Sir
Thomas Modyford, authorized his raids against the Spanish possessions,
he was not a pirate. The matter was settled out of court, and Morgan re-
ceived substantial damages.
   Recalled to London in order to placate the Spaniards, Morgan was soon
knighted by Charles II and later returned to Jamaica as lieutenant gover-
nor, where he acquired landed estates and over a hundred slaves. He died a
rich man. It was his gargantuan drinking bouts that did him in. «Palling
after into his old course of life and not taking any advice to the contrary,
his belly swelled so as not to be contained in his coat:' Hans Sloane, who
attended him, reported. Whereupon Morgan turned to an African shaman
who plastered him with mud and made him drink urine. «But he lan-
guished and, his cough augmenting, died soon after."

1For a recent and accessible edition see Alexander o. Exquemelin, The Buccaneers
ofAmerica, trans. Alexis Brown (New York: Dover Publications, 2000).


                                        47
48 • NakedTropics

   The governor of Jamaica ordered a state funeral for Sir Harry. A solemn
service took place at St. Peter's Church, of which Morgan was a benefactor.
When the warships in the harbor honored the old villain with a twenty-one-
gun salute, the cannons of the merchant vessels answered with their own dis-
orderly but thunderous barrage. But in all this Henry Morgan was an
exception. Most of his fellow pirates had short careers, met early and nasty
ends, and died penniless, having lost their spoils in the taverns and brothels
of Port Royal, Jamaica's capital, and one of the Caribbean's great buccaneer
havens until it was destroyed by an earthquake in 1692, a suitable punish-
ment for its past crimes and misdemeanors, some argued at the time.



                                       II
One thing, however, seems certain: books about pirates tend to make more
money than did most pirates. The London Maritime Museum's 1992 exhi-
bition «Pirates: Fact and Fiction;' a show planned to last four months, re-
mained open for three years by popular demand. So it was not surprising
that a New York literary agent encouraged David Cordingly, one of the cu-
rators, to take up the theme of the exhibition in a book contrasting the fic-
tional image of pirates with historical reality. 2
    Cordingly concentrates principally on the great age of piracy between
the last half of the seventeenth and the early eighteenth centuries, essen-
tially the 1650s through 1725. For the «real world" of the pirates, he exam-
ined contemporary English language sources, principally the logbooks of
the Royal Navy vessels sent out against the pirates, reports from colonial
governors, and the depositions of captured pirates and their victims. He
also has much to say about the popular image of pirates based on three
centuries of ballads, melodramas, epic poems, films, and romantic novels,
as well as the two classics of pirate lore, Treasure Island (1883) by Robert
Louis Stevenson and Peter Pan (1904) by J. M. Barrie. He draws extensively,
as he acknowledges, on the work of the historians Robert Ritchie, Marcus
Rediker, Peter Earle, and Nicholas Rodger, each of whom, in different ways,
has revolutionized the study of everyday life at sea during this period. 3

2David Cordingly, Under the Black Flag: The Romance and the Reality ofLife among
the Pirates (New York: Random House, 1995).
3Robert C. Ritchie, Captain Kidd and the War against the Pirates (Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press, 1986); Marcus Rediker, Between the Devil and the Deep Blue
Sea: Merchant Seamen, Pirates and the Anglo-American Maritime World, 1700-
1750 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987); Peter Earle, The Sack of
Panama: Sir Henry Morgan's Adventures on the Spanish Main (New York: Viking,
1982); N. A. M. Rodger, The Wooden World: An Anatomy of the Georgian Navy
(London: Collins, 1986).
                                                   Pirate Democracy • 49

   Cordingly concedes almost immediately that the popular conception of
how pirates dressed turns out to be surprisingly accurate. As other
mariners in this period did, they wore short blue jackets, a checkered shirt,
a pair of long canvass trousers or baggy petticoat breeches, and often a red
waistcoat and neckerchief. Pirates did indeed tie scarves or large handker-
chiefs around their heads (a sensible and practical protection from the rays
of the sun at sea or in the tropics); they slung several pistols on ribbons
around their shoulders (also a wise precaution, since flintlock pistols were
unreliable at sea and if one failed owing to a damp charge, a second or
third backup came in handy); they wielded cutlasses and their elected
chiefs were flamboyant and charismatic characters. The pirate captain
Bartholomew Roberts, known as "Black Bart," said to have captured four
hundred vessels, fought his last sea battle in 1722, clad "in a rich crimson
damask waistcoat and breeches, a red feather in his hat, a gold chain round
his neck, with a diamond cross hanging to it."
   But dress is one thing, behavior is another. The pirates we meet in Cord-
ingly's book are a bloodthirsty bunch, far from the grandees fallen on hard
times depicted by W. S. Gilbert and Sir Arthur Sullivan in their Pirates of
Penzance. The Boston Gazette in March 1726 gave a graphic description of
Philip Lyne, the notorious pirate who, when he was tried in Barbados, con-
fessed to killing thirty-seven masters of vessels and an unspecified number
of seamen; the commander walked to the trial
    with about 20 other pirates, with their black silk flag before
    them.... As they were much wounded, and no care taken in dress-
    ing, they were very offensive, and stunk as they went along, particu-
    larly Line the commander; he had one eye shot out, which with part
    of his nose, hung down on his face.
   "Pirate" was a very specific designation and the distinction between pi-
rate and privateer was an important one, at least in law if not in practice. A
"privateer" was an armed vessel, or the commander and crew of a vessel,
that was licensed to attack and seize the vessels of a hostile nation. The li-
cense took the form of a "letter of marque and reprisal." By the sixteenth
century, the licensing system provided all the European seafaring nations
with a cheap way of attacking enemy shipping in time of war. The letter of
marque was an impressive and ponderous legal document, and the priva-
teer captain was expected to keep a journal and hand over the ship and
goods he had seized to an admiralty court, where the sovereign took his
share (or her share in the case of Queen Elizabeth, who always displayed a
greedy interest in such divisions of spoils). The rest of the loot was divided
among the ship owners, captain, and crew. A "pirate," on the other hand,
was legally defined in England from the time of Henry VIII as someone
50 • NakedTropics

who robs and plunders on the sea; and the laws against piracy provided for
punishment for "felonies, robberies, and murders committed in any haven,
river, creek, or place where the Lord High Admiral had jurisdiction:'
    Pirates had different regional names. "Buccaneer" was used in the
Caribbean and along the Atlantic seaboard of the Americas. The term was
first applied to hunters in the woods and valleys of western Hispaniola
(today's Haiti) who lived off the herds of feral hogs and cattle, whose num-
bers rapidly increased after the first Spanish s~ttlers introduced them into
a land without natural predators. Mostly French frontiersmen, these
hunters cooked and dried strips of meat over open barbecues, a method
borrowed from the indigenous Arawak inhabitants. The word for this pro-
cess, boucaner (meaning to smoke-dry or cure), gave the men their name.
They dressed in leather and, with their knives and bloodstained appear-
ance, "looked and smelled like a man from a slaughterhouse:' according to
Cordingly. By the 1630s, the buccaneers were established on Tortuga, off
the north coast of what is now Haiti, and an ideal launching ground for at-
tacks on the merchant vessels using the windward passage between His-
paniola and Cuba. Here the buccaneers formed a loose confederation
calling itself the "Brethren of the Coast."
    Much of what is known of the Caribbean pirates of Harry Morgan's
time comes from Alexander Exquemelin's Buccaneers of America. He
claimed in his book to "give no stories taken on hearsay, but only those to
which I was eyewitness." Born in the French channel port of Honfleur, Ex-
quemelin had arrived on Tortuga about 1666 as an indentured servant. He
was sold to a barber-surgeon, learned his master's trade, and gained his
freedom. Being "naked and destitute of all human necessities," he wrote, "I
determined to enter into the wicked order of the pirates." For five years, he
served with the buccaneers under both Henry Morgan and Franc;ois
l'Olonnais, joined them in their raids out of Tortuga and Port Royal, and
was paid handsomely for his medical skills. He broke with Morgan after
the attack on Panama, in which he participated. Like many of the bucca-
neers, he believed that Morgan had cheated him. After the raid, Ex-
quemelin returned to Europe where, in Amsterdam, he published his
best-seller. He later returned to the Caribbean and in 1697 joined in the
combined French and buccaneer attack on Cartagena, again serving as a
surgeon to the pirates.
    Exquemelin's account of the activities of Fran<;ois l'Olonnais, born
Jean-David Nau in western France at Les Sables d'Olonne (hence his nick-
name, "the man from Olonne"), fully justified l'Olonnais's other designa-
tion: "Fleau des Espagnols:' or Flail of the Spaniards. A former indentured
servant like Exquemelin, he had joined the cattle hunters on Hispaniola
and then turned buccaneer. He was a psychopath whose torture and mur-
                                                      Pirate Democracy • 51

der of prisoners became so feared throughout the Caribbean that he began
to meet with far more determined opposition than most pirates. The mer-
chant ships, Exquemelin said, "fought until they could fight no more."
    As well they might, since the man from Olonne was merciless. It was
common practice for pirates to torture their prisoners, as Morgan's men
had done in Panama to obtain information. The favorite pirate torture was
"woolding," after the word for the binding of cords around a mast. Ex-
quemelin describes how slender cords were "twisted about [the] heads, till
 [the] eyes burst out of the skull." But l'Olonnais clearly enjoyed torturing
men as much as he did taking their valuables: "When l'Olonnais had a vic-
tim on the rack, if the wretch did not instantly answer his questions he
would hack the man to pieces with his cutlass and lick the blood from the
blade with this tongue, wishing it might have been the last Spaniard in the
world he had thus killed." Eventually l'Olonnais met with a suitably bizarre
fate, if we can believe Exquemelin's story that he was captured on the Gulf
of Darien, near Panama, by cannibals, hacked to pieces, and roasted limb
by limb.
    Together with Exquemelin's book, the other major source is Captain
Charles Johnson's 1724 General History of the Pirates. Since the early 1930s,
this book has been attributed to Daniel Defoe and is so listed in most library
catalogs. This attribution is retained by Jan Rogozinski in his comprehensive
encyclopedia Pirates!4 But Cordingly, following the research of P. N. Furbank
and L. R. Owens, claims that not a single piece of documentation links Defoe
to the General History. Unfortunately nothing much is known about the mys-
terious Captain Johnson, although his history is the origin of most later ac-
counts, film scripts, and myths about pirates; so even if Defoe is not the
author, the problem of distinguishing fact from fiction remains. In one noto-
rious case, however, that of Edward Teach, famous as Blackbeard, Cordingly
demonstrates convincingly that Johnson's description was close to the truth.
Lieutenant Maynard, who fought him to the death on the deck ofhis ship in
Ocracoke Inlet of Pamlico Sound, North Carolina, in November 1718, wrote
later of Captain Teach that he "went by the name of Blackbeard, because he
let his beard grow, and tied it up in black ribbons." According to Johnson,
Teach used these ribbons to twist his beard up into small tails about his ears,
and stuck lighted matches under his hat when ready for action, so that "his
eyes naturally looking fierce and wild, made him altogether such a figure, that
imagination cannot form an idea of a fury, from Hell, to look more frightful."


4Jan Rogozinski) Pirates! An A-Z Encyclopedia: Brigands, Buccaneers, and Privateers
in Fact) Fiction) and Legend (New York and Cambridge) Mass.: Da Capo) 1996). For
a recent and accessible edition see Manuel Schonhorn) ed.) A General History ofthe
Pyrates [attributed to Daniel Defoe] (New York: Dover Publications) 1999).
52 • NakedTropics

   The Mediterranean pirates of the Barbary Coast were called «corsairs"
and operated from Algiers, Tunis, Sale, and other North African ports
where the Muslim rulers issued them licenses to attack Christian shipping.
Using swift galleys powered by oars and sail, they attacked heavily laden,
slow-moving merchantmen; they looted the cargoes, captured the passen-
gers and crew, and held them for ransom or sold them into slavery. Since
he was licensed, the corsair was technically a privateer and the term was
used without a particular geographic designation in French, Italian, and
Portuguese, but in English it applied more restrictively to the Barbary
raiders. Piracy was business for the Barbary rulers, and the corsairs formed
a guild that tried to regulate it. Although the Barbary states justified their
actions as a form of religious warfare, many Christian renegades were
prominent in the corsair fleet.
   The Barbary corsairs thrived in the shifting and ambiguous maritime
zone between Ottoman and Spanish sea power in the Mediterranean.
Their bases were strategically placed to prey on the merchant ships using
the Strait of Gibraltar. They were most active between 1580 and the late
seventeenth century, and returned with increased firepower during the
long European wars between 1792 and 1815. «The depredations commit-
ted by the Algerine corsairs, on the commerce of the United States" pro-
vided the justification for a reluctant Congress in 1794 to approve the
construction of the frigates that marked the beginning of the permanent
navy. The United States fought a series of indecisive naval engagements
with the corsairs between 1801 and 1815, when the Barbary fleet was led by
the Glaswegian Peter Lisle, who had converted to Islam, taken the name of
Murat Reis, and married the daughter of the pasha of Tripoli. The phrase
in the U.S. Marine Corps anthem «to the shores of Tripoli" refers to the
seven marines who took part in a harrowing march across the Libyan
desert to capture Derna in 1805 on orders from President Thomas Jeffer-
son. Despite this victory, the United States was still obliged to pay a humil-
iating $60,000 ransom for the crew of the frigate Philadelphia, captured by
Peter Lisle when the vessel ran aground on a sandbar while trying to
mount a blockade of Tripoli harbor.
   The literary image of the Barbary pirates, like that of the buccaneers,
emerged with their increasing notoriety. Lord Byron's The Corsair told the
story in couplets of the proud and tyrannical pirate Conrad, who, Cord-
ingly observes, had «the vices of a Gothic villain with the ideals of the noble
outlaw." On its day of publication in 1814, The Corsair, which would later
inspire works by Verdi and Berlioz, sold 10,000 copies and went through
seven editions within a month. Ironically, in 1816, a mere two years later, a
combined British and Dutch fleet bombarded Algiers, virtually destroying
the real corsairs as a serious threat to merchant shipping. Cordingly uses
                                                     Pirate Democracy • 53

the painting The Bombardment of Algiers by George Chambers from the
National Maritime Museum in London as the cover illustration of his
book, even though he has very little to say about the corsairs and criticizes
the moviemakers of Hollywood for putting their pirates into precisely the
sort of large, three-masted, heavily gunned vessels from a later phase of
warfare that were far removed from the smaller, swifter vessels preferred by
the buccaneers in the Caribbean.
    Robert Louis Stevenson was more accurate in Treasure Island with Long
John Silver's parrot, "Cap'n Flint;' as when Silver told Jack Hawkins that
the bird had been "at Madagascar, and at Malabar, and Surinam, and Prov-
idence, and Portobello. She was at the fishing up of the wrecked plate ships.
It's there she learned 'Pieces of Eight,' and little wonder; three hundred and
fifty thousand of'em, Hawkins!"
    "Pieces of eight" were the most famous coins associated with pirate lore.
These coins were eight reales-silver coins. Pieces of eight minted in Peru
and Mexico bore the Spanish coat of arms on one side and a design repre-
senting the pillars of Hercules on the other, symbolizing the limits of the
ancient world at the Straits of Gibraltar. To this design, by the eighteenth
century, two hemispheres were added in the space between the pillars, rep-
resenting the New and Old Worlds. The pieces of eight became so familiar
in oceanic commerce that the twin pillars eventually became the dollar
sign. (Gold coins were escudos and the famous doubloon was an eight-
escudo gold coin.)


                                       II
The ubiquity of Spanish silver and gold coins in pirate narratives was not ac-
cidental and helps to explain the historical and geographical background of
piracy, something largely missing from Cordingly's book. The early appear-
ance of French, English, and Dutch privateers in Caribbean waters was a re-
sponse by seafaring nations to Spanish claims of monopoly in the New World
and their exploitation of the silver mines in northern Mexico and the High
Andes. By the 1570s, Spanish-American silver fed the great demand in Eu-
rope and Asia for coinage, trade, and metal for the decorative arts; Spanish sil-
ver had a huge effect on Atlantic, and later Pacific, commerce and navigation.
   Word of the riches of the New World had spread fast. Only two years
after the fall of the Aztec capital in 1521, a French pirate, Jean Fleury, cap-
tured two Spanish caravels off Cape St. Vincent, Portugal, and stumbled
upon an astounding Aztec treasure plundered by Hernan Cortes: three
enormous chests of gold ingots, 500 pounds of gold dust, 680 pounds of
pearls, emeralds, topazes, golden masks set with gems, helmets, and feath-
ered cloaks. French privateers soon arrived in the Caribbean. Captain
54 • NakedTropics

Fran<;ois Ie Clerc, known as "Jambe de Bois" because of his wooden leg,
sacked Santiago de Cuba in 1554, and the English, in the formidable per-
sons of John Hawkins and Francis Drake, followed.
    By the late sixteenth century, in order to protect their ships from
raiders, the Spanish established a system of armed convoys between the
Caribbean and Europe. Mexican treasure was embarked at Vera Cruz,
while the silver from Peru was transported from Nombre de Dios, and later
Portobello, on the Isthmus of Panama. At Havana the galleons would ren-
dezvous and take on water and supplies for the voyage to Spain. The out-
bound fleets from Europe wintered in the well-fortified and sheltered
harbor of Cartagena on the northern coast of South America.
   The timing of pirate, privateer, and buccaneer attacks on these Spanish
ports and treasure fleets thus followed a logical strategy, one governed by
geography. French privateers seized and burned Cartagena and Havana in
1559. Sir Francis Drake attacked Nombre de Dios in 1572, and sacked
Cartagena in 1585. Spain went to great pains to make the defenses of these
harbors as near to being impregnable as was possible, as one can still see
from the ramparts of the port of Havana; but by concentrating its forces so
largely on protection of the treasure fleets, Spain virtually abandoned the
rest of the Caribbean to the freebooters, and the Dutch, French, and Eng-
lish soon filled this void.
   The cruising grounds of the buccaneers and the strategic location of
their lairs were largely determined by the shipping lanes of the Atlantic,
Caribbean, and Indian Oceans-the Bahamas were used to prey on Span-
ish ships that had left the treasure ports of the Isthmus of Panama and
Mexico and were en route to Europe; Tortuga was the place from which to
attack merchant ships inbound from Europe and Africa for Jamaica and
the Caribbean; and Madagascar was perfectly placed on the path of ships
trading in the Indian Ocean. There was also a seasonal pattern to the pirate
voyages. The winter months were spent in the Caribbean. In April or May,
the buccaneer might head north. Blackbeard was on the coast of Virginia
in October 1717. In 1718 he raided Charleston, South Carolina, blockaded
the harbor, and held the town to ransom. In the intervening winters, he
plundered ships off St. Kitts and in the Bay of Honduras. Pirates also scav-
enged off the coast of West Africa in search of gold, ivory, and slaves or
rounded the tip of South America as Drake had done to prey on Spanish
treasure ships in the Pacific.
   Cordingly provides some fresh insights into the rough democracy of pi-
rate life. On a pirate ship the captain was elected, and occasionally deposed,
by the votes of the majority of the crew. In most cases it was the crew, not
the captain, who decided the destination of pirate voyages and when to at-
tack. John Rackam, known also as Calico Jack because of his colorful
                                                      Pirate Democracy • 55

clothes, took command of a pirate vessel in 1718 by challenging a captain
who had declined to attack a French frigate in the windward passage. Henry
Avery, also known as Long Ben, was a former Royal Navy midshipman who
took over the privateer Charles in 1694 in Spanish waters when her captain
was found wanting and was incapacitated by drink. Avery renamed the ship
Fancy and set sail (f)r Madagascar and the Red Sea where, lying in wait for
pilgrim ships outbound from India to Mecca, he captured and looted the
 Ganj-i-Sawai, the largest ship belonging to the great mogul of India, a raid
that earned each man a thousand pounds. Avery's feat was soon celebrated
on the London stage at the Theatre Royal in Drury Lane in 1713 in a long-
running melodrama titled The Successful Pirate, which, Cordingly observes,
began a long line of pirate melodramas, later parodied in Gilbert and Sulli-
van's light opera. Avery himself died a pauper in the fishing port of Bide-
ford, in Devon, having been cheated out of his riches by local traders and
«not being worth as much as would buy a coffin."
   The crews of the pirate vessels often signed written articles. These set the
rules for behavior aboard the ship and for the distribution of plunder, and
established rates of compensation for injuries (600 pieces of eight for the loss
of the right arm, 500 for a left arm, 100 each for the loss of an eye or a finger).
Cheating fellow pirates brought severe retribution. Under the articles drawn
up by the men led by Bartholomew Roberts, defrauding the company was
punished by marooning-that is, by setting the offending sailor ashore on
some uninhabited cape or island. Where «robbery was only betwixt one an-
other;' after the "slitting of ears and nose of him that was guilty;' the offend-
ing pirate was left off in a region known to be inhabited. The articles of
Roberts's crew set the time for lights out at eight o'clock. After that hour
those "still ... inclined for drinking" had to go on the open deck.
   Pirate flags were red and black, emblazoned with skulls, bleeding hearts,
hourglasses, spears, cutlasses, and whole skeletons. By 1730, the skull and
crossbones on a black cloth had edged out other symbols and was adopted
by English, French, and Spanish pirates in the West Indies. Captain
Richard Hawkins, captured by pirates in 1724, described how they ((hoisted
Jolly Roger (for so they call their black ensign, in the middle of which is a
large white skeleton with a dart in one hand, striking a bleeding heart, and
in the other an hourglass). When they fight under Jolly Roger, they give
quarter, which they do not when they fight under the red or bloody flag."
   During the early eighteenth century, pirates were young men whose av-
erage age was twenty-seven. Many pirate captains refused to take on mar-
ried men. Edward Low of Boston was adamant that «he might have none
with him under the influence of such powerful attractives as a wife and
children, lest they should grow uneasy in his service...." Article Six of one
pirate code of conduct decreed «no boy or woman to be allowed amongst
56 • NakedTropics

them. If any man were to be found seducing any of the latter sex, and car-
ried her to sea, disguised, he was to suffer death." The historian B. R. Burg
suggested some years ago that all-male pirate crews were often homosex-
ual. s Cordingly is not convinced (nor was Christopher Hill),6 though he is
less sure about the proclivities of the naval ship captains and their young
servants and cabin boys. He points to the case of Samuel Norman, which
he discovered among the papers of the High Court of Admiralty. Captain
Norman was being bathed by the fourteen-year-old Richard Mandervell
while his ship was anchored in Oporto, and "had the carnal use of him &
was then guilty of the crime commonly called buggery or sodomy & he
twice afterwards used the Informant in the same way...."
   Captain Norman's behavior, however, does not really get at the broader
question that Burg raised. Portuguese shopkeepers in Brazil, their sexual
activity in no way ~onstrained by the all-male companionship of a ship at
sea, were regularly investigated by the Inquisition for their pursuit of shop-
boys. Captain Norman, anchored off Oporto, could have gone ashore for
female companionship had he so desired. Rogozinski is more to the point
in Pirates! when he describes how buccaneers recognized a same-sex rela-
tionship called matelotage-comrades who were "mates," shared hard-
ships, fought side-by-side, and pooled possessions.? The pirate captain
Edmund Cook sailed for many years with an unnamed servant who was
captured and forced to confess that "his Master had oft times Buggered
him in England ... in Jamaica ... ; and once in these seas before Darien."
The confession apparently did not offend the rest of the crew. Bartholo-
mew Sharp returned to England in 1682 with a sixteen-year-old Spanish
boy captured in South America, and Captain George Shelvocke infuriated
his crew by promoting his cabin boy to first mate.
   There were cross-dressing female pirates, the most famous being Mary
Read and Anne Bonny, who sailed with Captain John "Calico Jack"
Rackam, out of New Providence in the Bahamas. At their trial for piracy in
1720, in the town of St. Jago de la Vega, today Jamaica's Spanish Town, one
of the witnesses against them, Dorothy Thomas, said: "Each of them had a
machet and pistol in their hands, and cursed and swore at the men, to mur-
der the deponent [i.e., Thomas]; and that they should kill her, to prevent
her coming against them; and the deponent further said, that the reason of
her knowing and believing them to be women then was by the largeness of
their breasts." Read and Bonny, "largeness of their breasts" notwithstand-

SB. R. (Barry Richard) Burg, Sodomy and the Perception ofEvil: English Sea Rovers
in the Seventeenth-Century Caribbean (New York: New York University Press,
1982).
6Christopher Hill, ((Jolly Rogers," New York Review ofBooks, May 12, 1983.
7Rogozinski, Pirates!, 217-218.
                                                    Pirate Democracy • 57

ing, had fallen in love, each thinking the other to be a man, or so they told
Calico Jack. Convicted of piracy, they were sentenced to death by hanging,
but were reprieved at the last moment when both were found to be preg-
nant. Calico Jack suffered the fate of many convicted of piracy. He was put
in an iron cage, hanged from a gibbet on Deadman's Cay, a small island
within sight of Port Royal now known as Rackam's Cay, and his corpse was
coated in tar to preserve it as a warning to others.
    The pirate crews were multinational and multiracial. Dutch smugglers
and pirates appeared in the Caribbean after Dutch traders were expelled
from the Iberian peninsula in 1598, and Dutch freelance marauders con-
tinued to attack ships in the West Indies into the early eighteenth century.
French privateers were active in the Caribbean in the early eighteenth cen-
tury, and Spanish coast guards often launched freelance attacks on the
English colonies. Cordingly finds that the pirates based on the island of
New Providence in the Bahamas between 1715 and 1725 were mostly Eng-
lish-speaking-35 percent of them were from England, 25 percent from
the American colonies, 20 percent from the West Indies, 10 percent Scots.
The rest were Swedes, Dutch, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. Among the
English, most came from London and the West Country.
   The crews of the pirate vessels often included black Africans. Cordingly
assumes that they were slaves and believes that however contemptuous the
white pirates might have been of the customs of their day, they were not
likely to accept blacks as equal partners. But this seems a hasty judgment.
African seamen had participated in the oceanic voyages of the Portuguese
for over two centuries before the buccaneers roamed the same seas. The
Japanese screen paintings depicting the arrival of the Portuguese carracks
in Nagasaki Bay in the sixteenth century show African sailors on the rig-
gings. That pirates stole and sold slaves as part of their booty in no way
precluded the participation of black pirates in the looting and selling of
human cargoes, any more than it prevented Africans from selling other
Africans into slavery.

                                      III
Yet as the power of Spain declined and that of France and Britain rose, the
pirates began to be perceived in a very different manner; they were no
longer seen as potential allies in times of adversity, as the old privateers had
been, but as enemies of good commerce. How, Cordingly asks, was it that
the pirates acquired a heroic and relatively benign image? The answer lies
in early pirate literature in English, which often conflates the anti-Spanish
privateers of Elizabethan England with the predators of a later epoch.
Against the background of a powerful anti-Spanish and anti-Catholic tra-
dition, it is not surprising that the people who read pirate stories in the late
58 • NakedTropics

seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries displayed no great sympathy
for the Spanish victims. In any case, "singeing King Philip's beard," and
those of his successors, was seen as the patriotic duty of any good English-
man (or Welshman), pirate or privateer; and such was in essence Captain
Morgan's justification for his atrocities in Panama.
   Already by Morgan's later years, however, there was grumbling about his
unsuitability to hold official positions in Jamaica and, in many ways, he
was identified with the old Caribbean at a time when the prospects for
freelance plunder were rapidly diminishing. Sugarcane cultivation was
rapidly expanding in the West Indies as was sugar consumption in Britain,
and so too was the importation of slaves from Africa. The merchants and
the slave traders backed by powerful commercial and political interests in
London, Bristol, and Liverpool had little time for the buccaneers; and fol-
lowing the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 the English obtained the formal right
(the asiento) to supply slaves to the Spanish American markets. By the
eighteenth century, the British were learning, as were the French, that it
was easier to subvert the Spanish Empire from within than to attack it on
the high seas. It was better to use the credits of London merchants to take
indirect control of Spanish American trade, and smuggle and barter along
the coasts of South and Central America than to loot and destroy potential
customers. And the pirates no longer confined their attacks to the Spanish.
As wealth and power shifted in the Atlantic shipping lanes, it was the Eng-
lish who became the object of pirate assaults.
   Around 1720, at the time of peak pirate activity in the Atlantic, the pi-
rates were thought to number about two thousand in all. Within a decade
they were reduced to fewer than two hundred. As soon as the British gov-
ernment decided to respond in force, the pirates stood little chance. The
Royal Navy in 1718 had sixty-seven ships of the line. Even the smallest of
these had fifty guns, equal in force to Blackbeard's Queen Anne's Revenge,
the largest pirate vessel. Changes in the law in 1700 made it possible there-
after to try to impose the death sentence in Vice-Admiralty Courts overseas.
One of the first cases took place in Boston in 1704, when John Quelch, after
plundering along the coast of Brazil, made the mistake of returning to the
port of Marblehead, where he had seized his vessel. Quelch and six of his
crew were sentenced to death. After a barrage of sermons from the Reverend
Cotton Mather, they were hanged on the shoreline by Hudson's Point.
   To comply with the jurisdiction of the lord high admiral, all such hang-
ings took place from gallows set up "within the flood marks;' since his au-
thority was held to extend up to the low-tide line. Between 1716 and 1726,
four hundred men were hanged for piracy by such courts around the At-
lantic seaboard, from Port Royal to Barbados, to New Providence, to Lon-
don, and from Boston to the Cape coast of West Africa. Captain Woodes
Rogers, a famous former privateer, was sent to New Providence as governor
                                                    Pirate Democracy • 59

 of the Bahamas in 1718 at the request of the merchants of Bristol and Lon-
don, and proved to be one of the most effective scourges of the pirates.
Woodes Rogers, accompanied by the buccaneer William Dampier, had cap-
tured a Manila galleon in 1709, one of only two English privateers to do so,
 and circumnavigating the world, returned to London in 1711 with gold bul-
lion, precious stones, and silks valued at 800,000 English pounds. He had
also rescued the castaway sailor Alexander Selkirk, said to be the model for
Defoe's Robinson Crusoe (1719), from the Juan Fernandez Islands off the
coast of Chile. A poacher turned gamekeeper, Woodes Rogers sent out the
naval ships to capture Calico Jack, Anne Bonny, and Mary Read. The coat of
arms granted to the colony of Bahamas in 1728 summed up the new situa-
tion. It portrayed a Royal Navy warship with three more in the background,
and bears the motto Expulsis Piratis, Restituta Commercia (Pirates Expelled,
Commerce Restored). Woodes Rogers commissioned a family portrait from
the young William Hogarth in 1729. In it he sits comfortably in an armchair
before the Fort at Nassau, a globe by his side represents his voyage around
the world, his son holds open a map of New Providence Island, and in the
harbor a warship fires a salute. After the 1730s, pirates were best left to nov-
elists and playwrights. Commerce replaced plunder.
    Yet out of the rich mixture of fact and fiction of the early eighteenth
century, the pirate genre emerged in which the works of J. M. Barrie and
Robert Louis Stevenson were sold along with adventures of earnest ama-
teur sleuths and treasure hunters; where ancient sea chests were found to
have secret compartments, and ambiguous ink blots on old charts were
claimed to represent, at the same time, Pacific atolls, islets off the coast of
Indochina, or Gardiner's Island off Montauk. The early-eighteenth-cen-
tury pirate narratives, cleaned up a bit, of course, have been taken over by
Disney World and dozens of Hollywood B movies.
    I was delighted to find, the other day, my well-thumbed copy of Treasure
Island, a present from my father when I was seven. It brought back memo-
ries of summer rambles along the coastlines and bays of Devon and Corn-
wall. Doubtless with the intention of keeping me quiet, he used to promise
that around the corner of some profusely hedgerowed seaside lane, or be-
yond some bracken-clad headland, or at the edge of some rocky inlet or
cove, we would find the Admiral Benbow Inn. For boys growing up in the
west of England, Drake, Hawkins, Raleigh, and assorted sea dogs, freeboot-
ers, smugglers, and pirates, real or invented, were part of popular culture.
Cordingly has, to some degree, set out to clarify and debunk this rich imag-
ined heritage. So it was some relief to discover in his book, all these years
later, that even if the Admiral Benbow Inn did not exist, Admiral John Ben-
bow did. An opponent of pirates, Spaniards, and the French, he died hero-
ically of his wounds off Cartagena in 1702, after his right leg was smashed
by chain shot and he refused to leave the quarterdeck.
B Y 0   PA.   RO   TUE SOUTflE   TER   R MP RT.
                                                          CHAPTER            5
                      Hegemonies Old and New
                                             ((The universal monarchy of the Seas."
                                                            -Abbe Raynal, 1770




If we look at the Atlantic in the eighteenth century, it seems to me that we
still lack a comprehensive view of what changed during this period,
where we should set its boundaries, and how we might interpret the
salient characteristics of the century. Perhaps, we have been both too
general and too specific, simultaneously seeking with the synthesizers to
explain too much and with the more specialized monographic literature
to explain too little.
    If we begin in the South, which is my own starting point, this is a frus-
trating situation. Because our historiography on the Ibero-American and
Afro-American Atlantic is still in a state of development, not to say under-
development, we are often forced to establish context and frameworks out
of thin air, to ask what must appear from the perspective of the more de-
veloped historiographers of the North Atlantic to be obvious, foolish, and
even naive questions. We are obliged, I think, to look at the "big picture" if
only to see if what happens in our sphere has any resonance elsewhere. I
will try to tackle two themes. The first relates very broadly to economic
chronologies within the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic and whether
what we see here allows us to speak sensibly of an Atlantic system in the
eighteenth century, and what the dimension and limits of such a system
might be. The second theme relates more to geopolitics and questions of
empire or, if you will, of imperial hegemonies and the challenges that these
hegemonies faced as the century ended.



                                     61
62 • NakedTropics

                                        I
We are of course confined to some degree, as we must be in any historical
speculation, not only by our own research but by what our colleagues have
chosen to write about. And inasmuch as history writing since the Second
World War has tended to deemphasize the role of individuals, of institu-
tions, and of events-instead plotting the longer-term trends in economic
development and delineating social and economic structures-the recent
decades have seen an accumulation of more information about the first
theme, the economic aspects of the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic sys-
tems, than about the second, the policies and politics of empire. While
much has been achieved by the emphasis on conjunctural economic analy-
sis and social history, it has unquestionably also led to the almost total ex-
elusion of detailed examinations of elites, institutions, and above all
intellectual life and politics and policy. Hence, today, if we look at the late
colonial period of the Spanish and Portuguese empires in America, we
tend to know more about slaves than their masters, more about the forced
Indian labor drafts of the Andes than the attitudes of Peruvian merchants
and bureaucrats in Lima, more about Mexican silver production than the
political role of mining entrepreneurs. The best book on the Enlighten-
ment in Latin America, for example, remains the collection of essays edited
by the late Arthur Whitaker in the early 1940s, twice reissued in the early
1960s but long since out of print. l
    The end of our period is also compromised by the consequences of
colonial emancipation in the sense that a relatively cohesive imperial past
is fragmented into a series of sometimes spurious national histories, and
we can no longer rely on the well-organized archives of the Indies in Seville
or of the overseas dominions in Lisbon to help reveal to us what hap-
pened-or at least what the record keepers thought happened. For the
western shores of the Atlantic we thus have a division of historical output
into two broad categories, one of which might be called the vertical dimen-
sion, the other the horizontal. By the vertical dimension I mean a form of
history writing confined by the geographical limits of what became, after
independence, national entities. National histories inevitably stress origi-
nality and uniqueness, rather than any common colonial background, and
are sometimes hostile to a point of view that would place the new nations
that emerged in the Americas within an international or comparative

lArthur Preston Whitaker, ed., Latin America and the Enlightenment (Ithaca, N.Y.:
'A
Cornell University Press, 1961). I am drawing in this section on my chapter, "The
Impact of the American Revolution on Spain and Portugal and Their Empires," in
The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution, ed. Jack P. Greene and J. R.
Pole (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Reference, 1991),528-543.
                                             Hegemonies Old and New • 63

framework, or even within a colonialIor neocolonial context. The horizon-
tal dimension is, of course, the comparative one-but this is also some-
thing we still largely lack even for North America (with the possible
exceptions of Canada and the Caribbean). Despite the heroic efforts of
Jack Greene and J. R. Pole, most U.S. historians still seem locked within the
concept of the "singularity" of U.S. history. For Latin America the situation
is no less extreme. The Cambridge History ofLatin America (1984-), for ex-
ample, is almost totally devoid of comparative analysis, especially in its
colonial and early national volumes, a factor emphasized by the ease with
which the original volumes are now being subdivided and reissued as what
are essentially national histories. And a final caveat: According to a popular
textbook, Early Latin America, by James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz
(Cambridge University Press, 1983), national independence is, in any case,
a shadow thing at best. As they put it, "It has been said often and truly that
the division between colonial and national periods is an artificial one, es-
pecially in the social, economic, and cultural domains where so much cur-
rent scholarly interest lies." But if this is true, the eighteenth century
becomes a mere blip on a very broad canvas. It is significant that Schwartz
and Lockhart have long been leading rejectionists of what they call "insti-
tutional history," by which they appear to mean essentially Atlantic history
and the history of European (,'Eurocentric") colonialism, including the
great works on Atlantic commerce and navigation written by their imme-
diate predecessors, such as C. H. Haring, Richard Pares, and Vincent
Harlow. Not all revisionists have taken this narrow view. Radical compara-
tivists like Susan Deeds and Edward Countryman see the political emanci-
pation from Europe as a critical transition, which at the very least requires
an inquiry into the place of North and South America within the process
of industrial, political, and social transformation that flowed from the cir-
cum-Atlantic upheavals of the late eighteenth century, of which the Amer-
ican Revolution was the most dramatic colonial manifestation. 2 The
question they raise is one Stanley and Barbara Stein raised some time ago,3
that is, why at independence did the histories of South and North America
diverge so dramatically; or to put it in Immanual Wallerstein's terms, how
was it that North America moved from the periphery to the core of the
world system, while Latin America remained peripheral?4

2Susan Deeds and Edward Countryman, "Independence and Revolution in the
Americas," Radical History 27 (May 1983).
 'A rthur J.Preston
3Stanley            Whitaker,
              Stein and       ed.,
                        Barbara H.Latin America
                                   Stein, The   and the
                                              Colonial  Enlightenment
                                                       Heritage of Latin(Ithaca,
                                                                         America;N.Y.:
                                                                                   Es-
says on Economic Dependence in Perspective (New York: Oxford University Press,
1970).
4Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World System, 2 vols. (New York: Academic
Press, 1980).
64 • NakedTropics

   Currently there are two major interpretive frameworks for examining
the impact of the North Atlantic democratic revolution in Latin America.
First, there is the Robert Palmer-Jacques Godechot vision of an Atlantic-
based transformation, an essentially political and institutional view, which
sees mutual influence in political theory, constitutional experimentation,
and the politics of democratic incorporation. In this view, the Enlighten-
ment is a positive, benign, and causative influence, essentially a progressive
force. 5
   A second view is a more economic view-partly Marxian but also capa-
ble of incorporating much of classical liberalism; that is) it is a view that
sees a general crisis of the old colonial system which affects the British Em-
pire in the 1770s and the Spanish and Portuguese empires in the early
nineteenth century) all of which flows from the shift from commercial to
industrial capitalism. In this view) the intellectual contribution is minimal.
The revolutions in America) both North and South) represent a shift from
formal to informal domination, with the newly industrializing states of
Europe-especially Great Britain-replacing the decaying bureaucratic
and mercantilist empires of Spain and Portugal.
   Brazilian historians such as Fernando Novais have also been concerned
to place the late-eighteenth and early-nineteen-century experience of
Brazil within the context of a crisis of the old regime of the old colonial
system in the face of the Atlantic and Industrial revolutions. 6 Less work of
this nature has been done on Spanish America, although Tulio Halperin
has long focused on the economic and political complexities of the inde-
pendence period in the La Plata region and more broadly in Spanish
America.? And Nancy Farriss) in her brilliant book on the Maya, sees the
impact of the reformist protoliberal policies of the Spanish Bourbons as
marking the critical divide in the history of Meso-America. 8 Much of the
new economic history of late colonial Mexico is seeking some explanation
for the paradox of the coexisting boom and rising social tensions within

SR. R. (Robert Roswell) Palmer, The Age ofDemocratic Revolutions, 2 vols. (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1959 and 1964); Jacques Godechot, Les Revolu-
tions, 1770-1799 (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1970) and L'Europe et
l'Amerique a l'epoque napoleonienne, 1800-1815 (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1967).
6Fernando Novais, Portugal e Brasil na crise do antigo sistema colonial, 1777-1808
(Sao Paulo: Editora HUCITEC, 1979). Also see Emilia Viotti da Costa, "Introdu<;ao
ao estudo da emancipa<;ao politica do Brasil," in Brasil em perspectiva, ed. Carlos
Guilherme Mota (Sao Paulo: Difusao Europeia do Livro, 1969).
7Tulio Halperin Donghi, Reforma y disoluci6n de los imperios ibericos, 1750-1850
(Madrid: Alianza Editorial, 1985).
8Nancy Farriss, Maya Society under Colonial Rule: The Collective Enterprise of Sur-
vival (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984).
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 65

the most important of Spain's colonial holdings in the Western Hemi-
sphere. And we have the now substantial body of new writing on the Bour-
bon reforms in Spanish America with major contributions by John Lynch,
John Fisher, and David Brading. Yet, it seems to me that mainstream eco-
nomic historians remain skeptical about the significance of the Atlantic-
based commercial system to the onset of industrialization. The important
point about these disagreements is how "scatter shot" they are and to em-
phasize how very little explicit discussion we have had about the broader
context of some of the most critical elements in eighteenth-century At-
lantic history and their implications.
    Perhaps we would be better off speaking of process, which involves, in
part, a rethinking of the history of ideas within their social and economic
context-again, looking from the South, which is my basic perspective
here. For Latin America and the Iberian powers, this involves very much a
new look at the impact of the ideas of the Enlightenment, which for Spain
under Charles III (1759-1788) and Portugal during the predominance of
the Marques de Pombal (1750-1777) led to major reforms in the manage-
ment of colonial affairs. This was motivated in both cases by a decision to
fortify their colonial links, retake the benefits of Atlantic commerce from
their northern competitors, and reestablish their power and prosperity by
adapting the techniques they believed Britain and France, in particular,
had used to surpass them. These measures by Portugal and Spain in some
instances served also to preempt and in others to mitigate the impact of
the North American revolution, although neither Spanish nor Portuguese
America was able to avoid the consequences of the late-eighteenth-century
European upheavals. Second, however, it is important to look not only
from South to North but also from the North to South. The issue of revo-
lution as example and as potentiality, involving the creative articulation of
new institutional mechanisms of government was a central concern to
would-be anticolonialists in the late eighteenth century. In both Brazil
during the late 1780s and in Spanish America in the aftermath of the wars
of independence, the North American constitutional model proved attrac-
tive. Yet, thirdly, we are also dealing with colonial opposition to metropoli-
tan powers and it is this aspect, of course, the achievement of national
independence, where the ambiguity of the Iberian and Ibero-American
role in the Atlantic as a whole is most apparent. Spain was an important
component of the European alliance that helped the thirteen colonies in
North America escape from British rule. Many would-be Latin American
nationalists on the other hand saw Britain, the erstwhile colonial power, as
a potential ally against Spain for their own independence movements. Pro-
cess, therefore, is a critical element in the period because we are dealing
with a complex interaction between two aspects of the Enlightenment-its
66 • NakedTropics

absolutist form which involved a reformulation of imperial policy along
neomercantilist lines, as well as a reassertion of the rights of the state on
the one hand, as opposed to its more liberal form on the other, where the
Enlightenment provided a guide to experimentation with new forms of
governance and constitution making, defining thereby the rights of the in-
dividual within the process of decolonization. Both imply a de-linking of
previously set patterns and upsetting, changing, and resetting of the insti-
tutional context within which collectivities define themselves.


                                         II
How do the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic fit into this picture? The case
of Portugal and Brazil is especially interesting, given the Atlantic focus of
their trade, Brazil's large slave population and consequent links to Africa,
and the interpenetration of the Luso-Atlantic system via Lisbon by the
British-dominated commercial system of the North Atlantic. But first it is
essential to establish the parameters of the system we are talking about-
for, if the eighteenth-century Luso-Atlantic commercial system is charac-
terized overwhelmingly by the rise of gold production in Brazil and its
subsequent fall, both cycles took place within a broader framework which
changed surprisingly little between the 1660s and 1807, the year of the
Napoleonic invasion of Portugal. Hence, we are here talking about what I
would call the long eighteenth century. Let me look briefly at the origins of
this long eighteenth century and explain why I take these origins back to
the 1660s.
    The Dutch assault on the Portuguese overseas possession during the
mid-seventeenth century had been transatlantic in scope. The Dutch were
well aware that control of the sugar-producing northeast of Brazil was use-
less to them unless they also controlled the source of slaves in Africa.
Hence, in 1641, the Dutch seized the slave supply port of Luanda, the capi-
tal of Portuguese Angola, the slave transshipment depot located on the off-
shore island of Sao Tome, as well as the sugar-prOducing Brazilian
captaincy of Pernambuco. These Dutch successes, however, were tempo-
rary. In 1648, an expeditionary force mounted by the Portuguese governor
of Rio de Janeiro retook Angola, and after a long and bitter guerrilla cam-
paign in Pernambuco the Dutch were expelled from Recife in 1654. 9
    The Portuguese victories in Africa and Brazil were not repeated in the
Orient. The 1650s, in fact, saw Portuguese power virtually eliminated in
Asia, or at least reduced to a shadow of what it had been in the sixteenth
century. The oceanic dimension of Portuguese imperial interest, therefore,

9C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Salvador de Sa and the Struggle for Brazil and Angola,
1602-1680 (London: Athlone Press, 1952).
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 67

 from the 1660s until the early nineteenth century came to be preeminently
 focused on the South Atlantic. As early as 1644, moreover, direct trade be-
tween Bahia and the West African coast had been authorized, Bahia ex-
 porting tobacco and importing slaves. These trading and commercial links
between South America and West Africa remained important well into the
nineteenth century, making Bahian merchants involved in African trade
wealthy and virtually independent of Lisbon.
    On the mainland of South America, the northern and southern fron-
tiers of the Portuguese dominions were also established, or, at least, the
claims to these frontiers were staked out in the seventeenth century. In
 1670, for instance, the bishopric of Rio de Janeiro was created, its jurisdic-
tion reaching in theory to the northern banks of the Rio de la Plata. In
 1680, the Portuguese established a "new colony" (Nova Colonia do Sacra-
 mento) opposite the Spanish port city of Buenos Aires. The reaction of the
Spaniards was rapid and Nova Colonia was seized after only a few months.
But, in 1681, the Portuguese reestablished and fortified the outpost. The
issue of the Portuguese presence on the Rio de la Plata caused continuous
friction with Spain. Despite several treaties, the problem was not resolved
and remained after the independence of both Spanish and Portuguese
America to complicate the relations between the successor states.
    In the far north, the Amazon frontier also remained subject to dis-
pute-in this case by France, which had in 1676 established a strategic
presence on the coast of South America in Cayenne. French interest in
Brazil, in fact, did not abate throughout the eighteenth century, despite the
fact that in 1712, following the War of Spanish Succession, France formally
renounced all claims to the left bank of the Amazon.
    In the late seventeenth century, therefore, the focus of Portugal's imper-
ial interest shifted decisively westward from the trading-post thassalocracy
of the Indian Ocean first established in the early sixteenth century to the
plantation-based colonies of the South Atlantic. The Afro-American At-
lantic commercial complex which had predated the Asian empire and
thrived even while overshadowed by the Asian spice trade now came fully
into its own. 10 Within the South Atlantic system itself, integrated by the tri-
angular interdependence of Lisbon, the slaving enclaves of the West and
Central African coast, and the expanding colonies of European and
African settlements in Portuguese America, imperial priorities were re-
ordered to favor support of Portugal's territorial empire in Brazil.
    Portuguese America in the 1650s was also very different from the collec-
tion of small coastal enclaves it had been sixty years before at the time of
the union of the crowns of Spain and Portugal. The development of a fleet

IOKenneth Maxwell, "Portugal, Europe, and the Origins of the Atlantic Commer-
cial System, 1415-1520," Portuguese Studies 8 (1992): 3-16.
68 • NakedTropics

system between Lisbon and Brazil in the immediate aftermath of Portu-
gal's independence from Spain, and the imposition of heavier customs du-
ties to support the construction of warships at midcentury as well as the
newly imposed monopoly of the Brazil company, proved advantageous to
the south of Brazil which had previously competed under serious disabili-
ties in terms of access to European markets with Bahia and Pernambuco.
The sugar ships from all the Brazilian regions now arrived at Lisbon to-
gether. The escort vessels left Rio de Janeiro toward the end of March and
picked up the sugar ships of Bahia in April, the fleet arriving at Lisbon dur-
ing early July or August.
    Between the mid-1640s and 1650, sugar prices were high in Europe, but
after that date the price of Brazilian sugar plummeted on the Amsterdam
market, falling constantly until the 1680s. The major cause was competi-
tion from the Caribbean. The Dutch, and later the British, were developing
their own sugar trade, and in the case of the British beginning to develop a
system of preferential tariffs to protect British markets for British-grown
Caribbean sugar. The response of the Brazilian sugar sector to this loss of
markets is very imperfectly understood, and little research has been done
on the second half of the seventeenth century. There are some indications
of attempts by Brazil mill owners to lower costs by vertically integrating
their enterprise. The Jesuit-managed Sergipe mill in Bahia, for instance,
which had relied entirely on sharecropping arrangements in the early years
of the century, was directly producing 60 percent of its own cane by the
1680s. Producers also managed to transfer some of their losses to salaried
employees whose wages suffered a substantial real decline over the second
half of the seventeenth century. I I
    The social and political consequences of the new economic situation
were significant. Planters and mill owners tended to lose their dominant
position in urban institutions. Certainly, merchants began to hold posi-
tions of importance in prestigious urban voluntary lay organizations, such
as the misericordia in the Brazilian port cities. And in the municipal gov-
ernment the old planter domination was challenged by the appointment of
a university-trained lawyer as presiding officer (juiz de fora) and the ap-
pearance (at least in Bahia in 1641) of representatives of the urban artisan
population, the "people's tribune" (juiz do pOVO).I2
    At the same time, the municipal councils in Brazil were acquiring added
importance in the broader imperial context. This autonomy was undoubt-
edly enhanced by the fact that the recovery of Pernambuco from the Dutch

IlStuart B. Schwartz, Sugar Plantations and the Formation of Brazilian Society:
Bahia, 1550-1835 (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
12A. J. R. Russell-Wood, Fidalgos and Philanthropists: The Santa Casa da Misericor-
dia ofBahia, 1550-1755 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968).
                                           Hegemonies Old and New • 69

had resulted as much from the actions of the inhabitants themselves and
their allies from Sao Paulo and Bahia within Brazil as from the interven-
tion by Lisbon. Indeed, the Pernambucans had been prepared at one point
to seek the support of the Catholic monarch of France when the aid of Por-
tugal for their cause had seemed problematical. The municipal councils
had raised money for defense. They subsequently instigated a vigorous op-
position to the monopoly of the Brazil company, and with the aid of the
Inquisition (which opposed the privileges granted to New Christian
bankers who had invested in the Brazil company) they succeeded in de-
stroying the company's monopolies in 1659. The fleet system which had
been imposed at the time of the company's establishment, however, was re-
tained and continued to operate under the administrative direction of a
new Lisbon-based board of commerce (junta do comercio). The Brazilian
municipal councils, however, were represented in Lisbon by procurators;
and the council of Bahia acquired the right in 1653 of sending two repre-
sentatives to the Cortes, Portugal's ancient parliamentary institution. This
was a privilege of some importance because the Cortes played a vital part
in the years following the restoration of Portuguese independence, meet-
ing eight times between 1641 and 1698. Peace with Spain in 1668 and the
treaties with the Dutch in 1661 and 1688 and with the English in 1654 and
1662 had been bought at considerable cost in terms of special privileges
granted to foreign merchants and indemnities paid, including the theoret-
ical right of British merchants to reside in Brazil, something which in prac-
tice was rigorously opposed. 13
   The weakness of Portugal undoubtedly contributed to the relative au-
tonomy of Brazilian institutions. Portugal was well aware of the need to
treat Brazilians with care and respect since Portugal's power to coerce obe-
dience was very limited. By the 1690s Brazilian sugar no longer dominated
world markets. It did not, however, disappear from circulation. Brazilian
white sugar was of high quality and remained an important export (and
for Lisbon reexport) item. The major positive impact of sugar's relative de-
cline in value was to stimulate diversification and give new incentive to ex-
ploration and expansion into the vast hinterland of South America.
Tobacco, for instance, became a key Brazilian export to both Portugal and
Africa; the quantity of tobacco sent to Portugal doubled between 1662 and
1672. Attempts were made to introduce cloves and cinnamon from Asia


l3Carl Hanson, Economy and Society in Baroque Portugal, 1668-1703 (Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981); also the classic works by C. R. (Charles
Ralph) Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825 (London: Hutchinson,
1969) and The Golden Age ofBrazil, 1695-1750: Growing Pains ofa Colonial Society
(Berkeley: Published in cooperation with the Sociedade de Estudos Hist6ricos
Dom Pedro Segundo, Rio de Janeiro, by the University of California Press, 1962).
70 • NakedTropics

and to 'develop a trade in cacao. The cattle frontier was also pushing inland,
opening up connections between the Sao Francisco river valley and the Sao
Paulo plateau. With paulista aid the long-lasting complex of fugitive slave
settlements known as Palmares in the backlands between Pernambuco and
Alagoas was destroyed. Since 1670 the Crown had also used the paulistas
extensively for systematic exploration of the interior, rewarding them with
the titles of nobility and membership in the chivalric military orders.
    The most dramatic and decisive consequence of Portuguese exploration
of the interior, however, was the discovery of gold. The search for precious
metals had of course brought many of the first Europeans to the Western
Hemisphere, and also provoked the most audacious explorations of the
vast interior of South and North America, and the Spanish had been well
rewarded for their early explorations. In the Caribbean within months of
Columbus's landfall, gold had been discovered. During the 1540s in the
barren mountains of the Andes, the Spaniards came upon a vast mountain
of silver at Potosi in present-day Bolivia, and in Mexico along the eastern
slope of the Sierra Madre they were no less successful in exploiting silver
ore. The Portuguese, on the other hand, were less fortunate. For almost two
hundred years after Portugal laid claims to the territory which became
known as Brazil, they had to make do with more prosaic products-first
Brazil wood used to produce red dye, then sugar, hides, cacao, and to-
bacco-worthy and valuable products all, but the precious metals the early
settlers hoped for eluded them. At the end of the seventeenth century,
however, half-Indian frontiersmen from the small inland settlement of Sao
Paulo struck it rich. Sao Paulo was a resource-poor community which
made its living by capturing and selling Indian slaves and raiding the pros-
perous Jesuit missions in Paraguay. The paulistas were ever on the lookout
for booty. In the 1690s, after years of searching, they eventually came
across rich deposits of alluvial gold in the streams along the flanks of the
mountain range of Espinha~o, which runs north-south between the pres-
ent-day cities of Duro Preto and Diamantina in the state of Minas Gerais
across the great interior plateau of Brazil. Three hundred and fifty miles
inland from the port city of Rio de Janeiro, the Mantiquira range marked
the watershed for the great north-flowing Sao Francisco River, as well as
for the tributaries which flowed south into the vast La Plata river basin. As
word spread, avid speculators used both river systems to reach the gold
field and within a decade of the paulistas' discovery, the first great gold
rush of modern history was in full swing. More than anything else, it was
gold that pushed Portuguese settlements deep into the interior of Brazil-
first to Minas Gerais, later to Goias and Mato Grosso-well beyond the
traditional sphere of Portuguese interest determined by the Treaty of
Tordesillas. The issue of the interior frontier hence became a matter of
acute concern to the courts of both Lisbon and Madrid.
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 71

   As the negotiations for a treaty to establish boundaries between Por-
tuguese and Spanish America progressed during the 1740s, it became gen-
erally accepted that clear topographical landmarks such as rivers and
mountains should serve to delineate frontiers. The Portuguese had two
major bargaining chips. First, they held Colonia do Sacramento on the
east bank of the Plate Estuary. Second, the westernmost Portuguese min-
ing region, in what is now Mato Grosso, had been integrated administra-
tively and economically with the northern Brazilian coast by means of a
fluvial transportation and communications route running along the Gua-
pore, Mamore, and Madeira Rivers in the western Amazonia basin. When
an agreement was finally reached, these rivers constituted the northwest-
ern border of Portuguese lands, much to the satisfaction of authorities in
Lisbon. 14
   It was within these broader geographical limits that the economic char-
acteristics of the long eighteenth-century Portuguese-Atlantic system need
to be seen. They were therefore, first and foremost, marked by the flow of
specie (gold and silver, the latter obtained from the contraband trade with
the Spanish) and the preeminence of colonial, mainly Brazilian, staples.
Second, the growth, decline, and revival of the manufacturing industry in
Portugal were inversely proportional to the rise and fall of gold production
in the Brazilian interior. That is to say, Portuguese domestic manufactur-
ing thrived prior to 1700 and again after 1777, but languished during the
golden age. This had major implications for the Portuguese foreign and
colonial policy. Portugal also remained throughout the eighteenth century
a chronic grain importer-from Northern Europe at the beginning of the
century and from North America, especially Virginia and the Carolinas,
toward the end. This fact during the 1780s and 1790s had a major impact
on the attitudes of the new North American republic, for example, marked
especially in the person of Thomas Jefferson, toward protonationalist re-
publican movements in Brazil. These attitudes were ambivalent at best
when Virginia's trade with Portugal was placed in the balance against sup-
port for nationalist movements for independence from Portugal of uncer-
tain origin in Portugal's vast South American territories.
   The third important characteristic of the long eighteenth century was
the British presence in Portugal and indirectly within its empire, protected
by treaties and exercising de facto extraterritorial rights and privileges
much on the pattern later imposed during the nineteenth century on
China. For example, the whole period from the late 1660s through 1807


14David M. Davidson, "How the Brazilian West Was Won," in Colonial Roots of
Modern Brazil, ed. Dauril Alden (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973),
61-106; J. R. (Jose Roberto) do Amaral Lapa, Economia colonial (Sao Paulo:
Editora Perspectiva, 1973).
72 • NakedTropics

was marked by the dominant-the Portuguese felt-domineering pres-
ence of influential British merchant communities established in Lisbon
and Oporto. The British merchants in Lisbon and Oporto were organized
within so-called factories, which were in effect legally recognized commer-
cial corporations, their privileges guaranteed by the Cromwellian treaty of
1657, reinforced by the Methuen Treaty of 1703. Through their entrepre-
neurial skills and access to capital, British merchants penetrated the whole
fabric of the metropolitan and colonial economy. IS
   The need for external political and military support was at the core of
the commercial concessions Portugal had made to the British and others in
the seventeenth century. This need remained a basic given throughout the
eighteenth century, setting the parameters within which Portuguese for-
eign and colonial policy had to be conducted. Political and military depen-
dency, however, did not mean there was no room for maneuver in the
national interest or options open to a skillful Portuguese nationalist to ex-
tract whatever benefits he could from the Anglo-Portuguese relationship.
In fact a central preoccupation of Portuguese economic thinkers and
diplomats throughout the eighteenth century had been precisely how to
achieve balance in what had become an unequal relationship but which in-
trinsically need not be so if a true reciprocity could be achieved. Nor did all
British economic thinkers see pure benefit in the series of treaties and tariff
privileges which governed Anglo-Portuguese commerce. The issue in fact
became, as the eighteenth century wore on, a central topic of debate
among the leading lights of the new science of political economy engaging
Adam Smith and later David Ricardo. 16
   The eighteenth-century Luso-Atlantic world, finally, was caught up in
the struggle between France and England, a struggle that increasingly
compromised Portugal. Lisbon tried to accommodate both, but by its very
Atlantic nature, and because of the central economic role of Brazil within
the Luso-Atlantic commercial system, Portugal was tied inextricably to
Britain and, although it always sought to remain neutral and thereby retain
the prosperous entrepot function of Lisbon for the reexport of colonial
products, it was very rarely able to maintain neutrality for long.
   The role of Brazil in Portuguese calculations and diplomacy, economic
and institutional, thus held much higher priority than did the colonial
weight of North America in British calculations. These preoccupations
with the development of the Portuguese Atlantic Empire on the one hand,

15Kenneth R. Maxwell, Conflicts and Conspiracies: Brazil and Portugal, 1750-1808
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973).
16H. E. S. Fisher, The Portugal Trade: A Study of Anglo-Portuguese Commerce,
1700-1770 (London: Methuen, 1971). Also, Virgilio Noya Pinto, 0 ouro brasileiro e
o comercio anglo-portugues (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1979).
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 73

and with Portugal's diminished stature and apparent backwardness on the
other, permeated the Portuguese intellectual milieu of the age.
   The most dramatic reformulation of Portugal's policy toward Brazil oc-
curred during the long period of rule by the Marques de Pombal, between
 1750 and 1777. Pombal himself took much from classic mercantilist theory
and practice in his policymaking; both from its British and its French or
Colbertian origins, but the use of the term mercantilism to describe Pom-
bal's policy is not entirely appropriate. Mercantilism, when defined nar-
rowly, as we know, describes a policy whereby trade is regulated, taxed, and
subsidized by the state to promote an influx of gold and silver-the objec-
tive of such state intervention being aimed more broadly at achieving a fa-
vorable balance of trade.
   Pombal's policy was at once limited and more focused than this. Its
objective was to use mercantilist techniques-monopoly companies, reg-
ulation, taxation, and subsidies-to facilitate capital accumulation by in-
dividual Portuguese merchants. This aid to individual Portuguese capitals
had wider objectives and consequences because it was part and parcel of a
scheme to fortify the nation's bargaining power within the Atlantic com-
mercial system. I7
   The problem for an enlightened Iberian economic nationalist, which is
perhaps a more accurate way to describe Pombal, was not so much to en-
courage the influx of precious metals; this was rarely a problem for Iberian
economic policymakers given the fact that Spain, Portugal, and their em-
pires were the principal source of the world's bullion supply in this period,
with gold from Brazil and silver from Peru and Mexico. The dilemma was
precisely the opposite; that is, policymakers needed to devise measures to
retain capital within their own economic system and at the same time to
multiply the positive and diminish the negative economic impact of being
producers of precious metals. The theory and practice of mercantilism
were, after all, the creation of bullion-starved northwestern Europe. The
application of the theory and practice of mercantilism in the bullion-rich
Iberian Peninsula was bound to be partial because the end of the policy
was fundamentally different from that sought by mercantilism's progeni-
tors. The Iberians aimed to retain bullion, the northwest Europeans aimed
to attract it.
   Pombal's methods reflected, in fact, the peculiarities of Portugal's posi-
tion within the Atlantic system, and the particular impact on Portuguese
entrepreneurship of the Brazilian gold boom of 1700-1760. Essentially, the

17Kenneth Maxwell, Pombal: A Paradox of the Enlightenment (Cambridge and New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995); and Francisco Jose Calazans Falcon, A
epoca pombalina: politica, econ6mica e monarquia ilustrada (Sao Paulo: Editora
Atica, 1982).
74 • NakedTropics

all-powerful minister, Pombal, placed the power of the state decisively on
one side of the conflict that had developed between Portuguese entrepre-
neurs as a consequence of the gold boom. He chose the large established
Portuguese and Brazilian merchants over their smaller competitors be-
cause he saw the small merchants as mere creatures or commission agents
of the foreigners. With support from the state he hoped the Portuguese
merchants would in time be able to challenge the foreigners at their own
game. His economic policy was a logical one in view of Portugal's position
within the eighteenth-century international trading system. It protected
mutually beneficial trade (such as the Portuguese wine trade), but it also
sought to develop a powerful national class of businessmen with the capi-
tal resources and the business skills to compete in the international and
Portuguese domestic markets with their foreign, especially British, com-
petitors. It was not an easy policy to pursue, at least overtly, because it was
essential to achieve this outcome without bringing into question the polit-
ical and military support that the treaties with Britain guaranteed and that
was essential if Spanish ambitions were to be kept at bay.
   At the same time in Brazil, in striking contrast to the Bourbon reform-
ers in Spanish America, Pombal sought to incorporate and co-opt the
Brazilian oligarchy. Portugal was, after all, a small country with a large em-
pire. It did not possess the resources of a Britain or France. It did not have
the military capabilities or the economic resources to force Brazil into a
subservient role. Indeed, as Pombal watched the British attempt to repress
the rebellious colonists in English-speaking North America during the
1770s, he was fortified in his belief that conciliation was a more effective
weapon against colonial uprising than military force.
   Portugal's colonial policy under Pombal in effect served to diffuse ten-
sions within the colonial nexus by preventing any polarization along colo-
nial versus metropolitan lines. The intervention of the Pombaline state had
almost always been sectoral; that is, it had swung state support behind one
side in a series of preexisting conflicts which themselves bridged the met-
ropolitan-colonial divide. Hence, Pombal supported the large entrepre-
neurs against their smaller competitors; he had aided the educational
reformers within the church such as the Oratorians, while destroying the
Jesuits and their colleagues; he had crushed powerful elements among the
old aristocracy while encouraging the access of businessmen to noble sta-
tus. The benefits and the displeasure of the Pombaline state, in other
words, helped and hindered both Brazilian and Portuguese, forging a se-
ries of alliances across the Atlantic, as well as counteralliances that linked
Portuguese and Brazilian interests at a variety of levels. Some of these re-
sults of policy were unintentional; but the conciliatory aspect of Pombal's
policy toward powerful Brazilian interests was entirely explicit.
                                              Hegemonies Old and New • 75

   The fundamental problem for Portugal, however, arose from the logic
of the Brazil-based Atlantic system within which Pombal had operated. In
the final analysis, Brazil would inevitably become the dominant partner
within the Portuguese-speaking empire. If the political constraints that
had governed the whole period from the 1660s to the end of the eighteenth
century also changed, that is, if for example Great Britain no longer saw it
in its own interest to protect Portugal from her continental neighbors,
then the British might opt for a direct relationship with the colony rather
than with the mother country.I8 Since the whole basis of Portugal's pros-
perity had been built on the manipulation of colonial monopolies, cash-
crop exports, colonial markets, and colonial gold, such a rupture would
bring fundamental change and would close an epoch. Ironically it was the
French seizure of Lisbon in 1807 that forced the effective political and eco-
nomic emancipation of Brazil in 1808 by neutralizing the power of those
in Portugal opposed to recognition of Brazil's central economic and politi-
cal role within the Luso-Brazilian Atlantic system, collapsing thereby the


18There had long been a clandestine direct trade between British merchants and
Brazil, especially involving the slave trade. The rolled tobacco of Bahia, most of it
from the Cachoeira and Mantiba regions, was the basic commodity of exchange on
the African coast, as necessary to other European slavers as to the Portuguese. [See
Jose da Silva Lisboa to Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 19, 1781, Anais da Bib-
lioteca Nacional, Rio de Janeiro (ABNRJJ, XXXII (1920),505; Jose Honorio Rod-
rigues, Brazil and Africa, trans. Richard A. Mazzara and Sam Hileman (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1965) and Pierre Verger, Flux et reflux de la traite des
negres entre Ie Golfe de Benin et Bahia de Todos os Santos, du XVlle au XIXe siecle
(Paris: La Haye, Mouton, 1968).] Some fifty vessels a year, corvettes and smaller
vessels, left Bahia for Africa, four-fifths of them for the Guine Coast and the
remainder for Angola. [See Luis dos Santos Vilhena, Recopilafiio de noticias
soteropolitanas e brasilicas . .. (1802),3 vols. (Bahia: Imprensa Official do Estado,
1922-1935).] European goods and gold dust came back to Bahia with the cargoes
of slaves. This clandestine commerce had outraged the secretary of state for over-
seas dominions, Martinho de Melo e Castro, as had the degree of control that the
merchants of Bahia exercised over the African commerce to the exclusion of met-
ropolitan merchants. ["Instruc<;ao para 0 Marques de Valen<;a, no qual informa a
respeito da referida devassa ... ," Bahia, February 4,1783, ibid., 529.] The contra-
band manufactures, however, did underprice those imported from the metropolis,
and restricted the market for metropolitan goods. [See Jose da Silva Lisboa to
Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 19, 1781, ibid., p. 505.] The profitable sub-
sidiary trade which accompanied the slave and tobacco commerce contributed to
the favorable balance Bahia enjoyed with the metropolis. Most of the capital ob-
tained was sunk into the purchase of more slaves. Melo e Castro held that the
working of the Bahian-African trade was the same as "according to the English,
French and Dutch a free trade by the ports of Africa between those nations and the
Portuguese dominion in Brazil without the intervention of the merchants of the
metropolis." ["Instruc<;ao para 0 Marques de Valen<;a," Martinho de Melo e Castro,
Queluz, September 10, 1779, ABNRJ, XXXII (1910),444.]
76 • NakedTropics

structure of the Luso-Atlantic system as it had existed since the 1660s and
replacing Lisbon as the required intermediary between South America and
Europe by direct access between Europe and the ports of Brazil. 19


                                         III
But what of the Spanish American Atlantic world? Here the eighteenth
century had seen three major processes at work. First, the old monopolistic
trading connection of Atlantic convoys of protected ships sailing on a reg-
ular pattern between the Caribbean and the monopoly port of Seville
(later Cadiz) had been superseded by a de facto diversification of trade.
Some of this diversification was illegal-but like the trade through Ja-
maica, this had become a substantial contribution to overall Atlantic com-
merce. After 1715, in fact, the old fleet system was clearly limiting the
growth of trade as economic and demographic expansion occurred
throughout Spanish America. Spain had also eventually permitted other
Spanish ports into Atlantic commerce, gradually ending the Cadiz monop-
oly between 1765 and 1789 and giving formal administrative recognition
to the peripheral coastal regions in South America away from the old high-
land Indian-populated core areas, where Spain's major bases in the West-
ern Hemisphere had been since the time of the Conquest. Thus, while
Lima and Mexico City remained important (Mexico still accounted for
half the population of Spanish America in this period), new regions also
developed, such as the Rio de la Plata, Caracas, and Cuba, which had previ-
ously been backwaters-good for provisions but producing very little else.
These regions all became major exporters in the late eighteenth century-
Buenos Aires, an exporter of salt beef, silver, hides, and grains; Caracas for
cacao and hides; Cuba, especially after the revolt in Haiti, a major center
for sugar and slaves.
   Second, starting at midcentury Spain had attempted to implement a se-
ries of major administrative, mercantile, and fiscal reforms aimed at the
enhancement of the power of the metropolis through the more efficient
exploitation of its colonies. 20 As in Portugal, there had been growing


19Jose Jobson de Andrade Arruda, a Brasil no comercio colonial (Sao Paulo: Atica,
1980); Joseph C. Miller, Way ofDeath: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave
Trade, 1730-1830 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988).
2°1 am drawing here on the work of Stanley J. Stein and Barbara H. Stein in "Con-
cept and Realities of Spanish Economic Growth, 1759-1789;' Historia Iberica I
(1973): 103-119, and also see their more recent work, Silver, Trade, and War: Spain
and America in the Making ofEarly Modern Europe (Baltimore and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2000). Also see Charles C. Noel, "Charles III of Spain," in
Enlightened Absolutism, ed. H. M. Scott (Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan,
1990), 119-143.
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 77

awareness in Spain that its role as a great power was severely undermined
by the failure to adapt to modern conditions; which in eighteenth-century
terms meant using the power of the state to increase revenues and impose a
more centralized administrative system. This preoccupation with national
regeneration during the first half of the eighteenth century was in the fore-
front of the minds of several high government officials who saw Spanish
America as the means for Spain to recuperate its position in Europe if
colonial resources could be more effectively utilized. The 1743 proposal of
Jose de Campillo, minister of finance, in which he called for a "New system
of economic administration for America" (Nuevo sistema de Gobierno
Econ6mico para fa America) encapsulated the intention to develop the em-
pire as a market for Spanish manufactures and as a source for raw materi-
als. Campillo wished to see a system of general inspectors (visitas
generales), the creation of intendancies on the French model, and the in-
troduction of "free trade" into colonial administration, by which they
meant the ending of the Andalusian monopoly and the opening of Spanish
American trade to all ports of Spain, as well as the creation of a more eco-
nomically integrated society within Spanish America by changing the way
in which the Indian communities within the New World were governed.
Campillo's proposals, however, were not published until 1789 under the
Bourbon monarch Charles III (1759-1788), whose reign became associ-
ated with the implementation of a series of far-reaching new governmental
measures for the administration of the vast Spanish territories in the New
World. The urgency of these reforms became more than ever evident after
the seizure of Havana by the British in 1762, during the Seven Years' War. 21
    Each major Spanish crisis in the eighteenth century had a colonial com-
ponent. Commercial competition between England and France for the
Spanish contract (asiento) to supply African slaves to Spain's colonies in
America had been a prominent issue in the War of the Spanish Succession.
At midcentury, the second crisis in 1759-1762 was precipitated by English
commercial expansion in India, Canada, and the Caribbean, gateway to
Spain's colonies in Middle America and northern South America. The
third crisis at the century's end came with conflict between England and
Napoleonic France in large measure over seapower and trade with Spain's
colonies. What defined these crises was Spain's monopoly of American sil-
ver production, its inability to develop a manufacturing industry to supply

21John Robert Fisher, Commercial Relations between Spain and Spanish America in
the Era of Free Trade, 1778-1796 (Liverpool, U.K.: Centre for Latin-American
Studies, University of Liverpool, 1985); and Antonio Garcia-Baquero Gonzalez,
Cadiz y el Atlantico (1717-1778): el comercio colonial espanol bajo el monopolio
gaditano, 2 vols. (Sevilla: Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas: Excelentisima Diputaci6n Provincial de
Cadiz, 1976).
78 • NakedTropics

its colonies, and the competition between two of the more developed Eu-
ropean economies over exploiting the Spanish Empire in America.
    To England and France, Spanish America represented, above all, a mar-
ket for manufactured goods and a source of silver essential for expanding
international trade and settling the imbalance of payments. At the end of
the War of Succession, however, the forms of British and French commer-
cial penetration in Spain diverged. Less developed commercially and in-
dustrially than the British, and linked to Spain as a wartime ally and tied by
the Bourbon dynasty, French merchants and shippers had to expand inside
the Spanish colonial trading system now centered on Cadiz. The Utrecht
settlement confirmed the concessions yielded by Madrid over the last half
of the seventeenth century to foreign resident merchants and shippers at
Cadiz. Such concessions included extraterritorial rights, the exemption of
firms and vessels from certain customs controls, and lower duties on im-
ports such as French linens and other select items. 22
    Over the decades of 1724-1778 there were on average about sixty major
French commercial houses established in Cadiz. Of the declared value of
the Cadiz merchants, moreover, the French merchants accounted for 43
percent, the Spanish merchants only 18 percent. Until 1789, the French re-
mained the largest foreign colony in Cadiz, always conspicuous and sensi-
tive, like the British factory in Lisbon, to any infringement of their treaty
rights. A significant percentage of the French textiles shipped to Cadiz
were reexported; and the sales of French linens, woolens, and silks at Cadiz
had important repercussions for employment and earnings in France's
textile-producing centers. 23 French industry also absorbed appreciable
quantities of Spanish primary exports-raw wool, soda ash, raw silk-
along with products from Mexico and Guatemala like cochineal and in-
digo dyes. As little as 10 percent of colonial cargoes consisted of Spanish
goods, with the balance made up by the production of Spain's French ally.
Sales to the Spanish colonies generated a counterflow of silver that fed into
the private banking system centered on Paris and Lyons, which was vital
for trade with India and China and for the deficit-plagued finances of the

22Lutgardo Garcia Fuentes, EI comercio espanol con America, 1650-1700 (Sevilla:
Escuela de Estudios Hispano-Americanos; Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, 1980); Miguel Artola, "America en el pensamiento espanol del siglo
XVII," Revista de indias XXIX ( 1969); and N. M. Sutherland, "The Origins of the 30
Years War and the Structure of European Politics;' English Historical Review CVII
(July 1992): 586-625.
23Carlos D. Malamud, "Espana, Francia y el comercio directo con el espacio peru-
ano, 1695-1730," "Cadiz y Saint Marlo;' in La economia espanola al final del antiquo
regime: comercio y colonias, III (Madrid: Alianza; Banco de Espana, 1982). Also, Al-
bert Girard, Le commerce franrais a Seville et a Cadix aux temps des Habsbourgs:
contribution a l'etude du commerce etranger en Espagne aux XVle et XVIle siecles
(Paris and Bordeaux: Feret & fils, 1932).
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 79

French state. Silver, in fact, continued to dominate the Spanish American
traffics: between 1717 and 1778 it composed 77.6 percent of the annual
value; and 75.4 percent of the value of the trade of New Spain. And this was
still a very substantial business comparatively speaking-the value of the
commerce of Spanish America being double that of the British West Indies
in the 1780s. 24
    English merchants were less important at Cadiz. They enjoyed other
channels of trade with Spain's American colonies, especially along Spain's
Caribbean coasts. Between Utrecht and the outbreak of war in 1739, the
British managed the slave supply contract (the asiento) at Havana, Vera-
cruz, Cartagena, and Buenos Aires, where along with African slaves they
introduced smuggled goods; from Jamaica the British developed an exten-
sive smugglers' network to Havana and Santiago on the island of Cuba, to
the Campeche and Belize coasts, and to New Spain's sole major Caribbean
port of Veracruz. Jamaica also served as both entrepot and naval base;
there British naval forces could threaten the French sugar islands and
Spanish American ports. This threat materialized, of course, in the war be-
ginning in 1757, when English forces took Canada and occupied first
Guadeloupe and later Martinique. 25
    The accession of Charles III offered an opportunity for Spain to reform
traditional attitudes. For France, which saw its colonial empire in India
and Canada collapse, and for Spain, unprepared to withstand English as-
saults upon its Caribbean trading zone alone, the accession of Charles III
was the opportunity at last to renew their dynastic alliance of mutual con-
venience. Charles III, and the key collaborator he brought from Naples, the
Marques de Esquilache, wished to diminish the pressure from French com-
mercial and manufacturing interests who had long enjoyed direct and in-
direct participation in Spain's transatlantic trading system, much as
Pombal sought to diminish British influence in Portugal. Yet, there was a
paradox to the Franco-Spanish diplomatic and military collaboration not
dissimilar to that within the Anglo-Portuguese alliance.
    Charles revived projects of economic reform outlined earlier by men
like Campillo. Charles and Esquilache's first actions were to terminate the
seventeenth-century tariff concessions hampering the development of do-
mestic industry; this was followed by standardizing tariffs and procedures
at all peninsular ports. Given the importance of colonial trade in Spain's
aggregate external exchanges, Madrid was, in effect, shifting much of the


24D. A. Brading, "Bourbon Spain and Its American Empire," in The Cambridge His-
tory of Latin America, ed. Leslie Bethell (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1984), I, 389-439.
25Dorothy Goebel, "British Trade to the Spanish Colonies, 1796-1823," American
Historical Review XLIII (1938): 288-320.
80 • NakedTropics

burden of customs revenue to colonial consumers. Charles's government
also attempted to reduce the illegal foreign share in Spain's colonial ex-
changes, in effect, attempting to increase Spain's participation and advan-
tage in colonial trade. And, in light of Franco-Spanish diplomatic and
defense collaboration symbolized in the family pact, Madrid expected
French manufacturing interests to tolerate Spanish protectionism de-
signed, as Madrid saw it, to make Spain's contribution in the joint contain-
ment of English commercial and naval power more effective.
   The impact of the new governmental measures within Spanish America
varied considerably from region to region. One immediate consequence
was that tensions were aggravated between European Spaniards and the
old Latin American white Creole oligarchies, which had for several cen-
turies, it should be remembered, found a political niche within local ad-
ministrations throughout the Americas. The Bourbon reforms, especially
the intendant system, were therefore first introduced in the regions where
the opposition of the old Creole oligarchies was less formidable; Cuba after
1764 and the Rio de la Plata after 1776. Only in 1784 was the system intro-
duced in Peru, and in 1786 in Mexico. The articulation of the new system
owed much to the reforming visitor general of New Spain (Mexico), Jose
de Galvez (1765-1771), who later became the long-term secretary for the
Indies (1776-1787). His objective in Mexico had encompassed the estab-
lishment of a tobacco monopoly (to raise revenue), the reorganization and
raising of the sales tax (the Alcabala), and the stimulation of silver produc-
tion (by lowering the price of mercury).26
    In practice, Spanish neomercantilism proved limited in its impact. State
intervention did not create an industrial base in textile manufactures, except
in Catalonia whose cotton mills were the product of private rather than state
initiatives. In the mid-1780s, the colonial trade expanded, but the increase in
colonial exchanges appears to have been based largely on the sustained surge
in Mexican silver mining and colonial staple exports, more shipping in low-
tonnage vessels, and Europe's insatiable appetite for silver and staples. 27

26Allan Kuethe and Douglas Inglis, "Absolution and Enlightened Reform: Charles
III, the Establishment of the Alcabala and Commercial Reorganization in Cuba,"
Past and Present CIX (1985): 118-143; and Jacques Barbier, "Indies Revenues and
Naval Spending: The Cost of Colonialism for the Spanish Bourbons, 1763-1805;'
Jahrbuch fur Geschichte von Staat, Wirtschaft und Gessellschat Latinamerikas, XXI
(1984).
27Jacques Barbier, "Peninsula Finance and Colonial Trade: The Dilemma of
Charles IV's Spain," Journal of Latin American Studies XII (1980): 21-37; John
Fisher, "The Imperial Response to (Free Trade': Spanish Imports from Spanish
America, 1778-1796," Journal of Latin American Studies XVII (1985): 35-78; and
Antonio Garcia-Baquero Gonzalez, «Comercio colonial y producci6n industrial en
Catalonia a fines del siglo XVIII," Actas del I coloquio de hist6ria economica de Es-
pana (Barcelona: n.p., 1975),268-294.
                                         Hegemonies Old and New • 81

    Spain, Europe, and the East were still linked to American (now largely
Mexican) silver, and transforming a bullionist into a neomercantilist Span-
ish state was no easy process. The threat to the system from northwest Eu-
rope remained. The English manufacturers and merchants in preferring
their Caribbean outposts from which they participated directly (and ille-
gally) in Spanish colonial markets to the French method of participation
via Cadiz were, in effect, pointing to one of the basic flaws in the Spanish
neomercantilist project. The inability of the Spanish state to curb smug-
gling from English Caribbean ports, or from Dutch and French islands for
that matter, demonstrated clearly what the merchants well understood:
that multiple charges on goods within the formal Spanish trading sys-
tem-repeated duties, commissions, and insurance fees-all raised the
price of legal goods in Spanish America to levels that compensated for the
risks of smuggling.
    French textile manufacturers were also unable to provide the Spanish
colonial system with merchandise whose quantity, quality, and pricing was
competitive with other European goods. To protect their deteriorating
competitive position, the French defended traditional commercial privi-
leges in Spain's colonial trade. Yet it was precisely here that the French
manufacturers faced the competition of Spain itself which was trying to
reduce the privileged status of French merchants and goods in colonial
trade. The fundamental premise of mercantilism was economic competi-
tion, not cooperation. Thus, ironically, both French commercial agents
and their Spanish counterparts failed to observe that by the last third of the
eighteenth century both Spanish and French economic policies were being
bypassed by the rapid expansion of the international economy. English in-
dustrial development was generating products whose price and quality
would permit them to penetrate most mercantilist barriers.
   Neither Spaniards nor Frenchmen engaged in colonial trades with
Spanish America wanted to recognize that the age of mercantilism was
rapidly passing. Ironically, by the end of the eighteenth century, the British
had made this leap, and in their relationship with Portugal, no less; and
partly because of the comparative success of Pombal's policies, not because
of their failure; and it was France, or more precisely Napoleon, who forced
the issue to a denouement. Let me explain.
   Between 1785 and 1790 the balance of trade between Portugal and
Great Britain was brought almost to an equilibrium. From 1791 to 1795 for
the first time during the whole eighteenth century, Portuguese exports to
Britain showed a surplus over British exports to Portugal. From 1783, and
especially from 1788, there was rapid growth in Brazilian raw cotton reex-
ports from Portugal to Britain, and by the first decade of the nineteenth
century, about a quarter of Lancashire's cotton wool export came from
Brazil, especially Pernambuco and Maranhao. Robert Walpole, British
82 • NakedTropics

envoy to Lisbon, looked on in astonishment as Britain remitted gold to Lis-
bon to pay for its now unfavorable balance of trade. "It may be looked
upon as a kind of phenomenon," he told Lord Grenville in 1791. 28
   It was now the British who clamored for reciprocity, a reversal of cir-
cumstances which would have gratified the subtle old Marques de Pombal
had he lived long enough to see it. Between 1786 and 1788, extensive inves-
tigations were conducted in London into the changed Anglo-Portuguese
commercial relationship. Both the old woolen and wine industries and the
new cotton manufacturing interest pressured the government and the
committee of the Privy Council for Trade. The cotton spinners and the cal-
ico and muslin manufacturers of Manchester and Neighbourhood were
especially vocal as were the borough reeve and constable of Manchester. 29
In 1801 Lord Hawkesbury instructed the British minister in Lisbon to let it
be known that «in the case of invasion, the British envoy was authorized to
recommend that the court of Portugal embark for Brazil . . . and the
[British] were ready for their part to guarantee the security of the expedi-
tion and to combine with [the Portuguese government] the most effica-
cious ways to extend and consolidate [their] dominions in South
America."30
   This was an astonishing change of policy. But its immediate implemen-
tation was not easy-the traditional commercial organizations and their
lobbies remained powerful-not only in the form of the British factories
in Portugal, but also among the new Portuguese merchant industrial bour-
geoisie Pombal had created. But the British government was clear on the
issue. As Robert Fitzgerald, Walpole's successor in Lisbon, wrote to Lord
Hawkesbury, "the British property within these dominions forms no ob-
ject of great national importance ... especially where in the opposite bal-
ance are viewed the innumerable advantages to be derived from an open,
unrestrained trade with the Brazils."31 It took the French invasion of 1807
to neutralize the old interests. One cannot help thinking that it would have

28Michael M. Edwards, The Growth of the British Cotton Trade, 1780-1815 (Man-
chester: Manchester University Press, 1967); Arthur Redford, Manchester Mer-
chants and Foreign Trade, 1794-1858 (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1934); and [Robert Walpole] to [Lord Grenville], Lisbon, October 12,1791, PRO,
FO,63/14.
29"Minute of Propositions Impeding the Treaty with Portugal;' September 1786,
Chatham Papers, PRO 30/8/342 (2) f. 59; Office of the Committee of Privy Council
for Trade, June 25,1787, PRO, BT 3/1. 102; [We Fawkener] to [Borough Reeve] and
[constable of Manchester], Office of Privy Council for Trade, August 23, 1788,
PRO, BT, 3/1, 290.
3°0. Jose de Almeida de Melo e Castro to Dom Joao, September 1, 1801, Arquivo
Instituto Hist6rico e Geognifico Brasileiro, Rio de Janeiro, lata 58, doc. 17.
31 [Robert Fitzgerald] to [Lord Hawkesbury], Lisbon, October 21,1803, PRO, FO,
63/42.
                                             Hegemonies Old and New • 83

been better for the French if they had left Iberia alone when after the victo-
ries of Nelson they could not challenge British naval superiority in the At-
1antic Ocean. A factor incidentally the citizens of Liverpool well noted at
the time.



                                        IV
If the policies of neomercantilism in both Spain and Portugal were
thwarted, and thwarted be it noted where they succeeded as much as where
they failed, and if Enlightened Absolution proved incapable in the long
term of preventing the inexorable rise of the British commercial and naval
hegemony within the Atlantic system as a whole, what of the forces of pro-
tonationalism on the other side of the ocean-can we speak here of an age
of Democratic Revolution, as Robert Palmer proposed, or of an Atlantic
Revolution in the sense Jacques Godechot used the term? Or are we indeed
seeing a more economically based transformation from direct to indirect
dominion, from the old formal to the new informal empire of trade and
industrial power. The ferment of innovation and the difficulty of imple-
menting reform in the Americas had certainly revealed just how complex
Spanish American colonial society had become in the late eighteenth cen-
tury. It also demonstrated how difficult it would be in Spanish America for
a clear regional focus of protonationalistic sentiment to emerge, or for the
creation of a cohesive social base to support any rebellion against Spain.
Internal social, racial, and caste divisions permeated colonial society, and it
was very difficult anywhere in Spanish America for European Spaniards
living in the colonies, Creole magistrates, soldiers, and local businessmen
to come together in even the embryonic independence movement that had
briefly made the idea of an economically independent and Republican
Minas Gerais on the North American model so pertinent in Brazil in
1788-1789.
    The example of the American Revolution had been particularly impor-
tant in Brazil for reasons that lay in the coincidence of its anticolonial mes-
sage with the severe tension between Lisbon and major segments of the
local elite in the one area in Portugal's American territories that had the ca-
pacity to articulate as well as make effective an independent state, possess-
ing as it did in the 1780s adequate revenues, military forces, administrative
experience, and a close attention to international developments. That it
failed despite all these elements is an indication of how difficult the
achievement of colonial independence would be in Ibero-America. 32


32Maxwell, Conflicts and Conspiracies, especially 115-140.
84 • NakedTropics

   Movements of social protest did, of course, emerge in Spanish America,
and with much more violence, bloodshed, and disruption than ever oc-
curred in Brazil, where protonationalist movements, however articulate,
never got further than conspiracy in the eighteenth century. But the move-
ments of social protest in Spanish America were limited in their ideo-
logical content; they did not make the leap from protest against bad
government to an attack on the rule of Spain in America. The most signifi-
cant of these movements of protest and rebellion, the Comunero rebellion
in New Granada (present-day Colombia and Venezuela) in 1781 and the
Tupac Amaru rebellion in upper Peru (present-day Bolivia) in 1780-1781,
never projected themselves into an anticolonial struggle and both, espe-
cially the latter, served to terrify the Creole elites and make them acutely
aware of the risk of race and ethnic violence implicit in the complexity of
Spanish America's social makeup.
    Given the heterogeneity of Spanish America in the late eighteenth cen-
tury, the uneven impact of imperial reform, the diversification of the eco-
nomic system, and its reorientation toward the Atlantic trading system in
the new peripheral growth areas, such as Venezuela and the Rio de la Plata,
as well as the limited anticolonial sentiment apparent in the rebellions of
the 1780s, incipient nationalism was, when it emerged, more a characteris-
tic of disgruntled individuals than of the masses. The latter were, on the
whole, more preoccupied with immediate inequalities and exploitation
than with intraimperial injustices, and they felt more the oppression of the
local oligarchies than of the Crown in Madrid. The rebels in both Peru and
Venezuela, in fact, had looked to the Crown for redress of grievance. The
notion of independence from Spain, of a colonial emancipation from Eu-
rope, was hence confined to a very small number of the white Creole elite
and developed after the putative popular revolts of the early 1780s had
been repressed. These aspirations also were of a reformist rather than a
revolutionary nature, and while the institutional model of the new North
American nation was often an inspiration, in terms of overseas contacts
and hope of assistance it was Britain to which they looked rather than to
the United States. 33
    By the turn of the century, it is true that works by John Adams, George
Washington, and Thomas Jefferson were circulating in both Mexico and
South America, and key leaders of the Spanish American independence
movement, most notably Francisco de Miranda, visited the United States,
as did Simon Bolivar, who admired Washington. Miranda, however,
summed up the complex reaction of whites to the events of 1776 in North

33John Leddy Phelan, The People and the King: The Comunero Revolution in Colom-
bia, 1781 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1978).
                                           Hegemonies Old and New • 85

America and 1789 in France. "We have before our eyes two great exam-
ples," he wrote in 1799, "the American and the French Revolutions: let us
prudently imitate the first and carefully shun the second." After the revolt
in French Saint-Domingue (Haiti) in 1792, as in Brazil, property owners
throughout Spanish America became even more cautious, especially if
their property included African slaves. "I confess that as much as I desire
the liberty and independence of the New World:' Miranda observed, "I fear
anarchy and revolution even more."34
   The impact of the American Revolution would be confined mainly to
the peripheries in Spanish America. Very little impact can be discerned in
the two great core regions of Spanish dominion, Peru and Mexico. In many
respects, the North Americans, in terms of trade, influence, and contacts,
followed the sea-lanes, and their role was most significant with the
Caribbean and along the coastlines where they had long been involved in
the transatlantic commercial complex as purveyors of codfish, sugar,
slaves, grain, tobacco, and most recently cotton. But here it was the North
American commercial role within the Atlantic commercial system as a
whole that was decisive. The grain trade, in particular, found ready cus-
tomers in the Iberian Peninsula, among the colonial overlords of South
and Central America. And trade more than republican ideology would be
the watchword in the United States' dealings with both Spain and Portugal.
These powers, Spain in particular, had aided in a very substantial way the
attainment of American independence; it was a connection that made for
some caution when it came to aiding and abetting revolutionaries to the
south, at least until the Napoleonic period, when the United States gained
direct access to Spanish American ports and Spain to all intents and pur-
poses lost direct administrative control of its empire in America due to
British control of the sea-lanes.35
   In the case of Portugal and Brazil, it had become very evident that the
impact of the American Revolution in Brazil, which was a powerful influ-
ence before 1789, was nonetheless diluted and eventually rejected by the

34Peggy K. Liss, Atlantic Empires: The Networks of Trade and Revolution, 1713-1826
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983). Also see final chapter of
Bernard Bailyn, To Begin the World Anew: The Genius and Ambiguities of the Amer-
ican Founders (New York: Knopf, 2003) as well as Karen Racine, Francisco de Mi-
randa: A Transatlantic Life in the Age of Revolution (Wilmington, Del.: SR Books,
2003).
35John Lynch, The Spanish American Revolution, 1808-1826 (New York: Norton,
1973); The North American Role in the Spanish Imperial Economy, 1760-1819, ed.
Jacques Barbier and Allan Kuethe (Manchester [Greater Manchester] and Dover,
N.H., U.S.A.: Manchester University Press, 1984); also The Economics of Mexico
and Peru during the Late Colonial Period, 1700-1810, ed. Nils Jacobson and Hans-
Jiirgen Puhle (Berlin: Colloquium Verlag; Bibliotheca Ibero-Americana, 1986).
86 • NakedTropics

mid-1790s. This rejection was partly due to the failure of the Nationalist
and Republican conspiracy in Minas Gerais during early 1789, but it was
due also to the counterinfluence of the French Revolution and most par-
ticularly the manifestation of the French Revolution in the Americas, the
great slave revolt in the French Antilles.
    The white Brazilian elite, slave owners and those opposed to slavery
alike, found by the 1790s that republicanism and democracy were concepts
too dangerous for experimentation within a society half slave, and where
blacks outnumbered whites two to one. The consequence was that those
who avidly and approvingly followed the events in North America before
 1790 turned away from the North American model and, encouraged by the
Portuguese government, which had learned its own lessons from the revolt
'of the thirteen colonies, embraced monarchy in the interest of preserving
the status quo against racial and social upheaval. A similar interaction be-
tween the chronology of revolutions and elite attitudes took place in all the
American states and ex-colonies where slavery was entrenched.
    In mainland Spanish America, independence followed from external
more than internal events: the collapse of the Bourbon monarchy in Spain
itself in the face of the Napoleon onslaught in 1808. Unlike Portugal, where
the French invasion brought about a denouement to the dilemmas of the
metropolitan-colonial relationship with the removal of the Portuguese
Court to Brazil and the de facto (later de jure) establishment of Rio de
Janeiro as the seat of a New World monarchy, in Spain the invasion in effect
cut Spanish America loose from the old metropolis for a critical six years
between 1808 and 1814, with major consequences for Spanish American
unity and stability. The successor Spanish American republics often took
shape within the new boundaries imposed by the eighteenth-century re-
formers, but they all faced massive problems of social cohesion and eco-
nomic and administrative dislocations. The conflicting pressure arising
from unequal economic growth within the Spanish Empire in America, the
ambiguities of an administrative reform that was in part an attempt to re-
spond to those changes, as well as the several social, ethnic, and racial ten-
sions that permeated the social makeup of Spanish America had all served
to limit the development of a broad-based anticolonial sentiment prior to
 1808 and fragmented the social bases of support for a nationalistic project
on the North American model, limiting thereby the potential impact of the
North American example. Again, as in the lowland tropical areas of the
Western Hemisphere, the example of the great slave revolt and consequent
bloody conflicts in Haiti reinforced the fears arising from the uprising in
Upper Peru in the early 1790s. Those who saw the North American model
as relevant tended after 1800 to see it as the conservative option, a solution
                                        Hegemonies Old and New • 87

to the colonial dilemma that preserved the basic social organization, espe-
cially the system of slavery, but brought political emancipation from Eu-
rope. For an effective partnership they more often looked to Great Britain
and to trade: espousing "liberalism" in the sense of access to world com-
merce rather than liberalism in the sense of democratic government.
   For Latin America, especially for the areas where plantation economies
and African slavery predominated, it is essential, therefore, if we are seek-
ing to mark the end to the long eighteenth century, to look at the relation-
ship between the three revolutions of the late eighteenth century, the
American, the French, and the Haitian, and for Spanish America to look to
the vicissitudes of the eighteenth-century experience with reform and re-
bellion. From the perspective of the Americas at the time, the great slave
revolt of 1792 in French Saint-Domingue was a second "American" revolu-
tion that seemed no less important than the first. It brought to the fore-
front of elite consciousness fears and tensions inherent to plantation
systems throughout the New World. Within the empires of Spain and Por-
tugal, the Haitian revolt served both to stimulate a reapproximation be-
tween local oligarchs and the more progressive elements within the
metropolitan governments, as in the Portuguese-speaking empire, and, as
in Spanish America, to make it inevitable that the independence move-
ments, when eventually they came, would always find questions of race,
class, and social stability close to the surface. Whereas in the 1780s would-
be Latin American revolutionaries had found inspiration in George Wash-
ington, by the 1790s, they would recoil in fear before the example of
Toussaint L'Ouverture.
   The Haitian revolt also had a major impact on the attitudes of the gov-
ernments of Spain, France, and Britain toward independence movements
in the Americas. For Britain, in particular, Haiti brought great caution to
the encouragement of colonial rebellion if such revolts threatened to bring
about so much instability and violence as to destroy the very wealth which
had attracted British traders and merchants to the region in the first place.
Here, the British soon began to see the advantages of the Luso-Brazilian
solution to the dilemmas of the epoch of the Atlantic revolutions. As John
Barrow summarized the issue in 1806:

    Revolutions in states where each individual has some interest in
    their welfare are not effected without the most serious calamities.
    What, then, must be the consequences in a country where the num-
    ber of slaves exceeds the proprietors of the soil? In promoting revo-
    lutions, I trust England will never be concerned, being fully
    convinced that however much South America might gain by a quiet
88 • NakedTropics

    change of masters, she will be soon thrown back into a state of bar-
    barianism by revolutions. 36
From the early-nineteenth-century British perspective, the reasons for this
essentially conservative stance are not hard to discern. Hegemonic powers,
then as now, never like to see their interest challenged or their commercial
interests destroyed by radical and unpredictable change. The recently inde-
pendent North Americans were the first to see through such stratagems
and their implications for Spanish America and Brazil. The American
secretary of state, John Quincy Adams, writing on June 28, 1818, ably
summed up the British attitude toward the political emancipation of
South America when he wrote:
    The Revolutions in South America had opened a new world to her
    commerce, which the restoration of Spanish colonial domination
    would again close against her. Her Cabinet, therefore, devised a
    middle term, a compromise between legitimacy and traffic ... She
    admits all the pretension of legitimacy until they come in contact
    with her own interest, and then she becomes the patroness of liberal
    principle and colonial emancipation. 37
Only two months later the British envoy in Rio de Janeiro, Henry Cham-
berlain, in fact was writing secretly to Viscount Castlereagh (August 22,
1818) in terms which reflected Adam's supposition exactly:
    The political state of this part of the South American continent has
    become so changed by the establishment of the seat of the Por-
    tuguese Monarchy in the Brazils that a change in the system under
    which Spain formerly governed her colonies in the Plata is become
    necessary and unavoidable, even if they had remained faithful; they

36John Barrow, A Voyage to Cochinchina in the Years 1792 and 1793 (London: T.
Cadell and W. Davies, 1806), 133-134; Also see John Lynch, "British Policies and
Spanish America," Journal of Latin American Studies I (1969): 1-30; French Saint-
Domingue had been producing about 40 percent of the world's sugar and over half
of the world's coffee, according to David Geggus, when the 1791 slave revolt oc-
curred. The government of William Pitt and Henry Dundas sent some 15,000 sol-
diers to their deaths in Saint Dominique and spent some £ 10m trying to conquer
it. Geggus calls this "among the greatest disasters in British Imperial History."
D. Geggus, «The British Government and the Saint Dominique Slave Revolt
1791-1793," EHR XCVI (1981): 285-305. Also see Lester D. Langley, The Americas
in the Age ofRevolution, 1750-1850 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996).
37John Quincy Adams, secretary of state to George W. Campbell, United States
minister to Russia, Washington, June 28, 1818, in Diplomatic Correspondence ofthe
United States concerning the Independence of the Latin American Nations, ed.
William R. Manning, 3 vols. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1925), vol. I, 72.
                                          Hegemonies Old and New • 89

    have, however, thrown off their allegiance, and have maintained a
    struggle of several years for Independence . . . For Brazil, having
    ceased to be a colony and being become an independent kingdom
    open to the commerce of the whole world, they cannot return to
    their former state. However, as I regard the re-establishment of
    Spanish authority as impossible, it appears to me that the real inter-
    est of His Catholic Majesty would be secured by his putting an end
    to the contest as soon as possible, ... such as to promise stability,
    revolution would cease and prosperity would be restored in these
    fine countries to the advantage of the whole world, and of none
    more than of Great Britain. 38
   John Quincy Adams and Henry Chamberlain were both right. The
characteristics and options that had marked the long eighteenth century in
the Spanish and Portuguese Atlantic had been permanently transformed.
Yet this had occurred at least in part because the options for two very im-
portant participants in the eighteenth-century South Atlantic world, Spain
and Portugal, had been largely superseded and destroyed. For them, the
long eighteenth century had ended.




38Henry Chamberlain to Viscount Castlereagh (Secret), Rio de Janeiro, August 22,
1810, in Britain and the Independence ofLatin America, 1812-1830; Selected Docu-
ments from the Foreign Office Archives, ed. Sir Charles Webster, 2 vols. (London:
Oxford University Press, 1938), vol. 1,190-193.
R U IN S   or C H U R CH OF S A N   D O X IN Q O .
                                                              CHAPTER            6
                                                             The Spark
               The Amazon and the Suppression ofthe Jesuits
             "The Kings ofPortugal could come to have an Empire like China in Brazil."
                                                         -Duke Silva Tarouca, 1752




For the past two decades, historians-or many of them-have been down-
grading the role of events and of personalities. There has also been a ten-
dency to reject the history of ideas, or at least any easy cause-and-effect
interaction between ideas and the implementation of policy. On the posi-
tive side, however, we have witnessed the growth of a more international,
less Eurocentric, history. I say this at the outset, obvious as it may be, be-
cause we are dealing here very much with an event (the expulsion of the Je-
suits from Portugal and its empire in 1759); with a very dominant-not to
say domineering-personality (the Marques de Pombal, who in effect gov-
erned Portugal from 1750 to 1777); with ideas (especially in the case of the
Iberian monarchies, a reinvigorated and systematic thinking about the role
of the state in promoting economic development and in securing for itself
a monopoly over coercion, budgets, administration, and justice); and with
international history (in that I will be focusing on a very remote periphery
of the eighteenth-century world: the Amazon basin).
   This event: the Portuguese expulsion, this personality: Pombal, and this
periphery: the Amazon basin, however, provided the spark that set in mo-
tion a process throughout Catholic Europe that brought the Society of
Jesus down. In the aftermath, in Portugal, it was the Enlightenment that
provided a rationale, a justification, as well as the means to remedy some of
the damage done by the Jesuits' forced departure.


                                        91
92 • NakedTropics

   It is important to stress perhaps that this is where and when the expul-
sion began. We still tend to look out from the center to the edges-yet it
was at the very outer edges of the European world, where the Jesuits had al-
ways been most active, that the first decrees to suppress the Society of Jesus
were enforced. Why an action in Brazil found such resonance elsewhere is a
separate issue. Here I am interested in the spark. Why the Amazon? Why
Pombal?


                                          II
There were two distinct but interrelated aspects of the intellectual environ-
ment in eighteenth-century Portugal that influenced the way Pombal
thought about the problems confronting him as he took office in 1750;
each of them, in different ways, had an impact on the dispute with the
Jesuits. l First, there was the intense debate over fundamental questions
concerning philosophy and education. Second, a considerable body of
thought existed about various aspects of Portugal's political economy. The
stimulus for the former in Portugal, as elsewhere in Europe, was the intel-
lectual achievement of Descartes, Newton, and Locke. The most important
works to emerge from this intellectual school in Portugal included those of
de Martinho de Mendon<;a Pina e Proen<;a (b. 1693, d. 1743), who at-
tempted to adapt to Portugal some of Locke's theories, especially on edu-
cation; the writings of the New Christian2 Dr. Jacob de Castro Sarmento
(b. 1692, d. 1762), who introduced Newtonian ideas in Portugal; and the
works of Dr. Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches (b. 1699, d. 1783), another
New Christian who had left Portugal in 1726, working thereafter in Eng-
land, Holland, Russia, and finally in France, where (from 1747 until his
death in 1783) he was a collaborator of the Encyclopedists and wrote on
medicine, pedagogy, and economics. 3 Most influential of them all was the
Oratorian Luis Antonio Verney (b. 1713, d. 1792), the author of 0 ver-
dadeiro metodo de estudar (The true method of education), published in

1I use "Pombal" here as a shorthand, since this is usually how Sebastiao Jose de
Carvalho e Melo (b. 1699, d. 1782) is referred to by historians. But it is an anachro-
nistic and perhaps misleading shorthand to the extent that it anticipates his eleva-
tion to marques in 1769. He had become the count of Oeiras in 1759. For details on
Pombal's family background see Kenneth Maxwell, Pombal, Paradox ofthe Enlight-
enment (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), especially
2-4.
2So-called New Christians were the descendants of Portuguese Jews compelled to
embrace Christianity in 1497 rather than face expulsion.
3See Antonio Alberto Banha de Andrade, Vernei e a cultura do seu tempo (Coimbra:
Universidade de Coimbra, 1966); also The Portuguese Jewish Community in Lon-
don: 1656-1830 (London: Jewish Museum, 1992).
                                                                   The Spark • 93

1746. LUIs Antonio Verney lived most of his adult life in Naples and Rome,
where he studied with Antonio Genovesi (b. 1712, d. 1769) and was a
friend of Ludovico Antonio Muratori (b. 1672, d. 1750). In Rome he be-
came a member of the Arcadia, as well as for a time secretary to the Por-
tuguese envoy to the Vatican, Francisco de Almada e Mendon~a, who was
Pombal's cousin. 4
   The congregation of the Oratoria de S. Felipe de Nery, to which Verney
belonged, had taken the lead in Portugal, as elsewhere in Catholic Europe,
in the introduction of scientific experimentation and in the conflict with
the Jesuits over pedagogical models. The Oratorians were strong promot-
ers of the natural sciences, and they also stressed the importance of the
Portuguese language, grammar, and orthography, which they believed
should be studied directly and not via Latin. The reason the Jesuits were
the butt of this criticism was obvious: they held a monopoly of higher edu-
cation in Portugal and of secondary education in Brazi1. 5
   In addition to this philosophical debate, part of a Europe-wide phe-
nomenon, there existed a second important current of thinking more
specific to Portugal. This was a body of ideas and discussion about gover-
nance, economy, and diplomacy, which had emerged in the first half of the
eighteenth century among a small but influential group of Portugal's over-
seas representatives and government ministers, a group within which

4For Muratori see Derek Beales, Joseph II: In the Shadow of Maria Theresa,
1741-1780 (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987),47; and
Franco Venturi, Da Muratori a Beccaria (1730-1764), vol. 1, Settecento riformatore
(5 vols.) (Turin: Giulio Einaudi Editore, 1969). There is a vast literature on Verney.
For a brief introduction see Antonio Alberto Banha de Andrade, Vernei e a pro-
jecfao de sua obra (Lisbon: Instituto da Cultura Portuguesa; Biblioteca Breve,
1980), which contains an appendix with extracts from Verney's correspondence
with Muratori. Also by the same author, Contributos para a hist6ria da mentalidade
pedag6gica portuguesa (Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional, 1981). For a more complete
account see Andrade, Vernei e a cultura do seu tempo. Also valuable is the broad
overview by J. S. (Jose Sebastiao) da Silva Dias, Portugal e a cultura europeia (seculos
XVI a XVII) (Coimbra: Universidade de Coimbra, 1953), and Samuel J. Miller, Por-
tugal and Rome, c. 1748-1830: An Aspect ofthe Catholic Enlightenment (Rome: Uni-
versita Gregoriana, 1978).
sJoao V had granted the convent of Nossa Senhora das Necessidades to the Orato-
rians in 1744 with the obligation to conduct classes in Christian doctrine, rhetoric
and grammar, moral philosophy, and theology. See Manuel H. Corte-Real, 0 Pala-
cio das Necessidades (Lisbon: Ministerio dos Negocios Estrangeiros, 1983). The
convent is now the seat of the Portuguese Foreign Ministry. For a comprehensive
overview of the Jesuit activity in Portugal and its empire, see Dauril Alden, The
Making of an Enterprise: The Society of Jesus in Portugal, Its Empire and Beyond,
1540-1750 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996), especially 597-613. For
Brazil in particular see Caio Boschi, "Jesuitas," vol. 3 in Francisco Bethencourt and
Kiri Chaudhuri, eds., Hist6ria da expansao portuguesa, 5 vols. (Lisbon: Circulo de
Leitores, 1998-1999),295-300.
94 • NakedTropics

Pombal was a key figure. D. Luis da Cunha, successively Portuguese ambas-
sador to the Dutch Republic and France, was the most formidable of these
thinkers and author of a comprehensive analysis of Portugal's weaknesses
and the means to remedy them. D. Luis was in many respects Pombal's
mentor. 6
    This debate focused on Portugal's location within the international sys-
tem and confronted directly both the constraints and the options with
which a small country like Portugal, part of Iberia but independent of
Spain, had to live. Central to these discussions was the problem of retain-
ing and exploiting the considerable overseas assets Portugal controlled in
Asia, Africa, and, above all, Brazil; and developing at the same time a mech-
anism to challenge English economic domination of Portugal and its vast
American colony without weakening the political and military alliance
with Britain, which Portugal needed to contain Spain.
    D. Luis da Cunha, in particular, had placed Portugal's problems in the
context of its relation to Spain, its dependence on-and economic ex-
ploitation by-England, and what he believed were Portugal's self-in-
flicted weaknesses in terms of the lack of population and spirit of
enterprise. This sad mental and economic condition he attributed to the
excess number of priests, the activity of the Inquisition, and the expulsion
and persecution of the Jews. He proposed the creation of monopolistic
commercial companies on the Dutch and English model.?
    Pombal also drew models from his interpretation of the experience of
other European countries. From 1739 until 1744, he had represented the
Portuguese king in London. For Pombal, the threat the British posed to
Portugal's vast and rich dominions in Brazil became a major preoccupa-
tion. It was essential, he believed, to understand the origins of Britain's
commercial and military superiority and of Portugal's economic and po-
litical weakness and military dependence. 8
    In London, Pombal, who had become a member of the Royal Society in
1740, set out to investigate the causes, techniques, and mechanisms of


6For Pombal's family connection see Joaquim Verissimo Serrao, 0 Marques de
Pombal: 0 homen, 0 diplomata e 0 estadista (Lisbon: Edi\ao Camara Municipal de
Lisboa, Oeiras e Pombal, 1982).
7See Pedro de Azevedo and Antonio Baiao, eds., Instrucfoes ineditas de D. Luis da
Cunha e Marco Antonio de Azevedo Coutinho (Coimbra: Universidade de Coimbra,
1930). For a detailed discussion of the intellectual sources of Pombal's ideas see
Francisco Jose Calazans Falcon, A epoca pombalina: politica, economia e monarquia
ilustrada (Sao Paulo: Editora Atica, 1982).
8The contents of Pombal's London library are catalogued in several codices in Lis-
bon's National Library. In particular see Colec\ao Pombalina, Codices 165, 167,
342, 343, Biblioteca Nacional, Lisbon. Also see Sebastiao Jose de Carvalho e Melo,
Escritos econ6micos de Londres, 1741-1746 (Lisbon: Biblioteca Nacional, 1986).
                                                                 The Spark • 95

British commercial and naval power. But England was not his only foreign
experience. From London, Pombal moved to Vienna. Here he was no less
observant, and became involved in a long, arduous, and frustrating negoti-
ation with the papacy on behalf of the Austrian government, in the course
of which he became the very intimate friend of Manuel Teles da Silva, a
Portuguese emigre of aristocratic lineage who had risen high within the
Austrian state. Manuel Teles da Silva, who had been created Duke Silva
Tarouca by the Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI in 1732, was president of
the Council of the Netherlands and of Italy and was a confidant of Empress
Maria Theresa. Pombal had married for a second til~e while in Vienna, a
successful and highly advantageous match with Maria Leonor Ernestina
Daun, by whom he eventually had five children. The Countess Daun was a
niece of Marshal Heinrich Richard Graf von Daun, the commander in
chief of the Austrian army. The Empress Maria Theresa took a special in-
terest in the union. The Portuguese envoy in Rome observed sourly that it
was this marriage which guaranteed Pombal the position of secretary of
state in Lisbon. And it was in fact the Austrian wife of Joao V, Maria Ana of
Austria, queen regent during Joao V's final illness, who recalled Pombal
from Vienna in 1749 to join the ministry in Lisbon. 9
   There exists an extraordinarily frank and intimate private correspon-
dence between Duke Silva Tarouca and Pombal, covering the first decade
after Pombal's assumption of office in Lisbon, which provides a uniquely
revealing discussion of Pombal's objectives and governmental measures.
Silva Tarouca, excited by Pombal's rise to power in Lisbon, wrote in 1750 to
congratulate his friend and to remind him of their conversations and
hopes for the future. "We are not slaves of fashion and foreign practices,"
Silva Tarouca told Pombal, "... but still less are we slaves of ancient habits

9See Maxwell, Pombal, 3-4. The negotiations with the Vatican were extremely vex-
ing for the future marques, though they served to cement his close relationship
with Silva Tarouca. His private correspondence with Lisbon was conducted via the
Jesuits who were intermediaries in the most sensitive state business, given their key
positions at the court of D. Joao V as confessors and de facto private secretaries
to the royal family. The correspondence with the Jesuits also reveals the mutual
antagonism between Pombal and the Portuguese minister in Rome and his con-
tinuing complaints about his lack of financial resources (also a theme of his
correspondence in London), as well as his dependence on the English for credit
lines (John Bristow of London and Lisbon). Later, when in power in Lisbon, Pom-
bal removed the Jesuits from their positions as confessors and restored to Por-
tuguese merchants the ability to sustain credit lines, both central planks of his
policy agenda. See Antonio Lopes, Marques de Pombal e a Companhia de Jesus, cor-
respondencia inedita ao longo de 115 cartas (Cascais: Principa, 1999), and Collecfao
dos neg6cios de Roma no Reino de EI-Rei Dom Jose, Ministerio do Marquez de Pom-
bal e Pontificados de Benedicto XIVe Clemente XIII, Parte I (1755-1760), Parte II
(1759-1769), Parte III (1769-1774), and Additamento a Parte III (1774-1775),
(Lisbon, 1874).
96 • NakedTropics

and preoccupations." He spoke of the "great new dispositions" they had
discussed together. lo The reign of D. Joao V had seen a considerable
strengthening of royal prerogatives largely as a consequence of the vast
riches which flowed in from Brazil after the discoveries of gold. The Bra-
gan<;a monarchy did not need to have recourse to Portugal's ancient repre-
sentative institution, the Cortes, for taxes for the whole eighteenth century,
and D. Joao V used his colonial wealth to enhance his prestige in Europe
and persuade Rome to grant him the title of ((Most Faithful." Well over half
of all the revenues of the state came directly or indirectly from the overseas
dominions of Portugal, especially Brazil. 11


                                        II
But how did this general climate of ideas and preoccupations affect policy?
What were Pombal's ((great new dispositions"? Why did they bring him so
quickly into conflict with the Jesuits, particularly as there is no evidence to
suggest hostility toward the Jesuits on Pombal's part prior to 1750, and Je-
suits in fact may well have aided his rise to power?
    In part, it resulted from the fact that it was the colonial situation that
first forced itself on the attention of the new administration in Lisbon. The
Treaty of Madrid between Spain and Portugal had been signed in January
1750. 12 The treaty was the first negotiated settlement between the Iberian
powers to delineate the landward boundaries of their colonial territories in
South America in their entirety. Portuguese claims to the Amazon were up-
held, particularly the fluvial interior boundary formed by the Guapore-
Mamore-Madeira Rivers. 13 When Pombal took office as secretary of state

lO[Manuel Teles da Silva] to [Sebastiao Jose de Carvalho e Melo] , Vienna, Septem-
ber 24, 1750, in Carlos da Silva Tarouca, S.J., ed., "A correspondencia entre 0
Duque Manuel Teles da Silva e Sebastiao Jose de Carvalho e Melo," Anais da Acade-
mia Portuguesa de Hist6ria, VI, 2d series (Lisbon: Academia Portuguesa de
Hist6ria, 1955),277-422; citation from 313-315; author's translation.
11 Fernando Tomaz, "As Finan~as do Estado Pombalino, 1762-1776;' in Estudos e
ensaios em homenagem a Vitorino Magalhaes Godinho (Lisbon: Editora Don
Quixote, 1990), 255-388. An important reevaluation of the reign of D. Joao V is
contained in Angela Delaforce, Art and Patronage in Eighteenth-Century Portugal
(Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
12The classic account is Jaime Cortesao, Alexandre de Gusmao e 0 Tratado de
Madrid (1750),8 vols. (Rio de Janeiro: Ministerio das Rela~6es Exteriores, Insti-
tuto Rio Branco, 1955-1963). Also Luis Ferrand d'Almeida, "Problemas do
Comercio Luso-Espanhol nos Meados do Seculo XVIII: urn Parecer de Sebastiao
Carvalho e Melo," Revista economica e social 8 (1981): 95-131.
l3See especially the account by David M. Davidson, "How the Brazilian West Was
Won," in Colonial Roots ofModern Brazil, ed. Dauril Alden (Berkeley and London:
University of California Press, 1993), 61-106. Also "Consolidac;ao do Roteiro
Madeira-Guapore;' in Jose Roberto do Amaral Lapa, Economia colonial (Sao
Paulo: Editora Perspectiva, 1973), 23-111.
                                                                 The Spark • 97

for foreign affairs in July 1750, therefore, he was inheriting a fait accompli,
some parts of which he did not approve.
   These inland frontier demarcations were of great sensitivity for the mis-
sionary orders, since the Jesuit missions in particular were strategically
placed deep in the continental interior between Spanish and Portuguese
territories as well as along the key river systems. The Jesuits had cooperated
with Spain in the 1740s, and the use of the Jesuits' Indian neophytes as
troops and labor was an indispensable part of Spanish plans to counter
Portuguese frontier expansion, Spanish strategy at this point merging with
the traditional goal of the Jesuits for a united, well-defended chain of mis-
sions throughout the interior of the South American subcontinent. 14 Por-
tugal's fears as to the loyalty of the Jesuits, therefore, were not unfounded.
   With the Treaty of Madrid the Portuguese ceded Colonia do Sacra-
mento and the land immediately to the north of the Rio de la Plata to
Spain in return for Spanish recognition of the western fluvial frontiers of
Brazil. This included the Uruguay River, which placed the seven Jesuit mis-
sions in the region, long under Spanish sovereignty, under that of Portugal.
The Madrid agreements called for the evacuation of the Jesuits and their
Indian neophytes from the Uruguayan missions, as well as over a million
head of cattle, and envisioned a survey of the line of demarcation between
Spanish and Portuguese America by two joint commissions. The governor
general of Brazil, Gomes Freire de Andrade, was appointed Portuguese
commissioner for the south. To the Amazon region in the north, Pombal
sent his own brother, Francisco Xavier de Mendon<;:a Furtado. 15

14The principal source on the Jesuits in Brazil remains Serafim Leite, Hist6ria da
Companhia de Jesus no Brasil, 10 vols. (Lisbon and Rio de Janeiro: Livraria Portu-
galia, 1938-1950), supplemented now by Alden, The Making of an Enterprise. For
the Amazon region still valuable is Joao Lucio de Azevedo, as Jesuitas no Grao-
Para, suas missoes e a colonizarao: bosquejo historico, com varios documentos inedi-
tos (Lisbon: T. Cardoso & irmao, 1901).
15Marcos Carneiro de Mendon~a, ed., A Amazonia na era pombalina: corresponden-
cia inedita do Governador e Capitao-General do Estado de Grao Para e Maranhao,
1751-1759, 3 vols. (Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Hist6rico e Geognifico Brasileiro,
1963). This comprehensive collection contains the official and private correspon-
dence between Pombal and his brother, the governor of Grao Para and Maranhao.
Padre Jose Caeiro (b. 1712, d. 1791) provides a counterpoint to the account in the
letters from Mendon~a Furtado to his brother Pombal, covering many of the same
events from a Jesuit perspective. For this intimate account of the expulsion from a
Jesuit contemporary, see the remarkably detailed «Sobre 0 Exilio das Provincias
Transmarinas da Assistencia Portuguesa da Companhia de Jesus," published by the
Academia Brasileira de Letras, Primeira publicarao apos 160 anos do manuscrito in-
edito de Jose Caeiro sobre os Jesuitas do Brasil e da India na perseguirao do Marques
de Pombal (seculo XVIII) (Bahia: Escola Tipografica Salesiana, 1936). For Portugal
proper see Padre Jose Caeiro, Hist6ria da expulsao da Companhia de Jesus da
Provincia de Portugal (sec. XVIII), 3 vols. (Lisbon: Editorial Verbo, 1991, 1995,
1999).
98 • NakedTropics

   The "very secret" letter to the Gomes Freire supplementing his general
instructions revealed the full extent of Pombal's aims and hopes for Por-
tuguese America and demonstrated how powerful the Viennese experience
and his discussions with Silva Tarouca were for Pombal. "As the power and
wealth of all countries consists principally in the number and multiplica-
tion of people that inhabit it:' he wrote, "this number and multiplication
of the people is most indispensable now on the frontiers of the Brazil for
their defense ..." As it was not "humanly possible" to provide the necessary
people from the metropolis and adjacent islands without converting them
"entirely into deserts," it was essential to abolish "all differences between
Indians and Portuguese," to attract the Indians from the Uruguay missions
and to encourage their marriage to Europeans. 16 The instructions to Men-
donc;a Furtado reflected similar objectives. In order to promote an increase
in population and to deepen its commitment to Portugal, Pombal recom-
mended that his brother emancipate the Indians from the control of the
missionaries, stimulate the migration and settlement of married couples
from the Azores, and greatly increase the commerce in African slaves to the
region. I7
   In practice, the implementation of these ideas, as far as the Indians were
concerned, meant the removal of the tutelage of the Jesuits and envisioned
their assimilation into-rather than separation from-Portuguese society
in Brazil. These ideas received warm commendation from Vienna: Duke
Silva Tarouca wrote to Pombal in 1752, "The kings of Portugal could come
to have an empire like China in Brazil [ ... ] Great care," he said, must be
taken to populate Brazil. "Moor, white, negro, mulatto, or mestizo, all will
serve, all are men, and are good if they are well governed." Above all, the
vast Amazon basin should be secured. "Population is everything, many
thousands of leagues of deserts serve for nothing...."18 The interests of
the state so defined, of course, collided with the most basic philosophical
tenet of the protectionist Indian policy of the Jesuits, and in effect placed
state policy on the side of the colonists with whom the Jesuits had always
struggled in their efforts to protect the Indians from exploitation.
   Drawing on Luis da Cunha's and Pombal's ideas about monopoly com-
panies, Pombal's brother soon after his arrival in Belem, the capital of Para


16"Carta Secretissima de [Carvalho e Melo] para Gomes Freire de Andrade, Lisboa,
September 21,1751," in Marcos Carneiro de Mendon~a, a Marques de Pombal eo
Brasil (Sao Paulo: Editora Nacional, 1950), 184; author's translation.
17«Instru~6es regias, publicas, e secretas para [Mendon~a Furtado] ... ," Lisbon,
May 31, 1751, in Mendon~a, A Amaz6nia na era pombalina, 1,26-31.
18[Teles da Silva] to [Carvalho de Melo], Vienna, August 12, 1752, in Anais,
323-329; author's translation.
                                                               The Spark • 99

at the mouth of the Amazon River, recommended that a commercial com-
pany be established to facilitate the supply of African slaves to the Amazon
region; he believed African slave imports would relieve the pressure on the
colonists to enslave and mistreat the native Indian population. He also
wanted to see more investment in the Amazonian economy, which he be-
lieved a monopoly company would provide, to help develop its potential
exports. 19
    In 1755, in response to this advice, Pombal established the Company for
Grao Para and Maranhao. 20 The company was given the exclusive right to
all commerce and navigation between Portugal, Africa, and these Amazon-
ian captaincies for a period of twenty years. Simultaneously, Pombal issued
decrees on June 6 and 7, 1755, suppressing the Jesuits' secular authority
over the Indians, declaring them to be ((free men."21 In addition, he ordered
the expulsion from Brazil of those itinerant traders (comissarios volantes),
who acted as commission agents of foreign, mainly British, merchant
houses established in Lisbon. 22
    These three decisive measures were linked. The hidden objective of the
Company of Grao Para and Maranhao was broader than its regional focus
might indicate. In fact, Pombal began his efforts to ((nationalize" sectors of
the colonial trade where the foreign merchants were least active to camou-
flage his wider intentions. Pombal hoped by granting special privileges and


19[Mendons:a Furtado] to Diogo de Mendons:a, Corte Real, Belem, January 18,
1754, and [Mendons:a Furtado] to [Carvalho de Melo] , Belem, January 26, 1754, in
Mendons:a, A Amazonia na era pombalina 2, 456-459, 465-470.
2°Alvanl, June 7, 1755, "Confirma os estatutos da Companhia Geral do Grao Para e
Maranhao." For a detailed account see Manuel Nunes Dias, Fomento e mercantil-
ismo; a Companhia Geral do Grao Para e Maranhao (1755-1778),2 vols. (Belem:
Universidade Federal do Para, 1970). Also see Antonio Carreira, As Companhias
Pombalinas de Griio-Para e Maranhao e Pernambuco e Paraiba, 2d. ed. (Lisbon: Pre-
sens:a, 1982), which contains the statutes of incorporation of the two companies:
"Instituis:ao da Companhia Geral do Grao-Para e Maranhao;' 252-271; and "Insti-
tuis:ao da Companhia de Pernambuco e Paraiba," 281-302.
21Lei, June 6, 1755, "Restitui aos indios do Grao-Para e Maranhao a liberdade das
suas pessoas, bens e comercio." Also see discussion by Colin M. MacLachlan, "The
Indian Labor Structure in the Portuguese Amazon, 1700-1800," in Colonial Roots
ofModern Brazil, ed. Dauril Alden (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1973), 199-230; and Dauril Alden, Royal Government in Colonial
Brazil; With Special Reference to the Administration of the Marquis of Lavradio,
Viceroy, 1763-1779 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1968).
22Alvara, December II, 1755, "porque ... he servido prohibir que passem do Brasil
comissarios volantes ... ," in Colecs:ao Pombalina, Codex 453, fls. 79-80. Also see
Kenneth R. Maxwell in "Pombal and the Nationalization of the Luso-Brazilian
Economy," in Hispanic American Historical Review XLVIII, no. 4 (November 1968):
608-631.
100 • NakedTropics

protection to stimulate the issuance of longer credits by Portuguese mer-
chants so that via such a mechanism national merchant houses in Portugal
would be able to accumulate sufficient capital to compete more effectively
with British merchants in the colonial trade as a whole, and by extension in
Portugal proper. In this way the Pombaline state would contain and limit
the role of foreign participation in Luso-Atlantic commerce. And by strik-
ing at the itinerant traders he hoped to remove one key link between the
foreign merchants in Portugal and the Brazilian producers, and, in the case
of Amazonia, the Jesuits, whose trade in Amazon products he saw as com-
peting unfairly with that of Brazilian and Portuguese entrepreneurs whom
he wished to encourage. Pombal told Duke Silva Tarouca that his aim in es-
tablishing the Company of Grao Para and Maranhao was "to restore [to]
the merchant places of Portugal and Brazil the commissions of which they
were deprived, and which are the principle substance of commerce, and
the means by which there could be established the great merchant houses
which had been lacking in Portugal. ..."23 Pombal also urged his brother,
in private correspondence, to use «every possible pretext to separate the Je-
suits from the frontier and to break all communications between them and
the Jesuits of the Spanish dominions."24
    Pombal's monopoly company thus met objectives on several levels-not
all of them made explicit. The fundamental objective in the colonial trade
was to try to diminish the influence of the British, but the methods em-
ployed to achieve this aim were subtle, pragmatic, and enveloped in sub-
terfuge. The unavoidable problem with the British-Portuguese relationship
was that it was circumscribed by treaties which, for political and security
reasons, the Portuguese wanted to maintain. One way of taking action
against British influence, however, while avoiding open confrontation over
the terms of the treaties between the two countries, was to use a variety of
techniques in Portugal and within the colonial setting to shift concession-
ary economic advantages from foreigners to Portuguese merchant groups.
In this respect the choice of the Amazon to begin the process was a very
clever subterfuge. The British did not perceive the threat to their interests
until the end of the decade. In Vienna, Silva Tarouca, when informed of
Pombal's actions, much appreciated the idea. 25 These were precisely the
type of great new dispositions of which he approved, and surrounded by
the camouflage he recommended should always disguise them.


23 [Carvalho e Melo] to [Teles da Silva], no date (internal evidence suggests early
1756), in Anais, 419-420; author's translation.
24((Instruc;6es regias, publicas, e secretas para [Mendonc;a Furtado] ... ;' in Men-
donc;a, A Amazonia na era pombalina, 1, 26-31.
25 [Teles da Silva] to [Carvalho e Melo], November 3, 1759, in Anais, 348.
                                                               The Spark • 101

                                         III
This is not to say Pombal's intervention went unopposed. Far from it. The
promulgation of the Company of Grao Para and Maranhao's monopoly
privileges and Indian emancipation from mission tutelage provoked an
immediate response from the dispossessed traders and Jesuits. Both found
an organ for agitation in the mesa do bem comum, a rudimentary Lisbon
commercial association established in the late 1720s. 26 In the face of these
provocations, Pombal acted swiftly. He dissolved the commercial fraternity
of Espirito Santo as prejudicial to the royal service, common interest, and
commerce, and the offending deputies were condemned to penal banish-
ment. The confiscated papers of the mesa revealed the extent of Jesuit in-
volvement, and Pombal interpreted and dealt with the protest as if it were a
conspiratorial uprising against royal power. 27
   The creation of the Company of Grao Para and Maranhao thus had sev-
eral important and probably unintentional consequences. First, it linked
the attempts to assert national control over sections of the colonial trade to
wider geostrategic questions, arising from the implementation of the
Treaty of Madrid. Second, it brought Pombal, and no less importantly his
brother, into headlong conflict with the Jesuits because Grao Para and
Maranhao was a stronghold of Jesuit missionary activities and a region
with a history of bitter disputes between the Jesuits and the colonists.
   The Jesuit Indian missions on the southern frontier had in the mean-
time taken up arms do defend themselves and oppose the implementation
of the Treaty of Madrid, provoking a joint Spanish-Portuguese military
campaign against them. 28 The image of the militarized Indians under Je-
suit control opposing unilaterally the mandates of the Iberian monarchs
had a significant effect on the European mind. Voltaire, in Candide, por-
trays a sword-wielding Jesuit riding on horseback. 29 More significantly, the

26See J. (Joao) Lucio d'Azevedo, Novas eponaforas: estudos de hist6ria e literatura
(Lisbon: Livraria Chissica Editora, 1932), 54-56; and his 0 Marques de Pombal e a
sua epoca, 2d ed. (Lisbon: Seara Nova, 1922), 138-140.
27See [Carvalho e Melo] to [Mendon<;a Furtado], August 4, 1755, in Colec<;ao
Pombalina, Codex 626, fl. 90, and also in Mendon<;a, A Amazonia na era pom-
balina, 2, 784-788.
28There is a vast literature on the Guarani missions and their destruction: the best
starting point remains Magnus Morner, ed., The Expulsion of the Jesuits from Latin
America (New York: Knopf, 1965) and Magnus Morner, The Political and Economic
Activities in the La Plata Region: The Hapsburg Era (Stockholm: Victor Pettersons;
Institute of Ibero-American Studies, 1953). Also the discussion by John Hemming,
Amazon Frontier: The Defeat ofthe Brazilian Indians (Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1987), 1-80, and his Red Gold: The Conquest of the Brazilian Indians
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978),441-461.
29Voltaire, Candide, trans. and ed. Robert M. Adams (New York and London: W. W.
Norton & Co., 1966),30-31.
102 • NakedTropics

events surrounding the attempted implementation of the Treaty of Madrid
fortified Pombal's conviction that the presence of the Jesuits in Portuguese
lands, strategically placed as the missions were throughout the border re-
gion, was an impediment to the realization of his designs for reestablishing
Portugal's power and prosperity and to protecting its frontiers by encour-
aging population growth through the incorporation of the Indians via
miscegenation and secularization into Portuguese colonial society. From
Vienna, Duke Silva Tarouca, reversing his earlier view on the desirability of
Jesuit cooperation, observed in February 1758:
    It was not evangelical spirit that armed with muskets eighty or a
    hundred thousand Indians, and erected an intermediate power
    from the River Plate to the Amazon, which one day could be fatal to
    the dominant powers of South America. 30
   The 1750s, therefore, marking the first decade of Pombal's preemi-
nence, had seen Portugal embark on an ambitious plan to reestablish some
measure of national control over the riches flowing into Lisbon from Por-
tugal's overseas dominions, Brazil most especially. To do this he adapted to
the peculiarities of the Portuguese position many of the techniques of eco-
nomic development he had seen deployed in London and Vienna, espe-
cially the use of state power to enhance national entrepreneurial skills and
the imposition of state monopolies to protect nascent national industry
and commerce. He had also been faced with implementing the Treaty of
Madrid, involving a major effort to delineate and survey the vast frontiers
of Brazil. In both cases the Jesuits provided major obstacles to his plans.
On the southern border, a military campaign had been needed to defeat
forces put into the field by the Jesuit missions. In the north of Brazil, the
Amazonian missions ran into a headlong conflict with Pombal's brother.
   In the midst of these accumulating struggles, the earthquake of 1755
struck Lisbon, propelling Pombal into virtual supreme power and opening
the way for a radical reconstruction of the city. Yet the disenchantment of
the old nobility with Pombal's policies was also growing. The Company of
Grao Para and Maranhao had used the allurement of ennoblement as an
incentive to invest. The company's statutes offered to nonnoble investors
certain exemptions and privileges that had previously been the exclusive
prerogative of the nobility and the magistracy, and admitted them to
membership in the military orders. 3 ! The exclusivist aristocracy was upset
at the exclusion from office and by the favors Pombal bestowed on the

3°[Teles da Silva] to [Carvalho e Melo], Vienna, 10 February 1758, and Vienna,
April 1, 1758, in Anais, 386-387, 395; author's translation.
31See Alvara of January 5, 1757, Colec<;ao Pombalina, Codex 456, fl. 138.
                                                                The Spark • 103

merchants and businessmen. In addition, small merchants and tavern
keepers were angry at being excluded by the new monopoly company
Pombal set up to protect the wine producers of the upper Douro Valley,
and these reactions combined to produce a series of violent riots and assas-
sination attempts to which Pombal reacted ferociously, not only against
the popular classes but also against the high nobility and the Jesuit order. 32
   The mesa do bem comum affair, the attack on contraband, and the regu-
lation of colonial commerce thereby forged an identity of interest between
the dispossessed itinerant interlopers, their English creditors, and the Je-
suits, and the favors bestowed on Pombal's collaborators produced an
identity of interests between those groups and the discontented nobles. For
the old aristocracy Pombal's merchant collaborators represented a potent
challenge to aristocratic privilege within the Portuguese social structure,
and the reaction to this state sponsoring social engineering was not slow in
developing.
   The crisis came to a head with the attempted regicide in 1758. King D.
Jose I was returning to the Palace of Belemafter an evening visit to his mis-
tress, the young wife of the marquis of Tavora, when his carriage was fired
upon. The king was wounded sufficiently seriously for his queen Dona
Mariana Vit6ria (b. 1718, d. 1781) to assume the regency (September 7,
1758) during his recuperation. There was official silence on the incident
until early December, when a substantial number of people were arrested
in a large dragnet operation, including a group of leading aristocrats. The
most prominent prisoners were leading members of the Tavora family, the
count of Atouguia, and the duke of Aveiro. The Duke D. Jose de Mascaren-
has, who was the most powerful noble in Portugal, excluding the royal
family, was president of the Supreme Court. The marquis of Tavora was a
former viceroy of India and commander of the cavalry. The count of
Atouguia headed the Palace Guard. 33
   The king established a Supreme Junta de Inconfidencia (December 9,
1758), presided over by the three secretaries of state and seven judges, but


32For a good discussion of the suppression of the uprising in Oporto against the
Douro monopoly company, see Susan Schneider, 0 Marques de Pombal e 0 vinho
do Porto: dependencia e subdesenvolvimento em Portugal no seculo XVIII (Lisbon:
Regra do Jogo, 1980).
33See Guilherme G. de Oliveira Santos, 0 caso dos Tavoras (Lisbon: Livraria Portu-
gal, 1958), 15. For discussion of this episode also see Tarcisio Beal, «Os Jesuitas, a
Universidade de Coimbra e a Igreja Brasileira: Subsidios para a Hist6ria do Regal-
ismo em Portugal, 1750-1850" (Ph.D. diss., Catholic University of America, 1969),
45. Pombal denunciation in Arquivo Nacional da Torre do Tombo, Lisbon, in In-
quisition papers, No. 18, proceeding No. 8064, fos. 1-6, listed in «0 Marques de
Pombal e 0 seu Tempo," RHDIIMdP, 2 vols. (Coimbra, 1982), vol. 1,370-376.
104 • NakedTropics

in fact dominated by Pombal. 34 The tribunal, which was granted wide
powers that denied to the defendants the usual protections in Portuguese
law, acted with dispatch. On January 12, 1759, the prisoners were found
guilty of attempted regicide and sentenced. The duke of Aveiro was to be
broken alive, his limbs and arms crushed and exposed on a wheel for all to
see, his ashes thrown into the sea. The marquis of Tavora was to suffer the
same fate. The limbs of the rest of the family were to be broken on the
wheel, but they were to be strangled first. The grotesque sentence, the vio-
lence of which against aristocrats shocked much of Europe, was carried
out the next day in Belem.
   The day before, eight Jesuits were arrested where they had worked in
Maranhao for alleged complicity, among them Gabriel Malagrida, a mis-
sionary and mystic of Italian origin who had gone to Brazil in 1721. After a
brief sojourn in Lisbon between 1749 and 1751, he returned to Brazil
where he quickly ran afoul of Pombal's brother. Malagrida had published a
pamphlet on the Lisbon earthquake, attributing the disaster to Divine
Wrath. Pombal had gone to great efforts to explain the earthquake as a nat-
ural phenomenon, and he personally denounced Malagrida to the Inquisi-
tion, at the head of which he had installed his other brother, Paulo de
Carvalho.
   A royal alvara on September 3, 1759, declared the Jesuits to be in rebel-
lion against the Crown, reinforcing the royal decree of July 21 of the same
year, which ordered the imprisonment and expulsion of the Jesuits in
Brazil. By March and April of 1760, 119 Jesuits had been expelled from Rio
de Janeiro, 117 from Bahia, and 119 from Recife. The order's vast proper-
ties in Brazil, Portugal, and throughout the remnants of the once vast Por-
tuguese Empire in Asia were expropriated.
    On September 21, 1761, after an auto-da-fe in Lisbon, Malagrida was
garroted and burned, and his ashes were thrown to the wind. About the
Malagrida case Voltaire wrote, "this was the excess of the ridiculous and the
absurd joined to the excess of horror. {Ainsi l'exces du ridicule et de l'ab-


340 processo dos Tavoras, prefaciado e anotado por Pedro de Azevedo, ineditos I (Lis-
bon: Biblioteca Nacional, 1921). Padre Jose Caeiro claimed that the order to liqui-
date the Jesuit properties in Brazil had been given in June 1758, three months
before the assassination attempt. Also Francis A. Dutra, «The Wounding of King
Jose I: Accident or Assassination Attempt?" Mediterranean Studies VII (1998):
221-229. On the important role played by young Brazilians and other artists, espe-
cially Jose Basilio da Gama, author of 0 Uruguay, in the promotion of anti-Jesuit
measures and Pombaline reforms, as well as of those protected by the minister, see
Ivan Teixeira, Mecenato pombalino e poesia neoclassica (Sao Paulo: EDUSP, 1999),
and his Obras poeticas de Jose Basilio da Gama, ensaio e edifao critica (Sao Paulo:
EDUSP, 1996). Jose Basilio da Gama became private secretary to Pombal. Ivan
Teixeira's books also provide an invaluable depiction of Pombaline iconography.
                                                                The Spark • 105

surdite fut joint a l'exces d'horreur.)" The reaction elsewhere in Europe
was strong enough to prompt Pombal to print the sentence against Mala-
grida with a justification in French. 35 That the last individual burned at the
stake by the Portuguese authorities at the instigation of the Inquisition
should have been a priest and a member of an order that had been at the
very spearhead of the Counter-Reformation was heavy with symbolism
and served as a launching pad for Pombal's formidable promotion of state
propaganda in the anti-Jesuit cause. The Pombaline administration there-
after stimulated and subsidized throughout Europe a virulent campaign
against the order. Pombal himself was intimately involved in the writing
and formulation of the remarkable piece of propaganda known as the De-
durao chrono16gica e analitica. 36 The "Chronological and analytical deduc-
ti<;>n" divided the history of Portugal between the useful and the disastrous,
essentially linked to the influence of the Jesuits. It upheld a rigorous regal-
ist view concerning the Catholic Church in Portugal. Professor Samuel
Miller describes the work not unjustifiably as ((a monotonous repetition of
all the accusations ever leveled at the Jesuits by anyone at any time."3? The
history of the assault by the Portuguese and Spanish Crowns on the Jesuit
missions along the Uruguay River in South America during the late 1750s
was also encapsulated-and was for many years defined-by another piece
of state-supported and financed propaganda, the Relarao abreviada. 38
Published in Portuguese, Italian, French, German, and English in Amster-
dam, the Relariio abreviada was an account of the joint Portuguese and
Spanish military campaign against the Jesuit missions in what is now the
southern borderlands of Brazil. Some 20,000 copies are estimated to have
been distributed. It was a major weapon in the Europe-wide battle that led
to the suppression of the Jesuits by Pope Clement XIV in 1773. 39 As Franco

35Claude-Henri Freches, Voltaire, Malagrida et Pombal (Paris: Fundas:ao Calouste
Gulbenkian, 1969). Also see the comments on Malagrida in C. R. (Charles Ralph)
Boxer, Some Contemporary Reactions to the Lisbon Earthquake of 1755 (Lisbon:
Faculdade de Letras, Universidade de Lisboa, 1956) and Liste des personnes qui ont
ete condamnees al'act public de Poi, celebre dans Ie cloitre du convent des Dominiques
de Lisbonne Ie 20 septembre 1761 (Lisbon: 1761).
36Dedurao chronol6gica e analitica ... dada a luz pelo Doutor Joseph de Seabra da
Silva . .. em Lisboa, Anno de MDCCLXVII, 3 vols., original manuscript with anno-
tations and additions in handwriting of Pombal. Colecs:ao Pombalina, Codices
444-446. For discussion of the Dedurao chronol6gica see d'Azevedo, 0 Marques de
Pombal e a sua epoca, 290-291.
37Miller, Portugal and Rome, 187.
38First published in late 1756 and probably written mainly by Pombal, the full title
is: Relarao abreviada da Republica que os religiosos das Provincias de Portugal e Es-
panha estabeleceram nos Dominios Ultramarinos das duas Monarquias, e da guerra
que neles tern movido e sustentado contra os exercitos espanhois eportugueses (1758),
Biblioteca Nacional, Lisbon, Reservados 4.394.
39See discussion by Miller, Portugal and Rome, 53.
106 • NakedTropics

Venturi has shown, Venice and Rome in particular specialized in printing
vivid accounts of the goings-on in Lisbon. 40
   The expulsion of the Jesuits left Portugal virtually bereft of teachers at
both secondary and university levels. Not surprisingly, the establishment
of a state-sponsored school system of secondary education and the reform
of the University of Coimbra drew directly on the recommendations of the
old enemies of the Jesuits, the Oratorians and Luis Antonio Verney, the lat-
ter by now a paid consultant to the Portuguese government. 41 Both of
these reforms were later to provide Pombal with his claim to being a pro-
ponent of an Enlightenment government. Both reforms were financed in
part by expropriated properties of Jesuits and aristocrats condemned for
regicide. 42
   Finally, let us return to the question posed earlier: Why Pombal, and
why the Amazon? The answer lies in five key points of conflict. First was
Pombal's plan for economic regeneration through the rational exploita-
tion of the colonies. Second, there was a geopolitical conflict over frontiers
and the security of the empire, in which the Guarani missions in particular
opposed Portugal's decisions by force of arms. Third, the attempted regi-
cide. Fourth, there was an ongoing conflict within the church over educa-
tion and regalism; this important schism enabled an attack on the Jesuits
to proceed under the cover of Catholic tradition, in which the leading anti-
Jesuit spokesmen were fellow churchmen. Fifth and finally, the situation
constituted a direct conflict between the Jesuit Order and a powerful and
ruthless minister who would not tolerate dissent, for whom raison d'etat
was supreme policy, and who did not hesitate to act when provoked.
   That these five causes served as a catalyst for the expulsion of the Jesuits
from Portugal owed much to the receptivity of European enlightened
opinion, Church politics, and the diplomatic acquiescence of the other Eu-
ropean Catholic monarchies. But European opinion alone would not nec-
essarily have been sufficient to bring about an act of expulsion, much less
lead to the momentous decision of Pope Clement XIV in 1773 to suppress

4°Franco Venturi, La Chiesa e la Repubblica dentro i loro limiti (1758-1774), vol. 2,
Settecento riformatore (5 vols.) (Turin: Giulo Einaudi Editore, 1969),21,27-29.
41Miller, Portugal and Rome, 51, 54.
42See R6mulo de Carvalho, Hist6ria da fundafu-o do Colegio Real dos Nobres de Lis-
boa, 1761-1772 (Coimbra: Atlantida; Universidade de Coimbra, 1959) and Fran-
cisco de Lemos, Relafu-o geral do estado da Universidade, 1777 (facsimile edition)
(Coimbra: Universidade de Coimbra, 1980); Luis de Bivar de Sousa Leao, Inven-
tario e sequestro da Casa de Aveiro em 1759 (Lisbon: Tribunal de Contos, 1952) and
Luis de Bivar de Sousa Leao, Inventario e sequestro das Casas de Tavora e Atouguia
em 1759 (Lisbon: Tribunal de Contos, 1954). For a fuller discussion of the conse-
quences of the expulsion of the Jesuits for the educational reforms of Pombal see
Maxwell, Pombal, especially 87-109.
                                                          The Spark • 107

the Jesuit order entirely. The European Catholic monarchs in Spain, then
France and Austria, were quick to follow Portugal's example in expelling
the Jesuits, but it is not at all clear that any of them would have acted, had
Portugal not acted first. It is here that the currents of Enlightenment
thought I outlined earlier conveniently provided justification for actions
that at the core, as we have seen, had more prosaic motivations.
V IE *   OF RIO FROM   BOA VISTA.
                                                              CHAPTER            7
                                     The Idea of
                       the LU50-Brazilian Empire
             «However much South America might gain from a quiet change ofmasters,
                     she will be thrown back into a state ofbarbarism by revolutions."
                                                             -Sir John Barrow, 1806




Between 1786 and 1808, critical changes occurred in the attitudes of
Brazilians and Portuguese which were to have profound repercussions on
the later development of Portuguese-speaking America. Internal and ex-
ternal influences combined and interacted to suggest a peculiarly Luso-
Brazilian solution to the problems of nationalism and colonialism,
republicanism and monarchy. This chapter attempts to delineate some of
these changes, to seek causes, and to explain results.

                                         I
During October 1786, Thomas Jefferson, the envoy of the United States in
France, received a letter from the ancient University of Montpellier signed
only with the pseudonym Vendek. The writer indicated that he had a mat-
ter of great consequence to communicate, but as he was a foreigner he
wished Jefferson to recommend a safe channel for correspondence. Jeffer-
son did so at once. In a second letter Vendek declared himself a Brazilian.
The slavery in which his country lay was "rendered each day more insup-
portable since the epoch of your glorious independence;' he wrote. Brazil-
ians had decided to follow the example of the North Americans, he
continued, to break the chains that bound them to Portugal and "relive
their liberty." To solicit the aid of the United States was the purpose of his

                                       109
110 • NakedTropics

visit to France. "Nature made us inhabitants of the same continent,"
Vendek told Jefferson, "and in consequence in some degree compatriots."!
   Vendek, Jose Joaquim Maia e Barbalho, who arranged a secret ren-
dezvous and met Thomas Jefferson near Nimes, was a native of Rio de
Janeiro. 2 He had entered the faculty of medicine at Montpellier in 1786,
having previously matriculated at the University of Coimbra in Portugal
where he studied mathematics. 3 Maia may have been commissioned by
merchants in Rio de Janeiro to enter into contact with the American
envoy.4 Probably he was one of a group of students who during the early
1780s had joined hands at Coimbra and vowed to work for the indepen-
dence of their homeland. 5 An accurate account of Jefferson's encouraging
but noncommittal response to Vendek reached Brazil via Domingos Vidal
Barbosa, another Brazilian stu,dent at Montpellier. 6
   Maia and Vidal Barbosa were not alone in their educational accom-
plishments or their political enthusiasms. Between the Marques de Pom-
bal's reform of the University of Coimbra in 1772 and 1785, three hundred
Brazilian-born students had matriculated there.? Others continued their
studies or went directly to the faculty of medicine at Montpellier, where fif-
teen Brazilian-born students matriculated between 1767 and 1793. 8 Vidal
Barbosa, a landowner from the captaincy of Minas Gerais, was an enthusi-


1 Vendek to Jefferson, Montpellier, October 9, 1786; Vendek to Jefferson, Montpel-
lier, November 21, 1786; Jefferson to Vendek, Paris, December 26, 1786; Vendek to
Jefferson, Montpellier, January 5, 1787, Anuario do Museu da Inconfidencia (here-
after cited as AMI), II (Ouro Preto, 1953), 11-13.
2Thomas Jefferson to Mr. Jay, Marseille, May 4, 1787, ibid., 13-19. Also see Julian P.
Boyd, ed., The Papers of Thomas Jefferson (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1950-), vol. 10 (1954),427,546-547; vol. 11 (1955),338-343; vol. 17 (1965),
258-259.
3"Estudantes Brasileiros em Coimbra 1772-1872;' ABNRJ, LXII (1940),174; Ma-
noel Xavier de Vasconcelos Pedrosa, "Estudantes Brasileiros na Faculdade de Med-
icina de Montpellier no fim do seculo XVIII," RIHGB, CCXLIII (April-June 1959),
35-71.
4S uch was the view expressed in Autos de devassa da inconfidencia mineira (here-
after cited as ADIM) , 7 vols. (Rio de Janeiro, 1936-1938) 11,81-95. It is difficult to
identify with any certainty the merchants in Rio de Janeiro who might have been
implicated in this enterprise. Possibly the idea had something to do with Francisco
de Araujo Pereira, for he is cited at a later date as being openly critical of the colo-
nial administration (ADIM, I, 280), and he was, according to Viceroy Lavradio, the
only merchant in the city worthy of the name; the rest Lavradio dismissed as being
simple commissaries (Lavradio, Relat6rio, RIHGB, IV [2d edition, 1863],453.)
sVisconde de Barbacena to Martinho de Melo e Castro, Vila Rica, July 11, 1789,
AMI, 11,68.
6Jefferson made a detailed report on his conversation with Vendek and his response
to the request for aid, Jefferson to Mr. Jay, Marseille, May 4, 1787, ibid., 17.
7"Estudantes Brasileiros em Coimbra," 141-181.
8"Estudantes Brasileiros ... Montpellier," 40.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 111

astic propagandist for the writings of the Abbe Raynal, passages of which
he was in the habit of reciting by heart. 9 Raynal was a dominating influence
in the thinking of many educated Brazilians during the 1780s. His Histoire
philosophique et politique des etablissements et du commerce des Europeens
dans les deux Indes was invariably part of the greatest private libraries in
the colony, and a much-quoted textbook for many of those inspired by the
example of the United States. 10
    Raynal's Histoire contained an extensive account of Brazil, presented a
contemptuous picture of Portugal, condemned British political and eco-
nomic influence, and recommended that the ports of Brazil be opened to
the trade of all nations. I I During 1785, Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva, a
paulista, who matriculated at Coimbra in the same year as Maia, was writ-
ing poems, heavy with a bewildering profusion of heroes, including
Rousseau, Locke, Voltaire, Pope, Virgil, and Cam6es, which attacked "the
horrid monster of despotism." 12 Jose Alvares Maciel, son of a wealthy mer-
chant, landowner, and tax farmer in Vila Rica (today Ouro Preto), and a
contemporary of Maia at Coimbra, traveled to England. 13 Maciel spent a
year in Britain studying manufacturing techniques and whenever possible
obtaining accounts of the American Revolution. He discussed the possibil-
ity of Brazilian independence with sympathetic English merchants. 14 Even

9Ibid., 41, 48-50; for comments on Vidal Barbosa's habit of citing Rayna!, ADIM,
II, 59.
10Abbe (Guillaume-Thomas-Fran<;ois) Rayna!, Histoire philosophique et politique
des etablissements et du commerce des Europeens dans les deux Indes (Amsterdam:
n.p., 1770), 8 vols. For the influence of Raynal on the thinking of Luis Vieira da
Silva and the members of the Literary Society of Rio, see ADIM, I, 445-465; II, 95;
IV, 207, and ABNRJ, LXI, 384, 409-412, 435. Also "Relacrao completa dos livros
pelos autores," Rio de Janeiro, April 10, 1791 [the books of Dr. Antonio Teixeira da
Costa] cited by Herculano Gomes Mathias, A colerao da casa dos contos de Duro
Preto (Rio de Janeiro: Arquivo Nacional, 1966), 145; and "Sequestro feito em 1794
nos bens que forao achados do bacharel Mariano Jose Pereira da Fonseca ex-
trahido do respectivo processo," RIHGB, LXIII (1901), 14-18.
II For wider-ranging discussions of intellectual currents in late colonial Brazil, see
Alexander Marchant, "Aspects of the Enlightenment in Brazil," in Latin America
and the Enlightenment, 2d ed., ed. Arthur Preston Whitaker (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1961),95-118; E. Bradford Burns, "The Enlightenment in Two
Colonial Libraries;' Journal of the History of Ideas XXV (1964): 430-438; E. Brad-
ford Burns, Nationalism in Brazil: A.Historical Survey (New York: Praeger, 1968),
especially 23-26. And for a fascinating and broadly based discussion of Portuguese
intellectual development see "The 'Kaffirs of Europe,' the Renaissance, and the En-
1ightenment;' in C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire,
1415-1825 (London: Hutchinson, 1969),340-366.
120ctavio Tarquinio de Sousa, Hist6ria dos fundadores do imperio do Brasil: 1, Jose
Bonifacio (Rio de Janeiro: J. Olympio, 1960),63. All translations by author.
13Maciel matriculated in 1782 and graduated in 1785. Maia matriculated in 1783.
See "Estudantes Brasileiros em Coimbra," 172,174.
14ADIM, II, 11,40,251; IV, 400.
112 • NakedTropics

on the far-off frontiers of Portuguese America, ideas and opinions subver-
sive to the colonial system were aired. During 1786, Antonio Pires da Silva
Ponte was denounced to Martinho de Melo e Castro, secretary of state for
the overseas dominions, for his rebellious discourses in Mato Grosso.
Ponte had claimed that his homeland, Minas Gerais, would become "the
head of a great kingdom." 15
    The designation of Minas Gerais as the potential leader of an emancipated
colony was not surprising. The captaincy had become the cultural center of
late colonial Brazil. 16 Among the native-born whites, there existed a highly
literate elite. For forty years rich mineiros had been sending their sons to the
University of Coimbra. In 1786, twelve of the twenty-seven Brazilians matric-
ulated at Coimbra were from Minas, and in 1787, ten of nineteen. I? Doyen of
the older generation of Brazilian-born graduates was the gracious poet Chiu-
dio Manuel da Costa, a wealthy Vila Rica lawyer who had entered Coimbra in
1749. In 1759 he had been elected a member of the Academia Brasilica dos
Renascidos of Bahia, a short-lived literary and historical association, one of
the few enterprises which had genuinely sought to embrace the whole of Por-
tuguese America as its parish. Accumulating landed estates and slaves, the
successful young Brazilian had been appointed secretary to the government
of Minas, a post he held between 1762 and 1765 and again from 1769 to 1773.
In 1771 he was appointed attorney to the Third Order of Saint Francis ofVila
Rica, one of the most prestigious sodalities in Minas's capital. 18
    The poet's elegant town house was a gathering place for the intellectuals
of the captaincy. Among his regular visitors during the 1780s was the supe-
rior crown magistrate (ouvidor) of Vila Rica, Tomas Antonio Gonzaga, an
ambitious and fastidious legalist, son of one of Pombal's confidants. Gon-
zaga's father was a Brazilian-born magistrate who had served as ouvidor of
Pernambuco, as a judge of the Bahian High Court, intendant-general of
gold, first minister of the Inspection House of Bahia, and as a judge of the
High Court of Oporto. He had personally presented his son's dissertation
on the natural law to Pombal. The treatise was dedicated to the marques,
described in the preface as "that hero and lover of true science." Tomas An-

15JOSe de Lacerda e Almeida to Martinho de Melo e Castro, September 24, 1786,
Mato Grosso, ma~o 12.
16See comments by C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Some Literary Sources for the His-
tory ofBrazil in the Eighteenth Century (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967).
17"Estudantes Brasileiros em Coimbra," 181-187.
18Clciudio Manuel da Costa, "Sequestro," ADIM, I, 356-364; "Traslado dos seque-
stros;" ADIM, V, 263-276; Manuel Rodrigues Lapa, As "Cartas chilenas": um prob-
lema historico e filologico (Rio de Janeiro: Ministerio da Educa<rao e Cultura,
Instituto do Livro, 1958),28, 37; Lucio Jose dos Santos, A Inconfidencia Mineira:
papel de Tiradentes (Sao Paulo: Escolas Profissionaes do Lyceu Cora~ao de Jesus,
1927),234-239.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 113

tonio Gonzaga was born in Oporto but brought up almost entirely in
Brazil. He had attended the Jesuit college at Bahia, witnessing the expul-
sion of the Black Robes in 1759. He was nominated ouvidor of Vila Rica in
1782. Long an admirer of the works of Claudio Manuel da Costa, he him-
self was a poet of merit and originality. The two men formed the center of
a group which embraced Ignacio Jose de Alvarenga Peixoto, ouvidor of Sao
Joao d'EI Rei, and Luis Vieira da Silva, canon of the cathedral of Mariana,
the episcopal seat of Minas Gerais. 19
   Ignacio Jose de Alvarenga Peixoto, a Brazilian graduate of Coimbra, had
composed some fulsome verses in honor of the Marques de Pombal and
his family. His appointment as ouvidor of the comarca of Rio das Mortes in
Minas Gerais was a consequence of these poetic endeavors. He himself se-
lected the post because of his vast landed estates, slave holdings, and min-
ing interests in the area, though the Portuguese government did not
ordinarily sanction such initiative. 20 Luis Vieira was a well-known and per-
suasive preacher, much in demand on solemn and festive occasions, of
which there were many in the ecclesiastical calendar of Minas Gerais. An
erudite and thoughtful cleric in his early fifties, he had studied at the Jesuit
college in Sao Paulo during the 1750s, and was appointed to the chair of
philosophy in the seminary at Mariana in 1757. He was elected commis-
sary of the Third Order of Saint Francis of Vila Rica in 1770. Luis Vieira
was outspoken in his enthusiasm for the events in North America. He held
that the European powers had no right to dominion in America. The Por-
tuguese monarchy had spent nothing on the conquest of Brazil, and the
Brazilians themselves had restored Bahia to the Crown from the Dutch and
ransomed Rio de Janeiro from the French. Luis Vieira, a man who had
never left Brazil, was close in opinion to those conspiratorial students who
had attempted to negotiate with Thomas Jefferson in France. 21

190bras completas de Tomas Antonio Gonzaga: I, poesias, Cartas chilenas, ed.
Manuel Rodrigues Lapa (Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Nacional do Livro, Ministerio da
Educa<;ao e Cultura, 1957), ix-xv; ((Auto de inquiricrao summario de testemunhas,"
Vila Rica, May 26, 1798, ADIM, II, 441-452; ((Direito Natural accommodado ao es-
tado civil catolico, offerecido ao 111° e Exo Sn r Sebastiao Jose de Carvalho e Mello,
Marques de Pombal, por Thomas Antonio Gonzaga," BNLCP, c6dice 29.
2°Manuel Rodrigues Lapa, Vida e obra de Alvarenga Peixoto (Rio de Janeiro: Insti-
tuto Nacional do Livro, Ministerio da Educacrao e Cultura, 1960), x, xxvii, xxviii.
21 ((Avaliacrao dos livros sequestrados, conego Luis Vieira da Silva," ADIM, I,
445-465; (~uto de perguntas," Rio de Janeiro, November 20, 1789, A DIM, I~
292-293; ((Auto de continuacrao de perguntas," Rio de Janeiro, July 21, 1790 (sic;
this must be 1791, for the interrogating judge in this instance, Chancellor Vascon-
cellos Coutinho, did not arrive in Rio de Janeiro until late December 1790), ibid.,
304; Vicente Vieira da Mota, witness, Vila Rica, June 23, 1789, ADIM, I, 110-111;
Vicente Vieira da Mota, Witness, Vila Rica, August 3, 1789, ADIM, III, 336; (~uto
de perguntas," Rio de Janeiro, July 19, 1791, ADIM, V, 19-20; AMI, II, 68.
114 • NakedTropics

   The Vila Rica circle was not the only group of like-minded and intelli-
gent men who met informally to discuss poetry, philosophy, and the events
in Europe and America. Similar groups of lawyers and writers met in Sao
Joao d'EI Rei and elsewhere in the captaincy for conversation and cards. 22
The members of the Vila Rica circle, however, by the quality of their writ-
ing' and by their position, influence, and wealth, stood at the apex of Minas
society. Books and information often reached them more rapidly than offi-
cial dispatches which had to pass through the cumbersome bureaucracy
from Lisbon to the secretariat of the captaincy. The canon Vieira's cos-
mopolitan collection of books, some 600 volumes all told, contained
William Robertson's Histoire de l'Amerique, and the Encyclopedie, as well as
the works of Bielfeld, Voltaire, and Condillac. 23 Claudio Manuel da Costa
was reputed to have translated Adam Smith's Wealth ofNations. 24
   Literate and open-minded, the intellectual elite of Minas Gerais proved
creative and origina1. 25 The history of the captaincy became the theme of
Claudio Manuel da Costa's epic poem Vila Rica and the subject of a
lengthy prose dissertation by him replete with statistical tables. 26 During
1781 Alvarenga Peixoto reflected this powerful self-awareness in his canto

22Lapa, Alvarenga Peixoto, xxxii.
23"Avalia<;ao dos livros sequestrados," AD1M, I, p. 458; Also see Jose Ferreira Car-
rato, 19reja, iluminismo, e escolas mineiras colonias: notas sobre a cultura da deca-
dencia mineira setecentista (Sao Paulo: Cia. Ed. Nacional, 1968), 113-114; and
Eduardo Frieiro, a diabo na livraria do conego: como era Gonzaga? E outros temas
mineiros (Belo Horizonte: Editora Itatiaia, [1957]).
24Joaquim Noberto de Sousa Silva, "Commemora<;ao do centenario de Claudio
Manuel da Costa;' R1HGB, LIII, I (1890), 150.
2sThere is a very large bibliography on the cultural flowering of Minas Gerais dur-
ing the late eighteenth century; especially useful studies are, Augusto de Lima
Junior, A capitania de Minas Gerais, origens e formafaO (3d edition) (Belo Hori-
zonte: Instituto de Hist6ria, Letras e Arte, 1965), 123, 791-793; Jose Ferreira Car-
rato, As Minas Gerais e os prim6rdios do carafa (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora
Nacional, 1963), 57-62; Fritz Teixeira de Salles, Associafoes religiosas no cicIo do
Duro (Belo Horizonte: Universidade de Minas Gerais, 1963),27,36,65, 71; Silvio de
Carvalho Vasconcellos, ''Architectura colonial Mineira," 1° Seminario de estudos
mineiros (Belo Horizonte: Universidade de Minas Gerais, 1956), 67; Curt Lange,
"Musica Religiosa de Minas Gerais;' MEC (Ministerio da Educa<;ao e Cultura, Rio
de Janeiro, May-June, 1958), 19-25; Francisco Antonio Lopes, Hist6ria da con-
strufao da igreja do Carmo de auro Preto (Rio de Janeiro: Ministerio da Educa<;ao e
Saude, 1942); for the extensive bibliography on the Minas Baroque, an excellent in-
troduction is provided by Germain Bazin, L'Architecture religieuse baroque au
Bresil, 2 vols. (Paris: PIon; Sao Paulo: Museu de Arte, 1956), I, 173-213; and by
Robert C. Smith Jr., "The Arts in Brazil: Baroque Architecture," in Portugal and
Brazil, ed. Harold Livermore (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963), 349; and his "Colo-
nial Architecture of Minas Gerais," The Art Bulletin XXI (1939): 110-142.
26"Noticia da capitania de Minas Gerais por Claudio Manuel da Costa," IHGP, lata
22, doc. 13.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 115

genetliaco, an enthusiastic apology for the riches, men, and promise of the
Brazilian land. He compared the deeds of the Mineiros to those of Her-
cules, Ulysses, and Alexander the Great. And he did not fail to include
"strong and valiant" slaves in his panegyric. In a portentous phrase which
could well have applied to the rest of his countrymen, the poet asserted:
"They are worthy of attention."27
   Gonzaga, Claudio Manuel da Costa, and the canon Luis Vieira were
men "who have ascendancy over the spirits of the people," the comman-
dant of the Minas Dragoons told Alvarenga Peixoto in 1789. 28 All three
were involved in the plot to foment an armed uprising against the Por-
tuguese Crown during late 1788 and early 1789. 29 Much later an inquiry
into the implication of one of the conspirators described the intention of
the Minas movement as being "to change the government of Minas from
monarchical to democratic."30 At the time, however, as far as the evidence
shows, the word democratic was never used. The American Revolution was
thought especially pertinent because the Minas conspirators saw the
course of events in North America as remarkably similar to their own situ-
ation. "Nothing caused the break [between Britain and her colonies] but
the great duties that were imposed," one of the conspirators claimed. 31 The
demands of the Portuguese government that the colossal arrears due on
the royal fifth of the gold production of the captaincy be made up by the
imposition of a per capita tax (derrama) on the Minas population seemed

27Lapa, Alvarenga Peixoto, xli, 33-38.
28"Continua\ao de perguntas feitas ao ... Alvarenga Peixoto," Rio de Janeiro, Janu-
ary 14, 1790, ADIM IV, 138.
29For a summary of the evidence against the conspirators, see Desembargador Jose
Pedro Machado Coelho Torres to Luis de Vasconcellos e Sousa, Rio de Janeiro, De-
cember 11, 1789, with "a lista das pessoas ... dando hum idea das prezumsoens, ou
prova que rezulta contra cada hum deles," AHU, Minas Gerais, caixa 92, folder no.
47. Some discussion in English of the Minas Conspiracy can be found in Manoel
Cardoso, "Another document on the Inconfidencia Mineira;" Hispanic American
Historical Review XXXII (1952): 540-551; and Alexander Marchant, "Tiradentes
and the Conspiracy of Minas," Hispanic American Historical Review XXI (1941):
239-257; the standard account in Portuguese remains Lucio Jose dos Santos, A In-
confidencia Mineira, supplemented by two articles by Herculano Gomes Mathias,
"0 Tiradentes e a cidade do Rio de Janeiro," Anais do Museu Hist6rico Nacional,
XVI (1966), 102, and "Inconfidencia e Inconfidentes," Anais do congresso comemo-
rativo do bicentenario da transferencia da sede do governo do Brasil da cidade do Sal-
vador para 0 Rio de Janeiro, 3 vols. (Rio de Janeiro, 1967) III, 250; and by Celia
Nunes Galvao Quirino dos Santos, A Inconfidencia Mineira (Separata do Torno XX
dos Anais do Museu Paulista, Sao Paulo, 1966).
30The reference came concerning a petition by Padre Oliveira Rolim, one of the
priests implicated in the plot, August 1822, RAPM, IX (1904),624.
31 "Continua\ao de perguntas feitas a Francisco de Paula Freire de Andrade," Rio de
Janeiro, July 29,1791, ADIM, IV, 230.
116 • NakedTropics

all too reminiscent of the duties levied on the American colonists. The
conspirators concluded that "the Abbe Raynal had been a writer of great
vision, because he had prognosticated the uprising in North America, and
the captaincy of Minas Gerais because of the imposition of the derrama
was now in the same circumstances. 32 Their intention was to establish a re-
publican and constitutional state in Minas Gerais. Parliaments were to be
set up in each town. 33 These would be subordinate to a supreme parlia-
ment (um parlamento principal). A university was to be founded in Vila
Rica. 34 The plotters contemplated the total abrogation of past laws and
statutes. 35
    How far the institutions to be established imitated those in North
America is not clear. There is some evidence of opposition to a slavish imi-
tation of the North American example at least as far as the arms of the state
were concerned, and perhaps on more fundamental matters. 36 However,
circulating among the conspirators was the Recueil de Loix Constitutives
des Etats- Un is de l'Amerique, published in Paris in 1778, which contained
the Articles of Confederation and drafts of the state constitutions of Penn-
sylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, the Carolinas, and Massachu-
setts. 37 The conspirators also possessed constitutional commentaries by
Raynal and Mably.38 Gonzaga, despite his disparagement of democracy in

32"Auto de perguntas feitas ao Freire de Andrade;' Rio de Janeiro, November 16,
1789, ADIM, IV, 207.
33"Continua<;:ao de perguntas feitas ao vigario ... Carlos Correa;" Rio de Janeiro,
November 27, 1789,ADIM,IV, 17l.
34Senten<;:a de AI<;:ada (1792), Santos, Inconfidencia Mineira, 59l.
35 cc Joaquim Silverio dos Reis and Carlos Correa, auto de acarea<;:ao," Rio de Janeiro,
July 13, 1791, ADIM, IV, 193.
36 cc Continua<;:ao de perguntas feitas ao ... Alvarenga Peixoto;' Rio de Janeiro, Janu-
ary 14, 1790,ADIM, IV, 147.
37 cc Translado e Appensos, No. 26; neste lugar e debaixo do No. 26 vai apo aos dos
Autos originais 0 livro em Frances intitulado, Recueil des Loix Constitutives des
Etats-Vnis de L' Amerique," AHV, Minas Gerais, caixa 92. The full reference for this
collection is: Recueil des loix constitutives des colonies angloises, confederees sous la
denomination d'Etats- Un is de I'Amerique-Septentrionale. Auquel on a joint les Actes
d'Independance de Confederation, et autres actes du Congres general, traduit de l'an-
glois. Dedie a M. Ie Docteur Franklin. (En Suisse: Chez les Libraires Associes [i.e.
Paris: Cellot], 1778). In fact two editions of this work were published in Paris; the
first with the place of publication noted as Philadelphia and the second pirated
edition claiming to have been published in Switzerland. The copy in the possession
of the Minas conspirators was the pirated edition noted above. For a history of
these works see Durand Echeverria, C(French Publications of the Declaration of In-
dependence and the American Constitutions, 1776-1783," The Papers ofthe Biblio-
graphical Society ofAmerica 47, no. 4, (1953),313-338.
38"Item, Ie droit public de l'Europe de Mably:' tres volumes em oitavo," avalia<;:ao
dos livros, ADIM, I, 461; and for other books by Mably, "Termo de encerramento,
Marianna," ADIM, I, 466.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 117

his treatise on the natural law) was even at that time a firm supporter of the
contractual nature of government. The king) the young Gonzaga had writ-
ten) was a mandatory of the people) a minister of God) the end of whose
rule was the utility of the people. Gonzaga)s acrimonious dispute with the
government of Luis da Cunha Menezes of Minas) immortalized in his Car-
tas Chilenas, had centered on the dangers of arbitrary rule. His memorials
to court during the 1780s strongly emphasized the legal and moral re-
straints on the actions and power of the executive. 39
   The Minas plot was betrayed. With others) Gonzaga) Chiudio Manuel da
Costa) Alvarenga Peixoto) and the canon Luis Vieira were arrested. The ide-
ology of the Minas Conspiracy) however) influenced by the success of the
American Revolution and the impact in Brazil of the ideas of Raynal and
others had projected the movement into a much greater context. There
had been uprisings far more damaging in lives and property before. The
Vila Rica uprising of 1720) for example) was more dramatic in action and
more bloody than the nonevents of 1788-1789. But no previous plot had
possessed motivations so fundamentally anticolonial and so consciously
nationalistic. Members of an important segment of that group in society
on whom the metropolitan government most relied for the exercise of
power at the local level) in one of Brazil)s most important) populous) and
strategically placed captaincies) had dared to think that they might live
without Portugal. Inspired by the example of North America and by cur-
rent political theory) they had questioned what had been unquestioned.
The new mental climate was not something that could be concretely de-
fined) but it was obvious to all) and most especially to the agents of the
metropolitan government in Brazil. 40 Men in Minas had thought they
could be free) independent) and republican.

                                         II
The conspiracy in Minas Gerais had occurred at a special moment in time.
The plot was concerted before the French Revolution. But the arrests) the
trial, and the sentencing of those involved coincided with growing revolu-
tionary turmoil in Europe. Rumors of possible French invasion had been
bandied around among the conspirators) but they meant the France of the

39There is a vast bibliography on the Cartas Chilenas, their attribution, identifica-
tion of the characters, and so on. Hardly a literary scholar or historian in Portugal
or Brazil has not at some time discussed the work. I have relied heavily on Manuel
Rodrigues Lapa's masterly As "Cartas Chilenas," though it is unlikely that even this
profound and careful study will prove to be the definitive work.
40See, for example, the comments by Chancellor Vasconcellos Coutinho in his let-
ter to Martinho de Melo e Castro, Rio de Janeiro, July 30, 1791, AHU, Minas
Gerais, caixa 94.
118 • NakedTropics

Old Regime. The chronological relationship of the Minas Conspiracy to
the French Revolution is important. The Minas oligarchs had believed they
could control and manipulate the popular will. They had taken as their ex-
ample the American Revolution, where political readjustments had taken
place without social upheaval. But the example of the American patriots
had not prepared them for the events of the French Revolution, particu-
larly not for the spectacular repercussions of the French Revolution in the
Americas. The revolt of the slaves in the French sugar island of Saint-
Domingue during 1792 brought an awful awakening to those slaveowners
who had talked naively of republics and revolt while ignoring the social
and racial consequences of their words. The British scientist, traveler, and
writer John Barrow, who was in Rio de Janeiro during 1792, noted the
change "black power" had brought. "The secret spell that caused the Negro
to tremble in the presence of the white man is in a great degree dissolved,"
he wrote. "The supposed superiority by which a hundred of the former
were kept in awe and submission by one of the latter is no longer acknowl-
edged."41 Martinho de Melo e Castro recognized at once the threat the
Saint-Domingue revolt posed for Brazil. He warned the governors against
"the pernicious and perverse intent of the [Jacobin] clubs established in
France to propagate the abominable and destructive principles of liberty,
in order to effect by these means the fatal revolution." And he warned that
it was these abominable principles that caused "the fire of revolt and in-
surrection that made the slaves rise against their masters ... in'Santo
Domingo."42
   The innocuous Literary Society of Rio de Janeiro, with its dedication to
Raynal and Mably, and its alleged sympathy for the Minas conspirators,
was an obvious target for the nervous colonial administration. In 1794, its
members were arrested and subjected to prolonged interrogations. The so-
ciety, founded in 1785 by Luis de Vasconcellos e Sousa, the former viceroy,
had attempted to form a secret inner conclave where "good faith and se-
crecy might be maintained among the members." Democratically consti-
tuted, it was to discuss "philosophy in all its aspects." Among the papers
confiscated from Jacinto Jose da Silva, a graduate in medicine from Mont-
pellier, were two remarkable letters from a colleague, Manuel Jose de No-
vais de Almeida, which dramatically underlined the impact of the revolt in
Saint-Domingue on his contemporaries. In February 1791, Dr. Novais de


41John Barrow, A Voyage to Cochinchina in the Years 1792 and 1793 (London: T.
Cadell and W. Davies, 1806), 117-118.
42Martinho de Melo e Castro to Bernardo Jose de Lorena, Lisbon, February 21,
1792, DISP, XLV (1924),449-452.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 119

Almeida had written enthusiastically of the "equality of men." But by May
25, 1792, his comments had a different tone. "I am very worried with re-
spect to the Americas,'" he told da Silva. "What happened in French
[America] demonstrates what might one day happen in ours, which god
permitting I shall never see, for I am a friend of humanity.... Sell the
slaves that you possess, have the generosity to grant them their freedom,
you will have fewer enemies."43
    The example of the Antillean revolt was especially pertinent for white
Brazilians. In Minas Gerais the population in 1776, excluding Indians, was
over 300,000, or 20 percent of the total population of Portuguese America.
Over 50 percent of the population of Minas was black, and the remainder
equally divided between browns (pardos) and whites. In 1786, the number
of freemen to slaves was placed at 188,712 to 174,135. 44 In Bahia, the capi-
tal city of Salvador had a population of 40,000 during the 1790s, and the
total for the captaincy was near 280,000, or 18 percent of the total popula-
tion of Portuguese America. Jose da Silva Lisboa, a Brazilian graduate of
Coimbra and professor of philosophy in Bahia, estimated that a mere
quarter of the population was white. 45
   The only racial overtones during the Minas Conspiracy had come in the
form of vague comments attributed to Manoel da Costa Capanema, and
the evidence which linked him to the conspirators was so slight that he was


43''Autto do exame que fizerao 0 Dez[embargador] Ouvidor G[eneral] do Crime
Francisco Alvarez de Andrade, e 0 Dr. Intendente General do Ouro, Caetano Pinto
de Vasconcellos MonteNegro, em todos os Papeis do Dr. Jacinto Jose da Silva," Rio
de Janeiro, January 8, 1795, which together with the rest of the documents con-
cerning the Literary Society is published in ABNRj, LXI (1939): 241-523, espe-
cially 364-370. The nervousness of the Rio administration had been very obvious
the year before (1794), when the Brazilian justice of the peace in Rio turned over
an anonymous letter he had received recommending an uprising and the methods
by which it should be carried out, ''Autos de Exame e Averigua<;ao sobre 0 a autor
de uma carta anonima escrita ao juiz de fora do Rio de Janeiro, Dr. Baltazar da
Silva Lisboa (1793)," ABNRj, LX, 261-313.
44"Taboa das habitantes da capitania de Minas Gerais, 1776, noticia da capitania de
Minas Gerais," IHGB, lata 22, doc., 13; Dauril Alden, "The Population of Brazil in
the late Eighteenth Century: A Preliminary Survey," Hispanic American Historical
Review XLIII (1963): 173-205; "Popula<;ao da provincia de Minas Gerais,
1776-1823;" RAPMIV (1899),249-276.
45"Mappa da enumera<;ao da gente e povo desta capitania da Bahia, December,
1780;" ABNRj, XXXII (1910): 480; Thales de Azevedo, Povoamento da cidade do
Salvador (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1955),201; Jose da Silva Lisboa
to Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 18, 1781, ABNRj, XXXII (1910): 505; Vil-
hena put the proportion of whites at nearer a third, Luiz dos Santos Vilhena, Re-
copilafaO de noticias soteropolitanas e Brasilicas, contidas em XX cartas (1802), ed.
Braz do Amaral, 3 vols. (Bahia: Imprensa official do estado, 1922, 1935), I, 49.
120 • NakedTropics

absolved by the court of inquiry (Alrada).46 Jose Alvares Maciel had re-
garded the presence of so large a percentage of blacks in the population as
a possible threat to the new republic, should the promise of their liberation
by the Portuguese induce them to oppose the native whites. Alvarenga
Peixoto recommended that the slaves be granted freedom, which would
make them the passionate defenders of the new state, committed to its sur-
vival. Maciel, however, pointed out that such a solution might be self-de-
feating, for proprietors would be left with no one to work the mines. The
conspirators appear to have reached a compromise solution whereby only
the native-born black and mulatto slaves would be freed in the interests of
the defense of the state. 47 The proposition was itself a startling one for
1789, but the conspirators seem to have underestimated the potential con-
sequences of their plans. They assumed the situation could be controlled
with ease, just as they assumed the uprising could be instigated, manipu-
lated, and controlled in their own interests.



                                         III
In the climate of opinion that followed the Saint-Domingue revolt, the dis-
covery of plans for an armed uprising by the mulatto artisans of Bahia dur-
ing 1798 had a very special impact by demonstrating what whites had
already begun to realize: that ideas of social equality propagated within a
society where a mere third of the population was white risked being inter-
preted in racial terms. The Bahian affair revealed the politicization of levels
of society barely concerned with the Minas conspiracy. The middle-aged
lawyers, magistrates, and clerics in Minas Gerais (most of them opulent,
members of racially exclusive sodalities, and slaveowners) contrasted
markedly with the young mulatto artisans, soldiers, sharecroppers, and
salaried schoolteachers implicated in the Bahian plot. Embittered and an-
ticlerical, the Bahian mulattoes were as opposed to rich Brazilians as to
Portuguese dominion. They welcomed social turmoil, proposed the over-
throw of existing structures, and sought an egalitarian and democratic so-
ciety where differences of race would be no impediment to employment
and social mobility. The pardo tailor Joao de Deus, who at the time of his
arrest possessed no more than eighty reis and eight children, proclaimed
that «All [Brazilians] would become Frenchmen, in order to live in equality

46The statement attributed to him was: "Estes branquinhos do Reino que nos
quirem tomar a terra cedo os havemos de deitar fora," Senten<;:a da AI<;:ada, Santos,
Inconfidencia Mineira, 607-617.
47"Perguntas feitas a Jose Alvares Maciel," Rio de Janeiro, November 26, 1789,
ADIM, IV, 398.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 121

and abundance. They would destroy the public officials, attack the monas-
teries, open the port ... and reduce all to an entire revolution, so that all
might be rich and taken out of poverty, and that the differences between
white, black and brown would be extinguished, and that all without dis-
crimination would be admitted to positions and occupations."48
    It was not the North American patriots who provided the example for
Joao de Deus and his colleagues. It was the sans-culottes. It was not the
constitutional niceties of the United States that inspired them. It was the
slogans of the Paris mob. Handwritten manifestoes appeared throughout
the city on August 12, 1798. 49 Addressed to the "Republican Bahian peo-
ple" in the name of the "supreme tribunal of Bahian democracy," the man-
ifestoes called for the extermination of the "detestable metropolitan yoke
of Portugal."50 Clergy who preached against popular liberty were threat-
ened. All citizens, especially mulattoes and blacks, were told that "all are
equal, there will be no differences, there will be freedom, equality and fra-
ternity."51 There was no equivocation over slavery. "All black and brown
slaves are to be free so that there will be no slavery whatsoever."52 The gov-
ernment would be "Democratic, free and independent."53 "The happy time
of our liberty is about to arrive, the time when all will be brothers, the time
when all will be equal."54


48"Denuncia publica, jurada ... que da Joaquim Jose da Veiga, homen pardo forro
... ," August 27, 1798, ADIB, I, 8; eel. Ignacio Accioli de Cerqueira e Silva, Memo-
rias hist6ricas e politicas da Bahia (hereafter cited as MHPB) , ed. Braz do Amaral, 6
vols. (Bahia: Imprensa Official do Estado, 1919-1925), III, 93.
49F. Borges de Barros, "Copia de varios papeis sediciosos que em alguns lugares
publicos deste cidade se fixarao na manha do dia 12 de agosto de 1798," Anais do
Arquivo Publico da Bahia, II (1917): 143-146; Carlos Guilherme Mota, Ideia de rev-
olUfaO no Brasil (1789-1801): estudo das formas de pensamento (Petr6polis: Editora
Vozes, 1979). For a brief account in English of the Bahian plot see R. R. Palmer, The
Age ofDemocratic Revolution, 11,513. Two documentary collections are available. A
Inconfidencia da Bahia, devassas e sequestros (hereafter cited as ADIB), 2 vols. (Rio
de Janeiro, 1931); "Autos de devassas do levantamento a sedi~ao intentados na
Bahia em 1798," Anais do Arquivo Publico da Bahia, XXXV, XXXVI (1959-1961).
Also see the article by Katia M. de Queir6s Mattoso, "Conjoncture et Societe au
Bresil ala fin du XVllle Siecle: Prix et Salaires ala veille de la revolution des Alfa-
iates, Bahia 1798," Cahiers des Ameriques Latines V (January-June, 1970): 33-53.
so "Aviso ao clero e ao povo Bahinense indouto," MHPB, III, 110.
51('Prelo," MHPB, 111,109.
52"Denuncia publica ... que da 0 capitao do regimento auxiliar dos homens pretos
Joaquim Jose de Santa Anna," ADIB, 1,13.
53"Auto ... para proceder a devassa pela rebeliao a levantamento projectada nesta
cidade, para se estabelecer no continente do Brasil, hum governo democratico
... ," August 28, 1798, ADIB, 1, 7.
54"Aviso," MHPB, 111,106. Also see Katia M. de Queir6s Mattoso, Presenfa francesa
no movimento democratico baiano, 1798 (Salvador: Itapua, 1969).
122 • NakedTropics

    Long before they had concerted even the most rudimentary plan, the
Bahian artisans were caught red-handed. 55 The causes of the plot had been
an amalgam of social resentments, high food prices, and the impact of the
revolutionary slogans of France. The appointment of a white sargento-mor
as commandant of the auxiliary regiment of free pardos crossed racial lines
and placed the mulatto regiment in an unfavorable relationship with the
regiment of free blacks, the famous Henriques, with its black commandant
colonel.56 The price of manioc flour, the basic subsistence food, had risen
during the previous four years from 640 reis per alqueire to between 1,280
and 1,600 reis. 57 "The most vile meat imaginable was selling for prices
twice what it was worth," according to the professor of Greek in Salvador,
Luis dos Santos Vilhena. 58 The mulatto artisans and soldiers, many of them
literate, had been receptive to revolutionary ideology. But the appearance
of the manifestos in Bahia, the demand for "liberty, equality and frater-
nity;' and the racial composition of the conspiratorial conclave provoked a
reaction out of all proportion to the incidents themselves. Since 1792,
slaveowners throughout the Americas had barely hidden their concern
that the revolution in the Caribbean might prove contagious. For slave-
owners in Brazil at least, the actions of Bahian mulattoes made the conta-
gion a concrete reality. After 1798 all white men in Portuguese America
faced the question posed by Admiral Campbell, commandant of the
Brazilian squadron of the Portuguese navy during the early nineteenth
century: Was it indeed true that "the transactions at St. Domingo had
plainly evinced that there was no stability in the sovereignty of whites in a
country necessarily worked by blacks?"59
    The government in Lisbon suspected that more important and influen-
tial men might be behind the Bahian conspiracy, a concern understandable
in light of events in Minas Gerais. In addition there had been rumors in
Portugal "that the principal people [of Bahia] were infested ... with the
abominable French principles         with great affection for the absurd and
intended French constitution        " If French troops landed, it was said, the
city would unite with them. Specifically, the wealthy priest and entrepre-


55"OS conspiradores que foram presos;' MHPB, III, 99-102; also see account by
Braz do Amaral, ibid., 96-97, and Affonso Ruy de Souza, A primeira revolufao so-
cial brasileira (1798) (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1942). Also see the
more recent study by Istvan Jancs6, Na Bahia, contra 0 Imperio: historia do ensaio
de sedifao de 1798 (Sao Paulo: HUCITEC-EDUFBA, 1996).
56"Denuncia ... que da ... Santa Anna," ADIB, I, 12.
57Vilhena, Cartas, I, 159; Carlos Guilherme Mota, "Mentalidade Ilustrada na colo-
nizacao Portuguesa: Luis dos Santos Vilherna," RHSP, no. 72 (1967): 405-416.
58Vilhena, Cartas, I, 128-129.
59Donald Campbell, London, August 14, 1804, Chatham Papers, Public Record Of-
fice, London (hereafter cited as PRO) 30/8/345 part 2, f. 223.
                          The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 123

neur Francisco Agostinho Gomes was denounced to the authorities in Lis-
bon. The governor of Bahia, D. Fernando Jose de Portugal, was instructed
to investigate these charges. 6o
    Gomes was an erudite and enlightened man with as fine a private library as
that which canon Luis Vieira had built up in Minas Gerais. Thomas Lindley,
who met him at the turn of the century, was singularly impressed. "In the
French I noticed Alembert's Encyclopedia, Buffon, and Lavoisier, among our
own authors he had chiefly selected natural history, political economy, travels
and philosophical works ... Robertson's America he particularly commended
and Smith's Wealth of Nations ..." Lindley also noted how Father Gomes
praised the works of Thomas Paine. 61 D. Fernando, however, found nothing
to incriminate Gomes. The ideas and organization of the Bahian conspiracy
were such, he wrote, "that no persons of consideration, or understanding, or
who had knowledge or enlightenment had entered...."62 With respect to the
priest, he pointed out to Lisbon that "the reading of English papers did not
make a man a Jacobin." Moreover, he found it highly improbable that any of
the principal people of the captaincy were implicated in the Bahian conspir-
acy. He had no indication of this implication among either the businessmen
or the men in public office, or the people of property, all of whom reacted
strongly when the seditious papers appeared. Those involved in the plot were
all of the lower class (classe ordinaria). "That which is always most dreaded in
colonies are the slaves, on account of their condition and because they com-
prise the greater number of the inhabitants;' he told Lisbon. "It is therefore
not natural for men employed and established in goods and property to join a
conspiracy which would result in awful consequences to themselves, being
exposed to assassination by their own slaves." He did not seek "to apologize
for the inhabitants of Bahia"; he wished "only to express his sentiments."63
    D. Fernando had made a vital distinction, and his comments stressed
the change which had occurred since 1792. The sugar planters and their
apologists desired "liberty," to be sure, and the more literate of them were
avid disciples of European thinkers; but the theories that appealed to them
articulated and provided justification for their own self-interest, and this

6°D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to D. Fernando Jose de Portugal, Queluz, October
4, 1798, MHPB, Ill, 95. The suspicion that more important members of society
were implicated has been put forward by both Souza, A primeira revolufao, and
Antonio de Araujo de Aragao Bulcao Sobrinho, "0 patriarcha da liberdade Bahi-
ana, Joaquim Inacio de Sequeira Bulcao;" RIHGB, 217 (1952), 167-185, though
neither has presented any evidence.
61Thomas Lindley, Authentic Narrative of a Voyage from the Cape of Good Hope to
the Brazils . .. in 1802 and 1803 . .. (London: J. Johnson, 1805),66-68.
62D. Fernando Jose de Portugal to D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, Bahia, October
20, 1798, MHPB, III, 123.
63D. Fernando Jose de Portugal to D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, Bahia, February
13, 1799, MHPB, III, 132-134.
124 • NakedTropics

self-interest, D. Fernando discerned, was not in conflict with the colonial
relationship. The liberty the planters most desired was the freedom Bishop
Azeredo Coutinho proposed in his memorial on the price of sugar, pre-
sented to the Lisbon Academy of Sciences in 1792. It was the liberty "for
each to make the greatest profit from his work."64 Freedom for capitalist
enterprise was not the freedom Joao de Deos had in mind. As D. Fernando
saw, the firmest opponents of the demands of the Bahian mulattoes would
be the Bahian planters, for it was they, not Lisbon, who had the most to
lose if those demands were met.
   Paradoxically the slave revolt in the West Indies had added acuteness to
the sugar planters' demands for freedom from government interference
and control, just as the events in Saint-Domingue had stimulated appre-
hensions about the racial balance of the population, and produced the so-
cioeconomic situation out of which the Bahian conspiracy emerged.
Collapse of French sugar production in the West Indies during the 1790s
gave Bahia the opportunity for economic renaissance. 65 So profitable had
sugar become and so high the prices fetched on European markets that, ac-
cording to Luis dos Santos Vilhena, "there is no one who does not wish to
be a sugar planter."66 Azeredo Coutinho, who before becoming an ecclesi-

64Jose Joaquim da Cunha de Azeredo Coutinho, "Memoria sobre 0 prec;o do ac;ucar
(1791 )," in Memorias economicas da Academia Real das Ciencias de Lisboa para 0
adiantamento da agricultura, das artes, e da industria em Portugal e suas conquistas
(1789-1815), ColeCfao de obras classicas do pensamento economico portugues (I in 5
vols.) (Lisbon: Banco de Portugal, 1990-1991), vol. 3, 273-280. The Academy of
Sciences had been founded in 1779. Some indication of its importance to the intel-
lectuallife of the period can be obtained from Antonio Baiao, A Infancia da Acade-
mia (1788-1794): visita aos arquivos do Reino; correspondencia a tal respeito de loao
Pedro Ribeira, Santa Rosa de Viterbo ... (Coimbra: Imprensa da Universidade,
1934); Antonio Ferrao, "0 segundo duque de Lafoes, e 0 marques de Pombal (sub-
sidios para a biografia do fundador da Academia das Ciencias);' Boletim da se-
gunda ciasse, Academia das Ciencias de Lisboa, XIX (1924-1925), 407-588. For
listing of the Academy's publications, see Moses Bensabat Amzalak, Do estudo e da
evolUfao das doutrinas economicas em Portugal (Lisbon: n.p., 1928). For Azeredo
Coutinho, Manoel Cardozo, "Azeredo Coutinho and the Intellectual Ferment of
His Times," in Conflict and Continuity in Brazilian Society, ed. Henry H. Keith and
S. F. Edwards (Columbia, s.C.: University of South Carolina, 1969), 72-103, and E.
Bradford Burns, "The Role of Azeredo Coutinho in the Enlightenment of Brazil,"
Hispanic American Historical Review XLIV (May 1964): 145-160.
65Caio Prado Junior, A formafao do Brasil contemporaneo, colonia, 7th ed. (Sao
Paulo: Editora Brasiliense, 1963), 126, 159.
66Vilhena, Cartas, 1,158; "Exportac;ao da Bahia para Portugal (1798);' ibid, I, 53.
Comment on the high price of South American products was made by Robert Wal-
pole to Lord Grenville, Lisbon, October 12, 1791, PRO, Foreign Office, 63/14. For
price of Brazilian sugar on the Amsterdam market see N. W. (Nicolaas Wilhelmus)
Posthumus, Inquiry into the History ofPrices in Holland, 2 vols. (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1946,1964),1,122,124.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 125

astic had administered a sugar mill in Brazil, urged that full advantage be
taken of the favorable market conditions provided by the "providential
revolution of the French colonies." As the price of sugar rises, he wrote,
"the greater becomes our production and our commerce."67
    The sugar boom was partly responsible for the favorable balance of
trade with the metropolis enjoyed by Bahia during the 1790s, as a result of
which it became necessary to send bullion from Portugal to Brazil.68 It was
a spectacular reversal of circumstances. A mere forty years before, Brazil-
ian gold had provided the mainstay of colonial exports to Lisbon. Azeredo
Coutinho's essay on the commerce of Portugal and her dominions at-
tempted to rationalize the new situation. "The mother country and the
colonies taken together ought to be regarded as the farm of a single
farmer;' he wrote. "The owner of many estates does not care whether such
and such a one procures him more revenue, but he only rates the collective
revenues of the whole. If the mother country could not consume all the
produce of the colonies or provide sufficient manufactures so that instead
money had to be sent, what prejudice could arise to the mother country?
The more colonial products it possesses, the more it has to dispose to for-
eigners. Though the mother country be in this case made the debtor to the
colonies, yet it becomes, at the same time, a creditor doubly considerable
in its claims upon the foreigner."69
   The high price of sugar led planters to exploit all available land. They
strongly resented the obligation imposed by law to plant subsistence crops.


67Azeredo Coutinho, "Memoria sobre 0 pre~o do a~ucar (1791 )," in Mem6rias
econ6micas in Colecfao de obras classicas I, vol. 3, 273-280. For a discussion of
prices of a variety of colonial commodity exports in the late eighteenth-century,
see Dauril Alden, "Late Colonial Brazil, 1750-1808;' in The Cambridge History of
Latin America, ed. Leslie Bethell (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1984), 11,601-662.
68In 1796 the value of goods exported to Portugal from Bahia was assessed at
3,702,181,721 reis, and the value of goods sent from Portugal to Bahia at
2,069,637,404 reis, "Tableau general de la valeur des marchandises importees dans
Ie royaume de Portugal." Adrien Balbi, Essai statistique sur Ie royaume de Portugal et
d'Algarve (2 vols.) (Paris: n.p., 1822) 1,431. For detailed analyses of the trade bal-
ances of this period see Jorge Miguel Viana Pedreira, Estructura industrial e mer-
cado colonial, Portugal e Brasil (1780-1820) (Lisbon: Difal, 1994) and Jose Jobson
de A. Arruda, 0 Brasil no comercio colonial (Sao Paulo: Atica, 1980).
69Azeredo Coutinho, Ensaio economico sobre 0 comercio de Portugal a suas colonias
... D. Jose Joaquim da Cunha de Azeredo Coutinho, Bispo em outro tempo de, Per-
nambuco . .. e actualmente Bispo d'Elvas ... in Colecfao de obras classicas III (Lis-
bon: Banco de Portugal, 1992). There is an English translation published in 1807,
An Essay on the Commerce and Products of the Portuguese Colonies in South Amer-
ica, Especially the Brazils (London: G. G. & J. Robinson, 1801). The quotations are
taken from this edition, 154-155.
126 • NakedTropics

Professor Luis dos Santos Vilhena condemned the great sugar producers
for their failure to plant sufficient manioc and warned that such an un-
thinking pursuit of their self-interest threatened famine. He firmly be-
lieved that plantation owners should be obliged to plant manioc, for there
was no other source of supply available. Vilhena held that "European
ideas" which had led to the removal of price controls on meat and manioc
were responsible for the shortage of subsistence food and for high prices.
Such ideas should only be applied in a place like Brazil after the most care-
ful attention had been paid to local factors. In Europe, one nation in time
of dearth might have recourse to its neighbors for added supplies, but mu-
tual dependence was impossible in South America, where food supplies
were inelastic. Vilhena saw a direct relationship between the removal of
price controls and «the ineffectual uprising and cruel massacre" projected
by the Bahian mulattoes in 1798. 70
   The «European ideas" Vilhena especially condemned were those of
Adam Smith and J. B. Say. Both economists were used by Joao Rodrigues de
Brito and Manuel Ferreira da Camara to document and justify their rejec-
tion of state interference to regulate production or control the prices of
commodities. Rodrigues de Brito and Ferreira da Camara had been con-
sulted over the state of agriculture in Bahia, and their responses were a
clear defense of the interests of the great sugar planters. Manuel Ferreira da
Camara, speaking as proprietor of the great sugar mill of Ponte, categori-
cally rejected all laws and regulations that restricted the liberty of the pro-
prietors. He was violently opposed to the Inspection House which
regulated the prices of sugar and tobacco, and also to the public granary
established by Governor D. Rodrigo Jose de Menezes in the city of Salvador
during 1785 in an attempt to provide regular food supplies at reasonable
prices to the population. These institutions, Ferreira da Camara claimed,
«had been set up out of the fantasy of those in government as obstacles to
the freedom of commerce." He attributed the granary «to a zeal more reli-
gious than practical. ..." He could conceive of nothing worse than that
commodities «should be sold for less than they cost to produce or trans-
port." He boasted that he had not «planted a single foot of manioc in order
not to fall into the absurdity of renouncing the best cultivation of the
country for the worst." Each «must be master to do what most benefits
him, and what benefits him is that which most benefits the state."71


7°Vilhena, Cartas, I, 128-129; I, 159; 11,445-448.
71Carta II, M[anuel] F[erreira] da C[amara], Cartas economica-politicas, sobre a
agricultura a commercio da Bahia . .. pelo Desembargador loao Rodrigues de Brito a
outros (Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional, 1821),80-85.
                           The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 127

    For Rodrigues de Brito, admissible direction in agricultural matters by
the government could be reduced to three points: "the granting of liberties,
facilities, and instruction." The proprietor should not be forced to plant
manioc. De Brito opposed "restrictions that prevented our farmers from
taking their goods to the places where they could obtain most value." He
argued in favor of the removal of the prohibitions against the commissarios
 volantes, the itinerant free traders outlawed by the Marques de Pombal
during the 1750s. He was strongly opposed to price fixing. Capitalist enter-
prise should be liberated in order to encourage entrepreneurs to partici-
pate in agricultural improvement, and the institutional and judicial
obstacles to investment should be removed. "Intolerable inconveniences
placed on the capitalist in the matters of debt collection and foreclosure
should be abolished;' he contended, and in particular "foreign investment
should be welcomed."72
    The apologists for the sugar planters were making a frontal attack on
the whole concept of state regulation and government interference in eco-
nomic matters. Yet the planters' demands were so closely related to their
own self-interest that they were also limited by them. Planters desiring
emancipation from government interference did not necessarily desire
emancipation from the colonial relationship with Portugal. To Ferreira da
Camara, Rodrigues de Brito, and Azeredo Coutinho, laissez faire was not
synonymous with free international commercial exchange. It was this basic
distinction that another disciple of Adam Smith, D. Fernando Jose de Por-
tugal, whose elimination of price controls in Bahia provoked Vilhena's
criticism, had evidently perceived in 1798. The sugar interests did not lead
the demand for free international commerce for one simple reason. Brazil-
ian sugar was sold in the continental European market, for which Lisbon
was a logical and necessary entrepot. Britain, the most likely candidate for
any free trade relationship outside the Luso-Brazilian commercial system,
placed prohibitive duties on the importation of Brazilian sugar, in the in-
terests of its own sugar colonies in the West Indies.
    The marriage in the writing of Azeredo Coutinho between his attack on
state interference and his restatement of the basic tenets of mercantilist
colonial policy was a perfect rationalization of the situation. He held up
the English Navigation Acts as "a pattern of imitation to all seafaring na-
tions." It was "in the true interests of both [metropolis and colony] that the
colony be permitted to carryon a direct trade with the mother country

nCarta, I, ]oao Rodrigues de Brito, ibid. For a discussion of the commissarios
volantes and Pombal's policy toward them see Kenneth R. Maxwell, "Pombal and
the Nationalization of the Luso-Brazilian Economy," Hispanic American Historical
Review XLVIII, no. 4 (November 1968): 608-631.
128 • NakedTropics

only, and that they [the colonists] should not have fabrics and manufacto-
ries of their own especially of cotton, linen, wool and silk." In fact, the in-
terests of Brazil, defined as the interests of the great sugar planters, were
compatible with those of Portugal.73
   The point of view of the planters of the littoral, so accurately stated by
Azeredo Coutinho, gained added weight during the 1790s as a result of the
sugar boom, and of the temporary removal of any political influence from
Minas Gerais, a region not dominated by an export-oriented plantation
economy. The strongly regionalist emphasis of the Minas conspirators had
verged at times on economic nationalism. Joaquim Jose da Silva Xavier
(known as Tiradentes) claimed that once free and a republic like English
America, Brazil might become even greater than English America, owing
to better resources. With the establishment of manufactories, he said, there
would be no need to import commodities from abroad. 74 Proposals for
trade and commercial arrangements were noticeably absent from the dis-
cussions of the Minas plotters, and many believed that there was no neces-
sity whatsoever to invite the support of foreign powers, for they would
rush to establish relations with the new state on account of its natural
riches. 75 But the influence of such views was suppressed in the aftermath of
the failure of the uprising.
   There were Brazilians, however, less closely linked to the interests of the
sugar planters, who came to the same conclusion as Dr. Novais de Almeida
in his letter to Jacinto Jose da Silva. The basic issue, as they perceived it, was
slavery itself. D. Fernando had found it necessary to expel a Capuchin friar
from Bahia during 1794 for his antislavery statements. 76 Professor Luis dos
Santos Vilhena observed soberly that he was "not persuaded that the com-
merce in slaves is so useful as it seems." He believed that "Negroes were
prejudicial to Brazil."7? A similar attitude had been expressed some years
before by his colleague, Professor Jose da Silva Lisboa, secretary of the
Bahian Inspection House. Although he recognized the importance of slav-
ery and sugar to the Bahian economy, Silva Lisboa did not believe that the
number of slaves imported brought a commensurate increase in popula-

73An Essay on the Commerce, 155-157.
74Witness, Vicente Vieira da Mota, Vila Rica, June 22, 1789, ADIM, I, 108; Witness,
Vicente Vieira da Mota, Vila Rica, August 3, 1789, ADIM, III, 334; Witness, Jose
Aires Gomes, Vila Rica, July 28, 1789, ADIM, I, 207; Witness, Jose Aires Gomes,
Vila Rica July 30, 1789, ADIM, III, 319-320; "Continua~ao de perguntas feitas ao
coronel Alvarenga," Rio de Janeiro, January 14, 1790, ADIM, IV, 141.
75"Continua~ao de perguntas feitas ao Padre Jose da Silva de Oliveira Rolim Vila
Rica," November 13, 1789, ADIM, II, 288.
76Dom Fernando Jose de Portugal to Martinho de Melo e Castro, Bahia, June 18,
1794, RIHGB, LX (1897), 155-157.
nVilhena, Cartas, I, 136, 139-140.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 129

tion or agricultural production. And, like Vilhena, he believed slavery was
responsible for many of the ills of Brazilian society. 78
   The suggestion of slave emancipation was anathema to the planters. Az-
eredo Coutinho thought abolitionist sentiment sufficiently threatening to
warrant a blistering attack on "the insidious principles of the philosophic
sect." He asked what would happen to the agriculture of Brazil and in con-
sequence the commerce and prosperity of Portugal if slavery was abol-
ished. To Azeredo Coutinho "necessity has no law, because she is the origin
of all law;' and necessity clearly demanded the continuance of the slave
trade. "To those that accuse me of occupying myself with a study more
proper to a farmer or business man than to a Bishop, it is necessary to re-
member that before I was a Bishop I was, as I continue to be, a citizen
linked to the interest of the state." He attacked those who "in the depths of
their studies presume to give laws to the world without having dealt at first
hand with the people of whom they speak." The bishop's concern at the
growth of emancipationist sentiment was evidently justified, for his de-
fense of the slave trade was refused by the Lisbon Academy of Sciences, and
he was forced to publish a French edition in London. When he sought
again in 1806 to have his polemic published in Portugal, the Royal Board of
Censorship denied permission, on the ground that although slavery might
be tolerated in present circumstances, nothing should be said to make its
elimination even more difficult. 79
   No one was advocating immediate abolition, but a small group of men
was beginning to regard slavery as the source of social ills in Brazil, and was
starting to think in terms of an alternative model for Brazilian develop-
ment, in which European immigration and free laborers would replace
slavery. Vilhena's objections to slavery were not so much the result of"hu-
manitarian" sentiment as they were a practical response to the problem of
a society where the racial balance appeared to be dangerously unstable.
The question of slavery raised fundamental questions about the most
desirable course for Brazilian development. And during the 1790s that


78JOSe da Silva Lisboa to Domingos Vandelli, Bahia, October 18, 1781, ABNR],
XXXII ( 1910),502,505.
79Azeredo Coutinho, "Analise sabre a justi<;:a do comercio do resgate dos escravos
da costa d'Africa (1798)," in Obras economicas, 1794-1804, ed. Sergio Buarque de
Holanda (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1966), 175-185; Sonia Apare-
cida Siqueira, "A escravidao negra no pensamento do bispo Azeredo Coutinho,
contribui<;:ao ao estudo da mentalidade do ultimo inquisidor geral," I, RHSP,
XXVII (1963), 349-365; II, RHSP, XXVIII (1964), 141-198. D. Fernando Jose de
Portugal significantly also supported the views of the sugar planters with respect to
slavery; see D. Fernando to Martinho de Melo e Castro, Bahia, June 18, 1794,
RIHGB, LX (1897),155-157.
130 • NakedTropics

question was beginning to divide enlightened men. Discussion about de-
velopment resulted in a striking paradox. Those who were the strongest
supporters of laissez faire when it meant removal of the regulatory func-
tions of the state were also most committed to the slave trade and slavery.
Those who supported government interference, particularly in the control
of prices and in the guarantee of sufficient supplies of subsistence food to
the population, were also most opposed to the slave trade and slavery. No-
vais de Almeida and Vilhena saw the slave population as enemies within,
and Jose da Silva Lisboa believed Brazil would not develop without the cre-
ation of a free labor force and the Europeanization or whitening of the
population. 80 Bishop Azeredo Coutinho saw slavery as essential to Brazil-
ian prosperity. Those who attacked laissez faire where it demanded the re-
moval of what they considered judicious government controls would be
most in favor of free international commerce, because free trade promised
to stimulate European immigration and offered the possibility of an al-
liance with Great Britain against the slave trade. Yet at the same time, be-
cause the solution to Brazil's problems by opponents of laissez faire was
based on fear of the racial composition of the Brazilian population, they
would be the least likely to take any initiative that might provoke the disas-
ter they foresaw and sought to avoid. The division was profound. Vilhena
attacked those "European ideas" he held responsible for creating the condi-
tions that led to the Bahian plot. Azeredo Coutinho attacked the "humani-
tarians" and «philosophers" whose utopian concepts threatened, in his
opinion, to destroy Brazilian prosperity.


                                       IV
Republicanism had been discredited by its abortive uprising in Minas
Gerais and later association with social and racial turmoil, and Brazilians
were in very basic disagreement over fundamental issues; thus there was
room for metropolitan initiatives. And for the white minority in Por-
tuguese America, the failure of the oligarchic movement in Minas Gerais
during 1789, and the threat from below revealed by the Bahian artisans in
1798, provided two powerful incentives for compromise with the metrop-
olis. Psychologically, the situation was propitious for accommodation. The
recognition of this fact by influential members of the Portuguese govern-
ment during the 1790s had profound impact on the future development of
Brazil. During 1788 Luis Pinto de Sousa Coutinho became Portugal's for-

80Jose da Silva Lisboa, Memoria dos beneficios politicos do governo de EI-Rei Nosso
Senhor D. loao VI (Rio de Janeiro: Na Impressao Regia, 1818), 2d ed. (Rio de
Janeiro: Impressa nas Oficinas do Arquivo Nacional, 1940), 160, 169-175.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 131

eign minister. 8 ! He was a man with firsthand knowledge of Brazilian con-
ditions, having distinguished himself as governor of Mato Grosso
(1769-1772) before succeeding Martinho de Melo e Castro as minister
plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James. 82 In Britain he had provided
William Robertson with information on South America for Robertson's
famous history, a service he had also provided for the Abbe Raynal some
years earlier. 83 Once back in Lisbon, Luis Pinto made contact with Brazil-
ian intellectuals, many of them students of Domingos Vandelli, an Italian
scholar brought to Portugal by Pombal as part of his program of educa-
tional reform. On May 31, 1790, Luis Pinto sent two young Brazilians and a
Portuguese colleague on a grand European tour of instruction at the ex-
pense of the Portuguese government. The Brazilians were Manuel Ferreira
da Camara and Jose Bonifacio de l\ndrada e Silva. The group was in-
structed to proceed to Paris and take courses there in physics and mineral-
ogy. Two years at Freiburg would be spent gaining "all practical
knowledge." Afterward the scholars were to visit the mines of Saxony, Bo-
hemia, and Hungary, and to return to Portugal by way of Scandinavia and
Great Britain. 84
   Manuel Ferreira da Camara, the leader of the expedition, had close links
with those caught up in the events of Minas Gerais. His elder brother, Jose
de Sa Betencourt, who graduated from Coimbra in 1787, was implicated
on several occasions during the judicial inquiry into the conspiracy, and
had fled from Minas by way of the backlands to Bahia. His uncle had been

81Caetano Beirao, D. Maria I, 1777-1792; subsidios para revisao de hist6ria do seu
reinado, 2d. ed. (Lisbon: Emprensa Nacional de Publicidade, 1934); Simao Jose da
Luz Soriano, Hist6ria da Guerra Civil (Lisbon: Impr. Nacional, 1866) I, 349-350.
82Ibid., 355-356.
83William Robertson, History ofAmerica, 3 vols. (London: Printed for W. Strahan;
T. Cadell, in the Strand; and J. Balfour, at Edinburgh, 1783), vol. 1, preface, xiv; J.-
M. (Joseph-Marie) Querard, La France litteraire, ou dictionnaire bibliographique
des savants, 10 vols. (Paris: Firmin Didot pere et fils, 1827-1839), VII (1835),473.
For an excellent synopsis of Robertson's History ofAmerica as well as of Raynal's
influential books see D. A. Brading, The First America: The Spanish Monarchy, Cre-
ole Patriots, and the Liberal State 1492-1867 (Cambridge and New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1991),422-446. Brading's notes to this chapter (703-704)
provide a succinct listing of key bibliographic sources on these as well as other
French and Spanish Enlightenment figures who wrote about the European over-
seas colonies.
84Instru<;ao, Ajuda, May 31, 1790, in Marcos Carneiro de Mendon<;a, O Intendente
Camara, Manuel Ferreira da Camara Bethencourt e Sa, Intendente Geral das Minas
e Diamantes 1764-1835 (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1958),26-27.
Among the Brazilians' distinguished colleagues at Freiburg were Alexandre de
Humboldt and Andres Manuel del Rio; see Charles Minguet, Alexandre de Hum-
boldt, Historien et Geographe de l'Amerique espagnole, 1799-1804 (Paris: F.
Maspero, 1969),44-45.
132 • NakedTropics

a member of the Bahian High Court, and his wealthy relatives were propri-
etors of the sugar mill of Ponte. (Manuel Ferreira administered this estate
from 1801 to 1807; from it he wrote his observations about the agriculture
of Bahia. )85 At the time that Manuel Ferreira received his instructions for
the study tour of Europe, the Portuguese government had known for three
months of his brother's suspected implication in the projected uprising in
Minas Gerais. 86
   Luis Pinto's extension of the powerful protection of his office during the
critical year 1790 to these young Brazilian scholars, and his remarkable act
of faith in sponsoring the visit of Manuel Ferreira and Jose Bonifacio to the
center of European social and political upheaval, coincided with a series of
public criticisms of the attitudes and assumptions which had dominated
policymaking since the fall of Pombal in 1777. In 1790, D. Rodrigo de
Sousa Coutinho, Luis Pinto's successor, published under the auspices of
the Lisbon Academy of Sciences his "discourse on the true influence of
mines of precious metals on the industry of the nations that possess them,
and especially the Portuguese." D. Rodrigo was Pombal's godson. He was
related by marriage to Mathias Barbosa, one of the famous Minas pio-
neers, and as a result possessed extensive properties in the captaincy. In his
discourse, D. Rodrigo took issue with the view that mines were responsible
for Portugal's decadence, as the Encyclopedie had stated. He attributed the
stagnation of Portugal to the effects of the Methuen Treaty of 1703. 87 D.
Rodrigo was preparing the way for Manuel Ferreira da Camara's paper on
"physical and economic observations about the extraction of gold in
Brazil;' in which the young Brazilian made an eloquent plea for improved
methods and techniques. Manuel Ferreira recommended that mining
companies be promoted and encouraged by royal privileges. These compa-


85Carneiro de Mendonc;a, Intendente Camara, 9-10.
86Martinho de Melo e Castro acknowledged receipt of the first notice of the con-
spiracy i'n a letter to the Minas governor, the Visconde de Barbacena, dated March
9, 1790. A much-corrected minute of this dispatch in Melo e Castro's own hand
survives at the AHU, Minas Gerais, caixa 92. Ignacio Ferreira da Camara, a cousin
of Manuel Ferreira and Jose de Sa, had been a student at Montpellier, MHPB, VI
(1940),283.
87D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, "Discurso sobre a verdadeira influencia das
minas dos metaes preciosos na industria das nac;oes que as possuem e especial-
mente da portuguesa," in Mem6rias econ6micas in Colecfao de obras classicas, I, vol.
1, 179-183; Marques do Funchal, "Certidao do baptismo de Dom Rodrigo de
Sousa Coutinho," 0 Conde de Linhares, Dom Domingos Ant6nio de Sousa Coutinho
(Lisbon: Typ. Bayard, 1908), 186. For information on D. Rodrigo's Minas connec-
tions, see Miguel Costa Filho, A cana de aflicar em Minas Gerais (Rio de Janeiro:
Instituto do Ac;ucar e do Alcool, 1963), 92, 97, and John Mawe, Travels in the Inte-
rior of Brazil (London: Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown,
1812),181-182.
                           The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 133

nies should not be monopolies but organizations which could mobilize
capital for rational exploitation. He suggested that mining colleges be set
up in Brazil to provide skilled mining engineers. 88 The papers of both D.
Rodrigo and Manuel Ferreira implied that the imposition of fiscal de-
mands on Minas Gerais had been wrong, and that what Minas Gerais
needed was not increased tax burdens but rational reform and modern
technology.

                                        v
When Melo e Castro died in March 1795, Luis Pinto took over as interim
secretary of state for the overseas dominions. 89 On May 27, 1795, he for-
warded to the Brazilian governors a circular which contained a startling
admission of past mistakes. "Defects in policy and fiscal restrictions had
until now held back the progress of Brazil," he wrote. ((Her Majesty, desir-
ing to calm her subjects as much as possible;' had made important deci-
sions. First, the salt gabelle would be abolished in Brazil. Second, the
mining and manufacture of iron would be encouraged, especially in Minas
and Sao Paulo. 90 Both measures promised to ameliorate two principal irri-
tants to the white minority in Brazil. And one of the few areas of agreement
between Luis dos Santos Vilhena and Bishop Azeredo Coutinho was oppo-
sition to the salt monopoly, due to its restrictive effect on the development
of salt meat production.
   To formulate programs and implement the reforms, Luis Pinto relin-
quished his temporary portfolio to D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho in
1796. 91 D. Rodrigo had impressive credentials. He had been a student at the
College of Nobles, established by Pombal to create a ((virtuous" nobility in
Portugal. 92 In 1779 he had visited France and observed what he described
as its ((parasitic and useless court" and its ((chaotic financial situation."93 In

88Carneiro de Mendon<;a, "Memoria de observa<;6es fisico-economicas acerca da
extra<;ao do ouro do Brasil, por Manuel Ferreira da Camara;' Intendente Camara,
499-523.
89Luis Pinto's first dispatch as secretary of state for the overseas dominions was
dated March 26,1795, AHU, c6dice 610, f. 194v-195; the death of Melo e Castro
was announced to the governors in Brazil on March 30, 1795.
90Luis Pinto de Sousa Coutinho to Bernardo Jose de Lorena, Queluz, May 27,1795,
Arquivo do Estado de Sao Paulo, caixa 63, N. orden 421, livro171, f. 159-161. For
the complete transcription see Carneiro de Mendon~a, Intendente Camara,
174-175, and DISP, XLV (1924),466-468.
91 Luis Pinto announced the appointment of D. Rodrigo, September 9, 1796, DISP,
XLV (1924),486.
92R6mulo de Carvalho, Hist6ria da fundarao do colegio real dos nobres de Lisboa,
1761-1772 (Coimbra: Atlantida, 1959), 182-186.
93D. Rodrigo to Dona Marianna de Sousa Coutinho, Fontainebleau, August 4,
1779, in Funchal, 0 Conde de Linhares, 191-194.
134 • NakedTropics

Paris he met Abbe Raynal. He told Raynal that the «population and re-
sources of France would have made her insupportable to the rest of Europe
were it not for the disorder of her financial administration." Raynal replied
that «Providence had given France the forces but refused her good sense.
France would indeed be terrible ifher natural power was matched by a just
and wise administration." Writing to his sister, D. Rodrigo later wondered:
«What would be better for Europe, to be a factory of the English or a slave
of France? The only thing that can console us is the almost total impossi-
bility of France reforming her system of government."
    D. Rodrigo was right in his analysis but wrong in his prediction. Reform
in France had come through revolution, and as he had seen, the geopoliti-
cal consequences for Portugal threatened to be an intolerable choice be-
tween the Great Powers. Moreover, he attributed the collapse of the French
monarchy to its fiscal situation. His opposition to monopolies and the
contracting of revenues, and his fervent support of an efficient and solvent
financial administration, grew from his belief that intelligent reform was
essential if Portugal were to avoid a similar collapse. The financial problem
was especially relevant because one of the prime issues in Minas Gerais was
the tax farms. The «good administration of the royal exchequer would con-
tribute most to the opulence and conservation of the vast overseas do-
minions:' the new secretary of state observed."94 To achieve sound fiscal
policies, D. Rodrigo planned wise and enlightened reforms, executed by in-
telligent men, capable of forming well-organized systems, the utility of
which would be recognized by all."95 His optimism epitomized that of the
Enlightenment itself.
   The immediate problem was the status of mining in Minas Gerais. The-
oretical debate and practical suggestion centered on this. D. Rodrigo would
base his measures «on the most liberal principles, if it is legitimate to adopt
to our language the sense which the English attribute to that word."96
Domingos Vandelli, in a memorial on the gold of Brazil, complained that
policy had previously been «left only in the hands of people ignorant of
mineralogy to the grave prejudice of the state." Decisions about whether
gold mines were advantageous or prejudicial to Portugal he left to «those
who know how to calculate the true interest of nations." He recommended
that practical experience be taken into account, especially that of scholars
who might have been to Germany.97 D. Rodrigo consulted Antonio Pires

94"Plano sabre 0 meio de restabelecer 0 credito publico e segurar recursos para as
grandes despesas, October 29, 1799," ibid., 172-179; «Plano de fazenda;' March 14,
1799, ibid., 155-168.
95"Discurso, IV," ibid., 135
96"Discurso, II, ibid., 120.
97"Mem6ria ... sabre as Minas de Ouro do Brasil par Domingos Vandelli;' ABNR!,
XX (1898),266-278.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 135

da Silva Ponte, who embodied his thoughts in an essay on the mines. He
emphasized the necessity for more training in the mathematical and phys-
ical sciences and metallurgy because "of the present great difficulties in ex-
tracting gold." He criticized the fact that in Minas Gerais the value of gold
was kept artificially below its value outside the captaincy. He went so far as
to suggest that the royal fifth be abolished and replaced by a tax on luxury
goods proportional to their price. He noted that Minas abounded in agri-
cultural and pastoral riches whose development should be encouraged.
"The royal revenues do not depend so much on the fifth of the gold ... as
in the number of consumers (consumidores) and inhabitants in the re-
gion."98 Jose Eloi Ottoni, in a memorial on the state of the captaincy,
agreed that the extraction of gold was now beyond the capacities of the
miners. He pointed to the absurd expense of the importation of iron and
steel into Brazil. It was important to promote agriculture and commerce
with the interior by removing import taxes. Communications should be
opened, especially along the Rio Doce and the Rio Sao Francisco. He did
not mean to suggest that all manufactures be permitted in Brazil, but he
did think it wise to allow those which provided substitutes for items which
"from negligence we buy from foreigners, iron, steel, saltpetre."99 Azeredo
Coutinho, like Ottoni, pointed to the absurd price of iron in Minas Gerais.
A quintal of iron which in Portugal cost about 3,800 reis, he said, would
in Minas Gerais be worth 19,000 reis, and in Goias and Mato Grosso
28,000 reis. It was "absolutely necessary that schools of mining be immedi-
ately established in Sao Paulo, Minas Gerais, Goias, Cuiaba and Mato
Grosso."lOO
   D. Rodrigo mobilized a task force of erudite Brazilians to provide prac-
tical information. Jose Vieira Couto and Jose Teixeira da Fonseca Vascon-
celos were instructed to collect information on salt deposits, especially in
the Sao Francisco River valley.lOl Joao Manso Pereira, subsidized by local
tax money, was to conduct mineralogical and metallurgical investigations


98"Mem6ria sobre a utilidade publica em se estrahir 0 ouro das minas e os motivos
dos poucos interesses que fazem os particulares que minerao actualmente no
Brasil, por Antanio Pires da Silva Pontes Leme [sic]," with a letter to D. Rodrigo,
RAPM, I (1896),417-426.
99"Mem6ria sobre 0 estado actual da capitania de Minas Gerais por Jose Eloi Ot-
toni, estando em Lisboa no anno de 1798," ABNR], XXX (1908), 303-318.
100Azeredo Coutinho, ((Discurso sabre 0 estado actual das minas do Brasil;' Obras

econ6micas, 190-229.
lOlRodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to Bernardo Jose de Lorena, Queluz, March 18,
1797, AHU, c6dice 610, f. 202v. Also "Mem6ria sabre as Minas da capitania de
Minas Gerais, suas descrip<;:6es, ensaios, e domicilio pr6prio, a maneira de itin-
erario com hum appendice sabre a nova lorena diamantina, sua descrip<;ao a utili-
dades, que d'este pais possa resultar ao estado, por ordem de sua alteza real, 1801,
por Jose Vieira Couto," IHGB, lata 18, doc. 17.
136 • NakedTropics

and experiments in Sao Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro. l02
Joaquim Veloso Miranda, a student of Vandelli, whose information had
been used by the Italian scholar in his memorial, was appointed secretary
to the new governor of Minas, Jose de Lorena, a close personal friend of D.
Rodrigo and a disciple of the Abbe Raynal. l03 Veloso Miranda was in-
structed to continue his studies of the natural resources of the region and
most especially of the deposits of saltpeter. Jose de Sa Betencourt received a
commission to investigate the copper and saltpeter deposits at Jacobina. l04
The secretary of state outlined explicitly the objective of these various in-
vestigations. He told Veloso Miranda that «orders might perhaps be issued
to the governor to establish the manufacture of gunpowder on the account
of the royal exchequer ... as soon as sufficient saltpeter was found."los
Governor Lorena was informed that the proposed iron works would be set
up on the account of the exchequer and iron sold at «a price discrete and
wise, equally beneficial to the royal exchequer and the inhabitants...."106
When Manuel Ferreira returned to Portugal during 1798, D. Rodrigo at
once called for his views on the proposed legislation. lO ?


                                       VI
After three years of study and planning, the outlines of a general policy for
the empire as well as specific legislative drafts had been composed. lOB Dur-

102D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to Bernardo Jose de Lorena, Queluz, March 18,
1797,AHU, c6dice 610, f. 202.
l03D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to Bernardo Jose de Lorena, Queluz, February
21, 1797, AHU, c6dice 610, f. 201v, and D. Rodrigo to Joaquim Veloso de Miranda,
Queluz, March 18, 1797, AHU, c6dice 610, f. 202v; Carvalho, Fundarilo do Colegio
dos Nobres, 182-186; D. Rodrigo to Lorena, Queluz, October 11, 1798, AHU, c6dice
610, f. 215v-216; Lorena's comments on Raynal in Dl, XLV, 10-11.
104D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to D. Fernando Jose de Portugal, March 2, 1798,
and letter from Jose de Sa, Bahia, October 7, 1797, MHPB, VI, 278. Some observa-
tions on cotton by Jose de Sa had been favorably received in Lisbon and published
as Memoria sabre a plantarilo dos algodoes e sua exportarao; sabre a decadencia da
lavoura de mandiocas no termo da villa de Camamu, comarca dos llheos, governo da
Bahia . .. por Jose de Sa Bitencourt (Lisbon: Academia das Ciencias, 1798).
losD. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to Joaquim Veloso de Miranda, Queluz, Septem-
ber 17, 1799, AHU, c6dice 611, f. 7.
106D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to Bernardo Jose de Lorena, Queluz, September
20, 1798,AHU, c6dice 610, f. 212v-213v.
107Carneiro de Mendon<;a, Intendente Camara, 33-66.
l08Numerous drafts for the future legislation were made: for some of these see
AHU, Minas Gerais, caixa 57, document 221. (This is mistakenly dated 1780 on the
folder. These projects were written between 1798 and 1800, the first drafts in the
name of Queen Maria I, and the later ones in that of Dom Joao, the prince regent.
Dom Joao formally became prince regent of Portugal in 1799 though he had been
exercising the function of head of state since 1792.)
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 137

ing 1798, D. Rodrigo formally presented his ideas to the Council of State of
Portugal. 109 He intended, he told the councillors, to "touch rapidly on the
political system that it is most convenient for the crown to embrace in
order to conserve its vast dominions, particularly those of America, that
are properly the base of the greatness of the throne...." D. Rodrigo as-
serted that "Portugal reduced to herself would within a very brief period
become a province of Spain:' He advised that the empire be regarded as
being composed "of provinces of the monarchy, all possessing the same
honors and privileges, all reunited with the same administration and all
contributing to the mutual and reciprocal defense of the monarchy." Brazil
should be divided into two centers of power, Rio de Janeiro in the south
and Para in the north. It was essential, he said, to "occupy our true natural
limits," and in particular the northern bank of the Rio de la Plata. The
choice of governors was important for the maintenance of justice and the
efficient administration of the royal exchequer; with higher salaries, he be-
lieved, governors would have less incentive to become embroiled in busi-
ness. Associations should be formed to exploit the mines more efficiently.
The number of high courts in Brazil should be increased, and the need for
appeal to Lisbon abolished. He proposed that taxation be reformed so that
it would "be productive but not fall heavily on the contributors." The tax
contract system would be abolished because it fell unequally and because
most of the money remained in the hands of the tax farmers. Duties on
slaves, iron, steel, copper, lead, gunpowder, and metropolitan manufac-
tures sent to the interior of Brazil would be removed. The royal fifth would
be reduced to a tenth, and the value of gold in Minas Gerais revalued to its
market price.
   The ideas of his Luso-Brazilian braintrust were very evident in the plan
for empire proposed by the secretary of state. And the urgency of imple-
mentation of the plan was increased by the Bahian episode. D. Rodrigo

109Discurso de D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, document no. 4 (I) Carneiro de
Mendon~a, Intendente Camara, 277-299. This is from the Cole~ao Linhares, Bib-
lioteca Nacional do Rio de Janeiro, I, 29-13-16. Also in D. Rodrigo de Souza
Coutinho, Textos politicos, economicos e financeiros (1783-1811) in Colecfao de
obras classicas do pensamento economico portugues (XII in 2 vols.) (Lisbon: Banco
de Portugal, 1993) II, 47-66. The Portuguese historian Valentim Alexandre rejects
the view that the inconfidencias represented any generalized challenge to Por-
tuguese rule, nor does he accept that D. Rodrigo's plans in any way changed the
basic colonial regime. See in particular chapter two ('(Politica colonial e (incon-
fidencias''') in his Os Sentidos do Imperio: questao colonial na crise do antigo regime
portugues (Lisbon: Edi~6es Afrontamento, 1993), 77-89. On the sharp debate
among Portuguese and Brazilian historians over the economic relations between
Brazil and Portugal in the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth century,
within which Alexandre is a participant, see bibliographic essay in Kenneth
Maxwell, 0 Marques de Pombal (Lisbon: Editorial Presen~a, 2001), 207-208.
138 • NakedTropics

sensed more acutely than most the opportunities the situation presented,
and he distinguished more clearly than most between the necessity of en-
lightened reforms and the dangers posed by the revolutionary slogans of
the French Revolution. The severity with which he treated the Bahian mu-
lattoes and the favors he continued to bestow on the Brazilian graduates of
the University of Coimbra were indicative of his point of view. I10 His fear
of revolution made it essential that "the federative system, the most analo-
gous to Portugal's position in the world, be conserved with the greatest
firmness and pure good faith." I11 He attacked "the banal declamations" of
those who claimed "that in the ... difficult circumstances of the moment
great reforms should not be attempted and only palliatives employed; ex-
perience had shown the opposite." I12
    D. Rodrigo had employed many erudite Brazilians in the process of de-
cision making. He had encouraged others to undertake state-sponsored
scientific expeditions in Brazil. He had been especially responsive to those
who were connected with the Minas conspiracy. The exiled Jose Alvares
Maciel, for example, forwarded a memorial on the iron mines in Angola. It
was favorably received and Maciel was given an official mission to investi-
gate the situation more closely.II3 The members of the Literary Society of
Rio de Janeiro, languishing in jail since 1794, were released. II4
   In 1800 D. Rodrigo was appointed president of the Royal Treasury.IIS
The position had been created by Pombal as the linchpin of the govern-
ment, and its occupant was principal minister of the Crown. At the trea-
sury, Pombal's godson had the opportunity to implement the reforms he
had long regarded as most important, for which draft legislation was pre-
pared. The royal decree of April 24, 1801, "in favor of the inhabitants of
Brazil;' promulgated the reforms outlined by Luis Pinto in 1795. The salt

110Three of the leaders of the Bahian plot were hanged, beheaded, and quartered in
the center of the city of Salvador. The rest of the plotters were taken to Africa and
abandoned along the African coast. Charles R. Boxer has attributed the clemency
displayed by the Crown toward the Minas conspirators, of whom only Tiradentes
was hanged, in comparison with the severity of the repression of a similar move-
ment in Goa during 1787, to "colour prejudice." The same could be argued in the
Bahian episode. Boxer, Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 199-200.
l11"Discurso 1," December 22, 1798, in Funchal, 0 Conde de Linhares, 108-109.
112"Plano de Fazenda," March 14, 1799, ibid., 168.
113Jose Alvares Maciel to D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho, November 7, 1799, AHU,
Minas Gerais, caixa 94.
114Devassa of Literary Society, introductory notes, ABNRJ, LXI (1939),241-245.
Also see Autos da devassa: prisao dos letrados do Rio de Janeiro, 1794 (Rio de
Janeiro: VERJ; Arquivo Publico do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Secretaria de Estado
de Justic;a; FAPERJ, 1994) and Afonso Carlos Marques dos Santos, No rascunho da
nafao: Inconfidencia no Rio de Janeiro (Rio de Janeiro: Biblioteca Carioca;
Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro, 1992).
115Soriano, Historia da guerra civil, II, 296-297.
                             The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 139

monopoly was abolished and the mining and manufacture of iron permit-
ted. 1l6 Manuel Ferreira da Camara was nominated general intendant of
mines and the Serro do Frio (the Diamond District),ll? Antonio Pires da
Silva Ponte was appointed governor of the captaincy of Espirito Santo. IIB
Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva became intendant of mines and metals
in Portugal. l19 There was precedent for the appointment of Brazilians to
such high positions in the metropolitan and colonial administrations. But
the nomination to a new and important post second only to the governor
of Minas of a man whose brother had been seriously implicated in the pro-
posed uprising of 1789, and the appointment as a governor in Brazil of a
Brazilian whose loyalty had been gravely questioned in 1786, were little
short of revolutionary.
   In the meantime, however, the war in Europe had forced Portugal to
face the choice D. Rodrigo had foreseen while in France during 1779. His
views on the importance of Brazil made it logical that when he was con-
sulted in 1803 on the European situation, he should recommend that the
prince regent of Portugal, D. Joao, establish the seat of the monarchy in
America. The idea was not original. l20 The proposal that the monarch
leave for Brazil was a recurrent suggestion in times of difficulties. But to D.
Rodrigo the factors in favor of the move were not merely those imposed by
the deteriorating international situation. D. Rodrigo told the prince regent
that "Portugal is not the best and most essential part of the monarchy." In
his opinion a mighty empire might be established in South America. There
the offensive might be taken against the Spaniards, and natural frontiers be
established at the Rio de la Plata. In the event of a showdown over Portu-
gal, the French would take Lisbon and the British would take Brazil. There-
fore it was better for the prince regent to anticipate these moves by the
Great Powers and take the initiative in moving the government to Brazil.


116[JOSe da Silva LisboaJ, Synopse da legislarao principal do Senhor DomJoao VI pela
ordem dos ramos da economia do estado (Rio de Janeiro: Na Impresao Regia, 1818),
28.
117Carta regia, November 7,1800, and instrus:ao, in Carneiro de Mendons:a, Inten-
dente Camara, 86-9l.
118RAPM, (1896) 417 note; also ABNRf, LXII (1940), 145.
119"Carta de merce, concedendo a Jose Bonifacio de Andrada a Silva 0 cargo de in-
tendente geral das minas a metais do Reino, 25, VIII, 1801," Obras cientificas, politi-
cas, e sociais de Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva, (3 vols.) (Santos: Grupo de
Trabalho Executivo das Homenagens ao Patriarca, 1964), III, 29. For a detailed dis-
cussion of the activities and publications of many Brazilian scholars encouraged
by D. Rodrigo during the late eighteenth century see Maria Odila da Silva Dias,
"Aspectos da Ilustras:ao no Brasil," RIHGB, 278 (January-March, 1968), 105-170.
120"Quadro da situas:ao politica da Europa, apresentado ao Principe por D. Ro-
drigo de Sousa Coutinho," August 16, 1803, Angelo Pereira, D. loao VI, Principe e
Rei I (Lisbon: Empresa Nacional de Publicidade, 1953), 127-136.
140 • NakedTropics

   The plan to transfer the court to Brazil, espoused by D. Rodrigo in 1803,
was eminently acceptable to white Brazilians. Canon Luis Vieira da Silva
had considered the establishment of Rio de Janeiro as the seat of the Por-
tuguese monarchy the best possible solution to Brazil's problems in
1789. 121 Alvarenga Peixoto, in an ode to the queen in 1792, pleaded for her
to visit her American subjects. 122 One of the few points to emerge from the
investigation arising out of the seemingly trumped-up charges against
Captain Francisco de Paula Cavalcante and others in Pernambuco during
1801 was the evident concern in Brazil about what would happen if the
prince regent did not establish himself in America in the event of the loss
of Portugal. 123
   In 1789, important members of the Minas oligarchy had been prepared
to move in armed rebellion against the Portuguese Crown and to establish
an independent and republican government. After 1792 "men established
in goods and property," to use the words of D. Fernando Jose de Portugal,
were wary of republicanism. The slave revolt in the Caribbean frightened
slave owners throughout the Americas. The sugar boom in Brazil, in part a
result of the collapse of production in Saint-Domingue, brought with it
social and economic problems which in turn were partly responsible for
the proposed uprising of the mulatto artisans of Bahia. The Bahian mani-
festos of 1798 confirmed that the slogans of the French Revolution propa-
gated within a society like that of Portuguese America brought with them
the risks of racial upheaval, risks that the American Revolution, the inspi-
ration of the Minas conspirators, had not brought. After 1792 both the
great slave owners of the coastal plantations and the chastened Mineiros
were prepared for an accommodation with the metropolis. Even more
than the reforms and reorganization proposed by D. Rodrigo, the estab-
lishment of the monarchy in Brazil was a welcome and hopeful compro-
mise which offered political change without social disintegration.
   The Brazil plan was anathema to many in Portugal. Admiral Campbell
attributed the opposition to "the French, but also the Spanish influence,
and finally to a greater part of the nobility, who dread the idea of seeking
their fortunes in a new country while they can grasp at the shadow in their
own."124 The plan was unthinkable to Portuguese merchants and industri-
alists who, unlike D. Rodrigo with his extensive properties in Minas Gerais,

121Witness, Vicente Vieira da Mota, Vila Rica, June 22, 1789, ADIM, I, Ill.
122Lapa, Alvarenga Peixoto, lii-liii.
123"Devassa de 1801 em Pernambuco," ed. J. H. Rodrigues, DR, CX, 151. For some
comments on this so-called conspiracy see Cardozo, "Azeredo Coutinho;' in Con-
flict and Continuity, ed. Keith and Edwards, 84.
124Donald Campbell, London, August 14, 1804, Chatham Papers, PRO, 30/8/345
(2) f.224.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 141

had much to lose and nothing to gain by such a move. Nor was D. Ro-
drigo's distinction between reform and revolution appreciated by those
who saw subversion in all Enlightenment philosophy. Combating nation-
alism overseas, he had underestimated nationalism at home. His relega-
tions of Portugal to a secondary status in his federative scheme provoked
ferocious opposition. 125 The limitations of D. Rodrigo's influence were
made apparent by his failure to protect his protege, Hyp6lito da Costa,
from arrest and imprisonment for masonic activities on his return from
the United States, a visit D. Rodrigo himself had sponsored. 126 Jose
Joaquim Vieira Couto, brother of the scientist Jose Vieira Couto, who came
to Lisbon on behalf of the residents of the Diamond District, was also ar-
rested and imprisoned on the orders of the intendant of police, Pina
Manique. 127 Manuel Ferreira da Camara remained intendant of mines in
name only, and was forced to remain at his estate in Bahia waiting in vain
for instructions to proceed to Minas Gerais. 128 When, in late 1803, the
prince regent submitted the new mining legislation to ministers in the gov-
ernment regarded by D. Rodrigo as incompetent to judge the issue and op-
posed to his objectives, he found his position no longer tenable, and
resigned. 129 The setback was temporary. D. Rodrigo had accurately fore-
seen the course of events. In November 1807, the showdown between
Britain and France over Portugal took place. With a British fleet off Lisbon
and a French army marching across the frontier, the move to Brazil became
essential if the monarchy was to survive at all. 130 But when the Portuguese

125For an account of the violence of the merchants' opinions see Robert Walpole to
Lord Grenville, Lisbon, September 9, 1795, Foreign Office 63/21.
126Mecenas Dourado, Hypolito da Costa, e 0 Correio Brasiliense, 2 vols. (Rio de
Janeiro: Ministerio da Guerra, 1957), 1,47-67; Carlos Rizzini, Hypolito da Costa eo
Correio Brasiliense (Sao Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1957),9, 13. Also see
Hipolito Jose da Costa, Correio Braziliense ou Armazem Literario (Edic;:ao Fac-sim-
ilar) (31 vols.) (Sao Paulo: Correio Braziliense; Imprensa Oficial do Estado,
2001-). The first volume contains essays by Barbosa Lima Sobrinho, Jose Mindlin,
Paulo Cabral de Araujo, Sergio Kobayashi, Alberto Dines, and Isabel Lustosa.
127Ibid., 12-13; also, "carta de Diogo Ignacio de Pina Manique em que trata sucin-
tamente dos serviyos prestados a tranquilidade publica combatendo os Jacobinos e
mayons," September 4, 1798, IHGB, latal77, doc., 8.
128D. Rodrigo told Manuel Ferreira, "I hope that you have that quality of obstinacy
necessary to overcome the obstacles of ignorance and those who oppose the public
wellbeing." Carneiro de Mendonya, Intendente Camara, 103.
129Ibid., 113-118, 491.
13°Alan K. Manchester, "The Transfer of the Portuguese Court to Rio de Janeiro;"
in Conflict and Continuity, ed. Keith and Edwards, 148-183, trans. as "A transferen-
cia da corte portuguesa para 0 Rio de Janeiro;" RIHGB, CCLXXVII (October-De-
cember, 1967), 3-44. Also see the recent book by Kirsten Schultz, Tropical
Versailles: Empire, Monarchy, and the Portuguese Royal Court in Rio de Janeiro,
1808-1821 (New York and London: Routledge, 2001).
142 • NakedTropics

fleet sailed from the Tagus with the Court of Portugal aboard, plans were
ready for the new situation. A vindicated D. Rodrigo was reappointed to
the government to implement the blueprint he and his associates had
drawn up during the 1790s.
   The fact that Dom Joao arrived in Brazil so well prepared was important
to the success of the establishment of monarchy in Portuguese America.
And the warm reception accorded the European Court in Brazil was also
important. Part of the reason for both the preparation and the cordial re-
ception lay in the course of events between 1789 and 1808. The timing of
the Minas Conspiracy and the Bahian plot, and the relationship between
the chronology of events in Brazil, the French Revolution, and the slave re-
volt in Saint-Domingue, caused a shift among white Brazilians from a flir-
tation with republicanism to an optimistic acceptance of monarchy.
Sympathetic ministers in the Portuguese government, especially during
the period of D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho's control of the Department
of Overseas Dominions between 1796 and 1800, encouraged many Brazil-
ians who might have been nationalists-indeed many who had been sym-
pathetic with the republican movement in Minas Gerais-to join in the
highest levels of policymaking. This collaboration between Brazilian intel-
lectuals and enlightened ministers produced an imperial idea, Luso-Brazil-
ian in inspiration, which moved beyond nationalism to a broader imperial
solution, and sought to defuse metropolitan-colonial tensions.
   The idea of Luso-Brazilian Empire possessed weaknesses. The circum-
stances which compelled influential Brazilians to seek an accommodation
during the 1790s were not permanent phenomena. Basic differences of
opinion existed on vital matters such as slavery. In addition, the opposition
in Portugal to the Luso-Brazilian concept was seriously underestimated,
and had been neutralized only by the French invasion. In 1808, moreover,
the viability and acceptability of the blueprints had yet to be tested. How
fundamental these weaknesses might be only the future would reveal. But
whatever the impact of the imperial idea itself, the Luso-Brazilian genera-
tion of the 1790s, which gave it shape, was to be extremely influential. D.
Rodrigo became the principal minister of the first new world monarchy.
Jose da Silva Lisboa was the ideologue of free trade. Manuel Ferreira da Ca-
mara became intendant of mines and his family was instrumental in secur-
ing Minas Gerais and Bahia for Dom Pedro I. Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e
Silva became the patriarch of Brazilian independence. And it is also note-
worthy that following 1789, in the Lisbon Academy of Sciences and in the
writing of private individuals, debates were opened on topics such as lais-
sez faire, slavery, and the slave trade, which were to dominate discussion of
Brazilian development for much of the nineteenth century.
                            The Idea of the Luso-Brazilian Empire • 143

   Pierre Chaunu entitled a discussion of the transition of Portuguese
America from colony to independent nation "Heureux Bresil."131 If Brazil
was indeed fortunate in its monarchical solution, in being spared the ago-
nies of nineteenth-century Spanish America, part of the cause must be
sought not in the Brazilians' lack of imagination, instruction, and enlight-
enment' or even in vague attributes of their national character, but in the
perspicacity of the generation of the 1790s, who brought reason to the
analysis of colonial problems and with optimistic faith projected a
grandiose concept of Luso-Brazilian Empire.




131Pierre Chaunu, L'Amerique et les Ameriques (Paris: A. Colin, 1964), 216. For a
succinct overview of this period also see Luiz Carlos Villalta, 1789-1808: 0 imperio
luso-brasileiro e os brasis (Virando Seculos, coord. Laura de Mello e Souza and Lilia
Moritz Schwarcz) (Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2000).
ST A T C E OF P D
               EDRO   I.
                      I,
                                                             CHAPTER            8
                        WhyWas Brazil Different?
                                      The Contexts ofIndependence
                               ((The conservation ofmonarchy in one part ofAmerica
                                    is an object ofvital importance to the Old World."
                                                            -George Canning, 1824




Over recent decades surprisingly little scholarly work has been done on the
achievement of Brazilian independence. Even less attention has been de-
voted to the impact of the decolonization of Portugal's vast South Ameri-
can empire during the 1820s on Portugal itself. Portuguese historians still
sometimes write as if Brazil never existed-the most recent and most pres-
tigious history of Portugal in the eighteenth century, for example, barely
mentions Brazil, even though for most of that century 60 percent of the
state's revenues derived from Brazil-and Brazilian historians often ignore
the important transatlantic dimensions of Brazil's domestic political con-
flicts and economic constraints. l The period that runs from late 1807,
when the invasion of Portugal by General Jean-Andoche Junot forced the
Portuguese Court to take refuge in Brazil, up to 1825, when Portugal and
the major European powers recognized Brazil's independence, lacks even
the most rudimentary interpretative outline. Yet events on each side of the
Atlantic were intimately linked, and cannot be explained without an
understanding of their connectedness. Indeed, between 1815 and 1821
Portugal and Brazil were formally and institutionally part of a «United


ISee Antonio Manuel Hespanha, ed., 0 Antigo Regime, vol. 4, Historia de Portugal
(8 vols.), ed. Jose Mattoso (Lisboa: Editorial Estampa, 1997).


                                     145
146 • NakedTropics

Kingdom." The interpenetration of Brazilian and Portuguese politics and
economy was extensive, and remained so well into the mid-nineteenth
century.
   My objective is in a very preliminary way to take a fresh look at what
happened during these critical years in a comparative Atlantic context; to
suggest some of the theoretical and practical problems concerning the
study of the independence of Brazil; and to delineate some key aspects of
the international context of Brazilian independence. Finally, I will touch
on the social and economic history of this period where the greatest conti-
nuities between the colonial and national periods are claimed in the cur-
rent literature for Brazil, and the greatest discontinuities seen for Portugal.


                                      II
We come to the study of the establishment of new nations out of old em-
pires with certain expectations and preconceptions. Primarily we are
thinking of political emancipation from colonial status; involved also are
assumptions about the democratization of internal politics, or at least
their liberalization; thus we expect a defeat of despotism and the emer-
gence of some sort of institutional formula to express the popular will, es-
sential for the legitimacy of any new state. Legitimacy, however, does not
depend on internal or domestic factors alone: foreign recognition of the
new national status is essential; as is, eventually, reconciliation with the
former colonial master (or at least a formal acceptance of separation), usu-
ally by means of an international treaty. Geopolitical questions are, there-
fore, inevitably involved as well as great power politics. The constellation
of external forces, their willingness to intervene or not intervene as the case
may be, is perhaps more important than at any other time in a nation's his-
tory. The new nation must also satisfy obligations internationally: contract
loans; engage in and finance trade; organize its economic and financial life;
sometimes pay indemnities or assume obligations to payoff colonial
debts.
   Thus, as at few other times in a nation's history, at the moment of inde-
pendence fundamental decisions of a founding nature are needed. These
can involve profound questions about the organization of the social and
economic sphere; continuity of property rights and claims; perhaps deci-
sions over the relationship between church and state; as well as institu-
tional decisions over constitutional structures, law courts, and public
administration; organizational questions over how to set up banks and
credit institutions; questions as to how to impose tariffs or negotiate com-
mercial treaties, and how to create a credible currency.
   It is the explicit nature of these challenges which makes such moments a
fascinating topic for historical investigations; for once we are not speculat-
                                        WhyWas Brazil Different? • 147

 ing about the connections between perceptions, ideas, and actions, but
watching the translation of ideas into institutional or social arrangements,
and constitutional frameworks. And in all this, as we look back from the
vantage point of a century and three quarters, we need to penetrate also
the thicket of "invented" national tradition which is an inevitable compo-
nent of any national consciousness.
    We tend to assume that all these changes are for the better. I mention
this only to indicate how subjective our view of national independence and
decolonization can be. Rarely, for example, do we see independence as a
"bad thing," as a regression, a triumph of "despotism" over "liberty," of
"slavery" over "freedom," of an "imposed" regime over a "representative"
one, of oligarchy over democracy, of reaction over liberalism. Yet the truth
is, that in the case of Brazil's independence, almost all these charges against
the new regime can be made; and indeed they were made at the time.
    Brazil was not alone in confronting such dilemmas. As independent na-
tions emerged in Latin America after three centuries of Iberian domina-
tion, the persistence of their colonial heritage was a preeminent issue.
Brazil, for example, was at the time of its independence from Portugal al-
ready 322 years old; and today its experience as a nation free from formal
European domination is still far shorter than its colonial life. Yet in Latin
America this "colonial persistence" was unlike that inherited by many of
the postcolonial states that emerged out of the European empires in Asia
and Africa during the mid-twentieth century. The impact of Spain and
Portugal within the Americas had been more disruptive, and hence more
permanent, than was the impact of the Europeans who imposed them-
selves, temporarily as it turned out to be, over other ancient societies from
the Middle East to China, where populations, religions, social structures,
and behavior patterns were never uprooted and destroyed as catastrophi-
cally as were those of the ancient civilizations of pre-Columbian America.
After the Second World War, particularly where there were no large-scale
white-settler populations to complicate the transition, Africans and Asians
achieved independence by negotiating the removal of, or by forcibly ex-
pelling, a handful of white soldiers, overseers, and administrators. In Latin
America, it was precisely the white soldiers, overseers, and administrators
who expelled the representatives of the Spanish or Portuguese Crown,
while continuing or usurping the overlordship of large nonwhite, or in-
digenous populations, or African slaves.
    Latin America is thus not fully comprehensible it seems to me if seen
only within the "Third World" context of the new nations which came into
existence as the French, British, and Dutch empires collapsed between
1945 and 1965. In this sense Brazil was indeed a "New World in the trop-
ics," as Gilberto Freyre once put it, a settler society that had become rooted
in the New World and where the population-whether of European,
148 • NakedTropics

African, or indigenous origin-was sufficiently intertwined to be not eas-
ily resegregated. The extraordinary depth of the impact of Spanish and
Portuguese colonization in the Western Hemisphere was such that post-
colonial nation building became intrinsically an incestuous affair.



                                       II
In effect Brazil in the 1820s was negotiating its relationship to the outside
world within the heavy constraints imposed on it by history, geography,
and its colonial experience. Until recently, the interpretation of this critical
period has been strongly influenced by dependency theory. But depen-
dency theory tended to homogenize the Latin American experience into a
worldwide explanatory model. Strongly influenced by the African and
Asian decolonization movements of the twentieth century, this approach
often denied autonomy to the social, political, and economic forces at play
in the so-called peripheral regions. Above all, it discouraged an investiga-
tion of the process, causes, and dynamics of change, and it gave short shrift
to institutional innovations or ideas. This created an enormous impedi-
ment in understanding the case of colonial Latin America, the control of
which had been an essential component of the building of European world
domination in the first place, something John Parry, in his marvelous book
The Establishment ofthe European Hegemony, 1415-1715, demonstrated so
skillfully and succinctly. 2 Dependency theory, on the other hand, tended to
sublimate any investigation of how European preeminence was achieved,
and confined explanations of major systemic changes (the ending of feu-
dalism, the rise of capitalism, and so on) to the internal dynamics of Euro-
pean societies, an unconscious Eurocentrism which I must say in my view
still seems to dominate much economic history writing to this day.
    Brazilian scholars were much enamored of this theoretical construct,
and played an important role in its evolution. Emilia Viotti da Costa and
Fernando Novais, for example, both placed the emergence of Brazil as an
independent nation within the context of the shift from mercantile to in-
dustrial capitalism in Europe, and the consequent changes this provoked
in the international economic system. Historians who were not part of a
Marxist tradition also took a similar view: Robinson and Gallagher, for in-
stance, saw the independence of the Latin American nations as the classic
example of the shift from formal to informal imperialism. 3

2John H. Parry, The Establishment of the European Hegemony, 1415-1715; Trade
and Exploration in the Age ofthe Renaissance (New York: Harper & Row, 1961).
3R. H. Robinson and J. Gallagher, «The Imperialism of Free Trade," Economic His-
tory Review 1, 2d series (1953): 1-15.
                                        Why Was Brazil Different? • 149

    Yet British interests in Portugal and Brazil were not monolithic; two dis-
tinct lobbies in Britain had been engaged in the economic relations with
 Portugal in the century prior to Brazilian independence: the wine import
merchants and the woolen textile exporters, both of which had a very
strong interest in sustaining the old favorable tariff regimes and privileged
extraterritorial rights in Portugal which aided their enterprises and which
dated back to the mid-seventeenth century. On the other hand, the new
and aggressively expansionist Lancashire cotton textile manufacturers
were interested in free trade and until 1818 drew a large percentage of their
raw material from northeast Brazil, Pernambuco in particular. They had
no interest whatsoever in perpetuating Portugal's political and economic
dominion over Brazil, especially since Portugal had developed its own cot-
ton textile mills and retained Brazil as a privileged and closed market.
    It is important, therefore, not to overemphasize the power of purely
economic forces, or to assume the inevitability of these broader shifts. The
cotton textile interest in Britain and their lobbyists in Parliament certainly
believed that their comparative advantage would allow their products to
break through the old mercantilist tariff barriers of the Iberian powers, but
they were also keen to see these barriers removed by government interven-
tion. In this respect the continuity is notable in the mutually supporting
strands of commercial, military, and diplomatic pressure the British exer-
cised over Portugal and its overseas possessions. In the mid-seventeenth
century, the new Bragan<;a monarch had been extremely reluctant to agree
to the Cromwellian treaty in the 1640s which provided British recognition
for a country recently emancipated from Spanish domination in return for
major commercial concessions. It was the threat of Admiral Blake's guns in
the Tagus estuary that finally persuaded the king of Portugal to ratify the
accord on May I, 1656. The British fleet which escorted the Prince Regent
Dom Toao, his mad mother, Queen Maria, and the court to Brazil in 1807
was also riding at anchor off the Lisbon waterfront to intimidate as well as
to offer assistance. Had the Portuguese Court not left for Brazil as planned,
and instead succumbed to French demands that the royal family remain in
Lisbon, there was no doubt that the British would have bombarded Lisbon
as they had only recently bombarded Copenhagen and destroyed or seized
the Portuguese ships in the harbor. Admiral Sir Sidney Smith had clear in-
structions from London that on no account was the Portuguese fleet to be
allowed to fall to the French.
   The precociousness of these unequal treaties between Britain and Por-
tugal recalled for C. R. Boxer, that rare historian who knew both Portugal
and China intimately, the later unequal treaties of Nanking of the late
1840s, the heyday, it should be remembered, of the so-called age of free
trade imperialism and informal empire. Portugal had in this respect been a
150 • NakedTropics

forerunner of a relationship which imposed severe conditionalities over
another nation's sovereignty without the direct exercise of sovereign
power. As with China at midcentury, the British did not always produce
what overseas customers wanted, and in these circumstances the British
rarely hesitated to impose trade by military and political power, or to seek
special concessions, even if this made them, as in the China trade, purvey-
ors of narcotics.
    The opening of the ports of Brazil in 1808 to the trade of "all friendly na-
tions" was the first action taken by the newly arrived Portuguese Court after
its escape from Lisbon. It was an action that ended over three centuries of
mercantilistic practice where Lisbon had been the obligatory entrep6t for
Brazilian colonial products. While this action had ideological motivations
to be sure, that is, it was justified in terms of the superiority of free trade
over protectionism, it was also an entirely pragmatic measure, made inevi-
table by the French determination to incorporate Portugal's ports within
the continental blockade against Britain. And as far as the British traders in
Brazil were concerned, many potential European competitors, not the least
of which, the French, were temporarily out of the picture. In these favorable
circumstances, the British merchants quickly saturated the consumer mar-
ket in Brazil, where the majority of the population was composed of slaves,
not a free population of middle-class consumers.
    Only two years later, not surprisingly, the British were agitating again
for special privileges. The Anglo-Brazilian Treaty of 1810 imposed on the
Portuguese higher tariffs in Brazil than it did on the British, an imposition
that dealt a severe blow to the already fragile chances of reconciling Portu-
gal to Brazil's new status as center of the monarchy. It is ironic to note that
the first and second partial editions ofAdam Smith's The Wealth ofNations
published in Brazil appeared in 1811 and 1812 in Rio de Janeiro and Bahia,
respectively, as if to remind the British (and certainly to remind the Brazil-
ians) that hegemonic powers do not always practice what they preach. In
effect, as in the mid-seventeenth century, Portugal and later Brazil were
obliged to balance the need for autonomy against the need for political and
military support, especially in their relations with Great Britain, the domi-
nant naval and economic power.
    But how far did these circumstances lead Brazil to sacrifice its own eco-
nomic prospects, and fall into a neocolonial relationship as the dependen-
tists argue? Or were those who had promoted the transfer of the seat of the
Portuguese government to Brazil in 1807 on the grounds that it would
make the Bragan<;:a regime less susceptible to European pressure right or
wrong in the light of subsequent experience?
    Commercial pressure from the British was certainly counterproductive
at times as far as Britain's broader political interests were concerned, espe-
                                            Why Was Brazil Different? • 151

cially if these ran headlong into powerful vested interests combined with
strong nationalist sentiments. The British found this out the hard way in
Buenos Aires in 1806 when their intervention force had been ignomin-
iously defeated. This should also have been the lesson of the American
Revolution. And it was a lesson Napoleonic France discovered with
catastrophic consequences as a result of intervention in Haiti. In Brazil this
was especially the case in the matter of the slave trade. Despite treaty com-
mitments between Brazil and Britain to abolish the slave trade dating from
the 1810 treaty, the influence of landed and slave trading interests in Brazil
was strong enough to counteract over forty years of British gunboat diplo-
macy during the first half of the nineteenth century.4
    Here again the economic influence of Britain was often at cross-pur-
poses with Britain's political, diplomatic, and philanthropic initiatives. As
Sidney Mintz has argued, the Industrial Revolution in Britain (and in the
northern states of North America, for that matter) helped revive slavery
throughout the Americas by creating a vast new urban consumer market
for products such as coffee and sugar, as well as by creating the enormous
demand for raw cotton to supply the textile mills of both old and new Eng-
land. And it was not only merchants in Rio de Janeiro or Bahia who were
financing the illegal slave trade or the legal commerce in cotton, coffee, and
sugar that depended on slave labor. It was also the merchants of New York
and Baltimore, and London and Liverpool. And it was ships of the North
Americans that carried a large percentage of the slaves that were imported
illegally into the Brazilian Empire as late as the 1850s. 5 Henry Wise, u.S.
minister to Brazil, told Secretary John C. Calhoun in 1843: "without the
aid of our citizens and our flag, the African slave trade could not be carried
out [in Brazil] with success at all."6
    Ironically, the resistance to antislavery and abolitionist arguments in
Brazil was probably weaker in the independence period than at any time
before or after. In the south of the country, especially in Sao Paulo, a criti-
cal region in terms of organized political opposition to Lisbon in the
1820s, large-scale coffee production only developed after national inde-
pendence was achieved. In the decade 1821-1830 coffee accounted for a


4"Treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between His Britannic Majesty and
His Royal Highness the Prince Regent of Portugal; signed at Rio de Janeiro, the
19th of February, 1810," in A. R. Walford, The British Factory in Lisbon & Its Closing
Stages Ensuing upon the Treaty of 1810 (Lisbon: Instituto Britanico em Portugal,
1940),163-184.
sSee Sidney W. Mintz, Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History
(New York: Penguin Books, 1985).
6Robert H. Holden and Eric Zolov, ed., Latin America and the United States: A Doc-
umentary History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 30.
152 • NakedTropics

mere 19 percent of total exports for Brazil, but over the next two decades
this share rose to well over 60 percent. The expansion of the coffee market
in Europe, and most especially in North America, led to a massive renewal
of slave imports into Rio de Janeiro and the expansion of slavery into the
Paraiba Valley and beyond into Sao Paulo. Economic historians have ar-
gued that the main reason for Brazil's slow overall economic development
in the nineteenth century lay precisely in the country's agricultural sector,
where low income and inelastic supply, intrinsic to slavery, constrained the
pace of development in the rest of the economy.?
   This was precisely what Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva, who more
than any individual helped shape the newly independent Brazilian state in
the 1820s, had foreseen when warning his contemporaries about the long-
term negative effects, for Brazil's future well-being, of the failure to deal
with the question of slavery or to promote agrarian reform or to integrate
the Indian population at the onset of national independence. This led to
his courageous but in the end hopeless appeals to his fellow Brazilians in
his manifesto in favor of abolition of slavery, his proposals for agrarian re-
form, and his plan for the "civilization of the wild Indians of Brazil," as he
put it, all written during 1822: ((Experience and reason demonstrate that
richness rules where there is liberty and justice, and not where lives captiv-
ity and corruption." Jose Bonifacio argued that ((If this evil persists we will
not grow. Gentlemen, continually our domestic enemies grow; and they
have nothing to lose; except above all to hope for a revolution such as that
of Santo Domingo." In other words, to hope for a new Haitian revolution
in Brazi1. 8


                                         III
The ambiguity of Brazil's passage from colony to imperial center to inde-
pendent nation is best exemplified on the one hand by the aborted plans

7Nathaniel H. Leff, Underdevelopment and Development in Brazil (2 vols.) (London
and Boston: Allen and Unwin, 1982), and Stephen Haber and Herbert S. Klein,
«The Economic Consequences of Brazilian Independence," in How Latin America
Fell Behind: Essays in the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914, ed.
Stephen Haber (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997),243-259.
8«Apontamentos sabre as sesmarias do Brasil," in Obras cientificas, politicas, e soci-
ais de Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva (3 vols.) (Santos: Grupo de Trabalho Execu-
tivo das Homenagens ao Patriarca, 1964), II, 20-21; «Representas:ao a Assembleia
Geral Constituinte e Legislativa do Imperio do Brasil sobre a Escravatura:' por Jose
Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva. Typographie de Firmin Didot, 1825, in ibid., II,
115-158; «Apontamentos para a Civiliza~ao do Indios Bravos do Imperio do
Brasil," ibid., III, 103-114. See also Projetos para 0 Brasil, org. Miriam Dolhnikoff
(Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1998) and the commentary by Carlos Guil-
herme Mota in Introdufao ao Brasil, ed. Louren~o Dantas Mota (Sao Paulo:
SENAC, 1999), 77-95.
                                         Why Was Brazil Different? • 153

 for reform put forward by Jose Bonifacio, and on other in the enigmatic
 Dom Pedro, first emperor of Brazil after the break from Portugal. Bonifa-
cio was one of the most remarkable figures in any of the independence
 movements in the Americas-a man in scientific achievement who
matched and in some cases surpassed the remarkable generation of leaders
who had made the American Revolution. Closer in personality and fame to
a Franklin than to a provincial landlord like Thomas Jefferson, Bonifacio
was born and raised in Santos. He had been a brilliant student at the re-
formed University of Coimbra in Portugal and arrived in Paris in 1790 as a
postgraduate student supported by a grant from the Portuguese govern-
ment brokered by the secretary of the new Lisbon Academy of Sciences, the
Abbe Correa da Serra. He had witnessed the most turbulent stages of the
French Revolution in person and then continued his studies in Germany
and Scandinavia. During the French invasion of Portugal he had led the
students of Coimbra in guerrilla warfare behind the enemy's lines. He had
been a high government functionary, intendant of mines and metals; his
scientific papers had appeared in the most prestigious journals; he was a
corresponding member of Europe's great scientific bodies; and he went on
to succeed Correa da Serra as secretary of the Lisbon Academy of Sciences.
He was very much part of the remarkable late-eighteenth- and early-nine-
teenth-century circum-Atlantic community of scholars and political re-
formers. But his experience made him a firm believer in the role of the
state in the tradition of enlightened reformers in Southern and Eastern Eu-
rope; he saw order as the handmaiden of progress. He was a constitutional-
ist, but not a democrat; more Burkian than Jeffersonian.
    Dom Pedro was a populist, a classic man on horseback, the handsome
son of grotesquely ugly and dysfunctional parents, and heir to a dynasty so
inbred as to verge at times on lunacy. He was a temporary ruler who within a
decade had abdicated in order to return to Europe to fight a civil war in Por-
tugal against his brother to ensure that his daughter became queen ofPortu-
gal. Loyal father and chronic philanderer, savant and ignoramus, courageous
soldier and clumsy politician, Brazilian and Portuguese, heir and usurper, he
was a monarch too "liberal" for the Holy Alliance in Europe but too
"despotic" for many Brazilians, not least the would-be republicans of Per-
nambuco who rose up twice in a decade to repudiate him. His role as por-
trayed in Portuguese history is that of the upholder of "constitutionalism,"
an image totally incompatible with his image in Brazilian history, where he
was the ruler who rejected Brazil's first constitution as too liberal and exiled
Jose Bonifacio and his brothers, the leaders of the small minority of Brazil-
ians who wanted fundamental reform and who had provided the direction
during the most critical moments of the transition to independence.
    It is vital to recognize, therefore, that on September 7, 1822, when Dom
Pedro stopped at the banks of the Ipiranga River near Sao Paulo, suffering
154 • NakedTropics

from a bout of diarrhea, and cried out it was to be "Independence or
Death", the young prince and heir apparent to the Portuguese throne was
exaggerating. The problem in September 1822 was certainly not "death,"
and only indirectly "independence." His pithy declaration was, and soon
became, very much part of a spurious myth of the origins of Brazilian na-
tionality. Yet the reality was that Brazil had been independent for all intents
and purposes since 1808; since December 16, 1815, Brazil had been a king-
dom coequal with Portugal. But John Quincy Adams, the u.S. secretary of
state, was not alone in quite misunderstanding the occasion and its signifi-
cance when he told Ceasar Rodney on his appointment as U.S. minister to
Buenos Aires that "in Brazil ... an empire probably as ephemeral as that of
Mexico at our door has taken the place of Portugal." What was really at
stake in 1822 was a question of monarchy, stability, continuity, and territo-
rial integrity. It was in these interests that Dom Pedro was preempting rev-
olution in 1822 at Ipiranga, not promoting it.
   The avoidance of revolution in Brazil in fact was also a paramount con-
cern in Europe. Henry Chamberlain, British minister in Rio de Janeiro in
1824, was ever concerned that the social turmoil under the surface in Brazil
and evident on the streets and in the constituent assembly in Rio would, as
he put it:

    excite ... such a flame ... as it might not be possible to control, and
    would perhaps end in the destruction of the imperial government
    and the division of the country into a variety of small independent
    republican states, wretched in themselves and the cause of
    wretchedness amongst their neighbours, such as we have witnessed
    in the Spanish American colonies in our neighbourhood. 9

   Portugal's major European allies-both Britain and the members of the
Holy Alliance-were quite clear on this point, as George Canning, the
British foreign secretary who had previously served as British envoy in Lis-
bon, wrote very succinctly in 1824:

    The only question is whether Brazil, independent of Portugal, shall
    be a monarchy or a Republic.... The conservation of monarchy in
    one part of America is an object of vital importance to the Old
    World. 10

9Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, May 15,1824, in
Charles K. Webster, ed., Britain and the Independence ofLatin America, 1812-1830:
Select Documents from the Foreign Office Archives (2 vols.) (London and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1938), I, 240-241.
lOGeorge Canning to Henry Chamberlain (secret and confidential), London, Janu-
ary 9, 1824, in Webster, I, 236.
                                          WhyWas Brazil Different? • 155

The government in London, since the establishment of the Portuguese
Court in Rio in 1808, in fact had always made a clear distinction between
the circumstances of Brazil and Spanish America. Canning emphasized the
contrast between the Brazilian situation and that of Spanish America writ-
ing to Sir Charles Stuart in 1825:
    Let it be recollected that the difference between the relation of Por-
    tugal to Brazil and that of Spain to her Americas is in nothing more
    than this-that all the Spanish colonies have gained in despite of
    the mother country, but that Brazil has been raised to the state of a
    sister kingdom, instead of colonial dependency, by the repeated and
    advised acts of policy of the common sovereign of Portugal and
    Brazil. Up to the period of the emigration of the Royal Family to
    Brazil, Brazil was as strictly a colony as Mexico or Peru or Buenos
    Aires. From that period began a series of relaxations first, and after-
    wards of concessions of privileges, which gradually exalted the con-
    dition of Brazil and almost inverted its relations with Portugal so as
    to make, during the residence of His Most Faithful Majesty in
    Brazil, the mother country in fact a Dependency. I I
    Dom Joao, the prince regent, soon to be Dom Joao VI on the death of
his demented mother in 1816, had said as much to Thomas Sumter Jr., the
u.S. envoy in Rio de Janeiro in 1815, ((The times have been difficult but
now the independence of Brazil is fixed."12
    The important point about Brazil, therefore, is that it became economi-
cally and politically emancipated between 1808 and 1820 while acting as the
center of the Luso-Brazilian Empire. It became ((independent" in 1822 only
after the experience as an ((imperial center;' to which subjects of the Por-
tuguese monarchy in Europe, Africa, and Asia looked for leadership, had
failed. This unusual circumstance explains why in 1820 it was Portugal that
declared ((independence" from Brazil, and only afterward, in 1822, that Brazil
declared its ((independence" from Portugal. The ((Manifesto of the Por-
tuguese Nation to the sovereigns and peoples of Europe;' which was issued
by the rebels in Oporto in 1820, reads very much like other such declarations
of independence from colonial status and contained the same complaints;
the only difference was this manifesto came from rebels in a European city,
not rebels across the Atlantic in a colonial port city. It declared:

IlGeorge Canning to Sir Charles Stuart, London, March 14, 1825, in Webster, I,
262-272, citation from 265-266.
12Thomas Sumter Jr., U.S. Minister to the Portuguese Court in Brazil, to James
Monroe, Secretary of State, Rio de Janeiro, December 29, 1815, in William R. Man-
ning, ed., Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States concerning the Indepen-
dence of the Latin American Nations, (3 vols.) (New York: Oxford University Press;
1925-[1926]), II, 696-700.
156 • NakedTropics

     The Portuguese are beginning to lose the hope of the unique re-
     source and the only means of salvation that remains to them in
     midst of ruin which has almost consumed their dear homeland.
     The idea of the status of a colony to which Portugal in effect is re-
     duced, afflicts deeply all those citizens who still conserve a senti-
     ment of national dignity. Justice is administered from Brazil to the
     loyal people in Europe, that is to say at a vast distance ... with ex-
     cessive expense and delay ... [italics added] 13


                                     IV
But if the "anticolonial" revolution occurred in Oporto not in Rio de
Janeiro, the interesting questi.ons from the Brazilian perspective are:
Would the independence of Brazil have occurred at this time had not the
1820 liberal revolution in Oporto taken place and had not the Portuguese
parliamentary assembly, the Cortes, forced the king to return to Europe?
Was the antimonarchist sentiment within Brazil on its own strong enough
to have sustained a republican movement, such as those in North America
and in much of Spanish America which rejected both monarchy and Euro-
pean rule?
   These questions were not only theoretical-republicanism after all had
been the central ideological strand in the thinking of the Minas conspira-
tors in 1788-1789; the Bahian plotters in 1798, and in 1817 in Pernambuco
as well as again in the 1820s. The problem for Brazil was that all these re-
publican movements were, or at least could be interpreted as, regionalist
revolts against centralized authority and as a threat to the territorial in-
tegrity of Portuguese-speaking America. The centralized monarchical sys-
tem had established a very strong institutional presence in Brazil since
1808. In fact, it had instituted in Rio de Janeiro almost all of the founding
institutions, usually the task of a postcolonial government: a centralized
administration and bureaucracy; superior law courts; a public library and
an academy of fine arts; a school of medicine and law; a national press and
national bank; and a military academy. This government had negotiated
international treaties, sent envoys abroad and received envoys in return,
had married the heir presumptive of the head of state to an Austrian
princess, and had defeated a regionalist revolt and conducted an expan-
sionist war on the northern and southern frontiers. There was never a
question therefore of legitimacy. As George Canning told the British cabi-
net in November 1822:

 Manisfeste de la Nation Portugaise aux Souverains e aux Peuples de l'Europe
13
(Oporto: 1820); author's personal collection.
                                        Why Was Brazil Different? • 157

    to refuse to recognize Brazil would not be, as it has hitherto been in
    the case of the Spanish colonies, an act merely negative. For we have
    with Brazil established relations, regulated commercial intercourse,
    and agencies if not actually political, affording channels of political
    correspondence. We cannot withdraw our consuls from Brazil. It is
    obvious that we must continue to cultivate the commercial rela-
    tions of that country. [emphasis in original] 14

   This would all be a critical heritage for the regime Dom Pedro was to
head as first emperor of Brazil, as well as contributing to his ability to pro-
tect his new empire from republican challenge. So the answer to these
questions is probably "no." In other words, the social base for radical
change was stronger and opposition to it weaker in Portugal in 1820 than
was the case in Brazil, and the reason for this is that in all ways continuity
was greater in Brazil than it was in Portugal during the first two decades of
the nineteenth century. Since 1808 Portugal had not only lost its role as the
seat of the monarchy, but it had been subject to invasion and devastating
warfare; it had mobilized a population against a common enemy; it had
seen its commerce and industry destroyed and its profitable colonial mar-
kets lost; and the British, forgetting the cardinal rule of "informal" empire,
had subjected a proud and nationalist population to the direct and insensi-
tive rule by a British general.
   In Brazil, moreover, threats to social order since the 1790s had been
strongly associated with republicanism and this, in moments of crisis,
tended to produce greater coalescence within the elite, especially among
property owners whose ownership of human property, moreover, was far
more widespread than was the ownership of land. Here the fear of conta-
gion from the Haitian slave revolt was ever present in their minds, and "lib-
erty," if it also implied "equality," was bound to raise fundamental
questions about a society ordered by racial as much as by social hierarchy.
We are, needless to say, talking in this context of "perceptions." I am not
implying that social conflicts can or should only be seen in terms of slav-
ery-obviously social structure and the interaction of class and race were
much more complex and multifaceted in Brazil than this. And it should
also be emphasized that the slave revolt in Haiti had dramatic impact not
only because the balance of social and racial tensions within Brazil and
elsewhere in the Americas made its example frightening to whites, but be-
cause of its intrinsic importance. The Haitian example was qualitatively of
much greater significance than previous slave rebellions. First, because it

14Canning's memorandum for the cabinet, November 15, 1822, in Webster, II,
393-398.
158 • NakedTropics

was successful, the only successful slave uprising in modern history. Sec-
ond, because Haiti sustained its independence-at vast cost to be sure-
but a fact which made Haiti the Western Hemisphere's second
independent nation after the United States. IS


                                       v
Yet again, Brazil presents ambiguities. One possible response to the per-
ceived threat from below was to eliminate slavery, encourage European im-
migration, and substitute free for slave labor. This is what Jose Bonifacio
wanted. But in Brazil the fear of slave revolt was not a sufficient argument
of itself to force the Brazilian power brokers to defy their immediate mate-
rial interests and embrace the reform of the system of production based on
slave labor. In fact, slavery had the opposite effect: it cemented a unity
around the defense of the institution. The paulista Diogo Antonio Feijo,
priest, fazendeiro, deputy to the Portuguese Cortes in Lisbon, member of
the General Assembly in Rio de Janeiro after Independence, minister of
justice and regent in the 1830s, put the case quite succinctly:

    Slavery which certainly brings many ills to civilization, also creates
    within Brazilians a sense of independence, of sovereignty, that the
    observer can also see in free men whatever their status, profession
    or fortune. 16

   In this, the parallels with the attitudes toward slavery of the Virginian
patriots who had played so large a role in the making of the United States
are striking, even if the Brazilians in the 1820s were constructing a new na-
tional state, in an international environment where reaction had tri-
umphed in Europe, and the consequences of slave revolution in the
Caribbean were more stark and menacing than anything North Americans
had to worry about in 1776. Jefferson in particular found much to admire
in the Brazilian experience. In 1821 Prince Metternich, much like Dr.
Henry Kissinger in the 1970s, believed strongly in the principle of counter-
revolutionary interventionism. Kissinger's predecessors as secretary of
state in the early nineteenth century thought just the opposite, shocked as
they had been by the experiences of the War of 1812 and the vulnerability
of the young republic to European attack it had revealed. Fearful that Met-
ternich's Holy Alliance intended to bring Spain's rebellious colonies in the

15See the important observations on this point by Eugene D. Genovese in his From
Rebellion to Revolution: Afro-American Slave Revolts in the Making ofthe New World
(New York: Vintage Books, 1981),92-98.
16Cited by Miriam Dolhnikoff, ''A Civilizac;ao Contra a Sociedade," Rumos 1, no. 3
(May-June 1999): 11-19.
                                          Why Was Brazil Different? • 159

New World back into the European fold after the Austrian army had sup-
pressed republican revolutions in Naples and the Piedmont, and France
had restored the execrable Bourbon Ferdinand VII to the throne in
Madrid, President Monroe in late 1823 announced his famous doctrine in
a message to the Congress and it would be the guiding principle of u.s.
policy in the Western Hemisphere for the rest of the century.
   But the Monroe Doctrine had been foreshadowed some years before in
conversations between Jefferson and the envoy of the court of Rio de
Janeiro in Washington, the Abbe Correa da Serra, and as originally con-
ceived it joined Brazil and the United States together in an ''American sys-
tem:' where the two nations would act collaboratively to keep Europe at
bay. Jefferson had sustained a long interest in Brazil since the time he was
u.s. envoy in Paris. In 1786 he had held a secret meeting in Nimes with a
young Brazilian revolutionary who went by the pseudonym Vendek, a stu-
dent from Rio de Janeiro who was then studying at the University of Mont-
pellier. Later, he had met the Abbe Correa while presiding officer of the
American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia. Correa da Serra, a bril-
liant Portuguese naturalist and founding secretary of the Lisbon Academy
of Sciences, had come to the United States in 1812 and was perceived as a
man of great learning and was avidly sought after by the leaders of the new
republic.!?
   The Abbe became a regular visitor to Monticello. In their discussions
there Jefferson and the Abbe Correa first traced their ''American system."
Jefferson wrote of the Abbe in 1820:
    From many conversations with him, I hope he sees and will pro-
    mote in his new situation [the Abbe had been recalled to Rio de
    Janeiro and Jefferson assumed he would become the minister of ex-
    ternal affairs] the advantages of a cordial fraternization among all
    the American nations, and the importance of their coalescing in an
    American system of policy, totally independent of and uncon-
    nected with that of Europe. The day is not distant, when we may
    formally require a meridian partition through the ocean which sep-
    arates the two Hemispheres, on the hither side of which no Euro-
    pean gun shall ever be heard, nor an American on the other; and
    when during the rage of the eternal wars of Europe, the lion and the
    lamb within our regions, shall lie down together in peace. The ex-
    cess of the population of Europe and want of room, render war, in

17Richard Beale Davis, The Abbe Correa in America 1812-1820: The Contribution of
the Diplomat and the Natural Philosopher to the Foundations of Our National Life,
in Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, New Series, vol. 45, part 2
(1955). Reprinted with introduction by Gordon S. Wood and afterword by Leon
Bourdon (Providence, R.I.: Gavea Brown, 1993).
160 • NakedTropics

    their opinion necessary to keep down that excess of numbers. Here
    room is abundant, population scanty, and peace the necessary
    means for producing men, to whom the redundant soil is offering
    the means of life and happiness. The principals of society there and
    here are radically different, and I hope no American patriot will
    ever lose sight of the essential policy of interdicting in the seas and
    territories of both Americas, the ferocious and sanguinary contests
    of Europe. I wish to see this coalition begun. I am earnest for an
    agreement with the maritime powers of Europe, assigning them the
    task of keeping down the piracies of their seas and the cannibalisms
    of the African coasts, and to us, the suppression of the same enor-
    mities within our own seas, and for this purpose I should rejoice to
    see the fleets of Brazil and the United States riding together as
    brethren of the same family and pursuing the same object. IS

   Secretary of State John Quincy Adams was less sympathetic. And it was
he, not Monroe or Jefferson, who was to have the most influence over U.S.
foreign policy toward the newly independent nations of South America
both as secretary of state between 1817 and 1825 and as president from
1825 to 1829. John Quincy Adams saw the merits of separation from Eu-
rope, but did not think this implied any mutual identity between the
United States and the new nations to its south. He saw South Americans as
irredeemably corrupted by the Roman Catholic religion, Iberian tradition,
and the tropical climate. The U.S. commercial agent in Rio de Janeiro was
reporting to him that the Portuguese monarchy in Brazil had "degenerated
into complete effeminacy and voluptuousness. Hardly a worse state of so-
ciety can be supposed to exist anywhere, than this country. Where the cli-
mate also excites to every sort of depravation and delinquency." John
Quincy Adams, the dour New Englander from Massachusetts who de-
scribed himself as a man of "cold and austere" temperament, was not
amused by such an untidy and unpromising neighbor. (Such views I notice
are still popular in some quarters around Harvard Yard.) 19
   Adams reluctantly acquiesced in President Monroe's desire in mid-1822
to proceed with U.S. recognition of Mexico, Chile, the United Provinces of


18Thomas Jefferson to William Short, August 4, 1820, in Andrew A. Lipscomb and
Albert E. Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, (20 vols.) (Washington,
D.C.: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association, 1903-1904), XIV, 262-264.
19See Lars Schoultz, Beneath the United States: A History of u.s. Policy toward Latin
America (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998), 4-9, and Memoirs of John
Quincy Adams, Comprising Portions from His Diary from 1795 to 1848, ed. Charles
Francis Adams (12 vols.) (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co., 1874-1877).
                                             Why Was Brazil Different? • 161

Rio de la Plata, and the Brazilian Empire. But he wanted as little to do with
them as possible. He, like Jefferson, knew the Abbe Correa well, and
thought him a man of"extensive general literature, of profound science, of
brilliant wit, and of inexhaustible powers of conversation." But Adams also
found Correa "quick, sensitive, fractious, hasty and when excited obsti-
nate." He ridiculed the Abbe Correa's (and Thomas Jefferson's) suggestion
that Brazil and the United States create an ''American system." With the
disdain and arrogance that was also to characterize U.S. attitudes toward
Latin America for the next century, John Quincy Adams wrote: "As to an
American system we have it; we constitute the whole of it."20



                                        VI
In Brazil, however, the internal threat to stability and territorial integrity
was not only a question of unfounded or unrealized fears; such a threat
had come to fruition prior to 1822 in one very important test case, Per-
nambuco. The prices of sugar and cotton especially had reached an all-
time high during the Napoleonic wars, but with peace in 1815 both
suffered collapse. Pernambucan cotton especially faced massive competi-
tion in Europe from the United States. In 1817 the regionalist antagonisms
in Pernambuco toward the central government resurfaced, and this time
conspiracy broke into open revolt. Early in the year a republic was pro-
claimed in Recife and agents sent abroad to gain international recognition.
   The seventy-four-day Republic of Pernambuco revealed ambiguities
and divisions among the would-be opponents of the status quo no less
acute than among its adherents. The enthusiastic support from the great
proprietors and slaveholders and their hatred for the Portuguese mer-
chants were a predominant and unifying factor among the separatists. But
they could agree on little else. Fears and antagonisms were immediately
brought into the open by the "Organic Law" promulgated by the provi-
sional government as a draft constitution. The municipal councils of the
hinterland balked at two sections in the Organic Law in particular, one
promising religious toleration and the other "equality of rights." Inevitably
the latter raised the issue of slavery. The provisional government explained
that property, even that "most repugnant to the ideal of justice is sacred."
No less offensive to the great landowners was the mobilization of the povo,
small sharecroppers and squatters, the marginally employed free popula-
tion, and artisans, whose ideas, fraternization and occasional interracial


2°Cited by Schoultz, Beneath the United States, 10-11.
162 • NakedTropics

solidarity offended their sense of status and challenged their local author-
ity. Rent by internal factionalism, blockaded by sea, and with a land army
approaching from Bahia, Recife capitulated. 21
    There had been no response to Pernambuco's requests for international
recognition. The provisional government had expected support from the
United States and France-Jefferson's friend, the Abbe Correa, had worked
mightily in Washington to thwart Pernambuco's representatives and frus-
trate the merchants of Baltimore who were helping them-but it was
Britain that really mattered. 22 British influence over the central govern-
ment in Rio de Janeiro, however, offered much greater opportunities than
did the encouragement of separatist revolts. London had no strong mater-
ial interests at stake in Pernambuco by 1817, for raw cotton could be ob-
tained in great quantities from the United States and sugar from British
islands in the Caribbean. The provisional government of Recife had little
to offer that Britain had not gained in 1810. British policy too was strongly
influenced by the slave trade. Strong pressure by the British government in
1810 had forced Dom Joao to promise the gradual abolition of trade
"throughout the whole of his dominions." In 1815, the government in Rio
agreed to abandon the trade north of the equator. Neither commitment
was entirely satisfactory to Britain as the slave trade continued legally
below the equator between Portuguese territories in Africa and those in
South America. The separation Britain was less reluctant to support was
that between Brazil and the Portuguese enclaves in Africa. Until 1820 this
intraimperial trade was a question of internal Luso-Brazilian concern;
after 1825, however, this major obstacle to outright interference was re-
moved by the separation of Brazil and Portugal, and British insistence that
the African territories remain linked to Lisbon, not to Rio de Janeiro. Now
that they were independent and sovereign nations, the slave trade between
them and South America became internationalized and open to suppres-
sion by the British navy on the high seas.
    Yet even the British, who after all did not abolish slavery in their own
colonies until the mid-1830s, privately recognized the strength of slave-
owning interests in Brazil. Henry Chamberlain told George Canning:

21JOSe Honorio Rodrigues) ed., Revolufao de 1817; Documentos Hist6ricos (9 vols.)
(Rio de Janeiro: Biblioteca Nacional) 1953-1955); Evaldo Cabral de Mello) Prei
Joaquim do Amor Divino Caneca (Colefao Formadores do Brasil) (Sao Paulo: Edi-
tora 34) 2001); Carlos Guilherme Mota) Nordeste (Sao Paulo: Editora Perspectiva)
1972); and Jose Honorio Rodrigues) Independencia, revolufaO e contrarevolufaO (5
vols.) (Rio de Janeiro: Livraria EAlves Editora) [1975-1976]).
22Leon Bourdon) Jose Correa de Serra: Ambassadeur du Royaume-unide Portugal et
Bresil a Washington 1816-1820 (Paris: Centro Cultural Portugues) Funda~ao
Calouste Gulbenkian) 1975).
                                        Why Was Brazil Different? • 163

    There are not ten persons in the whole Empire who consider the
    trade a crime, or who look at it in any other point of view than one
    of profit or loss, a mere mercantile speculation to be continued as
    long as it may be advantageous. 23

   Jose Bonifacio himself saw the Brazilian dilemma with great realism. He
told the British envoy Henry Chamberlain in April 1823:

    We are fully convinced of the impolicy of the slave trade ... but I
    must candidly state to you that the abolition cannot be immediate,
    and I will explain the two principal considerations by which we
    have been led to this determination. One is economical, the other
    political.
        The former is founded upon the absolute necessity for taking
    measures to secure an increase of white population previous to the
    abolition, that the ordinary cultivation of the country may go on,
    for otherwise upon the supply of Negroes ceasing, that cultivation
    would go backwards and be followed by great distress.... we shall
    lose no time in adopting measures for drawing European emigrants
    hither. As soon as these begin to produce this effect, the necessity
    for the African supply will gradually diminish, and I hope in a few
    years a stop will be put to it for ever....
       The latter consideration is founded upon political expediency as
    affecting the popularity, and perhaps even the stability, of the gov-
    ernment. The crisis and representations in the trade we might per-
    haps venture to encounter, but we cannot, without such a degree of
    risk as no man in their senses think of incurring, attempt at such a
    moment as the present to propose a measure that would indispose
    the whole of the population of the interior.... Almost the whole of
    our agriculture is performed by Negroes and slaves. The whites un-
    fortunately do very little work, and if the landed proprietors were to
    find their supply of laborers suddenly and wholly cut off, I leave you
    to judge the effect it would have upon these uninformed and unen-
    lightened class of people. Were the abolition to come upon them
    before they were prepared for it, the whole country would be con-
    vulsed from one end to the other, and there is no calculating the
    consequences to the Government or to the country itself.
       We know that as long as it is carried on and a state of slavery con-
    tinued in the country, that real sound industry cannot take root,

23Henry Chamberlain to George Canning, Rio de Janeiro, December 31,1823, in
Webster, I, 232-234, citation from 233.
164 • NakedTropics

    that a vigorous prosperity cannot exist, that our population is un-
    sound, and so fully are we persuaded of these truths that were it
    possible, we would at once abolish both. 24
   These objections to slavery were not, it must be emphasized, so much
the result of "humanitarian" or "philanthropic" sentiment, as they were in
Europe, but were more similar to the objections to slavery in the United
States in the same period, and were a response to the perception that the
racial balance of the population was potentially and dangerously unstable,
or would impede the growth of a nation on a European model. Those few
who urged eventual emancipation of the slaves, such as Jose Bonifacio, did
so not because of the humanity of slaves, but because they wished to see
Brazil Europeanized, not only in terms of aspirations, institutions, and na-
tional purpose, but also in terms of the composition of its population.
   But Bonifacio was in one important respect far more radical than were
his North American counterparts, and his attitude reflected a strong cur-
rent of thinking that had emerged in the eighteenth century, especially
during the long rule of the Marques de Pombal of which Bonifacio was
very much an heir. He was skeptical, and explicitly so, about the ability of a
society so heterogeneous as that of Brazil, where, as he put it, white propri-
etors, black slaves, and poor mestizos did not possess a sense of identity
that united them. On the contrary, as enemies among themselves, they
were more predisposed to conflict than to unity. It was therefore, he be-
lieved, necessary to homogenize the population, which signified eliminat-
ing slavery, integrating the Indians, encouraging miscegenation between
Indians and whites and between whites and blacks. He intended thereby
to create a Brazilian "race" composed of mestizos united by a common
national identity. As a metallurgist of some fame in Europe, he used a met-
allurgical analogy for what he envisioned: he sought, he wrote, to "amalga-
mate so many diverse metals, so that a homogeneous and compact whole
might emerge." Only in this manner would the «sloth and vices" of the
whites be eliminated, «we tyrannize the slaves and reduce them to brute
animals, and they inoculate us with their immortality and all their vices"
was the way he described it.
   We now know, of course, that Jefferson engaged in his own form of
clandestine amalgamation, but this was, as he might have said had he cho-
sen to acknowledge his relationship with Sally Hemings as he did with
the Englishwoman Maria Cosway in Paris, an affair of the «heart" not of
the «head." Bonifacio's was very much a policy of the head. But Bonifacio,
the protegee of Jefferson's friend, the Abbe Correa da Serra, was after all,

24Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, April 2, 1823, in
Webster, I, 222-223.
                                           Why Was Brazil Different? • 165

with his distinguished reputation and achievements as a natural scientist,
the sort of natural philosopher Jefferson aspired to be. And over the ques-
tion of slavery it was the patriarch of American independence, Thomas Jef-
ferson, who equivocated, not the patriarch of Brazil's independence, Jose
Bonifacio. 25
    The ideologues of"free trade" in Brazil also took an essentially racist view.
Jose da Silva Lisboa, the Brazilian political economist who had urged the
opening of the Brazilian ports to the prince regent in 1808, argued in 1818
that the progress of Sao Paulo was due "to extraordinary preponderance
 [there] of the white race." Rio Grande do SuI, the granary of Brazil as he
called it, likewise had been colonized by "the Portuguese race, and not the
Ethiopian population." Taking the example of Madeira, he asserted that "ex-
perience had shown that once the supply of Africans has been cut off, the
race does not decrease and decline but becomes better and whiter ..." He
went on to ask: "Was the best area in America to be populated by the off-
spring ofAfrica or of Europe?" To avoid "the horrid spectacle of the catastro-
phe that reduced the Queen of the Antilles [Haiti, that is] to a Madagascar:'
Brazil should be prevented from becoming a "Negroland:' He wished to see
the cancer of slavery eliminated from the Rio de la Plata to the Amazon. 26
    The question of slavery thus raised fundamental questions about the
most desirable course for Brazilian development, questions as to the type
of society, state, legal system, and government Brazil as an independent
state would adopt. But what to do about slavery divided "enlightened"
men, and it consolidated the determination of those major commercial
and landed interests whose welfare depended on slavery to make sure that
the new structures of state power, as well as the new constitutional monar-
chy, remained firmly wedded to their interests.
    In sum, Brazilian intellectuals, traders, and patriots might espouse "lib-
eralism," but their zeal was strictly limited to a desire for access to markets,
protection of property, and guarantees that debts would be paid. And in
this centralism, monarchy and continuity were paramount. Brazil's "patri-
ots" were realists and they could move no further than their base of social
support. Those who did so, such as Jose Bonifacio, were soon jettisoned.

25William Howard Adams, Thomas Jefferson: The Paris Years (New Haven and Lon-
don: Yale University Press: 1997), 207-250; also John Chester Miller, The Wolf by
the Ears: Thomas Jefferson and Slavery (Charlottesville and London: University
Press of Virginia, 1991).
26JOSe da Silva Lisboa, Memoria dos beneficios politicos do governo de El-Rei Nosso
Senhor D. Joao VI (Rio de Janeiro: Na Impressao Regia, 1818), 2d. ed. (Rio de
Janeiro: Impressa nas Oficinas do Arquivo Nacional, 1940) 160-164. Also see Jose
da Silva Lisboa, Escritos economicos escolhidos (1804-1820) in Colecfao de obras
classicas do pensamento economico portugues (V in 2 vols.) (Lisbon: Banco de Por-
tugal, 1993).
166 • NakedTropics

    Slavery and industrial capitalism in fact proved highly compatible
within the nineteenth-century Atlantic system-industrial capitalism
thriving on slave-produced cotton and coffee no less than commercial cap-
italism had thrived on slave-produced sugar. In this context, reformers like
Jose Bonifacio were double victims. Not only did this economic system it-
self, both domestically and in its Atlantic dimensions, create conditions
hostile to his proposal for fundamental reform; he was also a victim of the
British policy, the overbearing pressure of which helped to undermine the
one administration with any real commitment to the ending of slavery and
slave trade. In secret conversations with Henry Chamberlain in April 1823,
Jose Bonifacio warned the British not to push too hard or too soon:

    You know how sincerely I detest the Slave Trade, how prejudicial I
    think it to the country, how very desirous I am for its total cessa-
    tion, but it cannot be done immediately. The people are not pre-
    pared for it and until this has been brought about, it would
    endanger the existence of the Government if attempted suddenly.
    This very abolition is one of the principle measures I wish to bring
    before the Assembly without delay, but it requires management,
    and cannot be hastened ...
       With regards to Colonies or the Coast ofAfrica, we want none, nor
    anywhere else. Brazil is quite large enough and productive enough
    for us, and we are content with what Providence has given us.
       I wish your cruisers would take every slave ship they fall in with
    at sea. I want to see no more of them, they are the gangrene of our
    prosperity. The population we want is a white one, and I soon hope
    to see arrive here from Europe in shoals the poor, the wretched, the
    industrious; here they will find plenty, with a fine climate; here they
    will be happy; such are the colonists we want. 27


                                     VII
To feed this Atlantic system and to sustain its economic organization of
production, however, one thing was clear: Brazil did not need Portugal.
The resentments and the financial and economic difficulties which led to
the Gporto revolution, the convocation of the Cortes in Lisbon in 1820,
and to the formulation of a liberal constitution arose in large part from the
loss of Portuguese privileges and monopolies in colonial trade; and once
assembled, the measures of the Cortes quickly reflected these imperatives.
Not only was Dom Joao VI forced to return to Lisbon, but the Cortes soon

27Henry Chamberlain to George Canning (secret), Rio de Janeiro, April 2, 1823, in
Webster, I, 222-223.
                                         WhyWas Brazil Different? • 167

legislated the end to many of the powers that he had granted to his eldest
son, Dom Pedro, who had been left in Rio as regent. Brazilians increasingly
saw the measures of the Cortes, strongly supported by the hated Por-
tuguese merchants and immigrants in Brazil, as an attempt at "recoloniza-
tion" which would turn back the clock on the thirteen years during which
Rio had been the center of government. It was against this background that
Dom Pedro defied the instructions of the Cortes to return to Europe, ac-
cepted the title "Perpetual Defender of Brazil" from the Municipal Council
of Rio de Janeiro in early 1822, and then, on September 7, 1822, made his
declaration of "independence" on the outskirts of Sao Paulo.
   The political emancipation of Brazil is thus a long and cumulative pro-
cess with much continuity retained along the way; 1808, 1816, 1822, even
1831 are all important moments in this gradual assertion of separation
and definition of nationhood. The path was not without its arduous mo-
ments to be sure. International recognition only came after long negotia-
tion in 1825 and the promise by Brazil to pay a large indemnity to
Portugal. War in the south broke out with renewed vigor along the frontier
in the Banda Oriental, and was not resolved until the end of the decade
with the establishment, under British auspices, of the independent buffer
state of Uruguay, establishing a southern boundary less ambitious than
that of either colony or united kingdom. Much internal military activity
both on land and by sea was necessary to bring about the adherence of
Bahia, as well as the far north. Pernambuco again tried to break away in
1824. Administratively, the country was not "Brazilianized" until the end
of Dom Pedro's short reign in 1831. And it was only in the 1840s that the
actions of the duke of Caxias (a man who was, ironically, the nephew by
marriage of the rich entrepreneur who had denounced the republican
Minas Conspiracy in 1789 to the royal authorities) brought to an end re-
gional separatist revolts. Yet by 1858, well into the long reign of Brazil's sec-
ond emperor, Dom Pedro II, the satisfaction with this outcome was well
summarized by Domingos Antonio Raiol in his 0 Brasil politico: "How dif-
ferent [we Brazilians are] from other people who inhabit the same South
American continent. When we rest, they fight. When we fraternize, they
quarrel. A government monarchic, hereditary, is without doubt a true
choice, which tames ambitions and because of stability forms a powerful
element of order and prosperity." 28
   In these circumstances, it is not surprising that every attempt to alter
the economic organization of labor failed. The alternative model for
Brazilian development, in which European immigration and free laborers

28Domingos Antonio Raiol, 0 Brasil politico, dedicado ao Excelentissimo Senhor
Bernardo de Souza Franco, Ministro e Secretario dos Negocios da Fazenda, por
Domingos Antonio Raiol (Para: Typographia do Diario do Commercio, 1858).
168 • NakedTropics

would replace slavery, was not to be, at least as long as emperors ruled in Rio
de Janeiro, and as a consequence, the slave trade continued until midcen-
tury, slavery until the 1880s. Nor is it surprising that when slavery fell, the
monarchy fell with it; in part, at least, because with the emancipation of the
slaves the republican alternative to the monarchy had at long last also been
emancipated from the stigma of separatism and social upheava1. 29
   So I hope that by highlighting some of the multiple contexts within
which Brazil became an independent nation, I also may have gone some
way toward demonstrating why Brazil was different, and why it is high
time historians took a fresh look in a comparative framework at this fasci-
nating and complex transition.




29For a discussion of the interplay between centralism and regionalism, and be-
tween monarchy and republicanism from the perspective of Pernambuco, see
Evaldo Cabral de Mello, A ferida de Narciso. Ensaio de Hist6ria Regional (Sao Paulo:
Editora SENAC, 2001), especially 69-90.
This page intentionally left blank
P A IR OF T O U C A N S AND TH EIR NEST,
                                                           CHAPTER           9
                                           The Odd Couple
                                                Jefferson and the Abbe
                                 "The most learned man I have met in any country."
                                 -Thomas Jefferson on the Abbe Correa da Serra




The friendship between Thomas Jefferson and the Abbe Correa da Serra in-
volves an enigma, a mystery, and a remarkable historical coincidence. If you
visit Monticello, Jefferson's mountaintop mansion in Virginia, you will see
the grave of Jefferson, surmounted by the obelisk he designed. It is inscribed
with the epitaph he wrote for himself. Jefferson did not want to be remem-
bered for being president of the United States, or for being secretary of
state, or the u.S. ambassador in Paris on the eve of the French Revolution.
The three things he wished to see recorded on his obelisk are: first, that he
was the author of the Declaration of Independence; second, that he wrote
the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom; and, third, that he was the father
of the University of Virginia. These achievements of Jefferson's career of
which he was most proud help unravel the enigma, the mystery, and the co-
incidence that is involved in the relationship between these two men.



But who was the Abbe Correa da Serra? Jose Correa da Serra was born in
Portugal in 1750. His father was a physician who was forced to flee with his
family in the face of a pending action by the Inquisition. Young Correa da
Serra was six years old when the family moved to Naples where he later
studied with two very important figures of the Italian Enlightenment, the
Portuguese-born Luis Antonio Verney, who was the author of a widely


                                    171
172 • NakedTropics

read treatise on educational reform, 0 verdadeiro metodo de estudar
(Naples, 1746) and the Abbe Antonio Genovesi, an Italian philosophe who
was interested in political economy and the reform of the church. Both
were disciples of the three towering figures Jefferson considered his own
intellectual progenitors-Locke, Newton, and Bacon~and whose por-
traits Jefferson displayed prominently at Monticello. Naples was a center of
the Southern European Enlightenment in this period, ruled by Charles of
Bourbon, the future Charles III of Spain, and the great reform minister
Bernard Tanucci.
   In the 1770s Correa da Serra moved to Rome to complete his education,
became a presbyter, and took holy orders. In Rome, he became acquainted
with the widely traveled Dom Joao Carlos de Bragan<ra, the second duke of
Laffies, grandson of King Pedro II of Portugal and his French mistress,
Madame Laverger. This relationship to the Portuguese royal family, legit-
imized by the king, placed the duke of Laffies too close to the legitimate
Bragan<ra line for comfort, which was the principal reason it made it pru-
dent for him to travel. But Laffies, who had known Correa da Serra's father
at the University of Coimbra, was a well-educated and scientifically
minded aristocrat and a member of the Royal Society of London.
   The period the young Correa da Serra spent in Rome was a critical one.
In 1773 the pope suppressed the Society of Jesus; a watershed event in the
eighteenth century for the European Catholic monarchies. The suppres-
sion of the Jesuits had been made possible by the aggressive campaign
against the Society of Jesus instigated in the first instance by the de facto
ruler of Portugal between 1750 and 1777, the Marques de Pombal. Luis
Antonio Verney, Correa da Serra's old mentor from Naples, became secre-
tary to the Portuguese Embassy at the Vatican, the nerve center of the Eu-
ropean-wide campaign against the Jesuits. The Abbe Correa da Serra
returned to Portugal in 1778, and under the duke of Laffies's patronage a
year later he became one of the founding members of the class of natural
sciences of the new Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, established by Queen
Maria I in 1779 and inaugurated in July 1780.
   Lisbon remained, at this time, one of Europe's greatest ports; enriched
by the flow of wealth from Brazil, Portugal's most important eighteenth-
century colony. In the immediate aftermath of the rule of the Marques de
Pombal, following the death of Dom Jose I in 1777, however, an intense
struggle between the reformers and traditionalists persisted in Portugal,
and the rise and fall of anti- and pro-Pombaline factions at court had im-
mediate impact on individuals like the Abbe Correa da Serra who were en-
lightenened reformers. Thus, in 1786 unfavorable conditions in Lisbon
again forced him to leave Portugal. But in 1790 Correa da Serra was back in
Lisbon and served as the secretary of the Academy of Sciences for six years.
                                                   The Odd Couple • 173

During this period he published a series of critical works on bibliography
and historiography, developed a wide correspondence with leading Euro-
pean scientists and philosophers, and pursued his passion for scientific ex-
perimentation and botany.
    In 1790 the Abbe Corrc~a da Serra, as the secretary of the Lisbon Acad-
emy of Sciences, drew up the itinerary for three promising young scholars,
two young Brazilians and a Portuguese colleague, for a government-spon-
sored scientific tour of Europe, beginning in Paris. It was a remarkable ini-
tiative-if one thinks of Portugal in this period as being reactionary,
backward, and the bastion of obscurantism-for the Portuguese govern-
ment to send two young Brazilians to France at the very height of the
French Revolution. One of them, Dr. Manuel Ferreira da Camara, was re-
lated to a young natural scientist involved in a republican plot to throw off
Portuguese control in Brazil a year before in Minas Gerais, and another,
Dr. Jose Bonifacio de Andrada e Silva, would succeed Correa da Serra as
secretary of the Lisbon Academy of Sciences and later become famous in
history as the ((patriarch" of Brazilian independence.
    But in 1795, in the face of the reaction against the French Revolution, the
situation again deteriorated in Portugal to the detriment of reformers such as
Correa da Serra. This time he fled to England via Gibraltar and remained in
London for a number ofyears. In 1796 he became a member of the Royal So-
ciety, as well as a member of the Linnaeus Society. By this time he was an in-
ternationally known botanist and was already well acquainted with the
leading scientists in England, most notably Sir Joseph Banks, president of the
Royal Society, with whom Correa da Serra conducted an important botanical
expedition to the Lincolnshire coast in England. Sir Joseph Banks had visited
Lisbon as a young man in the mid-1760s, as well as Rio de Janeiro in 1768
when he accompanied James Cook on his circumnavigation of the world. It
was at Banks's request that the Abbe helped smuggle a French natural scien-
tist, Peter Marie Auguste Broussonet, a Girodin who was escaping from the
terror of the French Revolution through Portugal. This temporarily seems to
have lost him the patronage of his old protector, the duke of Lafoes, who had
been appointed to the unlikely position of commander-in-chief of the Por-
tuguese army, though his interests lay more in the minutiae of soldiers' uni-
forms and the organization of their campsites than in the fighting battles.
    Lafoes liked to style himself the ((duke of Bragan<;a" while traveling out-
side Portugal, but William Beckford, the caustic English esthete then in
Lisbon, said that the ((duchess of Bragan<;a" would have been a more appro-
priate title. Beckford wrote in his diary:

    He is like an old lady of the bed chamber, as fiddle faddle and co-
    quettish and gossiping. He has got on rouge and patches, and
174 • NakedTropics

    though he is seventy years old, contrived to turn on his heel and to
    glide away with youthful agility. After lisping French with a most re-
    fined accent and complaining of the wind and the roads and the
    state of the architecture, he departed to mark the site for the en-
    campment of the cavalry.!

    In 1801, however, the situation in Portugal changed again in favor of the
more liberal elements and Correa da Serra's close friend, Dom Rodrigo de
Sousa Coutinho, the godson of Pombal, became the foreign minister and
gave Correa da Serra a consular position in London intended to help him fi-
nancially since the Abbe Correa was always in chronic need of emoluments.
    While in London, Correa da Serra procured micrometers, theodolites,
achromatic telescopes, threshing machines, and "engines" for watering
gardens for the famous shops of James Ramsden. Thomas Jefferson, an-
other scientific experimenter, was buying his scientific instruments from
Ramsden in this same period. Many of the instruments Correa da Serra
bought make up part of the unique collection of eighteenth-century scien-
tific instruments owned by the University of Coimbra. Some of the instru-
ments Jefferson purchased in this same period are displayed today at
Monticello.
    Unfortunately, the Portuguese ambassador in London came from a
family of the aristocracy, the Ponte de Lima, that was most opposed to the
reform faction in Portugal, and he made Correa da Serra's life miserable,
despite the support of Dom Rodrigo. Finding his position in London in-
tolerable, Correa da Serra left for Paris where he lived from 1801 to 1811.
    In Paris, the Abbe Correa da Serra was very closely associated with the
Encyclopedists. Among his close friends and colleagues in Paris were An-
toine Laurent de Jussieu, professor of botany at the Museum of Natural
History; Baron Alexander von Humboldt; and Baron Cuvier (Georges
Leopole Chretien Frederic Dagobert), professor of natural history at the
College de France and titular professor at the Jardin des Plantes. Like
Thomas Jefferson before him, who while American ambassador had been
smitten by the beautiful Maria Cosway, the Abbe fell in love. The object of


lWilliam Beckford, The Journal of William Beckford in Portugal and Spain,
1787-1788, ed. Boyd Alexander (London: Hart-Davis, 1954), 172. The most com-
prehensive Portuguese account of the Abbe Correa da Serra's career remains Au-
gusto da Silva Carvalho, 0 Abade Correia da Serra (Lisbon: Academia das Ciencias
de Lisboa, 1948). For a brief introduction and catalogue of documents from Cor-
rea da Serra's archive see Michael Teague, ed., Abade Jose Correia da Serra, docu-
mentos do seu arquivo (1751-1795) (Lisbon: Funda<rao Luso-Americana para 0
Desenvolvimento, 1997).
                                                      The Odd Couple • 175

his amorous attention was a young French woman, Esther Delavigne, by
whom he had a son, Eduardo Jose, in 1803. 2
   But Correa da Serra again ran into trouble. During the second French in-
vasion of Portugal in 1811, Napoleon requested that Correa da Serra write a
justification of the French action. Correa da Serra refused, and unsur-
prisingly found himself once more on the road. This time he left Europe
altogether, taking passage on an American frigate, the famous USS Consti-
tution (which still exists to this day docked at the Boston harbor). He ar-
rived at Norfolk, Virginia, in the fatal year of 1812 when hostilities broke
out between the young North American republic and Great Britain, one
consequence of which was the humiliating capture by the British of the new
federal capital, Washington, and the burning of the presidential mansion.
   The Abbe Correa da Serra arrived in the United States well furnished
with letters of introduction to President James Madison and to former
President Thomas Jefferson, as well as to leading members of the American
Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. These letters were from some of the
leading figures of the European Enlightenment including Andre Thouin,
the conservator of the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, his friend Sir Joseph
Banks, the Marquis de Lafayette, Pierre Samuel du Pont, Alexander von
Humboldt, and Joel Barlow, American envoy in Paris.
   Correa da Serra's arrival in Washington, soon after the British had burnt
the fledgling federal capital, was inauspicious. During his first week his
coach turned over in a mud patch. He had little good to say about Wash-
ington thereafter. But in Philadelphia he found an extremely congenial
environment and immediately became a favorite of the American Philo-
sophical Society and its erudite members. Benjamin Franklin had presided
over the American Philosophical Society from 1769 until his death in 1790,
being eulogized by Correa da Serra before the Lisbon Academy of Sciences
in 1791. The society was "dedicated to the improvement of useful knowl-
edge more particularly what relates to this new world. It comprises the
whole circle of arts, sciences, and discoveries, especially in the natural
world." These were, of course, no less the objectives of Correa da Serra's

2Like Jefferson and his relationship with Sally Hemings, the Abbe apparently also
had secrets. Professor David Higgs came across a denunciation among the papers
of the Lisbon Inquisition (Cadernos do Nefando, no. 145, Arquivo Nacional Torre
do Tombo, Lisbon). These involved accusations of sodomy; according to the docu-
ments, the Abbe had four times made a "sin against nature" with Faustina, a
woman from the Prac;a das Flores. His most recent acts of sodomy, in 1792 and
1793, had been with "unknown persons in the darkness of night outdoors," and in
particular five or six times with a boy (mofo). See David Higgs, "Lisbon;' in Queer
Sites: Gay Urban Histories since 1600, ed. David Higgs (London and New York:
Routledge, 1999), 127.
176 • NakedTropics

Lisbon Academy of Sciences, whose activities focused equally on natural
history, with a strong interest in Brazil. Thomas Jefferson had been elected
one of the three vice presidents of the American Philosophical Society in
1791 and had been installed in Philadelphia as its president in 1797, on the
evening before his inauguration as vice president of the United States.
    The Abbe Correa da Serra's first visit with Jefferson was so mutually sat-
isfying to both men that he became a welcomed annual guest at Monticello
between 1813 and 1816. On the first floor at Monticello, across the hallway
from Jefferson's own suite, there are two bedrooms: one is the Madison
room and the other the Abbe Correa da Serra room. This room was set
aside for Correa da Serra and half a century later Jefferson's granddaughter
still called it the Abbe Correa room. This was where Abbe Correa da Serra
stayed when he visited Jefferson.
    Some of Jefferson's friends have left records of their reactions to the
Abbe at this time. One of the most interesting was from Francis Gilmore,
Correa's companion on an extensive expedition collecting botanical speci-
mens as well as social and natural historical information along the western
frontier. Gilmore traveled with the Abbe Correa da Serra back to Philadel-
phia from Monticello in 1813 and said of Correa,

    He is the most extraordinary man now living or who perhaps ever
    lived ... He has read, seen, understands, and remembers everything
    obtained in books, or to be learned from travel, observation, and
    the conversation of learned men. He is a member of every philo-
    sophical society in the world, and he knows every distinguished
    man living. 3

   Jefferson, himself had a very similar reaction to him, and his own de-
scription was equally flattering:

    Mr. Correa was a gentleman from Portugal of the first order of sci-
    ence, being without exception the most learned man I have met in
    any country. Modest, good humored, familiar, plain as a country
    farmer, he became the favorite of everyone with whom he becomes
    acquainted. He speaks English with ease. 4

3Prancis Gilmer to P. R. Gilmer, November 3, 1814, in Richard Beale Davis, The
Abbe Correa in America 1812-1820: The Contribution of the Diplomat and the Nat-
ural Philosopher to the Foundations of Our National Life, in Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, New Series, vol. 45, part 2 (1955). Reprinted with
introduction by Gordon S. Wood and afterword by Leon Bourdon (Providence,
R.I.: Gavea Brown, 1993),43.
4Thomas Jefferson to John Milledge, September 22, 1815, cited in ibid., 46.
                                                    The Odd Couple • 177

                                      II
 But how is it that a Catholic priest in the late eighteenth century should be-
come one of the closest friends of the sage of Monticello, a deist and Uni-
tarian who had little good to say about organized religion. This, of course,
is the enigma.
    So let me try to unravel this enigma to some degree. First, one has to re-
alize that there was an important strain in Portuguese intellectual life, gov-
ernment policy, and action in the eighteenth century that made it very
much a part of the fervor of change in Southern Europe exemplified by
Genovese and Verney. Three people stand out in this intellectual current:
Jacob de Castro Sarmento, Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches, and, of course,
the great Luis Antonio Verney himself. These people were highly cos-
mopolitan; two of them were "New Christians"-"New Christians" in the
Portuguese context were the descendants of Jews who had been converted
forcibly or had claimed to be converted in the immediate aftermath of the
expulsions of the Jewish population from Spain in the late fifteenth cen-
tury. By the eighteenth century they were a community who existed in a
very conflictive world between their Judaic past, their Christian accep-
tances, and, in not a few cases, their Judaic future. They remained always
threatened by the Inquisition, and subjected in law to many disabilities be-
cause of their so-called impurity of blood.
    The "New Christians" were, therefore, a people who had a mixture of reli-
gious backgrounds, suffered persecution, and were often forced to leave their
own country if they had good family contacts or the luck to escape the Inqui-
sition's torture chambers and the fires of the auto-da-Fe. Yet they remained
throughout the centuries in Portugal important in two key areas-business
and medicine-and they were extremely internationally minded in their
thinking and family connections. Jacob de Castro Sarmento and Antonio
Nunes Ribeiro Sanches both became leading philosophes of the eighteenth
century. Yet, as with the Abbe Correa da Serra, you rarely see their names
mentioned when the Diderot encyclopedia is discussed, even though Ribeiro
Sanches was one of the contributors to the encyclopedia on medicine, par-
ticularly on issues of hygiene, and the Abbe Correa da Serra was commis-
sioned to write a report on the Lisbon earthquake and the reconstruction of
the city which arrived too late for inclusion.
    Ribeiro Sanches, like the Abbe Correa da Serra family later on, had been
forced by the Inquisition in the 1730s to leave Portugal. Fleeing to London,
during the 1740s he served as the personal physician of Jose Sebastiao Car-
valho e Melo, who later became the Marques de Pombal. Ribeiro Sanches
studied in Holland at Leiden University under one of the greatest medical
innovators and natural scientists of the eighteenth century, Hermann
178 • NakedTropics

Boerhaave. Castro Sarmento and Gerhard Van Swieten were also Boer-
haave students, as were several faculty members of the new College of
Medicine in Philadelphia. Van Swieten, a Roman Catholic Dutchman, was
to become reformer of the Austrian monarchy's educational and medical
systems. Van Swieten was the personal physician to the future Marques de
Pombal when he served as Portuguese envoy in Vienna and was also the
Empress Maria Teresa's personal physician.
   Ribeiro Sanches had left London for Vienna at Van Swieten's suggestion.
From Austria he traveled to Moscow where he was made responsible for
the health of the Russian armies fighting the Turks and the Tartars. He
wrote a series of important treatises at this time, one on venereal disease,
where he claimed that venereal disease did not come from America but was
of Asiatic origin. (Correa de Serra's French-born son, Eduardo Jose, also
became a doctor and wrote his thesis for the Faculty of Medicine in Paris
on venereal disease.) But Ribeiro Sanches's most important work was on
saunas and hygiene. He believed soldiers should bathe and he was im-
pressed by the Russian sauna and wanted to see the sauna introduced into
Western Europe. His book on the sauna or on the use of vapors to cleanse
the body was one of the best-sellers of the eighteenth century. In the late
1770s Ribeiro Sanches moved to Paris, and he collaborated with the
philosophes and many of his ideas entered into the great encyclopedia. So
we are not talking here about somebody who was marginal to the eigh-
teenth-century Enlightenment; Ribeiro Sanches was central to it and was
central to it as an exiled Portuguese «New Christian," with a fractured
background of persecution and of religion and cultural experience. 5
   What came out of this experience was an emphasis on educational re-
form and religious toleration, the desire to do away with forced categoriza-
tion of people. When Pombal, his former patient in London, took power in
Lisbon, Ribeiro Sanches was able to exercise considerable influence over
educational reform. In fact, both Castro Sarmento and Ribeiro Sanches
served as consultants to the Portuguese government during the late 1760s
through the 1770s and were involved in all the educational reforms that
took place in this period, particularly the founding of the College of No-
bles and the reform of the University of Coimbra.
   For the College of Nobles in Portugal, Ribeiro Sanches provided con-
crete position papers on how the curriculum should be developed, based
on his experience in Russia with the Russian Imperial Corps of Cadets. The
college was to have lectures on hygiene. It also had a physics laboratory.

SSee David Williamse, "Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches, eleve de Boerhaave et son
importance pour la Russie:' Janus: Revue internationale de l'histoire des sciences de
la medecine, de la pharmacie et de la technique, Supplements, VI (Leiden, 1966).
                                                     The Odd Couple • 179

Ribeiro Sanches in his Cartas sobre a educafiio da mocidade (Paris, 1759)
had recommended the value of physics in the educational curriculum as
well as the use of scientific apparatus so that the teachers could demon-
strate "by means of the use of these instruments that results were caused
not by miracles but through the effects of nature ... [and] ... the pupils
would see the proofs of what they were taught."
    The professor of experimental physics at the College of Nobles, Gio-
vanni Antonio dalla Bella, had arrived in 1766 from Italy and was responsi-
ble for the purchase of instruments, in part from England and in part by
commissioning instruments constructed in Portugal. The young prince
Dom Jose, heir apparent, had his own physics laboratory at the Royal
Palace of Ajuda in Lisbon. William Beckford, who met the prince a year be-
fore he tragically succumbed to smallpox, observed that the very first thing
the prince had spoken of was his physics laboratory. The writings of Cor-
rea da Serra's mentor, Antonio Genovesi, were cited in the statutes of the
college. The college included among its first pupils the sons of recently en-
nobled merchants, some of them said to be "New Christians."
    Later on in 1772, when the reform of the University of Coimbra took
place, the principal elements of that reform included the setting up of a
curriculum in natural sciences, anatomy, and hygiene and the formation of
chemistry and physics laboratories and an observatory. The reform aimed
to modernize the faculties of theology and canon law, to incorporate the
study of Portuguese sources into the curriculum of the faculty of law, to
thoroughly update the faculty of medicine by the return of the study of
anatomy through the dissection of corpses (previously prohibited in Por-
tugal for religious reasons), the study of hygiene "because it is easier to
conserve health than to recuperate it once lost," as well as to adopt William
Harvey's discoveries concerning the circulation of blood, Bernard Sieg-
fried Albinus's theories in anatomy, Hermann Boerhaave's in pathology,
and Gerhard Van Swieten's in pharmacology.6
   Pombal also attempted to do away with the invidious distinctions be-
tween "old" and "new" Christian and to bring, in effect, a more tolerant at-
titude within the country. Ribeiro Sanches, then in Paris, was consulted by
Pombal on this legislation. Ribeiro Sanches kept a day-by-day diary which
contains his personal reactions to the reforms under way in Portugal. He
was privately skeptical that legislation could counteract the prejudices of
centuries. Are the prejudices, he wrote, that people hold in their hearts
learned from their priests as children, learned in their confessionals; can

6Por more details on educational reforms in eighteenth-century Portugal see Ken-
neth Maxwell, Pombal, Paradox of the Enlightenment (Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1995), 13-15,92-109.
180 • NakedTropics

this be changed by the legislation of the state? He was doubtful as to the re-
sults. Nevertheless the attempt was made to remove the legal impediments;
the invidious distinction between "new" and "old" Christians was formally
abolished by Pombal in the 1770s. 7
    It should be noted that throughout this whole reform processes Brazil-
ians played a very important role. Of the Brazilians who came to the re-
formed University of Coimbra 65 percent worked in the new natural
sciences faculties, taking degrees and doctorates for the first time in nat-
ural sciences, and many of them went on to be very important figures in
the independence movement in Brazil-men such as Jose Bonifacio de An-
drada e Silva, one of the students whose scientific education in Europe was
sponsored by the Abbe Correa da Serra in 1790. Francisco de Lemos, a
Brazilian, was the reforming rector of the university placed in this position
by Pombal.
    The role of Brazilians in these developments is interesting because re-
form in imperial relationships seemed important to all these thinkers and
they tended-Ribeiro Sanches, Correa da Serra, and his great sponsor in
Portugal, Dom Rodrigo da Sousa Coutinho-to argue that Brazil would
eventually be the center of the Portuguese Empire. So it is no mere coinci-
dence that in 1816, when in Rio de Janeiro the United Kingdom of Portu-
gal, Brazil, and the Algarves was proclaimed, the Abbe Correa da Serra, by
then in Philadelphia, should be chosen to be the first ambassador to the
United States to represent the new South American-based monarchy.
    Out of this background we can begin, I think, to unravel our enigma
and begin to see some of the intellectual experiences that Jefferson would
find so interesting in Correa da Serra. Jefferson regarded broadly diffused
educational opportunity as the most important function of the state, and
while in Paris he wrote to George Wythe, under whom he had studied law
at the College of William and Mary in Virginia:
    I think by far the most important bill in our whole code, is that for
    the diffusion of knowledge among the people. No other sure founda-
    tion can be devised for the preservation of freedom and happiness. 8
   As we see from Jefferson's obelisk at Monticello and the correspondence
between Jefferson and Correa da Serra, one major interest that joined

7See Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches, June 23, 1773, in "Journal," Bibliotheque de
la Faculte de Medecine, Paris, ms. 2015, folio 117-118. Also see Maria Helena Car-
valho dos Santos, "Ribeiro Sanches e a questao dos judeus" in RHDI/MdeP I,
117-142.
8Thomas Jefferson to George Wythe, Paris, August 13, 1786, in Andrew A. Lip-
scomb and Albert E. Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, (20 vols.)
(Washington, D.C.: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association, 1903-1904), V, 396.
                                                    The Odd Couple • 181

them was the foundation of the University ofVirginia, its curriculum, how
the faculty should be recruited, and how the botanical garden should be
organized. In 1820 Jefferson wrote:
    Mr. Correa's approbation of the plan of principles of our university
    flatters me more than that of all its other eulogists because no other
    could be put in a line with him in science and comprehensive scope
    ofmind. 9
    This passionate interest in educational reform clearly provides part of
an explanation of our enigma: the mutual interests of Correa da Serra and
Jefferson which focused on the establishment of the University of Virginia,
one of the three elements that Jefferson himself was most proud of in his
life's work, and the third of his achievements he instructed should be
carved on the obelisk over his tomb at Monticello.


                                      III
But what is the mystery? The mystery is why we do not know about this re-
markable story. Why is it that this very important friendship, and the mu-
tual interests that joined Correa da Serra and Jefferson in discussions
about subjects that were vital to Jefferson's sense of himself and what he
had achieved in life, are so little known. I think there are several possible
explanations; let me just give some of them. The first grows from our no-
tions of the Enlightenment, particularly in the North American and north-
west European context. We tend to think, and recent interpretations have
led us to believe, that the Enlightenment was an exclusively northwestern
European phenomenon, or if there was a Southern European influence in
eighteenth-century North America, it was derived from a much earlier pe-
riod. Yet curiously this misses the importance of contemporary influences,
contemporary to Jefferson that is, and which came directly from personal
engagement with men like the Abbe Correa da Serra. Thus, we know in the
historical literature much about the role of the Scottish Enlightenment, or
we tend to see the scientific revolution as a development confined to
Protestant Europe, at least in its scientific and experimental aspects; but we
lack any discussion or any awareness at all that the Enlightenment was a
much broader movement that was shaking up Catholic Europe as much as
it was Protestant Europe. I think that the first blockage therefore is the fog
of lingering prejudice about what was happening in Southern Europe in
general in the late eighteenth century.

9Thomas Jefferson to Correa da Serra, Monticello, October 24, [1820], in Davis,
The Abbe Correa in America, 181.
182 • NakedTropics

   But why is it Catholic historians have not dealt with this? I think there is
a very interesting reason here. The Abbe Correa da Serra was anticlerical
and he was anti-Jesuit; and he opposed the pretentions of the papal curia;
here was an elderly Portuguese Abbe who strongly advised Jefferson that it
was absolutely essential to preserve the separation of church and state in
Virginia and especially within his new state university. To understand this
position one has to go back and read what Antonio Genovesi and Antonio
Nunes Ribeiro Sanches were writing. Both were adamantly opposed to the
monarchical conception of the papacy, and they favored an episcopal as
opposed to papal domination of the Catholic Church. And they were fer-
vently opposed to the Jesuits. As we know the Jesuits, following their sup-
pression by the pope in 1773, were reestablished in the early nineteenth
century, and they regained a dominant role in Catholic education. This is
part of the explanation, I suspect, as to why we have very few Catholic his-
torians dealing with the Enlightenment fervor within the Catholic Church
in the eighteenth century with its very strong anti-Roman cast.
   A further reason lies in the course of u.S. history, especially the history
of the South following the Civil War. The state university was a southern
invention; the northern universities were still in the eighteenth century
and long dominated by religious denominations, exclusively in some cases,
and were, as the Abbe Correa da Serra told Jefferson, no more than "semi-
naries" in his view. Later of course it was these northern private universi-
ties which became most prestigious in the American system of higher
education, not the state universities. The University of Virginia itself did
not, in the nineteenth century, fulfill the high objectives Jefferson set for it,
though it did succeed in doing so in many ways in the twentieth century.
So the originality of Jefferson's educational reform was not much recog-
nized or appreciated until comparatively recently since most post-Civil
War northern historians could not conceive of an advanced educational
establishment embedded with Enlightenment thinking existing in the
South.
    The important role of the "New Christians" has also not been dealt with
adequately by Jewish historians, and here again the story is complicated.
Ribeiro Sanches, for example, went through a very complicated personal
engagement with his own religious persona. He was baptized and brought
up a Christian. It was only when he went to Lisbon at age thirteen or four-
teen that he was made aware that he came from a "New Christian" family;
and it was only then very slowly that he learned of what that meant in
terms of Jewish heritage. Being a brilliant young person, he then read
everything about Judaism that he could get his hands on, and he decided,
in fact, that he wanted to be a Jew. When in London, he was circumcised
and joined the Jewish community; but in only three years he grew to so
                                                  The Odd Couple • 183

dislike the Jewish community there that he left and went to Paris in order
to become a Christian again. There are extensive observations in his per-
sonal diary as to the merits and demerits of the two religions, none too
flattering to either. In this, Ribeiro Sanches was very much a child of the
Enlightenment, of course, but as a consequence he does not fit easily in
Portuguese historiography which sees him as a Jew, or Jewish historiogra-
phy which is uncomfortable with his religious ambiguity. The story of Cas-
tro Sarmento is not dissimilar; he left the Jewish community to marry an
Episcopalian. lo



                                     IV
What finally of the coincidence? It related to the second epitaph on Jeffer-
son's tomb, his pride in the Virginia statute for religious tolerance. One of
the more important Sephardic families in the United States was the Levy
family of Philadelphia and New York who, for the better part of a century,
owned Jefferson's Monticello estate. In 1834 Commodore Uriah Phillips
Levy USN bought Monticello, then in an advanced state of disrepair, and
in effect saved Monticello from disintegration and collapse. Jefferson had
died bankrupt in 1826. Monticello was at first bought by a private individ-
ual, but the house was vandalized. Commodore Levy, one of the more con-
troversial and flamboyant members of the United States Navy, was the first
Jew to hold a high rank in the service. Born in 1792, as a boy he fought in
the War of 1812 against the British and was later captured and imprisoned
for eight months in England. Despite six court martials, he rose to com-
mand the U.S. Mediterranean fleet. Levy was a reformer who argued for
the abolition of flogging in the U.S. Navy. He bequeathed Monticello to the
U.S. government in 1862, but during the Civil War the Confederacy seized
and sold the property. After the Civil War, years of litigation took place
until Uriah Levy's nephew retook possession in 1879. His family owned
Monticello until the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation purchased
the property in 1923.
    Looking back over the genealogical origins of the Levy family, one finds
listed the name of Dr. Antonio Nunes Ribeiro Sanches. Ribeiro Sanches's
uncle, a well-known doctor, had emigrated to Savannah, Georgia, in 1733,
leaving Portugal as a baptized Christian but fleeing the Inquisition. Once
in North America he remarried as a Jew and helped the then colony of
Georgia overcome a yellow fever epidemic. His son-in-law, David Mendez


lOOn the activities of Castro Sarmento in London see Edgar Samuel, The Jewish
Community in London (1656-1830) (London: The Jewish Museum, 1992), 10-11.
184 • NakedTropics

Machado, moved from Savannah to New York and became hazan [minis-
ter] of the Congregation Shearih Israel, the famous Spanish and Por-
tuguese synagogue which had been founded in 1654 by Portuguese Jews
fleeing from Recife after the fall of Dutch Brazil. His granddaughter, Re-
becca, married Michael Levy, whose son was Commodore Uriah Phillips
Levy, who bought and preserved Monticello. Rachel Phillips Levy, grand-
daughter of Ribeiro Sanches's uncle, is buried at Monticello and was thus
related by marriage to Ribeiro Sanches, the educational reformer and
mentor of the Abbe Correa da Serra, Thomas Jefferson's friend.
   So we have here a remarkable historical coincidence. Ribeiro Sanches,
one of the great scholars of the European Enlightenment, a Portuguese
"New Christian" whose ideas were used to reform the University of Coim-
bra, and one of the people who had promoted the notion of religious toler-
ation by the abolition of legal discrimination against people of Jewish
origin, was a mentor of Correa da Serra, who in turn was linked with Jef-
ferson at Monticello in discussions over the creation of the University of
Virginia. And in this circular historical way, this same remarkable Por-
tuguese "New Christian" was also linked to the very family that later saved
and preserved Jefferson's home for future generations.
   The Virginia statute for religious freedom is the second achievement
Thomas Jefferson wished to be remembered by and have inscribed on his
obelisk at Monticello. It is one of the great expressions of the Enlighten-
ment in America. The statute reads:
    No man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious
    worship or ministry or shall otherwise suffer on account of his reli-
    gious opinions or beliefs, but all men shall be free to profess and by
    argument maintain their opinions in the matter of religion. 11
   Commodore Uriah Phillips Levy admired Jefferson precisely for what
he had done "to mold our republic in a form in which a man's religion does
not make him ineligible for political or governmental life:' It was for this
reason above all others that he wished to see Jefferson remembered, and his
hilltop mansion Monticello preserved for the American nation. 12
   I have called this connection between Correa da Serra and Levy a coin-
cidence. But there is one final question to ask: Why was the Abbe Correa da

11See Merrill D. Peterson and Robert C. Vaughan, The Virginia Statute for Religious
Freedom: Its Evolution and Consequences in American History (Cambridge and New:
York: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
12See Melvin I. Urofsky, The Levy Family and Monticello, 1834-1923: Saving
Thomas Jefferson's House ([Charlottesville, Virg.]: Thomas Jefferson Foundation,
2001), and Marc Leepson, Saving Monticello: The Levy Family's Epic Quest to Rescue
the House that Jefferson Built (New York and London: Free Press, 2001).
                                                    The Odd Couple • 185

Serra so hated by the old aristocracy, the so-called Puritans of the old no-
bility in Portugal who defined their ((puritanism" as the absence of Jewish,
Moorish, or heretic blood? There is an odd note in Correa da Serra's biog-
raphy which needs to be mentioned here; Correa da Serra took his
mother's, not his father's, name. Process number 1911 of the Inquisition,
held in the Torre do Tombo in the Lisbon National Archives, is an investi-
gation to determine if Correa da Serra's family were ((New Christians" and
the probable cause of this father's flight to Naples. It is, therefore, not im-
possible that the old Abbe was more part of this complex clandestine his-
tory than we yet know. But this is a mystery awaiting to be unraveled.
IN THE FIELDS.
                                                        CHAPTER            10
                                     A Story of Slavery,
                                     Sex, and Mammon
                                                 "In all pride ofsupposed equality."
                                          -Middletown Gazette, Connecticut, 1831




Timing is everything in the news business, and the timing of three post-
graduate students at Yale University was perfect. Yale, the third-oldest U.s.
university, celebrated its tercentenary in the year 2001. On May 21 the cur-
rent occupant of the White House, George W. Bush, Yale Class of 1968, was
invited back to New Haven, Connecticut, for the commencement cere-
monies, where he extolled the merits of his fellow "c" students. And from
August 31 until September 7,2001, the predictably contentious United Na-
tions World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenopho-
bia, and Related Intolerance was to take place in South Africa.


                                     II
Against this background in mid-August 2001, Anthony Dugdale, J. J.
Fueser, and Jose Celso de Castro Alves released a remarkable polemic titled
"Yale, Slavery and Abolition." They IIalso launched a website. l Here their
work was made accessible to a wider audience. In lean prose and with solid
documentation they draw attention to some very inconvenient facts about
their university: How can the buildings of Yale's residential colleges, the
core of undergraduate life at the university, carry the names of Yale alumni

Ihttp://www.yaleslavery.org



                                    187
188 • NakedTropics

who were not only slaveholders, but who beyond that were also ardent ad-
vocates of slavery. And how could Yale have chosen to honor them not dur-
ing the time of slavery but as late as the 1960s at the height of the struggle
for civil rights in the United States? Within a few days of the report's re-
lease, Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves had received a full article, an edi-
torial comment, and an approving op-ed piece in the New York Times, an
extended note on the AP wires and CNN, and a chiding editorial in the
"Review and Outlook" section of the weekend Wall Street Journal which
complained they had "presented Yale with something that is less a scholarly
inquiry than a legal brief."
   The brochure Yale University put out for its tercentenary year summa-
rized Yale's official view on its relationship to slavery. Yale graduates, it
says, "have a long history of activism in the face of slavery and a modern
history of scholarship about it. Today the Gilder Lehrman Center for the
Study of Slavery, Resistance and Abolition, located at Yale, is the first of its
kind in the world." True as far as it goes, but as Dugdale, Fueser, and Cas-
tro Alves point out, Yale also helped in 1831 to stop the effort to expand
higher education to African Americans in New Haven, and in the twenti-
eth century chose to name most of its colleges after slave owners and
proslavery leaders.
   The three authors are active members ofYale's GESO, the Graduate Em-
ployees and Students Organization (Dugdale was the recent chair of the
group), which is an affiliate of the federation of hospital and university
employees union (HERE local 34). The GESO has been locked in a bitter
dispute with Yale over recognition of the right of graduate student instruc-
tors to unionize. Their report is published under the auspices of the New
Haven Amistad Committee, successor to the original Amistad Committee
based in New Haven. In February 1839, Portuguese slave traders had taken
a large group of Africans from Sierra Leone to Havana, violating the
treaties then in effect against the slave trade. Fifty-three Africans had been
purchased and put aboard the Cuban schooner Amistad for shipment. On
July 1, 1839, they seized the ship, killed the captain, and attempted to sail
back to Africa, arriving instead off Long Island where the schooner was
seized by a U.S. warship. The Africans were imprisoned in New Haven and
charged with murder. The cause was taken up by abolitionists, and the case
eventually went to the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1841 former President John
Quincy Adams argued the defendants' case, and the Court ruled in the
Africans' favor. Thirty-five eventually returned to Africa. The Amistad
Committee, formed in 1839 and supported by Yale students and faculty,
led the campaign to free the Amistad captives. The story was the subject of
a recent Steven Spielberg movie.
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 189

    The challenge laid down to Yale is not only one to historical memory.
The authors of "Yale, Slavery and Abolition," in addition to choosing their
timing with care, have been equally selective in the institutions with which
they wish to associate their findings. In the process they have picked at
scabs over some of the most sensitive evasions that lie at the core of Amer-
ica's-not just Yale University's-benign historical view of itself.
    There is also something heroic about what these three postgraduate stu-
dents have done at such a critical moment in their careers. Because of the
incestuous structure of u.s. graduate education, they are indentured now
more than at any time to the good or ill will of their principal faculty advis-
ers. They are thereby vulnerable to the multiple and subtle retribution that
can be exacted in the future by the very cosseted professors whose
hypocrisy they have exposed by their research and whose comfortable
privileges their union challenges. Like all good scholars they have suc-
ceeded in turning over a long buried rock; yet even they underestimate all
the slimy creatures that may sally forth from sundry dark places when ex-
posed to the sunlight.
   What is it precisely that Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves uncovered?
First they undermine conventional wisdom by showing that slavery was
not only a southern phenomenon. In fact, slavery underpinned many
facets of the economy in the North and in colonial New England, "from
household to the field, from the legal system to religious education." Prom-
inent New Englanders owned slaves, and many financial transactions at
some point depended on slavery. Emancipation in the North took place
gradually. The Connecticut emancipation law passed in 1784 envisioned a
gradual phase-out of slavery which would allow it to slowly disappear. No
slaves were immediately freed in 1784. The law provided for children born
to slaves to remain bonded while children, but to attain freedom on reach-
ing twenty-one years of age (at first the age was set at twenty-five). In 1774
there were 6,562 slaves in Connecticut, but by 1790 the number had fallen
to 2,759 and to 97 by 1820. There were none by 1850. Yet even as slavery
withered away in New England, many at Yale remained apologists for the
institution of slavery. Yale in fact graduated twice as many proslavery
clergy as its peer institutions.
   Second, they reveal that some of the critical financial endowments
which helped establish Yale University as a preeminent national institution
of higher education were slavery-based. Yale's first endowed professorship,
the Livingstonian Professorship of Divinity, was named for its benefactor,
Colonel Philip Livingston of New York, one of the most prominent slave
traders of the mid-eighteenth century. The first scholarship fund was
named after Bishop George Berkeley and funded by the income from his
190 • NakedTropics

slave-worked plantation in Newport, Rhode Island. Yale's first endowed li-
brary fund was named after Reverend Jared Eliot of Killingworth, a re-
forming agriculturist for whom slave labor was key.
    Moreover, when Yale did have a choice between graduates who held
high places within the political establishment of the country and who
took opposing views over slavery, it chose to honor a slave owner and
apologist of slavery. James Hillhouse, for instance, who served •for fifty
years as Yale's treasurer, was an outspoken antislavery leader as a U.S. sen-
ator. Hillhouse, as others in the North, hoped that slavery in the South
would wither away as it had in Connecticut. It did not, of course, spurred
in large part by the expansion of cotton plantations based on the inven-
tion of the cotton gin by another Yale graduate, Eli Whitney (Class of
1792). But Yale nowhere honors the abolitionist Hillhouse as it does John
C. Calhoun, Yale Class of 1804, a South Carolinian who benefited greatly
from the expansion of the world cotton market. Elected to Congress in
1811, Calhoun became secretary of war from 1817 to 1825; was elected
vice president of the United States serving under two presidents until
1832; became a senator and then secretary of state; and later was elected a
senator again. Calhoun was one of the most vociferous and successful de-
fenders of American slavery over his long and turbulent political career.
In the Senate Calhoun engineered passage of the gag rule that precluded
discussion of slavery and arranged the annexation of Texas as a slave state.
His defense of slavery led him to reject democracy itself. In a famous
speech in the U.S. Senate chamber in 1837, Calhoun argued ((concession
or compromise" over slavery «to be fatal." And he continued: « .•.. let me
not be understood as admitting, even by implication, that the exjsting re-
lations between the two races in the slaveholding states is an evil--far oth-
erwise; I hold it to be good." In 1930 Yale named one of its residential
colleges after him.
    As late as 1961 Yale also chose to honor another alumnus with a residen-
tial college: Samuel F. B. Morse, the inventor of the telegraph, b'ut a man
who was the North's most virulent defender of slavery. Slavery, he wrote,
was divinely ordained: «the greater declared object of the Savior's mission
to earth." Morse also regarded the Declaration of Independence as a «mix-
ture of truths, qualified truths and fallacious maxims." The special ter-
centennial edition of the Yale alumni magazine lists Morse as among the
top graduates from its entire 300-year history. The invention of the tele-
graph was no mean feat, and he doubtlessly deserves on this count to be
there; but as Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves point out, the alumni mag-
azine nowhere mentions Morse's proslavery views, or his leadership of
proslavery societies during the Civil War, much less Morse's attack on Pres-
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 191

ident Abraham Lincoln as "the Fanatic on the Throne." Ten of Yale's twelve
residential colleges are named after prominent men in Yale's history; eight
owned slaves or preached in favor of slavery.
   The third story Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves bring to light is the
fate of the attempt to establish a "negro college" in New Haven in 1831. The
project for a multiracial educational institution was promoted by two local
white men: Simeon Jocelyn, founding pastor of the African American
Congregation in New Haven, and Arthur Tappan, who purchased land for
the building and committed one thousand dollars to the fund-raising
drive. They were supported by the famous abolitionist William L. Garri-
son. The proposal met a stone wall of resistance from the town and Yale
College, led by the mayor of New Haven and prominent members of the
Yale faculty, including Yale's then one professor of law, four of the five prac-
ticing lawyers in New Haven, three judges, and the U:S. representative in
Congress.
   As one of the resolutions passed at the town meeting to protest the idea
stated bluntly:

    Yale College, the institutions for the education of females, and the
    other schools, already existing in this city, are important to the
    community and the general interests of science, and as such have
    been deservedly patronized by the public, and the establishment of
    a College in the same place to educate the colored population is in-
    compatible with the prosperity, if not the existence of the prl~sent
    institutions of learning, and will be destructive to the best int(~rests
    of the city....

   In New Haven, where town and gown rarely agreed on anything over
the centuries, on the question of the establishment of a black college there
was near unanimous sentiment. The vote at the town meeting opposing
the "negro college" was 700 to 4.
   The second resolution passed that day was no less revealing. It reads:

    [T]he propagation of sentiments favorable to the immediate eJnan-
    cipation of slaves in disregard of the civil institutions of the States
    in which they belong, and as an auxiliary thereto the contempora-
    neous founding of Colleges for educating colored people, is unwar-
    rantable and dangerous interference with the internal concerns of
    other States, and ought to be discouraged.

  The day after the resolution was passed a mob attacked Arthur lappan's
house. Simeon Jocelyn's home was also ransacked by a mob, and he was
192 • NakedTropics

forced to end his leadership of the African American church. But a few
years later both men were founders of the New Haven Amistad Committee
and prominent advocates of justice in the Amistad affair. Undoubtedly Yale
was concerned with the negative impact of the proposed "Black College"
on their university's fund-raising prospects, a concern clearly present in
the twentieth century as well. As the Boston Courier put it in 1831: «The
real objection to the [Black] College appears to have been the apprehen-
sion of giving offense to the Southern patrons of Yale." But mammon was
not all that was at stake here.
   The editorials and comments in the Connecticut newspapers in 1831
make it evident that the citizens of New Haven and the professors at Yale
were as much concerned about sex as they were with race; or more explo-
sively to their way of thinking, they were worried specifically about inter-
racial sex. The New Haven Connecticut Journal in an editorial argued
that:

    The location of a college of blacks here would be totally ruinous to
    the city.... whose certain effect will be to lower the town's public
    morals-to drive from our city its female schools-its throngs of
    summer visitors-and stop the vital stream to the city, the influx of
    young men to Yale College.

  The Connecticut Middletown Gazette agreed:

    [T]he support ofYale College and the numerous female seminaries,
    depends in no inconsiderable degree, on the character of the inhab-
    itants. Hitherto, New Haven has been distinguished.... But now, if
    the young ladies are to be elbowed at every corner by black colle-
    gians, and the students of Yale are to be met by them in all pride of
    supposed equality, the interest of the city, identified as it is with the
    prosperity of the institutions, will suffer material injury.

   Dugdale, Fueser, and Castro Alves cite these reports, but they do not fol-
low them up, which is a pity because therein lies a fascinating and revealing
adjunct to their story. The New Haven paper on the day of the town meet-
ing had made a recommendation:

    If it is necessary to have an African college in Connecticut, may the
    projectors of it, on mature consideration, conclude to locate it in
    the town of Cornwall. ... Cornwall possesses many advantages for
    such an institution, over other places; and it is not among the least
    of them, that the ladies of that town readily give themselves, better
    for worse, to the colored gentlemen.
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 193

                                     II
I was struck by the reference to Cornwall, Connecticut. It is a remote place,
and must have been even more so during the early nineteenth century. The
township of Cornwall spreads over the higher elevations of the Litchfield
hills and the steep valley where the Housatonic River cuts sharply through
northwestern Connecticut. It is an upland landscape consisting of three
parallel valleys with wooded ridges between them. The ridges, not the val-
leys, were settled first. It is a rough broken country with clear streams and
little peaks. Today its small resident population is augmented by weekend
residents from New York City, including several celebrities-most recently
Whoopi Goldberg, the NBC news anchor Tom Brokaw, and the tennis
great Ivan Lendl among others. I have in my library a History ofCornwall, a
leather-bound volume published for private subscribers in 1926 by the
Reverend Edward Comfort Starr, who had for twenty-four years served as
pastor of the Cornwall congregational church and was a graduate of Yale
College and its theological seminary. I remembered reading something of
the story of the Cornwall missionary school and its misadventures, the
evident origin of the aspersions about the proclivities of the girls of Corn-
wall, to which the New Haven press and Yale worthies referred disparag-
ingly in 1831.
    The Reverend Starr's account provides the bare bones of the history of
the Foreign Mission School which opened in Cornwall in 1817 and closed
its doors in 1827. The school's origins were said to go back to 1810 when
Edwin Dwight, son of Yale's President Timothy Dwight, found a "dark
skinned youth on the college steps at Yale crying because he had no means
of getting an education." Edwin took the young man, a Hawaiian who New
England sailors had brought to America and called Henry Obookiah, to his
father. Partly inspired by Henry Obookiah, the clergy of Connecticut
turned to the American Board of Commissioners of Foreign Missions to
establish a school to train Obookiah and other Hawaiians as missionaries
for the Pacific Islands. Cornwall was chosen because it was "apart from the
temptations and distractions of the larger towns."
    Obookiah had a remarkable story. Born in 1792 in Ka'u at Ninole near
Punalu'u on the big island, he had survived the deaths of his parents, vic-
tims of warfare on the island. He was then schooled in the rituals of priest-
hood by his uncle at Hiki'au Heiau, where Captain Cook had been killed
two decades earlier in 1779. Taken aboard a New England ship in
Kealakakukua Bay, he and a young friend, Hopo'o, voyaged to the North
Pacific, later on to Macao and around the Cape of Good Hope to New
York. The two young Hawaiian boys then moved to New Haven to live with
the captain of the vessel that had taken them from Hawaii, where they met
Edwin Dwight.
194 • NakedTropics

   By 1814 Henry Obookiah was speaking publicly, translating the Bible,
and beginning a grammar dictionary on the Hawaiian language. Henry
Obookiah (or Opukaha'ia as he is now known in Hawaii) became famous
after his early death in 1818 from typhus fever at the age of twenty-six,
when Edwin Dwight published a small book titled Memoir of Henry
Obookiah, A Native of the Sandwich Islands, Who Died at Cornwall, Con-
necticut. This memoir comprising Obookiah's account of his life, feelings,
and philosophies inspired fourteen American missionaries to volunteer to
evangelize the Hawaiian Islands (or Sandwich Islands as they were then
known). Obookiah was buried at Cornwall where his tombstone but not
his body remains. He was, the inscription reads, "a worthy member [of the
Mission School] he was once an Idolater, and was designed for a Pagan
Priest; but by the grace of God and by the prayers of pious friends, he be-
came a Christian." In 1993 a group of his descendants claimed the body
which was returned to the big island of Hawaii and reinterred.
   Beginning with twelve pupils, the number of students at the Cornwall
Mission School tripled over the nine and a half years of its existence. Stu-
dents were of several races, including many Native Americans, so that the
school, the Reverend Starr said, was sometimes spoken of as "the Indian
School." But Starr also reports that "two marriages of Indians who had
been at the school, with white girls of the village, had produced great ex-
citement and are popularly said to be the cause of the breaking up of the
school ... it also aroused much unpleasant gossip about the people of
Cornwall." In fact, Starr tells us in a footnote, the editor of the Litchfield
Eagle had declared that the Cornwall girls were left alone at unreasonable
hours with the mission boys and were seen walking arm in arm with them.
   The real history is more complicated and tragic. Among the "Indian"
students at the Cornwall Mission School were two Cherokees: John Ridge
and "Buck" Oowatie (later known as Elias Boudinot). John was the son of
Major Ridge and Buck's father was Ridge's half-brother. Major Ridge led a
body of Cherokee Indians in alliance with the United States under the
command of General Andrew Jackson fighting against other Native Amer-
icans during the Creek War and first Seminole War, where he earned his
military title. Ridge's Cherokee name was "kah-nung-da-tle-ghe," the man
who walks on the mountaintop. He was a leader of the Cherokee nation
settled at Pine Log, in present-day Bartow County, Georgia, under the or-
ders of President George Washington. Here the Cherokees evolved an ex-
periment in acculturation merging U.S. and Cherokee traditions and
greatly prospering as settled farmers. John, Major Ridge's son, was edu-
cated by Moravian missionaries before being sent by the major to the
Cornwall Mission School as a paying pupil. Major Ridge was a man of sub-
stantial property; his estates contained 240 acres under cultivation, 1,142
                           A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 195

peach trees, 418 apple trees, a ferry, and a store. He also owned thirty black
slaves.
   At the mission school, both John Ridge and Buck Oowatie fell in love
with local girls. John met Sarah Bird Northrupt, the daughter of the stew-
ard of the Mission School, John P. Northrupt. In the face of strong opposi-
tion from Major Ridge as well as Sarah's parents, they eventually married
in 1824. Major Ridge had consulted the Moravian missionaries if "there
was anything in your Bible to prevent such a marriage." They assured him
there was not.
   John Ridge's cousin, Buck Oowatie, on his way from the Cherokee nation
in Georgia to the Cornwall Mission School had visited the former President
Thomas Jefferson at his residence Monticello in Virginia as well as James
Madison at his country house Montpelier. In Washington, D.C., Buck
Oowatie had also met Dr. Elias Boudinot, briefly president of the United
States under the Articles of Confederation and an early abolitionist and
philanthropist who believed the American Indians were descended from
one of the lost tribes of Israel. In appreciation of his support of the Chero-
kee nation, Buck took Boudinot's name as his own from then on. At Corn-
wall, the newly named Elias Boudinot fell in love with Harriet Gold,
daughter of Colonel Benjamin Gold, a scion of one of Cornwall's most em-
inent families. Elias and Harriet were married in 1826 despite the fact that
the pastor, Reverend Timothy Stone (honorary Yale M.A. 1804), refused to
officiate at the ceremony at the Cornwall congregational church, fearing his
congregation would eject him. Elias was burnt in effigy in the town. These
two interracial marriages led to the closing of the Mission School in 1827.
   Both John Ridge and Elias Boudinot were to playa key role in one of the
most somber chapters in American history. In 1830 the Indian Removal
Act, vigorously promoted by President Andrew Jackson, forced the expul-
sion of the Cherokee from their fertile lands in Georgia. 2 Under military
escort tens of thousands of tribesmen were marched west to barren terri-
tory in the present state of Oklahoma. Over a third died en route. This
shameful resettlement of 1838-1839 coincided ironically with the Amistad
affair. The state of Georgia distributed the lands of the Cherokees by mean
of a lottery. The disastrous trek of the Cherokees to Oklahoma from Geor-


2The Indian removals have not been a topic treated in much detail by American
historians, even Jacksonian scholars. In fact in Arthur Schlesinger's classic account
of Jacksonian democracy, The Age ofJackson (Boston: Little, Brown, 1945), the re-
movals received no mention whatsoever. For a discussion of these events by the
leading scholar in the field see Robert V. Remini, Andrew Jackson and His Indian
Wars (New York: Viking, 2001). For a more critical approach to Jackson see An-
drew Burnstein, The Passions ofAndrew Jackson (New York: Knopf, 2003).
196 • NakedTropics

gia became known in history as "the trail of tears." Major Ridge, his son
John, as well as Elias Boudinot, had all signed the Treaty of New Echota in
1835 which accepted the removal against the majority opinion of the
Cherokee.
   President Andrew Jackson was more responsible than most for the be-
trayal of the experiment of peaceful coexistence, alliance, and mutual re-
spect between the United States of America and the Cherokee Nation,
which Major Ridge had espoused and lived by. Pathetically, he called on his
former commander at his home in Tennessee on the way to Oklahoma. But
Ridge already knew that by signing the Treaty of New Echota he had also
signed his own death warrant. Within days he was assassinated by Chero-
kees who saw his continued trust in the white man as base treachery.
Within six months after the arrival of the Cherokee in Oklahoma, both
John Ridge and Elias Boudinot had also been brutally murdered by Chero-
kee braves. John Ridge's wife, Harriet, had died in 1836 on the eve of the re-
moval to Oklahoma and is buried in Calhoun, Georgia. Elias Boudinot's
wife, Sarah, survived his assassination, moving with her children to Fayet-
teville, Arkansas. Their eldest son went to California where he became a
newspaper editor and politician.


                                      III
How sadly revealing it is that in opposing the "negro college" in 1831 the
good citizens of New Haven, with the support of the worthy faculty ofYale,
should have transformed the story of what was by all accounts two happy
marriages into gossip about "the ladies of town [Cornwall, who] readily
give themselves, better for worse, to the colored gentlemen." And how
banal is the reduction of the tragedy that befell the brightest students of
the Cornwall Mission School to a racist evocation of the danger of blacks
on the street in New Haven "elbowing" the young ladies of the seminaries
and discomforting the students at Yale College who would be confronted
with this assertion of "supposed equality."
   Yet this painful excursion into the underside of American history would
undoubtedly have appealed to Antonio de Castro Alves, the namesake of
one of the coauthors of the report on "Yale, Slavery and Abolition." Castro
Alves, the nineteenth-century Brazilian romantic poet from Bahia, heart of
Brazil's vibrant Afro-Brazilian culture, also lived a tragic life, was thwarted
in love, and died at the age of twenty-four from tuberculosis with only one
volume of his poetry published. Posthumously he became, and remains,
one of Brazil's most powerful antislavery voices, author of The Slaves (Os
Escravos, 1883), an oration from Africa imploring God's justice called
                         A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon • 197

Voices of Africa (Vozes d'Africa, 1880), and, above all, The Slave Ship (0
Navio Negreiro, 1880), a powerful portrayal of the horrors of the middle
passage. A disciple of Victor Hugo, he was a model for the late Brazilian
novelist Jorge Amado, who praised Castro Alves as a poet who saw Brazil
naked in all its contradictions and full of social and racial prejudices. Dug-
dale, Fueser, and Castro Alves have seen Yale naked, and we are all the wiser
for it.
A M U Z IL U * rORKXT WITH c iu iu c r a ts r ic MAMMAI I* .
                                                         CHAPTER            11
                      The Tragedy of the Amazon
                                                              "Order and Progress."
                                                         -Positivist inscription on
                                                               Brazil's national flag




Nineteen eighty-eight was the year of drought and fire in the Americas. It
was a year of growing public concern about global warming, with dire pro-
jections of melting ice caps and ozone depletion. It was a year of dramatic
images of the charred remnants of once majestic forests from the Rockies
to the Amazon basin. For the first time the destruction of the tropical rain
forest of Brazil became a major issue for North Americans and for people
concerned about the danger to the environment throughout the world.
But how did this vast ecological disaster occur? What can be done to deal
with its effects? Some answers to these questions are provided by the books
discussed in this chapter, each of which deals with some aspect of the
tragedy of the Amazon.


                                        II
The Amazon is a vast region; not all of it is rain forest, nor is all of it Brazil-
ian. As it was legally defined in 1953, the Amazon region within Brazil in-
corporates about 60 percent of Brazil and includes savannah grasslands,
wetlands, and shrublands, as well as humid rain forests, all connected with
the Amazon River system, which contains one-fifth of the earth's fresh-
water supply. The river rises 17,000 feet in the Andes and flows some 4,000
miles until it reaches the Atlantic, yet as one follows it 3,000 miles inland
from the sea it rises only to 300 feet. The river's mouth is 200 miles wide,


                                       199
200 • NakedTropics

and for 1,000 miles upstream it remains seven miles wide; oceangoing lin-
ers can travel 2,000 miles up the river from the sea. The river and the rain
forest cover the heart of the subcontinent and encompass nine South
American countries. Seventeen of the Amazon's tributaries are more than
1,000 miles long, each longer than the Rhine.
   Brazil's Amazonian forest is the largest remaining tropical forest on
earth, and its natural life is the richest and most diverse in the world, con-
taining 20 percent of all higher plant life, the same proportion of bird
species, and 10 percent of the world's mammals. The tall trees produce a
dense overhead canopy, which keeps out all but a fraction of the sunlight.
Within the semidarkness thousands of species thrive, only a tiny number
of which are known or recorded by scientists. Each tree can support as
many as four hundred insect species. The rainy season's floods deposit al-
luvium along the river banks to form flood plains (varzeas), rich in palms,
fruits, turtles, fish, and aquatic birds. Naturalists have found five hundred
different plant species in one forest patch of the flooded plains. To the
south and east are forests filled with mahogany, tropical cypress, and
cherry wood trees. The westernmost tributary, the Araguaia, flows through
swampy grasslands and forests of mahogany, Brazil nut, and rubber
forests.
   A marvelously comprehensive introduction to the rain forest can be
found in the thoughtful and readable The Last Rain Forests: A World Con-
servation Atlas, edited by Mark Collins. l It provides maps of the present
distribution of forest worldwide and helps to place the Amazon in a global
context, while one can study some of the extraordinary fauna of the region
in the beautifully produced and illustrated Neotropical Rainforest Mam-
mals: A Field Guide, the first such broad regional guide ever produced. 2
   The paradox of this "rich realm of nature;' as the early Portuguese ad-
venturers called it, is that while the soils of much of the Amazon region are
extremely impoverished, they can still sustain more than 250 metric tons of
living material per acre. For many years no one could explain how they did
so. As Susanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn point out in The Fate of the
Forest, a survey of the region and its crisis, the beginning of an answer came
in 1960, thanks to the cold war, when the u.S. Atomic Energy Commission
sought to find out what would happen to forests in the event of a nuclear
war, stimulating the first interdisciplinary study of the tropical forest. 3

1Mark Collins, ed., The Last Rain Forests: A World Conservation Atlas (New York
and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).
2Louise H. Emmons, Neotropical Rainforest Mammals: A Field Guide (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990).
3Suzanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn, The Fate of the Forest: Developers, De-
stroyers, and Defenders ofthe Amazon (London and New York: Verso, 1989).
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 201

   Students discovered that whereas forests in the temperate zone draw
nutrients up from the soil, in tropical forests the nutrients derive from an
exchange within the living forest and are held in the tissues of living organ-
isms. The leathery leaves characteristic of the Amazon plant life conserve
nutrients as well as high levels of secondary chemicals, which make tropi-
cal leaves tough or poisonous to eat, deterring predators and also making
them a rich source of drugs. Latex, a substance that acts as a defensive
membrane for the Brazilian rubber tree, Hevea brasiliensis, is just such an
adaptation. The wild germ plasm of the forest includes cacao, palm hearts,
guarana, Brazil nuts, rubber, chicle, babassu oil, fish, manioc, cashews, and
coca. As Hecht and Cockburn observe, the global annual value ofAmazon-
ian natural products may exceed one hundred billion dollars a year. 4



                                         II
The assault on the tropical forests has a long history, and so does the his-
tory of human habitation in the forest. The year 2000 marked the fifth cen-
tury since the landfall on the Brazilian coast by the India-bound fleet of the
Portuguese explorer Pedro Alvares Cabral. It was a land "with great groves
of trees," according to the fleet's notary, Pero Vaz de Caminha, who de-
scribed it in a letter to the king of Portugal on May 1, 1500. 5 Of the lush At-
lantic coastal forest that so impressed the Europeans in 1500-a narrow
belt of rain forest some one hundred miles deep, which then ran along vir-
tually the whole coast of Brazil-no more than 4 percent remains today.
From among its flora, ironically, Brazil took its name from the pau-brasil
tree, which yielded a purple dye much in demand among sixteenth-cen-
tury European textile manufacturers, and which can scarcely be found in
the wild today. The Portuguese had called their new territory in South
America the "Land of the True Cross;' but this was soon forgotten and the
more prosaic name stuck-resonant as it was of the forest and of business.

4These figures were disputed by Roger Stone in a review of the Hecht and Cock-
burn book, "The Politics of Deforestation," Issues in Science and Technology (spring
1990): 77-78. He says, "The total value of Brazilian exports, including manufac-
tured goods, amounted to less than $34 billion in 1988." Hecht and Cockburn's fig-
ure, however, included coca, the main product exported (albeit clandestinely)
from the western Amazon basin. See exchange in "Pate of the Amazon," New York
Review of Books, June 13, 1991, which includes comments by Professor Jose
Goldemberg, then Brazilian secretary of science and technology.
sFull text in W. B. Greenlee, ed., The Voyage of Pedro Alvares Cabral to Brazil and
India from Contemporary Narratives, Hakluyt Series, No. 81 (1838),3-33. Cam-
inha's letter is reproduced in facsimile in the New York Public Library exhibition
catalog, Brazil-Portugal: The Age ofAtlantic Discovery (Milan and Lisbon: Editora
Bertrand and Franco Maria Ricci, 1990).
202 • NakedTropics

   Like the coastal forest, the Amazon rain forest before the arrival of the
Europeans sustained a large population-it is virtually impossible to esti-
mate how large. 6 In two brilliant books, John Hemming, then director and
secretary of the Royal Geographical Society of London, has heroically tried
to reconstruct from thousands of pages of travel accounts, official reports,
diaries, and archeological and anthropological research the lost history of
the annihilated peoples of South America. He calculates that the native
population of the Amazon basin alone could have been about 3.5 million
in 1500. 7 It was at most 200,000 by the late 1980s. The lost population of
Indians did not live in an untroubled paradise, but they lived in harmony
with the forest, and they did not destroy it.
   Hecht and Cockburn tell us that the degree of human intervention in
the forest ecosystem is much greater than we have realized. Scholars have
learned from demographic reconstruction of the catastrophic and precipi-
tate population decline in the Caribbean and in Mexico after the Spanish
Conquest that we should be very cautious before we dismiss the early ac-
count of large indigenous populations as hyperbole. 8 As with the first reac-
tions in our century to the Holocaust in Europe, it has been difficult for
many people to accept the vast scale of extermination.
   Both greed and good intentions caused the destruction of the native
population. By the 1570s, the rich forests of the coastal region, especially
those of the flood plains around the great natural harbors of Rio de Janeiro
and Bahia, as well as further north at Recife in Pernambuco, had been
cleared and the land converted to sugarcane production. The sugar mills


6All the early accounts spoke of large populations. See Sir C. R. Markham, ed., Ex-
peditions into the Valley of the Amazon: 1539, 1540, 1639, Hakluyt Series, No. 24
(1859),61, 79, passim.
7John Hemming, Red Gold: The Conquest of the Brazilian Indians (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1987), and Amazon Fronteir: The Defeat of the Brazilian
Indians (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1987). Hemming is also author of
"How Brazil Acquired Roraima," Hispanic American Historical Review 70, no. 2
(May 1990): 295-325. Unfortunately, Hemming and other scholars rarely use the
extraordinary riches of the Portuguese archives to study these questions. They are
particularly valuable for any work on the Amazon, including scientific work. For
an introduction to the extensive scientific mission of Alexander Rodrigues Ferreira
in the late eighteenth century, for example, there is a good book by William Joel
Simon, Scientific Expeditions in the Portuguese Overseas Territories (1783-1808)
and the Role ofLisbon in the Intellectual-Scientific Community ofthe Late Eighteenth
Century (Lisbon: Instituto de Investigac;ao Cientifica Tropical, 1983). Also see Rus-
sell Mittermeier et aI, Viagem philosophica-uma redescoberta da Amazonia,
1792-1992/Philosophical Journey-A Rediscovery of the Amazon, 1792-1992 (Rio
de Janeiro: Comissao Nacional para as Comemoras:6es dos Descobrimentos Por-
tugueses; Editora Index, 1992).
8Sherborne F. Cook and Woodrow Borah, Essays in Population History, 3 vols.
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971, 1974, 1979).
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 203

required huge quantities of firewood to heat the cauldrons that processed
sugar, and the coastal forests were increasingly depleted. Forced into slave
labor, and lacking immunity to European and African diseases, the Indian
population died by the tens of thousands. Enslaved Africans were im-
ported to replace them, permanently transforming the ethnic composition
of the Portuguese coastal enclaves on the edge of the continent. 9
   As the Indian populations of the coastlines died out, Portuguese mis-
sionaries who had arrived to proselytize the native population moved in-
land to gain new converts. The Franciscans established Belem (Bethlehem)
at the mouth of the Amazon River in 1616, and after 1649, Jesuits,
Carmelites, and Mercedarians divided up the main tributaries of the river
between them. Throughout the colonial period royal governors, mer-
chants, and Portuguese colonists regularly sent upriver heavily armed
flotillas of canoes in search of slaves.
   The religious orders, especially the Jesuits, sought to protect the Indian
population from enslavement by organizing new communities of would-
be peasant farmers. Although these concentrations initially led to an even
more rapid spread of disease, the Jesuits in time were able to establish a
network of protected villages throughout the lower Amazon to comple-
ment the great missions they organized on the plains along the Uruguay
and Paraguay Rivers to the south. The struggle between the Jesuits and
others who sought to protect the Indians and the colonists who argued
that they should be integrated with the European communities, albeit as
lowly workers, is a long one in Amazonian history, and the arguments on
both sides were often well intentioned. The writings in defense of the Indi-
ans by the Jesuit polymath Antonio Vieira are among the most eloquent
works in the Portuguese language. Io The Marques de Pombal, King Jose's
chief minister between 1750 and 1777, who expelled the Jesuits from
Brazil, justified his actions in the language of the Enlightenment. (He
ended African slavery in Portugal itself.)
   As Hemming shows, the missions were eventually suppressed by jealous
officials of the monarchy abetted by the colonists' avarice. In the late seven-
teenth century, gold was discovered and prospectors flooded into the inte-
rior. The colonial government, suspicious of the loyalty of the Jesuit
missions that were strategically placed along the river systems, sent teams

9The African component in the formation of Brazilian society of course parallels
the story of the destruction of the Indians and is essential to any understanding of
Brazil. There is an excellent book by Joseph C. Miller, Way ofDeath: Merchant Cap-
italism and the Angolan Slave Trade, 1730-1830 (Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1988), which provides a good introduction to this story.
lOPor Vieira, one of the most remarkable figures of the seventeenth century, see
Thomas M. Cohen, The Fire of Tongues: Antonio Vieira and the Missionary Church
in Brazil and Portugal (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998).
204 • NakedTropics

of surveyors, soldiers, and administrators to establish Portugal's authority
over the land and establish frontiers. By the mid-eighteenth century they
thus had laid claims to tens of thousands of square miles of unexplored
territory. When Brazil gained its independence from Portugal in the 1820s,
the new nation inherited this "hollow frontier:' containing within it many
unknown Indian communities.
    During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries these hidden peoples
would slowly be «discovered." Natural scientists arrived to study the teem-
ing life of the forest. European anthropologists were sent to study living
societies but, more often than not, and certainly unintentionally, their con-
tacts with unknown groups of Indians helped to bring about their rapid
disintegration. The Indians were proselytized by Protestant fundamental-
ist missionaries who brought with them values regarded as simplistic and
ignorant by many in the societies they themselves came from. The Indians
were victimized by freelance miners, adventurers, and trappers, who were
seeking gold, booty, or natural forest products, such as Brazil nuts and rub-
ber. These pioneers were both fearful of the native forest dwellers and all
too willing to exploit or kill them.
    John Hemming has very little use for either the Christian missionaries
or the slavers, or for their modern counterparts. Amid the relentless de-
struction of the indigenous population, his heroes are those Indians who
were uncompromising in their opposition to the white man. In fact, he
sometimes implies that the only good white man is a dead white man.
There is a special poignancy and irony to this view. During an expedition
out of Cachimbo near the geographical center of Brazil in 1961, then a
crude airstrip in the forest, members of Kreen-Akrore tribe had ambushed
and killed Richard Mason, a young Englishman, among whose compan-
ions was John Hemming.
    But the killing of whites, when it occurred, never did, the Indians any
good. The whites always had more guns and more resources-an inex-
haustible supply. They also brought the invisible influenza and other
viruses that could cause mass destruction of the Indians. The fatal power
of such infection was something that the closed Indian societies never
comprehended when they came into contact with Europeans. Along the
river banks throughout Amazonia the Indian population was in large part
decimated, and often replaced by what Hemming calls «a growing prole-
tariat of semi-acculturated and discontented free Indians and mixed races
(caboclos)."
    In 1835, this population exploded in the most violent and revolutionary
of all nineteenth-century Brazilian rebellions, the Cabanagem revolt,
named after the migrants' cabana huts on the flood plains near Belem. Led
by priests, rubber workers, and mutinous soldiers, the revolt was a mass
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 205

popular uprising of the caboclos and large numbers of Indians against
property owners and government officials. The rebellion was put down
with great ferocity. Some thirty thousand lives were lost, a fifth of the pop-
ulation of the region. The rise in world demand for rubber brought new
settlers and new international attention at the end of the century. The rub-
ber tappers pushed far up into the tributaries of the Amazon and toward
the border territory of Acre, which was also claimed by Bolivia and Peru. In
1903, after a series of revolts and plots, and much international intrigue,
Acre became part of Brazil.
   Brazilian rubber could not compete with the new plantations in Asia,
and the region once more sank back into relative obscurity, though not be-
fore more wild schemes and ambitions had been consumed by the jungle,
including the infamous and corruption-ridden construction of the
Madeira-Mamore railroad in the early part of the century and the failed at-
tempts at industrialized plantation agriculture by Henry Ford in the 1930s
and the billionaire Daniel K. Ludwig in the 1960s-all well-known tales of
greed, naivete, and ecological ignorance, which are described with verve by
Hecht and Cockburn and others in what is sure to be a new wave of travel-
ers' tales of horror and disaster provoked by the growing interest in the
Amazon. II A more realistic perspective was provided in the 1920s by Ken-
neth Grubb, a missionary who wrote, in a sad reflection of the destruction
of Indian communities, that it was possible to travel from Belem to Peru
    without seeing a distinctly tribal Indian. These rivers are silent
    today, except for the lap of the waters along some deserted beach,
    the hoarse cry of the parrots or the call of the inambu. The past has
    gone, with its people, in central Amazonia, leaving only that bitter
    sense of impotence, as of being present before a consuming confla-
    gration and the same time being powerless to assist. I2


                                        III
The decimation of the Amazonian Indians, leaving a population of no
more than 200,000 today, is only part of the story of the destruction of the

11 The best book on these topics, much mined though rarely acknowledged, is that
by Warren Dean, Brazil and the Struggle for Rubber: A Study in Environmental His-
tory (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987). For a discus-
sion of the new, or rather the revived, genre of Amazonian tales see Stephen Milk's
reviews in the TLS, December 7-13, 1990, which examine Anthony Smith's Explor-
ers of the Amazon (London and New York: Viking, 1990), Dennison Berwick's
Amazon (London: Hutchinson, 1990), and Stephan Nugent's Big Mouth (Great
Britain: Fourth Estate, 1990).
12Cited by John Hemming in Amazon Frontier, 246.
206 • NakedTropics

rain forest. Just as destruction of the forest itself brings with it the destruc-
tion of millions of unrecorded plants and creatures, so the destruction of
the Amazon Indians destroys knowledge of the forest acquired over mil-
lennia. What is new since the 1980s is the scale of encroachment in the last
redoubt of the Amazon's native people.
    World Resources, 1990-1991: A Guide to the Global Environment, a mar-
velously comprehensive, well-produced handbook, cautiously estimates
the yearly loss of tropical rain forest in Brazil to be somewhere between 1.7
and 8 million hectares. I3 The disparity between the figures demonstrates
how tentative most calculations remain and how urgent the need for more
research is. The World Resources experts believe that some 7 percent of the
forested area has already been lost. Dennis J. Mahar, in his World Bank
study Government Policies and Deforestation in Brazil's Amazon Region, es-
timates on the basis of Landsat satellite images that the figure is as high as
12 percent. I4 Both would agree, however, that if the present rate of clearing
continues, 15 percent of all plant life in the Latin American rain forest
would become extinct by the year 2000. While accurate figures are difficult
to come by, Mahar argues that "because pasture has clearly been the pre-
dominant form of agricultural land use in the region, cattle ranching
would appear to be the leading proximate cause of deforestation." Small
farming activity has also increased, but farm plots are often sold or aban-
doned after only a few years of use. These areas are then converted to pas-
ture or quickly invaded by secondary growth. Logging has also contributed
to deforestation.
    Hecht and Cockburn blame the generals who ran Brazil between 1964
and 1985 for the destruction of the rain forest. The generals must be held
responsible for what occurred during these two decades, but like virtually
all political explanations based on a single cause, this one is too simple and
it may seem to imply that the solutions are simple as well, which, unfortu-
nately, is not the case. In fact, the great push to the interior was under way
well before the military coup of 1964; and, not surprisingly, it continued
unabated after the military retreated to the barracks in 1985. The inaugu-
ration of the new capital, Brasilia, in 1960, and the coincidental opening of
two arterial roads into the forest-the two-thousand-mile dirt highway
moving north between the new capital and Belem at the mouth of the
Amazon and the beginning of the Brasilia-Porto Velho road moving
west~were the events that it1 many respects set the contemporary disaster
in motion. Both enterprises were part of a government policy of opening


13Report by the World Resources Institute, World Resources, 1990-1991: A Guide to
the Global Environment (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).
14Dennis J. Mahar, Government Policies and Deforestation in Brazil's Amazon Region
(Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1989).
                                      The Tragedy of the Amazon • 207

up the resources of the backlands to development-a policy broadly sup-
ported at the time by most of the different groups that make up Brazilian
society. The idea of building a capital in the interior and of developing the
Amazon goes back at least as far as the eighteenth century. Hecht and
Cockburn do not make it sufficiently clear that the building of Brasilia and
the Brasflia-Belem highway marked the high point of the boom under
President Juscelino Kubitschek, a good democrat in his own fashion and a
politician who epitomized the expansionism and optimism, as well as the
pervasive corruption, of the fifties.
    The approach of Kubitschek to development during the mid-1950s had
very grave consequences which many authors fail to recognize, partly be-
cause they are excessively concerned with establishing continuity with the
exploitative Portuguese past. But Kubitschek and the military geostrate-
gists who took power after 1964, such as the eminence grise of the military
regime, General Golbery do Couto e Silva, did something radically new;
they pressed for a network of roads linking the northeast to the center and
south of the country to the Amazon basin. The credits and the special fa-
vors granted to southern businessmen were intended at first to encourage
them to invest in a region in which they saw few prospects for profit. But
the roads to the south undermined the assumption that had dominated all
previous thinking about the Amazon-the central importance of the
rivers. Now land routes were to have preference over riverine communica-
tion and forest clearance over forest extraction, and water was to be con-
sidered a source of energy and not of life.
    The dirt road to Belem was soon paved, and between 1960 and 1970
some 300,000 migrants went to seek their fortune along the highway. The
trans-Amazonian highway intended to link the northeast and Amazonia,
followed, as did the Cuiaba-Porto Velho highway in the states of Mato
Grosso and Rondonia. The most severe deforestation has been concen-
trated along these roads and the many roads that feed into them, a process
which is shown dramatically in the Oxford Conservation Atlas. The popu-
lation of Rondonia grew by over 21 percent per annum between 1970 and
1978. In Rondonia and Mato Grosso over one-fourth of the forest has dis-
appeared during the 1980s.
    As the huge road-building programs opened up the region, govern-
ment-sponsored projects to build new settlements attracted migrants from
Brazil's poverty-stricken northeast as well as from its southern states,
where extensive mechanization of agriculture and the spread of cash crops
such as soya were displacing thousands of smallholders. The military
regime encouraged cattle raising by providing special fiscal incentives, as
well as easy and subsidized credit to would-be ranchers, and extensive ben-
efits to businesses that invested in the region, exempting them from excise
duties and from corporate income taxes for ten to fifteen years. Many of
208 • NakedTropics

the ranch owners who received some $700 million in tax credits were never
seriously interested in producing beef-they acquired property only to
take advantage of the economic benefits. Once they received the tax cred-
its, they sold or abandoned the projects the credits were supposed to stim-
ulate, but not before these speculative enterprises caused extensive damage
to the environment.
    Businessmen from the south of Brazil, especially the Sao Paulo-based as-
sociation of Amazon businessmen, lobbied the central government in
Brasilia to subsidize cattle-ranching ventures, and in 1974 the government
set up the extensive Polamazonia program to encourage selective invest-
ment in production intended for export such as beef, timber, and minerals.
Subsidized rural credit was extended on very favorable terms (twenty-year
investment credit was made available at a nominal annual rate of 12 percent
to ranchers, for example). Because a land title was required to qualify for a
subsidy, Amazonia's sharecroppers, tenants, and squatters were, in effect, de-
nied access to this capital, which served to further concentrate wealth and
land ownership throughout the region. A destructive sequence was estab-
lished in the early 1970s which was to repeat itself throughout the Amazon
basin. Forest was cleared and opened up through the sweated labor of poor
migrants whose lands were later appropriated by large estates. The forests
cut down and burned for conversion to pasture during the dry season were
planted with African forage grains, which seldom provided more than two
to three years of good fodder. Phosphorous levels in the soil thereafter fell
dramatically, and the grasses were soon overtaken by shrubs and weeds.
    Overstocked, compacted, leached, and degraded, these lands will re-
quire at least one hundred years to recover. Since government credits had
been used by the proprietors to offset their expenses elsewhere in Brazil,
the absentee landowners were not greatly concerned by the waste of the
land. The small farmers in the meanwhile were forced to push on toward
new frontiers to the west-first to Rondonia, then in the 1980s to Acre and
Roraima. The pattern was one of settlement and then of the settlements'
failure, of land grabbing and violent protest against it, of the concentration
of ownership and ecological devastation.
    All of this is described in absorbing detail by Anthony Hall in his splen-
did book Developing Amazonia. Hall convincingly demonstrates that:
     the notion of Amazonia as a vast, fertile empty space ready to per-
     manently absorb the land-hungry masses from northeastern and
     southern Brazil is a myth. IS

 Anthony L. Hall, Developing Amazonia: Deforestation and Social Conflict in
15
Brazil's Carajas Programme (Manchester and New York: Manchester University
Press, 1989).
                                      The Tragedy of the Amazon • 209

   In his more journalistic book, Adrian Cowell, who in the early 1980s
was filming the onslaught of settlers, job seekers, entrepreneurs, and spec-
ulators in Rondonia for a British TV documentary unit, describes how he
became increasingly appalled by the scale and senselessness of this new
phase of Amazonian development:
    The History of Amazonia may have been littered with visionaries
    like Ford and Ludwig who fruitlessly tried to impose some dream
    or vision on the forest. But here was a government and a whole so-
    ciety marching into the forest with the manic zest of a lemming mi-
    gration, hypnotised by an obsession which was even more difficult
    than the lemmings' to understand. We seemed to have arrived at
    one of the frontier's dead-ends, where the forest mirrored the ab-
    surdity of the society confronting it. 16


                                     IV
The Amazon frontier soon reproduced the large landowning (latifundia)
pattern of the northeast and south of Brazil. In 1985, 30 percent of rural
properties in Brazil were less than two hectares, yet they occupied only 0.1
percent of farmland; 1.9 percent of properties of over a thousand hectares
occupied 57 percent of the agricultural land. The largest 152 Amazonian
estates occupied 40 million hectares, equal to the total area of cultivated
land in Brazil. These estates, moreover, do not create many jobs, since lum-
bering and cattle ranching require few employees.
   At the same time the exploration of the Amazon lands created a vast
army of landless, temporary wage laborers who migrate to the urban cen-
ters and take jobs as seasonal workers or try to make a living as indepen-
dent prospectors for gold (garimpeiros). Small farmers still produce 80
percent of the basic food crops and provide 82 percent of jobs in the east-
ern Amazon, but the concentration of landownership between 1985 and
1988 has caused the output of such basic staples as beans and cassava to fall
by 8 percent and 14 percent, respectively.
   In the eastern Amazon, and especially in the Araguaia-Tocantins region,
the expansion of settlement and ranching followed the highway, and was
accompanied by violent struggles over land. Until the 1950s, the economy
was based on the harvest of Brazil nuts (castanhas) and other forest prod-
ucts, and controlled by a few powerful families, who shipped the nuts
north to Belem. Between 1969 and 1975 the Maoist offshoot of the Brazil-
ian Communist Party established a guerrilla campaign in the region which

16Adrian Cowell, The Decade ofDestruction: The Crusade to Save the Amazon Rain
Forest (New York: H. Holt, 1990).
210 • NakedTropics

fought sporadically with the Brazilian army. The guerrillas were eventually
suppressed by thousands of troops.
    Two other major factors came into play here, each no less dangerous to
the ecology-one set in motion by mining for iron ore and the other by
gold. These processes of mineral extraction and their ecological and social
consequences are the subject of Anthony Hall's Developing Amazonia,
which examines the vast complex for mining iron ore and other minerals
called the Carajas project, and of David Cleary in his Anatomy of the Ama-
zon Gold Rush. 17 Both books, like Adrian Cowell's Decade of Destruction,
have the great advantage of avoiding the hyperbole that characterizes so
much writing about Brazil. Cowell has chosen, as he did in his television
documentaries, to follow the lives of ordinary people in the hope that these
case histories will help to explain the larger story. The three books taken
together re-create the fascinating history of the struggle in the Amazon as
it affects people in their everyday lives.
    Amazonian iron and gold could hardly have produced two more differ-
ent kinds of organizations. Carajas is a huge state enterprise, regional in
scope, mainly concerned with producing iron for export. To carryon the
mining it has been provided with dams, hydroelectric power, railroads,
and port facilities, and it has the benefit of large capital infusions from na-
tional and international investors. Prospecting for gold, by contrast, is gen-
erally an independent and uncontrolled activity, called garimpagem in
Brazil, which is carried on by small entrepreneurs and adventurers. The
large mining companies are implacable enemies of freelance prospectors,
who are continually penetrating company-held territory to set up their
clandestine mining operations.
    Only a small portion of the gold is sold to the state, and accurate pro-
duction figures, as always in the Amazon, are impossible to come by. Cleary
estimates that there are hundreds of thousands of garimpeiros. The gold
they produce was estimated in the late 1980s to be worth over one billion
dollars annually. Gold mining technology is cheap, and it is easy to run, the
most complex machinery needed being a small internal combustion en-
gine. According to Cleary, in 1987 mining professionals estimated that the
garimposwere producing around 120 metric tons of gold annually-which
could place Brazil third among world gold producers, behind only South
Africa and Russia-an amount equal to the great nineteenth-century gold
rushes. The most dramatic garimpo was the one found in 1979" at Serra
Pelada, about ninety kilometers from the city of Maraba in the south of
Para. At its peak in 1983, Serra Pelada produced one metric ton of gold a


17David Cleary, Anatomy of the Amazon Gold Rush (Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press, 1990).
                                         The Tragedy of the Amazon • 211

year and had some 100,000 garimpeiros and traders who removed entire
hills with pickaxes and shovels.
    The gold prospectors do not cut down large tracks of forest or take up
large stretches of land as the ranchers do, but the ecological impact of their
activities can be devastating. The most insidious and lasting damage comes
from mercury, which is used to separate the gold from the ore, and poisons
both the environment and the garimpeiros. If the garimpeiros were, as
Cleary suggests, producing over a hundred metric tons of gold per annum
in the Brazilian Amazon during the 1980s, an equivalent amount of mer-
cury escaped into the atmosphere in the form of vapor as it was burned off
during the amalgamation process.
    In addition, mercury is often spilled into the ground and rivers near the
garimpo. Testing in the Madeira River found mercury levels in fish several
times higher than World Health Organization safety levels. Cleary takes a rel-
atively benign view of the garimpeiros, rightly saying that they are among the
few groups of poor rural Brazilians who have a chance to rise in the world.
But the invasion of 45,000 garimpeiros into the lands of the Yanomami in the
far north of Brazil is wreaking havoc among the indigenous population. I8
Lucio Flavio Pinto, a courageous Amazonian journalist whose paper, lornal
Pessoal (published since 1987), was almost alone in reporting in depth on
Amazonian politics and corruption, points out that small-scale mining is
sometimes carried on by extremely well financed operators. Pinto estimates
that there were 1,200 clandestine airstrips and at least 800 small airplanes to
get the gold out, while the gold business has allowed some local bosses to ex-
ercise almost medieval feudal domination over the districts. I9
    The Carajas iron project started as recently as 1967, when a helicopter
with engine trouble landed in a bare patch in the forest southwest of
Maraba. It was carrying several geologists who were astonished to find that
they were standing on the top of a hill made up of billions of tons of high-
grade iron are, bauxite, manganese, copper, nickel, and cassiterite. The
Brazilian government quickly took over the site and assigned the state-
owned mining company CVRD (Companhia Vale do Rio Dace) to develop
it. The Greater Carajas Project, as it became known, was granted control of
a region of some 900,000 square kilometers-the size of France and
Britain combined-and started an enormous concentrated effort to build
roads, a railway, dams, and a hydroelectric power plant.
    The Carajas program has four major components: the iron ore mine, a
highly mechanized open-pit mine that began operation in 1986; two alu-
minum plants, one in Belem, the other in Sao Luis, the capital of the state
of Maranhao; the Tucurui hydroelectric complex on the Tocantins River;

18''A morte ronda os indios na floresta;' Veja, September 19, 1990, 70-77.
19"Belem Para," Jornal PessoalII, no. 64 (July 1990).
212 • NakedTropics

and a nine-hundred-kilometer railroad inaugurated in 1985 to link Cara-
jas and Sao Luis, where a deepwater port was opened a year later. Japanese
corporations are the single biggest group of investors, through cheap loans
of $500 billion to the Brazilian government. The European Economic
Community invested $600 million. The World Bank provided $304 mil-
lion, and $250 million came from u.S. commercial banks. Even the USSR
provided $60 million. The CVRD contracts to supply iron to Japanese and
European steel producers were tied to the loans. The CVRD is immensely
profitable. Although ranked only 294th in the Fortune Global 500 in 1990,
it was first in the world in profits as a percentage of sales (65 percent) and
of assets (45 percent).20
   Although within the CVRD enclave itself environmental deterioration
has been carefully monitored and controlled, the company's own territory
looks increasingly like a Potemkin village, surrounded everywhere by dev-
astation. The Carajas program acted as a strong population magnet, at-
tracting thousands of construction workers, gold panners, small farmers,
and speculators into the region which until very recently had been tropical
forest. The insatiable demands for the charcoal used to smelt the iron ore
will eventually destroy over 70,000 acres of forest every year, and has al-
ready led to destruction of the surrounding forest in a manner recalling
the insatiable demands of the sugar mills that consumed the coastal forests
four centuries before. The Tucurui hydropower complex, for which 35,000
people were displaced, has the largest dam in any of the world's tropical
forests and it caused the flooding of 2,500 square kilometers of uncleared
forest. The hydropower complex is central to the entire scheme-supply-
ing electricity at subsidized prices to the iron mine, the aluminum plants,
and the industries along the Carajas-Sao Luis Railroad.
    The profitability of the Carajas project depends heavily on these huge
state investments and on the cheap energy they will produce. Electronorte,
the state monopoly electricity company in the Amazon, has grandiose
plans for sixty-three new reservoirs in the Amazon basin, twenty-seven for
the Tocantins-Araguaia region alone. 21 Road and dam building is im-
mensely profitable, and all the major Brazilian public works and construc-
tion companies, such as Camargo Correa, Andrade Gutierrez, and Mendes
Junior, are involved in the projects, which absorb vast sums of government
resources. Lucio Flavio Pinto estimated that those expenditures represent
some 15 percent of Brazil's foreign debt. 22

20Fortune, July 30, 1990.
21Wolfgang J. Junk and J. A. S. Nunes de Mello, "Impactos eco16gicos das represas
hidreletricas na bacia Amaz6nica brasileira," Estudos Avanrados 4, no. 8 (Janu-
ary-Apri11990): 126-143.
22"Belem Para;' lornal Pessoal, II, no. 64 (July 1990): 10.
                                     The Tragedy of the Amazon • 213

   Many of the schemes for dams and reservoirs are particularly ill consid-
ered. The Balbina reservoir near Manaus, capital of the state of Amazonas,
covered an area of dense tropical forests and is, like almost all other Ama-
zonian basin reservoirs, extremely shallow; it therefore produces a low
level of energy per square kilometer flooded. Since no environmental im-
pact studies or land survey was made before the flooding, no one really
knows what potential mineral resources were submerged in the process.
No programs for saving animals were set up, nor was there provision made
for fish ladders at any of the dams. The deterioration of the quality of the
impounded water through decomposition and absorption of organic mat-
ter can lead to a lack of oxygen in the water, cause corrosion of the hy-
droelectric turbines, create a buildup of sulfuric acid, and help in the
proliferation of mosquitoes and the spread of intestinal diseases. Not sur-
prisingly, an epidemic of malaria broke out in the Amazon region, rising
from a reported 51,000 cases in 1970 to more than one million in 1990.
   Nowhere, moreover, have small projects been developed to provide
electricity to the rural populations. All the electrical power generated has
been for urban and industrial use, which only serves to increase migration
and to make more acute the crisis in producing food, which is largely
grown by the poor and vulnerable Amazon peasants. As the small farmers
and land-hungry migrants have faced the rapid concentration of land into
large holdings, society and the environment have been subject to damage
that Hall claims to be "unprecedented in Brazilian history."


                                    V
The end of military rule in 1985, if anything, speeded the process of eco-
logical depletion in the Amazon and intensified the growing confrontation
between large and small landowners. In 1986 it was estimated that 64 per-
cent of all conflicts over land in Brazil occurred in the Amazon. The Ama-
zon frontier also showed the highest incidence of murders involving more
than two victims.
   After 1985 the conflict in the Amazon changed. Powerful landed interests
became politically more aggressive, as the military, which had protected
them, retreated and the political system became more liberal. The economic
policy known as the Cruzado Plan of 1985-1986, which temporarily re-
duced speculative profits in the money markets, shifted investments to land
and property. The new civilian government also set up a ministry of agrar-
ian reform, and a program of land reform was announced.
   The proposed reform threatened to expropriate land that was not in use
and immediately caused more evictions and burning of forests as landown-
ers avidly began to open more pastures in order to prove the land was being
214 • NakedTropics

farmed. Peasants, too, occupied unused land on estates in the hope of ac-
quiring titles to it. Increasingly active workers' movements emerged during
the 1980s, organized by unions from the south and by the church. They
began to articulate peasant demands for land reform, while their members
harassed and in some cases killed landowners. At the same time a powerful
organization of landowners and ranchers, the Rural Democratic Union
(UDR), was formed to oppose even the mild proposals for land reform that
were put forward by the administration of President Jose Sarney. The
UDR's lobbying in Brasilia was highly successful, and the constitutional as-
sembly in 1988 voted down a proposal that would have allowed state expro-
priation of very large landholdings as part of a reform plan.
    Many saw the hand of the UDR behind the increasing sophistication
and violence of the ranchers' response to the rural workers' organizations,
as well as the rising number of assassinations of union leaders, church men
and women, and labor lawyers. Amnesty International's Brazil: Authorized
Violence in Rural Areas, a report first published in September 1988, tells the
story in grisly and horrifying detail. A steady increase in reported killings
of peasants in rural areas had occurred throughout Brazil, more than one
thousand between 1980 and 1986. Many of these killings were connected
with disputes over land, and were carried out by hired gunmen (pistoleiros)
employed by landowners; but there was also increasing participation by
state policemen.
    The failure to pursue serious investigations of these crimes was tanta-
mount to complicity in them, and Amnesty concluded that the pattern of
assassinations of workers' leaders was "so persistent that it facilitates fresh
killings and may amount to deliberate permissiveness toward them."
Amnesty could find only two cases in which hired gunmen were convicted
and sentenced for politically motivated killings and not a single case in
which those accused of commissioning the killing were brought to justice.
    The entire Amazon region was, in the words of Anthony Anderson, "in-
creasingly out of the control of the public sector."23 Whereas government
incentives and investment had once been a sine qua non for private activ-
ity, now ranchers, farmers, miners, loggers, and charcoal producers were
working on their own. Ranchers were opening their own roads. Private
gold mines were polluting the rivers. Settlements of new colonies were
spreading along the southern flank of the region and overwhelming the
frontier communities already in place.
    By 1987, in the Cachimbo region near the center of Brazil where the
Kreen-Akrore Indians had killed John Hemming's fellow explorer in 1961

23 Anthony B. Anderson, ed., Alternatives to Deforestation: Steps toward Sustainable
Use ofthe Amazon Rain Forest (New York: Columbia University Press, 1990).
                                       The Tragedy of the Amazon • 215

and where in 1968 Adrian Cowell had filmed his The Tribe That Hides from
Man, not a single Kreen-Akrore remained. Nor did most of the forest.
During the 1970s two roads had joined up at Cachimbo, and hordes of
prospectors had found gold in the Peixoto Azevedo River. The Kreen-
Akrore had been forced from their forest redoubt by an epidemic of flu and
were starving to death. With the tribe facing extinction, a handful of sur-
vivors were flown to the relative protection of the Xingu National park in
Mato Grosso. The region where the vast forest had stood was now popu-
lated by the cattle of ranchers and land speculators, some living in colo-
nists' towns close to the river. Cachimbo itself is a huge military base, used
to test rocket technology that was later sold to Saddam Hussein, and it was
revealed in 1990 to have housed a deep pit intended for the underground
testing of nuclear weapons.
    The burning seasons-whether for clearing farmland, ranch land, or
charcoal burning or for mining operations-was now affecting a great arc
from Acre and Rondonia along the western, southern, and eastern fringes
of the Amazon rain forest. The global impact of this transformation in the
Amazon and the effects of burning became dramatically evident in the
mid-1980s, when satellite imaging revealed to scientists for the first time
the monumental scale of the fires. In 1987 the dry season was unusually
long, and as a result the forest fires in Amazonia were exceptionally intense
and widespread. On August 24, 1987, Brazil's Institute for Space Research
(INPE) detected 6,800 fires just in the states of Mato Grosso and a small
portion of southern Para and eastern Rondonia. Smoke from the Amazon
fires lasted until December and forced the closing of most of the region's
airports.
    The fires in the Amazon are entirely man-made; they are not to be com-
pared, for example, with the raging fires that strike in the American West.
For trees to burn in the wet tropical forest they need to be felled and left for
two or three months to dry. They are then ignited usually by people who
want to clear the land, sometimes simply in the hope of selling it. That fire
does not spread naturally in this region is central to the surveillance efforts
of the Brazilian space institute, which began using meteorological satellites
to provide four images each day of the Amazon region. Using high-resolu-
tion satellite imagery, one can obtain a good map of areas burned, pin-
pointing particular properties. 24
    At the peak of the burning season, from the end of August until early
September, this space imaging revealed as many as eight thousand separate
fires in a single day throughout the region. Since at least half the rainfall in

24Alberto Setzer, Camoes Center Quarterly 2, nos. 1 and 2 (spring and summer
1990): 22-24. Also in Veja, July 5, 1989, 104.
216 • NakedTropics

the Amazon basin comes from water that is condensed from within the
forest atmosphere itself, the scale of deforestation threatened to heavily re-
duce the region's rainfall. But it was the scale of the burning forest revealed
by the satellites that brought home to scientists that what was occurring in
Brazil was no longer only a Brazilian disaster, it was a real threat to the
global climate.
   The reason for this threat lay in the vital link in the carbon cycle be-
tween climate and forest. Carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight make wood
and release oxygen in a process of photosynthesis. In the opposite reaction,
wood decomposes or burns, producing energy and carbon dioxide. What
is important is the change in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere.
Since carbon dioxide acts as a heat-trapping gas, it keeps the earth warmer
than it would normally be. The burning of the Brazilian forest dramati-
cally shifts the balance, changing from a situation where much carbon,
perhaps 150 tons, is retained in the total mass of living organisms or "bio-
mass," to a system where only a small amount of carbon, around fifteen
tons, is retained in grassland or pasture. It is because of this process, in
which the forest is transformed into grassland or pasture, that Brazil be-
comes dangerous globally for its release of carbon dioxide. 25
   How dangerous? Jose Goldemberg, a renowned Brazilian physicist and
former president of the University of Sao Paulo, estimated that the Ama-
zon fires approximated the level of the carbon dioxide emissions from all
of North America and exceeded that contributed by all of Western Eu-
rope. 26 Moist tropical forests contain approximately 35 percent of the
world's living terrestrial carbon pool, according to Anthony Anderson in
his introduction to the useful collection of essays by experts Alternatives to
Deforestation. The cautious estimate by World Resources is that deforesta-
tion is second only to fossil fuels as a human source of atmospheric carbon
dioxide, almost all of which comes from the tropics and overwhelmingly
from Brazil.
   The report Environmental Damage and Climatic Change by the Ditchley
Foundation, a body not exactly famous for its extremism, states without
hesitation that "global warming is ... the ultimate environmental threat."
New global measures of the surface temperature of the oceans, according
to the Ditchley report, show a rise of 0.1 degrees centigrade per year for the

25Foster Brown in "The Burning of Brazil: A Discussion with Foster Brown and Al-
berto Setzer," Camoes Center Quarterly 2, nos. 1 and 2 (spring and summer 1990):
20.
26Jose Goldemberg, ((A Amazonia e seu futuro," Folha de Sao Paulo, January 29,
1989, A3. However, Goldemberg, who became secretary of science and technology
in the Collor administration, gave much lower figures in a letter to the New York
Times (July 28, 1990).
                                       The Tragedy of the Amazon • 217

last eight years. This is a rate of 1.0 degrees centigrade per decade. An aver-
age global warming of 1.5 degrees centigrade would alter the climate be-
yond anything experienced by the planet in the past 10,000 years. 27
   There is a crude irony in this tragedy. The Brazilian politicians and mil-
itary strategists who planned and promoted the march to the west did so in
large part out of the desire to see Brazil make its mark on the world. They
succeeded in ways they never could have imagined. Brazil was indeed being
taken note of, but for causing a global environmental disaster. Out of the
vortex of fire, violence, and social and political conflict in the Amazon a
powerful human voice briefly but memorably emerged, that of Chico
Mendes.




27Pearce Wright, Environmental Damage and Climatic Change (Oxford: Ditchley
Foundation Report No. D88/4).
I.. TUE   I Y   KA 0 \
                                                      CHAPTER            12
                                                Chico Mendes
                       "What crawling villain preaches abstinence and wraps himself
                          In fat oflambs? no more I follow, no more obedience pay!"
                                      -William Blake, America: A Prophecy, 1793




On December 22, 1988, Francisco «Chico" Mendes, a Brazilian union orga-
nizer, was murdered at his modest house in Xapuri, a remote rubber-trad-
ing outpost of five thousand people in the Brazilian border state of Acre.
Mendes was a plump, agreeable, talkative activist who had tried to protect
the livelihood of his fellow rubber tappers, which was threatened by the
destruction of the Amazonian rain forest and the encroaching cattle
ranches. To do so he had allied himself with prominent members of the in-
ternational environmental movement. He spoke the lingua franca of visit-
ing anthropologists from Berkeley and Paris, European TV producers, and
Washington environmental lobbyists. Mendes's aim had been to protect
the forest, by persuasion if possible, by force if need be. He wanted the
Brazilian government to promote «extractive reserves," a policy by which
ecologically desirable activities such as rubber tapping and nut collecting
could continue, but environmentally destructive forest clearance would be
prevented.
   Chico Mendes's assassins were gunmen of a particularly nasty ranching
clan, the Alves da Silvas. The Alves da Silva family was originally from the
state of Minas Gerais in south-central Brazil, and had moved during the
1960s to the southern Brazilian state of Parana. In the mid-1970s they
came to Acre, on Brazil's northwestern border with Bolivia and Peru. Each
move, it was revealed later, was occasioned by the need to escape arrest for
a previous murder.


                                    219
220 • NakedTropics

    The assassination of Chico Mendes was ordered by Darly Alves da Silva
and was carried out by Darci, his twenty-year-old son. An archetypal, old-
time backlands boss, Darly lived on a 10,000-acre ranch with his wife, three
mistresses, thirty children, and an assortment of cowboys who could have
come out of the Dirty Dozen. He perfectly fit the demonology of Amazon-
ian ecological destruction. The cattle ranchers were to a large extent
responsible for the vast clearing, burning, and degradation of the Amazon-
ian landscape that occurred throughout the 1980s in Brazil. Chico Mendes,
little known within Brazil, had become through his connections with for-
eign ecological experts one of the best known abroad of the new genera-
tion of grassroots peasant leaders to emerge during the twilight years of
the Brazilian military regime. Of the many such leaders who were selected
for assassination by hired guns of the large landowners, Mendes was one of
the few with influential friends abroad.
    Chico Mendes became as well known internationally as Pele and Carmen
Miranda, with the difference that he is seen as a martyr from the worlds of
the dark Brazilian forest and violent backlands, which seem to have special
glamour for North Americans and Europeans and none at all for Brazil-
ians. David Cleary, in his sober account of the Amazonian gold miners
(garimpeiros), notes that there is a long tradition where ((people could be
enticed into believing almost anything about Amazonia;'l and several of
the recent North American and European books about Mendes are very
much of this genre. Considered together, however, they provide a revealing
picture of Chico Mendes, the causes of his death, and his transformation
into an international ((ecology martyr."




Acre, the backwoods region where Chico Mendes lived, suffered heavily
from the violence and destruction that swept through Amazonia in the
1980s. Once claimed by Bolivia, the region was incorporated into Brazil in
1903 during the rubber boom. In the 1940s, when the United States sought
to maintain a supply of rubber after the Japanese takeover of Southeast
Asia, a ((war for rubber" was declared by the government of President
Getulio Vargas. Poor peasants were mobilized in the drought-plagued
northeast of Brazil and sent west into the Amazon forest to tap Acre's rub-
ber trees. But after the emergency was over, Acre once again became a re-
mote, thinly populated federal territory, accessible almost exclusively by
river from Manaus and Belem.


1David Cleary) Anatomy of the Brazilian Gold Rush (Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press) 1990)) 203.
                                                        Chico Mendes • 221

    The territory became a state in 1962. As elsewhere in Amazonia, a new
highway, extending from the state of Rondonia in 1971, broke Acre's isola-
tion from the center and south of Brazil, though the road from Rondonia
remained little more than a dirt track through the forest, passable only for
a few months of the year. Nevertheless, in the inexorable Brazilian process
of settlement, land grabbing, ranching, and social conflict soon followed.
The new state government, having high hopes for ranching, encouraged
private investment inland, promoting Acre as a potential corridor to the
Pacific-five hundred miles to the west with the Andes standing in be-
tween and no roads yet constructed.
    This, however, was for the future-or so the government's publicists
promised. One-third of the land in Acre changed hands from 1971 to 1977,
much of it with forged titles. Land prices along the highway rose 2,000 per-
cent. Financial groups from the south of Brazil bought out rubber estates
and sought to evict the tappers, leading to violent fights. With the exten-
sion of another highway from the state capital, Rio Branco, to Brasileia on
the Bolivian border, Xapuri, a sleepy port halfway between the two towns,
became the new cattle frontier. Between 1970 and 1984, the number of cat-
tle in Xapuri County rose from 7,000 to 52,000 head. Augusta Dwyer, a
Canadian freelance writer whose book is among the best written and most
evocative of these books on the Amazon, visited Chico Mendes some
months before his assassination when he told her that:
    From 1970 until 1975 or 1976 all our comrades who lived along the
    margin of the road to Brasileia were expelled using the most violent
    means possible. Their shacks were burned down, gunmen would
    show up on their land, their animals were killed. 2
   Many of these dispossessed rubber tappers, some 10,000 according to
the Catholic Church's land commission, crossed the frontier into Bolivia.
Others migrated to the capital, Rio Branco, whose population rose from
36,000 in 1970 to 92,000 in 1980.
   In the new economic situation brought about by the highway and the
increase in cattle ranching, the bosses who had controlled the rubber trade
and held the tappers in virtual bondage through debt found their profits
declining so drastically that they were only too glad to sell off their rubber
estates to the ranchers. As elsewhere in Amazonia, the new roads to the
south and east broke the old riverine trading and business connections,
opening up the region to the aggressive intervention of powerful economic
interests from the industrial heartland of Brazil, especially Sao Paulo. The
rubber tappers were left to look after themselves as best they could.

2Augusta Dwyer, Into the Amazon: The Struggle for the Rain Forest (San Francisco:
Sierra Club Books, 1990).
222 • NakedTropics

   Thus, as the rubber trade diminished, the tappers gained by default a
certain degree of independence, but their livelihood also became highly
dependent on the government, which imposed tariffs and taxes to keep the
price of cheaper imported rubber high. This was the same government
that was simultaneously handing out easy credit and tax write-offs to
southern businessmen if they invested in Amazonia cattle ranching. But
despite a falloff in rubber production (in the municipality of Xapuri, for
instance, where 1,250 tons of rubber were produced in 1971, only 403 tons
were produced in 1981), Acre remained Brazil's largest producer of natural
rubber. In 1980 some 23,000 families were still directly dependent on tap-
ping native rubber trees for their livelihood. 3


                                        II
Born poor in one of the most remote and backward parts of Brazil, Chico
Mendes was illiterate until he was twenty years old. His grandfather had
migrated from Ceara in the northeast of Brazil to Acre in the 1920s and
settled near Xapuri. Mendes grew up in the forest, working as a rubber tap-
per from the age of nine. His family lived in a modest hut in a forest clear-
ing at the center of a clover leaf of forest trails used by the rubber tappers.
Each trail gave access to between one hundred and two hundred rubber
trees over an area of seven hundred or so acres, forming part of a large tract
of forest, or seringal. These estates were owned by well-to-do businessmen
in the town of Manaus, a thousand miles downriver.
   In 1962, when he was eighteen, Chico Mendes met Euclides Fernandes
Tavora, a Communist and former army lieutenant hiding out in the fron-
tier jungle. Their relations remain obscure, but there seems no doubt that
Tavora taught Chico to read and write. He also introduced Mendes, ac-
cording to Andrew Revkin in The Burning Season, to ((the basic tenets of
Marxism," giving the young rubber tapper a "mastery of the vocabulary of
socialism and communism."4 In 1965, Tavora, who settled in the district
for a time with a local woman, disappeared as mysteriously as he had ar-
rived, but he had given Mendes a sense of the larger world that existed be-
yond the forest. Mendes himself later recalled:

3The best short introduction to the social and economic history ofAcre is provided
by Keith Bakx in "The Shanty Town, Final Stage of Development? The Case of
Acre," in The Future of the Amazon, ed. David Goodman and Anthony Hall (New
York: St. Martin's Press, 1990),49-69.
4Andrew Revkin, The Burning Season: The Murder of Chico Mendes and the Fight
for the Amazon Rain Forest (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990). For further discus-
sion on Euclides Tavora see "Was Tavora There?" New York Review of Books, No-
vember 7, 1991, which includes responses from Augusta Dwyer and Laura
Renshaw, Grants Manager for Oxfam America, as well as research by historian
Peter Beattie in the Brazilian military archives.
                                                     Chico Mendes • 223

    [Tavora] gave me a lot of advice about how to organize in the trade
    union movement ... Despite the defeats, humiliations, and mas-
    sacres, the roots of the movement were always there, he said. The
    plants would always germinate again sooner or later, however much
    they were attacked.

    Chico Mendes moved to Xapuri in 1971. He had learned enough from
Euclides to teach for a year in the literacy campaign sponsored by the mili-
tary regime, and he worked as a salesman in the shop of Guilherme Zaire, a
local warehouse owner and rubber trader of Syrian origin. In 1975 Mendes
took advantage of classes in union organizing set up by a representative of
the state-sponsored Brazilian Confederation of Agricultural Workers
(CONTAG). The rubber tappers, faced with the expansion of ranching and
the transfer of titles to the forest where they worked, in 1976 devised an in-
creasingly successful method of resistance, the empate. The empate was an
organized showdown between the rubber tappers and the workers sent in
by the ranching interests to cut down the forest. The unions claimed this
was legal under the Brazilian civil code, which allows a person "to maintain
or reinstate his claim through his own force, provided he does so immedi-
ately." The empate was not a form of Ghandhian passive resistance, but, as
Cowell's TV documentaries (if not his book), Revkin's photographs, and,
in particular, Dwyer's account make clear, it used tactics of pressure and
persuasion. Dwyer describes it as:

    In many respects, a show of class force, a large group of people,
    often including entire families, descending on the ill-paid workers
    who were slaving away to destroy the forest. Their empate was first
    an attempt to bring these fellow workers around to the other side,
    to make them understand that they were taking the food from the
    mouths of their comrades. It was also a statement, one that said to
    everyone: "You will have to kill us to get us out of here."

   The problem with this strategy was that the right to defend land by force
was also claimed by the rich landowners. In the general atmosphere of law-
lessness that permeated the frontier, it is hardly surprising that the larger
proprietors, reacting to the empates, turned increasingly to gunmen to de-
fend their claims.
   Political changes in the south of Brazil were also beginning to affect
Acre during the 1970s. Brazil's military regime had maintained control
partly through secret services that repressed or infiltrated dissident move-
ments, but the regime had always been an odd hybrid that never aban-
doned the formalities of elections. In 1965 an artificial two-party system
had been imposed after the coup. Ironically, the military thereby created an
instrument for expressing antimilitary sentiment. To vote for the catchall
224 • NakedTropics

opposition group called the Brazilian Democratic Movement (MDB) was
to register dissatisfaction with the military regime. Chico Mendes had run
as a candidate for the MDB in the 1977 municipal election in Xapuri.
Sponsored by his then employer, the Syrian rubber trader Guilherme
Zaire, Mendes was elected with two other men who also worked for Zaire.
    He was not, however, particularly successful as a member of the munic-
ipal council. The chamber would empty when he launched into long, radi-
cal speeches, which even his opposition colleagues in MDB found
tiresome. Chico Mendes found his period on the municipal council a disil-
lusioning experience, but he justified his participation as well as his union
work as being consistent with the lessons Tavora had taught him. Tavora
had told him, Chico Mendes said, that "Lenin always said you shouldn't
stay out of a union just because it is yellow. You must join it and use your
ideas and strengthen the movement."
    During the late 1970s, however, several elements came together to help
the increasingly desperate cause of the rubber tappers. The church, long a
bastion of landed interests, began to accept new, mainly foreign priests,
who were followers of liberation theology and had experience in organiz-
ing grassroots community groups. The regime's repressive methods, in-
cluding widespread use of torture, extensive surveillance and intimidation,
and the restriction of political rights, and the forced exile of many political
figures, had brought the Catholic Church squarely into the political and
social struggle.
    The church moved into the rural regions on two fronts, both of which
were important to union organizing in Acre. The radical priests helped to
establish grassroots communities committed to mutual assistance and po-
litical activism. By the early 1990s there were 80,000 of these CEBs ( Comu-
nidades Eclesiais de Base) in Brazil. The Catholic Church also set up
pastoral land commissions in 1975 and soon found them in the forefront
of the struggle for peasant rights. These organizations, intended to moni-
tor land conflicts and encourage priests and lay workers to help the peas-
ants defend their rights, became more radical as they found themselves
caught up in deadly day-to-day conflict. One of the best known of the
priests who became involved is Dom Pedro Casaldaliga, the bishop of Sao
Felix de Araguaia. A Catalan with long missionary experience in the Ama-
zon, Dom Pedro still refuses to baptize the children of some ranchers or
say mass on their land. «It made no sense to go out and denounce these
people for the killing of peasants and then celebrate mass in their build-
ings," he told Augusta Dwyer. «It would be like celebrating mass in a salon
of the International Monetary Fund ... or the UDR."
    The rural workers' unions in the south also sent organizers to the new
frontier who provided training, helped in union organizing, and provided
legal support for what had previously been mainly isolated and sponta-
                                                      Chico Mendes • 225

 neous resistance. With church and union support, Mendes helped found in
 1977 the Xapuri Rural Workers' Union, of which he later became president.
    As the situation grew more tense, a small coterie of activist Brazilian in-
tellectuals, social scientists, and journalists appeared in Acre. Mary Alle-
gretti, an anthropologist from Parana who came to Acre to study the
rubber tappers of the upper Taranaca River in the late 1970s, became a
close friend and adviser to Mendes. Elson Martins set up in Rio Branco a
lively alternative newspaper, Varadouro. Between 1978 and 1981 it pro-
vided a forum for people whose views were previously unheard. At the end
of the 1970s Chico Mendes, through contacts at the new federal university
of Acre, established clandestine links with the Communist Party of Brazil
 (PCdoB), a Maoist splinter party that had taken China as its ideological
model and was shifting its allegiance to Albania.
   Important changes were also taking place nationally. The intrigues of
the secret services began to threaten the military hierarchy itself and the
generals found themselves confronted by growing pressure for change
within society which they could no longer contain by force alone. Pressure
from the church, unions, and other sectors of civil society, in an alliance
not dissimilar to those forming in Acre, forced the regime to begin a slow
process of liberalization. In 1979 the constraining and artificial two-party
system was abandoned and amnesty was declared for both those accused
by the military regime of political crimes and those accused of gross
human rights violations. The new powerful union movement in the south,
led by the metalworkers of Sao Paulo, whose chairman was Luiz Inacio da
Silva, known as Lula, used the occasion to launch a new Workers' Party
(PT): the first grassroots political movement to emerge in Brazilian history
and a striking innovation in a country where political parties, including
those on the populist left, were organized from the top down.
   The conflict between union and ranchers in Acre, however, had by 1980
become increasingly ugly. Wilson Pinheiro, a union leader in Brasileia, a
town on Acre's border with Bolivia, was gunned down in his union's hall.
Pinheiro had befriended Chico Mendes and given him advice, and many
assumed that Mendes, who was traveling at the time, was also a target. The
enraged rubber tappers took the law into their own hands and shot to
death a rancher they suspected of being involved in the union leader's
death. The reaction of the Brazilian authorities to the death of the rancher
was rapid. Here was a case where "justice moved instantly," Chico Mendes
told Augusta Dwyer with heavy irony. "Twenty-four hours later dozens of
tappers were rounded up, tortured, their fingernails pulled out." Mendes
himself was charged under the national security law in Manaus. He re-
treated into the forest. In 1981 he was captured and brought before a mili-
tary tribunal in Manaus, where he was defended by lawyers from Lula's
Workers' Party. The charges were dropped in 1984.
226 • NakedTropics

                                     III
By the mid-1980s Mendes had developed links with an international net-
work of sympathizers, some of whom could provide financial support for
the rubber tappers' cause. He became particularly close to the British aca-
demic Tony Gross, who had been working for Oxfam in Brazil since 1980. 5
    In 1981 Oxfam began supporting the education programs in Xapuri
run by the workers' union and aimed at bringing literacy to families in the
interior of the municipality. By 1983 two producer cooperatives had been
founded, located at two of the five schools then in existence. The coopera-
tives were supported by funds from the church's land commission. The Xa-
puri union, headed by Mendes, broke with the Brasileia union, which was
then close to the party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB),
the successor of the MDB, and which was working with the government's
rubber agency to establish small rubber-processing plants to encourage
production and improve the quality of processed rubber. In Xapuri,
Mendes, who opposed cooperation with state agencies, remained affiliated
with the Workers' Party. In effect, Oxfam and Mendes had chosen to sup-
port the more radical of the two opposition parties to the military regime.
    Augusta Dwyer describes the differences as being between "those who
want a social democratic society, such as Sweden, and those who want
democratic socialism, a true workers' state. Chico belonged to this second
group." The split in Acre, however, reflected the wider split then occurring
nationally, leading in 1983 to the formation of an independent union orga-
nization (CUT), closely associated with the worker's party.
    Tony Gross, who was now responsible for all Oxfam Amazon projects,
also introduced Mary Allegretti to environmental activists in Washington. In
1985 Adrian Cowell, a British documentary producer, had, like many others
concerned with the headlong destruction of the rain forest, turned his atten-
tion to Acre, where the frontier expansion which had devastated Rondonia
was now threatening. For Chico Mendes, whom Cowell soon discovered, the
connections with Gross, Allegretti, and Cowell were fateful ones.
    Adrian Cowell was an award-winning filmmaker who had been visiting
Amazonia since the late 1950s and had watched with growing resentment
and exasperation the senseless destruction of the Amazon rain forest and
its indigenous inhabitants. In the early 1980s he became a close friend of
the Brazilian agronomist Jose Lutzenberger, long an outspoken critic of
Brazil's development projects in the Amazon region and active promoter
of the international Gaia movement to protect the world's ecology. Cowell
became convinced of the need to stem the tide of destruction caused in


STony Gross, Fight for the Forest: Chico Mendes in His Own Words (London:
Monthly Review Press, 1992).
                                                    Chico Mendes • 227

large part by what he considered "phony finance:' especially the credits,
grants, and loans that had financed the conversion of forest to grasslands
and allowed the road system to be pushed into the rain forest. He there-
fore, he writes, "turned towards the ultimate source of much of that fi-
nance-one of the world's controlling economic institutions-the World
Bank."
   In 1984, while making a film in Washington, D.C., Cowell met Bruce
Rich, an environmental lobbyist leading the campaign against the banks
that were financing Brazilian development, and a leading member of the
Natural Resources Defense Council. It was Cowell who suggested to Bruce
Rich that Jose Lutzenberger be invited to testify in Washington before the
Congressional Subcommittee on Natural Resources. A year later, in 1985,
at a strategy meeting in the United States, Cowell argued:
    [M]ost previous environmental campaigns, against whaling, for in-
    stance, had been about issues that could be decided in the First
    World. But as tropical forests were in the Third World, everything
    depended on political decisions in those countries.
   At this meeting Cowell also met Stephen Schwartzman, a trained an-
thropologist who had worked with the Kreen-Akrore, the Indians whom
Cowell had first filmed in the 1960s and whose remaining numbers had
been subsequently relocated in Xingu Park. The American Beldon and
Threshold Foundations later financed a visit by Schwartzman to Brazil to
solicit Brazilian help in developing a campaign to oppose the activities of
the banks. Cowell had doubts that the tropical forest campaign would be as
successful as the one on whaling. "Tropical forests may be more important
to the world," he said, "but they're less emotive, less cuddly than whales."
Chico Mendes, however, was eminently "cuddly."
   In 1985, Cowell and his colleagues were planning an offensive to make
the fate of the tropical forests a major concern of the multinational lending
institutions based in Washington with which U.S. influence was para-
mount. At the same time, in Brasilia, the capital of Brazil, the rubber tap-
pers' first national meeting came up with the central idea of the
movement, that of "extractive reserves," the oxymoron combining the idea
of preserving the forest while exploiting its products, such as latex and
tropical nuts. "The extractive reserve is a form of land reform," Chico
Mendes told Augusta Dwyer when she visited him in Xapuri in 1988. "The
Brazilian government would be pressured to expropriate the rubber estates
and designate them extractive reserves. The land would become the prop-
erty of the nation with the rubber tappers holding the title to use it." The
idea of "extractive reserves" could be appealing to an international audi-
ence, as Cowell immediately realized. It was at the Brasilia meeting, ac-
cording to Revkin, that Cowell turned his attention to the one man among
228 • NakedTropics

the tappers who seemed smart enough, cool enough, and honest enough to
take the tappers' message out of the forest and straight to the boardrooms
of the banks and the halls of Congress, both in and out of Brazil. That man
was Chico Mendes.
   Cowell, Revkin observes, "never liked to think that he was meddling in
things. He did not want to transform the movement, only to give it a
louder voice." Cowell's friend, Mary Allegretti, persuaded Mendes to mod-
ify his message. Instead of the "old calls for social justice, workers' rights,
and agrarian reform-standard issues of the political left ... ," he would
now call for the preservation of the Amazon. Allegretti and Cowell were
now, according to Revkin, "in the middle of a three-year relationship."
It was during this period that they introduced Mendes to ecological and
international aid agencies in Washington, with the help of Stephen
Schwartzman. Their objective was to force the international lending agen-
cies, especially the World Bank and the Inter-American Development
Bank, both highly dependent on u.S. financing and under attack by Rea-
gan administration ideologues, to make environmental concerns central to
their leading policy decisions.
   There was a ready target at hand. By 1986 the road through Acre was
being paved with Inter-American Development Bank funding. Allegretti
and Schwartzman agreed that the time had come for an assault on the
banks that were financing Brazilian roads and commitments in ranching.
Through Cowell, Allegretti learned that Mendes, who was campaigning
now on the Workers' Party ticket for a seat in the state legislature, had in-
cluded attacks on the road paving in his campaign speeches. This had not
made him very popular with local voters (he lost resoundingly), but it pro-
vided a golden opportunity for the environmental cause. ''Allegretti and
Cowell concluded;' according to Revkin, "that Mendes would be much
more effective if he left local politics behind, came out of the forest ... and
directed his criticism directly at the bank." It made for a cynical marriage
of convenience.
   The u.S. Treasury under Reagan was looking, as Schwartzman put it, for a
"bludgeon with which to beat" the Inter-American Development bank,
which the administration saw as epitomizing the evils of foreign aid. The en-
vironmental movement, or more precisely Chico Mendes, would provide the
weapons. As Hecht and Cockburn observe in the Fate of the Forest, among
the charitable foundations and environmental groups aiding the rubber tap-
pers, "many of their constituents might have been horrified at the idea that
their organizations were supporting radical unionizing efforts."6


6Suzanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn, The Fate of the Forest: Developers, De-
stroyers and Defenders ofthe Amazon (London and New York: Verso, 1989).
                                                     Chico Mendes • 229

   In March 1987, Mendes set off on a trip to Miami to attend a meeting of
the Inter-American Development Bank. Schwartzman and Cowell met
him at the airport and took him to the Intercontinental Hotel. "Here we
were at one of those classic meetings where everyone is saying, 'Let's have
fresh raspberries, sip champagne, and talk about the poor.'" This, accord-
ing to Revkin, was how Jim Bond, special assistant to Senator Robert W.
Kasten Jr. (Republican of Wisconsin), described the scene when Chico
Mendes arrived among the bankers at cocktail hour.
   After introducing Mendes to the bankers in Miami, Schwartzman and
Cowell took him to Washington, where he was introduced to Senator Kas-
ten, who had time to shake his hand and comment: "I can promise you that
our subcommittee is going to continue to put pressure on the [bank] to
withhold funds-to cut off all funds possibly-if they are not more coop-
erative." As Revkin observes, it was the unlikeliest of alliances, a staunch
conservative from a state of rolling pastures and cows and a Marxist forest
dweller whose worst enemies were cattlemen.

                                     IV
The circulation of Mendes's proposal for "extractive reserves" at the First
National Rubber Tappers' Congress in Brasilia in 1985 occurred at a criti-
cal moment. That year Brazil returned to civilian rule. But the birth of the
"new republic," as it was optimistically called, was difficult. The civilian
elected by the Congress to the presidency, Tancredo Neves, an oldtime but
highly skilled politician from the opposition, died on the eve on his inau-
guration and the vice president, Jose Sarney, inherited the position. Sarney
was from Maranhao, the state on the edge of the Amazon basin which pro-
vided one of the key outlets for the great mineral discoveries of Carajas.
The state capital, Sao Luis, was the terminal of the new Carajas railroad.
Sarney had headed the political party that supported the military regime.
The power in the congress, however, lay with the eclectic PMDB, and after
1988 the PMDB also won twenty-two out of the twenty-three Brazilian
governorships. A new plan for agrarian reform put forward by the Sarney
government was eventually abandoned under intense lobbying by the large
landholders, but the threat of potential expropriations was sufficient to in-
crease conflicts throughout rural Brazil, especially in the Amazon, where
both landowners and landless sought to establish title. The church and the
rural union represented the peasants in this struggle, and against them
were the landowners organized throughout Brazil under the banner of the
UDR. Acre did not escape the conflict.
   Darly Alves da Silva had moved to Acre in 1974. His ranch was not large
by Acre standards. In fact, Darly's herd was so small that many supposed he
had other work-smuggling goods across the Bolivian border and killing
230 • NakedTropics

by contract. He was one of a notoriously violent family whose members
had left a trail of murder behind them in Minas Gerais and Parana. The
Alves da Silva clan and Chico Mendes came into conflict over the last large
section of rain forest left in Xapuri County, the Seringal Cachoeira. It in-
cluded the rubber tapping estate on which Mendes had grown up, and
which was now owned by four Sao Paulo businessmen who wanted it
cleared so that they could develop the land for ranching.
   A report circulated in Acre that the four businessmen had agreed to sell
the land to the Alves da Silva family, but only if the Alves da Silvas would
clear the tappers out of the forest. This deal was probably concluded in
early 1986. Darly first tried to buy the tappers out, offering them five hun-
dred acres of land that he said he would not touch. When they turned him
down he used hired workers to drive them out by force but was met with
an empate. He then tried legal action to enforce his title to holdings he had
bought from a disgruntled tapper who did not like the union, but the
union members occupied the land to prevent the transfer. Meanwhile, on a
visit to Parana where Allegretti had established a Center for Amazonian
Studies, Mendes was told by members of the Pastoral Commission that
there were warrants out for Darly Alves da Silva's arrest, and he used his
contacts in the Acre region's newspaper to publicize the government's
charges about the violent past of the Alves da Silva family. Darly's effort to
take over the land failed. He eventually accepted a settlement from the fed-
eral agrarian reform office; the government expropriated the land, and
paid him well for his title to it.
   Worried by the union's successes, the ranchers made an effort to buy
Mendes off. Although virtually penniless, he proudly rejected them. "We
have all the money and all the guns. Your movement is like mosquitoes
against a jaguar," Revkin quotes one of the ranchers saying. «But you don't
have the people:' Mendes replied.
   After his unsuccessful political campaign, Mendes was almost entirely
dependent on foreign financial support. The Gaia Foundation, of which
Jose Lutzenberger was a key Brazilian member, provided several hundred
dollars a month to cover his expenses until the Washington-based Ashoka
Foundation took over. Mary Allegretti, Steven Schwartzman, and Adrian
Cowell contributed $500 to buy Mendes and his family a house in Xapuri.
The Canadian government contributed a jeep and the Ford Foundation fi-
nanced travel and administrative expenses for the National Council of
Rubber Tappers, of which Mendes was a member. A Ford Foundation offi-
cer introduced Augusta Dwyer to Chico Mendes at an elegant Swiss restau-
rant in Rio de Janeiro.
   But back in Acre, the threats and violence against the tappers' union in-
tensified throughout 1988. In June, a local union organizer and Workers'
Party candidate was killed. On December 5, 1988, Chico Mendes noticed
                                                       Chico Mendes • 231

the arrival of an airplane belonging to the leader of the local ranchers' or-
ganization (UDR), Joao Branco, who was accompanied by two unknown
men. Fearing the worst, he wrote at the time:
    I do not wish flowers at my burying, because I know they will go
    and root them up in the forest. I hope only that my death will serve
    to put an end to the impunity of the hired gunmen under the pro-
    tection of the Federal Police ... I go to Xapuri to a meeting with
    death. I am not a fatalist, only a realist. I have already denounced
    who wishes to kill me and no measures whatsoever have been or
    will be taken ... [The delegate of the Federal Police] has canceled
    my permission to carry a gun, with the allegation that I have links
    to a «communizing" organization. It is the Ford Foundation of the
    United States, if you can believe it!?
   On December 22 he was shot in the back doorway of his house in Xapuri.



                                       V
Fixing the blame for the assassination of Chico Mendes should have been
easy. The Alves da Silvas had threatened to kill Mendes in an anunciado, as
the Brazilians call the chilling warning given to the victim-to-be. Mendes
had exposed the plans of the landowners for his assassination in a letter to
the Federal Police chief in Acre, Mauro Sposito, and the state governor on
October 28, 1988. He had telexed the governor and the head of the Federal
Police in Brasilia, Romeu Tuma, on November 29. On December 5 he had
again warned Tuma, as well as President Sarney. Yet it took two years for
the trial in the Mendes case to begin.
   At the trial, Darci Alves da Silva unexpectedly confessed (he had done so
earlier, but then retracted his statement). Many believe he confessed in
order to protect his father. With the Brazilian government under interna-
tional scrutiny, Darci and his father were found guilty and sentenced to
nineteen years in prison. Out of almost two thousand rural assassinations
the Mendes case was the first in Brazil in which the gunmen and their
sponsors were tried, let alone convicted. The result, however, satisfied none
of the interest groups that are in conflict over the future of the rain forest,
each of which has its own, often confused, vision of the future.
   The books by Revkin, Shoumatoff, and Souza, none of whom knew
Mendes, are each in their different ways part of this confusion. s All three

7Zuenir Ventura, "0 Acre de Chico Mendes," ]ornal do Brasil, July 5, 1989, 8.
8Revkin, The Burning Season; Alex Shoumatoff, The World Is Burning (Boston: Lit-
tle, Brown, 1990); Marcio Souza, a Empate contra Chico Mendes (Sao Paulo: Marco
Zero, 1990).
232 • NakedTropics

books contain long summaries of recent history, but it is a history that is
largely irrelevant to the story of Chico Mendes and seems for the most part
culled from the same newspaper clippings and texts (or text in the case of
Warren Dean's environmental history of rubber, which is extensively
mined by several of these authors).9
   Mr. Shoumatoff calls the events following Chico Mendes's death an
"ecofarce." An "eco-cash-in" would be a better word. The Francisco
"Chico" Mendes Foundation received nine offers for movie rights, four of
them over $1 million, according to Alan U. Schwartz, the lawyer for the
foundation, which is a coalition of environmentalists, rubber tappers, and
family members in Acre. IO Among the competitors for film rights were
Robert Redford and Twentieth Century Fox, with Stephen Spielberg as di-
rector; Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting System; HBO and Harmony
Gold Productions; Warner Brothers; David Puttnam and Chris Menges;
Goldcrest Company, with Costa-Gavras as director; and JN Film, a Brazil-
ian company. According to Hecht and Cockburn, "Stephen Schwartzman
spent a fair amount of the past few months [of 1989] in both the United
States and Brazil seeking to broker a Hollywood contract for a movie about
Chico Mendes and the rubber tappers that on the terms of at least one bid
could net him $100,000 in consultant's fees."l1
   In addition, Little, Brown publishers reportedly paid a vast figure ad-
vance for the book by Shoumatoff, who had written a piece on Chico
Mendes for Vanity Fair, which he hoped Redford would make into a film.
The Paris publishers PIon, part of the French Group Presses de la Cite, out-
bid two American houses for the book by Marcio Souza, who had the co-
operation of Mendes's widow, Ilzamar, in return for PIon's agreement to
donate the royalties to the Mendes Foundation, of which she is president.
Houghton Mifflin signed on Revkin, a senior editor of Discover magazine.
Almost all the other books discussed here, it should be noted, are dedicated
to Chico Mendes.
   Shoumatoff takes a more skeptical approach than Revkin to the various
parties engaged in the Acre drama. There are moments of high comedy,
however, in his breathless and self-indulgent account of his Amazonian ad-
ventures, though he recounts them in all seriousness. He visited the forest
with a young writer and Green Party activist called Julio Cesar from Rio de
Janeiro, who had never before visited Amazonia and arrived with silk paja-


9Warren Dean, Brazil and the Struggle for Rubber: A Study in Environmental History
(Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
lOEdwin McDowell, (~fter Amazon Slaying, Deals Abound;' New York Times, July
10, 1989, D6.
11Susanna Hecht and Alexander Cockburn in "Letters;' The Nation, September 18,
1989,292.
                                                     Chico Mendes • 233

 mas. Shoumatoff had hired Cesar to protect him from the police and the
 ranchers, as well as Brazilian leftists, all of whom he feared "may not have
liked" his Vanity Fair article. Together they met Mendes's uncle Joaquim
and his wife, Cecelia, "a radiant old couple;' and Shoumatoff came across a
 rambling reflection written by Chico on a napkin that turned up after his
death extolling "World Socialist Revolution." Oddly, the same napkin re-
flection was reproduced by Hecht and Cockburn in The Nation during
their quarrel with Stephen Schwartzman over Schwartzman's tendency to
suppress, as Hecht and Cockburn saw it, the rubber worker's radicalism.
The napkin is now to be found in a small circular glass frame under a pho-
tograph of Chico Mendes on his grave in Xapuri.
    Andrew Revkin's heroes are the anthropologist and activist Mary Alle-
gretti (Mr. Revkin's translator was Ms. Allegretti's brother), the British
filmmaker Adrian Cowell ("without Cowell Chico Mendes would likely
have remained a small-time labor leader in the Amazonion backwater of
Xapuri"), Tony Gross, the Oxfam representative, and Stephen Schwartz-
man, the anthropologist and Washington environmental lobbyist. This is
the cast of characters of the environmental cause that Mr. Shoumatoff
treats with suspicion. Mr. Souza makes them villains of his piece, though
he never condescends to name them directly.
    Both Revkin and Shoumatoff use many Portuguese words, presumably
to create an aura of authenticity. In Marcio Souza's 0 Empate contra Chico
Mendes, this device is turned on its head. His only reference in English is to
"a misteriosa Environmental Defense Fund-EDF." This sinister, foreign-
sounding EDF, as well as Mary Allegretti's "Instituto de Estudos Amazoni-
cos (lEA)," which, Souza darkly hints, has its "headquarters in the faraway
state of Parana," are all, he says, "very good at capturing funds for environ-
mental projects" but they "interfere with the struggle and organization of
the workers ... using funds from abroad to attack and divide the Workers'
Party, the unions, and the Church." Mr. Souza believes that Chico Mendes's
death, and "his mystification as Green leader and an ecologist, who defends
little plants and butterflies, brought confusion and uncertainty to the
movement." The colonizing mentality, he says ominously, appears "in
many disguises."
    Mr. Souza's left-wing rhetoric sounds surprisingly like that of the para-
noid right in Brazil. The former Brazilian minister of the interior, Joao
Alves Filho, in his testimony before the parliamentary investigation com-
mittee for the Amazon in its hearings in April 1988 following the interna-
tional outcry over Chico Mendes's death, provided a thirty-nine page
statement, later published in English, which contains a listing of every for-
eigner who ever set foot in, looked at, touched, conspired against, wrote
about, or worked in the Amazon from the first arrival of the Spaniards and
Portuguese in the sixteenth century until 1989. "Nowadays;' the minister
234 • NakedTropics

noted ominously, "we face new and strange plans of nations that in the past
invaded, occupied, or threatened to take over the Amazon from the Brazil-
ians. Could it be that the wolves of the past not only changed their fleece
but their own natures and became harmless lambs?"12
    "Chico Mendes, like many other popular leaders, learned to read as an
adult;' Mr. Souza concludes condescendingly, "and did not have a sophisti-
cated formal education. For this reason it is not strange that he did not de-
velop any work of theoretical investigation, no coherent project beyond
that of practical necessity." But Chico Mendes himself said that "the strate-
gic center of the movement, in terms of communications and information,
is the Institute of Amazon Studies, where Mary Allegretti, Paulo Chiesa
and other friends work ..." Perhaps because he was writing a screenplay
about Chico Mendes, Mr. Souza excluded or dismissed a great deal that did
not fit his story line, for example, the entire notion of"extractive reserves,"
the central element of the rubber workers' demands after 1985, and the di-
rect cause of Chico Mendes's murder. From his book we can imagine a
Marcio Souza-Warner Brothers film in which Gross, Schwartzman, Cow-
ell, Allegretti, et al. are portrayed as so many sinister agents of ecoimperial-
ism. They are not, and Mr. Souza should have known better.


                                      VI
Unlike Revkin, Shoumatoff, and Souza, Adrian Cowell knew Mendes well
and in fact followed him around Brazil and the United States, filming his
activities off and on over the two-year period prior to his assassination.
Cowell is also as much a part of the story of Chico Mendes as he is recorder
of it, yet he is very reticent in his discussion of Mendes's political views
(though less reticent in claiming credit for his promotion of Mendes and
his efforts to obtain for Mendes his two international awards). Only Hecht
and Cockburn's book deals seriously with his ideas and only Augusta
Dwyer in an account of her travels in Amazonia adequately evokes his
qualities of tenacity and stubbornness or the degree to which these quali-
ties contributed to his almost inevitable martyrdom.
    Many inconsistencies in all these accounts remain unresolved. No one
seems to have bothered to check the military records or otherwise tried to
find the truth of Mendes's claims about the past of Euclides Tavora, the
former Communist and army lieutenant who befriended him when he was
young. Tavora told Chico Mendes that he had been part of the Prestes Col-


12Parliamentary Investigation Committee for the Amazon, statement of Joao Alves
Filho, Minister of the Interior, Department of Communications Publication No.
27/89, Brasilia, April 19, 1989, especially 16-17.
                                                      Chico Mendes • 235

umn, the insurgent forces led by the Communist Luis Carlos Prestes in
1923 on a three-year, eight-thousand-mile odyssey through the interior of
Brazil. But Tavora's participation seems unlikely, since he would have been
far too young at the time. When Shoumatoff interviewed Prestes shortly
before his death, the Communist leader, then ninety-one, said he had
never heard of Euclides Tavora.
    It is also odd that Tavora should have been living clandestinely in 1962-
the Brazilian military coup was two years later and although the Commu-
nist Party was illegal at the time (between 1947 and 1985) the Goulart
regime was perceived to be sympathetic to the left (this after all was the jus-
tification put forward by the military for its overthrow). Chico Mendes, ac-
cording to Cowell, also said he had met Che Guevara on his way to Bolivia,
but no one else reports this claim. A former wife and daughter also turned
up after Mendes's death to lay claim to the Mendes legacy, much to the sur-
prise of Mendes's ecological colleagues from North America.
    The most perplexing aspect about Chico Mendes was his relationship
with Mauro Sposito, the head of the Federal Police in Acre. The Federal Po-
lice is one of the few police organizations in Brazil that are perceived to
be fairly honest. (It was for this reason that President Collor appointed
Romeu Tuma, head of the Federal Police, to be the chief Brazilian tax col-
lector.) When criticized for his lack of response to the threats against
Mendes, Sposito published a letter in A Gazeta of Rio Branco saying that
Chico Mendes was a police informer-an accusation that no one apart
from Augusta Dwyer, who categorically dismisses the idea, seems to want
even to consider. In view of extensive surveillance to which the left was
subjected by the Brazilian secret services, it seems unlikely that the Brazil-
ian authorities would not know whether this was true. Mauro Sposito in
1991 was serving as chief assistant to the head of the Federal Police in
Brasilia.
    It is, in any case, impossible to find a clear and consistent account of
Mendes's political career in any of these books. That Mendes was a "forest
ecologist" is an image rejected by Hecht and Cockburn, who see Mendes as
"an extremely radical political militant" who had at the core of his pro-
gram a demand "for popular control of the means of production and dis-
tribution of forest commodities, along with the provision of financial
credits to producers rather than middlemen." It is obviously no accident
that Chico Mendes called his daughter Elenira, "in homage to another
Elenira, a young woman of courage who gave up her life in an attempt to
liberate the Brazilian people:' as Marcio Souza put it in his book. Elenira
Rezende de Souza Nazareth was a Maoist guerrilla from the PCdoB, the
splinter Communist Party of Brazil, with which Mendes had been clandes-
tinely affiliated in the late 1970s, and she was killed in the Tocantins-
Araguaia combat zone in 1972. She was ((famous for her marksmanship,"
236 • NakedTropics

according to Revkin, who heard that "she invariably killed her target with a
rifle shot between the eyes." 13
    Chico Mendes's son was named Sandino after the Nicaraguan guerrilla
leader. Alex Shoumatoff was apparently shocked to realize that Chico
Mendes was no "Albert Schweitzer, which is how the Environmental De-
fense Fund ... tried to portray him in one of their fund-raising letters ..."
but a "revolutionary, a warrior ... In the United States ... Mendes would
have been considered a pinko tree hugger and a radical labor leader." His
philosophy, according to Hecht and Cockburn, "had the concrete elements
of a socialist ecology-the only ecology that can save the Amazon and its
inhabitants."
    Andrew Revkin is the writer most taken by the idea of "extractive re-
serves;' and he depends mainly on Mary Allegretti, Adrian Cowell, and
Stephen Schwartzman for his information. Marcio Souza has only con-
tempt for what he calls "extractives;' which he dismisses as a product of the
"colonizing arrogance of those who say they are the defenders of the Ama-
zon forest but pollute and destroy the environment in Alaska or corrode
the forests of Europe with acid rain." Yet here, too, the rhetoric is mislead-
ing. Souza sees the hand of the multinationals behind these disasters. So do
Hecht and Cockburn. But as the Belem-based journalist Lucio Flavio Pinto
points out, the recent history of American multinational investment in the
economy of the Amazon is much more an example of the retreat of u.S.
enterprise before the new economic power of Europe and, most especially,
Japan. 14 Anthony Hall, in his excellent book Developing Amazonia, which I
discussed in the previous chapter, argues that the foreign and especially the
U.S. role in the Amazon economy has not been decisive. 1s
    The emphasis of such writers as Hecht and Cockburn on the multina-
tionals, not to mention the American government, seems somewhat mis-
placed when one considers the scale of the disasters the Brazilians create
on their own. Hecht and Cockburn are so anxious to find American vil-
lains that they misidentify the former State Department official (and cur-
rently my colleague at the Council on Foreign Relations) Richard Murphy
as the American diplomat allegedly present at the interrogation of a politi-
cal prisoner who had been tortured in Recife in 1968. Ambassador Mur-
phy, in fact, has never set foot in Brazil. Hecht and Cockburn also claim
that "U.S. support for the generals remained constant;' but this will come

13Elenira Nazareth was killed after her capture by the army. See Elio Gaspari, A Di-
tadura Escancarada, vol. 2 of As Ilusoes Armadas (Sao Paulo: Companhia das
Letras, 2002). Gaspari provides a detailed account of this conflict.
14Jornal Pessoal, No. 64, July 1990.
15Anthony L. Hall, Developing Amazonia: Deforestation and Social Conflict in
Brazil's Carajds Programme (Manchester and New York: Manchester University
Press, 1989).
                                                        Chico Mendes • 237

as a considerable surprise to former President Jimmy Carter and Patricia
Derian, Carter's assistant secretary of state for human rights, who success-
fully brought pressure on the Brazilian military regime to release political
prisoners.
   Equally odd is a passage in Shoumatoff's book quoting Robert Redford,
who bought the film rights to Shoumatoff's article on Mendes in Vanity
Fair, to the effect that Redford "wanted to play the bad guy, the ruthless
American manager of a multinational project." If so, he has the wrong
screenplay and would be better off speaking to Anthony Hall. In fact, the
ecological and social crisis in Brazil was caused by some of the same factors
that led to the ecological disasters in Russia and Eastern Europe: failed
overcentralized planning, rigidly organized management, private greed
and special privileges, corrupt and ineffective justice at the grass roots, as
well as permeating, callous disregard by the rich for the poor. In some ways
the Amazon might have been better off if the multinationals had been
more heavily involved. International companies are vulnerable to pressure
from environmental activists for some of the same reasons that the World
Bank and Inter-American Bank are vulnerable. Brazilian corporations, es-
pecially state companies, are less subject to such pressure and because of
the vast sums at stake from their involvement in road, railroad, and dam
building and in mining are notoriously involved in the corruption of polit-
ical decision making.
   The central point about the crisis in the Amazon is that it is a story
where the heroes and the villains are Brazilians; the struggle is a Brazilian
struggle, and it will be resolved, if it is to be resolved, by Brazilians. The key
question about the members of the Alves da Silva family who killed Chico
Mendes is not whether they were the assassins; it is whether they were
hired to do the job and by whom. If there was indeed an "authorized" con-
tract to kill Chico Mendes, then it was probably his efforts to block funds
for the Acre roadway that caused it. This was an action that affected large
interests, the hope of the eventual linkup to the Pacific, the value of tens of
thousands of acres accumulated as speculative investments. As Philip
Fearnside, an ecologist and longtime resident in Amazonia, has pointed
out, "Whenever a road is built or improved in Amazonia, the value of
nearby land immediately multiplies by as much as a factor of 10, if not
more."16 Understandably, some of those who hoped to benefit from the
new highway were among those who dismissed Mendes's death as a "per-
sonal matter:' a local dispute in which neither large interests nor outsiders
were involved. As Acre UDR president Joao Branco said, "Darly was backed
into a corner; like a trapped animal. He had no choice but to kill Chico."

16Philip M. Fearnside, «A Prescription for Slowing Deforestation in Amazonia,"
The Environment 31, no. 4 (May 1989): 18.
238 • NakedTropics

This in effect was the opinion of the court that convicted the Alves da Sil-
vas in December 1990.
    Zuenir Ventura, one of Brazil's best journalists, visited the only witness
to have heard the Alves da Silva family talk of plans to kill Mendes, a boy
named Genesio, then thirteen years old, who was virtually unprotected
when Ventura found him, although supposedly under police protection.
((It seemed to me:' Ventura concluded, ((that Xapuri was like the town in
the movie Mississippi Burning but without the resources of the FBI, and a
crazy idea occurred to me: why, instead of bringing in two environmental-
ists, not bring instead the two Federal agents?"1? Ventura in fact took upon
himself the protection of the child until the trial took place. Genesio's evi-
dence was crucial to the guilty verdict.


                                      VII
Marcio Souza is right, however, when he insists on the need to see the
Amazonia crisis in its wider Brazilian political and social setting. The in-
ternational attention that Chico Mendes case has received grew in part
from the links he had forged with the environmentalists. But the Chico
Mendes story also leaped to international attention because his death coin-
cided with the vast holocaust of 1988 throughout the Amazon basin, where
the brutal burning season was graphically pictured by satellite photogra-
phyat a time when the Northern Hemisphere was also experiencing forest
fires on an unprecedented scale. The outcry brought results. The Brazilian
government cut back on the credits that had fueled the vast conversion to
pasture, and began to use the satellite images provided by the Brazilian In-
stitute for Space Research (INPE) to pinpoint fires and find those shown to
be burning illegally.
    But these were palliatives. The forestry patrols had a handful of heli-
copters and aircraft, whereas the ranchers and garimpeiros had hundreds.
Still it was a beginning. In 1989 Brazil held its first popular election for the
presidency in almost thirty years and the campaign pitted the leader of the
Workers' Party, Lula, against a young governor of the northeastern state of
Alagoas, Fernando Collor de Mello. Lula, backed by an alliance of unions,
church-based communities, and intellectuals, came close to victory, but he
was defeated in the second round by Collor. The leader of the UDR, the
ranchers organization, had come in in tenth place, with fewer votes than
the candidate of the Brazilian Communist Party.
    During his presidential campaign, Collor dismissed the ecological com-
plaints against Brazil as outside interference, but on his European tour be-
fore his inauguration he was shocked by the depth and anger of world

17Ventura, ibid.
                                                         Chico Mendes • 239

opinion on the question of the Amazon-criticism he ran into every-
where, including a public rebuke from Prince Charles two days before his
visit to London. The ending of government loans and tax credits dimin-
ished the burn off, and climatic consideration may also have improved the
situation since there seem to have been fewer fires after 1988. The figures
from the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (INPE) in 1991 showed a
25 percent drop in burning in the period of July to September 1990 in
comparison with the same period in 1989, though the diminution has
been less impressive in Acre and in Rondonia, where the number of fires
actually increased. 18
    Collor then appointed the most outspoken and famous of Brazil's
ecological activists, Jose Lutzenberger, to be the secretary of state for the
environment. He also appointed another outspoken critic of Brazil's devel-
opment policies, the rector of the University of Sao Paulo, the Brazilian
physicist Jose Goldemberg, to become secretary of science and technology.
In this position, Goldemberg sent shock waves through the military estab-
lishment by publicly acknowledging Brazil's nuclear program and opening
up to the press the deep pits at Cachimbo in the central Amazon, pits in-
tended for testing nuclear weapons. These moves prompted Adrian Cow-
ell, Lutzenberger's good friend and promoter, to proclaim the 1990s to be
"the decade of the environment in Brazil.» Cowell's television series The
Decade ofDestruction, which was shown in Europe and North America in
1990, concluded on a very optimistic note portraying Collor as a born-
again hero of the environment. 19
    In 1992 Brazil hosted the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development. This gave some incentive to environmental good behav-
ior. But the decline in the rate of forest destruction may also be a result of a
general economic downturn in Brazil. The Brazilian government was then
in the midst of bitter negotiations with private banks over Brazil's vast for-
eign debt, and the favorable comments on the environment from Brazilian
officials who a year before were attacking the environmentalists as foreign
mercenaries might have been part of a deliberate policy to seek allies in the
attempt to reach a more favorable settlement with foreign creditors.
    There is a danger in romanticizing the idea of extractive reserves and
the power of an alliance of "forest people.» The market for Brazilian forest-
extracted rubber now depends entirely on government price supports.

18"Chamas apagadas;' Veja, January 9, 1991, 44-45. According to figures in Veja,
April 7, 1999, 111, forest destruction in 1992 was 13,786 square kilometers; 14,896
in 1994; 29,059 in 1995; 18,161 in 1996; and 13,277 in 1997. Another alarming five-
year high was reached in 2000; INPE figures released in May 2001 show that nearly
20,000 square kilometers of forest were cleared in 2000; see: http://www.inpe.br/.
19Adrian Cowell, The Decade ofDestruction: The Crusade to Save the Amazon Rain-
forest (New York: H. Holt, 1990).
240 • NakedTropics

With the opening up of the Brazilian economy and the encouragement of
plantation rubber elsewhere in Brazil, such subsidies will do no more than
artificially prop up a system that until the last decade was universally con-
demned as highly exploitative of the workers involved. 20 The key promot-
ers of the idea are not unaware of this vulnerability. Mary Allegretti herself
recognizes that «because long-term prospects of wild rubber in the Brazil-
ian economy are not bright ... the establishment of extractive reserves
should be accompanied by policies aimed at ... promoting exploitation of
other rain forest products."21 To concentrate exclusively on the reserves
also diverts attention from the scale complexity, and grave global conse-
quences of the ecological disaster elsewhere in the region.
   The Carajas region of the eastern Amazon, for example, absorbs vast
sums of money, and huge construction companies and powerful political
interests are determined to see it enlarged at great environmental cost.
Armies of public relations professionals and lobbyists are deployed both
within Brazil and outside it on behalf of these interests. Here the problems
are less easily reduced to the primary colors of a «Chico Mendes story:'
since they are the result of the vast expansion of a frontier that is no longer
under government control and that is driven by the hunger for land and
for gold, each of which promises opportunities to the landless and poverty
stricken. These inescapable circumstances make solutions to the ecological
problems of Amazonia all the more difficult. 22
   The bishop of Acre was not hopeful:

    Once the trial [of Mendes's assassins] is over the issue will be seen
    by the public to be resolved and the attention will move on. The
    world must realize that there are thousands of Chico Mendeses. 23

   The 1991 Americas Watch report on rural violence was a sad reminder
of how little changed since the 1988 Amnesty International report, which

20See comments by Mac Margolis in "False Visions of the Amazon," Journal of
Commerce, July 28, 1990.
21Mary Allegretti, in Anthony B. Anderson, ed., Alternatives to Deforestation: Steps
toward Sustainable Use of the Amazon Rain Forest (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1990),259.
22An excellent listing of over a hundred organizations concerned with the ecology
of the Amazon, describing their objectives, programs, special needs, and resources,
including addresses for them in both South and North America and in Europe, is
provided by the Rainforest Action Network in Amazonia: Voices from the Rainfor-
est: A Resource and Action Guide, ed. Angela Gennino, (San Francisco: Rainforest
Action Network; Amazonia Film Project, 1990),398-404.
23Cited by Christina Lamb in "The Forest Martyr:' Weekend Financial Times, De-
cember 8-9, 1990.
                                                       Chico Mendes • 241

described how cheap life remained in the Brazilian backlands. 24 The warn-
ings of Amnesty preceded by three months Chico Mendes's assassination.
The Americas Watch report's publication in January 1991 coincided with
the killing of a union leader whose life Americas Watch had specifically
warned was in danger.
   Ironically, the road Mendes opposed has now been rerouted through
Xapuri and Brasileia and on to the Peruvian frontier, much to the delight
of the rubber tappers who control much of the land in the region and hope
to benefit from it. And Mendes's widow has used some of the money she
received for the film rights to The Chico Mendes Story to buy a small ranch,
notwithstanding the criticism of ranching and its ecological effects by
Mendes and his environmentalist allies. 25 It is here, regrettably, that the
mystification of the Mendes case, the view that the situation has improved
as a result of his martyrdom, and the sordid squabbles over the Mendes
legacy create a smoke screen that obstructs rather than encourages any res-
olution of the incalculable disaster that is unfolding inexorably in the
Amazon. 26




24Rural Violence in Brazil: January 1991, An Americas Watch Report (New York:
Human Rights Watch, 1991).
25Jan Rocha, "Mendes and His Murderers;' TLS, January 11, 1991,7. See also "A
vida nova de Ilzamar" in Veja, December 12, 1990, 34.
26In the government of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva which took office on January 1,
2003, Marina Silva, who was co-founder with Chico Mendes of the CUT affiliate in
Acre, became minister of the environment.
SKDAN CHAIR
                                                       CHAPTER            13
                                              The Two Brazils
                                   "We progress at night when the politicians sleep."
                                                                -Brazilian saying




As 1998 began, Brazilians were full of confidence that their country was
poised to surge into the twenty-first century, that perhaps it was finally on
the road to becoming the great power many had long imagined it would
be. In 1994, Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former
Marxist professor of sociology turned neoliberal reformer, had master-
minded a sweeping currency reform-the Real Plan-which joined other
liberalizing measures and thrust Brazil, with the world's eighth-largest
economy, into the forefront of the global trend toward open markets and
free trade. Not only were Brazilians prospering but their decade-old de-
mocracy had found solid footing. Later in 1994, Cardoso was rewarded for
his efforts as finance minister with the presidency, becoming Brazil's sec-
ond directly elected civilian chief executive since the military surrendered
power in 1985.


                                     II
Then came the global economic crisis, beginning with the currency col-
lapses in Southeast Asia in 1997, escalating with the Russian defaults in Au-
gust 1998, and landing with a crash on Brazil shortly after. Having failed,
despite its many other successes, to get its fiscal house in order, Brazil
found itself dangerously dependent on infusions of foreign capital to fi-
nance its trade and government deficits, struggling to stay afloat even as
nervous investors fled with their dollars.


                                    243
244 • NakedTropics

   President Cardoso, who won a second term in October of 1998 in the
midst of the crisis, was forced to take drastic measures to cut government
spending, increase taxes, and reduce indebtedness. In return, Brazil won a
$41.5 billion bailout orchestrated by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF)-and the guarantee of more painful measures to come, as well as a
recession that promises to be long and deep. Cardoso, who was, in his
Marxist days, a high priest of dependency theory-the notion that the de-
veloped capitalist nations would forever hold the less developed econo-
mies in thrall-must have wondered if he had been so wrong after all.
   Yet Brazil's decade of political and economic success changed the coun-
try in certain irreversible ways. And the changes will, paradoxically, com-
plicate its recovery. Prosperity, the opening up of political life, and the
expansion of educational opportunities brought with them a deeper polit-
ical engagement by the population, and the emergence of unions, political
parties, and a variety of grassroots organizations. To a degree that is un-
precedented in the country's history, Brazilians found their political voice,
and they began to rethink what it means to be Brazilian.
   IMF-mandated policies thus risk bringing about headlong confrontation
between the Brazil of bankers and businessmen and a new Brazil of political
and social activism. One thing is certain: the Brazilian government can no
longer rule by dictate or from the top down, whatever it promises the IMF.
   How successfully these two Brazils work out their collective future will
be one of the most dramatic stories of the first decade of the twenty-first
century, and not only for Brazil. Failure in this South American giant will
profoundly affect the reforms under way throughout Latin America as well
as the assumptions on which the new international economic order has
been founded. It is precisely for this reason that then u.S. Treasury Secre-
tary Robert Rubin declared that Brazil is "too big to be allowed to fail."
   Brazil for many foreigners is still the land of the bossa nova and "The Girl
from Ipanema:' but Brazilians themselves are becoming irritated with their
country's willful folkloric self-image as forever young, bronzed, and beach
bound, oblivious to the past and giddily committed to a future as ephemeral
as the country's torrid telenovelas. Antonio Carlos Jobim, author of that
great lyrical celebration of Ipanema beach and the graceful passing beauty
of its denizens, once said that Brazil is "not for beginners." And he was right.
   Brazilians still want to have fun, to be sure, and no one is proposing the
abolition of Carnival. Yet as Brazil has embraced democracy, bringing new
voices into the political and social arenas, Brazilians are beginning to rec-
ognize that getting to the future involves understanding the past.
   This new concern with history is reflected in the recent vogue for restor-
ing colonial architecture-some of the most extraordinary examples in the
Americas-which was once allowed to rot or was simply swept away to
make room for modern buildings. In Bahia and Sao Luis in Maranhao,
                                                         TheTwo Brazils • 245

splendid baroque churches and eighteenth-century townhouses have been
magnificently restored; old forts and ruins of Jesuit missions along the
southern frontier have become popular tourist attractions. But these
buildings are artifacts of the traditional Brazilian history, while the past
that Brazil is rediscovering is replete with contradictions.
     Brazil's transition to national independence in 1822, unlike that of its
Spanish American neighbors, preserved great continuity in institutions-
the military, the law, and administration. It was led, after all, by the eldest
son of the Portuguese monarch, who promptly named himself Emperor
Pedro I. Portuguese-speaking America, unlike its Spanish-speaking neigh-
bors, also avoided fragmentation into numerous new republics. Indepen-
dent Brazil emerged as a monarchy with its huge territory intact. The state
.as it developed was, as a consequence, highly centralizing, and the national
mythology it spawned depicted the country as a product almost exclusively
of the coastal Portuguese and the imperial inheritance.
    But today Brazilians are learning a new history. It brings into focus the
unruly Brazil of the escaped slaves who held out for decades in the backlands
of what is today the state of Alagoas against the Portuguese in the seven-
teenth century; the bloody uprisings in the Amazon, Pernambuco, and the
southern borderlands of Rio Grande do SuI against the Brazilian Empire in
the early nineteenth century; and the extraordinary messianic communities
of the semiarid interior of Bahia brutally suppressed a century ago and im-
mortalized by the great Brazilian essayist Euclides da Cunha in his Rebellion
in the Backlands, and more recently by the Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas
Llosa in his War at the End ofthe World. The historian Laura de Mello e Sousa
calls this the Brazil of the "unclassified ones"-the majority of the Brazilian
population, neither white nor black, neither slave master nor slave in origin,
not landowners but squatters and smallholders, not only Portuguese but
Italians, Germans, Japanese, Arabs, and Jews, as well as mestizos, mulattos,
Indians, and Africans, not only bankers but small entrepreneurs and shop-
keepers, not just bishops but African orixas and Pentecostal pastors.
    The recognition of the "unclassified ones" has been accompanied by the
emergence of movements among the landless, the indigenous peoples, in-
dustrial workers, Protestants, and others. African Brazilians are perhaps
the most important group now finding a political voice.! For centuries,


1Racial self-definition is a complex matter in Brazil, where a very wide range of
racial categories between black and white has traditionally been recognized. The
count of "African Brazilians" varies from a high of 120 million, using a U.S. defini-
tion that includes all persons with some degree of African ancestry, to Brazil's offi-
cial 1991 census estimate, which listed only 7 million blacks (pretos) and classified
62 million Brazilians as browns (pardos). Essentially in stark contrast to the tradi-
tional U.S. classification, being black in Brazil means having no white ancestors.
Brazil was the foremost recipient of African slaves in the Western Hemisphere.
246 • NakedTropics

they retained a resilient pluralistic religious and cultural presence at the
core of Brazilian society, but one barely recognized in the corridors of elite
power until very recently. Sao Paulo elected its first black mayor, Celso
Pitta, in 1996, and President Cardoso brought Edson Arantes do Nasci-
mento, the great Brazilian soccer star universally known as Pele, into his
cabinet as minister of sport. The secretary of social welfare in the govern-
ment of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva which took office in January 2003,
Benedita da Silva, is an African Brazilian born in a Rio favela (shanty-
town). As more Afro-Brazilians have moved into the middle class, black
faces have also appeared more regularly in advertisements and the press.
    Brazil's rediscovery of history challenges above all the peculiar legacy
that has since the eighteenth century allowed the country's rulers to graft
the imperative of authoritarianism onto their vision of the future. It was
this mind-set that made the French positivists so attractive to the military
officers who overthrew the monarchy in 1889, and to the generals who
seized control in 1964. It is perfectly summed up in the motto emblazoned
across Brazil's national flag: Ordem e Progresso (Order and Progress). De-
mocracy in Brazil has all too often been seen as the enemy of progress, the
harbinger of anarchy, disunion, and backwardness. That, it seems clear,
will no longer do.
    Brazil's transformation grows in part out of its recent prosperity. When
I first came to Rio de Janeiro as a student in the mid-1960s, the country
was still largely rural, with short life expectancy, large families, low per
capita income, and a high illiteracy rate. By the 1990s, Brazil, with a popu-
lation of more than 160 million, had become one of the world's largest
economies, with a per capita income of more than $5,000. Family size
dropped dramatically, from 6 children per family in the 1970s to 2.5 in the
mid-1990s. It had become a largely urban country. Brazil's two million cars
in 1970 increased in number to twenty-six million, its TV sets from four
million to thirty-one million. Infant mortality decreased from 118 per
1,000 in 1970 to 17 per 1,000, and illiteracy greatly diminished.
    The Brazilian states of Sao Paulo and Rio Grande do SuI, if they stood
alone, would be numbered among the richest forty-five nations on earth.
The economy of Rio Grande do SuI, the southernmost state, abutting Ar-
gentina and Uruguay, was built on European immigration and cattle. The
state of Sao Paulo has a gross national product larger than Argentina's, and
Sao Paulo City is a megalopolis with a population of 15 million and a vi-
brant financial, cultural, and business life; the state-supported university
of Sao Paulo is a world-class institution. Like several of Brazil's larger
cities, Sao Paulo has a lively press; dailies such as the Folha de Sao Paulo, the
grand old Estado de Sao Paulo, the business-oriented Gazeta Mercantil and
the new Valor Econ6mico are as articulate, critical, and influential as any
                                                   TheTwo Brazils • 247

quality newspaper in Europe or North America. Brazil also boasts one of
the world's most successful television networks, TV Globo, and one of its
most aggressive publishing empires, Editora Abril, proprietor of the mass-
circulation newsweekly Veja, which reaches more than four million read-
ers, all of them full-fledged members of the emerging global consumer
order.


                                     II
A large segment of the population, perhaps 40 million people, however, re-
mains in poverty, with incomes below $50 a month. Brazil's income dis-
parities are among the worst in the world. The most impoverished 20
percent of Brazilians receive a mere 2 percent of the national wealth, while
the richest 20 percent receive 60 percent. Festering shantytowns surround
the large urban centers, and Rio's favelas are especially notorious for crime
and violence. This is the Brazil of half-starved children playing outside
makeshift shacks in dusty northeastern villages and smudge-faced urchins
knocked out by glue sniffing, huddled together under benches in Sao
Paulo's principal downtown squares. But extreme poverty is now concen-
trated in the semiarid northeast of Brazil, where drought and disease have
long been curses of biblical dimensions. Both were greatly aggravated in
1998 by the effects of El Nino. Brazilians are proud to call themselves a
racial as well as a political democracy, and are irritated when scholars and
activists point out that poverty is disproportionately concentrated among
the Afro-Brazilian population. In fact, whites on average earn two and a
half times as much as blacks. As veteran Brazil watcher Ronald Schneider
notes, out of 14,000 priests, 378 bishops and archbishops, and seven cardi-
nals, the Brazilian Catholic Church has only 200 nonwhite priests. Similar
disproportions can be seen in Brazil's diplomatic service and military offi-
cer corps.
   Nevertheless, the poor did see their lives improve during most of the
1990s, with large numbers of people moving up from the bottom ranks of
society into the emerging middle class. The credit for this change belongs
to Cardoso's Real Plan, introduced in 1994 while he was finance minister
under President Itamar Franco. Confronted with economic chaos and
feverish inflation, Cardoso created a new currency, the real, linked to the
u.S. dollar, with its value pegged to permit only minimal depreciation. In-
flation plunged from more than 2,000 percent annually to single digits,
with instant tonic effects felt throughout the country.
   As the currency stabilized, Brazilians had money to spend for refrigera-
tors, televisions, and clothing. Analysts looking at consumer trends over
the first six years of the Real Plan reckoned that some 19 million people
248 • NakedTropics

moved from basic subsistence into the lower level of the Brazilian middle
class, which by the year 2000 embraced some 58 million people. Those who
remained poor benefited as well, finding more money in their pockets for
meat, chicken, eggs, corn, and beans. Their income increased by 30 percent
during 1995-1996 alone. In earlier decades, poverty pushed millions of
Brazilians from the hinterlands into Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro and out
into the frontier on the western fringes of the Amazon basin. During the
1990s, prosperity allowed many of the smaller cities in the interior of
Brazil to flourish, attracting some five million mostly middle-class people
searching for a better quality of life.
   The spread of prosperity and population over the face of Brazil has
made it both a more homogenous and a more complex society. For four
and a half centuries, most of Brazil's population remained around key sea-
ports close to the zones where sugar, cotton, cacao, coffee, and other major
export commodities are grown. Brazil's first historian, Friar Vicente do
Salvador, writing in 1627, said that the Portuguese settlers and their
African slaves "scratched at the seacoast like crabs." The first Europeans to
penetrate the vast interior were intrepid missionaries, explorers, and ruth-
less Portuguese frontiersmen traveling up the Amazon River and the tribu-
taries that run south into the La Plata basin. This huge geographical area,
larger than the contiguous United States, remained for centuries a hollow
frontier, incorporating vast unexplored territories and many thousands of
indigenous peoples unknown to the Portuguese governors and viceroys
who ruled until 1808, or to the Portuguese monarchs who held court in
Rio de Janeiro between 1808 and 1821, or to the Brazilian emperors Pedro
I and Pedro II, who succeeded them after the declaration of Brazil's inde-
pendence from Portugal in 1822, or to the generals and civilian politicians
who established the United States of Brazil in 1889.
   Yet slowly and inexorably the hollow frontier was filled in, as cattle
ranchers moved inland from the coast and squatters established them-
selves between the plantation-dominated littoral and the backlands. These
independent-minded mixed-race families lived largely outside the juridi-
cal formulas that elsewhere defined and contained both Portuguese mas-
ters and African slaves, but they helped root Brazilian society in the
Brazilian landscape.
   In the eighteenth century, the first great modern gold rush brought Eu-
ropean settlers, slaves, and, belatedly, government, into the mountainous
interior of what is today the state of Minas Gerais. Today the spectacular
churches and mountain towns they constructed are among Brazil's most
precious colonial heritage; here the magnificently carved figures of the
Apostles by the crippled mulatto sculptor Aleijadinho stand as marvels of
this age of extravagance and piety. In the nineteenth century, large-scale
                                                     TheTwo Brazils • 249

coffee bean plantations were developed in Sao Paulo and Parana in the
south, reviving the demand for African slaves. After the abolition of slavery
in 1888, immigrant laborers poured in from Italy and southern Germany,
joined in the 1920s by newcomers from Japan. By the early twentieth cen-
tury, a cotton textile industry was established in Sao Paulo, augmented in
the 1960s by steel and automobile industries, creating an industrial urban
working class and a powerful business elite.
    Both civilian and military rulers saw the development of the interior as
the means to Brazil's future greatness. In the late 1950s, President Juscelino
Kubitschek forced through the extraordinary plans for the futuristic new
capital and federal district of Brasilia, set down like a spaceship on the
largely uninhabited high plateau of Goiania in the center-west of the coun-
try. Modernistic bowls, towers, and upturned cups contained the Congress
and its functionaries, dwarfed against a backdrop of enormous sky and red
earth. Soon thereafter, the generals who ousted Kubitschek's successor,
President Joao Goulart, and established one of Latin America's longest-
lived military regimes (1964-1985) embarked on a series of grandiose
schemes to develop the Amazon. Ignoring the established river-based life-
lines, they drove roads straight through the tropical rain forest and built
huge dams to tame the Amazon's tributaries and flood the river plains,
often with disastrous ecological consequences. The highways brought with
them economic exploitation and its predictable companions, greedy spec-
ulators and corrupt and callous bureaucrats, as well as a plague of infec-
tious diseases. The forced contact with the outside world was disastrous for
the remaining 250,000 Brazilian Indians, the majority living in the Ama-
zon forests. The long-isolated Yanomami were hard hit with malaria as
10,000 prospectors invaded their territory in the late 1980s.
   The military regime also poured money into the expansion of higher
education, substituting more pragmatic American approaches for the old
French-influenced disciplines that had produced Cardoso and other schol-
ars. But this only created a new generation enamored of democracy as well
as technology. Purging and exiling Cardoso (who was seen as a dangerous
Marxist despite the fact that he was the son and grandson of generals) and
other professors from the University of Sao Paulo and other major institu-
tions also had paradoxical consequences. It provoked u.S. foundations,
notably the Ford Foundation, to invest heavily in a parallel system of pri-
vate research centers in Brazil that would later provide a haven and politi-
cal base for the democratic opposition.
   Meanwhile, the exiles were welcomed on American campuses. Cardoso,
who lived in Chile, and later in France, became a visiting professor at the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, and Stanford University, and spent two years at
the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, working closely
250 • NakedTropics

with that wise and brilliant pragmatist, the veteran economist and proponent
of reform by "muddling through;' Albert o. Hirschman. When he returned to
Brazil in 1970, Cardoso, like many of the other upper-middle-class exiles of
his generation, had become thoroughly cosmopolitan, skeptical of Marxism,
well connected in the wider world, and thoroughly knowledgeable about the
workings of the u.s. political and economic systems.


                                      III
Momentous changes were also taking place at the grass roots within Brazil.
Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s, trade unions that had been
founded in the 1930s during the dictatorship of Getulio Vargas on an Ital-
ian fascist model as syndicates dependent on the state shook off govern-
ment control. Most formidable was the metalworkers' union in Sao Paulo.
The unions nourished the emergence of a new Workers' Party (PT) in 1980
and a National Trade Union Confederation (CUT) in 1983. Together they
provided a base for the charismatic Luiz Inacio da Silva, popularly known
as Lula, who rose through union ranks from the shop floor and awakened
hopes that he would become a Brazilian Lech Walesa. Lula ran three times
unsuccessfully for the presidency, but in 2002 made a historic break-
through, and by 61 percent of the popular vote, a full 22.5 percentage
points more than the government candidate, former health minister Jose
Serra, was decisively elected Brazil's leader. 2
   The Workers' Party thrives in the industrialized south of Brazil, and by
the 1998 election had gained control of the important governorship of Rio
Grande do SuI with the election of PT candidate Olivio Dutra. But the or-
ganization of workers was not restricted to the industrial zones. Threat-
ened by the encroachment of cattle ranchers and loggers, rubber tappers
on the Amazon frontier began to mobilize in the 1980s to protect their
livelihood. Like the metalworkers in Sao Paulo, these poor workmen pro-
duced a formidable grassroots leader from among their ranks, Chico
Mendes. His rubber tappers' organization linked up with Brazilian social
activists and international environmental groups to pressure the Brazilian
government for recognition of their grievances and to carve out ecological
reserves to protect the forests on which their way of life depended. They
also developed critical networks of international supporters in Europe and
the United States who were able to pressure international lending agencies
such as the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank to in-
corporate ecological concerns into their decisions about loans to Brazil.

2S ee Kenneth Maxwell, "Brazil: Lula's Prospects," New York Review of Books, De-
cember 5, 2002. For the early years of the PT see Margaret E. Keck, The Workers'
Party and Democratization in Brazil (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
                                                    TheTwo Brazils • 251

    The indigenous communities, facing a life-and-death struggle for sur-
vival as the outside world pressed in on their remaining refuges in the
Amazon basin, also found a voice during the 1980s. With the support of
international organizations such as the Cambridge, Massachusetts-based
Cultural Survival, tribes such as the Kayap6 and Xavante pressed for recog-
nition and protection against the freelance gold prospectors who were in-
vading their forests and polluting their rivers with deadly mercury. A
Xavante chief, Mario Juruna, was elected federal deputy in 1983, and Ail-
ton Krenak became well known in Brasilia and among the international
human rights networks.
    While the hierarchy of the Catholic Church was divided on its approach
to political activism, grassroots clergy strongly influenced by liberation
theology provided organizational support to Brazil's many new reform
movements. Protestant fundamentalists have also emerged as a force in the
Brazilian social and religious landscape. Small, impeccable, white Pente-
costal meeting houses now dot the landscape. The Universal Church of the
Kingdom of God, founded in 1977 by a Pentecostal pastor, Edir Macedo,
claims more than 3.5 million members and receives more than $700 mil-
lion in annual donations. It owns Brazil's third-largest TV network and
thirty radio stations. As it is often said in Brazil: "Catholics opted for the
poor; the poor opted for the evangelicals."
    Many Protestant converts come from the lower levels of the new urban
middle class. Protestant evangelicals practice a faith of personal salvation
and promote a frugal lifestyle emphasizing thrift and family. They are seen
as a conservative force; at the local level, however, their organizations have
quickly shifted to municipal activism, seeking improved water supplies
and better services, which has propelled them increasingly into politics.
The evangelical caucus in the Brazilian Congress had reached thirty-five by
1998, and an evangelical bishop in Rio de Janeiro, Carlos Rodrigues, has
consistently received a huge vote in congressional elections. The former
governor of the state of Rio de Janeiro and presidential candidate in 2002,
Anthony Garotinho, is also an evangelical. Responding to the evangelical
challenge, the Catholic Church in Brazil is now encouraging a powerful
charismatic movement that is galvanizing many of the faithful in Brazil's
cities. The charismatics, like the evangelicals, place a strong emphasis on
family values, but they, like the Catholic hierarchy, are also critical of the
harshness of Brazil's capitalist system.
    Most threatening to Brazil's political elite and to its large rurallandown-
ers in particular has been the emergence of a powerful rural movement of
the landless. Founded in Rio Grande do SuI in the mid-1980s, the Movi-
mento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra (Movement of Landless Rural
Workers, MST) now has some five hundred thousand members, including
all sorts of people from the margins of Brazilian society: the unemployed,
252 • NakedTropics

migrant agricultural workers, the illiterate, slum dwellers, all people the tra-
ditionalleft believed it was impossible to organize, stimulated by Brazil's
total failure for centuries to break the power of the great latifundios and
bring about any meaningful land distribution. Less than 1 percent of farms,
all over five hundred acres in dimension, account for 40 percent of all occu-
pied farmlands in Brazil. The movement was also energized by the expul-
sion of many smallholders from their plots, especially in Rio Grande do SuI,
Parana, and Santa Catarina, by the mechanization of large-scale soya and
wheat production in the 1980s. The MST is now the largest and best-orga-
nized social movement in Latin America, with successful cooperatives, a
website, and extensive international contacts. Its members often take the
law into their own hands, invading properties and setting up squatter settle-
ments, sacking warehouses to obtain food, and challenging landowners. Al-
most as often they provoke violent reactions from Jazendeiros (large
landowners), local police, and hired gunmen. 3
    What the MST seeks is access to land and the breakup of the large es-
tates, many of which remain undeveloped and unproductive, or are held
for tax purposes or to draw government subsidies. Its ideology is an eclec-
tic mix of revolutionary socialism and Catholic activism, as befits an orga-
nization built in large part by itinerant priests. Its most prominent leader is
an economist named Joao Pedro Stedile, who did postgraduate work in
Mexico and takes inspiration from the Mexican Zapatistas. He argues that
the Brazilian elite is too "subservient to foreign interests"-an obvious
swipe at the IMF and the forces of global capitalism as well as the former
dependentista, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, while he was lodged in the fu-
turistic presidential palace in Brasilia.
    Finally there is the Brazilian environmental movement, composed of
some 800 organizations stirred into being by the uncontrolled destruction
of the Amazon rain forest, ecological disasters in the grotesquely polluted
chemical complex at Cubatao in Sao Paulo state, and rampant encroach-
ment on the remnants of the once-lush Atlantic forests.
    In 1998 forest fires in the Amazon region, aggravated by the impact of £1
Nino, were the worst on record, but the Cardoso administration did little
to respond until the extent of the catastrophe became difficult to hide. The
devastating drought in the northeast, another predictable consequence of
£1 Nino, also received scant attention until famished peasants organized by
the MST raided warehouses and occupied bank agencies and police sta-
tions. This finally caught the attention of the indifferent bureaucrats in the
surreal world of Brasilia, preoccupied with the purchase of expensive Ori-
ental carpets for their offices so that "foreign visitors could be more ele-

30 n the MST see Bernardo Mancano Fernandes, A formarao do MST no Brasil
(Petr6polis, R.I.: Editora Vozes, 2000).
                                                     TheTwo Brazils • 253

gantly received;' as a spokesman for the minister of communication ex-
plained to the New York Times. Not surprisingly, all these movements strike
a raw chord with the "owners of power," as the brilliant Brazilian lawyer
and social critic Raymundo Faoro so aptly put it. Owing to the overseas
support the environmental movement receives, the Brazilian military
views it as a pawn of foreign interests, part of a thinly disguised effort by
the United States to take the Amazon away from Brazil. The military intel-
ligence network closely monitors the activities of the MST, and President
Cardoso's ministers often dismissed the movement as "enemies of moder-
nity." It was similar attitudes that a hundred years ago led to the repression
and slaughter in the backlands so brilliantly immortalized by Euclides da
Cunha and Mario Vargas Llosa.
    The great twentieth-century Brazilian historian Sergio Buarque de
Holanda defined a Brazilian as a "cordial" individual, and Brazilians are
people of great and infectious charm. But where politics and social con-
flicts meet, their country can be a very violent place. It has many martyrs to
prove it, among them Chico Mendes, gunned down in 1988 by cattle
ranchers threatened by his rubber tappers' movement. More than a thou-
sand labor leaders and grassroots peasant activists have been assassinated
in Brazil since the mid-1980s. In much of the country the murderers of ac-
tivists act with impunity. In November 1998, Miguel Pereira de Melo, the
crusading Brazilian photojournalist, was killed by gunmen. He had re-
corded the 1996 massacre of landless peasants by military police and was
about to testify at the trial of those officers.


                                      IV
The subtler obstacles to pluralism may prove the hardest to overcome. Re-
form will require changing an oligarchic style of politics and an entrenched
bureaucracy that have both skillfully deflected challenges for centuries. In-
deed, the deals made to bring about the transition from military to civilian
rule during the 1980s guaranteed the persistence in power of many old-line
politicians, including preeminently the powerful Bahia political boss, for-
mer state governor and president of the Senate, Antonio Carlos Magalhaes.
ACM, as he is universally known, is a gregarious, tough, and single-minded
political operator who proudly professes his admiration for Napoleon.
Through most of the Cardoso administration he was as influential as ever, a
pivotal figure in the coalition that supported Cardoso-an odd but very
Brazilian twist of fate since Cardoso was precisely the sort of upper-class in-
tellectual that Antonio Carlos Magalhaes and other power brokers under
the military regimes of the past most distrusted.
   The bosses and bureaucrats have plenty to protect. The welfare and
pension system, for example, does virtually nothing for the poorer workers
254 • NakedTropics

but vastly benefits state functionaries. In 1996, Brazil had twenty-nine
four-star generals on active duty and 5,000 people drawing generous pen-
sion checks at the four-star level, including far-flung relatives of dead and
retired officers.
   Brazil's formal political structure also makes reform excruciatingly dif-
ficult. It has twenty-seven state governors and more than 5,500 municipal
mayors (prefeitos), many of whom have run up massive deficits which by
tradition the federal government is expected to cover. The 1988 constitu-
tion obliges the central government to transfer a large share of tax revenues
to the state governments and municipalities but without a commensurate
shift of responsibility for government programs. The idea was to devolve
power and encourage democracy. The result was to strengthen parochial
interests and the local political bosses. These problems were aggravated by
the Real Plan's success, since, during the years of high inflation, govern-
ment deficits had miraculously disappeared as delayed payments wiped
out obligations. But after 1994 such flimflams no longer worked, as money
retained its value. The opening of the economy and the stabilization of the
currency had some perverse effects as well. Many industrial workers were
displaced as imports flooded the consumer market. Not only did the ser-
vice sector expand, but many industrial workers were forced into the infor-
mal sector. Subsequently, unemployment increased dramatically.
   Cardoso hoped to pass a half-dozen ambitious reform measures during
his first term-from cutting public payrolls to rewriting tax laws-and,
not surprisingly, all fell victim to constant dilution and delays. His major
success, altering the constitution to allow for his own reelection, was
bought at the high cost of also allowing state and local political bosses to
run for reelection. They promptly opened the spending spigots to ensure
victory at the polls, swelling public-sector debt to more than $300 billion
in early 1998 and leaving Brazil pitifully vulnerable when the international
crisis hit.
   President Cardoso found it difficult to sustain the momentum of re-
form in his second term. Arrayed against him were the old corporatist in-
terests, eager to protect the past and their own privileges, as well as the
newly assertive groups such as the MST, which opposed Cardoso's policies.
   Cardoso's popularity, though great enough to have reelected him with a
clear majority in the October 1998 presidential election, was based almost
entirely on the success of the Real Plan. He saw himself as a man of the cen-
ter-left, an adherent of the new "third way" of Bill Clinton and Tony Blair,
but was perceived by the public as being a political leader decisively of the
center-right, the friend of bankers, industrialists, civil servants, and politi-
cians rather than workers and the landless. As the realities of IMF-imposed
austerity begin to hit home-Brazil's economy was already shrinking by
                                                      TheTwo Brazils • 255

 the end of 1998-Cardoso found his popular support waning. He self-
 consciously steered away from the heady rhetoric of populism, avoided
demagoguery, and preferred persuasion and compromise to executive
decree, but his resolve was increasingly tested as his term in office drew to
a close.
    Lula lost the 1998 election in part because he chose to attack the Real
Plan. But the 1998 elections also saw the emergence of middle-class Work-
ers' Party leaders who spoke a language closer to that of the new social
democrats of Europe, consciously avoiding the radical rhetoric of the shop
floor. These Workers' Party representatives in Congress provided solid op-
position to Cardoso's IMF-inspired policies over the course of his second
term. The center-left political allies within Cardoso's own political family
were alienated by his orthodox economic retrenchment, which cut deeply
into the social programs Brazil so desperately needs. The president also
found less support from powerful governors, especially since they were
forced to bear the brunt of the budget cuts. Particularly troublesome was
the newly elected governor of the important state of Minas Gerais, former
president Itamar Franco, under whom, as finance minister, Cardoso imple-
mented the Real Plan. The erratic Franco was still deeply resentful that
Cardoso and not he got all the credit. In fact it was his repudiation of the
debt of Minas Gerais with the federal government that provoked a major
crisis in Brazil's international financing and the devaluation of the Real
that shook Brazil in early 1999. 4 Nor will the protests of landless rural
workers go away. Stedile in particular made no secret of his desire to "finish
off the neoliberal model." Over the course of his second term the MST laid
siege to the family rural estate of President Cardoso several times, going so
far on one occasion as to invade the main house itself.
    It is ironic that in the charged international economic climate in which
Fernando Henrique Cardoso began his second term as president in 1999,
the protection of the Real Plan, by plunging Brazil into recession, posed the
greatest threat to the benefits it brought to many Brazilians. Yet posing one
of the greatest challenges to the IMF-mandated program to satisfy the inter-
national markets are groups and forces within Brazil that barely existed
before political and economic liberalization began in the early 1990s. The
travails of the Brazilian economy-no matter where they lead-should not
obscure the significant success story the rise of these new voices represents.




4S ee Kenneth Maxwell, «Brazil in Meltdown," World Policy Journal (Spring 1999),
25-33.
SCENE ON A COOLIE SHIP.
                                                        CHAPTER             14
                                                                     Macao
                                                                Shadow Land
                         "Wishing to speak ill oftheir adversary, the Chinese will say:
                                'He's a man who makes a habit ofgoing to Macao.' "
                                                -Father Matteo Ricci, Peking, 1605




Fifty miles across the Pearl River estuary from Hong Kong lies the ancient
city of Macao. First settled by the Portuguese in the 1550s, it was handed
back to China on December 20, 1999. This tiny European enclave on the
South China Sea played a small and long-forgotten role in U.S. history; on
July 3, 1844, the first Chinese-American treaty, known as the Treaty of
Wang Xia, was negotiated and signed here. In 1997 the Chinese made
much of the fact that their recuperation of sovereignty over Hong Kong
marked the final abrogation of the 1842 Chinese-British Treaty of Nanjing,
whereby China had ceded Hong Kong to Queen Victoria "in perpetuity"
and was forced to pay $12 million for having "obliged" the British to wage
war on them, as well as compensation to the tune of an additional $6 mil-
lion for the cost of the opium seized from British merchants and destroyed
by the Chinese authorities-the original casus belli of the "Opium War."
   In contrast, the Treaty of Wang Xia was not punitive; and the United
States-with its own anticolonial past strongly in mind-acquired the
same "most favored nation" status in China that the British enjoyed, not by
force of arms but by convincing the Chinese that it sought no unfair ad-
vantage and, above all, did not seek territory.
   In July 1844, Caleb Cushing, a congressman from Massachusetts and a
forceful advocate for the China trade merchants of his state, and the Impe-
rial commissioner Qiying met at the old Temple of Kun lam, which today

                                     257
258 • NakedTropics

faces onto a busy avenue toward the center of the small peninsula on which
Macao stands. At that time, the temple lay within the Chinese village of
Wang Xia, just outside the seventeenth-century walls of Macao city but
well inside the territory controlled by the Portuguese. Kun lam, as she is
known in Macao, is the Buddhist Kwan Yin, Goddess of Mercy and Queen
of Heaven. The image of the goddess, dressed in the robes of a Chinese
bride, is set above the altar table in the smoky inner third chamber of the
temple, where, on a side wall, a long glass case contains the gold lacquer
figures of eighteen Chinese wise men, including Marco Polo-whose stat-
uette has bulging round eyes, a largish nose, and a small curly beard in-
tended to denote his European origin. Beyond the temple's maze of shrines
lies a garden with a round stone table, four simple granite stools, and a
plaque written in Chinese that mark the spot where the treaty of "peace,
amity, and commerce" was signed by Caleb Cushing and Qiying.
    The Treaty of Wang Xia gave American cargo ships access to the five
Chinese treaty ports, only recently forced open to foreigners as a result of
the Opium War, and it also gave Americans the right to construct hospitals,
churches, and cemeteries in China, a privilege the missionaries who served
as Caleb Cushing's translators in Macao were especially anxious to obtain.
The Imperial commissioner Qiying had been China's representative at the
acrimonious Nanjing negotiations, and his large entourage of soldiers, ser-
vants, officials, and advisers was lodged at the Temple of Kun lam during
the negotiations with Cushing.
    The Treaty of Wang Xia, which governed the American relationship
with China until 1905, committed the United States and China "to a per-
fect reciprocity" and was concluded with the utmost cordiality in less than
two weeks. As Qiying wrote to Cushing when inviting him to take "fruit
and tea" at the temple of Kun lam: "This conduct is vastly different from
that of the English taking and keeping possession of Hong Kong...." 1
    The British officials based in Hong Kong had implied that the Chinese
could not be trusted to police their own agreement since it was insinuated
in London that they had signed one document with the British, but then
published a different version for the use of their own customs officials.
Cushing thought it "a harsh construction to suspect the Chinese of such an
act." The problem, he thought, had more to do with the "want of care on the
part of the English translators." Daniel Webster, the U.S. secretary of state,
had given Cushing careful instructions: "You are a messenger of peace, sent
by the greatest power of America to the greatest empire in Asia to offer re-

IThe Sino-American Treaty and documents can be found in Hunter Miller, ed.,
Treaties and Other International Acts of the United States ofAmerica, 4 (Washing-
ton, D.C.: GPO, 1934),647-662.
                                                                  Macao • 259

spect and good will and to establish the means of friendly intercourse." It is
a pity that no senior u.s. public official in recent decades has taken the short
helicopter flight to Macao across the Pearl River estuary from Hong Kong
and stopped by at the Kun lam Temple. It would do no harm at all to think
back to the Treaty ofWang Xia once in a while, or to the goodwill the United
States could once count on, in its less bellicose days.


                                        II
The territory of Macao today consists of a tiny, densely populated penin-
sula of just over two square miles and two islands: Taipa, of 2.2 square
miles, and Coloane, of 3 square miles. Its population is about 430,000, of
which 97 percent are Chinese. Lisbon had wanted the transfer of Macao to
China to take place in 2007 and mark the four hundred and fiftieth an-
niversary of their settlement on the south China coast, but the Chinese
wished to have the matter settled before the end of the millennium. 2 The
British mandarins of Whitehall, who could not come to terms with the fact
that the Portuguese flag would fly over Macao longer than the Union Jack
flew over Hong Kong, and smarting from accusations that they blundered
in their reading of Chinese intentions and "lost" Hong Kong prematurely,
were quick to claim that the Portuguese had sold out to the Chinese long
ago. 3 Sir Percy Craddock, former British ambassador to Beijing and adviser
to Margaret Thatcher on China policy while she was prime minister, called
Portuguese authority in Macao "a ghostly sham." The Portuguese in
Macao, however, have been long used to such snootiness from the British,
who often forget that they arrived in China as drug dealers, not democrats.
The British inhabitants of Hong Kong in the 1850s called Macao "an un-
recognized and unpermitted, but unchallenged squatting, on an undefined
portion of Chinese territory."
   In many ways they were right. Lisbon was always very far away and the
Chinese very close at hand. Yet Macao had been most convenient to the
British for the century before their own forceful annexation of Hong Kong.
Prior to that date, the Chinese denied foreign merchants the right to re-
main year-round at the great trading city of Guangzhou (Canton), and
Macao was absolutely essential to British merchants, or to any other Euro-
pean or American merchants for that matter, if they wanted an entrep6t
from which to sell Indian opium and purchase Chinese tea. The ambiguity
of Macao's status suited all parties.

2S ee Geoffrey C. Gunn, Encountering Macau: A Portuguese City-State on the Periph-
ery of China, 1557-1999 (Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 1996).
3"Did Britain's Diplomats Blunder?" Economist, May 17,1997,47-48.
260 • NakedTropics

    The Portuguese arrived in the Pearl River estuary as early as 1513, al-
though Macao itself was not settled by them until 1557. The initiative for
its founding came from the merchants of Malacca, seized by Afonso de Al-
buquerque in 1511, giving the Portuguese a stronghold on the critical sea
passage between the South China Sea and the Bay of Bengal. Initially,
Macao's prosperity rested on its strategic location on the trade route from
Goa through Malacca to Japan. No less important was access to Guang-
zhou, the great outlet for South China silk, porcelain, and lacquerware, a
three-to-five-day voyage some eighty miles up the Pearl River from Macao.
    Climatic conditions were also important for Macao. As the Northern
Hemisphere tilts on its axis toward the sun in the early spring, the Asia
landmass warms and the rising heated air creates a low-pressure zone,
drawing the cooler, denser air from the ocean, creating the southern mon-
soon, which blows up the Indian Ocean and eastward and northward along
the China coast. In the autumn the process is reversed. For centuries,
seaborne traders took advantage of the monsoons, moving north and east
to arrive off the southern coast of China in the spring and summer and de-
parting for South and Southeast Asia in the winter. The Canton fairs of
January and June were held to coincide with the monsoons.
    The Portuguese, who saw Macao always from the seaward end of the
peninsula, named it after the seaward-facing temple of A Ma. The Chinese,
looking out to the peninsula from the mainland, named the narrow sand
spit and the hills of the peninsula beyond after the stem and bud of a lotus
flower. The Chinese found the Portuguese both peculiar and fearsome.
"They are white and black," one Chinese observer noted. "The faces are
pink, and their hair is all white. Even the young appear as white as snow."
The Chinese were impressed by the European's "beaklike noses, deep-set
green eyes, piercing and unblinking like a cat's." The African slaves the Por-
tuguese brought with them the Chinese claimed were "generally similar to
humans." The Chinese believed that the Portuguese were cannibals, kid-
napped children, and were quic~y roused to anger and violence, at which
time they ceased to be human and became wild animals. 4 The Chinese also
had a healthy respect for Portuguese firepower and fighting ability, and
wanted to confine them to a remote place where they could be observed,
monitored, and, if need be, learned from. The technological wonders and
curiosities to be observed in Macao especially intrigued the Chinese. One
Chinese observer found a "particularly obscene device:' the inflatable
naked woman made of leather and silk some Portuguese travelers carried
with them in a case to be taken to bed when needed.

4There was truth to the charges of kidnapping. See C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Fi-
dalgos in the Far East, 1550-1770 (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1948),223.
                                                                   Macao • 261

    Chinese dislike and suspicion of Westerners remained strong through-
out the Ming period and beyond. The Italian-born Jesuit Matteo Ricci,
who had entered China in 1582, writing to the general of the Jesuit Order
Claudio Acquaviva, noted that those wishing to speak ill of their adver-
saries say, "He's a man who makes a habit of going to Macao."5 To keep out
such influences, in 1573 the Chinese district magistrate ordered the con-
struction of a barrier gate surmounted by a small gatehouse at the mid-
point of the sand spit between the Macao peninsula and the mainland.
Here Chinese troops were stationed to control the flow of people and
goods across the border. 6
   When, in 1684, after a period of prohibition, China resumed foreign
trade contacts, Macao was incorporated in China's system of port control,
and in 1688, the Chinese established a customs office (hoppo) in Macao.
Chinese bureaucratic oversight was increased in the eighteenth century,
when the Portuguese-Macanese fleet was strictly limited to twenty-five
vessels. In 1736, a local mandarinate was established, and at midcentury
the district magistrate moved his residence to the Chinese village of Wang
Xia within the Macao peninsula itself.? In effect, Macao lived under an
overlapping mixed Portuguese-Chinese jurisdiction, and the Portuguese
paid tribute to the Chinese emperor for the right to reside there.
   The link with Lisbon was always tenuous. The distance between Portu-
gal and Macao by sea was immense, a voyage of some 10,000 to 15,000
miles that began south and west across the Atlantic to Brazil, then east to
the Cape of Good Hope and north to Madagascar, across the Indian Ocean
to the Malabar Coast, on from Goa, Cochin, and Calicut and around India
to the Coromandel Coast and Malacca, and from there past Java and the
Malay Peninsula to Macao. Macao lived by commerce, and it was pivotal to
the trade network between Japan, South China, and Southeast Asia and
India. From the 1550s until the 1640s, it became prosperous on the silks
exported from China to Japan and the silver brought back from Japan in
payment. Silver was also used to purchase exports in Macao and Canton
for reexport to Southeast Asia, India, and Europe.


sJonathan D. Spence, The Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci (New York: Viking Pen-
guin, 1984), 193.
6The district or county office was the lowest level in the Chinese imperial bureau-
cracy. The major responsibility of this low-level bureaucrat in Macao was to make
sure that the Portuguese paid their annual rent and customs duties to the Chinese
imperial authorities. See Jonathan Porter, Macau: The Imaginary City (Boulder,
Colo.: Westview, 1996). Porter's is by far the best recent book on Macao in English.
7Angela Guimaraes, Uma relafiio especial: Macau e as relafoes luso-chinesas,
1780-1844 (Lisbon: Edi<;ao Centro de Investiga<;6es e Estudos de Sociologia,
1996.)
262 • NakedTropics

   Macao's prosperity depended in the early years on an inter-Asian com-
merce where the Portuguese had established themselves as intermediaries,
partly because of their superior gunpower but also because of the political
decision of the Chinese not to take part in overseas commerce and mar-
itime exploration, despite the success of their voyages into the Indian
Ocean in the preceding century.8 Goa, the administrative heart of all the
Portuguese settlements from East Africa to Japan, was at the western end of
this interoceanic commercial system. Every two or three years, the "Japan
ship" set out from Goa carrying cotton cloth from India, glassware, silver,
ivory, Spanish velvet and scarlet cloth, olives, olive oil, and wine. At
Malacca, pepper, cloves, and aromatic woods were taken on for sale in
Japan and China.
   At Macao, the carrack remained sometimes for up to a year before mak-
ing for Nagasaki with white silk, red silk, porcelain, musk, white and black
sugar, and other precious commodities. The Japanese called these vessels
Kuro-fune, or "black ships;' a name revived for Commodore Perry's vessels
three centuries later. Beginning in 1571, a prosperous if unauthorized
trade between Manila and Macao was financed by the silver flowing across
the Pacific from the mines of Peru and Mexico.
   The Portuguese administration of Macao reflected this seasonal,
oceanic, and inter-Asian trade. Executive authority was held not by a Por-
tuguese resident official but by the captain-major who commanded the
Japan-bound carrack, and he was only in Macao while en route to India or
awaiting the monsoon for the onward voyage to Japan. The "Great Ship of
the Amacon;' as the English called it, was an enormous vessel of 1,600 tons
or more, the largest in the world at the time; only the Manila galleon that
plied the Pacific between the Philippines and Acapulco was comparable. 9
The illustrious figure of the captain major is depicted in the Japanese
Namban-byobu screens of the period, where he is often shown sitting on a
folding chair on the ship's deck, surrounded by cases of trade goods, or he
is seen arriving on land in Japan with his retinue, accompanied by black


8For a discussion of the seven great Chinese voyages of the Grand Eunuch Zheng
He between 1405 and 1433, see K. N. Chaudhuri, Trade and Civilization in the In-
dian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise ofIslam to 1750 (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1985), especially 34-62.
9C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer's The Great Ship of the Amacon: Annals ofMacao and
the Old Japan Trade, 1555-1640 (Lisbon: Centro de Estudos Hist6ricos Ultramari-
nos, 1963) is one of the great works on the Portuguese in Asia and is still unsur-
passed for its pithy detail and original research. More recently, the Indian historian
Sanjay Subrahmanyam has written an excellent overview, The Portuguese Empire in
Asia, 1500-1700: A Political and Economic History (London and New York: Long-
man, 1993).
                                                                   Macao • 263

slaves and acrobats, Arabian steeds, cages of hawks, peacocks and tigers, to
be greeted by black-garbed Jesuits. 10
   To govern in the absence of the captain major, the citizens of Macao
formed an elected body, the Senado de Camara, in 1586. This included a
chief judge, a secretary, and a procurador, whose job was to represent the
city government with the Chinese authorities, which recognized his right
to do so. The Macao Senate thus became the first representative institution
established in Asia, occasionally removing Portuguese officials it disap-
proved of, and by running the day-to-day operations of the city. 11
   The impressive building of the Loyal Senate still dominates the colon-
naded central square of Macao. The walls of its council chamber are hung
with the portraits of the senators who have held office since the sixteenth
century; they have recently been joined by a portrait of Ho Yin, the rich
Chinese senator who ran the Chinese Chamber of Commerce in Macao
and was the unofficial link between the Chinese in Macao and Beijing in
the 1960s and 1970s. His son Edmund Ho Hau Wah became the first chief
executive of Macao when the enclave returned to China.
   The threats to Macao for most of its history came less from the Chinese,
in fact, than from other Europeans, especially the Dutch. The Jesuits built
the first fortification on the Monte, the central strong point of the penin-
sula; and the Jesuits as well as the fortress helped defend Macao from a
naval assault by the Dutch in 1622, when they laid siege to the city with
thirteen men-of-war carrying a force of 1,300 men. A large cannon
mounted on the Sao Paulo Church and manned by Father Jeronimo Rho, a
Jesuit of Italian origin and a mathematician, fired a shot that landed di-
rectly on the Dutch magazine. It was John the Baptist Day, and he was
promptly dubbed patron saint of the city. It was claimed that the African
slaves in Macao took the reference to John the Baptist too literally and to
celebrate the feast beheaded the unfortunate Dutch captives. I2
   In 1641, however, a key link in the trade chain that underpinned the
city's prosperity was broken when Malacca fell to the Dutch. Even more
catastrophic for Macao was the expulsion of the Portuguese from Japan in
1639, and the end of the profitable Japan commerce. The Senate of Macao

IOYoshitomo Okamoto, The Namban Art ofJapan (New York and Tokyo: Weather-
hill and Heibonsha, 1972). See also Luiz Carlos Lisboa and Mara Rubia Arakaki,
Namban (Sao Paulo: Alian~a Cultural Brasil-Japao, 1993).
IIC. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer, Portuguese Society in the Tropics: The Municipal
Councils of Goa, Macao, Bahia, and Luanda 1510-1600 (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1965).
12For these events, see Boxer, Fidalgos in the Far East, 72-92; and Jonathan Israel,
The Dutch Republic and the Hispanic World, 1606-1661 (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1982), 119-120.
264 • NakedTropics

sent a delegation to plead with the Japanese to reverse their prohibition. As
a final warning that they meant what they said, the Japanese executed
sixty-one of the delegates; only the servants were spared to relay the mes-
sage back to Macao.
   Portugal's assertion of its own sovereignty in the revolution against
Spanish rule in 1640 also meant that Macao's lucrative trade with Manila
collapsed. In China, the Manchus had overthrown the Ming dynasty and
were consolidating their power. With Manila and Japan gone, the Macao
merchants no longer had the silver with which to finance their trade. "We
are living proof of the fable of Midas who died of very hunger at a table of
golden dishes," wrote one Macao merchant, Joao Marques Moreira, in
1644. "Such is happening to us now, for having seen our tables replete with
gold, silver, diamonds, rubies, pearls and seed pearls, we are dying by
inches."13 The Jesuit priest Gabriel de Magalhaes drew an equally discour-
aging lesson. "Can God forget the piety of such a city," he wrote to the
Macao Senate from Peking in 1656. "Where is the refuge and sanctuary of
religion but in this city, which is gloriously called after the name of God.
Can God forget his promises? He hath promised tribulations and a hun-
dredfold for the suffering of his saints; and a hundredfold will He pay."14
   After 1640, Macao turned to Indochina, Macassar, and Timor, and
many of its merchants became commission agents for Cantonese business-
men who continued to trade with the Japanese in Chinese junks. In fact,
Macanese merchants were often front men, or compradores, for wealthy
Chinese merchants and slipped easily into the role of intermediaries sell-
ing their names to both Chinese and Europeans to allow them to do busi-
ness through Macao.

                                       II
It was during the period of economic decline and isolation, however, that
the "Macanese" acquired a distinct identity. This identity was reflected, in
part, in their ethnic makeup through racial intermarriage or concubinage
between European men and Malay, Indian, Japanese, and Chinese women.
A Creole Macao patois developed, a mixture of Portuguese and Chinese
with Malay words and phrases, which facilitated communication between
Europeans and Chinese merchants and shopkeepers as the Macanese be-
came important intermediaries to both Chinese and Europeans. Macao's
domestic architecture and decoration reflected this eclectic mix, with large
roomy houses built around Chinese-styled central courts, shuttered Euro-
pean windows on upper stories, with doors opening onto an interior space

13Boxer; Great Ship from Amacon, 19.
14Ibid.
                                                                 Macao • 265

graced with carved, painted columns, ornate railings, interior lanterns, and
shrines. Macao's houses were painted yellow, green, and pink, soon faded
by the sun and stained with mildew from the subtropical rain. IS
    In the eighteenth century, English, and other European merchants who
were engaged in the Canton trade, prohibited from living permanently in
Canton by the Chinese, established year-long residences and trading com-
panies along the beautiful semicircular bay of Macao's Praia Grande.
Among the most important of their establishments was the headquarters
of the English East India Company, whose directors occupied a house close
to the Cam6es Grotto, which is now the offices of the Orient Foundation.
Through an archway still boasting the East India Company name stands
Macao's Protestant church and a leafy Protestant cemetery, where the
gifted painter of the South China coast George Chinnery (1774-1852) is
buried, as well as many young New England seamen, their names recorded
on simple headstones "raised by their messmates."16
   Opium was first imported to China from India for medical uses, princi-
pally to relieve pain and dysentery. But the traffic in opium escalated expo-
nentially after the English East India Company's tea monopoly was
abolished in the 1830s, and the tea market in Britain expanded by 40 per-
cent. The Chinese tried unsuccessfully to prevent the imports of opium,
provoking the aggressive intervention of British gunboats to protect
opium traders. Prosperity returned to Macao's waterfront, crowded now
with opium-laden vessels, its warehouses full of disguised crates awaiting
transshipment upriver to Canton.
   The founding of Hong Kong, however, struck at Macao's prosperity no
less than had the loss of Malacca and the destruction of the Portuguese
presence in Japan two centuries before. Macao was no longer needed to
house merchants engaged in the commerce of Canton. Macao's shallow,
easily silted harbor was no competition for Hong Kong's deepwater an-
chorage on the other side of the Pearl estuary. Macao's merchants thus
turned to less savory enterprises, creating an underworld specializing in
drugs, slavery, and prostitution. From the 1850s to the 1870s, the notorious
"coolie trade" to Peru and Cuba flourished in Macao; the conditions under

15The most accessible Chinese text on this period is the report by two officials,
Tcheong-u-Lam and Ian-kuong-Iam, Ou Mun Kei-Leok: monografia de Macau,
trans. Luis Gons:alves (Macao: Imprensa Nacional, 1950). Boxer reproduced the re-
markable illustrations of Chinese and Portuguese inhabitants of Macao contained
in the original manuscript in his Fidalgos in the Far East.
16This period has been skillfully evoked in the romanticized histories of Austin
Coates's City ofBroken Promises (Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1967) and
A Macao Narrative (Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1975). For the opium
trade, see Martin Booth, Opium: A History (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1998),
103-137.
266 • NakedTropics

which the rural Chinese were transported as indentured workers to the
New World were as bad as those of the recently suppressed African slave
trade. Poverty and instability at home, and economic opportunities over-
seas, led to increasing mainland emigration to the Philippines, Cochin
China, Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia, as well as to Hawaii, the United
States, Canada, and South Africa. Most of the emigrants came from the
coastal districts of the Canton delta, which made Macao, more porous
than Hong Kong, an important conduit for remittances of the overseas
Chinese to their families at home.
   The political consequences followed quickly as well. The establishment
of Hong Kong inspired the Portuguese to seek a similar status for Macao.
Until the 1840s, the dual sovereignty exercised over Macao was of mutual
convenience to China and Portugal. But this balance of power was to
change dramatically. Encouraged by the example of the British, an aggres-
sive Portuguese governor, Joao Ferreira do Amaral, was determined to imi-
tate them. He imposed taxes on the Chinese fishermen, expelled the
Chinese customs agents, suspended the annual tribute payments to the
Chinese emperor, and took control of the barrier gate that had always been
under Chinese control.
   The Chinese reacted with fury. Governor Amaral, while inspecting the
new construction of the gate, was pulled from his horse and assassinated,
his head and left hand chopped off and taken back to China. When the
Chinese sent additional forces to garrison their fort outside Macao, a
young Macanese lieutenant, Mesquita by name, set out with thirty-six
Macanese soldiers and routed them. He became an instant hero to Macao's
residents, and his statue was raised in the square outside the Loyal Senate,
where it stood until it was destroyed by Maoist student rioters in 1966. But
the avenue that today cuts through what was once the old Chinese village
of Wang Xia still bears his name, and Governor Amaral is commemorated
by the road leading up to the old barrier gate, and did so at least until De-
cember 20,1999.
   The Chinese returned Governor Amaral's head and hand in 1850, and
his remains were later shipped to Lisbon to be buried in the curiously
named Cemiterio dos Prazeres (cemetery of the pleasures) in that city. But
symbols remain potent in this world of shadow play. Governor Amaral's
statue in Macao was removed in 1991 and sent back to Lisbon at the insis-
tence of the director of Beijing's Office of Hong Kong and Macao Affairs.


                                     III
In the sixteenth century, the Portuguese named Macao the "City of God in
China." Later on, they added the phrase, «There Is No Other More Loyal;'
                                                              Macao • 267

in recognition, it is said, of Macao's support of Portuguese independence
from Spain in 1640 despite the fact it was threatened by Spanish troops
from Manila, a city with which it enjoyed a profitable commerce. In fact,
the title was given in the early nineteenth century, when Macao resisted
British attempts to "protect" it from the French by sending in an occupa-
tion force during the Napoleonic Wars. The Portuguese were wont to name
their overseas settlements in such a grandiloquent manner, but such names
rarely stuck in popular usage. "Macao" is a bastardization of a Chinese
name, and referred to the bay of the goddess A Ma (A-Ma-Gao). Her tem-
ple, the oldest in Macao, faces out at the seaward end of the peninsula. It is
set tight against the rocks of the steep hillside, as a Chinese temple usually
is to placate the dragon who lived in such places. A Ma is holy to fishermen
and is daily thronged with worshipers, unlike Macao's largely empty
Catholic churches.
    I was in Macao at the time of the A Ma festival, and all day long the tem-
ple was filled with the endless staccato concussion of firecrackers, to which
the sampans and high-decked Pearl River fishing junks responded as they
rounded the headland on their way to and from Macao's inner harbor,
turning their prows toward the temple and paying a noisy obsequiousness
to the goddess. A modern maritime museum, built on landfill in front of
the temple gate, and where both Chinese and Portuguese navigational ex-
ploits are celebrated, was closed for the day in homage to a more ancient
presence, entirely hidden behind the intricate bamboo latticework and col-
orful banners of a traveling Chinese opera.
    At times, Macao certainly was the "City of God in China," home to
many zealous Jesuits and saints-to-be. The Spanish-born Francis Xavier
died on the nearby island of Shangchuan, awaiting the call to Peking that
never came, and the chapel named after him on Coloane Island contains
part of the left arm of the saint as well as the venerated bones of Viet-
namese and Japanese Christian martyrs. By the seventeenth century, it was
claimed that Macao had more convents and monasteries than Vatican City.
Speculative landfills and high-rise buildings have today almost obliterated
the old Macao of fortresses and churches, a skyline recorded by George
Chinnery in the nineteenth century, and which had remained largely un-
changed from the mid-seventeenth century until the late 1980s.
    In the eighteenth century, this remarkable cityscape often reminded
sailors arriving from the seaward side of the Macao peninsula of the bay of
Naples. Some part of this atmosphere still remains toward the end of the
Praia Grande, where the grand old Bela Vista Hotel, scene of much intrigue
over the decades, still sits high on the hillside. The Bela Vista, much to the
dismay of many, became the Portuguese consulate after Macao returned to
China. This area of Macao, with its curving seaside boulevard and old
268 • NakedTropics

shade trees and the remaining musty nineteenth-century palaces of the
great Macao merchants of that time, recalls the Urca district under the
Sugar Loaf Mountain in Rio de Janeiro, or the port of Cannes in the 1950s.
Here motorized rickshaws ply their trade, neatly uniformed Chinese chil-
dren play happily in the gardens outside the Matteo Ricci School, and
Macao's old folks quietly exercise each morning before the sticky subtropi-
cal heat rises with the sun.
   The Praia Grande was traditionally the "European" or «Christian" quar-
ter of Macao. The Chinese quarter layover the hill, around the inner har-
bor, and beyond the old city wall. To reach the inner harbor from the Praia
Grande is a brief walk past Government House, up past the empty Saint
Joseph's Seminary, which holds in its cluttered rooms the paintings of the
Christian martyrs crucified by the Japanese in 1596, past a remarkable
square onto which faces the colonnaded facade of the oldest European
Theater in China, and beyond a quiet stucco building that houses a mag-
nificent Chinese library, bequeathed to Macao by a Hong Kong Chinese ty-
coon in gratitude for Macao's role in harboring his family and many other
Hong Kong residents during the Japanese occupation of the British colony.
   The inner harbor lies below, a bustling commercial and industrial wa-
terfront with old warehouses, a gaudy floating casino, long sidewalks
under arches onto which face a jumble of narrow open entranceways
housing the occasional dark interior of a Buddhist temple, metal work-
shop, food store, and fish shop, peopled by straggling bleary-eyed gamblers
and worn-out prostitutes on their way home, and busy shoppers and old
men chatting. The inner harbor itself is crowded with craft of all sizes and
shapes, and at a very short distance beyond is China proper.
   The cornerstone of Macao's most famous Jesuit Church of Sao Paulo
was laid in 1601. Only its facade now stands at the top of its wide staircase
beside the great seventeenth-century fortress of the Monte, also built by
the Jesuits and a critical bastion for the defense of Macao. The first Jesuits
settled permanently in Macao in 1563. By the end of the 1570s, a spacious
residence had been constructed between the Monte and the hilly garden
within which lies the grotto named after the Portuguese epic poet Luis de
Cam6es, who mayor may not have lived in Macao (the two leading histori-
ans of Macao, Father Manuel Teixeira and Charles R. Boxer, vigorously dis-
agreed on the subject).l? The garden is still a beautiful place, and a bust of
Cam6es, under which are carved the first three verses of the first canto of
The Lusiads, now sits within the grotto. Here, under the shade trees, old

17For a discussion on Charles R. Boxer (1904-2000) see chapter 15. Father Teixeira
(1924-) left Macau in May 2001; see Father Manuel Teixeira and Jose Hermano
Saraiva, Camoes Was in Macau, Portuguese/Chinese bilingual edition (Macau:
Macau Foundation; International Institute of Macau, 2001).
                                                                 Macao • 269

Chinese men bring their caged birds each morning to chirp and warble. It
is fortunate that less than 2 percent of Macao's population can read Por-
tuguese, hence few can understand Camoes's somewhat disparaging refer-
ence in his second verse about the "terras viciosas de Africa e de Asia." The
oratory for St. Martin, built in 1580 by Michele Ruggieri as a center for
Chinese and Japanese converts, also housed the school where he, and then
Matteo Ricci, could learn Chinese. The Jesuit college founded in 1594 sub-
sequently developed Chinese studies, Latin, mathematics, and music, and,
eventually, with its printing press and extensive library, became one of the
great centers of Chinese studies in Asia.
    The famous church of Sao Paulo itself was financed by the city of
Macao, from which the Jesuits had obtained a fixed share of profits from
the Japan trades. A Chinese narrative of the seventeenth century described
the "Mother of Heaven" on the altar as a goddess who "wears curious
cloths and a veil made of glass beads; her hair appears lifelike." I was struck
by the relative simplicity of the Catholic churches in Macao, almost Cal-
vinist in their lack of ornamentation and strikingly plain in comparison to
the baroque effervescence of churches in Brazil or Spanish America of the
same period. But having visited the incense-laden interior of the temple of
Kun lam, this made more sense, as did the seventeenth-century Chinese
references to the virgin set above the altar of Sao Paulo.
   The great facade of Sao Paulo, still one of Macao's most prominent
landmarks, reflects the vision of its Chinese and Japanese craftsmen. A
broad flight of steps leads up to the front of the church where the facade
rises in four tiers; the second containing the four Jesuit saints, with Loyola
and Francis Xavier at the center; a dragon and a Portuguese great ship in
full sail are on the third tier, to the left and right of which are admonitions
in Chinese; on the fourth is Jesus and the instruments of the crucification,
and at the top a bronze dove between the sun and the moon. The steps of
Sao Paulo are usually thronged with Japanese tourists amazed at the work
of their seventeenth-century ancestors. To the extreme left of the facade
are two stone slabs that once held the flags indicating that the Jesuits were
granted the rank of mandarin by the Chinese emperor.
   Francis Xavier had failed in his attempt to enter China. But Alessandro
Valignano, Father Visitor of the order in the East Indies, while spending ten
months in Macao on his return from Japan, developed a new and far more
effective strategy to "open the rock:' as he put it. I8 He found the Chinese,
with "their love of learning, their neat dress, their delicate eating habits,
their banning of weapons in public places, the shyness of their women,
their good government:' in every way superior to the Japanese. Valignano

I80n Valignano, see Spence, Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci, 40-41. For the Jesuits
in Macao and China, see also Porter, Macau, 104-116.
270 • NakedTropics

decided, in effect, that to convince the Chinese of Christianity's validity, it
was necessary to impress the educated elite, to dazzle them with the Jesuits'
own education and skills. In order to do so, the Jesuits must learn the lan-
guage and traditions of China.
    Michele Ruggieri was the first new recruit under this dispensation to ar-
rive in Macao, via Goa in 1578, but he encountered enormous difficulty
himself in mastering Chinese and requested that Matteo Ricci be sent from
Goa to join him in Macao. Ricci was to be much more successful and went
on to establish, in 1601, the Jesuit mission in Peking. Here his skill and
what Ricci called his cosette, bits and pieces, metallic spheres, sundials,
prisms, and, above all, clocks, were much appreciated. Ricci and his follow-
ers attempted to show that the moral doctrine of Confucius in no way con-
flicted with Christian morality, and that the ritual observances were purely
secular. The remarkable Cologne-born Johann Adam Schall von Bell,
who arrived in Macao in 1619 in response to Ricci's call for true scien-
tists to meet the Chinese demand for competent mathematicians and as-
tronomers, succeeded brilliantly in fulfilling Valignano's surmise that
scholars more than mendicants would win the way to Peking. He studied
Chinese in Macao and helped defend the city from the Dutch in 1622; a
year later he was in Peking and accurately predicted the lunar eclipse with
great impact on the court, beginning an extraordinary career. He eventu-
ally became the first director of the Imperial Astronomical Bureau under
the Manchus, from 1644 to 1655, and was permitted to build a mission
compound and church close to the imperial palace, a place, to the surprise
of the Chinese hosts, the Portuguese president Jorge Sampaio sought out
during a visit to Beijing in 1998. The Peking Jesuits dressed and behaved
like Confucian literati, but they also brought ingenious gadgets and clever
maps, which allowed them to survive the transition from Ming to Qing dy-
nasties, providing protection for the Christian mission in China and ob-
structing other Europeans in their attempts to reach the Chinese court.
    The Jesuits, despite their dominant role, were not the first Catholic
order in China, nor were they the only order in Macao. The Augustinians,
Dominicans, and Franciscans had little love for the Jesuits, or for each
other. In 1613, Jesuits and Dominicans and their respective partisans
fought pitched battles in the streets with guns and swords, much to the
consternation of the Chinese authorities, who put the Canton armed
forces on alert and banned food sales to the Portuguese. 19 It was not the
Chinese who in the end undermined the Jesuits' position in China and
made impossible the continuation of their experiment in cultural adapta-


19The Macao Senate had to calm the Chinese with a lengthy memorial explaining
that no anti-Chinese plot was involved in the fracas.
                                                                  Macao • 271

tion pioneered by Valignano; it was contention within the Catholic Church
over the question of how far the church should go in accommodating Chi-
nese traditions. The bitter controversy over Chinese rites was eventually
resolved against the Jesuits by papal decree in 1742. The Jesuit Order was
itself expelled by the Portuguese from its overseas possessions in 1759
(1762 in Macao) and suppressed by the papacy in the 1770s. 20 The vast
riches the Jesuits were supposed to have hoarded in secret tunnels between
their church and the Monte were never found; but old myths die hard, and
the archaeologists accompanying the building of a new historical museum
to present Macao's history beyond 1999 told me they are again searching
for these hidden chambers.
    Portugal suppressed the monastic orders in the 1830s, converting the
monasteries and convents to other uses. When in 1835 fire destroyed the
old Jesuit college, which once housed one of the great Western centers of
Chinese scholarship, it was no longer a place of worship but the kitchen for
the local garrison. In the narrow street that leads from the base of the steps
at Sao Paulo toward the grotto garden I noticed a shop window overflow-
ing with porcelain statuary. Here many small fat Chinese buddhas were
lined up beside several "mothers of heaven" or "Our Lady of Fatima;' fairly
interchangeable in these parts apparently depending on the season, as well
as miniature Red Guards raising a flag much in the style of the u.S.
Marines at Iwo Jima, and Mao holding up his little book, even Joseph
Stalin looking much as I remember seeing him in Moscow some weeks be-
fore he was removed from the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square. In the end,
it seems most things can be commercialized.
    By the early nineteenth century, Macao had become a home base for
earnest Protestant missionaries, many of them Americans, doing good
works and building hospitals and anxious to proselytize the Chinese
masses. They were of course deeply suspicious of their Catholic hosts-a
suspicion returned in good measure by Macao's numerous Catholic
priests. The bishop of Macao's enormous palace, now empty, sits atop the
hill on the landward side of the Penha peninsula, of which the A Ma Tem-
ple marks the seaward end, just where the Chinese dragon might have been
supposed to live.
    The current bishop of Macao, Dom Domingos Lam, the first Chinese to
head the diocese since its founding in 1576, is turning the palace into a
university business and management school, and prefers to live elsewhere.

200n the expulsion of the Jesuits from Portugal and its empire, see Kenneth
Maxwell, Pombal, Paradox of the Enlightenment (Cambridge and New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1995), 71-86; on the Jesuits within the Portuguese Empire,
see Dauril Alden, The Making of an Enterprise: The Society ofJesus in Portugal, Its
Empire and Beyond (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996).
272 • NakedTropics

Bishop Lam is a small, chain-smoking, energetic cleric. His door «is open
to all comers;' he told me when I called on him at his office next to the
cathedral in downtown Macao. He is a great enthusiast for the World Wide
Web and its potential for his work in Macao, as well as for communication
beyond it.
    There are fewer than twenty thousand Catholics in Macao today, but the
church's role is much more important than these numbers suggest. Over
forty thousand children, for example, are enrolled in Catholic private
schools. He «never talks politics;' the bishop told me. «We do what we have
to do regardless, and I don't much worry if people like it or not; they can
draw their own conclusions." His position is a sensitive one given what he
calls «the bad relationship between the Chinese government and the Vati-
can." In an elliptical way, the bishop was saying something very important
about Macao: look at actions and not words.
    The Catholic schools and religious expression are both explicitly pro-
tected in Macao's Basic Law (Article 34), to which China formally commit-
ted itself in 1993. The Basic Law became the constitution of Macao after
December 1999. The status of the enclave is that of a «special administra-
tive region" (SAR) of China like Hong Kong, under the formula invented
by the late Deng Xiaoping of «one country, two systems." It is an arrange-
ment intended, as with Hong Kong, to leave the territory to run its own in-
ternal affairs while preserving its special Sino-European character and
capitalist system. 21
    Yet even before the ink was dry on the Basic Law, doubts emerged as to
how much autonomy this particular special administrative region would
have. Bishop Lam's commitment to establishing a new interuniversity insti-
tute with a school of business and management in collaboration with Por-
tugal's Catholic University quickly became subject to intense pressure from
Beijing, which made it clear that China will not accept an institution subject
to the control of a «foreign state;' by which China means the Vatican.
    Bishop Lam made no direct reference to this dispute in his conversation
with me, but he did make a point of handing me the brochure for the uni-
versity institute and its planned curriculum, as well as calling up on his
computer and printing out for me a listing of the Christian missions sup-
ported by his bishopric, including the construction in 1992 of a church at
Ta-huang, the largest church built in the Pearl River delta region in the past
fifty years. Given the historical role of Macao in Christian missionary en-

2IThe Basic Law is printed in full in Steve Shipp, Macau, China: A Political History
of the Portuguese Colony's Transition to Chinese Rule (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland,
1997), 143-171. There is also a good description of the negotiations and legal
background in R. D. Cremer, ed., Macau: City of Commerce and Culture, 2d ed.
(Hong Kong: API Press, 1991), especially 261-353.
                                                               Macao • 273

deavors in the Far East and China, how the Beijing Communists deal with
this part of Macao's heritage will be a vital indication of their willingness
to abide by other protections embedded in Macao's Basic Law.
   The bishop's resistance to attempts to manipulate him provoked some
criticism on the Portuguese side too. A number of Portuguese officials find
him "very Chinese," tending to place "community values over individual
values." My own sense of the bishop is that he is a man of great personal
strength and conviction, and that he will be a key player at one of the most
sensitive points of potential confrontation in the coming years. Bishop Lam
walked me past the faded portraits of his predecessors as I left his residence.
They stretch back four centuries. But as the great Jesuit polymath Antonio
Vieira noted in the 1640s: "The preachers took the Gospel and the mer-
chants took the preachers." Macao's raison d'etre after all was commerce,
and it remains so: only the commodities have changed over the centuries.


                                      IV
Macao, despite its godly aspirations, was no less often a city of sin, a nether
zone of concubines and prostitutes, an opaque shadow world of shady
deals and opium dens, well known for its corruption. One shocked visitor
in the 1930s saw Macao as the playground of the "riffraff of the world, the
drunken shipmasters; the flotsam of the sea; the derelicts, and more
shameless, beautiful, savage women than any part of the world." W. H.
Auden in a memorable phrase called it "a weed from Catholic Europe."
   This is the Macao thousands of eager Hong Kong residents hope for as
they crowd aboard the jet hydrofoils that rush back and forth across the
Pearl River estuary between the two cities. Owned by Macao's casino king,
Stanley Ho, these speedy vessels bring gamblers to the Hotel Lisboa and the
casino "VIP rooms," where they rub shoulders with Communist cadres
from the mainland, dropping their ill-gotten gains at the card tables. Six
million visitors cross to Macao each year; 80 percent of them are Hong
Kong Chinese, most of whom head straight for the gambling. The rich
pickings of Macao's casinos are swiftly reinvested in China, Europe, and
New York, in Hong Kong enterprises, and Lisbon real estate, as well as in
payoffs to Chinese party officials, local administrators, and Portuguese bu-
reaucrats, and in campaign contributions to Portuguese politicians-and
in 1996, it seems, to U.S. politicians as well-who can provide favors. The
casinos provide over 60 percent of Macao government revenues.
   Stanley Ho has held the gaming monopoly since 1962 through his
Macao Tourism and Entertainment Corporation (STDM) in which he
holds a 25 percent personal stake, although his gambling monopoly was
due to expire in 2001. Ho's net value was placed in 1992 at well over a bil-
lion dollars and his gambling interests now extend to Europe through the
274 • NakedTropics

Portuguese-based Sol Estoril group. He is the head of the Shun Tak ship-
ping company, which dominates the transportation routes between Hong
Kong and Macao. There are very few enterprises or developments in
Macao in which Stanley Ho is not a major participant.
    Ho, now in his late seventies, was born in Hong Kong to a well-to-do
Eurasian family and educated at the University of Hong Kong. He made his
fortune during the Japanese occupation. Macao, as a Portuguese territory,
retained its neutrality during the Second World War and became a refuge
for many from Hong Kong. Ho developed a profitable trade between
Japan, Macao, and occupied Hong Kong. After the Communist takeover of
China and during the Korean War, he supplied the Chinese with gold and
airplanes and other embargoed materials.
    It is sometimes said of Stanley Ho's role that Macau it is the only place
in the world where a «casino king" owns his own colony. As one might ex-
pect, the Macao casino king is not himself a gambler; he does «not have the
patience for it:' he says. Stanley Ho and the Portuguese governor open the
gambling season on the eve of the Chinese New Year. Ho arrives in his
green Rolls Royce and the governor in a black Mercedes Benz to place the
first stakes at the roulette table at Ho's flagship, the «Casino Lisboa."
    The final years of Portuguese administration saw increasing gang vio-
lence around the edges of Ho's empire. He stepped up security and hired
Gurkhas demobilized by the British in Hong Kong to provide protection.
The triads, Chinese secret societies and criminal brotherhoods, have
played a key role in the Chinese underworld for centuries and are at war
again in Macao, with two Hong Kong-based gangs, the 14K and the Wo On
Lok (the latter through its Macao affiliate, the Shui Fong) pitted against
each other. These triad organizations are believed to number about
400,000 members worldwide, from corporate executives to street corner
thugs. 22
    The upsurge of gang-related shootings, knifings, arson, and bombings
in Macao is also partly attributed to the drying up of illegal shakedowns
from the construction business in the territory. The speculative property
boom in Macao, fueled by hot money flowing in from China in the early
1990s, burst after China clamped down in an attempt to cool off its econ-
omy. Property values in Macao collapsed, leaving more than thirty thou-
sand apartments, or a quarter of the total housing stock, empty and
unsold. Clampdowns on the triads in China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong
forced them to shift their operations to Macao.
    The triads are not subtle when they go to war. One of the first victims,
the general manager of the Macao Holiday Inn, Gerhard Kropp, tried to

22S outh China Morning Post, May 12, 1997.
                                                                Macao • 275

keep prostitutes and their pimps out of his lobby. He was ambushed at his
home by three assailants who hacked at him with knives and choppers. He
nearly lost three fingers and left for a new posting. «Choppings," an assault
with a cleaver, are the triads' favorite means to settle scores. The triads then
took their war to the elegant Praia Grande Avenue. Most blatant was a
pointblank and deadly fusillade unleashed by two motorcyclists brandish-
ing 7.62-mm Chinese military issue semiautomatic pistols, who ambushed
a car carrying a former officer of the Hong Kong police and a bodyguard of
the 14K's leader.
    The killings were believed to be in retaliation for the murder on Macao's
Taipa Island of a rich businessman and Kong Lik triad member from Hong
Kong who was a shareholder in one of the enclave's franchised VIP gam-
bling rooms and a gambling-tour operator for wealthy clients from Indo-
nesia, Hong Kong, and Thailand. 23 Breaking a long unwritten convention
against attacking senior government officials and expatriate Portuguese,
the gangs then attempted to murder the chief of Macao's gambling secre-
tariat, who was shot twice in the head and, despite a remarkable recovery,
was called back to Lisbon for his own safety.
    Macao's lone prodemocrat legislator, Antonio Ng Kuok-cheong, says po-
lice corruption and triad membership by officers have caused the crisis. He
blames the casino regulations that allow individuals to operate VIP rooms
for high rollers. 24 After several police raids on suspected triad safehouses
failed, the director of the judiciary police, Antonio Marques Baptista, con-
fiscated his officers' mobile phones and pagers and immediately met with a
striking success. He now never leaves his office without a bodyguard, and
his car is flanked by armed motorcycle outriders. A very nervous Macao
public was not reassured by Baptista's statement that for law-abiding men,
women, and children "the streets were safe because these attacks were car-
ried out by professional killers who never miss their targets."25
    The question of what constitutes a threat to «public order" has serious
political implications. Recurrent claims in the press that the «situation is
out of control" can provide an excuse for more Chinese intervention. Arti-
cle 18 of the Basic Law provides that: «In the event that the standing com-
mittee of the national People's Congress decides to declare a state of war or,
by reason of turmoil within the Macao Special Administrative Region,
which endangers national unity and is beyond the control of the govern-
ment of the region, decides that the region is in a state of emergency, the


23Ibid.,ApriI19,1997.
24Reuters World Service, May 12, 1997.
25S outh China Morning Post, April 19, 1997; and Foreign Broadcast Information
Service (FBIS), Chi-92-082, April 27, 1997.
276 • NakedTropics

central people's government may issue an order applying relevant national
laws in the region."26
    As the owner of a furniture store near the landmark facade of the old
Sao Paulo Church told Peter Stein of the Wall Street Journal: "]f Macao's
police can't solve the problem, China will."27 The Xinhua News Agency,
China's official mouthpiece, has urged tougher measures and asserted that
the Guandong authorities will help if need be. 2s
    Given the multiple layers of motivation on all sides in Macao it is worth
noting that the professional hit men brought in from China by the triads-
and who slip back across the border in ten minutes on foot or by boat
across the narrow inner harbor-are believed to be members of the Chi-
nese security forces. All the recent hits have been carried out with People's
Army-issue firearms. The struggle over ownership of the new Grandview
Hotel on Taipa Island involved the Anran Company owned by the Chinese
Ministry of State Security, which is also believed to be trying to obtain a
slice of the casino monopoly.29
    Indeed, almost on cue, before the Portuguese could bring in sophisti-
cated eavesdropping devices, the bigwigs of the local Chinese community,
together with Stanley Ho and the representative of the Chinese central
government in Macao, the head of the Xinhua News Agency, acted with the
authorities across the border in Guandong Province to cut triad money-
laundering sources and bring the warring factions to an agreement. The
Beijing government has used the argument of public order to justify the
stationing of army troops in Macao after its retrocession to China on De-
cember 20, 1999.

                                       v
The last Portuguese governor of Macao, General Vasco Rocha Vieira,
whom I met at the pink-and-white colonial-style Government House
(which houses both his office and the Macao legislature), told me that he
believes the English press in Hong Kong has greatly exaggerated the prob-
lem of gang violence in Macao and that the streets of Macao are among the
safest in the world. Statistically, he may be right. I was certainly able to walk
anywhere in Macao. But gang-related mayhem has a life of its own. Gory
pictures of murdered hoodlums have already badly dented Macao's vital
tourist business. The number of gamblers visiting Macao from Hong

26Shipp, Macau, China, 146.
27 Wall Street Journal, May 6, 1997.
28FBIS, Chi-93-139, May 19,1997, A6.
29FBIS, Chi-92-127, daily report, May 7,1997; FBIS, Chi-97-128, May 8,1997; and
Far Eastern Economic Review, September 26, 1996, 30.
                                                                 Macao • 277

Kong, who are big spenders and are vital to Macao's prosperity, has fallen
precipitously since gang violence first broke out. And Macao's competitors
for Hong Kong dollars in the gambling business have been quick to take
note of its troubles. Hong Kong's shrewd business leaders not only have re-
cently signed a deal with Disney for a vast new theme park, but also have
been visiting Las Vegas and dropping hints that Hong Kong might estab-
lish its own casino. Like the loss of the Japan trade in the seventeenth cen-
tury, or the establishment of Hong Kong in the nineteenth century, such a
move would be a disaster for Macao, and Stanley Ho has been quick to
condemn the idea.
    General Rocha Vieira is a quiet but determined individual. He believed,
as the Portuguese who dealt with Macao generally did, that it is essential to
work with the Chinese and not against them. They see this as the best way,
as the general told me, "of making possible a continuing and effective pres-
ence of European culture in this important Chinese region." He was a gen-
eral without troops. The last Portuguese military units withdrew from
Macao at the end of 1975. After the fall of the dictatorship in Lisbon in
1974, the Macao governorship became a revolving door for Portuguese
politicians, and the instability of the governments in Lisbon in the early
years of the new democracy did not help Portuguese credibility or enable
Portugal to become a serious player in the real power games in Macao.
   The dominant role played in Lisbon by the pro-Moscow Portuguese
Communist Party between 1974 and 1976 was also viewed with great sus-
picion by Beijing. General Rocha Vieira, however, came with impeccable
credentials in that respect. Not only had he served in Macao in the 1970s,
but he played a critical role in Lisbon during the anti-communist coup of
November 1975, which in effect sent the Portuguese Communists packing.
   His head of security in Macao, Brigadier Manuel Monge, an early mem-
ber of the armed forces movement that overthrew the right-wing regime in
Portugal in 1974, like General Rocha Vieira, had also fallen afoul of the
Portuguese Communists. While the democratic credentials of both these
military officers are impeccable, more important from Beijing's perspec-
tive was the fact that both had opposed the Moscow-inspired power grab
in Lisbon. 30
   In Macao, General Rocha Vieira, who was appointed governor in 1991,
brought both stability and integrity to an office that had been severely
tainted previously by accusations of corruption. Universally and unsolic-
itedly, people I spoke with in Macao testified to his honesty. But I also
detected in General Rocha Vieira a sense of determination that the

30Por this period in Portugal, see Kenneth Maxwell, The Making ofa Portuguese De-
mocracy (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
278 • NakedTropics

Portuguese in Macao avoid at all costs the disasters that followed their
withdrawals in Africa and East Timor, and that if the Portuguese politi-
cians and functionaries have notoriously sticky fingers, then the Por-
tuguese military at least will withdraw with honor.
   Macao's formal institutional structure, where the Portuguese presence
in Macao is most pronounced, has many of the trappings of a Western so-
ciety: law courts, an elected legislature, formal protection of free speech
and assembly. Most of these rights in Macao preceded the liberalization in
Hong Kong and were a direct consequence of the Portuguese Revolution of
1974, which provided the constitutional means on the Portuguese side for
reexamining sovereignty and reforming Macao's institutions. In 1976,
wide autonomy was granted to Macao by the new democratic Portugal
under an "organic statute" that established a wide range of civil rights and
set up the Macao Legislative Assembly. Election to the legislature was by
means of a restricted franchise with only one-third of the seats open to di-
rect election. (The remaining representatives were either indirectly elected
by professional and neighborhood organizations or appointed by the Por-
tuguese governor.) Nevertheless, the Portuguese residents and a minority
of the Chinese population have participated in direct elections in Macao
since 1976.
   The Macao legislature was no rubber stamp. In the early years, the
Macanese legislators, who had centuries of experience bucking the author-
ity of Portuguese governors through their domination of the Loyal Senate,
became so outspoken in their opposition to the executive that a governor
dissolved the legislative assembly and called new elections in 1984. The
system of proportional representation used in Macao as in Portugal also
helped to assure a voice for the small liberal minority in Macao, which has
consistently obtained at least one of the directly elected seats since the as-
sembly was first instituted. In the hotly contested 1996 election, for exam-
ple, one seat went to a prodemocracy candidate. The eight indirectly
elected members of the assembly come from the traditional probusiness,
pro-China sector.
    Beijing did not object to direct elections in Macao as it had in Hong
Kong, and the legislature continued in office through the transfer of sover-
eignty in 1999 until 2001, unlike that of Hong Kong, which was dissolved
at the time of the handover. Since 1992, Macao has had its own court of
final appeal.
   The Basic Law also includes some significant concessions on China's
part; there is no restriction on foreign passport holders taking important
posts in the administration after 1999, except those of chief executive and
chief justice, a reassurance to the large number of Macao Chinese who
qualify for Portuguese passports. The 10,000 Macanese Eurasians retain
                                                                   Macao • 279

access to the civil service, where they have traditionally sought official ca-
reers' and over a quarter of Chinese residents of Macao hold Portuguese,
hence EU, passports. Both China and Portugal are aware that if they mis-
handle the transfer, Macao could easily lose much of its Eurasian and
Macao-born Chinese and end up as an empty shell and suburb of the Chi-
nese border city of Zhuhai.
   Portuguese authority in Macao, however, was essentially broken in
1966, when the balance of power in Macao between the Portuguese and
Chinese shifted dramatically during the turmoil unleashed by the Cultural
Revolution. Maoist militants rioted in Macao's streets, and the Portuguese
governor, after some initial armed clashes, capitulated to their demands,
which included the closing of the offices of the Nationalist Kuomintang in
Macao and the ending of Macao's use as an exit point for dissidents fleeing
China. The Portuguese governor was obliged to sign the agreement in the
office of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce under a huge portrait of Mao
Zedong, with Ho Yin presiding. But Beijing did not want the Portuguese
facade destroyed. It was useful to the Chinese Communists to preserve a
place where the appearance of separation from the regime could provide a
gray area for deals and contacts, a place with enough ambiguity to permit
a degree of separation and plausible deniability.
   To the surprise of the Salazar regime, China did not seek to expel the Por-
tuguese administration from Macao in 1966; and when in the mid-1970s the
Portuguese twice tried to give Macao back to China, the offer was politely re-
fused, with Ho Yin telling the Portuguese that the time was not ripe. 3!
   But this in many ways was the traditional use the Chinese had made of the
Portuguese enclave. Professor Fok Kai Cheong, an American-trained histo-
rian at the University of Macao, calls this arrangement the "Macao Formula;'
a type of implicit acquiescence in each other's claims to overlapping areas of
sovereignty.32 Premier Antonio de Oliveira Salazar's wily foreign minister,
Franco Nogueira, said that after 1967 the Portuguese in Macao remained as
"a caretaker of a condominium under foreign supervision."33
   In effect, the modus vivendi after the Maoist riots reestablished the old
de facto system of overlapping authority, with the head of the Xinhua


31China thus demanded that the United Nations exclude Macao from the list of
territories «under colonial rule." As far as China was concerned, Macao was «part of
China" and a domestic question. The Portuguese acquiesced in this definition and
described Macao thereafter as «a Chinese territory under Portuguese administra-
tion."
32Fok Kai Cheong, Estudos sobre a instalatriio dos portugueses em Macau (Lisbon
and Macao: Gradiva, 1996).
33Franco Nogueira, Salazar: estudo biografico, 6 vols. (Coimbra: Athintida Editora,
1977), III, 393.
280 • NakedTropics

News Agency representing the interests of the central government, much
as the local mandarins had done prior to the 1840s, which the historian
Charles R. Boxer called a matter of ((give and take." And while it has been
true from the sixteenth century onward that China could disrupt Macao's
food supply at any moment and impose its will by force, China never
sought to do so.
   Unlike the other ancient Portuguese enclaves in Asia, Goa, invaded by
India in 1961, and East Timor, bloodily annexed by Indonesia in 1975, in
the case of Macao the Chinese chose stealth. As the director of the Xinhua
News Agency's Hong Kong branch said, quoting Sun Tzu's The Art of War,
('defeating the enemy without going to war is the utmost success."34 The
Chinese waited for the moment that suited them.



                                      VI
The largely European superstructure of Macao is embedded in a politics
and society rooted in a complex network of powerful interconnecting Chi-
nese clans whose collaboration is essential if anything is to be done at all in
Macao. These Chinese networks of individuals and business interests are
closely tied to the mainland and to Beijing. The Nam Kwong trading com-
pany was China's official political and economic representative in Macao
for thirty-five years until 1984, when these functions were split into politi-
cal and trading arms, with the Xinhua News Agency and its Macao head
becoming China's spokesman and unofficial representative in the territory.
Today, China is the leading investor in Macao, with two hundred compa-
nies in the territory controlling 50 percent of finance and insurance and 70
percent of the tourism business. 35
   Overlapping memberships in Chinese and Portuguese institutions is
typical of Macao, as is the continuity within the leadership of the Macao
Chinese community. The venerable Macao Chinese Chamber of Com-
merce, founded in 1912, became the central mediator between Portugal
and China between 1949 and 1979. From 1950 until his death in 1983, its
chairman and the undisputed leader of the Macao Chinese was the afore-
mentioned Ho Yin, a very rich businessman with interests in hotels, restau-
rants, banks, buses, and utility companies. Two-thirds of the Chinese
members of the legislative assembly are also members of the Board of Di-
rectors of the Chamber of Commerce. The current chairman is also a


34FBIS, Chi-97-086, daily report, May 2, 1997, All. C. R. (Charles Ralph) Boxer,
"Dares-e-tomares nas rela<;6es luso-chinesas durante os secules XVII e XVIII
atraves de Macau;' Boletim do Arquivo Hist6rico de Macau 1 (January 1981): 3-13.
35 Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report: Macau, May 13, 1997.
                                                              Macao • 281

 member of the standing committee of the National People's Congress in
 Beijing.
    Ho Yin's son, Edmund Ho Hau Wah, the then forty-four-year-old exec-
 utive director and general manager of the Tai Fung Bank, half of which is
owned by the Bank of China, became chief executive of the Macao SAR
after the Chinese takeover in December 1999. The Tai Fung Bank is the sec-
ond-largest bank in the territory and Edmund Ho is chairman of the
Banking Association and was a member of the Basic Law drafting commit-
tee and of the Sino-Portuguese Joint Liaison Group. He was then also vice
chairman of the All China Federation of Industry and Commerce.
    I met with Edmund Ho-who is Canadian educated-in his wood-pan-
eled third-floor office at the Tai Fung Bank, which sits off Macao's busy Cen-
tral Avenue. His major concern, he said, is how Macao positions itself for the
challenges of the new century by diversifying its economic base to enable it
to sustain a real autonomy, especially from the neighboring Chinese main-
land development areas. He sees a need for urgently enhancing technical and
scientific education and believes the city is too small to be viable.
    Macao's per capita income, at $15,010 in 1995, was the fifth-highest in
Asia, after Japan, Brunei, Hong Kong, and Singapore, and higher than Tai-
wan and South Korea. But like Hong Kong, its manufacturing industry is
crossing the border to find cheaper labor. When I met with Edmund Ho, he
had just returned from Brazil, where he had accompanied Governor Rocha
Vieira on a mission to promote Macao as a bridge to China for Brazilian
businesses.
    The Chinese print media in Macao tends to follow the Beijing line,
under the ever-watchful eye of the Xinhua News Agency. The lively Por-
tuguese language press has a small circulation and is focused on the in-
ternecine intrigues of Portuguese politics, something the Chinese find
entirely impenetrable and confusing, with the Portuguese endlessly and
needlessly complicating their own lives. Several Macao Chinese leaders
told me they find Portuguese politics as obscure as those of the old men of
the Central Committee in Beijing. The local television station, TDM, is
50.5 percent owned by the government and by Stanley Ho's STDM, the
Nam Kwong Group, and Edmund Ho. The electronic media in Macao take
a more independent line than the Chinese print media, but the Por-
tuguese-language station tends to broadcast the metropolitan news pro-
gram of no special interest to most of the residents of Macao, who cannot
understand the language, let alone the content. Much of the population
watches the Hong Kong English-language and Cantonese-language sta-
tions, and many have access to international cable and satellite television
services.
    The Chinese population of Macao is of quite diverse origins. Tanka boat
people constitute the oldest elements of the population, though most
282 • NakedTropics

today have left their boats and live in city apartments. In the past there was
a strong Fukanese component, but now 50 percent of the Chinese in
Macao are of rural Guandongese origin. These longtime residents have not
lived under the Communist regime and retain many of the practices of an
Old China, long destroyed on the mainland by war and revolution. Many
hold Portuguese passports. The leadership of the Chinese community rests
principally in this group, families with more than two generations of resi-
dence in Macao, influential in the world of business and the secret soci-
eties. They are extremely conservative socially and pro-Beijing politically.
Their children, often educated overseas, tend to be English-speaking, are
strongly influenced by developments in Hong Kong, and are more liberal
than their parents.
    About 40 percent of the Chinese population of Macao are more recent
immigrants, many having come clandestinely from the mainland since the
1980s. There is a smaller but important group that came from the Chinese
diaspora, returning to Macao from Southeast Asia in the 1960s. These tend
to be middle-class people with a high level of education.
    Several significant figures in Macao arrived from China after 1979, in-
cluding intellectuals as well as underworld figures and a contingent of Chi-
nese from Southeast Asia. Some had played key roles in Beijing in the past,
and now hold important positions in Macao's financial and intellectual cir-
cles. One of the most prominent of these is the multilingual Gary Ngai,
from a Chinese family that spent five generations in the former Dutch East
Indies and, later, Indonesia. Formerly a close confidant of Deng and his per-
sonal translator, he was until recently vice president of Macao's Cultural In-
stitute and then became executive director of the Sino-Latin Foundation.
    The Eurasian population of the city, known as the "Macanese;' is a
tightly knit group numbering until recently between 10,000 and 15,000;
but extensive out-migration means that today the Macanese dispersed
throughout the world probably equal or surpass the number of Macanese
at home. The Macanese community integrates genetic elements from
across Asia, its ancestors including principally Malays, Japanese, Indians,
Timorese, Chinese, and Koreans as well as Portuguese. In the local Can-
tonese argot they are referred to as "sons and daughters of the soil," that is,
people "born in the land" and not "foreigners" to the Chinese, as the Por-
tuguese were and remain. Macanese culture was a rich Creole mix, and
they spoke and wrote in a local patois. The Loyal Senate, Macao's de facto
government during much of its first three centuries, was dominated by
elected Macanese representatives. The Macanese also dominated the mid-
dle levels of the colonial administration and were important in the mer-
chant and legal communities.
    The Maoist riots of 1966 were a profound shock to this group. The
Macanese had always identified themselves with the ruling Portuguese,
                                                                  Macao • 283

and their sense of betrayal at Portugal's capitulation to Chinese demands
was profound. The Macanese had formerly distanced themselves from
Chinese elites in Macao in everything except business; after 1966 this
changed, especially with respect to marriage patterns, religion, and poli-
tics. 36 The estrangement of the Macanese from the Portuguese was also ag-
gravated by the fact that Macao's bureaucracy became more, not less,
"colonial" in the 1980s, its higher ranks filled with short-term Portuguese
expatriate appointees whom the Macanese deeply resent. Unlike Hong
Kong where expatriate British officials made up a very small percentage of
the civil service prior to the handover, in Macao the Portuguese participa-
tion increased as the end neared and with an inevitable consequence: the
Portuguese administration became more isolated from Macao's daily reali-
ties and more dependent on the collaboration of the long-entrenched
leadership of the Chinese community.3? Gary Ngai calls these officials the
"full stops," individuals who have no real interest in the future of Macao
but a great deal of interest in enriching themselves at Macao's expense.



                                       VII
But in an economy fueled by vast flows of cash, by casinos and sex; with in-
stitutions isolated by language and procedure from the vast majority of the
population; where for centuries intermediaries provided the contacts,
bribes, and special knowledge that produced results; an ambiguous place
where the wheels could be greased by kickbacks or favors, where money
could be laundered and commodities as well as people slipped in and out
without great supervision; where entrepreneurs lived by providing what
was prohibited elsewhere in their neighborhood-it is hardly surprising
that Macao, like other free cities with multiple and overlapping sovereign-
ties, should be a place ready-made for espionage and fund transfers for the
broader but clandestine political purposes of the great powers that chose
to keep Macao the way it is in the first place.
   So when Ron Brown, the late U.S. secretary of commerce, held a private
dinner party at the Hong Kong Island Shangri-La Hotel in October 1995,
to which "a Macao property businessman and his wife, a Macao banker
and legislative councilor, a Macao entertainment magnate and members of
several illustrious Hong Kong families" were invited, they were met by Yah


36There is an excellent account of the Macanese in "The Macanese: Anthropology,
History, Ethnology," Review ofCulture (Instituto Cultural de Macau), no. 20,1994.
37For a forceful analysis of the problem of corruption in Macao, see Lo Shiu-hing,
"Bureaucratic Corruption and Its Control in Macao," Asian Journal of Public Ad-
ministration 15 (June 1993): 32-58.
284 • NakedTropics

Lin Trie, a Chinese American, co-owner of a Chinese restaurant a few
blocks from the Arkansas State Capitol and a favorite watering hole of Bill
Clinton while governor, and Trie's partner Antonio Pan, a former executive
of the Lippo Group, and Ernest Green, a Clinton crony and Arkansas fund-
raiser for the Democratic Party. The guests quickly got the message. After
all, they were well used to similar requests from Portuguese presidential
candidates. 38 Brown himself, of course, had been the party's chief fund-
raiser before his appointment as secretary of commerce. In early 1996, de-
spite State Department objections, new rules permitting the export of
high-speed computers to Chinese companies went into effect. According
to a comprehensive investigative report by Jeff Gerth and Eric Schmitt in
the New York Times in 1998, "the Central Intelligence Agency and other
Federal agencies concluded that at least some of those computers [were]
being used by the Chinese military...."39
    "Charlie" Trie was to become a central if illusive figure in the inconclu-
sive Senate investigation of campaign abuses, the House Select Commit-
tee's report on Chinese ((theft of nuclear secrets;' as well as a federal
prosecution and conviction, all related to laundered Chinese contributions
to the 1996 presidential campaign. And most of these contributions were
laundered through Macao. Charlie Trie visited the White House twenty-
three times, at least, between 1993 and 1996, taking with him several casino
barons from Macao-more times to be sure than Congressman Caleb


38Hong Kong Sing Tao Jim Pao (in Chinese), FBIS, Chi-96-236, daily report, De-
cember 5, 1996, A16 (translated text). The veil that closely covers the role of Macao
and its money in domestic Portuguese politics was partially lifted by the ((tell all,"
or at least part of the ((all," in a remarkable book by Rui Mateus, the former confi-
dant, translator, and political bagman for Mario Soares. Mateus was caught up in
allegations of corruption in the contracting of Macao's new international airport,
and former President Soares quickly dumped him; as a result, Mateus's book re-
veals a good deal of the seamy side of Portuguese politics, including the extraordi-
nary tale of the murky proposed deals over the use of Macao as a base for a
television franchise aimed at the Hong Kong market and southern China, involv-
ing Soares and, at various stages, the late Robert Maxwell, Rupert Murdoch, and
Stanley Ho. See Rui Mateus, Contos proibidos: mem6rias de um PS desconbecido
(Lisbon: Dom Quixote, 1996). Soares, when asked about the Mateus book, said
that he ((had not read it.... He did not wish to disturb himself or waste time use-
lessly." See Maria Joao Avillez, Soares, democracia (Lisbon: Publico, 1996), 272.
Martin Booth in his book Opium, A History (New York: St Martin's Press, 1998)
pointed out how convenient gambling casinos can be for money laundering-or,
as he writes, for ((money cleaning facilities." According to Booth up to $2 billion
may be laundered monthly through Macao (see 336-337). This seemed a very high
dollar figure to me; but when I asked a former high-level u.S. government official
who was directly involved in international narcotics control, she said this was en-
tirely plausible.
39New York Times, October 19, 1998.
                                                                    Macao • 285

Cushing did in the late 1840s, when Macao was last on the White House's
agenda at the time of the Treaty of Wang Xia. 40
    Macao was also the front for the purchase for $20 million by a local
company (Chong Lot, incorporated in Macao for a mere $125,000 at a
nonexistent address on the Praia Grande) of a partially built Ukrainian
67,000-ton aircraft carrier. Vasyl Hureyev, Ukraine's industry minister, said
it was to be used as "a discotheque." Other reports said it would be used as a
floating casino. The problem no one noticed was that Macao cannot har-
bor deepwater ships. One of the central reasons Hong Kong boomed after
it was founded in the 1840s, and Macao did not, is that Macao is situated
on the side of the Pearl River estuary that silts up. In a very peculiar com-
ment, Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Guterres, who visited Macao in
April 1998, said that Macao's crime rate "compared favorably to the
Ukraine's;' a remark even the Chinese government found complacent in
the extreme, and told him so privately in Beijing a few days later. 41
    Rui Afonso, a Macao lawyer and former member of the legislature, took
a much more sober view, saying that the security situation in Macao was
desperate, that a culture of private justice by execution had emerged, and
that the Portuguese had lost the stamina to rule.
    But the gangs went too far when they embarrassed both the Portuguese
and the Chinese in the run-up to the December handover, which each side
wanted to look as smooth as possible. The sensational and much-delayed

40u.S. Senate, Final Report of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, Investigation
ofIllegal or Improper Activities in Connection with 1996 Federal Election Campaigns,
together with additional and minority views, March 10, 1998. 10Sth Cong., 2d sess.
(Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1998),2497-2904,5270-5413; and u.S. House of Repre-
sentatives, Report of the Select Committee, u.S. National Security and Military/
Commercial Concerns with the People's Republic of China, 10Sth Cong., 2d sess.
(Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1999). The most comprehensive discussion on Yah Lin
"Charlie" Trie's role as a direct source or solicitor of the second-largest volume of
contributions returned by the Democratic National Committee is to be found in
the testimony of Jerry Campane, special agent, Senate Governmental Affairs Cam-
paign Finance Investigation, on July 29, 1998. This testimony was not in the six-
volume Senate committee report, but is available through the Federal Document
Clearing House. Charlie Trie was charged by the Justice Department's Campaign
Finance Task Force. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to eighteen months of
home detention, three years' probation, and a $5,000 fine (Wall Street Journal, No-
vember 10, 1999). Ron Brown's tragic death in a plane accident on April 3, 1996,
the obsessive attention devoted to President Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky
and the consequent impeachment battle, powerful business interests who wanted
deals with the Chinese government, as well as the general lack of enthusiasm of key
politicians on both parties in the Senate and House of Representatives for any close
scrutiny of campaign contributions, combined to blunt the investigations of the
Chinese money connection in the 1996 election, and Macao's central role in the
scandal. In this, as in so much else, Clinton was lucky.
41 Economist Intelligence Unit, Country Report: Macau, April 27, 1998.
286 • NakedTropics

trial of Wan Kuok-koi, alias "Broken Tooth," alleged head of the 14K triad
in Macao, ended (to the surprise of many in Macao) in his conviction on
November 23, barely a month before the handover ceremonies were sched-
uled to occur. The Macao court found Wan guilty of being a member of a
triad group, loan sharking, illegal gambling, and interfering with a local
telecommunications network, and sentenced him to fifteen years. Two
days later, a former police officer and gang member was also sentenced and
jailed. Wan's mistake was to have emerged too blatantly from the shadows,
boasting about his gangland prowess in newspaper interviews. He was ar-
rested while attending a gangster movie called Casino, purportedly based
on his life history, which he had financed. And in a risky challenge to the
soon-to-be sovereign power, a well-known pro-China Macao legislator
had been attacked and wounded leaving the offices of the Xinhua News
Agency, no less.
    But these last-minute tidy-ups cannot disguise the fragility of the legal
system and the administration, where language and procedure are incom-
prehensible to 90 percent of the population, where laws have only recently
been hastily and often badly translated into Chinese, and where a supreme
court only created in 1993 has judges with less than a year's experience in
charge. The University of Macao only graduated its first class of lawyers in
the mid-1990s, and locally trained magistrates have little practical court
experience. Despite the hoopla, the sprucing up and repainting of public
buildings, and the construction of new museums, the fact remains that
after almost four and a half centuries in Macao, the Portuguese had spent
only the past half decade preparing Chinese officials to assume the critical
bureaucratic roles that would assure not only the continuation of Por-
tuguese institutions in Macao but also, and more important, help guaran-
tee that the statutory rights that legally protect Macao's special status
within China after the handover are respected and upheld.
    I asked a Hong Kong Chinese tycoon I had breakfast with what he
thought about all this. He replied elliptically. In Shanghai, he said, where
he was born, the police were also totally, irretrievably corrupt, so the army
had invited them to a banquet. Then, while they were eating and drinking,
the army set up sand bags and machine guns, and when the police were al-
lowed out, mowed them all down. It was not an encouraging answer.

                                    VIII
Macao, in addition to the rich veneer of an old Europe, also retains much
of traditional China, isolated as it has been from the turmoil that devas-
tated China over the past century. Many ancient religious practices survive
in Macao, where hardly a street or corner or niche does not house a small
                                                                  Macao • 287

shrine, candle, incense stick, or offering to a rich diversity of dieties. A wide
range of religious and civil groupings have long lived there in mutual toler-
ance. Partly as a consequence, the population of Macao is not as apolitical
as it appears. After the Tiananmen Square bloodbath in 1989, over 150,000
people-a very significant proportion of Macao's population of half a mil-
lion-protested, in an unprecedented rebuke to Beijing.
    The 1996 legislative elections saw workers in the tourist and gambling
sectors organize politically and join forces with the prodemocracy repre-
sentative, Antonio Ng Kuok-cheong, in complaining of vote buying by the
big business interests. Workers in manufacturing jobs also complained that
the powerful pro-Beijing union confederation was more interested in poli-
tics than in workers' rights and wages. 42 Macao human rights activists
complain that procedural changes may vitiate any guarantees of judicial
independence guaranteed by the Basic Law because of new rules limiting
tenure of judges to three years (they had lifetime tenure under the Por-
tuguese system) and the dominant role of the government in the selection
of magistrates and judges. 43
    Legislation to create a press council galvanized the usually self-censor-
ing press into vociferous protest. The president of the Macao Journalists
Club complained that the government proposal was ((very dangerous" and
that any press watchdog body should be ((a genuinely independent body
which protects press freedom. Macao is a very small community, interper-
sonal relations are very close and it is very difficult to find someone who is
totally independent, free of influence and unaffected by the people around
h ·1m."44
    Macao's Chinese and Macanese intellectuals are also beginning to real-
ize that Macao's special blend of Asia and Europe risks being engulfed by
the burgeoning economic growth of the Pearl River delta and the self-in-
terested philistinism of the odd coalition of capitalist magnates, Commu-
nist Party commissars, and short-term Portuguese bureaucrats who
together have set the agenda in construction and real estate in recent years.
An important motivation behind the cultivation of the Chinese central au-
thorities in Beijing by Macao's Chinese leaders and their belated embrace
of Macao's rich Sino-Portuguese cultural history is their growing anxiety


42Lo Shiu-hing, "Comparative Political Systems: The Cases of Hong Kong and
Macau," Journal of Contemporary Asia 25, no. 2 (1995): 254-271, and his "Aspects
of Political Development in Macao," China Quarterly, no. 120 (December 1989):
837-851.
43These questions are discussed in detail in u.S. Department of State, Macau Coun-
try Report on Human Rights Practices for 1996, released January 30, 1997.
44Asian Wall Street Journal Weekly, September 23, 1996.
288 • NakedTropics

about the activities of the neighboring special economic zone of Zhuhai.
This relationship has turned extremely competitive-«malignant and vi-
cious" is how Gary Ngai describes it-and has led to a failure to collaborate
on waste disposal, delays in a proposed Macao-Canton rail and highway
connection, the construction of duplicative international airports, and
even to Zhuhai's preemption of Macao's famous grand prix auto race with
a grand prix of its own held a week earlier. There are now two grandiose
schemes afoot to construct duplicative bridges across the Pearl River estu-
ary. And Macao has also become aware that its income from gambling
would be greatly diminished if China or Hong Kong were to permit casi-
nos. Should this occur, Macao could face a fatal blow to its prosperity.
    As Gary Ngai told me, turning Macao from «a city of gambling to a city
of culture is the best way for Macao to survive in the future, turning it from
a shadow of Hong Kong in tourism to a dragon head of cultural tourism in
the Pearl River delta." Macao's business leaders have come to realize that it
is in their own interest to persuade Beijing that Macao has a special role to
play precisely because of its unique European-Chinese mix, and they have
started to aggressively develop links to the European Community as well as
the Portuguese-speaking world. 45 Preserving the «City of God in China"
has thus by a strange historical reversal now fallen to the Chinese of
Macao, rather than to the Portuguese. The local Chinese elite's own power
and influence rest to a considerable degree in persuading Beijing that cul-
tural preservation in this case is an asset to China and in convincing the
local «nationalists" that this heritage is not «colonial trash" to be thrown
overboard.
    Gary Ngai, along with Professor Fok and other scholars from Macao and
Portugal, have formed a new Sino-Latin Foundation. «It is precisely Macao's
history and cultural identity which distinguished it from Hong Kong and
other Chinese coastal cities, a Sino-Latin identity; formed over four cen-
turies of its existence;' is the way Ngai puts it. Funds have been provided by
Stanley Ho and local entrepreneurs who launched the foundation with the
blessing of the Portuguese governor and the head of the Xinhua News
Agency. It is not an ignoble effort among the triad wars and the real estate
deals and the shadowy world of espionage and money laundering.
    One can only wish them luck, recalling of course the admonition of
Bishop Lam that nothing in Macao is ever what it appears to be, and the
shrewd observation of that wise old historian Charles Boxer that it is es-

45For the economic situation at the time of the transition, see International Mone-
tary Fund, Public Information Notice No. 99140, May 7, 1999; Article IV Consulta-
tion held in 1998 with Portugal-Macau.
                                                            Macao • 289

sential to remember, for better or worse, that "in Macao, if anywhere, East
and West did meet."46 So it is not inappropriate that at this tiny, ambigu-
ous, and opaque spot, the great adventure that took Europe more than 500
years ago to Asia in search of the riches of Cathay ended, just before the
end of the millennium as the Chinese had wanted, and very much on their
terms.




46Boxer, Fidalgos in the Far East, 288.
LOOKI G AeROS   THE BRInG •
                                                     CHAPTER           15
                                     Heroes and Traitors
                                                   "Home is where I hang my hat."
                                           -Charles Boxer, Cam6es Center, 1989




Heroes come cheap these days. The word is bandied around so promiscu-
ously for high-priced sports stars and short-lived celebrities that when a
real hero appears he or she makes people uncomfortable. The 2000 U.S.
presidential election saw a real hero enter the competition-Senator John
McCain-not a popular figure among his fellow senators but a truly excep-
tional man who survived long years of solitary confinement and torture as
a POW in Vietnam to emerge as a leading advocate of reconciliation with
his former tormentors. Charles R. Boxer was such a man, both a victim and
an admirer of the Japanese, and resented, like Senator McCain, by some of
his former colleagues for his magnanimity. But if heroes come cheap, so do
accusations of treachery. This is the rub of the C. R. Boxer affaire, a concoc-
tion of old resentments, gossip, and jealousies from a lost colonial world
served up now to impinge the reputation of a truly remarkable and com-
plex individual.



«Charles Boxer was a fine soldier and a brilliant historian. But ... was he
also a traitor whose information prolonged the Second World War?" So
began the headline of an article in the British newspaper The Guardian on
February 24, 2001, by Hywel Williams. In his article Williams asserts that
Boxer «may" have been a "traitor" who betrayed «... his fellow officers in a
Japanese-run POW camp in Hong Kong in a way that undermined the en-
tire British intelligence system in south east Asia." Boxer, Williams goes on,

                                     291
292 • NakedTropics

was "a globalist intellectual before his time" whose work "framed the as-
sumptions of the post-colonial and anti-western elites in Brazil, west
Africa and Japan, where he was read, translated and feted."
    Williams claims that Boxer had fallen "under the spell of the Japanese
cultural style, its combination of intellectual-aesthetic refinement and
power politics." It was, he continues, just like "the Philby-Burgess-
Maclean-Blunt generation of English intellectuals [who] embraced Marx-
ist communism in Soviet form." Boxer, he says, like "other members of his
[social] class had found another country and another cause in the east."
After the war "collaborators everywhere got off lightly." Boxer's case, writes
Williams, could be "a spectacular example of wartime temptation."
    These were dramatic charges against one of the twentieth century's
greatest historians, coming in one of Britain's most respected newspapers.
Once known as the Manchester Guardian, this newspaper since its found-
ing in 1821 has been Britain's strongest liberal voice, independent, non-
conformist, and a stalwart champion of unpopular causes. It is the one
British newspaper I have read diligently over the years, and I have long ad-
mired its writing and reporting. Its pioneering Manchester Guardian
Weekly incorporates selections from Le Monde and the Washington Post.
    Charles R. Boxer died in 2000 at the age of ninety-six. This protects the
newspaper from the risk of a charge of libel. In its March la, 200 1, edition
The Guardian published a detailed refutation of Williams's accusations
against Boxer by the American historian Dauril Alden. Fortuitously, Alden
had just finished a biography of Boxer. l Professor Alden is a meticulous
scholar of the old school for whom solid documentation is the core of
historical scholarship. His detailed rebuttal of Williams's charges against
Boxer can be read on The Guardian's website, www.guardianunlimited.co.uk,
where the newspaper originally posted Williams's attack.
    Curiously, however, the Williams article itself was removed from the
website archive. Such stealth in cyberspace is despicable-if The Guardian
is ashamed of what it published in the first place, it should say so. It is hard
to understand the lapse of editorial judgment that led The Guardian to
lend its pages to such a scurrilous attack, filled with innuendo, inaccura-
cies, and undocumented aspersion on the honor of the most honorable of
men. And it in no way relieves The Guardian from the moral obligation to
apologize to Boxer's family and its readers for this grotesque breach of its
own high journalistic standards. One assumes that under English libel law
if any of the individuals attacked in the Hywel Williams article were still
alive, The Guardian would be facing the probability of funding several aca-
demic chairs in Portuguese imperial history named in Boxer's memory.

IDauril Alden, Charles R. Boxer, An Uncommon Life: Soldier, Historian, Teacher,
Collector, Traveller (Lisbon: Fundas:ao Oriente, 2001).
                                               Heroes and Traitors • 293

    To generations of historians of the Portuguese-speaking world C. R.
Boxer was a true colossus. His highly original, pithy, and path-breaking
books, monographs, and articles flowed forth with seeming effortlessness.
Boxer's works covered the history of early European intrusions into Japan
and China during the sixteenth century, and splendid accounts of the opu-
lence and decline of Goa, seat of Portugal's empire in Asia. In over 350
publications, all of the highest order of scholarship, Boxer wrote on six-
teenth-century naval warfare in the Persian Gulf, the tribulations of the
maritime trading route between Europe and Asia, a sparkling overview of
Brazil during the eighteenth century in the age of gold strikes and frontier
expansion, magnificent syntheses of both Dutch and Portuguese colonial
history, race relations, and social mores, as well as many pioneering com-
parative studies of local municipal institutions in Asia, Africa, and South
America. Famously in the 1960s at the height of Portugal's colonial wars in
Africa, he took on the "Luso-tropicalist" propaganda of the Salazar dicta-
torship by unraveling its roots in Gilberto Freyre's assertion of Portuguese
colonial nonracialism and was thoroughly vilified for it by the regime and
its apologists.
    In my view Boxer's magnificent account of the career of Salvador Cor-
reia de Sa Benevides (1602-1686) is one of his very best books. This "no-
table old stickler," as Sir Robert Southwell called Salvador de Sa in a letter
to Lord Arlington in 1667, played a decisive role in the titanic seventeenth-
century struggle between the Iberian powers and the Dutch for hegemony
in the South Atlantic. The inscription for his now lost tomb at the Lisbon
convent of the bare-footed Carmelites praised Salvador de Sa as "the Re-
storer of the Faith of CHRIST in the Kingdom of Angola, Congo,
Benguela, Sao Tome and conqueror of the Dutch." As Boxer demonstrated,
to this accolade should have been added the savior of Portuguese-speaking
Brazil.
    Remarkably, Boxer had only formally entered academic life when mid-
dle-aged. Without a university degree, but on the strength of his outstand-
ing scholarship, he was appointed in 1947 to the prestigious chair at King's
College, London, named in honor of the great Portuguese poet Luis de
Cam6es, author of The Lusiads. He got the job at King's College, he said,
because there was no real competition: "it's like the duckbilled platypus.
I'm the only one of my kind."
    Boxer's attainments were so intimidating that when I wrote to him from
Lisbon in 1963 to ask how one should prepare for the field I was then
thinking of entering, he almost stopped me in my tracks. The basic qualifi-
cations, he said, for anyone studying the Portuguese empire were a combi-
nation of languages that encompassed Dutch and French and Italian on
the European side, in addition to Portuguese and Spanish, and for studying
Asia, Japanese and Chinese at the minimum and the paleographic skills to
294 • NakedTropics

be able to read archival documents in as many of these languages as possi-
ble from 1500 on. A strong foundation in the classics was advisable as well,
as was a thorough knowledge of the religious literature and theological
controversies within the Catholic Church, and between Catholics and
Protestants since the Restoration. He said this not to boast: he had no tol-
erance for pretension. He was only reciting some part of skills he possessed
himself and used so effectively to do his work. Boxer despite his eminence
was extraordinarily generous with his time and advice to those of us with
lesser attainments.


                                       II
Although it was well known that Boxer had been a soldier until his forties,
there was another Boxer about whom we-or at least I-knew very little.
This was Boxer the spy and Boxer the lover. Father Manuel Teixeira, the
veteran Portuguese priest who is Macao's premier historian, once asked
Boxer about his religion. It was well known that as a prisoner of war of the
Japanese for almost four years in Hong Kong and later Canton (Guang-
zhou to the Chinese), he had rejected the Bible in preference for the com-
plete works of Shakespeare, a decision that troubled the redoubtable old
priest, with whom Boxer had long retained a friendly rivalry. Boxer, whose
penchant for bawdy jokes and barrack-room doggerel was notorious, an-
swered: I am an Episcopalian from the waist up and a Mormon from the
waist down. In the case of the Mormons, he was evidently thinking of
polygamy and not the Salt Lake City Tabernacle Choir. Boxer's Hong Kong
affair with the American journalist Emily Hahn was one of the twentieth
century's most publicized romances. For seventy years Hahn, known to her
friends and family as "Mickey," was one of The New Yorker's most prolific
contributors. Like Boxer, her literary output was astounding-52 books
and hundreds of articles, short stories, and poems. Their wartime affair in
Hong Kong was fully laid out by Hahn herself in the best-seller China to
Me: A Partial Autobiography. 2 She predeceased Charles Boxer in 1997 at the
age of ninety-two.
   To many who had followed her adventures over the years, Emily Hahn
was the star and Charles Boxer was the handsome military bit player. Her
U.S. obituaries hardly mentioned him or his achievements as a scholar. For
Emily Hahn's public Charles Boxer was forever the British major from
Hong Kong who became her lover, father of her children, and then her

2Emily Hahn, China to Me, A Partial Autobiography (New York: Doubleday, Doran,
1944). Also see Emily Hahn, No Hurry to Get Home: The Memoir of the New Yorker
Writer Whose Unconventional Life and Adventures Spanned the Twentieth Century
(Seattle: Seal Press, 2000) and Ken Cuthbertson, Nobody Said Not to Go: The Life,
Loves, and Adventures afEmily Hahn (New York: Faber and Faber, 1998).
                                                Heroes and Traitors • 295

husband for over fifty years. Boxer and Hahn settled down at his country
seat in Dorset in the late 1940s, but Hahn was ill suited to the role of chate-
laine in a drafty English manor during the pinched conditions of the post-
war British countryside. Her all-too-accurate commentary on British
mores and foibles in England to Me published in 1949 was not appreciated
by her adopted countrymen. After 1950 her marriage to Boxer became a
transatlantic commute. Hahn avoided taxes in Britain by brief sojourns,
while Boxer, after a stint at Yale University, when in the United States
checked into the Yale Club on Vanderbilt Avenue behind Grand Central
Station in New York City.
    Emily Hahn was born of Jewish-German ancestry in St. Louis, Missouri,
in 1905. In 1926 she earned the first degree in mining engineer awarded to
a woman by the University of Wisconsin. During the early 1920s she had
driven across America in a Model T Ford dressed as a boy and settled
briefly in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Her letters to friends in Chicago, where
her family had moved, provided the material sent to but initially rejected
by The New Yorker. She worked as a screenwriter in the early days of Holly-
wood, took graduate studies in geology at Columbia University in New
York, and had her first New Yorker piece published in 1929. When a Cali-
fornia love affair went wrong, she took off in 1930 for Africa, settled
among the pigmies in the Belgium Congo and became attached to gib-
bons. At least one of these slender-bodied long-armed arboreal apes there-
after accompanied her everywhere perched on her shoulder.
    In 1935 she stopped off for a few days at Shanghai. "It had become clear
to me from the first day in China that I was going to stay forever," she wrote
later. In China she met the Soong sisters. The eldest was wed to Dr. W. H.
Kung, a wealthy Shanghai banker and China's prime minister in the late
1930s. Another Soong sister had married Sun Yat-sen, founder of the Chi-
nese republic, still revered by both Nationalists and Communists as the
founder of modern China. The third sister married Chiang Kai-shek, the
Nationalist leader.
   Hahn wrote the stories of these remarkable women in her book The Soong
Sisters, published in 1941. In Shanghai Hahn had a long affair with one of
China's leading intellectuals and poets, Zau Sinmay, and became an opium
addict. She was a friend of such luminaries of the Shanghai scene as Sir Victor
Sassoon and C. V. Starr, publisher of the American Shanghai Evening Post and
Mercury and backer of Sinmay's abortive attempts to establish a bilingual lit-
erary journal. She met the young Communist insurgent leaders Mao Zedong
and Zhou Enlai. All the while she was filing reports for The New Yorker as its
China correspondent, recording in vivid autobiographical detail life in China
against a background of civil war and revolution and the Japanese invasion.
   When Emily Hahn became Charles Boxer's lover in Hong Kong in 1940
he was already "an old Asian hand," as the saying went in British colonial
296 • NakedTropics

circles. Boxer, who was working with British military intelligence, had in
1939 married Ursula Tulloch. Hywel Williams, in his article in The
Guardian, claims Tulloch, known as the "most beautiful woman" in Hong
Kong, was also one of the most promiscuous. Her ambition, Williams as-
serts, "was to sleep her way through the entire intelligence community in
the far east." A marvelous English euphemism the word "sleep" in this con-
text. Sleep was presumably the last thing, Williams implies, that Ursula
Tulloch, Boxer, or anyone else was thinking of when they went to bed in
Hong Kong. Boxer and Tulloch were the colony's prime "swingers,"
Williams asserts.
    Alf Bennett, one of Boxer's old friends, arrived in Hong Kong in 1939 to
join the Far East Intelligence Bureau and after the headquarters was moved
to Singapore later that year, remained in Hong Kong and worked in adja-
cent offices to Boxer and saw him every day. Alf Bennett was kind enough
to share with me his reaction to The Guardian article. He says that "what-
ever the author wished to convey by 'swingers: not a word of that time, this
is complete nonsense." Boxer was a hard drinker and enjoyed a good party,
but as Alf Bennett says, "Charles was soon back to his books to write an
erudite article."
    Ursula Tulloch was also evacuated from Hong Kong to Singapore. It had
been assumed, inaccurately as it turned out, that Singapore would be safer
from attack by the Japanese and was in any case impregnable. When this
confidence proved disastrously misplaced, she managed to escape when
Singapore fell to the Japanese in 1942, making her way to Ceylon (now Sri
Lanka) where she chose to stay working as a cryptographer. In 1947, after
divorce from Boxer, she married 1. A. R. Peebles, a journalist at the London
Sunday Times and a well-known sportsman. Following Peebles's death she
married again. Ursula Tulloch, of course, like Charles Boxer and Emily
Hahn, is no longer around to refute Williams's assertions. She died in 1996
at the age of eighty-six.
    Boxer had met Hahn first in Shanghai, startled when first greeted at
the offices of Sinmay's magazine by "an enormous ape ... wearing a red
cap ..." This was Emily Hahn's companion, the gibbon "Mr. Mills." Boxer
told her he too was a writer, of "historical works, very dull." But he had
been given to understand that Emily and Sinmay"were actors in one of the
great love stories of the world, so naturally I didn't want to intrude." Hahn
found Boxer a "brilliant, amusing, mad man, who had insisted on talking
to me about the latest Chungking politics, of which I knew nothing, and
harping on the approaching dissolution of the British Empire." After Hahn
congratulated him on his marriage he said, "It always happens when one
lives in Hong Kong. One either becomes a hopeless drunkard or one mar-
ries. I did both."
                                               Heroes andTraitors • 297

   When Emily Hahn came to Hong Kong with Sinmay, "the Major," as she
invariably called Boxer, took the direct approach. At a dinner he overheard
Hahn say she could not have children. Well, Boxer told her, I do not believe
that, let's see, and the child can be my heir. The subsequent birth of Carola
in November 1941 took place six weeks before the Japanese surprise attack
on Pearl Harbor. The Japanese assault on Hong Kong itself came shortly
thereafter. After holding out for sixteen days, the British surrendered on
Christmas Day 1941, the centenary of the British annexation of Hong
Kong island from the Chinese Empire during the Anglo-Chinese Opium
War of 1839-1842. Boxer, who had rejected two Japanese demands for sur-
render on behalf of the British governor, had been severely wounded.
   The task of conveying the formal rendition of Hong Kong to the Japan-
ese thereby fell to his friend Alf Bennett, a Japanese-speaker who had also
served in Japan. He was very unhappy to have been handed this unpleasant
duty. But Emily Hahn gave a notable description of Alf Bennett in 1940:
    Alf was an RAF officer, at once deliberately comic and knowingly
    glamorous. He had an incredible mustache, curled at the ends like
    Father's in the Clarence Day play. He had high blood pressure and a
    growling voice; he roared, and drank, and knew poetry, and fancied
    himself a picturesque figure, as he was. Picturesque and privileged.
    Everybody knew Alf, and women were wistful about him, but a little
    afraid.
   Boxer himself had no doubt about the outcome of the war, even as he
lay gravely wounded in the hospital as Hong Kong fell. "In the end they
can't win. I don't see how they can, do you? Against America, and England,
and Holland and China. We must try to survive, that's all."


                                     III
Boxer came from a family with a long military tradition, and was born in
1904 on the Isle of Wight. He was educated at Wellington College, named
after the Duke of Wellington, victor over Napoleon at Waterloo, and at the
Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst. He was commissioned into the Lin-
conshire Regiment as a lieutenant in 1923. Boxer's father, who also served
in the Linconshire Regiment, had been killed at Ypres in 1915. His was a
typically heroic and needless death, as were so many on the dreadful killing
fields of the Western Front in World War I. Seriously wounded while serv-
ing with General Kitchener in Egypt. Boxer's father had, however, insisted
on returning to active duty when the world war broke out. At Ypres he had
led his men up out of the trenches into withering machine-gun fire,
propped up on his walking stick and resting on the elbow of his batman.
298 • NakedTropics

   Following language and intelligence training, Charles Boxer was sec-
onded to the Japanese army in 1930 for three years as part of an exchange
of Japanese and English officers. He was assigned to the 38 Infantry in
Nara. "Usually in armies the smart people were in the cavalry, but in Japan
the cavalry was regarded as a lot more stupid and upper class and not
nearly as good as the infantry:' Boxer said in 1989 in an interview we re-
corded at the Cam6es Center at Columbia University. Boxer enjoyed Japan:
"When you are young and lusty as an eagle and with a lot of money you
do." He took up the Japanese fencing called kendo-"Everyone does it
now, but in 1930 all the foreigners did jujitsu. I was the first one to do
kendo." Boxer explained, "I was very pro-Japanese anyway and the older
generation was still very pro-British ... it was a man's country and if you
learned Japanese, which I did, you were fine." Not that women were absent
from Boxer's Japanese life. His housekeeper concubine was a northerner
from Kakoadati on the island of Kakkaido. "There was no secret about it.
She had been someone else's concubine before and was very reliable."3
   It was in Japan that he expanded his interest in Portuguese imperial his-
tory, concentrating his attention on the first disastrous experiment of Eu-
ropean incursion into Japan and its catastrophic ending when Tokugawa
closed off the country to outside influence in the 1640s. The Japanese liter-
ally crucified hundreds of Christian missionaries and converts and for
good measure executed a delegation of anxious envoys sent out from the
Portuguese China enclave of Macao in order to make it entirely clear to the
European outsiders that they meant what they said. This was the subject of
Boxer's book The Christian Century in Japan, 1549-1650 (1951).
   Boxer returned to London for a two-year posting from 1935-1936 to
the military intelligence section of the War Office. Here, he told us in 1989,
"I had something to do with Anthony Blunt or Anthony Burgess-one of
those traitors who was in the Foreign Office because we had to liase with
each other over the phone." I am glad Mr. Hywel Williams did not see this
reference to the notorious Soviet moles within the British establishment-
it would undoubtedly have provided more grist to his conspiratorial mill.
In midwinter 1937 Boxer was sent to Hong Kong, traveling by way of the
Trans-Siberian Railroad, Manchuria, Korea, Japan, and Shanghai. In Hong
Kong he worked with the Far East Combined Bureau, a military intelli-
gence unit, and traveled widely in China on his spy missions as well as re-
turning several times to Japan.
   The center of Hywel Williams's charge of collaboration against Boxer
focuses on the period of the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong and secret

3"Boxer on Boxer: A Conversation;' Camoes Center Quarterly I, no. 2 (June 1989):
11-22.
                                               Heroes andTraitors • 299

transmissions between prisoners of war held at the Argyle Street camp in
Kowloon for British officers and the British Army Aid (BAAG) operating
out of Chongqing, former capital of Sichuan Province and the base of
Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist army. The discovery of the "transmitter" by
the Japanese in July 1943, Hywel Williams implies, was a result of Boxer's
treachery. Only a handful of officers knew of the transmitter at the time, he
claims, and all were executed except Boxer.
   Professor Alden takes apart these charges systematically in his March
10,2001, refutation of Hywel Williams's article. As Alden proves, far from
being responsible for «prolonging" World War II, Boxer was the one who
warned that «there could be no greater error than to assume, as is so often
done, that Japan's military is too bogged down in China to prevent it being
turned against us ..." It was the British War Office and Foreign Office that
ignored and underestimated this threat. As Alden also points out, Boxer
was shot in the back by a sniper trying to rally leaderless troops against the
invasion. At the Argyle Street camp in Kowloon the control of information
became critical to morale as the tides of war shifted against the Japanese.
For a time this news was accessible through a secret shortwave radio re-
ceiver (not transmitter). After the Japanese found it, Boxer and others were
arrested, interrogated, and condemned to hard labor. Alden quotes Ralph
Goodwin, a camp escapee who wrote that Boxer's prison companions
«never ceased to marvel at [his] amazing fortitude and calmness of spirit."
   After the war Boxer declined a decoration from the British government
(an MBE-Member of the British Empire) since he said he «had done noth-
ing to deserve the honor." Later in 1975 he declined an honor a second
time, a Commander of the British Empire (CBE). There was, he said, no
empire left to be a Commander of. Boxer himself rarely, if ever, spoke of his
imprisonment; nor did he want to write an autobiography. To have experi-
enced torture, he told a colleague, was to «share the experience of many
helpless people in the past." Colleagues looking at his personal files found
his folders empty. «Ever the intelligence officer" was the reaction of a long-
time colleague at King's College. When pressed on this period during the
Cam6es Center interview in 1989 and asked if he was surprised or appre-
hensive when Hong Kong fell, he said,
    No, I knew the Japanese and I saw clearly that would happen to us. I
    knew damned well that if they treated their own people badly why
    should they treat us better. The Japanese army's discipline was very
    severe, even when they made the slightest mistake. We had seen all
    this in Japan and I had no illusions.
   Emily Hahn was less reticent about the events in Hong Kong during the
Japanese occupation. Her voluminous writings and correspondence give a
300 • NakedTropics

richly detailed account of these years. Her book, China to Me, published in
1944 while Boxer was still held in a POW camp in Hong Kong, dealt explic-
itly with the whole cast of characters-Japanese, British, Chinese, and
American-Hahn met in this period. Her activities and subterfuges, nego-
tiations and hardships, and her relationship with Boxer was shared with
the over seven hundred thousand readers who bought her best-seller. The
"collaboration" Hywel Williams imputes to Boxer and Hahn was no mys-
teryat all, nor did it involve betrayal by any stretch of the imagination.
    In fact it was Hahn's identification papers, showing her to have a Chi-
nese husband, Sinmay, that saved her. And with the connivance of the
Japanese consul in Hong Kong, Mr. Shiroshici Kimura, who knew Boxer
and Hahn before the war. Hahn registered their exchange in China to Me:
    "You know I'm an American. Everyone knows that. I have an Amer-
    ican passport; you know that too:'
       ((I know."
       "According to American law this Chinese marriage does not
    make me Chinese."
       "According to Japanese law," he said, "it does."
       "And you know that's Boxer's baby, don't you?"
       "Of course. Your-uh-private life does not alter the law. You
    will not be interned, Miss Hahn. Indeed, you cannot be interned.
    We are ejecting all Chinese subjects from the internment camps."
   One of Williams's more bizarre inaccuracies is his "charge" that Hahn
was a "feminist and a communist sympathizer;' doubtless intended to rein-
force his innuendoes that Boxer was like the Soviet moles within the
British establishment, a man with the proclivities for treachery because of
his relationship with such a woman. Ironically this McCarthy-like smear,
and in The Guardian no less, parallels the suspicions of u.S. military intel-
ligence when Hahn eventually got back to New York with Carola in De-
cember 1943, and was interrogated by eight panels of military intelligence
officials and the FBI. Why had she not been interned? Had she been a
Japanese spy? Why had she fraternized with such high-ranking Japanese
officers? Why had she received "favors" from the Japanese?
   Hahn kept replying:
    the comparative freedom I had got out of the lie was important. It
    was not only that the very idea of being herded behind barbed wire
    was revolting. Outside, I was able to carry food and medicine to the
    military camp where Carola's father was incarcerated. We all did,
    every week, a draggle-tailed group of women whose men were
    locked up. Chinese women, and Swiss and French and Danish and
    Eurasian and Russian, and me.
                                                Heroes andTraitors • 301

   Hahn was without question a women ahead of her time in very many
ways, but she scoffed at the idea of being a feminist: "[F]eminists belong to
clubs. They collect money for causes. I wish feminists well but I've never
wanted to be one." She was too much the individualist for such collective
causes, and as the late William Maxwell of The New Yorker pointed out,
though it hardly needed emphasis for anyone who read what she wrote
over the years: she liked men. She was also no leftist, far from it: during the
increasingly bitter divisions in the United States over China during the late
1940s she spoke up for the Nationalists of Chiang Kai-shek and criticized
the Communist propaganda many Americans she claimed had "fallen for."
She dismissed as "stay at home experts" those American leftists and liberals
who supported the Chinese Communists. In fact it is probably precisely
because she was not a feminist nor a leftist in the fashionable New York
manner that even today Emily Hahn is not recognized as the amazing and
very American original that she undoubtedly was.
   Boxer also trespassed beyond the narrow bounds of British colonial eti-
quette and ingrained racism. As Hahn had written about Shanghai,
    The British were not aware of the Chinese as a people. Oh I don't
    mean the British didn't see the Chinese. They did. They mentioned
    them often as peasants, dwellers in the picturesque villages we saw
    when we went houseboating or shooting. They spoke of them as
    servants, quaint and lovable.... The British community, however,
    reserved its social life for itself and those among the Caucasian
    groups that could be considered suitably upper class.
   Boxer and Hahn were just the opposite. They moved in multiracial cir-
cles. Hahn had a Chinese lover. And she was an American. All these ele-
ments upset and obsessed and disgusted British Hong Kong. And the
resentments have evidently not diminished over the years. It is doubtless
from these poisoned roots that the tittle-tattle and gossip arose, which
landed up on the pages of The Guardian. As Hahn notes at one point in
China to Me, ((Nobody English thought of inviting Chinese people to (in-
formal parties.'" Boxer had no tolerance for racism, Portuguese or British.
A Japanese interrogator at the fall of Hong Kong paid him an unwitting
tribute when he told Hahn, ((Everybody say British bad; Boxer okay. No
proud."

                                     IV
I asked Boxer in 1989 about how the British Army had reacted to his schol-
arly interest. "Provided you hunted and had a horse and that kind of thing
then you were regarded as more or less all right;' he replied. "Whether you
took any interest in history didn't matter at all. If you were interested in
302 • NakedTropics

Portuguese or Dutch that was regarded as mildly eccentric, but as long as
you hunted and had a horse those were the main things." In Hong Kong
hunting was not enough. His Japanese connections were also no mystery:
this was precisely the reason for his intelligence posting to Hong Kong in
the first place. His Japanese regiment had in fact been one of those which
seized Hong Kong from the British in 1941. The Japanese knew Boxer and
he knew them, and he used this understanding to help his fellow prisoners
surVIve.
   Unlike Blunt, Burgess, and the Soviet moles, Boxer was no cynic. His
closest friends saw him as a stoic. In his personal copy of the Meditations of
Marcus Aurelius he had marked the passage on what it is to die, how"...
he can conceive of it not otherwise, than as a work of nature, and he that
fears any work of nature, is a very child." And this stoicism sustained him
through the ordeal of over three years in captivity, torture, and solitary
confinement. Was he afraid, we asked in 1989. "No, there was no reason to
be afraid. It was part of life. I feel sorry that a lot of people who died never
lived to see the end of the war. My friends never lived to see this, because
they were shot and killed. I was one of the lucky ones." Boxer was no trai-
tor, nor in his own mind was he a hero. He was, as his friend Professor Peter
Marshall of King's College called him, a person of"granite integrity." When
offered decorations he rejected them. But a title Charles Boxer might just
have accepted was the one he liked to quote about Salvador Correa de Sa.
For whatever else Boxer mayor may not have been, he was undoubtedly
like his seventeenth-century Luso-Brazilian hero: "a notable old stickler." A
stickler is defined in my dictionary as a tenacious and persistent person in
search of the truth. This is something once upon a time the Manchester
Guardian also used to be.
This page intentionally left blank
TH E   AQUKDUCT.
                                                      CHAPTER             16
                                                                      Orfeu
                                            "Rio de Janeiro/My joy and my delight!
                                   By day I have no water/By night I have no light."
                                                 -Anonymous Samba lyric, 1965




I first saw Black Orpheus (1959) by Marcel Camus in the early 1960s in a
crowded and cold old movie palace on the outskirts of Cambridge, Eng-
land. It was a dull and dismal winter evening and I was barely twenty years
old: so I suppose I was ripe for romance; the more exotic and erotic the
better, even if on celluloid. It was powerful enough to make me determined
to set out to see Brazil for myself.
    The new Orfeu (1999) directed by Carlos (aka "Caca") Diegues I saw in
Sao Paulo, in a rush, on a hot afternoon. The nearly empty theater off the
Avenida Paulista was shiny and new with an electronic entrance gate I had
great difficulty navigating until assisted by a sleepy attendant-and the air
was conditioned to English chilliness. I got there late and the film had
begun, so I missed the beginning.
    Euridice was the wife of Orfeu, the legendary Thracian poet and musi-
cian who could cast charms and spells by his singing and who was permit-
ted by Pluto to follow her out of Hades provided that he refrain from
looking back at her. Orfeu did, and Euridice was doomed to return. But the
new resilient Orfeu of the cinema has little to do with this Greek prove-
nance, set as his story now is within a Western Roman Catholic festival, his
music and its spell rooted in samba, speaking Portuguese with Brazilian
inventiveness, and located in a favela close to the sky, high up above the
sweeping arcs of Rio's beaches.



                                   305
306 • NakedTropics

   As I arrived, the spectacular Rio backdrop was still there on the screen,
and very occasionally, almost apologetically, the old music in the back-
ground. But the scene I happened in upon was more Lethal Weapon than
Vinicius de Moraes. A flabby, terrified middle-aged white man, sur-
rounded by a largely nonwhite crowd, was about to have his head blown
off. It was. His body was subsequently dumped over the edge of the morro
(slum), into a festering rubbish dump. I have no idea what the poor man
had done. Raped a little girl? Cheated on a drug deal? Was he a stand-in
that represented the Brazilian establishment, indifferent as ever to the
plight of the favelas, unless reminded, violently, that this is where millions
of Brazilians live out their daily lives, and not only during Carnival, and
most without "a room with a view"?
   Brazilian movie critics never seemed to have much liked the rendition
by Camus. It is too ((exotic tourism" as the phrase goes. But foreigners
should be forgiven for enjoying it. In 1962, I certainly took Black Orpheus
for what I saw on the screen: the fantasy, the cityscape, the magnificent set-
ting, and the human grace and musicality. But I also subsequently had the
suspicion that what many middle-class Brazilians objected to about Orfeu
was precisely the fact that it was not Orfeu do Carnaval as it was entitled in
Brazil (based on the original 1956 play Orfeu da Conceifao by Vinicius de
Moraes), but very much Black Orpheus, and that their unconscious reac-
tion was much like the Bahian police in the 1900s who would confiscate
the cameras of European photographers in Salvador when they were seen
taking pictures of nonwhites. This was not the Brazil foreigners were sup-
posed to see, much less propagate abroad by means of images. It repre-
sented after all that «archaic" Brazil, so deeply embarrassing to Brazilians
enamored by the idea of ((progress:' as in many ways it still does in some il-
lustrious circles who should know better.
   Some of the music, grace, and fantasy survive in the new version of
Orfeu. But I was struck by the Americanization, (or is it the ((global-
ization"?) of Brazilian popular culture over the past thirty years-Toni
Garrido's dreadlocks more Afro-Caribbean than Afro-Brazilian; the Pente-
costal pastor replacing the ritual of macumba; in place of the rattling bon-
des crossing atop of Rio's eighteenth-century aqueduct, shining subway
cars full of revelers that could just as well have been rumbling under New
York's Eighth Avenue, transporting back uptown from Greenwich Village
the bejeweled and extravagantly attired denizens of the ((Wigstock Parade:'
the annual extravaganza of New York drag queens and transvestites. The
Carnival sequences were more flamboyant and spectacular and costly than
before, but curiously self-contained within the concrete shell of the samb6-
drama (samba stadium); the rich spectators more voyeurs than partici-
                                                                Orfeu • 307

pants, separated and packaged and commercialized well away from the ac-
tion, and totally protected from the streets where Carnival once predomi-
nantly took place, even in my time in the midsixties. Was Caca Diegues's
telescopic gunsight view of the desfile, the setup for the would-be assassi-
nation of Orfeu, intended to demonstrate this? Or is Carnival now mainly
for TV only?
    I had in the mid-1960s been dropped off along the Vidigal road and
climbed up some steep steps in the hillside to a small enchanting chacara
(country cottage) where a Swedish couple working for the UN lived. As the
dusk gathered, far away in the distance between the leafy canopy of the
mata Atlantica lay the twinkling lights of Leblon, and below a sparkling
purple-hewed South Atlantic Ocean. When I was in Rio a few days before I
saw the new Orfeu, the main sewer pipe from the favela (shanty-town) that
now covered the hillside had broken and was spewing sludge into the
ocean from much the same location we had looked down over Rio that
evening thirty-five years ago. It seemed that this was just the spot Diegues
had set the most grotesque and memorable image of his film, the Hades
where the drug gangs threw the bodies of their victims, and where the de-
tritus of the globalized favela rotted, and the body of Euridice fell so deco-
rously on a tree limb.
    Not that violence and greed did not lurk behind the facade in the 1960s
anymore than it does today. I heard afterward that my hosts of that evening
were hounded out of their bucolic paradise some year or so later by the
hired pistoleiros (gunmen) of a Brazilian politican who wanted the land,
and were hurriedly flown thoroughly terrified back to Stockholm for their
own safety. It was a pity. They were sweet, good-hearted people who only
wanted to change the world for the better, and Brazil was the worse off for
losing their contribution. It would be sad to think they had been moved out
so rudely to provide space for a rubbish dump and a broken sewage pipe.
   With its concrete blockhouses and narrow Moorish alleys and steep
winding staircases and small open squares the Rio favela in Diegues's film
looks much like old Lisbon of the Alfama; an ironic historical throwback to
emerge just as Brazil's cultural bureaucrats, or should I say servidores
publicos (public servants) as they are so inappropriately called, ensconced
within their sanitized office blocks on the high plateau in Brasilia, squabbled
over how to spend the public money on a suitable celebration of Cabral's
accidental stopoff at Porto Seguro on his way to India in 1500.
    But these "jump cuts" permeated my reaction to Diegues's Orfeu. Poor
Cabral and his Portuguese companions were shocked at the nakedness of
the people they encountered on the Brazilian beach, and even more by
their lack of self-consciousness about it-their lack of "shame" as they put
308 • NakedTropics

it. I was struck by how overdressed all the characters in the new Orfeu had
become-poor Euridice must have sweltered, swaddled in what looked
like a discarded wedding gown, or the traficante Lucinho and his bizarre
woolen hat with his affected mannerisms, more Chicago in winter than
Rio in summertime. Even Orfeu was decked out in an American gigolo un-
dershirt and baggy pants-though we did get to see his naked bottom
briefly. This was not a very sexy movie despite the fact that sex or at least
unrequited love was what the story was all about. There was no spark to
this tragic triangle, and the life came more from the minor characters (the
marvelous Mary Sheila as the traficante Be Happy-how more American
can you get than that-and Isabella Fillards as Mira) than from the princi-
pals, who seemed self-absorbed and narcissistic, more in love with them-
selves than each other.

   But I suppose all of this just reflects the passing of time and nostalgic re-
membrances of things past. Today more Brazilians after all live in a context
that is more urban than rural, more international than national. Carnival
is more marginal than ever from the life of those who can afford to con-
sume culture and who are more distant and fearful of the underclass than
that time long ago when the romanticized and populist interpretations of
the culture brokers who once frequented the cafes of the Zona SuI of Rio
de Janeiro held sway. I was struck by this very forcibly the afternoon I went
to see Orfeu off the Avenida Paulista, and again while on my way to the air-
port later that evening, stuck in interminable traffic with the taxi driver
warning me to hide my bag to avoid the attention of thieves.
   The night before, a Chilean who had married a Brazilian and lived in
Brazil many years said in passing that the real Gotham City was not in
Manhattan but here in Sao Paulo. I could not get this marvelous insight
out of my head, looking up at the odd 1950s style antennae on top the sky-
scrapers, the deeply sunken highways and buttressed overpasses, the un-
derilluminated public streetlights, the cars skimming past the red stoplight
to avoid the armed gunmen at the intersections, the screaming sirens, the
ugly stucco churches wedged between the gray housing blocks, and the
raucous neon-lit brothels and the aggressive pimps banging on the car
windows along the Rua Augusta. What Brazil really needed as the twenti-
eth century ended was a Fellini who would set the Greek tragedy down in
the realm of Batman. Where Orfeu would be trapped in an interminable
bus ride from the periphery of the city, Euridice would be taking tickets at
the air-conditioned theater off the Avenida Paulista, and the gunman
would be lurking in Hades behind a concrete support for the highway
above waiting to press his revolver against the closed window, thinking of
                                                                     Orfeu • 309

crack not sex, and whose life would end far too early to see any sparkling
ocean in the distance.
   But I had after all missed the beginning of the movie, so perhaps I
missed the whole point. This is an old story for a foreigner to Brazil, and
especially for historians. At the best of times, they can only see fragments
of a mosaic, sometimes they can make sense of it; more often they cannot.
So I plead guilty to being unduly influenced by my early Orfeu, and cer-
tainly I do not regret it. Unfortunately, these days I do not think under-
graduates at Cambridge even go out to see exotic foreign films, let alone in
old movie palaces on cold winter nights. So I doubt they have the opportu-
nity to be inspired as I was to set out on a long trek south to see for myself
what the movie screen promised. Perhaps like the mythological Orfeu (the
original, that is, not the version of Camus or Diegues) I should not have
looked back to see if Euridice was following. l




IThe Brazilian singer, songwriter, and author Caetano Veloso, who composed the
soundtrack to Diegues's movie, took strong exception to my comments on the film
and especially on race in Brazil, and responded with a sharp attack in the lead arti-
cle in the New York Times Sunday «Arts & Leisure" section on August 20, 2000,
which coincided with the film's New York City premiere. New York film critics and,
more important, New York audiences reacted much as I did; the film had a very
short run. In any case, I was not writing a review when I wrote my piece.
This page intentionally left blank
                                     Sources ofPublications



*Note: The chapters in this volume have been updated and edited where
appropriate. Orthographic inconsistencies reflect original usage.
 1.   "Encontros Iniciais de urn Viajante;' Folha de sao Paulo (Decem-
      ber 28,1997), MAIS!, 8-10.
 2.   ",Adi6s Columbus!;' New York Review ofBooks 40, no. 3 (January
      28, 1993).
 3.   "The Road to Kisses;' New York Review of Books 53, no. 14 (Sep-
      tember 19, 1996).
 4.   "Pirate Democracy," New York Review of Books 56, no. 4 (May 6,
      1997).
 5.   "The Atlantic in the Eighteenth Century: A Southern Perspective
      on the Need to Return to the 'Big Picture,'" Transactions of the
      Royal Historical Society (London, 1993), 209-336.
 6.   "The Spark: Pombal, the Amazon and the Jesuits," Portuguese
      Studies 17 (November 2001): 168-183.
 7.   "The Generation of the 1790s and the Idea of the Luso-Brazilian
      Empire," in The Colonial Roots ofModern Brazil, ed. Dauril Alden
      (Berkeley and London: University of California Press, 1973),
      107-144.
 8.   "Why Was Brazil Different? The Contexts of Independence," John
      Parry Memorial Lecture, Harvard University, April 25, 2000,
      Working Papers on Latin America (Cambridge: David Rockefeller
      Center for Latin America Studies, 2000).



                                   311
312 • Sources of Publications

 9.   "Uma Dupla Incomun," Folha de sao Paulo (October 7, 2001),
      MAIS!,14-19.
10.   «Yale Naked: A Story of Slavery, Sex and Mannon;' Noticia e
      Opiniao (August 24, 2001).
11.   «The Tragedy of the Amazon," New York Review ofBooks 38, no. 5
      (March 7, 1991): 24-29.
12.   «The Mystery of Chico Mendes," New York Review ofBooks 38, no.
      6 (March 28, 1991): 39-48.
13.    «The Two Brazils;' The Wilson Quarterly XXIII, no. 1 (winter
      1999): 50-60.
14.   "Macao: The Shadow Land;' World Policy !ournaIXVI, no. 4 (win-
      ter 1999/2000): 73-95.
15.   «The C. R. Boxer Affaire: Heroes, Traitors, and the Manchester
      Guardian;' Noticia e Opiniao (March 16,2001).
16.   "Urn Fellini que Leve 'Orfeu' ao Reino de Batman;' Folha de sao
      Paulo (October 28, 1999), Ses:ao Ilustrada.
                                                    Abbreviations


ABNRJ, Anais da Biblioteea Naeional do Rio de Janeiro
ADIM, Aetas da Devassa da Ineonfideneia Mineira (1st edition)
AHU, Arquivo Hist6rico Ultramarino, Lisbon
AMI, Anais do Museu da Ineonfidencia
ANRJ, Arquivo Nacional, Rio de Janeiro
BNL, Biblioteca Nacional, Lisboa, Fundo Geral
BNLCP, Biblioteca Nacional, Lisboa, Cole<rao Pombalina
BT, Board of Trade, PRO, London
CUT, Central Unica dos Trabalhadores
CVRD, Companhia Vale do Rio Doce
DR, Doeumentos Ristorieos, Biblioteca Nacional, Rio de Janeiro
DISP, Documentos In teressantes para a Historia e Costumes de s. Paulo,
  Sao Paulo
FO, Foreign Office Papers, PRO, London
IHGB, Arquivo do Instituto Hist6rico e Geognifico Brasileiro,
  Rio de Janeiro
INPE, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais



                                   313
314 • Abbreviations

MHPB, Mem6rias hist6ricas e politicas da provincia da Bahia do Coronel
  Ignacio Accioli de Cerqueira e Silva; mandadas reeditar e annotar pelo
 governo deste estado ... annotador dr. Braz do Amaral . ..
   (6 vols.) (Bahia: Imprensa Official do Estado, 1919-1925)
MST, Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra
PMDB, Partido do Movimento Democnitico Brasileiro
PRO, Public Record Office, London
PT, Partido dos Trabalhadores
RAPM, Revista do Arquivo Publico Mineiro
RHDIIMdeP, Revista Hist6rica das Ideias; 0 Marques de Pombal e 0 seu
  tempo (2 vols.) (Coimbra, 1982)
RHSP, Revista Hist6rica, Sao Paulo
RIHGB, Revista do Instituto Hist6rico e Geografico Brasileiro
TLS, The Times Literary Supplement, London
UDR, Uniao Democratica Ruralista
                                                                                        Index


Academia Brasilica dos Renascidos, 112             Albuquerque, Afonso de, 260
Academy of Sciences (Lisbon). See under Lisbon     Albuquerque, Luis de, 18n, 31 n
ACM. see Magalhaes, Antonio Carlos                 alcabala (sales tax), 80
Acre, ix; and "rubber war," 220-222                Alden, Dauril, xix, 71n, 93n, 99n, 119n, 125n,
Adams, John Quincy (1767-1848), 88, 89,154;           292, 292n, 311; refutation of Williams, 299
   Amistad affair, 188; influence on U.S.          Aleijadinho (sculptor), 248
   foreign policy, 160; prejudices against South   Alexandre, Valentim, 137n
   Americans, 160, 161                             Algarve. See under Portugal
Adams, Robert M., lOIn                             All China Federation of Industry and
Adams, William Howard, 165n                           Commerce, 281
Afonso, Rui (lawyer), 285                          Allegretti, Mary, 225, 226, 228, 230,233,236,
Africa. See also North Africa: chocolate              240, 240n
   transplanted in, 43; map, ix; sailors/pirates   Almada e Mendon~a, Francisco de (Pombal's
   from, 57; as slave labor source, 18,26-27,         cousin),93
  26-29,67,98,203, 203n, 245n, 249; slaves in      d'Almeida, Luis Ferrand, 96n
  Madeira, 27                                      Alvarenga Peixoto, Ignacio Jose de (c.
African American Congregation (New Haven),            1743-1792),113-114,117,120,140
   191, 192                                        Alves da Silva family, 219, 229, 230, 231, 237-238
Afro- Brazilians, in modern Brazil, 245-247        Amado, Jorge (Brazilian novelist), 197
agriculture. See also livestock; rubber: in the    Amaral, Braz do, 122n
  Caribbean, 23; coffee production, and slave      Amaral, Joao Ferreira do (Macao governor),
  trade, 151-152,249; and CONTAG, 223;                266
  agrobusiness vs. small farmers, 208;             Amaral Lapa, Jose Roberto do, 71 n, 96n
  farmland occupation, 252; mechanization,         Amazon frontier: environmental!ecological
  252; and deforestation, 206-208; in Minas           concerns, 199-228,232,233,236-241;
  Gerais, 135; MST movement, 251-252;                 expulsion of Jesuits, under Pombal, 96-107;
  reform of: after 1985,229; favored by               land reform plans, 213-214; socioeconomic
  Andrada e Silva, 152; sugar vs. subsistence         problems, 213-217
  crops, 125-127                                   Amazon River system, 199-200
Air France employees, in Rio, 7-8, 9               American Board of Commissioners of Foreign
Ajami, Fouad, xvi-xvii, xx                            Missions, 193
Albinus, Bernard Siegfried, 179                    American Philosophical Society, 159, 175, 176



                                               315
316 • Index

American Revolution, impact of, on Brazil and            slaves/slavery, 265-266; spice trade, 20,70;
   Spanish America, 83-89, 115                           textile trade, 261, 262
"American system:' of Jefferson and Correa da         asiento (slave trade rights), 58, 79
   Serra, 159-160, 161                                assassination, of"Chico" Mendes, motivations
Americas Watch, report on rural violence,                for, 219, 231, 237, 253, 266
   240-241                                            assimilation, encouraged, under Pombal, 98
Amistad Committee of New Haven, 188                   Atlantic economic system, and political
Amnesty International, report on rural                   emancipation of Brazil, 166-168
   violence, 214,
              214,240-241                             Atlantic Revolution. See North America:
Amorim, Tomas, xix                                       democratic revolution
Amzalak, Moses Bensabat, 124n                         Atlantic system, economic chronologies of,
Anderson, Anthony B., 214, 214n, 240n                    62-76
Andes Mountains, silver mining, 53                    Atouguia, count of, trial and execution,
Andrada e Silva, Jose Bonifacio de                       103-104
   (1763-1838), xvi, 152; education at                Auden, W. H. (1907-1973),273
   University of Coimbra, 180; European study         Augustine, Saint, 37
   tour, 131-132, 173; leadership qualities of,       Avery, Henry (Long Ben), 55
   153; as a paulista, Ill; political ideals of,      Avillez, Maria Joao, 284n
   158; secret letter to Chamberlain, 166; on         Azeredo Coutinho, Jose Joaquim da Cunha de,
   slave trade, 163-164                                  124,124n-125n, 127,128,129,130, 133,
Andrade, Ant6nio Alberto Banha de, 92n                   135, 135n
Angola, ix; slave transshipment, 66                   Azevedo, Joao Lucio de, 97n, lOIn
animals. See also livestock: gibbons, of Emily        Azevedo, Pedro de, 94n
   Hahn, 295, 296; introduced by explorers,           Azevedo, Thales de, 4, 6-7, lOn, 119n
   18-19                                              Azores archipelago, ix; Portuguese settlement
Antilles, death rates in, 25                             of, 18
Antwerp, ix; commercial dealings in Iberia,           Aztecs, chocolate usage, 40
   20-21
Arabia, 33                                            Bacon, Francis (philosopher), 172
Arakaki, Mara Rubia, 263n                             Bahamas: coat of arms of, 59; extinction of
Araujo, Paulo Cabral de, 141n                           Indians, 24
Araujo de Aragao Bulcao Sobrinho, Antonio             Bahia, ix, 6, 67-68; conspiracy, 120-130, 156
   de,123n                                            Baiao, Antonio, 94n, 124n
Araujo Pereira, Francisco de, lIOn                    Bailyn, Bernard, 85n
Arawaks, 50                                           Balbi, Adrien, 125n
Arcadia academy (Rome), 93                            Balbina reservoir, and environmental
archaeology: and demographic history, 23;               destruction, 213
   and history of chocolate, 38, 39; in Macao,        Banks, Joseph (of Royal Society), 173, 175
   271                                                Baptista, Ant6nio Marques (police director),
architecture: eclectic style of Macao, 264-265;         275
   restoration of, in Brazil, 244-245                 Barbary Coast, and piracy, 52
Arias de Avila, Pedro. See Davila, Pedrarias          Barbier, Jacques, 80n, 85n
aristocracy: decline of, in Britain, 2; threats to,   Barbosa, Mathias, 132
   under Pombal, 102-103                              Barlow, Joel (U.S. envoy), 175
Aristotle, 13                                         Barrie, J. M., Peter Pan, 59
Arpoador beach, Rio, 9                                Barros, F. Borges de, 121n
Arruda, Jose Jobson de Andrade, 76n, 125n             Barrow, John (1764-1848),87, 88n, 109, 118,
Artola, Miguel, 78n                                     118n
Ashoka Foundation, 230                                Bartow County, Georgia, 194
Asia: European role in, 22; cacao transplanted,       Basilio da Gama, Jose, 104n
   43; emigration to Brazil, 249; map, ix;            Bay of Bengal, 33
   monastic orders in, 263, 267, 269-270;             Bazin, Germain, 114n
   Portuguese interest in, 30, 32, 33, 66-67;         Beal, Tarcisio, 103n
   representative government, in Macao, 263;          Beales, Derek, 93n
                                                                              Index • 317

Beattie, Peter, 222                              Brazil, xv; and Amazon crises, 237; Amazon
Beckford, William (esthete), 173-174, 174n,         region of, 199-217; ambiguities of
   179                                              independence, 158-161; antimonarchist
Beijing. See Peking                                 movement, 156; black population of,
Beirao, Caetano, 131 n                              119-120; Cabanagem revolt, 204-205; and
Beldon Foundation, 227                              Chico Mendes, 219-241; clandestine
Benbow, John, 59                                    tobacco trade, 75n; contrasted with Spanish
Benbow Inn, 59                                      America, 155; cuisine, 6; cultural change,
Bennett, Alf (RAF officer), 296, 297                306; "decade of environment," 239;
Berardi, Juanoto (Florentine trader), 21            deforestation tragedy, 199-217; democratic
Berkeley, George (bishop), 189-190                  revolutions, 64, 154-156; dominance of,
Berkeley scholarship, funded by slave-              in Portuguese empire, 75; economic
   produced income, 189-190                         conditions, 244, 254; foreign investment in,
Bertrand, Maite (boarding house                     243; frontiers of, under Treaty of Madrid,
   proprietress), 7-9                               97; «hollow frontier" of, 204, 209-213, 248;
Berwick, Dennison, 205n                             importance of American Revolution, 83-84;
Bessant, Rev. Dr. (dean), 1                         independence declared (1822), xv, 145-168;
Biblioteca Estense (Modena), 33                     independence recognized by Portugal
Birmingham, David, 26n                              (1825),145, 167; intellectual climate (18c),
"Black Bart" (Bartholomew Roberts), 49,55           109-143; international context of, 145-168;
Blackbeard (Edward Teach), 51, 54                   and international trade, 72-73; Jesuits, 93,
Black Orpheus (Camus), influence on                 104; as Luso-tropical ideal, 3; maps, ix;
  Maxwell, xii, 2, 7, 305-309                      Maxwell's introduction to, 2, 305-309;
Blake, William, 219                                 metropolitan accommodation, 130-133;
Blunt, Anthony (British traitor), 298, 302         military regime (1964-1985),223,225,
Boerhaave, Hermann, 177-178, 179                   249; abuse of social benefits, 254; nuclear
Bolivia, 84, 205, 220,221,225,235                  program of, 215, 239; opening of ports, 150;
Bond, Jim (senate assistant), 229                  political emancipation of, 167; Portuguese
Bonifacio, Jose de. See Andrada e Silva, Jose      claim to (1500),33; and Portuguese
  Bonifacio de                                     imperialism, 67-68; as Portuguese
Bonny, Anne (pirate), 56-57, 59                    monarchial seat, 139-143, 145, 149; in
Boorstin, Daniel, 31                               D. Rodrigo's plan, 137-143; role of, in
Booth, Martin, 265n, 284n                          Portuguese educational reforms, 180;
Borah, Woodrow, 22, 23, 202n                       sociopolitical stability of, 157; uniqueness
Boschi, Caio, 93n                                  of decolonization of, 155; U.S. recognition
Boudinot, Elias (aka Buck Oowatie;                 of Brazilian Empire, 161
  Cherokee), 194-196                             Brazil, Mr. (travel agent), 4
Boudinot, Elias (president of the                Brazil (trading) company, 68-69
  Confederation), 195                            Brazilian Communist Party, 209-210. See also
Bourbons. See also Charles III, of Spain           PCdoB
  (1759-1788); Spain: metropolitan-colonial      Brazilian Confederation of Agricultural
  relationship, 86, 87                             Workers (CONTAG), 223
Bourdon, Leon, 162n                              Brazilian Democratic Movement
Boxer, Carola, 297, 300                            (MDB/PMDB), 224, 226, 229
Boxer, Charles Ralph, 31, 31 n21, 66n, 69n,      Brazilian Institute for Space Research (INPE),
  105n, 111n, 112n, 138n,149,260n,262n,            215,238,239,314
  263n, 264n, 265n, 268, 268n, 280, 280n,288,    Brethren of the Coast federation, 50
  289n, 291; biographical essay, 291-302         Britain. See Great Britain
Boyd, Julian P., lIOn                            Brokaw, Tom (journalist), 193
Brading, David A., 65, 79n, 131 n                Broussonet, Peter Marie Auguste (French
Braganc;a monarchy. See Pedro II, Joao V, Jose     Girodin), 173
  I, Maria I, Joao VI                            Brown, Ron (U.S. secretary of commerce),
Branco, Joao (UDR president), 231, 237             283,284,285
Brasilia, ix; development of, 206-207, 249       Buarque, Chico (musician), 4, 4n
318 • Index

Buarque de Holanda, Sergio (historian), 4, 4n,    Caribbean islands: administration of,
  253                                                contrasted with Africa and Asia, 22; effects
buccaneers. See pirates/piracy                       of European expansion, 21-25; English slave
Buenos Aires, 65, 76, 79, 151, 154, 155              trade, 79; Higiiey Indians, 22; and piracy, 54
Burg, Barry Richard, 56, 56n                      Carmelites. See under monastic orders
Burgess, Anthony (British traitor), 298, 302      Carneiro de Mendon<;a, Marcos, 97n, 98n, 99n,
Burns, E. Bradford, III n, 124n                      lOOn, lOIn, 131n, 132n, 133n, 139n, 141n
Burnstein, Andrew, 195n                           Carnival, in Brazil, 306-307
Bushnell, Amy, xix                                Carrato, Jose Ferreira, 114n
                                                  Carreira, Antonio, 99n
Cabanagem revolt (Brazil), 204-205                Cartagena, ix, 50, 54
Cabral, Pedro Alvares (explorer), 201, 307-308    Cartas Chilenas, 117, 117n. See also Gonzaga
cacao. See chocolate                              Carter, Jimmy (U.S. president), 237
Cachimbo, and Brazilian nuclear tests, 215,       cartography, ix, 33-34
   239                                            Carvalho, Augusto da Silva, 174
Cadbury chocolatiers, 43                          Carvalho, Paulo de (Pombal's brother), 104
Cadiz, 76, 78                                     Carvalho, Romulo de, 133n
Caeiro, Jose, 97n, 104n                           Carvalho e Mello, Sebastiao Jose de. See
Calhoun, Georgia, 196                                Pombal, Marques de
Calhoun, John C. (U.S. senator and vice           Casaldaliga, Pedro (bishop), 224
   president), 151; defender of slavery, 190      Casino Lisboa (Macao), 274
Calico Jack (John Rackam), 54, 55, 56, 57, 59     casinos. See gaming industry
Cambridge University, 1-2                         Castiglione, Baldassare (1478-1529),
Caminha, Pero Vaz de, 201                            Cortegiano,33n
Cam6es, Luis de (poet), xiv-xv, 268, 269, 293     Castro Alves, Antonio de (Bahian poet): The
Cam6es Center. See under Columbia                    Slaves (as Escravos, 1883), 196; The Slave
   University                                        Ship (0 Navio Negreiro, 1880),197; Voices
Campane, Jerry (special agent), 285n                 ofAfrica (Vozes d'Africa, 1880),197
Campbell, Donald, 122, 122n, 140, 140n            Castro Alves, Jose Celso de, 187-197
Campillo, Jose de (Sp. finance minister), 77      Castro Sarmento, Jacob de (philosopher,
Camus, Marcel, Black Orpheus, xii, 2, 7,             1692-1762),92, 183n; influence on
   305-309                                           educational reform, 178-179; and
Canada, contributions to Mendes' movement,           intellectual fervor, 177
   230                                            Catholic Church(es). See also evangelicals;
Canary Islands, ix, 18,27                            monastic orders; Protestants: armed rivalry
cannibalism, 51                                      among monastic orders, 270-271;
Canning, George (British foreign secretary),         charismatic movement, 251; Church of Sao
   145,154,156-157                                   Paulo in Macao, 268; Inquisition, 56, 177;
Canton (Guangzhou), 259, 260                         liberation theology and political struggle,
Cape Verde, ix; African slaves in, 27                224,251; in Macao, 267, 269, 272-273; and
capitalism: critics of, in Brazil, 251-252; and      MST, 252; and Pombaline reforms, 91-107;
   IMF, 252; and mining, 132-133; under              Sino-Vatican relations, 272
   Pombal's reforms, 72-74; rise of, and          Catholic Enlightenment, 92-93, 182
  decolonization, 148; and slavery, 166; and      cattle. See livestock; ranching/ranchers
  slave-sugar trade, 29-30, 124, 126              Cavalcante, Francisco de Paula, 140
capital punishment, 58                            CEB (Comunidades Eclesiais de Base), 224
Caracas, 76                                       Center for Amazonian Studies, Parana. See lEA
Carajas project, 210-212, 229, 240. See also      Centurioni firm, employer of Columbus, 21
  mining/mineralogy                               Ceylon (Sri Lanka), 33
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique (Brazilian             Chace, James, xix
  president), 243, 244, 247, 249, 252;            Chamberlain, Henry (British envoy), 88, 89,
  constitutional alterations under, 254;             154; secret letter from Bonifacio, 166; on
  political exile of, 249-250; supported by          slave trade, 162-163
  ACM,253                                         Chambers, George, The Bombardment of
Cardoso, Manoel, 115n                                Algiers (painting), 53
                                                                                   Index • 319

Charles (English prince), 239                        colonialism. See also imperialism: and
The Charles, privateer ship, renamed The                Enlightenment decolonization process,
   Fancy,54                                             65-66; and historiography, 62; and
Charles III, of Spain (1759-1788), 65, 77, 79-80        independence, 146-148; maintained by
Charleston, S.C., raided by Blackbeard, 54              constant immigration, 25; and trade
Chastel, Andre, 33n                                     balance, 124-126
Chaudhuri, K. N., 262n                               Columbia University, 295; Cam6es Center,
Chaunu, Pierre, 17n, 28n, 143, 143n                     298,299; graduate program, 4, 9-10
Cherokee nation (Georgia), 194, 195                  Columbian quincentennial controversy, 13-35
Chiang Kai-shek (Chinese nationalist), 295           Columbus, Bartolomeu, 22
Chiesa, Paulo, 234                                   Columbus, Christopher (1451-1506),20;
Chile, 8, 59, 249; U.S. recognition of, 160             Spanish context of, 32; view on slavery, 26;
China, 33; Cultural Revolution, and Macao,              views of, revealed in textual analyses, 31-32
   279; free trade treaties, 149-150; Manchu         Columbus "lighthouse" (Santo Domingo), 14
   overthrow of Ming, 264; maps, ix; and             commerce. See trade
   Portuguese Macao, 258; transfer of Macao,         commodity supplies, 126
   278-280, 279n, 286-289; U.S. trade                Communism. See Marxism
   relations, 257-258; and U.S. political            Communist Party of Brazil (PCdoB), 225, 235
   contributions, 283-284; views of                  Communist Party of Portugal (PCP), 277
   Westerners, 260-261                               Company of Grao Para and Maranhao, 99,
Chinese-American relations, 257-259                     100,101,102
Chinnery, George (artist, 1774-1852),265,267         Comunero rebellion, 84
chocolate, 38, 40-44                                 Congo, slave exportation, 26
Christianity. See also Catholic church(es);          Congregation Shearih Israel (New York), 184
   evangelicals; monastic orders; Protestants:       USS Constitution, 175
   in Japan (1549-1650),298; missionaries,           constitutionalism, 153
   and decimation of Indians, 204; of Ribeiro        CONTAG (Brazilian Confederation of
   Sanches, 182-183                                     Agricultural Workers), 223
church-state relations, views of Abbe Correa         Cook, Edmund (sea captain), 56
   da Serra, 182                                     Cook, Sherburne F., 22, 202n
Cinema Novo, Rio, 9                                  "coolie trade;' 265
Cisneros, Francisco Ximenez de (1436-1517),          Copacabana, Rio, 9
   26                                                Cordingly, David, 48-54, 48n, 57, 59
Cleary, David, 210, 21 On, 211, 220, 220n            Cornwall, Connecticut, and "black college,"
Clement XIV (pope): chocolate poisoning of,             192,193
   42; suppression of Jesuits, 105, 106              Cornwall Foreign Mission School, 193, 194,
climate, and Luso-Sino trade, 260                       196-197
Clinton, Bill (U.S. president), 285n                 Correa, Camargo (construction company),
Clive, John, xii                                        212
clothing, of pirates, 49                             Correa, Marcos Sa, xix
Coates, Austin, 265n                                 Correa da Serra, Eduardo Jose (b. 1803),
Coatsworth, John, xx                                    174-175,178
Cockburn, Alexander, 200, 200n, 201, 201n,           Correa da Serra, Jose (abbe; 1750-1823): and
   202,205,206,228,228n,232-236                        American Philosophical Society, 175-176;
code of conduct, among pirates, 54-55                  biographical sketch, 171-176; botanical
Coe, Michael D., 37-44, 37n                            expedition, 173; contributions on medicine,
Coe, Sophie D., 37-44, 37n                              177; education, University of Coimbra, 180;
Cohen, Thomas M., 203n                                 mystery surrounding surname of, 185;
coinage, pieces of eight, doubloon, and $ sign, 53      relationship with Esther Delavigne,
College of Nobles (Portugal), 133, 178, 179             174-175; relations with Faustina, 175n;
Collins, Mark, 200, 200n                               sodomy of, 175n; and Thomas Jefferson, xv,
Collor de Mello, Fernando (Brazilian                    153,159,171-185
   president),238                                    The Corsair, by Lord Byron, 52
Colombia. See New Granada                            corsairs. See pirates/piracy
Colonia do Sacramento, 71; ceded to Spain, 97        C6rte-Real, Manuel H., 93n
320 • Index

Cortes (Portugal's parliamentary institution),     CVRD (Companhia Vale do Rio Doce), 211,
   69,96,156,158,166                                 212,313
Cortes, Hernan, treasure plundered, 53
Cortesao, Jaime, 96n                               D. Rodrigo. See Coutinho, Rodrigo de Sousa
Cortes family, in Mexico, 40                       Dagobert, Georges Leopold Chretien Frederic.
Cosa, Juan de la (1460-1510),33                       SeeCuvier
Costa, Claudio Manuel da (poet), 112-115,          dalla Bella, Giovanni Antonio, 179
   112n,117                                        Dampier, William (buccaneer), 59
Costa, Emilia Viotti da, 64n, 148                  dance, escola de samba, 9
Costa, Hypolito Jose da, 141, 141n                 Daun, Heinrich Richard Graf von, 95
Costa Capanema, Manoel da, 119                     Daun, Maria Leonor Ernestina (wife of
Costa Filho, Miguel, 132n                             Pombal),95
Cosway, Maria (1760-1838), Jefferson's             Davidson, David M., 71 n, 96n
   relationship with, 164, 174                     Davila, Pedrarias (c. 1440-1531),25
Council on Foreign Relations, xix, 236             Davis, Richard Beale, 159n, 176n
Countryman, Edward, 63n                            Deadman's Cay (Rackam's Cay), 57
Coutinho, Luis Pinto de Sousa (1735-1804),         Dean, Warren, 205n, 232, 232n
   130-131,133,138-139                             death rates: New World and Europe compared,
Coutinho, Rodrigo de Sousa, 132-143; and              25; of slaves in relation to sugar trade, 29; in
   Abbe Correa da Serra, 174, 180                     West Africa, 27
Coutinho, Vasconcellos (judge), 113n               Debret, Jean-Baptiste (artist), 5
Couto e Silva, Golbery do (general), 207           Deeds, Susan, 63n
Cowell, Adrian (filmmaker), 209-210, 209n,         Defoe, Daniel: authorship questioned, 51;
   215,223,226-228,229,230,233,234,235;               Robinson Crusoe, 59
   Decade ofDestruction series, 209, 209n, 239,    deforestation. See also forests: decline of, and
   239n                                               economic downturn, 239; and logging, 206;
Craddock, Percy (British ambassador), 259             and mechanization, 207-208; and
Cremer, R. D., 272n                                   population migration, 207, 212; and
crime: and decline of gaming industry, in             ranching,206-209,211,214, 215
   Macao, 276-277; in Macao, 283-286; and          Delaforce, Angela, 33, 33n, 96n
   Macao's Basic Law, 275-276; in modern           Delavigne, Esther, Abbe Correa da Serra's
   Amazon frontier, 214-215; in modern                relationship with, 175
   Brazil, 247, 307; in modern Macao,              democracy: among pirates, 54-55; and
   273-276; and rural violence, 214, 240-241          Brazilian revolutionary philosophy,
Crosby,Alfred, 18, 18n, 19,28                         118-119; Brazilian transformation, 243-247
cross-dressing, among pirates, 56                  Democratic National Committee, and
Cuba, ix, 21, 27, 28, 50, 54, 76, 79, 80, 265         "Charlie» Trie, 285n
Cultura Inglesa, Rio, 7, 9                         Democratic Revolution, and
cultural adaptation: in Brazil, 306; by Jesuits,      protonationalism, 83-89, 115
   among Asians, 270-271; in Sino-Portuguese       Denevan, William, 23, 23n
   Macao,287-288                                   dependency theory, of decolonization, 148
Cultural Survival (Cambridge, Mass.), 251          Derian, Patricia (U.S. asst. secretary of state),
Cunha, Euclides da (1866-1909),245,253                237
Cunha, Luis da, 94, 98                             Derna, Tripoli, captured by U.S. Marines, 52
Cunha, Tristao da (c.1460-1514?; Portuguese        Descartes, Rene (1596-1650), 92
   navigator),33                                   despotism, attacked by paulistas, III
currency reform, in Brazil, 243, 247-248           Deswarte, Sylvie, 33n
Curtin, Philip D., 26-27, 27n                      Deus, Joao de (Bahian tailor), 120, 121
Cushing, Caleb (U.S. congressman), 257,258,        development: of Brasilia, 249; of Brazilian
   284-285                                            frontier, 70-71,249; of Caribbean islands,
CUT (independent union organization), 226,            29; commercial, of chocolate, 70
   241n,250,313                                    Dias, Bartolomeu (d. 1500; Portuguese
Cuthbertson, Ken, 294n                                explorer), 16,20
Cuvier, Baron (Dagobert, Georges Leopold           Dias, Jose Sebastiao da Silva, 93n
   Chretien Frederic), 174                         Dias, Manuel Nunes, 99n
                                                                                  Index • 321

Dias, Maria Odila da Silva, 139n                       universities, 182; Jesuit, 93; reform
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal (1492-1584),38               movements, 106, 110,178-179, 179; by
Diegues, Carlos (Caca; film director, Orfeu),         Oratorians, 106; by Pombal, 106, 110
   305,307, 309, 309n                              Edwards, Michael M., 82n
diet: of conquistadors, and constipation, 40; of   Edwards, S. F., 124n, 140n
   indigenous islanders, 23                        Eliot, Jared (New England slave owner), 190
Dines, Alberto, 141 n                              Elizabeth I (England), 49
dinnerware, design influenced by chocolate         Elliott, John Huxtable, 15, 15n
   cups, 41                                        El Nino, environmental effects, 252
diseases: and death rates: New World and           empate (organized showdown), 223, 230
   Europe compared, 25; of slaves in relation      Encyclopedists (France), 92, 174
   to sugar trade, 29; in West Africa, 27; and     England. See also Great Britain: slave trade
   decimation of Caribbean and Canary                 rights (asiento), 58,79; and War of the
   Islands, 24; effect of, on world history, 26;      Spanish Succession, 77-78
   infections introduced in New World, 19,24;      Enlightenment. See also Catholic
   not imported to Africa and Europe, 25; as          Enlightenment: intellectuals of, 177-181;
   protection from European expansion, 27;            internationally broadbased, 181-182; as
   smallpox, 25                                       justification for Jesuit expulsion, 107; in
Ditchley Foundation, Environmental Damage             Latin America, historical study of, 62, 64;
  and Climatic Change, 216                            and Luso-Brazilian reform, 134, 141; in
diversity. See under race                             Southern United States, 182
Dolhnikoff, Miriam, 152n, 158n                     environment and ecology. See also Mendes,
Dominicans. See under monastic orders                 Francisco (Chico): Brazilian activists, 252;
Doria, Pedro, xix                                     concerns about: the Amazon, 199-217,219,
Dourado, Mecenas, 141 n                               226,227,228,232,233,236-241; the
Drake, Francis (English privateer), 54, 59            Caribbean, 24; extractive reserves policy, 12,
Dugdale, Anthony, 187-197                             219,227,229,234,236,239,240, 250; and
Dunkerley, James, xx                                  forests, 199-217; military opposition to, 253
du Pont, Pierre Samuel, 175                        escola de samba (samba school), 9
Dutch, assault on Portuguese possessions, 66,      espionage, of Boxer, 294, 298-299
   263                                             Espirito Santo (commercial fraternity),
Dutra, Francis A., 104n                               dissolved, under Pombal, 101
Dutra, Olivo (Rio Grande do SuI governor), 250     etiquette, in Brazil, 6, 8
Dwight, Edwin, 193                                 Euridice (wife of Orfeu), 305
Dwight, Timothy (Yale president), 193              Europe: attitude towards New World
Dwyer, Augusta, 221, 221 n, 222n, 223, 224,           conditions, 29-30; in British history
   226,230,235                                        curriculum, 1; early modern navigational
                                                      expansion, 33; post-Columbian hegemony
Earle, Peter, 48, 48n                                 of, 15; provincialism of, xiii
East India Company (English), 265                  European Economic Community (EEC),
Echeverria, Durand, 116n                              Brazilian investment, 212
ecology. See environment and ecology               evangelicals: Garotinho, Anthony (Rio
economic development: of Atlantic system,             governor), 251; Rodrigues, Carlos
  62-76; of modern Brazil, 245-247                    (congressman), 251; Universal Church of
economic policies, 213-214; bullionist, 73, 81;       the Kingdom of God, 251
  Cruzado Plan (1985-1986),213; effect of,         exploration, and world commerce, 16, 262
  on slavery, 165-166; and inflation, 247; Real    exports. See also imports: by Buenos Aires, 76;
  Plan (1994),243,247-248,254-255; under              French, from Cadiz, 78; grain, from North
   Pombal, 72-74, 91-107; and recession of            America, 71, 85; and re-exports from Spain,
   1990s, 244; role of, in decolonization,            78
   148-149                                         Exquemelin, Alexander O. (pirate), Buccaneers
EDF (Environmental Defense Fund), 233, 236            ofAmerica (1678/1684), 47,50-51; vs.
education. See also pedagogy: among Macao             Morgan, 47
  Chinese, 282; Catholic, in Macao, 272; and       extractive reserves policy, 212, 227, 229, 234,
  democratic ideas, 249; development of U.S.          236,239,240,250
322 • Index

Fage, J. D., 27n                                   French Revolution. See also France: impact of,
Fairtrade Foundation, and cacao, 44                   on Spanish America, 86, 117-121, 140
Falcon, Francisco Jose Calazans, 73n, 94n          Freyre, Gilberto, 38, 38n, 147
The Fancy (privateer ship), 55                     Frieiro, Eduardo, 114n
Faoro, Raymundo (lawyer and social critic),        Fry, Joseph, & Sons, chocolate supplier, 43
   253                                             Fueser, J. J., 187-197
Far East Intelligence Bureau, 296                  Funchal, Marques do, 132n
Farriss, Nancy, 64, 64n                            Furbank, P. N., 51
Fayetteville, Arkansas, 196
Fearnside, Philip M., 237, 237n                    Gaia Foundation, 226, 230
Feijo, Diogo Antonio (paulista priest and          Gallagher, J., 148, 148n
   regent),158                                     Galvez, Jose de (1729-1787), Spanish colonial
Fernandes, Bernardo Mancano, 252n                     administrator, 80
Fernandez-Armesto, Felipe, 16, 16n                 gaming industry, 273-274, 274, 281, 284n
Ferrao, Antonio, 124n                              Ganj-i-Sawai (Indian mogul's ship), 55
Ferreira, Alexander Rodrigues (scientist), 202n    Garda-Baquero Gonzalez, Antonio, 77n, 80n
Ferreira da Camara, Manuel, 126, 127, 139,         Garcia Fuentes, Lutgardo, 78n
   141; European study tour, 131-133, 173          Garotinho,Anthony (Rio governor), 251
fertility rate, Santo Domingo, 25                  Garrido, Toni (actor), 306
financial institutions, in Macao, 281, 283         Garrison, William L. (abolitionist), 191
First National Rubber Tappers' Congress, 229       Gaspari, Elio, 236n
Fisher, H. E. S., 65, 72n                          Geggus, David, 88n
Fisher, John, 65, 80n                              Gelb, Leslie H., xix
Fisher, John Robert, 77n                           Genoa, entrepreneurs in Iberia, 20
Fitzgerald, Robert (British envoy), 82             Genovese, Eugene D., 158n
fleet system, 68-69; decline of, 76                Genovesi,Antonio (1712-1769),93,172,179;
Fleury, Jean (French pirate), 53                      on church and state, 182; mentor of Abbe
Flint, Valerie I. J., 31n                             Correa da Serra, 172, 179
Fok Kay Cheong, 279, 279n                          geographical perception, and European
Ford, Henry (Brazilian agriculture scheme),           domination, 32, 35, 71, 248
   205                                             geography. See navigation
Ford Foundation, 230, 249                          German entrepreneurs, and oceanic
forests. See also deforestation: Amazonian rain       commerce, 20
   forest, 200-201; destruction of, by             Gerth, Jeff (journalist), 284
   manufacturing, 252; environmental and           GESO (Graduate Employees and Students
   ecological concerns about, 199-217,                Organization) at Yale University, 188
   222-228; and rubber tapping, 220-222, 250;      Gibbon, Edward (1737-1794), on first-person
   Seringal Cachoeira rain forest, 230                narrative, xii
France. See also French Revolution:                Gilbert, W. S., 48,55
   administrative chaos, 133-134; and              Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of
   emancipation of Brazil, 75; privateers of, in      Slavery, Resistance and Abolition (Yale), 188
   Caribbean, 53; South American claims of,        Gilmore, Francis, impressions of Abbe Correa
   67; trade privileges, with Spain, 78,81;           da Serra, 176, 176n
   treaty rights in Cadiz (1724-1778),78; and      Girard, Albert, 78n
   War of the Spanish Succession                   global warming, and Brazilian forest fires,
   (1701-1714),77-78                                  215-217
Francisco "Chico" Mendes Foundation, 232           Godechot, Jacques, 64, 64n, 83
Franco, Itamar (Brazilian president), 247, 255     Godinho, Vitorino Magalhaes, 17n
Freches, Claude-Henri, 105n                        Goebel, Dorothy, 79n
free trade. See under trade                        gold. See under mining/mineralogy
free traders, as racists, 165                      Gold, Benjamin, 195
Freire de Andrade, Gomes (1757-1817,               Gold, Harriet (wife of Elias Boudinot), 195,
   Brazilian governor), 97-98                         196
French Group Presses de la Cite, 232               Goldberg, Whoopi (actor), 193
                                                                                 Index • 323

Goldcrest Company, 232                                118, 120, 140; intrinsic importance of,
Goldemberg, Jose (physicist), 201n, 216, 216n,        157-158
  239                                             Hall, Anthony L., 208, 208n, 210, 213, 236, 237
Gomes, Francisco Agostinho (priest), 122-123      Halperin Dongui, Tulio, 64, 64n
Gonzaga, Tomas Antonio: Brazilian                 hanging, of pirates, 58
  revolutionary, 115-116; Cartas Chilenas,        Hanson, Carl, 69n
  117, 117n; crown magistrate, 112-113            Haring, C. H., 63
Goodwin, Ralph (POW), 299                         Harlow, Vincent, 63
Goulart, Joao (Brazilian president), 249          Harvard University. See Rockefeller Center for
government: development of, in Brazil, 68-70,         Latin American Studies
  156; and Luso-Brazilian commerce,               Harvey, William, 179
  126-127; in Macao, 278                          Havinden, M. A., 27n
Grafton, Anthony, 14-15, 15n, 25, 29, 30-31       Hawaiian Islands, missionaries to, 194
Great Britain. See also England: Anglo-           Hawkins, Jack (character in Treasure Island),
  Portuguese treaties, 72; hegemony, 77-83,           53
  85, 88, 149-150; Luso-Brazilian economic        Hawkins, John (English privateer), 54, 59
  relations, 149, 162, 166; in Marxian            Hawkins, Richard (English captain), 55
  historiography, 64; neomercantilism, 80-81;     Hecht, Susanna, 200, 200n, 201, 201 n, 202,
  and piracy, 57-58; Sino-British relationship,       205,206,228,228n,232,233,234,235,236
  258,259; studied by Pombal, 95; textile         Hemming, John, lOIn, 202, 202n, 203, 204,
  trade, with Brazil, 149; and transfer of           205n
  Portuguese court to Brazil, 140-143, 145,       Hemings, Sally, Jefferson's relationship with,
  149                                                 164,175n
Greek mythology, and Orfeu, 305                   Henriques (Bahian regiment of black
Green, Ernest (Democratic fundraiser), 284           freemen),122
Green and Black's Co. (chocolatiers), 44          HERE (hospital and university employees'
Greene, Jack P., xix, xx, 62n, 63                    union) at Yale, 188
Greenlee, W. B., 201n                             Hershey, Milton Snavely (chocolatier), 43
Gross, Tony, 226, 226n, 233                       Hespanha, Antonio Manuel, 145n
Grubb, Kenneth, 205                               Hieronymite Fathers, 25
Guanches (of Canary Islands), decimation of,      Higgs, David, 175n
  18,19                                           highways. See roads
Guangzhou (Canton), ix, 259, 260                  Higiiey Indians, rebellion of, 22
Guapore (river), ix, 71,96                        Hileman, Sam, 75n
The Guardian, and Boxer affaire, 291-302          Hillhouse, James (antislavery proponent), 190
Guatemala, archaeological evidence of             Hirschman, Albert O. (economist), xx, 250
  chocolate, 39                                   Hispaniola. See also Haiti: buccaneers of, 50; as
Guerra, E, 27n                                       pattern for Caribbean development, 29-30;
Guevara, Che, and Chico Mendes, 235                  price of African slaves in, 29; and Spanish
Guimaraes, Angela, 261 n                             gold trade, 21-25; sugar trade and slavery,
Gulbenkian Foundation (Lisbon), 3                    27; Taino Indians, 23
Gunn, Geoffrey C., 259n                           historian, Boxer's specifications to be, 293-294
Guterres, Antonio (Portuguese prime               historical process, and decolonization, 65-66
  minister),285                                   historiography/historical studies: of Abbe
Gutierrez, Andrade (construction company),           Correa da Serra, 173; and archaeology, 39;
  212                                                art, 39; Atlantic system (18c), 61-89; Boxer
                                                     affaire, 291-302; Brazilian, xv, 145-168;
Haber, Stephen, 152n                                 Cambridge curriculum, 1; and Columbus
Hahn, Emily, 294n; and Charles Boxer,                quincentennial, 13-35; comparative, 63;
  294-301; China to Me (1944),300,301;               demographic, 22-23, 24; dependency
  England to Me (1949), 295; life of, 294-301;       theory, 148, 150; dimensions of, 62-63;
  The Soong Sisters (1941),295                       economic, and Atlantic commercial system,
Haiti, ix. See also Hispaniola: independence,        61-89; Eurocentric, 148; as first-person
  158; slave revolts (1790- ), xv, 76, 87, 88n,      narration, xii; food and drink, chocolate,
324 • Index

   37-44; geohistory, 53-54; of independence,      Indian Ocean, ix: linked to Atlantic Ocean by
   145-168; institutional, 63; intellectual (See      Portuguese, 16, 30; navigation of, 16-17;
   history of ideas); Marxian/semi-Marxian,           and piracy, 54
   64; of new Brazil, 245; of New Christians,      Indian Removal Act (1830), 195, 196
   182; Palmer/Godechot interpretive               Indian tribes, 251
   framework, 64; recent trends in, 62; and        indigenous populations: and Cornwall
   religious ambiguity, 183;                          Mission School, 194; decimation of, 19,
   socioeconomic/sociopolitical, of Brazil, 64,       24-25,37,147,203,204,205-206,249;
   68-70; vocation of, xi; "Yale, Slavery and         "discovery" of, 203; estimates of, 202;
   Abolition," 187-192                                exploitation of, 2-4; extinction of Jamaican
history of ideas: Enlightenment, and colonial         Indians, 24; in the "hollow frontier," 248;
   reforms, 65, 91, 96-100,109-143; Pombal            intermarriage with Europeans, 25, 98-99,
   and expulsion of the Jesuits, 91-107               101, 102; and modern gold mining, 211;
Ho, Stanley (casino king), 273-274,276, 284n          political action of, 251; in Pombal's "great
Ho Hau Wah, Edmund (Macao chief                       new dispositions," 98-99, 101; and
   executive), 263, 281                               Spaniards, 21-25
Ho Yin (Chinese senator), 263                      industrial revolution: and revival of slavery,
Hogarth, William (artist, 1697-1764),59               151, 166; and urbanization, 64, 249
Holden, Robert H., 151 n                           inflatable "obscene device," 260
"hollow frontier" of Brazil, 204, 209-213, 248     inflation, and Real Plan, 247
Honduras, Bay of, raided by Blackbeard, 54         Inglis, Douglas, 80n
Hong Kong: under British rule, 257;                INPE (Brazilian Institute for Space Research),
   establishment of, 265-266; in memoirs of           215,238,239,313
   Boxer and Hahn, 299-302; relationship           Inquisition, and New Christians, 177
   with China, 272                                 Institute for Advanced Study (Princeton), 249
Horace, 47                                         Institute of Amazon Studies. See lEA
Huberman, Toni, xix                                Institute of Latin American Studies (London),
Humboldt, Alexander von, 174, 175                    xx
Hureyev, Vasyl (Ukraine industry minister), 285    intellectual history, 109-143; and
hygiene, and saunas, 178                              implementation of ideas, 146-148
                                                   intendant system, 80
Ian-kuong-Iam, 265n                                Inter-American Development Bank, 228, 229,
lEA (Instituto de Estudos Amazonicos), 230,           237
   233,234                                         Internet, Guardian article on Boxer, 292
IMF (International Monetary Fund)" 224,            interracial marriage/sex, 98; concerns about,
   244,252                                            in New Haven, 192; encouraged: by Jose
immigration: Asian and European, to Brazil,           Bonifacio, 98; under Pombal, 98; in Macao,
   249; and maintenance of European                   264; metallurgy analogy, 164
   settlements, 25                                 Israel, Jonathan, 263n
Imperial Astronomical Bureau (China), 270          Isthmus of Panama, ix, 54
imperialism. See also colonialism: in Camoes       Italian entrepreneurs, and oceanic commerce,
   Lusiads, xiv-xv; and commercial                    20
   development, 66-76; formal vs. informal,
   148; historiography of, 62                      Jackson, Andrew (U.S. president), and Indian
imports. See also exports: French, into Spanish       Removal Act (1830), 195, 196
   America, 78; grain, by Portugal, 71; and        Jacobson, Nils, 85n
   worker displacement, 254                        Jamaica: extinction of Indians, 24; and piracy,
income: per capita, in Macao, 281; and                54
   prosperity,248                                  Jansc6, Istvan, IOn
independence: Brazil, declared (1822), xv,         Japan, ix, 33; expels Portuguese (17c), 263-264;
   145-168; recognized by Portugal (1825),            investment in Brazilian mining, 212
   145, 167; and colonialism, 146-148; effects     Japanese military, and Charles Boxer, 298
   of, 146-148; of Haiti, 158; Jefferson's view    Jardin des Plantes (Paris), 174, 175
   of, 71; student revolutionaries (Brazil),       Jefferson, Thomas (1743-1826): and Abbe
   110-111                                            Correa da Serra, xv, 153, 159, 171-185;
                                                                                 Index • 325

   admirer of Brazilian experience, 158, 159;      Lagerfeld, Steven, xix
   attitudes toward S.A. independence              Lam, Domingos (Macao bishop), 271, 272,
   movements, xv, 71; correspondence with             273,288
   Vendek, 109-110; extramarital affairs, 164,     Lange, Curt, 114n
   174, 175n; orders capture of Derna, 52;         Langley, Lester D., 88n
   president of American Philosophical             Lapa, Manuel Rodrigues, 112n, 113n, 114n,
   Society, 176; visit from Elias Boudinot (aka       117n
   Buck Oowatie; Cherokee), 195                    Las Casas, Bartolome de (1474-1566),23,25,
Jesuits. See under monastic orders                    26,32,37
Jews: ancestry of Correa da Serra, 185; forced    latex, as forest protection, 201
   conversion of, in Portugal, 177; Luis da       Latin America, in British history curriculum:
   Cunha's views on, 94; Ribeiro Sanches and,         as academic subject, 3-4, 14-15; stereotypes
   178, 182-183; role of Commodore Levy in            of, 14
   U.S. Navy and in saving Monticello, 183;       Laverger, Madame, 172
   synagogue in New York, founded by              Ie Clerc, Fran~ois (Jambe de Bois; privateer),
   Brazilian Jews, 184                                54
Joao V, 96, 139-140, 149                          Leepson, Marc, 184n
Joao VI, ISS, 166; as prince regent, 143          Leff, Nathaniel H., 152n
Jobim, Antonio Carlos (Tom), 1,9,244              Leite, Serafim, 97n
Jocelyn, Simeon (pastor), 191                     Lendl, Ivan (tennis player), 193
John Paul II (pope), and Columbus                 Levy, Michael, 184
   quincentennial, 14                             Levy, Rachel Phillips, 184
Jose I (1714-1777), attempted regicide, 103       Levy, Rebecca, 184
Jose de Portugal, Fernando, 123-124, 127, 140     Levy, Uriah Phillips, 183, 184
Junior, Mendes (construction company), 212        Lewis, Bernard, xvii
Junk, Wolfgang J., 212n                           liberation theology. See under Catholic church
Junot, Jean-Andoche (genera!), 145                Lima Junior, Augusto de, 114n
]uruna, Mario (Xavante chief and                  Linconshire Regiment, 297
   congressman),251                               Lindley, Thomas, 123, 123n
Jussieu, Antoine Laurent de, 174                  Lindt, Rudolph (chocolatier), 43
                                                  Linnaeus Society, 173
Kasten, Robert W., Jr. (U.S. senator), 229        Linne (Linnaeus), Carl von (1707-1778),38
Kayap6 tribe (Brazil), 251                        Lisboa, Luiz Carlos, 263n
Keith, Henry R., 124n, 140n                       Lisbon. See also Portugal: Academy of Sciences,
Kimura, Shiroshici (Japanese consul in Hong           124, 124n, 129,132,142, 153, 159,172, 173,
  Kong),300                                           175, compared with American Philosophical
King's College, London, Cam6es chair, 293             Society, 176; antislavery sentiments of, 129;
Kissinger, Henry, compared to Metternich, 158         decline of, in commerce, 75-76; discourse
Klein, Herbert S., 152n                               on mining effects, 132; earthquake (1755),
Knox, Thomas W., xxi                                  102-103; Gulbenkian Foundation, 3-4; and
Kobayashi, Sergio, 141 n                              oceanic commerce, 15-21; political change,
Kreen-Akrore tribe (Brazil), 204, 214-215, 227        172-1173; political currents in, 172-1173;
Krenak, Ailton (human rights activist), 251           slave population of, 26
Kropp, Gerhard (hotelier), 274-275                Lisle, Peter. See Reis, Murat
Kubitschek, Juscelino (Brazilian president),      Liss, Peggy K., 14,32, 32n, 85n
  207,249                                         literacy: and "Chico" Mendes, 222-223; work
Kuethe, Allan, 80n                                    of Oxfam, 226
Kulthum, Umm (singer), xvi                        Literary Society of Rio de Janeiro, III n, 118,
Kung, W. H. (Chinese prime minister), 295             119n, 138
Kuok-cheong, Antonio Ng (Macao legislator),       livestock: and ecological transformation, 24,
  275,287                                             50; poor survival in West Africa, 27
                                                  Livingston, Philip (slave trader), 189
labor unions. See unions                          Livingstonian Professorship of Divinity (Yale),
Laf6es, duke of (Toao Carlos de Bragan~a),            189
   172,173-174                                    Locke, John (1632-1704),92,172
326 • Index

Lockhart, James, 63                               Macedo, Jorge Borges de, 18n, 28n
logging, and deforestation, 206                   Machado, David Mendez, 183-184
London: High Court of Admiralty, 56;              Maciel, Jose Alvares, Ill, 111n, 120, 138
   Institute of Latin American Studies, xx;       Madagascar, and piracy, 54
   King's College, Cam6es chair, 293; National    Madeira (island), ix, 18-19,21,27,28
   Maritime Museum, 53; "Pirates" exhibit         Madeira (river), ix, 71, 96
   (1992),48; Public Record Office (PRO),         Madison, James (U.S. president), and Abbe
   82n, 314; Royal Geographical Society, 202;       Correa da Serra, 175
   Royal Society, 172, 173; Theatre Royal in      Magalhaes, Antonio Carlos (aka ACM;
   Drury Lane, 55; University of London, xx         Brazilian politician), 253
Long Ben. See Avery, Henry                        magazines. See media
long eighteenth century, and Luso-Atlantic        Mahar, Dennis J., 206, 206n
   development, 66-76                             Maia e Barbalho, Jose Joaquim (Vendek),
Lopes, Antonio, 95n                                 meeting with Jefferson, 109-110, lIOn, 159
Lopes, Francisco Antonio, 114n                    Malacca, conquered by the Dutch, 263
Lopez, Robert S., 28n                             Malagrida, Gabriel (Jesuit), 104
Lorena, Bernardo Jose de, 136                     Malamud, Carlos D., 78n
Lo Shiu-hing, 283n, 287                           Malaspina, Marcello (1689-1757),41
Low, Edward (Boston pirate), 55                   Mamore (river), 71, 96
Low Countries. See Dutch                          Mancera, Marques de, 41
Ludwig, Daniel K., 205                            Manchester, Alan K., 141n
Luis Pinto. See Coutinho, Luis Pinto de Sousa     Mandervell, Richard (ship boy), 56
   (1735-1804)                                    "Manifesto of the Portuguese Nation;'
Lula da Silva, Luiz Inacio (b. 1945), 225, 238,     155-156, 156n
   241n; elected president of Brazil (2002),      Mann, Horace (1796-1859),42
   250; political rise of, 255                    Manuel I (1495-1521; king), claims suzerainty
Lusiads (Cam6es), xiv-xv, 111,268-269,293           of Africa/Asia, 32, 33
Luso-Atlantic commercial system: collapse of,     Mao Zedong (Chinese Communist), 271, 295
   75-76; in long 18c, 66-76; and Pombal,         maps. See cartography
   98-100                                         Marchant, Alexander, 111 n, 115n
Luso-Brazilian empire, 75, 86, 109-143,           Margolis, Mac, 240
   145-168                                        Maria I of Portugal, 172
Lustosa, Isabel, 141 n                            Maria Ana of Austria (queen consort of
Lutzenberger, Jose (agronomist), 226, 227,          Portugal), 95
   230,239                                        Maria Theresa (empress of Austria), 95
Lynch, John, 65, 85n,88n                          Mariana Vit6ria (queen consort of Portugal),
Lyne, Philip (pirate), 49                           103
                                                  maritime commerce. See oceanic commerce;
Mably, Gabriel Bonnot de (abbe de)                  Transatlantic commerce
  (1709-1785), 116, 116n, 118                     Marques, Alfredo Pinheiro, 31-33, 33n
Macao, ix, 257-289; Basic Law, 272-273, 275,      Marques de Esquilache, 79
  278-279,287; gaming industry, 273-274;          Marques de Pombal. See Pombal
  role of, in U.S. campaign financing, 285n;      marriage, between Europeans and
  transfer to China, 272-273, 275, 278-279,         Amerindians, 25
  287; underworld trade, 266-267, 273-276,        Marshall, Peter (British academic), 302
  283-286                                         Martins, Elson (Varadouro editor), 225
Macao Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Sino-          martyrs/martyrdom: Chico Mendes, 220, 253;
  Portuguese mediator, 280                          Christians, of Macao, 268; Francis Xavier,
Macao Formula, 279                                  267,269
Macao Journalists Club, 287                       Marxism: of F. H. Cardoso, 244, 249; and
Macao Tourism and Entertainment                     historiography, 64; Tavora-Mendes
  Corporation (STDM), 273, 281                      connection, 222
Macaulay, Thomas Babington (1800-1859), xii       Mascarenhas, Jose D. (Supreme Justice), 103
Macedo, Edir (pastor), 251                        Mason, Richard, 204
Macedo, Helder, xix                               matelotage, 56
                                                                                    Index • 327

Mateus, Rui, 284n                                    Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, 302
Mathias, Herculano Gomes, III n, 115n                Mello, Evaldo Cabral de, 162n, 168n
Mato Grosso, colonial development, 71                Mello e Sousa, Laura (historian), 245
Matos, Luis de, 31, 31 n                             Melo e Castro, Martinho de (secretary of
Mattoso, Katia M. de Queir6s, 121 n                     state),75n
Mawe, John, 132n                                     Mendes, Cecelia, 233
Maxwell, Kenneth, 62n, 67n, 72n, 73n, 83n,           Mendes, Elenira, 235
  92n, 95n, 99n, 127n, 137n, 179n, 250n,             Mendes, Francisco (Chico), 219-241
  255n, 277n; childhood, 59; undergraduate           Mendes, Ilzamar (widow of Chico), 232
  life, 1-2; youthful travels, 2-3; earliest         Mendes, Joaquim, 233
  writings of, 3; studies in Lisbon, 3-4;            Mendes, Sandino, 236
  doctoral work at Princeton, 4-5;                   Mendes Foundation, 232
  postdoctoral study Columbia University, 4,         Mendon<;a, Marcos Carneiro de. See Carneiro
  9-10; falling in love with Brazil, 5-10,             de Mendon<;a
  305-309; historical vocation of, xi-xvii;          Mendon<;a Furtado, Francisco Xavier de
  nostalgia for Brazil, 305-309                         (Pombal's brother), 97, 98
Maxwell, Robert (media tycoon), 284n                 Mendon<;:a Pina e Proen<;:a, Martinho de
Maxwell, William (journalist), 301                     (philosopher, 1693-1743), 92
Maya: early chocolate growers, 39;                   Menges, Chris, 232
  presentation of, to Prince Philip, 37              mercantilism, 76-83, 96; decline of: and
Maya Gold (chocolate bar), 44                          decolonization, 125, 148; and opening
Maynard, Robert (Lt.), and Blackbeard, 51              Brazilian ports, 150; Pombal's version of,
Mazzara, Richard A., 75n                               73, 100-104; Spanish neomercantilism, 80;
McCain, John (U.S. senator), 291                       of Azeredo Coutinho, 127-128; defined, 73
McDowell, Edwin, 232n                                Mercedarians (missionaries in Brazil), 203
MDB. See Brazilian Democratic Movement               mercury poisoning, from gold mining, 211,
media, 9, 247; AP (Associated Press), on Yale          251
  polemic, 188; Boston Courier, on Yale's «black     mesa do bem comum (commercial
  college," 192; church-owned, 251; CNN, on            association), 101, 103
  Yale polemic, 188; Connecticut Journal,            metallurgy. See also mining/mineralogy
  editorial against «black college:' 192; Discover   Metternich (prince; 1773-1859), compared to
  magazine, 232; growth and influence of, in           Henry Kissinger, 158
  Brazil, 246-247; Guardian, 291-292, 302;           Mexico, ix, 13, 14,35,37,43, 70, 73, 76, 78, 154,
  Harmony Gold Productions, 232; HBO, 232;             155,202,252,262; and Bourbon reforms,
  Hong Kong Sing Tao Jim Pao, 284n;                    80; silver mines, 53; socioeconomic
  Houghton Mifflin (publishers), 232; JN Film,         interpretations of, 64-65; as treasure port,
  232; Litchfield (Connecticut) Eagle, 194;            54; United States recognition of, 160
  Little, Brown (publishers), 232; in Macao,         Milk, Stephen, 205n
  287; Macao Journalists Club, 287;                  Miller, Hunter, 258n
  Manchester Guardian WeekI)!, 293;                  Miller, John Chester, 165n
  Middletown (Connecticut) Gazette, 187, 192;        Miller, Joseph C., 76n, 203n
  Nation magazine, 233; New Yorker, 294, 295,        Miller, Samuel J., 93n, 105, 105n
  301; New York Times, on Yale polemic, 188;         The Mimic Men (Naipaul), 30, 30n, vi
  Shanghai Evening Post and Mercury, 295;            Minas Conspiracy (1788-1789), 115-117,
  TDM-TV (Macao), 281; Turner                          130-131, 140; and D. Rodrigo, 138; and
  Broadcasting System, 232; Twentieth                  Ferreira da Camara, 131-132; and French
  Century Fox, 232; Vanity Fair magazine, 232,         Revolution, 118-120; Jefferson's comments
  233; Wall Street Journal, on Yale polemic,           on, 109-110; lack of trade policies, 128; and
  188; Warner Brothers, 232; Xinhua News               Luso-Brazilian empire, 142; U.S. as model
  Agency (China), 276, 280, 281, 286, 288              fOf, 109-110, 116, 116n
Medici, Cosimo de' (1642-1723) (chocolate            Minas Gerais: early gold exploitation, 70; gold
  addict),41                                           rush in, 248-249; mining reforms in,
medicine: contributions of New Christians,             133-136; revolutionary intellectuals,
  177; and hygiene studies, 179; use of                112-120
  chocolate, 38                                      Mindlin, Jose, 141 n
328 • Index

Minguet, Charles, 131 n                             Moraes, Vinkius de (playwright), Orfeu da
mining/mineralogy: aluminum, 211; Carajas             Conceicao,306
  project, 210-212, 229, 240; gold, 220;            Moravian missionaries, educational
  coinage, 53; and decimation of the                  endeavors, 194; opinion on interracial
  Caribbean, 21-25; discovery of, in Minas            marriage, 195
  Gerais, 248; effect of, on Portuguese             Morgan, Henry (1635-1688),47-48,58; vs.
  domestic manufacturing, 71; exploitation            Exquemelin, 47
  of: by Portugal, 71; by Spain, 70; and            Morner, Magnus, lOin
  expulsion of Jesuits, 203-204; garimpagem,        Morse, Samuel F. B. (defender of slavery), 190
  210-211, 220; mining of, in Hispaniola, 22,       Mota, Carlos Guilherme, 121n, 122n, 152n, 162n
  24,27; and mining reforms, 133-136; and           Movement of Landless Rural Workers (MST),
  oceanic commerce, 20; iron, 135, 139,210;           251-252,254,314
  precious metals, role of, in mercantilism,        Mpinda (African slave port), 26
  73; reform movements, 132-136, 134-135,           MST. See Movement of Landless Rural
  141; silver: coinage, 53; exploitation of: by      Workers
  Portugal, 70, 71; by Spain, 53; and oceanic       multinational corporations, and Amazon
  commerce, 20,79,261; smuggling of, 81;              development, 236, 237
  Spanish monopoly of, 77                           multinationalism/multiracialism, among
Mintz, SidneyW., 151, 151n                            pirates, 57
Miranda, Francisco de (1750-1816),84-85             Muratori, Ludovico Antonio (1672-1750),93,
Miranda, Joaquim Veloso, 136                          93n
Mittermeier, Russell, 202n                          Murdoch, Rupert (media tycoon), 284
Modyford, Thomas, 47                                Murphy, Richard (U.S. ambassador), 236
monarchy, Luso-Brazilian, 109-143, 145,245.         Museu Naval (Madrid), 33
  See also under Braganc;a monarchy
monastic orders: Augustinians, in Asia, 270;        Nam Kwong trading company, 280
  Carmelites, missionaries, in Brazil, 203;         Nascimento, Edson Arantes do (Pele), 246
  Dominicans: in China, 270; Montesinos and         National Council of Rubber Tappers, 230
  Las Casas, 25; present from Mayas to Prince       nationalism: in Brazil, 141; legitimation of,
  Philip, 37; Franciscans: in Asia, 270;               146-148,156
  establish Belem, 203; Jesuits (Society of         National Maritime Museum (London), 48,53
  Jesus): in Asia, 263, 267, 269-270; in Beijing,   National Trade Union Confederation. See
  270; in Brazil, 203; and chocolate, 42;             CUT
  Church of Sao Paulo in Macao, 268; and            Natural Resources Defense Council, 227
  cultural adaptation, 270-271; educational         Nau, Jean-David (Franc;ois l'Olonnais, pirate),
  program of, 93n; Jesuit college in Macao,           50-51
  271; persecution/expulsion of, under              navigation. See also exploration; roads:
  Pombal, 101,42, 74, 91-107, 100, 105,271;           Atlantic Ocean, linked to Indian Ocean by
  royal decree against, 104; Sergipe mill             Portuguese, 16, 30; "choke points"
  production, 68; suppression of: in the              controlled by Portugal, 34; "Great Ship from
  Amazon, 91-107; by the papacy, 271; in              Amacon," 262; Navigation Acts (British),
  Rome, 172                                            127; Portuguese expertise in, 16-17,32-33,
money: chocolate as "happie money," 40;               261, 262; Sagres school myth, 31; strategic,
  laundering, and gaming industry, 284n               by freebooters, 54; time/distance
Monge, Manuel (Macao security head), 277              relationship, 27
monopoly companies, 99-101                          Nazareth, Elenira Rezende de Souza, 235-236,
Monroe, James (U.S. president; 1758-1831),            236n
  159                                               neomercantilism. See mercantilism
Monroe Doctrine, 159                                Nestle, Henri, and chocolate, 43
Monteiro, Ayala, 3                                  Netherlands. See Dutch
Montesinos, Antonio de (Dominican priest, d.        Neves, Tancredo (Brazilian president), 229
  1545),25                                          New Christians, 92; origins of, 177; legal
Monticello (Jefferson's residence,                    impediments removed, 179; links to
  Charlottesville, Virginia): Abbe Correa da          Monticello, 183-185; role in Portugal, 178.
  Serra room, 176; saved by Levy family, 183        New Granada, Comunero rebellion (1781),84
                                                                                 Index • 329

New Haven, Connecticut: Amistad affair, 188;      Pan, Antonio (business executive), 284
  attempt to establish "negro college," 191       Panama: disease and death in, 25; pirate
New Haven Amistad Committee (Yale), 188, 192          attack, 50; and Spanish gold trade, 21
New Spain. See Mexico                             Panama, Isthmus of, treasure port, 54
newspapers. See media                             Paraiba Valley (Brazil), 3
Newton,Isaac (1642-1727),92,172                   pardos, 119, 122, 245n
New World: effects of European expansion,         Pares, Richard, 63
  21-25; first monarchy, 142-143;                 Parry, John H., 148, 148n; John Parry
  planisphere, by de la Cosa, 33                     Memorial Lecture (Harvard), 311
New York Public Library, Columbian                paulistas (residents of Sao Paulo), 70
  exhibition (1992), 15                           PCdoB (Communist Party of Brazil), 225, 235
Ngai, Gary, 288                                   pedagogy: Jefferson's views of, 180; of
Noel, Charles C., 76n                                Oratorians, 93n; science and physics
Nogueira, Franco (foreign minister), 279, 279n       introduced, 178-179; Verney's theories, 93-94
Norman, Samuel (British captain), 56              Pedreira, Jorge Miguel Viana, 125n
North Africa: early modern trade relations, 19;   Pedro I (emperor of Brazil), 153-154, 167,245
  as pirate haven, 52                             Pedro II (king of Portugal), 167
North America: in British curriculum, 1;          Peebles, 1. A. R. (journalist), 296
  democratic revolution: impact of, on Brazil,    Peking (Beijing), 257, 264, 267, 270
  114-117; socioeconomic interpretations of,      Pele (Nascimento, Edson Arantes do), 246
  64-65; map, ix                                  Pereira, Angelo, 139n
Northrupt, John P., 195                           Pereira de Melo, Miguel (photojournalist), 253
Northrupt, Sarah Bird (wife of John Ridge),       Peres, Marcos Flaminio, xix
  195,196                                         Perestrello, Bartolomeu (ca. 1397-ca. 1457;
Nova Colonia do Sacramento (est. 1680),67            Columbus's father-in-law), 18
Novais, Fernando, 64, 64n, 148                    Pernambuco: commercial and political
Novais de Almeida, Manuel Jose de, on slave          development of, 68-69, 156; conspiracy and
  emancipation, 118-119, 128, 130                    revolt of, 161-162, 167
Nugent, Stephan, 205n                             Peru, ix, 14,41,53,54,73,85,86,155,205,219,
Nunes de Mello, J. A. S., 212n                       262,265: and Bourbon reforms, 80; Tupac
                                                     Amaru rebellion (1780-1781),84
Obookiah (Opukaha'ia), Henry, 193, 194            Peter, Daniel (chocolatier), 43
oceanic commerce, 15-21,30-31,66-76               Peter Martyr (chronicler), 40
Okamoto, Yoshitomo, 263n                          Peterson, Merrill D., 184n
Olmecs, earliest chocolate growers, 39            Phelan, John Leddy, 84n
l'Olonnais, Fran~ois (Jean-David Nau, pirate),    The Philadelphia (American frigate), 52
   50-51                                          Philadelphia College of Medicine, 178
Onis, Harriet de, 38n                             Philip II (1527-1598), king of Spain, xiv
Oowatie, Buck. See Boudinot, Elias                physics, in educational curriculum, 178-179
opium, imported to china from India, 265          Pike, Ruth, 19n, 28n
Opium War, and international trade, 257-258       Pine Log, Georgia, 194
Oratorians (Oratoria de S. Felipe de Nery), 93,   Pinheiro, Fhivio, xix
   93n                                            Pinheiro, Wilson (unionist), 225
Orfeu (Thracian poet/musician), 305. See also     Pinto, Lucio Flavio (journalist), 212, 212n,
   Black Orpheus                                     236,236n
Orient. See Asia                                  Pinto, Virgilio Noya, 72n
Ottoni, Jose Eloi, 135                            Pinto de Coutinho, Luis. See under Coutinho
Ovando, Nicolas de (1460-1518), 22                Piperni, Geronimo, 41
Owens, L. R., 51                                  pirates/piracy, 47-59; clothing, 49; code of
Oxfam (Oxford Committee for Famine                   conduct, 54-55; cross-dressing, among
   Relief), 44, 222n, 226, 233                       pirates, 56; etymology of"buccaneers," 50;
                                                     flags, 55; Jolly Roger, rules of battle under,
Palmares (fugitive slave settlements), 80            55; legally distinct from privateers, 49-50;
Palmer, Robert Roswell, 64, 64n, 83, 121n            pregnancy among, 57; self-governance of,
Pamlico Sound, N.C., 51                              55; sodomy among, 56
330 • Index

Pitta, Celso (Sao Paulo mayor), 246                  commerce, 15-21, 17; Pombal's
plague, in Europe and New World, 25                  preeminence, 91-107; revolution against
PIon (French publishers), 232                        Spain (1640), 156, 166,264,278; settlement
PMDB. See Brazilian Democratic Movement              of archipelagoes and Madeira, 18; slave
Polamazonia program, and deforestation, 208          importation, 26; South American
Pole, J. R., 62n, 63                                 colonization, 67; South Atlantic focus (17c),
political activism, in Brazil, 250-253               66-67; suppression of monastic orders, 271;
political change: in Brazil, 166-168, 225,           trade: Asian, 260-263; and foreign policy,
   229,244-247,244-250; and liberation               71,260-263; policies, 73-74; treaties, 69;
   theology, 224; in Lisbon, 172-173; in             transfer of Macao to China, 278-280;
   Pernambuco, 68-69, 156, 161-162, 167;             transfer of monarchy to Brazil, xiii-xiv, xv,
   protonationalism, 83-89, 115; and race, in        140-143,145,149
   Brazil, 246; student activity University of    Portuguese (language): contrast between that
   Coimbra, 110-112; and University of Sao           of Lisbon and Brazil, xiii, 4; and Oratorian
   Paulo, 249                                        pedagogy, 93
political corruption, 283-285, 284n; in Macao,    Portuguese (people): literary impact of, 31,
   287; in U.S., 285n                                31 n; perceptions of, by Chinese, 260;
political informers, 6-7,224,225                     unrecognized in Columbian
political protest, in Macao, 287                     quincentennial, 30
political science, development of, 72             Portuguese-Atlantic system, 71
political theory (18c), 93-94,109-117             Portuguese Revolution (1974), xii
Pombal, Marques de (1699-1782): colonial          Posthumus, Nicolaas Wilhelmus, 124n
   reforms of (enlightened absolutism), 65,       poverty and prosperity, in modern Brazil,
   74, 96-100; creator of Royal Treasury,            247-248,307
   138; Dedufiio chronolOgica e analitica         Prado Junior, Caio, 124n
   (Chronological and analytical deduction),      Praia Grande (Macao), 267-269
   105; established College of Nobles, 133;       precious metals. See under mining/mineralogy
   and expulsion of Jesuits, 42, 74, 91-107,      Prestes, Luis Carlos (Prestes Column), and
   172,203; and Lisbon earthquake (1755),            Tcivora,234-235
   102-103; Maxwell's biography of, xii;          price controls, opposition to, 126
   mercantilistic techniques of, 72-74,           Princeton University, xvi, 3-4; Art Museum, 39
   99-100; opposition to, 101-107; Relafciio      Principe, ix. See also Sao Tome: sugar
   abreviada . .. , 105, 105n; summary of            production, 18
   policies of, 106-107; Voltaire' reaction to    privateers, legally distinct from pirates, 49-50
   terror of, 104-105                             Protestants. See also evangelicals: in Macao,
Ponte, Antonio Pires da Silva, 112                   265,271
population: diversity of (Macao), 281-283;        PT (Workers' Party), of Brazil, 225, 226, 250,
   migration and deforestation, 207, 212; and        255,314
   racial diversity (Brazil), 119, 164,245-247    publishers. See media
populism, of Pedro I, 153                         Puerto Rico: extinction of Indians, 24; and
Porter, Jonathan, 261n                               Spanish gold trade, 21; Taino Indians, 23
Porto Santo (island), 18, 19                      Puhle, Hans-Jiirgen, 85n
Port Royal, Jamaica, 48,50                        Putnam, Samuel, 38n
Portugal, ix. See also navigation: anti-Jesuit    Puttnam, David, 232
   campaign, 105; Asian explorations, 32-33;
   Asian trade, 260-264; Brazilian empire, 67;    Qiying (Chinese imperial commissioner), 257,
   cacao trade, 43; commercial system (18c),        258
   66-67; as dependent of Brazil, xv, 155;        Quakers, as chocolatiers, 42, 43
   displaces Venice as importers, 34; domestic    Queen Anne's Revenge (pirate ship), 58
   manufacturing cycles of, 71; impact of         Quelch, John (pirate), 58
   American Revolution, 85-86; intellectual       Querard, Joseph-Marie, 131n
   climate (18c), 92-96,177; Jesuits: as
   educators, 93; expulsion of, 104; and Macao,   rabbits, introduced in Porto Santo, 18-19
   257,259-264,276-280; navigation and            race: black population in Brazil, 119-120; in
   exploration, 16,30-35,260; oceanic                Brazil (18c), 119, 120, 121, 124,245;
                                                                                 Index • 331

    diversity ('(unclassified ones"), 245;          religious shrines, in China/Macao, 258
    integration and assimilation: encouraged        Remini, Robert V., 195n
   by Bonifacio, 164-165; in Macao, 281-283;        Renshaw, Laura, 222
    under Pombal, 98; and interracial               republicanism. See also Minas Conspiracy: in
    marriage/sex, 98, 192, 194, 195,264;               Brazil, 136-143, 156-157
    perceptions of: in China, 260; in Macao,        Revkin, Andrew, 222, 222n, 223, 227-228, 231,
   281-283; pluralism, obstacles to, 253-254;          231n,232,233,236
   and poverty, 247-248; and self-definition,       revolutionary movements, 83-89, 109-143,
   245n                                                154; antimonarchist, 156; avoidance of, in
Racine, Karen, 85n                                     Brazil, 154; Brazilian, 64) 155-156;
racism: of Adams, against South Americans,             Metternich's counterrevolutionary
    160; British colonial, 301; demise Cornwall        interventionism, 158
   Foreign Mission School, 196-197; and             Ribeiro Sanches, Ant6nio Nunes. See under
   educational reforms, 179-180; of free               Sanches
   traders, 165; of Silva Lisboa, Jose da           Ricardo, David (economist, 1772-1823),72
   (1756-1835), 165                                 Ricci, Matteo (Jesuit), 257, 261, 269, 270
Rackam, John (Calico Jack), 54, 55, 56, 57,59       Rich, Bruce (environmental lobbyist), 227
railroads, 212; Carajas-Sao Luis, 212, 229;         Ridge, John (Cherokee), 194, 196
   Madeira-Mamore, 205                              Ridge, Major (aka kah-nung-da-tle-ghe;
Raiol, Domingos Antonio, 167, 167n                     Cherokee), 194-195; and Indian Removal
Ramsden, James (scientific instrument                  Act (1830),196; slave owner, 195
   merchant), 174                                   Rio de Janeiro, ix, 7; created as bishopric
ranching/ranchers: assassination of Chico              (1670),67; Maxwell's first visit, 7-9
   Mendes, 219, 231; and deforestation,             Rio de la Plata, ix: and Bourbon reforms, 80;
   206-209,211, 214, 215, 220; encouraged, in          Spanish-Portuguese legacy, 67; United
   Acre, 221; encroachment on rubber                   States recognition of, 160-161
   tapping, 219, 223; Ilzamar Mendes (widow         Rio Grande do SuI, economic growth of,
   of Chico), 241; socioeconomic impact of, in         246-247
   Amazonia, 220-222, 248                           Ritchie, Robert C., 48, 48n
Rau, Virginia, 18n, 28n                             Rizopoulos, Nicholas X., xix
Raynal, Guillaume-Thomas- Fran~ois (abbe)           Rizzini, Carlos, 141 n
   (1713-1796),111, Illn, 116, 118, 131, 134        roads: and Acre's development, 221-222, 241;
Read, Mary (pirate), 56-57, 59                         and Brazilian deforestation, 205-207,
Reagan, Ronald (U.S. president), 228                   209-210; and ecological disaster, 249;
Real Plan (currency reform), 243, 247-248;             motivations for building, 237; trans-
   and F. H. Cardoso's political future,               Amazonian highway, 207
   254-255; and economic stabilization, 254;        Roberts, Bartholomew ('Black Bart"
   and recession, 255                                  (1682-1722),49,55
Recueil de Loix Constitutives des Etats- Un is de   Robertson, William, 114n, 131, 131n
   l'Amerique, 116, 116n.                           Robinson, R. H., 148, 148n
Redford, Robert (actor), 232, 237                   Robinson Crusoe (Defoe), 59
Redi, Francesco (1626-1697), inventor of            Rocha, Jan, 241 n
   chocolate flavorings, 41                         Rocha Vieira, Vasco (Macao governor),
Rediker, Marcus, 48, 48n                               276-278
Red Sea, ix, explored by Portuguese, 30             Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies
Reis, Murat (pirate), 52                               (Harvard University), David, xx, 311; John
religion. See also Christianity: Chinese,              Parry Memorial Lecture, 311
   in Macao, 267; commercialization of,             Rodger, Nicholas A. M., 48, 48n
   271; Confucius and Christianity, 270;            Rodney, Ceasar (ambassador), 154
   evangelicals, and sociopolitical action,         Rodrigues, Amalia (singer), xvi
   251; missionaries, in China, 258; protected      Rodrigues, Carlos (evangelical congressman),
   under Macao's Basic law, 272; and science,         251
   in China, 270; survival of, in Macao,            Rodrigues, Jose Hon6rio, 75n, 162n
   286-288                                          Rodrigues de Brito, Joao (economist), 126, 127
religious freedom/toleration, 178, 179, 184         Rogers, Woodes (scourge of pirates), 58-59
332 • Index

Rogozinski, Jan, 51, SIn, 56, 56n                   Sassoon, Victor, 295
Rosenblat, Angel, 22                                Sauer, Carl 0., 22, 22n10, 23, 24
Rouse, Irving, 22, 23, 23n                          saunas, and hygiene, 178
Rowntrees (chocolatiers), 42                        Saunders, A. C. de C. M., 26n
Royal Geographical Society (London), 202            Say, J. B. (economist, 1767-1832), 126
Royal Navy, and chocolate, 42                       Schall von Bell, Johan Adam (1591-1666),270
Royal Society (London), 172, 173                    Schlesinger, Arthur, 195n
rubber: in Caribbean, 23; early use of, 23;         Schmitt, Eric (journalist), 284
  market for, and price supports, 239-240;          Schneider, Ronald, 247
  "wars" in Acre, 220-222                           Schneider, Susan, 103n
rubber tappers, 229, 230; See also Mendes,          Schonhorn, Manuel, 51 n
  "Chico": empate (organized showdown),             Schoultz, Lars, 160n, 161n
  223, 230; grassroots political movement of,       Schultz, Kirsten, 141n
  250; immigration to Bolivia, 221; struggles       Schwartz, Adriano, xix
  of, in Brazil, 205, 220-241                       Schwartz, Alan U. (lawyer), 232
Rubin, Robert (U.S. Treasury Secretary), 244        Schwartz, Stuart B., 63, 68n
Ruggieri, Michele de (1543-1607),269,270            Schwartzman, Stephen (anthropologist), 227,
Rural Democratic Union (UDR), 214, 224,                228,229,230,232,233,236
  229,231,237,238,314                               science: of Jefferson and Abbe Correa da Serra,
Russell-Wood,A. J. R., 7, 7n, 68n                      174; of Schall, 270; and religion, in China,
                                                       270; at University of Coimbra, 179
Sa Benevides, Salvador Correia de                   scientific revolution, 181-182
   (1602-1686),302; Boxer's biography of, 293       Selkirk, Alexander (castaway), 59
Sa Betencourt, Jose de, 131-132, 136                separation of church and state, in Correa da
Sade, The Marquis de (Comte Donatien                   Serra and Jefferson's views, 182
   Alphonse Fran<;ois de Sade, 1740-1814),          Seringal Cachoeira rain forest, 230
   chocolate lover, 41                              Serra, Jose (Brazilian presidential candidate),
Saint-Domingue, ix. See Haiti                          250
saints. See Augustine; Xavier                       Serrao, Joaquim Verissimo, 94n
Salles, Fritz Teixeira de, 114n                     Serra Pelada, Brazil, gold mining, 210-211
salt tax, 133                                       Serro do Frio (Brazilian Diamond District),
Salvador, Bahia, ix, 6                                 139
Salvador, Vicente do (1564-ca. 1639),248            Setzer, Alberto, 215n
Sampaio, Jorge (Portuguese president), 270          Seven Years'War (1756-1763),77
Sanches, Antonio Nunes Ribeiro (philosopher,        Seville: Amerindian slaves in, 26; decline of
   1699-1783),92, 180n; career and writings            trade monopoly, 76; Genoese merchants,
   of, 177-178; on church-state relationship,          20; and oceanic commerce, 19
   182; educated at University of Coimbra,          Seychelles, 33
   180; genealogical connection to Jefferson        Sharp, Bartholomew (sailor), 56
   and Levy, 183-184; influence on                  Shelvocke, George (sea captain), 56
   educational reform, 178-179; views on            Sheridan, Richard B., 27n
   Jewish heritage, 182-183                         Shipp, Steve, 272n
Sanders, William, 23                                Shoumatoff, Alex, 231-233, 231n, 236, 237
Sandhurst, Royal Military Academy, 297              Silva, Benedita da (secretary of social welfare),
Santos, Afonso Carlos Marques dos, 138n                246
Santos, Celia Nunes Galvao Quirino dos, 115n        Silva, Jacinto Jose da, 118, 128
Santos, Guilherme G. de Oliveira, 103n              Silva, Joaquim Noberto de Sousa, 114n
Santos, Lucio Jose dos, 112n                        Silva, Jose-Gentil da, 28n
Sao Paulo, ix. See also Brazil: discovery of gold   Silva, Luiz Inacio da. See Lula da Silva, Luiz
   in, 70; economic development of, 246-247;           Inacio
   textile industry, 249                            Silva, Marina, 241 n
Sao Tome, ix: African slaves in, 26, 27; slave      Silva, Miguel da (Port. ambassador), 33n27
   transshipment depot, 66; sugar production,       Silva Lisboa, Jose da (1756-1835),128, 130n,
   18                                                  165n; racism of, 165
Sarney, Jose (Brazilian president), 229, 231        Silva Ponte, Ant6nio Pires da, 134-135, 139
                                                                                   Index • 333

Silva Tarouca, Manuel Teles da (duke),               Sobrinho, Barbosa Lima, 141 n
    influence on Pombal, 95, 98, 100                 social conscience: of British chocolatiers, 43;
Silva Xavier, Joaquim Jose da (Tiradentes,               and sugar exploitation, 125-126
    1748-1792),128, 138n                             social engineering, under Pombal's policies,
silver. See under mining/mineralogy                      96-107
Silvers, Robert B. (Bob), xix                        socialism, 224, 226. See also Marxism
Simon, William Joel, 202n                            Society of Jesus (Jesuits). See under monastic
Sinmay, Zau (Chinese poet), 295, 296, 297,300            orders
Sino-American relations, 257-259                     sociopolitical action: Macao Senate, 263;
Sino-Japanese war, and evacuation of Hong                religious, 251
   Kong,296                                          Socotra,33
Sino-Portuguese textile trade, 261, 262              sodalities, Third Order of Saint Francis of Vila
Siqueira, Sonia Aparecida, 129n                          Rica, 112
slaves/slavery: abolitionist sentiments, 128,        sodomy, 56, 175n
    152; African: in Canary Islands, 27; in New      Sol Estoril group, 274
   World, 26-29, 203; Amistad slave schooner,        Soriano, Simao Jose da Luz, 131n, 138n
   188; Asian, 265-266; attitudes toward: of         Sousa, Octavio Tarquinio de, III n
   Bonifacio, 164-165; Brazilian, 130, 158,          Sousa Coutinho. See under Coutinho
   163-164; of Jefferson, 164-165; and               Southwell, Robert, 293
   republicanism and democracy, 86; Brazilian        Souza, Affonso Ruy de, 122n, 123n
   equality movements, 120-130; in the               Souza, Marcio, 231, 231n, 232, 233, 235, 236,
   Caribbean and Hispaniola, 22-25; for coffee          238
   plantations, 249; in colonial New England,        Spain, ix: anti-Jesuit campaign, 105; Bourbon
   189; as commodities, 29; Congo, slave                policies in Meso-America, 64-65; and
   exportation, 26; Connecticut emancipation            Caribbean gold trade, 21-25; colonial
   law, 189; death rate, in relation to sugar           expansion and exploitation, 76-77; and
   trade, 29; and emancipation sentiments,              Columbus quincentennial, 14; Creole
   119, 120, 129, 163-164; in epic poetry, 115;         oligarchies, and Bourbon reforms, 80;
   and gold rush, 248; owners' return on                economic backwardness of, 80-81;
   investment, 29; percentage of population, in         hegemony of, xiv; limit of neomercantilism,
   Brazil, 119-120; in Pombal's "great new               79-80; metropolitan-colonial relationships,
   dispositions," 98; and racism, 165;                  86,87; trade privileges, with France, 78,81;
   reproduction rate, 29; revival of, during            treasure fleets of, 54
   Industrial Revolution, 151; revolts (See          Spence, Jonathan D., 261n
   under Haiti); and Yale University, 187-192        spices, and oceanic commerce, 20, 70
slave trade: affected by extermination of            Spielberg, Steven (director), 232; Amistad
   Amerindians, 26; of Amazon interior, 70;             movie, 188
   and Anglo-Brazilian treaties, 150-151;            Sposito, Mauro (police chief), 231;
   British attitudes toward, 162-163; census of,        relationship with Chico Mendes, 235
   26-27; clandestine, 75n, 79; Columbus's           S1. Kitts, raided by Blackbeard, 54
   view of, 26; equatorial division of, 162; fall    Stalin, Joseph, 271
   of, in Brazil, 168; increase of (l9c), 151-152;   Stanford University, and F. H. Cardoso, 249
   North American purveyors of, 151; and             Starr, C. V., 295
   oceanic commerce, 20, 21, 67; and sugar           Starr, Edward Comfort, 193
   trade, 27, 28, 29,120-130; and War of the         STDM (Macao Tourism and Entertainment
   Spanish Succession, 77; and Yale University,         Corporation), 273, 281
   187-192                                           Stedile, Joao Pedro (economist and MST
Sloane, Hans (physician), 47                            leader),252
Smith, Adam (economist; 1723-1790),72,126,           Stein, Barbara Hadley, 63, 63n, 76n, v
   150                                               Stein, Peter (journalist), 276
Smith, Anthony, 205n                                 Stein, Stanley J., v, 3, 63, 63n, 76n
Smith, Robert C., Jr., 114n                          Stevenson, Robert Louis, 59. See also Treasure
Smithsonian Institution, 23                             Island
smuggling. See trade: clandestine                    Stone, Roger, 201 n
Soares, Mario (Portuguese politician), 284n          Stone, Timothy, 195
334 • Index

students: role in Brazilian independence,           Thouin, Andre, 175
   110-111; in Portugal, 153; at Cambridge,         Threshold Foundation, 227
   1-2; postdoctoral, at Columbia, 4, 9-10; at      Tiradentes (Joaquim Jose da Silva Xavier,
   Princeton, 3-5                                      1748-1792),128, 138n
Subrahmanyam, Sanjay, 34, 34n, 262n                 tobacco trade/monopoly, 69, 75n, 80
sugar/sugarcane: and African slave trade, 27,       Tocqueville, Alexis de (1805-1859), xii
   28, 29; and chocolate, 40; and destruction       Tomaz,Fernando,96n
   of forests, 202-203; key export of Brazil        Tortuga, Jamaica (treasure port), 50, 54
   and Portugal, 69, 125-126; and oceanic           tourism: "exotic," and Black Orpheus, 306; in
   commerce, 20; production of: in Atlantic            Macao, 267-269, 273-274; and violence, in
   islands, 18; in Jamaica, 58                         Macao,276-277
Sullivan, Sir Arthur, 49,55                         trade: in Atlantic, 16-21,66-76; Bahian-
Sumter, Thomas, Jr. (U.S. envoy), 155, 155n            African, 75n; balance of, and sugar
Sun Yat-sen (founder of modern China), 295             production, 125, 125n; and climate, 260;
Sutherland, N. M., 78n                                 "coolie trade;' 265; D. Cunha's model for,
Switzerland, and chocolate, 42                         94; and economic expansion, 81; free: in
                                                       Brazil, 126-127, 130, 165,243; vs. state
Tai Fung Bank (Macao), 281                             regulated, 126-127, 149; grain, from North
Taino Indians, of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico,          America, 71, 85; impact of Spanish silver,
   23,26                                               53; importance of Macao, 260-263;
Tanucci, Bernard (Naples reform minister),             livestock, 70; monopoly companies, 99-100;
   172                                                 nationalization of, under Pombal, 99-100,
Tappan, Arthur, 191                                    101; open ports of Brazil, 150; Portugal-
tariffs. See also taxes/taxation: under Anglo-         Macao, 261; price controls, 126, 127; role in
   Brazilian treaty (1810), 150; British, on           Macao, 258-264; rubber, 222; Sino-
   Brazilian sugar, 127; British and Portuguese        American, 257-259; Sino-British, 259;
   dependence on, 149; under Charles III,              Spanish American diversification, 76-77;
   79-80; to offset smuggling, 81                      sugar: and African slave trade, 27, 28, 29;
Tarnoff, Peter, xix                                    socioeconomic impact on Brazil, 68,
Tarouca, Carlos da Silva, 96n                          123-126, 140; spice, 20, 70; tobacco,
Tavora, Euclides Fernandes, 222, 222n, 223,            clandestine trade, 75n, 76, 79, 80; trade
   224,234                                             treaties, 69, 72, 74 (See also treaties); and
Tavora family (18c), trial and execution of,           War of the Spanish Succession, 77
   103-104                                          trade unions. See unions
taxes/taxation. See also tariffs: alcabala (sales   "trail of tears," U.S. Indian Removal Act
   tax), 80; exemption from, and deforestation,        (1830),196
   207-208; federal/state obligations, 254;         transportation. See also navigation: Shun Tak
   grievances against, in Brazil, 115-116;             shipping company, 274
   Minas Conspiracy opposition to, 134; and         Treasure Island (Stevenson), 53, 59
   mining, 135; salt gabelle, abolished in          treaties: in age of free trade imperialism,
   Brazil, 133                                         149-150; Anglo-Brazilian (1810), 150-151;
taxonomy, of chocolate, 38                             Cromwellian (1657),72, 100, 149; Madrid
Tcheong-u-Lam, 265n                                    (1750),96-100,101,102; Methuen (1703),
Teach, Edward (Blackbeard), 51, 54                     72, 100, 132, 149; Nanjing (1842),257; New
Teague, Michael, 174n                                  Echota (1835), 196; and Portuguese
Teatro Jovem, Rio, 9                                   economic policy, 74; Portuguese trade, 69;
Teixeira, Ivan, 104n                                   Sino-American (Wang Xia, 1844),257,258;
Teixeira, Manuel (priest and historian), 268,          Utrecht settlement (1713-1714),78
   268n, 294                                        triads (criminals), of Macao, 274-276,286
television. See media                               Trie, "Charlie" (Yah Lin) (political campaign
textiles: British-Brazilian trade, 149; Franco-        contributor), 283-284, 285n
   Spanish trade privileges, 78, 81; industrial     Tucurui hydroelectric complex, 211, 212
   establishment in Sao Paulo, 249;                 Tulloch, Ursula (wife of Boxer), 296
   Portuguese-Asian trade, 261, 262; purple         Tuma, Romeu (of Brazilian Federal Police),
   dye from Brazil, 201                                231,235
Third Order of Saint Francis ofVila Rica, 112       Tupac Amaru rebellion, 84
                                                                                  Index • 335

UDR (Rural Democratic Union), 214, 224,             Valignano, Alessandro (Jesuit), 269, 270
   229,231,237,238,314                              Van der Wee, Herman, 19n
Ukraine, and Macao, 285                             Van Houten, Coenraad, patents chocolate
U.N. Conference on Environment and                     process, 42-43
   Development, 239                                 Van Swieten, Gerhard (physician), 178
U.N. World Conference against Racism, Racial        Vargas, Getulio (Brazilian president), 250
   Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Related          Vargas Llosa, Mario, 245,253
   Intolerance, 187                                 Vasco da Gama (1469-1524), 16,20
unions: aided by Catholic church, 224, 229;         Vasconcellos, Silvio de Carvalho, 114n
   and "Chico" Mendes, 223; establishment           Vasconcellos e Sousa, Luis de, 118
   and development of, 250; Lula, as organizer,     Vasconcelos Pedrosa, Manoel Xavier de,
   250; metalworkers', 225, 250; rural workers',        lIOn
   224-225; vs. ranchers, 229-230; Xapuri           Vasquez, Forne and Vivaldo (Genoese trading
   Rural Workers' Union, 225, 226                      company),29
United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the          Vassouras, Brazil, 3
   Algarves, 180                                    Vaughan, Robert C., 184n
United States, ix: Amistad affair, relation of to   Veloso, Caetano, 309
   Indian removals, 195; and China, 257-258;        Veloso Miranda. See Miranda
   foreign policy toward South America, 160;        Vendek (Jose Joaquim Maia e Barbalho),
   haven for political exiles, 249-250; Indian         meeting with Jefferson, 109-110, 159
   Removal Act (1830), 195, 196; intellectual       Venezuela. See New Granada
   influences of Enlightenment, 181-182;            Ventura, Zuenir, 231 n, 238, 238n
   portrayal of Americans as villains, 236          Venturi, Franco, 93n, 105-106, 106n
Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, 251         Verano, John W., 23n
University of California, Berkeley, and F. H.       Verger, Pierre, 75n
   Cardoso, 249                                     Verlinden, Charles, 19n
University of Cambridge, student life, 1-2          Verney, Luis Antonio (1713-1792), 93n, 171;
University of Coimbra, 138, 153, 172;                  intellectual fervor of, 177; mentor of Abbe
   Enlightenment reforms at, 178-180;                  Correa da Serra, 171; a verdadeiro metodo
   Oratorian reforms, 106, 110; student                de estudar, 92; reform of education, 106
   political activity, 110-112                      Vespucci, Amerigo (1451-1512),32
University of London, xx                            Vidal Barbosa, Domingos: conveys Jefferson's
University of Macao, 286                               comments to Brazil, 110; influenced by
University of Montpellier, Brazilian-born              Abbe Rayna!, Ill, I11n
  students, 110                                     Vieira, Alberto, 18n
University of Sao Paulo, 249                        Vieira, Antonio (Jesuit), 203, 273
University ofVirginia, 182; Correa da Serra's       Vieira Couto, Jose Joaquim, 141
  recommendations for, 181                          Vieira da Silva, Luis (Minas conspirator), 113,
University of Wisconsin, 295                           115, 117, 140
urban development, in Brazil, 68, 246               Vilhena, Luis dos Santos, 119n, 122, 122n,
Urofsky, Melvin 1., 184n                               124n,126,126n,127,128,I29,I30,133
Uruguay, establishment of, 167                      Villalta, Luiz Carlos, 143n
Uruguay River, and Treaty of Madrid (1750),         violence, in Macao, 274-276
  97                                                Voltaire, 101, lOIn, 104-105
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, and study of
  tropical forests, 200                             Walford,A. R., I5In
U.S. Congress: establishes permanent navy, 52;      Wallerstein, Immanuel, 63, 63n
  Subcommittee on Natural Resources, 227            Walpole, Robert (British envoy to Lisbon),
U.S. Department of Justice, Campaign Finance         81-82
  Task Force, 285n                                  Wan Kuok-koi ("Broken Tooth"), 286
U.S. Marine Corps, anthem, 52                       War of the Spanish Succession (1701-1714),
U.S. Senate Governmental Affairs Campaign            67,77
  Finance Investigation (1998), 285n                Webster, Charles K., 154n, 157n
U.S. Treasury, 244: and Inter-American              Webster, Daniel (U.S. secretary of state),
  Development Bank, 228; diplomatic                  258
  recognition of Mexico, 160                        Wellington College, 297
336 • Index

West Africa. See also Africa: conditions that    Wrigley, Linda, xix
  prevented European expansion in, 27; pirate    Wythe, George, 180
  raids on, 54; Portuguese trade links with,
  18; trade with Brazil, 75n; trade with South
  America, under Portugal, 67                    Xavante tribe (Brazil), 251
Whitaker, Arthur Preston, 62, 62n                Xavier, Francis (saint), 267
Whitney, Eli, 190
Williams, Hywel (journalist), 202, 291-292,      Yah Lin Trie. See Trie, «Charlie"
  296,298-299,300                                Yale Club, 295
Williamse, David, 178n                           Yale University: and Charles Boxer, 295;
Wills, Garry, 32                                    slavery polemic, 187-192
wind power navigation, 16-17                     Yanomami (Brazil), decimation of, 249
Wise, Henry, 151
Woodward, C. Vann, xvii
woolding, torture method, 51                     Zaire, Guilherme, 223, 224
Workers' Party (PT), of Brazil, 225, 226, 238,   Zapatistas, 252
  250,255,314                                    Zhou Enlai (Chinese Communist), 295
World Bank, 237: and Brazilian natural           Zolov, Eric, 151 n
  resources, 212, 227, 228                       Zuazo, Alonso (1466-1527),25,26
