Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


STATISTICAL  VIEW 


Of    VHP 


COMMERCE 


OP   THE 


UNITED   STATES    OF    AMERICA: 

-^    ^    • ": 

INCLUDING    ALSO    AN    ACCOUNT    Op  *  S       "   " 

BANKS,  MAxNUFACTURES  AND  INTERNAL  TRADE 

AND  LMPROVEMENTS: 

TOGETHER    WITH    THAT    OF    THE 

REVENUES    AND    EXPENDITURES 


or  THE 


GENERAL  GOVERNMENT: 


ACCOMPANIED  WITH  NUMEROUS  TAHLES. 


BY    TIMOTHY    PITKIN. 


/ 

1 


NEW  HAVEN : 

DURRIE   A   PECK. 

1835. 


-"Yd 


Ecov^*l5uC>8>-^5' 


•^. 


^■^  nhu  cou^ 


<?.: 


UL     6  1888 


I 


ic^.  .-^^.. 


^" 


'JLU 


Entered  according  to  an  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1835,  by 

Timothy  Pitkin, 
in  the  Clerk's  office,  of  the  District  Court  of  Connecticut. 


Printed  by  He lekiah  Howe  d  Co. 


vk"^ 


5'^ 


PREFACE. 


In  presenting  the  public  with  a  new  and  enlarged  edition  of  our 
Statistics  of  the  United  States,  we  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  the 
last  edition  was  published  in  1817,  just  after  Europe  had  emerged 
from  a  long  and  unexampled  war — a  war,  in  which  the  United  States 
themselves  at  last,  became  involved. 

Since  that  period,  this  country  has  been  placed  in  a  new  situation, 
as  the  European  nations  on  the  return  of  peace,  returned  to  their 
old  systems  of  commercial  and  colonial  policy.  This  has  driven  the 
Americans  to  look  more  to  their  own  internal  means  and  resources. 
And  as  the  population  of  the  United  States,  has  also,  since  that  time, 
nearly  doubled,  it  cannot  be  deemed  an  uninteresting  subject  of  in- 
quiry, whether,  in  this  situation,  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the 
country  have  kept  pace  with  its  population. 

We  have  brought  down  the  accounts  of  the  external  commerce 
of  the  United  States,  as  far  as  practicable,  to  the  years  1833  and 
1 834.  In  doing  this,  we  have  consulted  foreign  as  well  as  domestic 
official  and  other  documents,  in  order  to  shew  the  extent  of  American 
commerce  and  navigation,  not  only  in  comparison  with  preceding 
periods,  but  also,  in  comparison  with  the  commerce  and  navigation 
of  other  nations.  We  have,  thereby,  been  enabled  to  shew  how 
nearly  the  amount  of  American  tonnage  approximates  to  that  of  the 
British ;  and  also,  to  give  a  more  full  and  accurate  account  of  the 
trade  of  the  United  States  with  China,  than  is  furnished  by  our  own 
custom  bouse  books. 

We  have,  also,  in  the  present  edition,  extended  our  inquiries  to 
the  internal  wealth  and  resources  of  our  country,  limiting  them, 
however,  principally,  to  the  great  subjects  of  banks,  manufactures, 
and  internal  improvements,  by  means  of  canals,  rail  roads,  and  steam 
navif^tion.  Thb  we  have  done,  with  a  view  of  ascertaining,  as  far 
as  practicable,  the  extent  and  \'alue  of  the  domestic  production  and 
coDSumption  of  the  necessary  articles  of  national  supply,  and  to  see 
bow  iar  the  United  States  are  dependent  on  foreign  nations,  for  such 
articles. 


r 


IV  PREFACE. 

Destitute,  in  a  great  measure,  of  official  documents,  to  which  we 
could  recur  for  accurate  information  on  these  subjects,  particularly 
in  regard  to  manufactures  and  internal  commerce ;  we  have  been 
obliged  to  seek  for  information  from  individuals,  and  from  periodical 
and  other  publications  having  relation  to  the  objects  of  our  inquiry. 
And  we  beg  leave  here  to  express  our  grateful  acknowledgments  to 
those  who,  in  answer  to  our  inquiries,  have  obligingly  furnished  us 
with  much  valuable  information — and  among  the  publications  to 
which  we  are  indebted  for  great  aid,  we  would  mention  the  North 
American  and  Quarterly  Reviews,  Wood's  Treatise  on  Rail  Roads, 
(American  edition  by  George  W.  Smith,)  Gales  and  Seaton's  state 
papers,  Armroyd's  Internal  Navigation,  Niles'  Register,  Minor's 
Rail  Road  Journal,  and  Hazard's  periodical,  respecting  the  internal 
improvements  of  Pennsylvania.  But  with  all  these  aids,  much  must 
rest  on  estimates  somewhat  conjectural,  especially  respecting  the  ex- 
tent of  the  internal  commerce  and  the  extent  and  value  of  the  man- 
ufactures of  this  country. 

Indeed  from  the  well  known  difficulties  in  obtaining  statistical  in- 
formation respecting  the  various  and  daily  increasing  productions 
and  improvements  in  a  country  so  extensive,  perfect  accuracy  cannot 
be  expected. 

Enough  however,  we  trust,  is  here  disclosed,  to  prove,  beyond  all 
doubt,  that  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the  United  States  have  kept 
pace  with  their  population ;  and  that  for  the  last  eighteen  years,  the 
progress  of  internal  improvements  has  surpassed  the  most  sanguine 
expectations  of  the  American  patriot,  and  has  exceeded  that  of  any 
other  nation. 

March,  1835. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Fife. 

Difficaliies  with  Great  Britam,  France  and  Spain,  as  to  limits,  at  the  peace  of 
17ei3,  and  long  disputes  about  boundaries  under  the  treaty  of  peace — Some 
of  them  not  yet  settled — Louisiana  purchased  in  1803 — Disputes  about  its 
boundaries — Negotiations  respecting  them — France  joins  Spain  in  these 
disputes — Proceedings  of  the  American  government  in  relation  to  the  oc- 
cupation of  the  Floridas — Conduct  of  the  French  government  respecting 
the  Floridas — The  constitutionality  of  admitting  Louisiana  into  the  union 
doubted  by  Mr.  Jefferson  and  others — The  Floridas  purchased,  and  the  lim- 
its  of  Louisiana  settled  in  1819 1 

CHAPTER  II. 

Colonial  Policy  of  Great  Britain — Amount  of  Exports  and  Imports  prior  to 
the  Revolution — Commerce  interrupted  during  the  war  of  the  Revolution — 
Expenses  of  that  war — Amount  of  Public  Debt  in  1783 — Requisitions  upon 
tht  Stales,  for  provision  for  the  payment  of  it,  not  complied  with — lis  de- 
preciation— Exports  to  and  Imports  from  Great  Biilain,  from  1784  to  1790 
— Distressed  state  of  the  country,  during  this  period — Meeting  of  Commis- 
sioners at  Annapolis,  in  1786 — Adoption  of  the  new  Constitution,  and  the 
organization  of  the  Government  under  it,  in  1789 96 

CHAPTER  III. 

Bxpurts — Divided  into  those  of  Domestic  and  Foreign  origin — Domestic,  de- 
rived from  the  Sea,  the  Forest,  Agriculture  and  Manufacturer — Products 
of  the  Sea  principally  from  the  Cod  and  Whale  fisheries — State  of  the  Cod 
lisherj  prior  to,  and  since  the  revolution — Secured  to  us,  by  the  Treaty  of 
peace  in  1783,  by  the  firmness  and  perseverance  of  the  American  negotia- 
ton— WhaJe  fishery  began  at  Nantucket  in  1690— State  of  it  before  the  Rev- 
olution— Its  great  increase  of  late  years — Number  of  vessels  engaged  in  it, 
in  1^03,  with  thetr  tonnage,  number  of  men— Value  d  the  vesseb  and 
their  outfits,  and  of  their  produce — Value  of  Exports,  the  produce  of  the 
Ushehct,  in  each  jemr,  from  1803,  to  183^— Products  of  the  Forest— viz. 


i 


Tl  CONTENTS. 

Ptfe. 

lamber,  naval  stores,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  skins  and  Airs,  ginseng,  oak 
bark,  and  other  dyes,  value  and  quantity  of  each,  exported,  from  1803 
to  1833 34 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Produce  of  agriculture  divided  into  that,  1st.  which  constitutes  vegetable 
food;  as  flour,  rice,  indian  corn,  rye,  &c. — 2d.  Of  animals,  as  beef,  pork, 
butter,  lard,  cheese,  &c. — 3d.  Tobacco— 4th.  Cottoiv— and  5th.  Others  of 
minor  importance — duantity  and  value  of  these  exported  at  different  peri- 
ods— The  principal  countries,  to  which  flour,  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  beef  and 
pork,  are  usually  exported—Amount  of  the  kinds  and  value  of  domestic 
manufactures  exported — A  comparative  view  of  the  value  of  the  produce  of 
the  sea,  of  the  forest,  of  agriculture,  and  of  manufactures,  exported,  from 
1803  to  1833.  95 


CHAPTER  y. 

'^  Trade  of  the  United  States  increased  by  the  wars  in  Enrope — Greater  in  for- 
eign than  in  domestic  produce,  in  1805,  180G  and  1807 — duantity  of  sugar, 
coflce,  cocoa,  pepper,  goods  free  of  duty,  and  paying  duties,  imported  and 
exported  at  diflierent  periods — Amount  of  gold,  silver  and  bullion  imported 
and  exported  from  1821  to  1833,  and  the  countries  from  and  to  which  it  was 
imported  and  exported  during  the  same  period 145 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Value  of  imports  into  the  United  States,  at  different  periods — Mode  of  estima- 
ting the  value  of  imports  and  exports,  in  the  United  States  and  in  Great 
Britain — Amount  of  American  trade,  with  diff*erent  countries,  at  different 
periods,  from  the  commencement  of  the  present  general  government — A 
brief  history  of  the  trade  with  the  British  West  Indies,  of  the  disputes  res- 
pecting it,  and  the  efl^ect  of  the  arrangement  in  relation  to  it,  made,  in  1831, 
npon  American  navigation  and  the  carrying  trade — Comparative  view  of 
imports  and  exports,  at  different  periods — Origin  of  the  American  trade  with 
China,  and  the  amount  of  trade  with  this  country  from  American  and  Brit- 
ish accounts — duantity  of  teas  imported,  from  China,  in  diff*erent  years — 
Amount  of  woollen,  cotton,  and  other  goods  imported  from  Great  Britain, 
at  diff*erent  periods 163 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Revenues—Derived  chiefly,  from  duties  on  imports  and  tonnage,  and  on  sales 
of  public  lands — Internal  taxes  laid  at  different  periods,  but  soon  repealed — 
Amoimt  rveeived  firom  ibe  customs,  from  1191  to  1833— Direct  (axes  laid, 


/ 


CONTENTS. 


Tii 


Page. 


ml  four  different  periods— Amonnt  of  the  valoation  of  lands  in  1799,  and  a 
comparatiTe  liew  of  their  valae  in  1799,  and  in  1814  and  1815 — ^Lands,  ce- 
ded by  the  individual  States,  for  the  benefit  of  the  United  States— Whole 
amount  of  the  public  lands  in  1832 — Cluantity  to  which  the  Indian  title  has 
been  extin^ithed — GLuantity  granted,  for  the  support  of  schools,  colleges, 
and  benevolent  institutions — for  internal  improvements  and  other  special 
objects — Brief  view  of  the  questions  in  relation  to  the  future  disposition  of 
the  public  domain — Post  Office  establishment — Increase  of  post  offices,  and 
amount  of  postage  received— Gkneral  account  of  the  receipts  and  expendi- 
tures of  the  general  government,  from  1791  to  1833 307 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Amount  of  colonial  tonnage — by  whom  and  in  what  proportions  owned,  in 
the  different  colonies — Ship  building  carried  on  by  the  colonists— Duties 
on  American  and  foreign  vessels,  imposed  by  the  States,  under  the  confed- 
eration— Discriminating  tonnage  duties  adopted  by  the  general  govern- 
ment, in  1789,  and  ever  since  continued — Modes  of  keeping  accounts  of 
American  tonnage — Occasional  uncertainty  as  to  the  actual  amount  of 
such  tonnage— Amount  of  registered  tonnage  employed  in  foreign  trade — 
Of  enrolled  and  licensed,  engaged  in  the  coasting  trade,  steam  naviga- 
tion, and  in  the  fisheries — Number  of  vessels,  amount  of  tonnage,  and  num- 
ber of  seamen,  in  each  State  and  Territory,  in  1829 — Amount  of  foreign 
tonnage  employed  in  American  trade,  in  each  year,  fVom  1789  to  1833 — 
Amount  of  British  toimage  difficult  to  be  ascertained — Attempt  to  com- 
pare it  with  that  of  the  United  States — Amount  of  tonnage  in  several  ports 
of  Great  Britain  and  in  the  United  States — American  navy — Not  system- 
atically encouraged,  before  the  late  war  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain 344 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Peculiar  situation  of  the  United  States  at  three  different  periods — 1st,  during 
the  wars  in  Europe,  from  1793  to  1807— 2d,  during  the  embargo,  non  inter- 1 
coarse,  and  war  with  Great  Britain — and  3d,  from  the  close  of  this  and  the  r 
European  wars— During  the  first  period,  Americans  became  the  carriers 
of  the  continental  belligerents — Great  increase  of  American  shipping — 
Trade  in  foreign  articles  greater  than  in  domestic — Great  Britain  jealous 
of  the  American  neutral  trade — Revived  the  rule  of  17S6  concerning  colo- 
nial trade — Take  and  condemn  American  vessels  under  this  rule — New 
nerotiations  with  Great  Britain — Treaty  made  with  that  nation  by  Monroe 
and  Pinckney — Rejected  by  the  President,  without  consulting  the  Senate- 
British  refuse  the  terms  insisted  on  by  the  American  Executive— The  em- 
bargo—Causes which  led  to  it — French  decrees  and  British  orders  in  coun- 
cil— Bonaparte  determines  there  shall  be  no  neutrals — American  Execu- 
tiva  iafonned  of  il  before  the  embargo— Bonaparte  declares  the  Americans 


y 


J 


nil  CONTENTS. 

Ptfc. 
shall  be  bis  allies  or  bis  enemies — Embargo  nnpopalar — Is  ezcbanged  for 
Don  intercourse — Bonaparte  indignant  at  tbis,  and  seizes  American  vessels 
in  the  continental  ports  and  orders  a  sale  of  them — Refuses  compensation — 
Duke  de  Cadore's  Letter  of  the  5tb  of  August,  1810,  concerning  the  revo- 
cation of  the  French  decrees — President's  proclamation  declaring  them  re- 
pealed— Non  intercourse  revived  against  Great  Britain — Disputes  as  to  the 
actual  repeal  of  the  decrees  of  France— Bonaparte's  definitive  decree  re- 
pealing them — Not  made  public  until  more  than  a  year  aAer  its  date- 
War  declared  against  Great  Britain — Orders  in  council  repealed-^ Armis- 
tice offered,  and  refused  by  the  American  government — Treaty  of  peace — 
State  of  American  commerce  during  the  embargo,  non  intercourse,  and 
war — Americans  pass  navigation  acts  after  the  close  of  the  war — State  of 
American  commerce  during  the  third  period — Amount  of  trade  in  domestic 
and  foreign  articles,  and  with  different  parts  of  the  world 368 


CHAPTER  X. 

Bills  of  credit  constituted  the  principal  currency  of  the  North  American  Col- 
onies— First  issued  by  Massachusetts  in  1690 — These  bills  depreciate  in 
value — State  of  this  depreciation  in  1748 — Congress  resort  to  a  paper  me- 

.  dium  in  the  war  of  the  revolution — depreciates  and  dies  in  the  hands  of  the 
possessors — Establishment  of  the  Bank  of  North  America— a  National 
Bank  established  by  Congress,  in  1791 — Numerous  State  Banks  created — 
Proceedings  of  Congress  in  relation  to  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  Na- 
tional Bank  in  1811,  and  in  relation  to  a  new  National  Bank  in  1815 — New 
National  Bank  established  in  1816— Situation  of  the  State  Banks  during 
the  war — Many  of  them  stop  paying  specie — Their  bills  depreciate — Na- 
tional Bank  assists  in  the  restoration  of  specie  payments — Difference  of 
opinion  between  the  Legislative  and  Executive  branches  of  the  govern- 
ment, as  to  the  constitutionality  and  expediency  of  a  National  Bank — Bill 
passed  by  Congress  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  present  National 
Bank  in  1832 — Negatived  by  the  President — His  views  on  this  subject  dif- 
ferent from  those  of  his  predecessor — Number  and  condition  of  the  State 
Banks  at  different  periods — Proportion  of  their  circulation  to  their  capitals, 
in  different  States,  in  1833  and  January,  1834 — Evils  arising  from  banks  of 
circulation — Should  be  carefully  guarded  against 413 

CHAPTER  XL 

The  British  jealous  of  the  manufactures  of  the  colonists — Prohibit  the  expor- 
tation of  woollens  from  their  American  plantations  in  1699,  and  afterwards 
forbid  certain  manufactures  being  carried  on  there — State  of  the  colonial 
manufactures  in  1731 — State  of  manufactures  during  the  war  of  the  revolu- 
tion, and  to  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  present  constitution — First  Con- 
gress under  the  constitution  lay  duties  with  a  view  to  encourage  manufac- 
ture*—Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasoiy  on  the  sabject— British 


CONTENTS.  IX 

Page, 
gorerment  desirous  of  limiting^  these  duties — Wars  in  Europe  prevented 
much  attention  to  manufactures  in  the  United  States  until  1809 — ^Marshals 
directed  to  take  an  account  of  American  manufactures — These  accounts 
imperfect — New  manufactures  established  during  the  war  of  1812 — Their 
depressed  state  after  the  return  of  peace,  in  consequence  of  large  importa- 
tions—Encouraged by  the  tariffs  of  1816^  1834,  and  1828— Constitutionality 
of  these  acts  called  in  question — ilre  modified  by  subsequent  acts — Progress 
of  manufactures  since  1815— Amount  of  foreign  goods  consumed  in  the 
United  States — Rstimate  of  the  amount  of  the  domestic  manufactures  of 
cotton,  wool,  iron,  leather,  &c.  &c.  in  1833 — Comparative  view  of  the 
consumption  of  foreign  and  domestic  goods — First  Congress  in  the  tariff 
of  July,  1789,  encourage  domestic  manufactures — The  people  petition  that 
bc-dy  in  1789,  to  afford  such  protection — Principles  of  the  report  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Treasury  on  manufactures,  made  to  Congress  in  1791 — Differ- 
ent siiuatiun  of  particular  sections  of  the  Union,  as  to  forcfgn  markets  for 
their  different  productions — Views  of  British  statesmen  and  economists,  in 
relation  to  the  American  policy  of  encouraging  manufactures — New  Eng- 
land originally  opposed  to  the  tariff  acts — Extent  of  the  manufactures  at 
Lowell 461 


CHAPTER  XII. 

C&naN  first  made  in  Elgypt  and  China— The  Italians  and  Hollanders  first 
cuD struct  them  in  Europe — Extended  over  the  Continent — First  made  in 
England  by  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater  in  1760 — Few  constructed  in  tiie  Uni- 
if.d  States  prior  to  1814 — Two  principal  objects  in  view  in  their  constmc- 
ticin — One  to  form  a  safe  internal  water  communication  along  the  sea 
^<.sir<i.  and  another  to  connect  the  eastern  with  the  western  waters — Brief 
v>w  of  the  population  and  resources  of  the  western  country — Advantages 
of  ^tt-nm  navigation  on  the  western  rivers  and  lakes — Number  and  tonnage 
of  steam  boats  and  other  vessels  and  boats  employed  there — Estimate  of  the 
y  liue  of  the  >urplus  produce  of  the  western  country — An  account  of  the 
p-.;>'ilatiun  and  wealth  of  some  of  its  principal  cities  and  towns,  and  their 
rapid  increase — An  account  of  the  principal  canals  in  the  United  States — 
Parncalar  accounts  of  those  of  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio  and  others; 
their  length,  cost,  and  amount  of  business  done  upon  them — Elstimated  length 
ami  c(je^i  of  all  the  canals  in  the  United  States — Compared  with  the  extent 
and  cost  of  tha*M!  in  Kn«^land  and  France — Canals  in  Pennsylvania  em- 
I'lny  cd  in  the  transportation  of  coal — An  account  of  the  coal  fields  and  coal 
ir,n:»*  of  Pennsylvania — Vjiluablc  report  of  a  committee  of  the  senate  of 
;h,i:  Slate  on  this  subject — An  account  of  Rail  Roads  in  the  United  States — 
Lirtly  introduced  here,  a5  well  as  in  Europe,  for  general  transportation — 
Their  rapid  in«:rcase  in  the  different  states — Some  account  of  the  business  • 
':vr.fr  upon  thcin — Number  of  passengers,  from  Albany  to  Schenectady, 
fi-jiu  N*-w  York  to  Philadelphia,  antl  from  Baltimore  to  Harper's  ferry,  on 
^h«.«^  roads,  in  1.S3I — Extent  and  csiim.iied  cost  of  Rail  IU)ads  now  or  soon 
to  be  complei<*d.  ...  ........    ^i 

B 


Z  COMTBMTS. 

CHAPTER  XIIL  * 

Pift. 

Popnlation  of  this  country  prior  to  its  separation  Arom  Great  Britain  known 
only  by  estimates^Estimated  nnmber  of  its  inhabitants  in  1700,  1750,  and 
177S— Number  according  to  enumerations  made  nnder  the  present  con- 
•titntion — Increase  of  the  whites  andslaTcs,  in  each  ten  years  since  1790 
-—Difference  between  the  white  mdhi  and  females— Increase  of  popula- 
tion in  several  countries  in  Europe— population  of  Great  Britain  at  vari- 
ous periods 583 


ft 


CONTENTS 

OF  THB   TABL£t   ANNEXED   TO   THE   CHAPTERS. 


CHAPTER  III. 

^^  Table  No.  I. — A  summary  statement  of  the  ralne  of  the  i^ppoitiof  the  / 
sereral  states  and  territories  annually,  from  Oct.  1st,  1790  to  Sept. 

^-^Oih,  1816, 6a-«l 

No.  IL — Statement  of  the  Talae  of  exports,  the  s^wth,  prodace  / 

and  manofactores  of  the  United  States,  from  each  State,  dec,  from 
^^Oct.  1st,  1803,  to  Sept.  30th,  1816,         .  .  .  .  •         &S,54 

yw^'VjVo.  III. — Value  of  exports  of  the  growth,  &c.,  of  foreign  countries,  i 

from  1803  to  1816, 54— M 

1    'No.  I  v. — Elxportsof  domestic  and  foreign,  origin  in  the  years  1817, 

1818, 1819  and  30, 57 

.   No.  V. — Commerce  of  each  state,  in  each  year,  from  1890  to  1833,  56—81 

No.  VI. — State  of  the  cod  fishery  in  Massachusetts,  from  1765,  to  1775, 
and  from  1786  to  1790,  ......  84 

No.  VII. — Produce  of  the  fisheries,  exported  from  United  States,  from 
Aug.  178910  Sept.  30th,  1790,    ......  86 

No.  VIII. — Gtoantiiy  of  fish  smoked  or  dried,  exported,  from  1800  to  ^ 

1816,         •  oSyoT 

Ka  IX.  do.  do.        exported,  from  1831  to  1833.    . 

No.  X. — State  of  the  whale  fishery,  in  Massachusetts,  from  1771  to 

No.  XL  do.  do.  do.  fVom  1787,  to  1789, 

No.  XII.— Whale  oil,  to  what  countries  exported  from  1800  to  1816,^  10,91 

No-Xm.       do.                         do.           do.      from  1831  to  1833,  tt 
'So*  XIV. — Spermaceti  oil,  to  what  countries  exported  from  1800  to  i'^ 

1816,        ....•••••  ^9 

No.  XV.         do.                         do.          do.      from  1831  to  1833,  94 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Tablb  No  I.— flour,  whither  exported  from  1800  to  1816/ 
No.  II.                do.       da  do!     from  1831  to  1833, 

No.  I II.— Rice.  do.  Hn      fmm  IMP  t#y  }flifi^  / 

No.  IV.      do.  do.  do.     from  1831  to  1833,  • 

No.  v.— B|^ do.  do.     from  1800  to  1816.  \f 


119,130 
191 

199,191 
194 

195^196 


A 


zu 


CONTENTS. 


No.  VI.    do. 
No.  VII.— fork, 


do. 
do. 


do.     from  1821  to  1833, 

do.     from  IHOQ  m  IHlfii^ 


from  18-21  to  iaH3, 
from  1800  to  1816^^^ 


No.  VIII.   do.  do.  do. 

No.  IX. — Tobacco,       do.  do. 

No.  X.  do.  SoT  doT     from  18*21  to  1833, 

No.  XI.— Cotton.  Sea  Island. do.  do.     f|pir  i^nri  m  iftifi   ^ 

No.  XII.  do.     do.  do.     flrom  1821  to  1833, 

No.  XIII. — Cotton,  Sea  Island  and  oilfer,  whither,  exported,  from  1800^ 

to  1816,  ........ 

No.  XIV. — Cotton,  other  than  Sea  Island,      do.  do.    from  1821 

to  1833,  ........ 

No.  XV. — Statement  of  the  various  manufactures  of  the  United  States 


127 
128,129 
130 
131,132 
133 
134 
134 

135,136 

137 


exported,  with  the  value  in  each  year,  from  1827  to  1833, 


138—144 


CHAPTER  V. 

'Table  No.  I. — (Sold  and  Silver,  in  bullion  and  coin,  imported  into  the 
United  States,  from  1821  to  1832,  .... 

No.  II.  do  do.  exported,  from  1821  to  1832, 

No.  III. — Brown  sugar,  whither,  exported,   from  1800  to  1816,*^ 
No.  IV.        do.         do.         do.  do.       from  1821  to  1833, 

No.  v.— Brown  sugar,  clayed  or  powdered,  whither,  exported,  from/ 
1800  to  1816,        ....... 

No.  VI.  do.  do.  do.        from  1821  to  1833, 

No.  VII.— Coffee,  whither  exported,  from  1800  to  1816/ 

No.  VIII.      do.       do.         do.  from  1821  to  1833, 


153,154 

155,156 

157 

158 

159 
160 
161 
163 


CHAPTER  VI. 


^ 


Tablb  No.  I. — Value  of  British  produce  and  manufactures,  exported,  i/ 
to  all  parts  of  the  world,  from  1798  to  1832,       ....  256 

No.  II. — Value  of  imports  into  the  United  States,  from  each  countr}', 
from  1795  to  1801,  .......  257—260 

No.  III. — Value  of  exports  from  the  United  States  to  each  country, 
from  1795  to  1801 261,262 

Na  IV. — Amount  of  goods  imported  into  the  United  States,  a  year, 
ending  Sept  30th,  1807,  ......     263,264 

No.  V. — Statement  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  goods  imported  into 
the  United  States,  in  1815, 1816  and  1817,        ....  265 

No.  VI. — Siaii.stical  view  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States,  ex- 
V      hibiting  the  value  of  every  description  of  imports  from,  and  the  val- 
ue of  every  description  of  exports  to  each  Foreign  countrj*;  also, 
the  tonnage  of  American  and  Foreign  vessels,  arriving  from,  and 
departing  to  each  Foreign  country,  in  each  year,  from  16*il  to  1S33,     266—292 

No.  VII.  and  VIIl.— Account  of  the  odicial  and  real  value  of  all  the  l/ 
imports  and  exports  between  Qreat  Britain  and  the  United  States,  in 
1806, 1807, 1808,  Ac.       .  993^994 


CONTENTS.  Xlll 

Page. 

No.  IX. — Declared  valae  of  British  produce  and  manafactnres,  export- 
ed to  the  United  States,  from  1814  to  1831,  with  the  value  of  imports 
into  Great  Britain,  from  the  United  States,  for  the  same  period,  •  S94 

No.  X. — Cluantity  and  declared  value  of  thirty  seven  articles,  the  pro- 
duce and  manufactures  of  the  United  Kingdon'of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  exported  from  thence  to  the  United  States,  in  1827,  1828, 
1829  and  1830, 295,396 

No.  XI. — An  account  of  the  official  and  declared  value  of  cotton, 
woollen,  linen  and  silk  fabrics,  and  the  total  of  all  other  articles, 
exported  to  all  parts  of  the  world  from  Great  Britain;  the  officitU 
value,  in  the  years  1814  and  1829,  and  the  declared  value,  in  each 
year,  from  1814  to  1829,  ......  S97 

No.  XII. — Declared  value  of  the  principal  articles  of  British  produce 
and  manufactures,  exported  from  Great  Britain  in  1838^         .  .  296 

Nos.  XIII.  XIV.  XV.  and  XVI.— An  account  of  the  dirtU  trade,  be- 
tween the  United  States  and  China,  from  1821  to  1833,  .  299—301 

No8.  XVII.  XVIII.  XIX.  and  XX. — A  general  view  of  the  American  J 
trade  with  China,  from  1804  to  1833 — also,  imports  into,  and  exports 
from  Canton,  on  American  account,  from  1818  to  1827,  .  302—306 

No.  XXI. — Destination  of  exports  from  Canton  on  American  account, 

from  1818  to  1827, 306 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Table  No.  I. — The  gross  and  net  amount  of  the  customs,  &c.  from  r 
the  commencement  of  the  government,  to  1814,  .  .  333 

No.  II. — The  gross  and  net  amount  of  duties  on  merchandize  and  ton- 
cage,  &c.,  from  1815  to  1832,      ......  334 

No.  111. — A  general  view  of  the  assessment  and  apportionment  of  the 
Direct  tax,  in  1798,  .......     335,336 

N-».  IV. — Quantity  of  public  lands  unsold,  in  the  new  states,  and  in 
the  territories — and  quantity  granted,  for  internal  improvements, 
schools,  colleges,  and  other  useful  objects,  Jan.  1st,  1832,  .  337 

>, ,.  v.— Post  Office  establishment,  from  1789  to  1830.  .     338,339 

No.  Vl.^ — Statements  of  the  receipts  of  the  United  States,  from  1789  to 

Nu.  VIL  do.     of  the  expenditures  of  do.       do.  do.  342,343 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

T»E».r.  No.  I.— Amount  of  tonnage,  registered,  enrolled  and  licensed,       • 
ic  the  i^venl  districts  of  United  States,  annually,  from  1789  to  1832,  361 

S^.  II  —Statement  of  the  number  of  vessels,  and  the  seamen,  annually 
employed  in  navigating  the  same,  which  belonged  to  each  state  and 
territory  of  United  States,  on  the  31st  of  Dec.  1830,  .  363 

N'l.  III. — Amount  of  American  and  Foreign  tonnage  employed  in  the 
foreign  trade  of  the  United  Slates,  annually,  from  1789  to  1832;  and 


/ 


xir 


CONTENTS. 


the  propoition  which  the  foreign  tonnage  bean  to  the  whole  ttmnage  ^ 
employed  in  said  trade,  the  same  period,  .... 

No.  IV. — Amoant  of  foreign  tonnage,  which  entered  the  ports  of  the 
United  States,  annually,  from  1789  to  1833,       .... 

Vo.  v. — Tonnage  of  vessels  owned  and  registered  in  the  several  ports 
of  the  British  Empire,  from  1814  to  1831 

No.  VI. — General  statement  of  British  and  Foreign  shipping,  which 
entered  inwards,  in  the  trade  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Brit- 
ain and  Ireland,  from  the  principal  countries  in  the  world,  in  1830, 


Pfefft. 


963 


364,366 


366 


367 


CHAPTER  X. 


y/TABl 


iBLE. — Statement  of  the  nnmber,  capital,  issnes,  specie  and  specie 
Ainds,  deposits  and  discounts  of  the  banks  of  the  several  states  and 
territories  of  the  United  States,  in  1833  and  the  commencement  of 
1834,  


460 


CHAPTER  XI. 


Table  No.  I. — Statement  of  the  number  and  products  of  cotton  estab- 
lishments, in  twelve  of  the  United  States,  in  1831, 

No.  II. — Number  of  bags  of  cotton  imported  into  Great  Britain,  from 
each  country  of  its  growth,  in  each  year,  from  1814  to  1830,  the  quan- 
tity exported  and  taken  for  spinning,  with  the  average  price  and  total 
money  value  of  the  same,  ...... 

No.  III. — Gluantity  of  cotton  in  Great  Britain,  retained  for  home  con- 
sumption and  for  spinning,  on  an  average  of  the  years  from  1798  to 
1806,  and  from  1807  to  1813;  and  in  each  year,  from  1814  to  1830, 
with  the  declared  value  of  cotton  piece  goods  and  of  cotton  jram, 
exported,  for  each  year,  during  the  latter  period — also,  the  number 
of  pounds  of  cotton  imported  from  different  countries,  in  each  year 
from  1837  to  1839,  and  the  quantity  imported  and  exported  in  1831 
and  1833, 

No.  IV. — Statement  of  the  origin,  products,  Ac.f  of  the  cotton  mills,  in 
Lowell,  Massachusetts,  1833,  .  .  .  .  . 


536 


587 


538 


539,530 


CHAPTER  XIL 


Table  No.  I. — Commerce  of  Cleveland,  in  Ohio,  from  1885  to  1833, 

No.  II< — Statement  of  the  quantity  and  value  of  articles  brought  down 
the  Erie  and  Champlain  canals,  during  the  year  1833, 

Vo.  III. — An  account  of  property  which  passed  Utica,  on  the  Erie  ca- 
nal, in  the  years  1833  and  1834,  .... 

No.  IV. — Statement  of  the  business  of  the  Schuylkill  navigation  com- 
pany, from  its  commencement,  .... 


576 

577,678 
679 


CONTENTS.  Xr 

Pfefft. 

No.  y. — Statement  of  Lehigh,  Schuylkill  and  Lackawanna  coal, 
mined  and  broaght  to  market  and  consumed  in  each  year,  from  1836 
to  1833,  with  its  retail  prices  in  Philadelphia,  in  each  year,  with  the 
amount  of  foreign  coal  consumed  in  the  United  States,  during  the  581 

same  period,       ........ 


HAPTER  Xni. 


Tablk  No.  I^^Census  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States,  in  1790  586 

No.  11.                  do.                     do.                            do.             1800  587 

No.  III.                do.                     do.                            do.             1810  588 

Vo,  IV.                do.                     do.                            do.             1890  589-591 

No.V.                 do.                     do.                            do.             1830  592—696 


/ 


ERRATA. 

Page  165, 1.  lOfr.  top, for £38,718,036,  read  £37,818,036;  p.  191, 1. 18 fr.  bot.,  for 
miosureSj  read  measure  ijo.  238, 1.  5  fr.  bot.  for  181,094,  read  181,490;  p.  S50,  note, 
for  Sullivan  Daw,  read  AUivan  Dow  /  p.  316, 1. 7  fr.  UyOt  for  acce^d^  read  adopt- 
€d;  p.  331, 1. 1  fir.  bot.  for  may  not  be^  read  majLbe ;  p.  3o8, 1. 19  fr.  bot.  for  charge, 
read  charges ;  p.  429, 1. 10  fr.  bot.  for  Sire^  read  Seire ;  p.  435, 1.  17  fr.  top,  for  ex- 
tensivey  read  excessive;  p.486, 1. 15fr.  top,  for  $73,000,000,  read  $173,000,000: 
p.  490,  1. 18  fr.  top,  for  born,  read  borne;  p.  500,  1. 4  fr.  bot.  for  $150,000,  read 
|H50,006 ;  p.  529,  for  table  No,  VI,  read  No.  IV;  p.  565, 1.  13  fr.  bot.  for  Brewton, 
tttid  BrunUm. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Difficulties  with  Great  Britain,  France  and  Spain,  as  to  Umits,  at  the  peace  of 
1783,  and  long  disputes  about  boundaries  under  the  treaty  of  peaee — Some  of 
them  not  yet  settled — Louisiana  purchased  in  1803 — Disputes  about  its  boun- 
daries— Negotiations  respecting  them — France  joins  Spain  in  these  disputes — 
Proceedings  of  the  American  government  in  relation  to  the  occupation  of  the 
Floridas — Conduct  of  the  French  government  respecting  the  Fldridas— The 
constitutionality  of  admitting  Louisiana  into  the  union  doubted  by  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son and  others — ^The  Floridas  purchased,  and  the  limits  of  Louisiana  settled 
in  1819. 

Tbi  United  States  of  America,  since  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana 
and  the  Floridas,  embrace  a  territory  nearly  as  large  as  all  Europe. 
Extending  from  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  to  the  middle  of  the  great  lakes, 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi,  and  on  the  west  side  of  that  river, 
to  latitude  forty  nine  degrees  north,  and  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pa- 
cific ocean,  they  contain  a  variety  of  soil,  as  well  as  climate,  adapted 
to  the  production  of  most  of  the  articles,  now  deemed  necessary,  in 
civilized  life,  and  are  capable  of  sustaining  a  vast  population. 

In  the  view  of  this  extensive  country,  contemplated  in  the  following' 
pages,  we  presume,  a  brief  sketch  of  the  manner,  in  which  the  coun- 
try itself  has,  at  various  times,  been  acquired,  will  not  be  deemed  for- 
eign from  our  main  design,  or  be  found  entirely  without  interest 

Great  Britain,  France  and  Spain,  bad  original  and  undefined  claims, 
to  all  North  America  ;  and,  in  addition  to  the  limits  secured  from  the 
former,  by  the  treaty  of  peace  in  1783,  the  United  States  have  since 
acquired  a  vast  extent  of  country,  west  of  the  Mississippi,  from  France, 
by  purchase,  and,  also  the  Floridas,  from  Spain,  in  the  same  way. 

For  the  extensive  limits  finally  secured,  at  the  peace  of  1783,  the 
people  of  the  United  States  were  indebted  to  the  firmness  and  perse- 
verance of  their  negotiators.  France,  by  her  treaty  of  alliance, 
guarantied  to  the  Americans  their  possessions ;  and,  also,  the  islands 
of  Bermuda,  and  the  British  possessions  in  the  northern  parts  of 
America,  which  they  might  obtain  by  conquest.  The  extent  of  the 
possesions  then  held  by  the  Americans,  was  not  defined  by  the  treaty, 
and  afterwards  occasioned  great  difiiculties,  particularly  with  Spain. 

By  a  special  article  in  the  treaty,  Spain  was  permitted  to  accede  to 
it,  under  such  conditions,  as  might  be  agreed  and  settled  between  the 
parties.  It  is  well  known,  that  Spain  refused  to  become  a  party  to 
this  treaty,  bat  on  the  condition,  that  the  United  States  should  re- 

1 


> 


linquish  all  claims  to  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  river,  and,  in- 
deed, to  all  the  country  west  of  the  Alleghany  mountains. 

The  United  Slates  refused  to  purchase  the  alliance  of  Spain,  at  such 
a  price.  These  conditions  were  offered  to  Congress,  by  the  Spanish 
court,  through  the  French  Minister  in  the  United  States,  in  January, 
1760.  These  conditions,  however,  were  not  submitted  to  Congress, 
until  after  Mr.  Jay  had  been  sent  to  Spain,  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
cluding a  treaty  with  the  Spanish  court.  Before  his  departure,  how- 
CTer,  the  French  Minister  intimated  to  him,  that  a  cession  of  the  Flor- 
id«8,  as  well  as  a  relinquishment  of  all  claim  to  the  Mississippi,  would 
be  deemed  an  indispensable  prerequisite,  to  a  treaty  with  Spain.  Mr. 
Jay,  it  is  well  known,  was  unable  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  Span- 
ish court,  because,  he  would  not  consent  to  give  up  all  right  to  the  Mis- 
siMippi.  Fending  the  negotiations  for  peace,  in  1782,  Great  Britain, 
for  a  long  time,  insisted  on  the  Ohio,  as  the  western  boundary  ;  and 
Spain  still  urged,  that  the  United  States  had  no  right  to  the  country 
west  of  the  mountains.  In  this,  she  was  countenanced,  if  not  sup- 
ported, by  France. 

Rayneval,  the  confidential  secretary  of  Vergennes,  in  a  written 
communication  made  to  Mr.  Jay,  on  the  subject  of  western  limitSy 
declared,  that  the  United  States  had  no  right  to  the  lands  lying  be- 
tween the  Alleghany  mountains,  and  the  Mississippi :  and,  in  the  same 
communication,  referring  to  the  claims  of  Spain,  he  stated,  that  "  this 
power  cannot  extend  its  claim  beyond  the  bounds  of  its  conquests — 
She  cannot,  therefore,  pass  beyond  Natchez,  situated  towards  the 
thirty  first  degree  of  latitude :  her  rights  are,  therefore,  confined  to 
this  degree — what  is  beyond,  is  either  independent,  or  belonging  to 
England ;  jneitker  Spain  nor  the  Americans  can  have  any  pretensions 
thereto.  The  future  treaty  of  peace  can  alone  regulate  the  respective 
righu."* 

This  extraordinary  private  communication,  with  the  intercepted  let- 
ter of  Marbois,  and  other  circumstances,  at  last,  satisfied  all  the 
American  negotiators  at  Paris,  that  France  was  against  them,  in  re- 
gard to  the  western  country ;  and  they  therefore,  determined  to  con- 
clude a  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  without  consulting  the  French  court, 
although,  by  their  instructions,  they  were  not  only  to  consult  that 
court,  but  be  governed  entirely,  by  its  advice  or  that  of  its  ministers. 

In  vindication  of  their  conduct  in  this  respect,  they  all  joined  in  a 
letter,  to  the  American  Secretdry  of  foreign  affairs,  dated  the  14th  of 

^  Bee  4th  volume  of  the  Secret  Journals  of  Congress. 


December,  1782,  in  which  they  say,  **  We  knew  this  court  and  Spain 
to  be  against  our  claim  to  the  western  country,  and  having  no  reason 
to  think  that  lines  more  favorable  could  ever  have  been  obtained,  we 
finally  agreed  to  those  described  in  this  article ;  indeed,  they  appear 
to  leave  us  little  to  complain  of,  and  not  much  to  desire.'^* 

In  settling  the  precise  line  between  the  United  States,  and  the 
eastern  and  northern  British  Provinces,  great  difficulties  have  arisen ; 
ands  ome  parts  of  this  line  remain  yet  unrtettled.  The  north  east 
corner  was  to  begin  at  the  north  west  angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  being 
that  angle,  which  was  formed  by  a  line  drawn  due  north  from  the 
source  of  the  St.  Croix  river,  to  the  highlands,  and  along  the  said 
highlands,  which  divide  those  rivers,  which  empty  themselves  into  the 
liver  St  Lawrence,  from  those  falling  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  to  the 
head  of  the  Connecticut  river,  down  the  middle  of  that  river  to 
kL  45^,  then  due  west  to  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  from  thence,  by  the 
St.  Lawrence,  the  middle  of  the  great  lakes,  and  their  connecting 
waters,  to  the  north  western  part  of  the  lake  of  the  Woods ;  and  from 
that  point,  due  west  to  the  river  Mississippi.  At  the  date  of  the 
treaty  of  peace,  the  geography  of  the  interior  of  North  America  was 
little  known.  It  was  then  supposed,  that  a  line  running  due  west, 
from  the  lake  of  the  Woods,  would  strike  the  Mississippi ;  and  it  was 
Dot  ascertained  until  some  years  after,  that  the  sources  of  that  riTer, 
were  about  two  degrees  south  of  that  lake.  To  correct  this  error, 
in  1802,  the  American  Minister  at  London,  Mr.  King,  and  the  Brit- 
ish court,  agreed  upon  an  explanatory  article  ;  by  which  the  line  was 
to  run  from  the  lake  of  the  Woods  direct  to  the  sources  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi. This  agreement  was  not  ratified  by  the  American  govern- 
ment, as  it  might  not  correspond  with  tlie  north  line  of  Louisiana, 
joit  then  purchased. 

This  line,  therefore,  remained  unsettled  until  1818,  when,  by  ano- 
ther agreement  between  the  United  State:^  and  Great  Britain,  it  was 
to  extend  from  the  lake  of  the  Woods  west,  in  the  parallel  of  latitude 
49S  M  far  as  the  rocky  mountains ;  and  at  the  same  time,  **  it  was 
agreed,  that  any  country  which  might  be  claimed  by  either  party,  on 
tlie  north  west  coast  of  America,  westward  of  the  stony  mountains, 
together  with  its  harbors,  bays  and  creeks  and  the  navigation  of  all 
lirers  within  the  same,  should  be  free  and  open,  for  the  term  of  ten 
years  from  the  date  of  the  agreement,  to  the  vessels,  citizens  and 
subjects  of  both  powers,  without  prejudice  to  the  claim  of  either  par- 


•  Diplomatic  correspoadence,  vol.  10,  page  190. 


J 


ty  or  any  other  power/'  As  settlements  increased  on  or  near  the 
great  lakes,  it  became  important  to  ascertain  the  line  passing  through 
their  center,  with  a  view  to  their  navigation,  as  well  as  the  rights  of 
the  parties  to  the  numerous  and  valuable  islands,  scattered  through 
these  inland  seas.  Both  nations,  also,  claimed  certain  islands,  in  the 
bay  of  Passaroaquoddy ;  and  serious  difficulties  had  arisen,  as  to  the 
north  west  angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  the  highlands,  mentioned  in 
the  treaty  of  peace.  For  an  amicable  adjustment  of  these  questions, 
OTery  day  becoming  more  important,  provision  was  made  in  the 
Treaty  of  Ghent. 

Three  different  boards  of  Commissioners  were  to  be  appointed ;  the 
first,  to  settle  the  rights  of  the  parties  to  the  islands  in  Passamaquod- 
dy  bay — the  second,  to  ascertain  the  north  west  angle  of  Nova  Sco- 
tia, the.  highlands  along  which  the  line  was  to  run,  and  the  head  of 
Connecticut,  and  also,  to  survey  and  mark  the  line  from  the  head  of 
St  Croix,  to  the  St.  Lawrence,  in  lat.  45^ — ^and  the  third,  to  ascer- 
tain, the  middle  of  the  rivers  and  lakes,  from  this  place  on  the  St 
Lawrence,  to  the  lake  of  the  Woods,  and  determine  the  rights  of  the 
parties  to  the  islands  in  the  same.  Each  board  was  to  consist  of  two 
Commissioners,  one  to  be  appointed  by  each  government ;  and  in 
case  of  their  disagreement  the  subject  was  to  be  referred  to  the  de- 
cision of  some  friendly  sovereign  or  State,  to  be  named  by  both  par-  • 
ties.  The  commissioners  composing  the  first  board,  on  the  24th  of 
November,  1817,  amicably  settled  the  questions  referred  to  them,  and 
decided,  that  Moose  Island,  Dudley  Island  and  Frederick  Island  be- 
longed to  the  United  States,  and  that  all  the  other  Islands,  including 
that  of  Grand  Menan,  belonged  to  Great  Britain.  Those  of  the  se- 
eond  board  were  unable  to  agree,  as  to  the  location  and  course  of  the 
highlands  and  as  to  the  north  west  angle  of  Nova  Scotia.  The 
place  for  this  angle,  claimed  by  the  American  Commissioner,  was 
about  one  hundred  miles  north  of  that  claimed  by  the  British  ;  and 
this  subject  by  the  mutual  agreement  of  both  governments,  was  re- 
ferred to  the  decision  of  the  King  of  the  Netherlands.  The  quantity 
of  land  in  controversy,  was  said  to  be  between  five  and  six  millions 
of  acres ;  and  the  right  of  jurisdiction,  was  deemed  of  great  impor- 
tance to  the  British  government  as  the  great  road  leading  from  the 
eastern  Provinces  to  Quebec,  run  through  the  disputed  territory. 
The  three  points  to  be  decided  by  the  royal  arbitrator,  were,  first 
the  place  designated  in  the  Treaty  of  peace,  as  the  north  west 
angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  where  were  the  highlands,  dividing  the 
rivers,  that  empty  themselves  into  the  rivers  St  Lawrence,  from 


6 

thoM  which  fall  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  along  which  was  to  be 
drawn  the  line  of  boundary,  from  that  angle  to  the  north  westernmost 
head  of  Connecticut  river — the  second,  which  was  the  north  western- 
most head  of  Connecticut  river ;  and  the  third  was,  which  was  the 
boandary  to  be  traced  from  the  river  Connecticut  along  the  parallel 
of  the  45th  degree  of  north  latitude,  to  the  river  8t.  Lawrence,  named 
in  the  Treaties  Iroquois  and  Cataraguy. 

On  the  10th  day  of  January,  1831,  these  questions  were  decided 
bj  the  arbitrator.  As  to  the  first,  he  was  of  opinion,  **  That  it  will 
be  suitable  (il  conviendra)  to  adopt,  as  the  boundary  of  the  two 
8utea,  a  line  drawn  due  north  from  the  source  of  the  river  Su  Croix 
to  the  point  where  it  intersects  the  middle  of  the  Thalweg,  (the  deep* 
est  channel)  of  the  river  St.  John,  thence  by  the  middle  of  the  deepest 
channel  of  that  river,  ascending  it,  to  the  point  where  the  river  St 
Francis  empties  itself  into  the  river  St.  John,  thence  by  the  middle  of 
the  deepest  channel  of  the  river  St.  Francis,  ascending  it,  to  the  source 
of  its  sovthwestemmost  branch ;  which  sources  are  indicated  on  the 
nap  A,  by  the  letter  X,  authenticated  by  the  signature  of  our  min- 
kler  of  Foreign  affairs ;  thence  a  line  drawn  due  west,  to  the  point 
where  it  unites  with  the  line  claimed  by  the  United  States  of  Ameri- 
ca and  delineated  on  the  map  A,  thence  said  line  to  the  point  at  which 
according  to  said  map,  it  coincides  with  that  claimed  by  Great  Britain, 
and  thence  the  line  traced  on  the  map  by  the  two  powers  to  the  north 
westernmost  head  of  Connecticut  river.*' 

With  reject  to  the  second  point,  he  decided,  **  that  the  stream 
situated  farthest  to  the  north  west,  among  those  which  fall  into  the 
Dorthemmost  of  the  three  lakes,  the  last  of  which  bears  the  name  of 
Conaecticut  Lake,  must  be  considered,  as  the  north  westernmost  head 
of  Connecticut  river  ;**  and  as  to  the  third,  he  was  of  opinion,  *'  That 
it  wovld  be  suitable  (il  conviendra)  to  proceed  to  fresh  operations  to 
measure  the  observed  latitude,  in  order  to  make  out  the  boundary 
from  the  river  Connecticut  along  the  parallel  of  the  45th  degree  of 
Dorth  latitude  to  the  river  St.  Lawrence,  named  in  the  Treaties  Iro« 
qnois  or  Cataraguy,  in  such  a  manner,  however,  that  in  all  cases,  at 
the  place  called  Rouse's  Point,  the  territory  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  nhall  extend  to  the  Fort  erected  at  that  place,  and  shall  in- 
clude said  Fort  and  its  Kiloroetrical  radius  (rayon  Kilometrique.)" 

The  Senate  of  the  United  States  advised  the  President,  not  to  con- 
firm this  award,  or  to  deem  it  obligatory  on  the  United  States,  but  to 

ike  the  line  in  dispute  a  subject  of  further  negociation.    An  award, 
rhelher  between  nations  or  individuals,  in  order  to  bind  the  parties. 


A 


must  be  made  in  pursuance  of  the  authority  given  in  the  submission. 
The  authority  of  the  arbitrator  was,  to  ascertain  a  line  designated  in 
the  Treaty  of  1783,  but  not  to  make  a  new  line  for  the  parties.  The 
Senate,  no  doubt,  in  advising  the  President  in  the  manner  above  sta- 
ted, were  perfectly  satisfied  that  tlie  royal  arbitrator  had  made  an  en- 
tirely  new  line ;  and  particularly  between  the  heads  of  the  St.  Croix 
and  Connecticut  rivers ;  for  it  cannot  be  presumed,  that  body  would 
have  paid  so  ill  a  compliment  to  his  understanding,  as  to  suppose  that 
he  could  have  taken  the  deepest  channel  of  a  river  to  be  highlands  ; 
and  particularly,  highlands  separating  rivers  running  in  opposite  di- 
rections. The  Senate  were  probably  confirmed  in  this,  as  the  arbi- 
trator bad  also  awarded,  that  the  line  to  be  run  along  the  parallel  of 
the  forty  fifth  degree  of  north  latitude,  should  be  run  in  such  a  man- 
ner as  to  include  the  fort  which  the  United  States  had  erected,  at  a 
place  called  Rouse's  Point.  The  language  of  the  award  is  unusual, 
and  indicates,  beyond  a  doubt,  the  intention  of  the  arbitrator,  to  run 
or  recommend  a  new  line.  Instead  of  finding  the  north  west  angle 
of  Nova  Scotia,  and  the  highlands,  the  arbitrator  says,  according  to 
the  translation  given,  **  it  will  be  suitable  (il  conviendra)  to  adopU  ^^ 
the  boundary  of  the  two  states,''  &.c.  The  French  word  here  trans- 
lated suitable,  when  used  impersonally,  as  in  this  case,  is  taken  in  the 
aense  of  expediency,  and  might  have  been  translated,  **  it  will  be  fit, 
expedient,  convenient,  meet,  proper," -^.c.  The  King  of  the  Nether^ 
lands  certainly  had  no  right,  under  the  submission,  to  judge  of  the 
expediency,  suitableness,  or  convenience  of  the  line  he  w^s  to  survey 
and  mark,  either  to  both  or  either  of  the  parties. 

The  third  board  of  commissioners,  after  an  investigation  of  many 
years,  came  to  an  amicable  arrangement,  with  respect  to  a  great  part 
of  the  line,  submitted  to  their  decision,  particularly  the  part  south  and 
east  of  Lake  Superior,  and  made  their  report,  to  their  respective 
governments. 

The  United  States  have  also  come  in  collision  with  Russia,  on  the 
western  shore  of  America  The  Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias,  not  eon- 
tent  with  the  acquisition  of  all  the  northern  part  of  Asia,  at  length 
crossed  Behring's  Straits,  and  has  lately  claimed  a  large  portion  of 
western  America,  and  an  exclusive  right  to  the  navigation  of  the  seas 
adjoining.  These  extraordinary  claims  were  promptly  met,  and  re- 
sisted by  the  American  government ;  and,  in  18^,  were  settled  by  a 
treaty,  ascertaining  and  defining  the  limits  and  rights  of  the  respective 
nations,  in  that  quarter.  By  the  ^ird  article  of  this  treaty,  it  waa 
agreedt  that  no  eitabUahment  should  be  formed  by  the  citixens  of  the 


Uaited  SUiet,  u|>on  the  north  west  coast  of  America,  nor  in  any  of 
the  idands  adjacent,  to  the  north  of  fifty  four  degrees  and  forty  minotes 
of  north  latitude ;  and  that  none  should  be  formed  by  the  subjects  of 
Rwaia,  to  the  south  of  the  same  parallel. 

A  part  of  the  southern  boundary  was,  for  a  long  time,  a  subject  of 
dispote  between  the  United  States  and  Spain. 

Although,  by  the  second  article  of  the  provisional  treaty  of  peaeot 
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  the  south  line  was  to 
roD,  from  the  Mississippi,  due  east,  to  the  river  Apalachicola,  in  the 
perallel  of  latitude  thirty  one  degrees  north ;  yet,  by  a  secret  article 
annexed,  it  was  provided,  **  that  in  case  Great  Britain,  at  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  present  war,  should  recover,  or  be  put  in  possession  of 
West  Florida,  the  line  of  north  boundary  between  that  province  and 
the  United  States,  should  be  a  line  drawn  from  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Yazoua,  where  it  unites  with  the  Mississippi*  due  east,  to  the  river 
Apalachicola.'^  The  cause  of  this  article  requires  explanation.  By 
the  peace  of  1763,  Great  Britain  obtained,  both  from  Francei  and 
Spain,  a  cession  of  all  tlieir  right  to  the  country  east  of  the  Mbsia- 
sippi,  with  the  exception  of  the  island  of  New  Orleans ;  and  by  a 
royal  proclamation  of  the  7th  of  October  of  that  year,  the  country 
acquired,  and  lying  south  of  Georgia,  was  formed  into  two  proT- 

called  East  and  West  Florida ;  and  the  northern  limit  of  the 
ktler  was  fixed,  in  the  parallel  of  thirty  one  degrees  of  latitude,  mn- 
ming  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  Apalachicola.  Afterwards,  however, 
io  1774,  the  bounds  of  West  Florida,  by  royal  instructions  and  com- 
nissiona,  were  extended  north  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yazous,  and  from 
tkence  east  to  the  same  river ;  and  from  that  period,  the  territory  be- 
iweea  this  line  and  laU  31^,  was  considered  a  part  of  West  Flori- 
da, while  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  British  crown,  and  in  1779  and 
1780,  was  conquered  as  such,  and  possessed  by  Spain. 

At  the  date  of  the  Provisional  Treaty,  the  differences  between  Grreal 
Britain  and  Spain  were  unadjusted.    In  1783,  S|>ain,  as  well  as  France* 
;med  resolved,  in  some  degree,  at  least,  to  make  up  the  losses  sna- 

by  them,  at  the  peace  of  1763.  Spain  insisted  on  the  restora- 
tion of  her  ancient  territory,  east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  which  she 
tbcn  held  by  conquest ;  and  Great  Britain  finally  ceded  both  the  Flo- 
ridas  to  Spain,  without  any  definite  limits.  The  secret  article  above 
mentioned,  although  not  officially  communicated,  either  to  the  French 
or  Spanish  courts,  was  no  doubt  known  to  both,  and  caused  no  little 
diliculty  in  the  subsequent  negotiations,  in  relation  to  this  part  of  the 
Boatheni  boaadary. 


J 


8 

His  Catholic  Majesty,  not  only  kept  possession  of  the  country,  as 
far  north  as  the  mouth  of  the  Yazous,  but  prohibited  the  Americans 
the  use  of  the  Mississippi,  below  that  place.  Nor  were  the  United 
States  ahle  to  settle  these  important  questions,  until  1795,  when,  by 
the  Treaty  of  San  Lorenzo,  his  Catholic  Majesty,  agreed  to  the  limits 
fixed  by  the  Provisional  Treaty ;  and  accorded  to  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  the  narigation  of  the  Mississippi,  below  that  line,  with 
a  right  of  deposit,  at  New  Orleans,  for  three  years ;  reserving  to 
himself  the  liberty,  at  the  end  of  that  period,  either  to  continue  the 
right,  at  that  place,  or  to  assign  some  other  equivalent,  on  the  banks 
of  the  river.  From  several  causes,  however,  the  disputed  territory 
was  not  delivered  up  to  the  Americans  until  1798. 

In  1796,  Spain  and  the  French  Republic  concluded  a  Treaty  of  al- 
liance, offensive  and  defensive ;  and  at  that  time,  France  contemplated 
obtaining  from  Spain,  the  restoration  of  her  ancient  colony  of  Lou- 
isiana. This,  however  was  not  effected  until  1800,  when,  by  the 
Treaty  of  St.  Udefonso,  his  Catholic  Majesty  retroceded  to  the  French 
Republic,  then  under  the  direction  of  Bonaparte,  as  first  Consul, 
Louisiana,  by  the  following  description — viz.  **  The  Colony  or  Pror- 
ince  of  Louisiana,  with  the  same  extent,  that  it  now  has  in  the  hands 
of  Spain,  and  that  it  had,  when  France  possessed  it,  and  such  as  it 
should  be,  in  pursuance  of  Treaties  subsequently  entered  into,  be- 
tween Spain  and  other  States.*'  This  was  called,  as  it  really  was,  a 
retrocession  of  a  Colony,  first  settled  by  France,  and  which  remained 
in  her  possession,  until  the  3d  of  November,  176%  when,  by  a  secret 
Treaty,  never  yet  made  public,  his  Christian  Majesty  transferred  it,  to 
Spain.  This  was  done,  in  pursuance  of  the  celebrated  Family  Com- 
pact, and  to  compensate  her  ally,  for  the  loss  of  her  territory  on  the 
eitst  side  of  the  Mississippi,  which,  on  the  same  day,  she  had  ceded  to 
Great  Britain,  as  well  as  for  other  losses  sustained,  in  the  preceding 
war. 

Spain,  however,  still  continued,  nominally  at  least,  to  exercise  the 
powers  of  goTernment  in  the  .country;  and  in  October,  1802,  the 
Spanish  Intendant  of  the  Province,  withdrew  the  right  of  Deposit 
at  New  Orleans,  and  without  assigning  an  equivalent  establishment,  at 
any  other  place  on  the  river.  This  extraordinary  and  unexpected  vi- 
olation of  national  faith,  justly  excited  the  indignation  of  the  Ameri- 
cans, particularly  those  residing  west  of  the  mountains ;  and  many 
were  ready  to  take  possession  of  New  Orleans  by  force.  The  Amer- 
ican Executive,  to  secure  the  free  and  peaceable  navigation  of  the 
river  in  its  whole  course,  without  the  liability  of  future  intermptioB, 


9 

■et  on  foot  ft  Degrotiaiion  with  the  French  and  Spanish  goTenimentis 
for  the  purchase  of  the  Island  of  New  Orleant^  and  the  Provinces  of 
EoMt  and  West  Florida,  To  enable  the  President  to  effect  tins  ob* 
jeetv  Congress,  in  January,  1803,  placed  in  his  hands  two  millions  of 
dollars.  Mr.  Monroe  was  united  with  Mr.  Livingston  in  the  negotia- 
tion, and  with  all  possible  dispatch,  sent  to  Paris. 

Great  Britain  had  become  alarmed  at  the  ambitious  projects  of  Bo- 
naparte, and  particularly  in  his  acquisition  of  Louisiana,  and  his  con- 
templated possession  of  that  extensive  country,  with  a  large  army ; 
nnd  at  once,  determined  to  prevent  his  occupation  of  it  With  this 
view,  the  fleet,  and  troops  under  General  Victor,  destined  for  that 
country,  were,  for  a  long  time,  kept  in  strict  blockade,  in  the  ports  of 
Holland,  by  a  British  squadron. 

Bonaparte,  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  his  being  able  to  oc- 
cupy the  country,  resolved  to  offer  it,  to  the  Americans.  In  this  pe- 
culiar juncture  of  affairs,  Mr.  Monroe  arrived  at  Paris.  The  powers 
of  the  American  Negotiators,  however,  extended  no  further,  than  the 
purchaae  of  the  Island  of  New  Orleans,  and  the  two  Floridas.  In- 
deed, neither  Congress,  nor  the  President  contemplated  the  acquisi- 
tioo  of  the  extensive  country  west  of  the  Mississippi,  called  Looia- 
The  business,  however,  was  too  urgent  to  admit  of  the  delay 
try  for  obtaining -new  powers.  The  Treaty  of  Amiens  was,  in 
fret,  already  broken,  and  a  renewal  of  the  war,  and  particularly  be- 
tween Great  Britain  and  France,  was  daily  ex})ected. 

Under  these  circumstances,  the  American  negotiators,  on  the  30th 
#f  April  1803,  concluded  a  Treaty  for  the  purchase  of  the  whole  of 
die  Province  of  Louisiana,  for  the  consideration  of  fiAcen  millions  of 
dollart;  and  by  the  same  description,  as  that  contained  in  the  transfer 
Drom  Spain  to  France.  His  Catholic  Majesty  was  opposed  to  the 
transfer  of  the  country  to  the  United  States,  and  at  first,  entered  his  pro- 
test against  it;  and  although,  this  was  afterwards  withdrawn,  yet  he 
waa  never  perfectly  reconciled  to  the  measure.  A  difference  soon 
nrose  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  with  respect  to  the  limits 
of  the  country,  as  described  in  the  Treaties ;  a  difference,  which  oc- 
casioned long  and  expensive  negotiations,  and  at  one  time,  threatened 
a  mpture  between  the  two  countries.  As  Spain  ceded  the  province  " 
to  France,  and  France  to  the  United  States,  with  the  same  extent  it 
iMd,  **  in  the  hands  of  Spain,  and  that  it  had,  when  France  possessed 
it,  and  such  as  it  should  be,  in  pun^uance  of  Treaties  subsequently  en- 
tered into,  between  Spain  and  other  States,"  the  American  govern- 
ckimed,  that  it  extended  east  of  the  Mississippi,  as  &r  as  the 

2 


i 


10 

river  Perdido ;  alleging  that  Louisiana,  while  in  the  possession  of 
France,  extended  east  to  that  river ;  that  the  same  was  now  in  the 
hands  of  Spain,  and,  of  course,  embraced,  by  the  express  terms  of 
the  Treaty.  Spain,  however,  was  opposed  to  this  construction  of  the 
terms  of  the  Treaty,  declaring,  that  she  merely  ceded  back  to  France* 
what  she  had  received  from  her,  by  the  Treaty  of  1762 — that  the 
country  east  of  the  Mississippi,  (except  the  island  of  New  Orleans,) 
she  did  not  receive  from  France,  as  both  she  and  France  had  previ- 
ously  united,  in  ceding  it  to  Great  Britain — that  the  territory  east  of 
that  river,  in  her  hands,  she  held  by  conquest  and  cession  from  Great 
Britain,  under  the  name  of  the  Floridas ;  and  that  the  same,  since  the 
peace  of  1763,  had  not  been  known  or  deemed  as  a  part  of  Louisiana; 
and  that  the  extent  of  the  Province,  when  France  possessed  it,  as 
mentioned  in  the  Treaty,  referred  only  to  that  part,  in  the  actual  pos- 
session of  France,  at  the  time  of  her  cession  to  Spain  in  1762. 

The  order  of  his  Catholic  Majesty,  for  delivering  the  possession  of 
the  Province  to  France,  given  several  months  before  the  sale  to  the 
United  States,  confirms  the  construction  contended  for  by  the  Spanish 
government.  This  order  was  given,  when  General  Victor  was  about 
to  depart  for  the  purpose  of  taking  possession  of  the  country,  and 
bears  date  the  15th  day  of  October,  1802.  It  directs  the  Capt  Gen- 
eral of  Louisiana,  to  deliver  to  General  Vict«»r,  or  other  French  offi- 
cers, who  might  be  charged  with  the  expedition,  the  possession  of 
Louisiana,  and  its  dependencies,  and  also  the  City  and  Island  of  New 
Orleans,  **  with  the  same  extent  it  now  actually  has,  and  which  it  had* 
under  the  dominion  of  France,  tvhen  she  ceded  it  to  my  royal  crown^ 
(quand  elle  la  ceda  a  ma  couronne  royale,)  and  such  as  it  ought  to  be, 
in  pursuance  of  Treaties,  which  have  since  taken  place,  between  my 
Estates,  and  those  of  other  powers.^'  Spain,  as  will  fully  appear 
hereafter,  was  supported  by  France,  in  her  construction,  regarding 
eastern  limits. 

Soon  after  the  purchase,  the  President,  in  pursuance  of  an  act  of 
Congress,  (passed  for  that  purpose,)  established  a  Port  of  entry,  at  or 
near  Mobile,  and  within  the  disputed  limits.  The  Spanish  Court  re- 
monstrated against  this  proceeding,  and  the  President  immediately 
gave  it  up. 

The  bounds  of  the  newly  acquired  territory,  both  to  the  west  and 
the  norths  were,  also,  equally  undefined,  and  soon  became  subjects  of 
serious  altercation.  To  ttetile  these  various  and  important  questions, 
as  well  as  to  adjust  the  claims  of  the  United  States  upon  Spain,  for 
spoliations  on  their  commerce,  and  for  a  suppression  of  the  right  of 


11 

deposit  at  New  Orleans,  Mr.  Monroe,  then  minister  at  London,  was* 
in  1804,  sent  a  special  envoy,  and  joined  with  Charles  Pinckney, 
then  resident  minister  at  Madrid.  With  respect  to  limits,  Mr.  Mon- 
roe, was  instructed  to  claim,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi,  to  the 
river  Perdido,  and  on  the  west,  to  the  Rio  Bravo ;  and  from  the  source 
of  this  last  river,  by  a  line  to  run  west  of  the  sources  of  the  rivers, 
which  empty  into  the  Mississippi  from  that  quarter.  The  negotia- 
tions under  this  mission  entirely  failed.  The  Spanish  Court,  not  only 
denied  the  right  of  the  United  States,  to  any  portion  of  the  territory 
east  of  the  Mississippi,  but,  in  the  most  peremptory  manner,  declared 
their  claim  to  the  Rio  Bravo,  to  be  totally  unfounded. 

A  long  and  rather  angry  correspondence  took  place,  between  the 
American  Ministers,  and  the  Spanish  negotiator,  Don  Pedro  Ceval- 
los,  then  Secretary  of  foreign  affairs. 

Various  propositions  were  made  by  the  American  ministers  relative 
to  the  subjects  in  dispute,  but  were  all  rejected  by  the  Spanish  Court 
The  final  propositions  made  by  them,  were,  that  on  condition  Spain 
would  c«de  to  the  United  States,  the  territory  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
mud  would  arbitrate  with  respect  to  her  spoliations  on  American  com- 
merce, agreeable  to  the  stipulations  contained  in  the  Convention  of 
the  11th  of  August,  1802,  to  which  the  Spanish  minister  had  agreed, 
but  which  the  King  afterwards  refused  to  ratify,  the  United  States,  on 
tlieir  part,  would  cede  the  territory  west  of  the  Mississippi,  from  a 
fine  beginning  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Colorado,  and  by  that  river  to 
its  tources ;  and  from  thence,  to  the  northern  limits  of  Louisiana,  by 
a  Kne,  west  of  the  sources  of  the  rivers,  that  run  into  the  Mississippi. 
They,  also  proposed,  that  a  space  of  thirty  leagues,  be  left,  between 
tiM  American  and  Spanish  territories,  never  to  be  settled  by  either 
f^rif. 

The  United  States,  on  these  conditions,  were  to  relinquish  all  claims 
for  French  spoliations  in  Spanish  ports,  engaging  to  compensate  their 
own  citizens,  for  these  spoliations,  in  a  sum  to  be  specified ;  and  were 
to  relinqnish  all  claim  for  damages,  in  consequence  of  the  suppression 
of  the  right  of  deposit  at  New  Orleans.  These  propositions  were 
made,  on  the  12th  of  May,  1805.  The  Spanish  negotiator  promptly 
answered,  that  it  was  inconvenient  for  Spain  to  make  an  exchange  of 
territory,  or,  in  any  way,  accede  to  the  proposed  contract,  declaring 
that  the  United  States  hud  no  claims  on  Spain,  for  French  spoliations, 
or  for  damages,  in  consequence  of  the  withdrawing  the  right  of  de- 
pocit  at  New  Orleans — that  both  the  Floridas  belonged  to  Spain ; 
that  ih4   territory  w(^sl  of  the  Colorado,  tias  her  property,    and 


13 

indeed,  that  the  United  States  had  no  just  claims  to  territory  far  eaut 
of  that  river. 

The  true  line,  he  declared,  between  Louisiana,  and  the  Spanish 
possessions  in  that  quarter,  commenced  on  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  be- 
tween the  rivers  Caracut  and  Marmentao,  and  from  thence,  run  north 
between  the  old  Fort  Adais,  and  Natchitoches,  until  it  struck  the  Red 
river.  From  this  point,  further  north,  he  said,  the  line  had  never 
been  definitely  settled,  .and  was,  therefore,  a  proper  subject  to  be  re- 
ferred to  the  investigation  of  Commissioners.  This  interesting  ne- 
gotiation  closed,  on  the  10th  May,  1805. 

The  ruler  of  France,  was  not  an  idle  or  a  disinterested  spectator 
of  this  negotiation — and  we  would  here  observe,  that  at  the  time  of 
the  negotiations  relative  to  the  purchase  of  Louisiana,  Mr.  Monroe 
was  desirous  of  securing  the  aid  of  Bonaparte,  in  the  purchase  of  the 
Floridas ;  and  an  article  to  this  effect,  was,  at  first,  inserted  in  the 
Louisiana  Treaty,  but  was  afterwards  stricken  out,  at  the  request 
of  the  first  Consul.  Bonaparte  at  the  same  time  gave  verbal  assu- 
ranceii,  that  his  aid  towards  effecting  that  object,  would  be  readily 
afforded,  at  some  future  svitable  time.  In  consequence  of  this  inti* 
mation,  Mr.  Monroe  relinquished  the  plan  of  immediately  proceeding 
to  Madrid  as  he  had  before  contemplated.  While  at  Paris,  on  his  way 
from  London  to  Madrid,  in  November,  1K)4,  Mr.  Monroe,  in  a  note 
to  Talleyrand,  made  known  the  object  of  his  mission,  and  requested 
the  aid  of  Bonaparte,  agreeable  to  his  former  assurances. 

He,  at  the  same  time,  furnished  the  French  government  with  a  copy 
of  a  memoir,  prepared  by  the  American  Executive,  on  the  subject 
of  the  eastern  and  western  boundaries  of  Louii«iana.     In  answer  to 

« 

this  communication,  Mr.  Monroe  afterwards  received  a  letter  from 
Talleyrand,  dated  December  21  st,  1804.  In  this,  the  Emperor  of 
France,  (for  the  coronation  took  place  while  Mr.  Monroe  was  at  Pa- 
ris, a  little  before  the  date  of  this  letter)  in  the  most  explicit  manner, 
denied  the  right  of  the  United  States,  to  any  part  of  the  territory 
east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  Iberville;  declared,  that  France  had 
never  purchased  it  of  Spain,  and  that  any  attempt,  on  their  part,  to 
take  possession  of  it,  would  be  an  act  of  aggression,  on  the  lawful 
rights  of  Spain. 

The  tone  of  this  letter  was  indeed,  not  a  little  extraordinary,  after 
what  had  passed  between  the  American  negotiators,  and  the  French 
government,  respecting  the  limits  of  Louisiana,  before  and  aAer  the 
conclusion  of  the  Treaty  ceding  that  country  to  the  United  States. 


13 

this  negotiation,  the  American  ministers  were  giren  to  on- 
deratand  that,  the  country  offered  them,  would  include,  not  only  the 
Island  of  New  Orleans,  hut  also,  the  territory  east  of  the  Mississippi, 
as  &r  as  the  river  Perdido,  as  this  was  a  part  of  Louisiana,  wheii 
France  possessed  it ;  and  Marhois,  the  French  negotiator,  told  them, 
thai  the  town  of  Mobile  would  fall  within  the  limits  of  the  cession. 
And  yet,  after  the  completion  of  the  Treaty,  when  called  upon  for  n 
more  particular  explanation,  respecting  Mobile's  being  part  of  the  ce« 
ded  territory,  Marhois  informed  Mr.  Livingston,  that  he  had  no 
precise  idea  on  this  subject ;  that  he  knew  it  to  be  an  historical  fact« 
and  on  that  alone,  had  formed  his  opinion.  He,  also,  informed  Mr. 
Linngston,  that  he  did  not  know,  what  orders  had  been  given  the 
Prefect,  who  was  to  take  possession,  nor  what  orders  had  been  given 
by  Spain,  as  to  boundaries. 

An  explanation  as  to  the  extent  of  the  country,  was,  also,  required 
•f  the  French  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  by  Mr.  Livingston  ;  and  the 
following  singular  dialogue  passed  between  them,  on  this  subject. 
**  I  asked  the  ministeri'*  says  Mr.  Livingston,  in  his  letter  to  Mr. 
Madison  of  the  20th  of  May,  1805,  **  what  were  the  last  bounds  of 
tfe  territory  ceded  to  us  ?  he  did  not  know ;  we  must  take  it  as  they 
kad  received  it.  I  asked  him  how  Spain  meant  to  give  them  posses* 
sian  !  he  said,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Treaty.  But  where  did 
joa  mean  to  take  ?  I  do  not  know.  Then  you  mean  we  shall  con* 
atme  it  in  our  own  way  ?  I  can  give  you  no  directions ;  you  have 
a  noble  bargain  for  yourselves,  and  I  suppose  you  will  make  the 
of  it."* 

It  cannot  fail  to  appear  strange,  especially  to  those  unacquainted 
wilb  the  arts  of  diplomacy,  that  the  French  government,  in  the  third 
after  the  purchase  of  the  country,  and  after  the  lapse  of  six 
ithi,  from  the  date  of  the  order  of  Spain,  before  mentioned,  for 
thed^very  of  the  possession  of  it,  should  be  so  ignorant  of  its 
boundaries,  as  not  even  to  know  what  Spain  meant  to  give,  or  France 
to  receive.  Nor  can  it  appear  less  strange,  that  the  very  next  year, 
any  apparent  new  means  of  information,  the  same  govern* 
It  should  have  so  perfect  a  knowledge  of  the  subject,  as  is  contained 
la  Talleyrand's  letter,  above  mentioned. 

Marhois,  in  his  late  history  of  Louisiana,  and  its  cession  to  the  Uni- 
ted States,  declares,  that,  in  a  conference  with  the  American  Ministers 
oa  the  article  relating  to  boundaries,  he  said  to  them  several  times. 


•  See  Message  of  the  President,  of.  May  SOtb,  1826,  p.  767. 


J 


14 

**  the  first  article  may  in  time  give  rise  to  difficulties ;  they  are  now 
Insurmountable ;  but  if  they  do  not  stop  you,  I,  at  least  desire,  that 
your  government  should  know,  that  you  have  been  warned  of  them/' 
He  then  adds,  **  The  French  negotiator,  in  rendering  an  account  of 
the  conference  to  the  first  Consul,  pointed  out  to  him  the  obscurity 
of  the  article,  and  the  inconveniences  of  so  uncertain  a  stipulation. 
He  replied,  that  if  an  obscurity  did  not  already  exists  it  would  be 
good  policy  to  put  one  there.** 

Pending  the  negotiation  at  Madrid,  in  the  winter  of  1805,  Bonaparte 
was  sounded  by  Mr.  Armstrong,  who  had  succeeded  Mr.  Livingston, 
as  Minister  at  Paris,  as  to  the  course  he  should  pursue,  in  case  of  a 
rupture  with  Spain.  The  American  Minister  was  explicitly  informed, 
that,  in  such  an  event,  the  French  Emperor  would  not  doubt  or  hesi* 
tote  to  take  part  with  Spain. 

The  American  negotiators,  satisfied  that  Spain,  supported  as  she 
was  by  France,  would  not  quietly  yield  to  the  claims  of  the  United 
States,  informed  the  President,  that  a  **  successful  course  of  events, 
and  an  imposing  attitude  and  decision  of  the  government  and  coun- 
try,^* could  alone  induce  her  to  comply  with  the  ofiered  terms. 

Whatever  might  have  been  the  views  of  Bonaparte  or  his  Minister, 
in  opposing  the  claims  of  the  United  States,  to  any  part  of  the  conn* 
try  east  of  the  Mississippi,  and  in  supporting  those  of  Spain ;  certain 
it  is,  that  not  long  after  the  failure  of  this  negotiation,  a  certain  paper, 
in  the  hand  writing  of  Talleyrand,  but  not  signed  by  him,  was  put  into 
the  hands  of  the  American  Minister  at  Paris.  This  paper  declared, 
that  it  was  then  a  favorable  time  for  the  United  States  to  purchase  the 
Floridas  of  Spain ;  that  the  same  could  probably  be  obtained ;  and 
that  the  French  Emperor  would  assist  the  United  States,  and  use  his 
influence  with  Spain,  to  induce  her  to  part  with  them.  The  Araeri- 
can  Minister  was  requested,  by  the  person  who  handed  him  this  pa- 
per, to  reflect  upon  the  subject,  and  intimated  that  some  further  com* 
munications  might  be  made,  as  to  the  mode  of  efi*ecting  the  object  sug- 
gested. Mr.  Armstrong  was  afterwards  informed,  in  the  same  indi- 
rect way,  that  in  order  to  ensure  a  favorable  result,  the  United  States 
must  assume  a  hostile  attitude  towards  Spain,  put  on  the  appearance 
of  enforcing  their  claims,  and  that  the  French  Emperor  would  second 
their  efforts,  and  secure  the  Floridas  by  purchase. 

These  singular  and  indirect  communications,  were  made  known  to 
the  American  Executive ;  and  it  required  but  little  acquaintance  with 
French  diplomacy,  to  apprehend  their  real  object 


IS 

« 

The  grett  difference  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  with  res* 
pect  to  the  limits  of  Louisiana,  and  the  result  of  the  negotiations  on 
the  sobject,  had  placed  the  former  in  an  unpleasant  dilemma.  The 
western  line,  as  claimed  by  Spain,  was  many  hundred  miles  east  of 
that  insisted  upon  by  the  United  States ;  and  his  Catholic  Majesty 
totally  denied  the  right  of  the  latter,  to  any  part  of  the  country  east 
of  the  Mississippi.  The  American  Executive  could  not  recede  with 
honor;  and  to  enforce  the  claim,  by  a  hostile  occupation  of  the  dis* 
puled  territory,  would  have  brought  the  United  States  in  collision, 
not  only  with  Spain,  but  with  the  French  Emperor. 

This  important  and  interesting  subject,  was  brought  before  Con- 
ai  the  commencement  of  its  session  in  December,  1806.  In  his 
tge  of  the  6th  of  that  month,  secret  at  the  time,  but  since  made 
public,  the  President  officially  informed  the  National  Legislature  of 
the  result  of  his  negotiations  with  Spain ;  and  declared,  that  her  con- 
duct, particularly  in  advancing  into  the  disputed  territory,  had  been 
soeh  as  to  authorise  the  inference,  that  her  aggressions  could  only  be 
repressed  by  force;  and  that  it  rested  with  Congress  alone,  to  take  the 
necessary  measures  for  this  purpose.  The  President  also  declared, 
thmt  the  conduct  of  France,  and  the  part  she  might  take,  in  this  mis- 
vnderstanding  between  the  United  States  and  Spain,  was  too  impor- 
tant to  be  unconsidered.  That  although  she  had  supported  the  latter, 
in  her  claim  on  the  east  side  of  the  Mississippi ;  yet  that,  from  her 
silence  respecting  the  western  boundary,  it  might  be  inferred,  her 
opinion  was  against  Spain  in  that  quarter.  That  whatever  directions 
the  French  Emperor  might  mean  to  give  to  these  differences,  he  had 
not  contemplated  an  actual  rupture ;  but,  there  were  reasons  for  be- 
lieving, that  he  was  disposed  to  effect  a  settlement,  on  a  plan  analo- 
gous to  the  one  proposed  by  the  American  Ministers,  and  so  compre- 
bensive,  as  to  remove  all  grounds  of  future  collision,  on  the  eastern^ 
me  well  ^b  western  side  of  the  Mississippi.  *'The  present  crisis  in 
Eorope,"  the  President  said,  **  is  favorable  for  such  a  settlement :  not 
a  moment  should  be  lost  in  availing  ourselves  of  it.*'  ^^  Formal  war^** 
be  added,  *'  is  not  necessary ;  and  it  is  not  probable  it  will  follow ; 
bat  the  protection  of  our  citizens,  the  spirit  and  honor  of  our  country 
require,  that  force  should  be  interposed  to  a  certain  degree ;  it  will 
probably  contribute  to  advance  the  object  of  peace.  But  the  course 
to  be  pursued  will  require  the  command  of  means,  which  it  belongs 
to  Congress  exclusively  to  yield  or  deny.  To  them  1  communicate 
every  fact  material  for  their  information,  and  the  documents  necessary 
to  enable  them  to  judge  for  themselves.    To  their  wisdom  then  I  look 


y 


16 

for  the  coarse  I  am  to  pursoe ;  and  I  will  porsue  with  sincere  zetl, 
that  which  they  shall  approve.^' 

The  real  object  of  this  Message  was,  to  obtain  an  appropriation  of 
money,  to  enable  the  President  to  purchase  the  territory  east  of  the 
Mississippi,  including  that  part  claimed  to  be  embraced  in  the  Looisi- 
ana  Treaty.  The  sum  of  two  millions  of  dollars  was,  after  much  de- 
lay, appropriated  by  Congress,  **  towards  the  purchase  of  the  Flori- 
das.*'  The  Message  itself,  and  particularly  the  project  of  appropria- 
ting money  for  the  purchase  of  territory,  already  purchased  and  paid 
for,  created  long  and  violent  debates  in  Congress.  In  the  House  of 
Representatives,  the  subject  was  under  deliberation  and  discussion 
many  weeks ;  and  a  strong  effort  was  made  to  prevent  the  application 
of  any  part  of  the  two  millions,  to  the  purchase  of  the  territory  lying 
between  the  Mississippi  and  the  Perdido,  but  without  success.  John 
Randolph,  one  of  the  Representatives  from  Virginia,  was  Chairman 
of  the  Select  Committee,  to  whom  the  Message  was  referred,  and  was 
violently  opposed  to  the  appropriation  of  money,  for  the  purchase  of 
a  territory,  already  purchased  and  embraced  in  the  Louisiana  Treaty* 
It  was  in  the  debates  on  this  subject,  he  often  declared,  that,  on  his 
first  arrival  at  Washington,  he  was  informed  by  the  Secretary  of  State, 
that  '* France  wanted  money,  and  must  have  it'* 

It  was  said,  at  the  time  of  the  appropriation,  that  the  two  Floridat 
could  be  then  obtained  for  about  five  millions  of  dollars,  and  that 
France  was  to  have  two  millions  of  it,  for  a  debt  due  to  her  from 
Spain* 

Mr.  Bowdoin  was  sent  special  Envoy  to  Madrid,  to  conduct  the 
negotiation,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government  It  is  well 
known,  that  this  negotiation  entirely  failed  ;  but  from  causes,  not  gen- 
erally known.  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  one  of  his  letters,  found  in  his  gen- 
eral correspondence,  &c.  lately  published,  clearly  intimates,  that  one 
cause  of  its  failure,  was,  the  delay  on  the  part  of  Congress,  in  making 
the  necessary  appropriations  *,*  in  consequence  of  which,  new  cir- 
cumstances had  changed  the  mind  of  the  other  party. 


•  The  Letter,  supposed  to  contain  this  intimation,  will  be  foand  in  the  4th  vol- 
ume of  Jefferson's  Writings,  p.  150,  and  was  written  in  answer  to  one  addressed 
to  him,  by  J.  B.  Colvin,  enquiring  his  solution  of  the  question,  whether,  circum- 
stances do  not  sometimes  occur,  which  make  it  a  duty,  in  an  officer  in  high  tmst, 
toa«sume  authorities  beyond  the  law  7  In  answering  this  question,  in  the  affirma- 
tive, in  cases  of  necessity,  where  delay  would  be  highly  injurious  to  the  interests 
of  the  country,  Mr.  Jefferson,  among  other  cases,  to  elucidate  the  principle,  pots 
the  following,  realf  as  an  kfpotkiiical  cast. 


17 

In  the  ezecutioii  of  his  tnist,  Mr.  Bowdoin,  it  is  nndentood,  pr<M 
ceeded  no  further  than  Paris ;  where  alone,  this  negotiation  was  to 
aMome  a  shapey  which  could  ensure  its  success.  The  particular  facts 
eoonected  with  this  transaction,  as  well  as  the  motives,  which  led  to 
it»  together  with  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  special  mission,  fur- 
niak  materials  not  less  curious,  than  ample,  for  the  page  of  history. 
Pending  this  negotiation,  the  President  assumed,  the  river  Sabine,  aa 
the  western  limits,  and  instructed  Gen.  Wilkinson,  the  Commander 
of  the  American  troops,  to  keep  possession  of  the  territory  between 
that  river  and  the  Mississippi,  and  by  force,  if  necessary,  to  drive  the 
Spaniards  from  the  same.  Gen.  Wilkinson  was,  at  the  same  time 
direeted,  to  leave  the  country  east  of  the  Mississippi,  in  statu  quOf 
the  City  of  New  Orleans  should  be  in  danger ;  but,  in  no  events 
he  to  take  possession  of  any  part,  east  of  Pearl  rive/. 

The  Spanish  troops  having  moved  east  of  the  Sabine,  actual  hoe* 
were  expected.  The  Spanish  Governor,  howerer,  and  Gen. 
Wilkinson,  near  the  close  of  1806,  came  to  an  amicable  arrangement, 
and  agreed  upon  the  Sabine,  as  a  temporary  western  line,  and  the 
Spanish  force  retired  west  of  that  river. 

Id  this  situation  the  business  remained,  during  the  great  struggle 
between  the  French  Emperor  and  the  people  of  Spain,  without  any 
rial  act  of  either  party.  During  this  struggle,  the  Spanish  Amer- 
Colonies  were  necessarily  leA,  to  take  care  of  themselves.  In 
the  oiean  time,  a  number  of  persons,  styling  themselves  the  Repre- 
aentatives  of  the  people  of  West  Florida,  met,  in  Convention,  at 
Baton  Rouge,  on  the  26th  of  September  1810,  and  declared  thera- 


**  Farther  to  exemplify  the  principle,  I  will  state  an  hypothetical  case.  Suppose 
ix  had  heen  made  known  to  the  Executive  of  the  Union,  in  the  Autumn  of  1805, 
thai  we  might  have  the  Floridas  for  a  reasonable  sum,  that  that  sum  had  not  been 
so  appfophated  by  law,  but  that  Congress  were  to  meet  within  three  weeks,  and 
Bight  appropriate  it  on  the  first  or  sec4md  day  of  their  session,  ought  he,  for  so 
great  aa  advantage  to  his  country,  to  have  risqued  himself,  by  traDscendiog  the 
taw  and  making  the  purchase?  The  public  advantage  offered,  in  this  supposed 
caae,  was,  indeed,  immense ;  but  a  reverence  for  law,  and  the  probability,  that 
the  advantage  might  still  be  legally  accomplished,  by  a  delay  of  only  three  weeks, 
were  powerful  reasons,  against  hazarding  the  act.  But  suppose  it  foreseen,  that 
a  John  Randolph  would  find  means  to  protract  the  proceedings  on  it  by  Congreai» 
aatil  the  ensuing  spring,  by  which  time  new  circumstances  should  change  the  mind 
of  the  other  party.  Oui^ht  the  Executive,  in  that  case,  and  with  that  foreknowledge 
to  have  secured  the  good  to  his  country,  and  to  have  trusted  to  their  justice,  for  the 
»n  of  the  law  I  1  think  he  ought,  and  that  the  act  woold  have  been  ap- 


/ 


18 

seWes  **  a  free  and  independent  state ;''  and  transmitted  this  Declara- 
tion to  the  President  of  the  United  States.  And,  on  the  lOih  ef  (>€• 
tober  following,  this  Convention  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Americam 
Secretary,  through  the  Governor  of  the  Mississippi  territory,  request- 
ing to  be  acknowledged  and  protected  by  the  government  of  the  Uni- 
ted States ;  and  among  other  considerations  suggested,  in  order  to  in- 
duce the  American  government  to  do  this,  the  Convention  stated  that 
^  the  Emperor  of  France  has  invited  the  Spanish  Americans  to  declare 
their  independence,  rather  than  remain  in  subjection  to  the  old  Spanish 
government;  therefore,**  the  Convention  added,  ** an  acknowledgment 
of  our  independence,  by  the  United  States,  could  not  be  complained 
of  by  France^  or  involve  the  American  government^  in  any  conteMi 
with  that  power  r* 

The  people  of  West  Florida,  it  seems,  entertained  the  idea,  thai 
the  American  government  had  delayed  taking  possession  of  the  coun- 
try claimed  under  the  Louisiana  treaty,  through  fear  of  coming  into 
collision  with  Bonaparte ;  and  to  remove  those  fears,  communicated 
the  information  above  mentioned. 

In  consequence  of  these  proceedings  of  the  people  of  West  Floridat 
the  President  of  the  United  States,  (Mr.  Madison,)  on  the  27th  of  Oc- 
tober, 1810,  issued  a  proclamation  and  order,  for  the  possession  of 
West  Florida,  so  far  as  claimed  by  the  United  States.  This  produced 
a  remonstrance  from  the  British  Charg6  d^ Affaires,  then  at  Washington. 

In  addition  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Convention,  the  American 
Executive,  also,  received  a  letter  from  the  Spanish  Governor  of  West 
Florida  (Folch,)  dated  the  2d  day  uf  December,  1810,  expressing  a  de- 
aire  to  deliver  up  the  country  to  the  United  States,  and  requesting  the 
appointment  of  some  person  to  treat,  about  the  delivery  of  the  same. 

These  papers,  with  some  others  on  the  same  subject,  were  commu- 
nicated to  Congress,  by  a  confidential  message,  on  the  3d  day  of  Jan- 
vary,  1811.  **  Taking  into  view,**  says  the  President,  *'the  time  of 
these  several  communications,  the  posture  of  things,  with  which  they 
are  connected,  the  intimate  relations  of  the  country  adjoining  the  Uni- 
ted States  eastward  of  the  river  Perdido,  to  their  security,  and  the 
peculiar  interest  they  have,  in  its  security,  I  recommend  to  the  con- 
sideration of  Congress  the  seasonableness  of  a  declaration,  that  the 
United  States  could  not  see,  without  serious  inquietude,  any  part  of 
a  neighboring  territory,  in  which  they  have  so  deep  and  just  a  con- 
cern, pass  from  the  hands  of  Spain,  into  those  of  any  foreign  power. 

I  recommend  to  their  consideration,  also,  the  expediency  of  author- 
the  Executive  to  take  temporary  possession  of  the  said  territo* 


19 

ry«  in  pvivotiiee  of  arrangements  which  nay  be  deaired  by  (he  Span« 
ish  tutborities,  and  making  provision  for  the  government  of  the  same.** 
Congrcaa,  icon  aAer,  made  the  declaration  required,  and  also,  passed 
SB  aety  abthortzing  the  President,  to  take  possession  and  occupy  all  or 
aoy  part  of  the  territory,  '*  in  case  any  arrangement  has  been,  or  shall 
be  made,  with  the  local  authority  of  the  said  territory,  for  delivering 
vp  the  possession  of  the  same,  or  any  part  thereof,  to  the  United 
States;  or,  in  the  event  of  an  attempt  to  occupy  the  said  territory  or 
mnj  part  thereof,  by  any  foreign  government.**  For  this  purpose,  he 
was  empowered  to  employ^ any  part  of  the  military  and  naval  force  of 
tbe  United  States ;  and  until  otherwise  provided  by  Congress,  he  was 
•lae  authorized  to  establish  a  temporary  government,  in  the  territory 
thus  occupied.  The  President  appointed  Gen.  George  Matthews,  and 
CoL  John  McKee,  jointly  and  severally,  Agents  or  Commissioners,  to 
cmrry  this  act  into  effect.  With  respect  to  that  part  of  West  Flor- 
ida, Ijring  east  of  the  Perdido,  they  were  directed,  in  case  Governor 
Fokh,  and  the  local  authority,  then  existing,  should  be  inclined  to  sur- 
render the  same  in  an  amicable  manner,  to  accept  it,  in  the  name  of 
the  United  States ;  and  to  stipulate  for  its  redelivery,  at  a  future  pe- 
fiod«  to  the  lawful  Sovereign,  in  case  such  a  stipulation  should  be  re- 
q^ared ;  and  in  case  Governor  Folch  should  pertinaciously  insist,  that 
tbe  stipulation,  for  the  redelivery  of  the  territory,  should  include  that 
portion,  which  was  situated  west  of  the  Perdido,  the  Commissioners, 
ia  yielding  to  such  demand,  were  only  to  use  general  words,  that 
■igbt,  by  implication,  comprehend  lhat{>art  of  the  territory,  but  with- 
out impairing  or  affecting  the  right  of  the  United  States  to  the  same. 
In  ease  such  amicable  surrender  should  not  be  made,  yet  if  **  there 
should  be  reason,  to  entertain  a  suspicion  of  an  existing  design,  in 
uy  foreign  power,  to  occupy  the  country,**  they  were  to  make  use 
of  the  military  and  naval  force  of  the  United  States,  to  pre-occupy 
tbe  saaie.  With  regard  to  East  Florida,  they  were  to  accept  an  am- 
icable surrender  of  it,  by  the  local  authority,  and,  **in  case  of  the  ac- 
tual appearance  of  an  attempt  to  take  possession,  by  a  foreign  powery** 
they  were  to  pursue  the  same  effective  measures  for  the  occupation  of 
it,  as  in  the  case  of  West  Florida. 

A  large  proportion  of  the  people  of  East  Florida,  were  willingt 
and  agreed  to  surrender  the  country  to  the  United  States,  but  the 
local  authority  refused ;  and  General  Matthews,  employed  the  Ameri- 
can troops,  to  take  possession  of  it,  by  force.  His  conduct  in  this 
respect  was  disavowed  by  the  President,  his  powers  revoked,  and  the 
remained  in  the  possession  of  the  Spaniards. 


/ 


so 

The  annexation  of  the  Floridas  to  the  United  States,  had  long  beea 
a  favorite  object  of  the  State  of  Georgia. 

One  of  the  amend  men  t9  proposed  by  that  State,  to  the  articles  of 
Confederation,  in  1778,  was^  that  tlie  Floridas  should  ha?e  the  righl 
of  acceding  to  the  Confederacy.  This  territory  afforded  a  safe  asy- 
lum for  fugitive  slaves,  and  the  people  of  Georgia  urged  the  posses- 
sion of  it  by  the  national  authority.  This  subject  was  again  brought 
before  Congress,  by  a  member  from  that  State,  on  the  19th  of  June 
1812,  the  day  after  the  declaration  of  war,  against  Great  Britain. 
In  the  House  of  Representatives,  a  Committee  was  instructed  to  in- 
quire into  the  expediency  of  authorizing  the  President  to  occupy 
East  and  West  Florida  without  delay ;  and  a  Bill  soon  after  passed 
the  House,  70  to  48,  empowering  the  President  to  take  possession  of 
both  the  Floridas.  This  Bill  was  negatived  by  the  Senate.  Early  the 
next  session,  however,  a  similar  Bill  passed  the  Senate ;  and  although 
supported  by  a  memorial  from  the  Legislature  of  Georgia,  urging 
Congress  to  take  immediate  possession  of  East  Florida  as  well  at 
that  portion  of  West  Florida,  purchased  from  France ;  yet  in  th« 
House  of  Representatives,  it  was  so  amended,  as  only  to  embrace  tho 
tract  of  country  lying  south  of  the  Mississippi  territory,  and  loest  of 
the  Perdido,  and  in  this  shape  passed  both  branches  of  the  Legislature. 

On  the  20th  of  February,  1811,  the  people  of  Louisiana  were  ao- 
thorized  to  form,  for  themselves,  a  constitution,  and  to  become  a  part 
of  the  union.  The  new  State  was  bounded  west  by  the  river  Sabine 
from  its  mouth  to  the  thirty  second  degree  of  latitude,  and  from 
thence  due  north  to  the  northernmost  part  of  the  thirty  third  degree 
of  north  latitude,  and  on  the  east,  by  the  Mississippi,  the  Iberville, 
the  lakes  Maurepas  and  Pontchartrain,  to  the  gulf  of  Mexico. 

The  inhabitants  living  within  these  limits,  were  admitted  into  the 
union,  on  the  8th  day  of  April,  1812,  and  on  the  14th  of  the  same 
month,  the  territory  west  of  the  eastern  branch  of  Pearl  river,  up  to 
latitude  thirty  one  degrees,  was  annexed  to  the  new  State,  which  was 
called  Louisiana.  This  was  done  in  pursuance  of  an  article  in  the 
Treaty  of  cession,  declaring,  *'  That  the  inhabitants  of  the  ceded 
territory  should  be  incorporateu  into  the  union  of  the  United  Statetv 
and  admitted,  as  soon  as  possible,  according  to  the  principles  of  the 
federal  Constitutiun,  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  rights,  advantages 
and  immunities  of  citizens  of  the  United  States.*^  This  article,  it 
will  be  remembered,  gave  rise  to  one  of  the  most  important  question* 
ever  agitated  in  this  country,  whether  the  Executive  or  even  Congress 
had  constitutional  power  to  admit  a  foreign  territory  and  its  inhabit- 


ff 

J 


\ 


21 


\ 


■iti,  iato  the  ddiod  T    Mr.  Jefferson  was  decidedly  of  opinion,  that 
this  could  not  be  done  without  an  amendment  of  the  constitution.    In 

• 

MM  of  his  letters  to  Mr.  Breckenridge,  written  as  early  as  August* 
10OS,  mod  found  among  his  writings  lately  published,  he  is  explicit 
M  this  question.  After  stating  that  the  Treaty  must  be  laid  before 
both  houses  of  Congress,  who,  he  presumed  would  ratify  and  pay  for 
Ike  territory  therein  acquired,  he  ad(^,  «*  But,  I  suppose,  they  roust  . 
tlwn  appeal  to  the  nation^  for  an  add^^lional  article  to  the  constitutibn,  /  ^ 
tpproving  and  confirming  an  act,  which  the  nation  had  not  pleTioUsly 
Mtliorixed.  The  constitution  has  made  no  provision  fdr  ou^  holding 
foreign  Umktfyf  still  less  for  incorporating /orct^n  nationa  into  our 

JtSoDt  of  his  letters  to  Mr.  Lincoln,  then  attorney  General  of  the 
United  States,  he  goes  so  far,  as  to  send  him  the  form  of  an  amend- 
■eoC  of  the  Constitution,  declaring  that  **  Louisiana,  as  ceded  by 
France  to  the  United  States,  is  made  part  of  the  United  States/*  ^c. 
with  the  exception,  however,  of  that  portion,  lying  north  of  an  east 
and  west  line  drawn  through  the  mouth  of  Arkansas  river,  out  of 
which  no  new  State  was  to  be  established,  nor  any  grants  of  land 
onde,  other  than  to  Indians,  in  exchange  for  equivalent  portions  of 
land  occupied  by  them,  until  an  amendment  of  the  constitution  should 
be  made  for  that  purpose.  To  his  particular  friend  Wilson  C.  Nich* 
cbs,  he  afterwartls,  on  tbe  same  subject  says,  **  Whatever  Congress 
dull  think  it  necessary  to  do,  should  be  done  with  as  little  dcMate  at 
poenble,  and  particularly  as  to  the  constitutional  difficulty/  I  am 
awmre  of  the  force  of  the  observations  you  make  on  the  pow^r  given 
by  the  constitution  to  Congress,  to  admit  new  States  into  the  union, 
without  restraining  tbe  subject  to  the  territory  then  constituting  the 
United  States.  But  when  I  considered  that  the  limits  of  the  United 
States  are  precisely  fixed  by  the  Treaty  of  1783,  that  the  constitution 
expressly  declares  itself  to  be  made,  for  the  United  States,  I  cannot 
help  believing  tbe  intention  wap,  to  permit  Congress  to  admit  into  the 
Boion,  new  States,  which  should  be  formed  out  of  the  territory,  for 
which  and  iMbder  whose  authority  alone  they  were  then  acting.*' 
i  **I  do  not  belicTe  it  was  meant,  that  they  might  receive  England, 
Ireland,  Holland,  6lc.  ;  which  would  be  the  case,  on  your  construc- 
tion.^ >Mr.  Jefferson  adds,  *'  If,  however,  onr  friends  shall  think 
fifimtly,  certainly  I  shall  acquiesce  with  satisfaction ;  confiding 
that  the  good  sense  of  our  country  will  correct  the  evil  of  constmc- 
ticm,  when  it  shall  produce  ill  effects.^* 


% 
* 


\ 

.1 


22 

/  .  When  the  Treaty  was  submitted  to  the  House  of  RepreientatiTei^ 
/  tof  ihe  purpose  of  having  it  carried  into  efiect,  the  question  as  to  the 
I  constitutionality  of  that  part  which  stipulated  for  the  admission  of  the 
country  into  the  union,  was  mtide  and  warmly  debated.  The  opponent! 
of  this  part  of  the  Treaty,  agreed,  that  foreign  territory  might  be  •€-> 
quired  either  by  conquest  or  purchase^  and  held  as  a  colony  or  pror«l 
ince ;  but  could  not  be  admitted  ii\to  the  union,  without  an  amende 
roent  of  the  Constitution.  In  supj^rt  of  this,  they  urged  that  the 
goTernment  of  this  country  was  formed  by  a  union  of  States,  and 
the  people  had  declared,  that  the  constitution  was  established,  **  to 
form  a  more  perfect  union  of  the  United  States.*^  That  the  United 
States  here  mentioned  could  not  be  mistaken.  They  were  the  States 
Uien  iA  existence,  or  such  other  new  States,  as  should  be  formed 
within  the  then  limits  of  the  union,  conformable  to  the  proTisiont  of 
the  constitution.  Every  measure,  therefore,  they  said,  which  tends  to 
infringe  the  present  union  of  the  States  here  described,  was  a  tiola- 
tion  of  the  first  sentiment  expressed  in  the  constitution.  The  incor* 
poration  of  a  foreign  territory  into  the  union,  so  far  from  tending  to 
preserve  the  union,  was  a  direct  inroad  upon  it ;  it  destroyed  the 
perfect  union  contemplated  between  the  original  parties  by  interpos- 
ing an  alien,  ifnd  a  stranger,  to  share  the  powers  of  government  with 
them,     y 

Pressed  by  arguments  of  this  kind,  and  by  the  opinions  of  Mr. 
Jefferson,  some  of  those,  who  were  in  favor  of  carrying  the  Treatj 
into  effect,  took  a  middle  course,  and  said,  that  the  Treaty  merelj 
stipulated,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  ceded  territory,  should  be  here- 
after incorporated  into  the  union,  according  to  the  principles  sf  the 
constitution.  That  by  taking  possession  of  the  country  under  the 
Treaty,  it  did  not  necessarily  follow,  that  it  must  be  admitted  into  the 
union ;  that  this  question  was  to  be  decided  hereaAer ;  and  the  terri- 
tory would  not  be  admitted  into  the  union,  unless  warranted  by  the 
principles  of  the  Constitution. 

In  answer  to  this,  it  was  said,  that  there  was  no  difference,  in  prin- 
ciple, between  a  direct  incorporation,  by  the  express  words  of  e 
Treaty  and  a  stipulation,  that  such  an  incorporation  should  take 
place ;  because,  if  the  faith  of  the  nation  was  pledged  in  the  latter 
case,  the  incorporation  must  take  place ;  and  that  it  was  of  no  conse- 
quence, whether  the  Treaty  gave  the  incorporation,  or  produced  the 
laws,  which  gave  it ;  that  in  both  cases,  the  Treaty  produced  the 
effect ;  and  that  the  question  returned,  whether  there  exists,  under 
the  constitution,  a  power  to  incorporate  a  foreign  nation,  or  peo- 


23 

pie,  into  the  onion,  either  by  a  Treaty,  or  by  a  law  7  Such  a  slip* 
nlntion,  therefore,  they  said,  created  no  obligation,  and  was  roid* 
Mr.  Jefferson  yielded  his  opinion  on  this  important  subject,  to  that 
of  the.  party  which  placed  him  in  power,  and  did  not  interpose  his 
(titutional  veto.  In  181%  as  before  stated,  a  pari  of  this  territory 
admitted  into  the  union,  but  without  an  amendment  of  the  con- 
•titation ;  not,  however,  without  opposition.  In  the  House  of  Rep« 
lescBtatiTes,  the  votes  were  79  to  23,  and  the  opposition  arose  priuci- 
pdRy,  if  not  entirely,  on  constitutional  grounds. 

The  great  mass  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  were  agreed  in 
Um  Importance  of  the  acquisition  of  the  new  territory,  and  therefore 
quietly  acquiesced  in  having  it  incorporated  into  the  union,  without 
ibeir  express  assent,  by  an  amendment  of  the  great  national  compact. 
Few,  however,  it  is  believed,  will  agree  to  admit  this,  as  a  conclusive 
precedent  in  all  cases  which  may  arise  hereafter ;  and  yet,  if  the 
President  and  Senate,  or  Congress  had  the  constitutional  power  to 
hiod  the  nation  in  this  case,  they  must  have  it  in  all ;  and,  can,  here*      ': 
after,  on  the  same  principle,  admit  Texas,  Cuba,  Mexico,  and  Japan,      / 
sad  as  Mr.  Jefferson  supposes,  even  England,  Ireland,  and  Holland,   / 
to  be  a  part  of  the  onion. 

May  the  people  of  the  United  States  never  have  reason  to  regret, 
Ael  the  national  will,  on  this  important  question,  was  not  expressc;^ 
im  a  constitutional  way.  History  too  truly  teaches  us,  that  the  illegfial 
er  oneonstittttional  exercise  of  power,  in  the  best  of  times,  for  the  real 
benefit  of  the  people,  with  their  silent  acquiescence,  has  hardly  ever 
friled  10  be  resorted  to,  as  a  precedent,  in  the  worst  of  times,  and  often, 
ipr  the  worst  of  purposes ;  and  who  will  venture  to  predict,  that  the 
Artore  annals  of  this  country  will  prove,  that  the  people  of  the  United 
8utes  have  formed  an  exception  to  this  general  rule. 

The  sobjects  in  dispute  between  the  United  States  and  Spain  re- 
lined  unsettled,  until  the  22d  day  of  February,  1819,  when  forto- 
nately  for  the  United  States,  they  were  brought  to  a  close  by  sn  amica- 
ble arrangement.  His  Catholic  Majesty,  at  last,  agreed  to  cede  to  the 
Uoited  Suten,  all  the  territory  belonging  to  him,  eastward  of  the  Mis- 
SMsippi,  known  by  the  name  of  East  and  West  Florida.  In  consider* 
atioB  of  this  cession,  the  United  States  relinquished  the  claim  for 
Spanish  spoliations,  and  stipulated  to  make  satisfaction  for  the  same, 
to  their  own  citizens,  to  an  amount  not  exceeding  Rve  millions  of  dol« 
kra.  Isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  Spanish  territories,  its  value  was,  m 
ia  a  great  measure,  lost  to  the  parent  country.  It  was  valuable  to  the  ^ 
Caited  States,  not  merely  for  the  purpoee  of  rounding  their  own  terri- 


84 

tory,  but  from  its  local  gituation,  affording  a  near  and  safe  asylam  for 
their  ships,  in  the  West  India  seas.  In  addition  to  this,  the  United 
States  are  now  secure  against  its  occupation,  by  any  foreign  power^ 
disposed,  by  acquiring  it,  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  Union.    , 

The  settlement  of  limits  between  Louisiana  and  the  Spanish  terri- 
tories on  the  west  side  of  the  Mississippi,  was  no  less  an  object  of  im- 
portance to  both  countries. 

The  parties,  however,  differed  so  widely  on  this  subject,  that  a  satis- 
factory issue  seemed,  for  a  long  time,  scarcely  possible.  The  country 
in  dispute,  extended  many  hundred  miles  east  and  west,  and  nemrly 
one  thousand  north  and  south.  While  the  American  Elzecutive  claim- 
ed to  the  Rio  Bravo  along  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  his  Catholic  Majesty 
insisted  upon  a  line  east  of  the  river  Sabine,  running  north  to  the  Red 
river,  and  from  a  point  on  this  river,  east  of  the  source  of  the  Sabine* 
running  north  or  north  west  to  the  Missouri,  leaving  the  sources  of  th« 
great  rivers  falling  into  the  Mississippi,  from  the  west,  within  the  lim- 
its of  the  Spanish  possessions.  To  this  line  the  American  government 
refused  to  yield,  and  a  long  and  rather  angry  correspondence  followed, 
between  the  Spanish  Minister,  Don  Onis,  and  Mr.  Adams,  Secretary 
of  State,  without  any  prospect  of  a  favorable  issue. 

The  instructions  of  the  former,  however,  were  afterwards  varied, 
apd  the  aid  of  France,  then  restored  to  the  Bourbons,  was  solicited  by 
SjNiin,  in  the  settlement  of  this  controversy. 

The  French  Minister  at  W^ashington,  M.  Hyde  de  Neuville,  by  th« 
consent  of  both  parties,  acted  as  a  mediator.  Under  the  new  instroc- 
tions,  and  the  friendly  mediation  of  the  French  Minister,  the  negotia- 
tion was  renewed,  at  Washington,  in  the  winter  of  1819,  and  finally 
ended  in  a  cession  of  both  the  Fioridas,  and  a  settlement  of  western 
limits. 

An  historical  view  of  this  important  negotiation,  does  not  fall  within 
our  design ;  we  would  observe,  however,  that  great  difficulties  arose, 
with  respect  to  a  point,  on  the  Red  river,  from  which  the  line  should 
run  north ;  and  many  propositions  were  made  on  both  sides,  and,  at 
last,  a  point  one  hundred  degrees  in  longitude  west  from  London,  and 
twenty  three  from  the  city  of  Washington,  was  fixed  upon.  From  thiv 
point  the  line  was  to  run  due  north  to  the  river  Arkansas,  and  up  that 
river  to  its  source  in  latitude  forty  two  degrees.  The  direction  of  the 
line,  from  the  source  of  the  Arkansas,  produced  another  serious  diffi* 
^culty.  The  Spanish  Minister  at  first  insisted,  that  it  should  go  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  and  that  those  mountains  should  be  the  western 
limits ;  and  when  the  American  negotiator  refused  to  accede  to 


25 

ke  urged,  that  the  line  should  run  to  Clark's  river,  beyond  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  and  by  that  river,  to  the  Columbia,  into  which  it  empties, 
and  thence  down  the  Columbia  to  the  Ocean.  This  proposition,  how- 
ever, was  rejected  ;  and  a  line  direct,  from  the  source  of  the  Arkansas, 
or  bt.  42^,  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  was  ultimately  agreed  upon. 

And  we  would  also  observe,  that  although  Mr.  Adams  was  the  ne- 
gotiator on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  has  been  blamed  by 
some  for  yielding  too  much,  at  the  west,  the  President  and  the  Cabi- 
net were  consulted  in  the  various  stages  of  the  negotiation,  and,  as 
to  aoine  parts  of  the  western  limits,  they  overruled  the  American  ne- 
gotialor* 


S 


/ 


CHAPTER  II. 

Colonial  Policy  of  Great  Britain — Amount  of  Exports  and  Imports  prior  to  tlK 
.  ItevolatioB — Commerce  interrupted  during  the  ixrar  of  the  Revolotion — ^Ex- 
penses of  that  war^Amount  of  Public  Debt  in  1783— Requisitions  upon  the 
Slates,  for  provision  for  the  payment  of  it,  not  complied  with— Its  depreciation — 
Exports  to  and  Imports  from  Great  Britain,  from  1784  to  1790— Distressed  state 
of  the  country,  during  this  period — Meeting  of  Commissioners  at  Annapolis,  in 
1786-- Adoption  of  the  new  Constitution,  and  the  organization  of  the  Govern- 
ment under  it,  in  1789. 

Whilk  in  a  colonial  state,  the  European  commerce  of  the  Americans 
was  confined  to  Great  Britain,  and  that  part  of  the  continent  of  Europe, 
which  lies  south  of  Cape  Finisterre. 

The  great  staples  of  the  colonies,  could  only  be  carried  to  the  parent 
state,  and  all  the  imports  from  Europe  came  through  the  same  chan- 
nel. The  exports  from  Great  Britain  to  the  colonies,  now  the  United 
States,  on  an  average  of  six  years,  ending  with  1774,  were  £2^732,036 
sterling,  and  the  imports  from  the  same,  £1,752,142.* 

The  colonial  policy  of  the  parent  state,  was  not  confined  to  the  ex- 
ternal commerce,  but  extended  to  the  internal  concerns  of  the  colonies. 

The  colonists  were  entirely  prohibited  from  carrying  on,  some  kinds 
of  manufactures,  and  in  others,  were  restricted  to  very  narrow  Hmits, 
so  as  not  to  interfere  with  those  of  a  similar  kind,  in  the  mother  country. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  therefore,  the 
Americans  were  without  external  commerce,  or  internal  resources; 
and  during  the  long  conflict,  which  followed,  they  were  compelled  to 
depend  almost  entirely  upon  themselves,  for  supplies,  not  only  of  arms 
and  munitions  of  war,  but  of  those  common  and  necessary  articles  of 
consumption,  previously  obtained  from  Great  Britain  and  elsewhere. 
Those  articles,  which  their  soil  would  not  produce,  or  which  they  were 
unable  to  make  themselves,  they  were  obliged  to  obtain  at  great  risk 
and  expense,  from  other  countries,  or  be  content  without  them.  En- 
couragement was  given  to  all  the  necessary  manufactures,  and  the  zeal, 
ingenuity  and  industry  of  the  people  supplied  the  place  of  a  foreign 
market. 

At  the  peace  of  1783,  which  secured  the  independence  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  their  commercial,  as  well  as  political  situation  was  new^ 
and  attended  with  many  difficulties.     During  a  contest  of  more  than 


♦  Achcson's  Collections,  &c.  pp.  64, 67. 


27 

mwtn  years,  their  commerce  was  annihilated,  their  shipping  nearly 
destroyed,  public  credit  impaired,  and  a  vast  debt  accumulated.  In 
addition  to  this,  the  general  government  was  not  calculated  to  repair 
tlMse  losses,  restore  public  credit,  or  to  bring  into  active  operation, 
Ihe  energies  and  resources  of  the  nation.  The  whole  expense  of  the 
war,  was  more  than  one  hundred  and  thirty  ^ye  millions  of  dollars.* 
▲boat  one  half  of  this  expense  was  paid  by  taxes,  levied  and  collected 
during  the  war,  and  the  residue  remained  a  debt,  due  from  the  United 
States,  or  the  individual  states,  on  the  return  of  peace. 

In  April,  1783,  the  debt  of  the  United  States,  (exclusive  of  the  State 
debts,  which  exceeded  twenty  millions,)  was  estimated  at  §42,000,375, 
nod  the  annual  interest,  at  92,415,966.  No  funds  had,  at  this  time, 
been  provided  for  the  payment,  either  of  the  interest  or  principal  ef 
ibis  debt    It  now  became  necessary  for  Congress  to  provide  perma- 

it  funds,  for  this  purpose. 


Ui 


*  The  whole  expense  of  the  Revolutionary  war  cannot  be  ascertained  with  cer-^ 
laiaty.  The  following  estimate  was  made  oat  by  Mr.  Nourse,  the  Register  of  the 
Tieasary,  ia  1790. 

'General  abstract  of  the  annual  estimates,  and  abstract  statements  of  the  total 
It  of  the  expenditures  and  advances,  at  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States. 
**  The  estimated  amount  of  the  expenditures  of 

*  Jljiij^l  is,  in  specie, 890,064,666  ^9(Hhs. 

^      1777  "  " 24,986,646  85  " 

1778  "  " 24,289,438  26  " 

17T9  "  " 10,794,620  65  " 

1780  "  " 3,000,000  00  « 

1781  "  " 1,942,465  30  " 

1782  "  " 3,632,745  85  " 

1783  "  " 3,226,583  43  " 

To  llov.  1st,  17B4  "  " 548,596  03  "* 

Pormiog  an  amount  total  of $92,485,693  16    " 

"  The  foregoing  estimates  being  confined  to  actual  Treasury  pajrments,  are  ez- 
dnsave  of  the  debts  of  the  United  States,  which  were  incurred,  at  various  periods, 
for  fte  sapport  of  the  late  war,  and  should  be  taken  into  a  general  view  of  the  ez- 
thereof,  viz. 
Amy  debt,  upon  commissioners*  certificates,  $11,080,576    l-90th. 

For  supplies  furnished  by  the  citizens  of  the  several 
states,  and  for  which  certificates  were  issued  by  the 

commi^ioners, 3,723,625  90    " 

*For  supplies  furnished  in  the  quarter-master,  commis- 
sary, hospital,  clothing  and  marine  department,  1,159,170    6    " 
For  supplies,  on  accounts  settled  at  the  Treasury,  and  fur 
i^^ich  certificates  were  issued  by  the  Register,  744,638  49    " 

tl6,?06,OO9  75    " 


M 


U 


J 


28 

It  had  been  foreseen  by  many,  that  this  could  not  be  done,  unlew 
Congress  had  power  to  regulate  the  general  coinmerce  of  the  country^ 
or,  at  least,  were  authorized  to  levy  duties  on  imports.  This  power^ 
by  the  articles  of  confederation,  had  been  reserved  to  the  States  res- 
pectively. Congress  could  only  recommend  to  the  States,  the  pro- 
priety and  necessity  of  granting  them  this  p<»wer,  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Union.  As  early  as  February,  1781,  that  body  declared  to  the 
States,  *^  as  indispensably  necessary,  that  they  vest  a  power  in  Con- 
gress to  levy,  for  the  use  of  the  United  States,  a  duty  of  five  per  cent, 
ad  valorem,  at  the  time  and  place  of  importation,  upon  all  goods,  wares 
and  merchandize  of  foreign  growth  and  manufacture,  which  may  be 
imported  into  any  of  the  said  States,  from  any  foreign  port,  island  or 
plantation,  after  the  first  day  of  May,  1781,"  with  the  exception  of  cer- 
tain articles.  They  also,  at  the  same  time,  resolved,  '*  that  the  monies 
arising  from  the  said  duties,  be  appropriated  to  the  discharge  of  the 
principal  and  interest  of  the  debts  already  contracted,  or  which  may 
be  contracted,  on  the  faith  of  the  United  States,  for  supporting  the 
war;  and  that  the  said  duties  be  continued,  until  the  said  debts  be 
fully  and  finally  discharged."     The  journals  of  the  old  Congress  show. 


"  The  foreign  expenditures,  civil,  military,  naval,  and  coDtingen- 
cies,  amount,  by  computation,  to $5,000,000 

"  The  expenditures  of  the  several  states,  from  the  commencement 
of  the  war,  to  the  establishment  of  peace,  cannot  be  stated  with 
any  degree  of  certainty,  because  the  accounts  thereof  remain  to 
be  settled.  But  as  the  United  States  have  granted  certain  sums 
for  the  relief  of  the  several  states,  to  be  funded  by  the  general 
government,  therefore,  estimate  the  total  amount  of  said  as- 
sumption,      21,000,009 

"Estimated  expense  of  the  late  war,  in  specie,      .  $136,193,7 

The  advances  made  from  the  Treasury,  were  principally  in  a  paper  medium, 
ealled  continental  money,  and  which  in  a  short  time  depreciated,  the  specie  valoe 
of  which  is  given  in  the  foregoing  estimate.  The  advances  made  at  the  Treasoiy 
of  the  United  States,  in  continental  money,  in  old  and  new  emissions,  are  estima- 
ted as  follows,  viz. 

Old  Eminion.  New  BmteioD. 


In  1776 

.  $20,064,666  66-90ths. 

1777 

26,426,333  1  " 

1778 

66,965,269  34  " 

1779   . 

,   149,703,856  77  " 

1780 

.   .   82,908.320  47  " 

$891,236  80^90ths. 

1781 

11,408,095  00  " 

1,179,249  00  •* 

$357,476,541  45  *» 

$2,070,4^80  «< 

29 

Uiml  the  power,  thus  required  of  the  States,  was  not,  in  the  opinion 
of  some  members  of  that  body,  sufficiently  extensive ;  but  that  Con- 
gress ought  to  have  the  general  power  of  regulating  the  whole  com- 
merce of  the  country,  and  the  exclusive  right  of  laying  duties  on 
imports.  A  substitute  was  therefore  proposed,  couched  in  more  gen- 
eral terms,  declaring  it  to  be  ''  indispensably  necessary,  that  the  Uni- 
ted States  in  Congress  assembled,  should  be  vested  with  a  right  of 
saperintending  the  commercial  regulations  of  every  State ;  that  none 
may  take  place,  that  shall  be  partial  or  contrary  to  the  common  in- 
terest ;  and  that  they  should  be  vested  with  the  exclusive  right  of 
laying  duties  on  all  imported  articles."  This  substitute  was  nega- 
tived, and  the  resolution,  which  passed,  was  not  adopted  by  the  States. 

On  the  18th  of  April,  1783,  Congress  again  urged  the  States,  in  the 
nost  pressing  manner,  to  establish  permanent  funds  for  the  payment 
of  the  debts  of  the  Union.  For  this  purpose,  they  declared  it,  "  as 
indispensably  necessary  to  the  restoration  of  public  credit,  and  the 
panctoal  discharge  of  the  public  debts,  to  invest  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled,  with  a  power  to  levy,  for  the  use  of  the  United 
States,  the  following  duties  upon  goods  imported  into  the  said  States, 
from  any  foreign  port,  island  or  plantation, 

**  Upon  all  rum,  of  Jamaica  proof,  per  gall.  4-90ths  of  a  dollar. 


all  other  spiritous 

liquors, 

3  " 

do. 

Madeira  wine. 

. 

12  " 

do. 

all  other  wines. 

. 

6  " 

do. 

common  Bohea  tea  per 

lb. 

6  " 

do. 

all  other  teas. 

34  " 

do. 

pepper,    . 

3  " 

do. 

brown  sugar. 

•     w     *" 

do. 

loaf  sugar. 

.     >    2  " 

do. 

all  other  sugars, 

1  " 

do. 

molasses,  per  gall. 

1  " 

do. 

cocoa  and  coffee. 

1  " 

do. 

aod  upon  all  other  goods,  a  duty  of  five  per  cent,  ad  valorem,  at  time 
and  place  of  importation ;  with  a  proviso,  that  none  of  said  duties 
should  be  applied  to  any  other  purpose,  than  the  discharge  of  the  in- 
terest and  principal  of  the  debts  contracted  on  the  faith  of  the  United 
Slates,  for  supporting  the  war,  agreeably  to  the  resolution  of  the  16th 
of  December  last,  nor  be  continued  for  a  longer  term  than  twenty  ^we 
jears.*^  It  was  calculated,  that  the  proposed  duties  would  produce 
an  annual  sum  of  9915,1^.  As  this  would  fall  short  of  paying  the 
annnal  interest  of  the  debt,  a  million  and  a  half  of  dollars,  CoDgreas 


/ 


80 

recommended  to  the  States  "  to  establish,  for  a  time  limited  to  twentjr 
five  years,  and  to  appropriate  to  the  discharge  of  the  interest  and  prin- 
cipal of  the  debt,  substantial  and  effectnal  revenues,  of  such  a  naturet 
as  they  may  judge  convenient,  for  suppl3ring  their  respective  propor- 
tions of  $1,500,000  annually,  exclusive  of  the  aforementioned  dattea.** 

This  system  was  not  to  take  effect  until  acceded  to  by  all  the  States* 
but  when  adopted  by  all,  was  to  be  a  mutual  compact,  irrevocable  hy 
one  or  more,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  whole,  or  a  majority  of 
the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled.  To  induce  its  adoption,  sn 
appeal  was  made  to  the  several  States,  by  Congress,  in  an  able  address* 
in  which  they  urged,  in  most  forcible  language,  the  justice,  ss  well  as 
propriety,  of  making  provision,  for  the  payment,  at  least,  of  the  in- 
terest of  a  debt,  which  was  the  price  of  their  Independence.* 

This  financial  system,  however,  was  not  adopted  by  the  States,  in 
such  a  manner,  as  to  go  into  operation ;  and  Congress  had  no  means 
of  paying  either  the  principal  or  interest  of  the  debt,  but  by  requisi- 
tions upon  the  States ;  and  various  causes  combined,  to  prevent  a  edOBh 
pliance  with  these  requisitions. 

Before  the  adoption  of  the  present  constitution,  and  the  regakr  es- 
tablishment of  custom  houses,  under  the  general  government ;  there 
were  no  data,  from  which  an  accurate  calculation  could  be  made,  of  the 
general  trade  of  the  United  States ;  much  less,  of  that  with  particu- 
lar countries.  On  the  return  of  peace,  the  American  trade  was  re- 
newed with  Great  Britain ;  and  the  following  account,  from  the  En- 
glish custom  house  books,  shews  the  trade  between  Engknd  and  the 
United  States,  from  1784  to  1790,  in  sterling  money. 

Tean.  Imports.  Bxporti. 

1784  £749,345  .        £3,079,467 


2,306,023 
1,003,405 
2,009,111 
1,886,142 
2,525,298 
3,431,778 


1785  .  893,594 

1786  .  843,119 

1787  .        .  893,637 

1788  .        .         1,023,789 

1789  .        .         1,060,198 

1790  .        .         1,191,071 
During  the  two  first  years  after  the  war,  goods  imported  from  Eng- 
land, amounted  to  nearly  six  millions  sterling.    As  the  value  here  sla^ 
ted  is  the  official  value,  which  is  considerably  less  than  the  real,  the 
amount  of  imports  from  England  into  the  United  States  in  1784,  nrast 


«  This  address  wax  drawn  by  a  committee,  consisting  of  Mr.  ElUswortb,  Mr. 
Hamilton,  and  Mr.  Madison. 


31 

haTe  been  about  eighteen  millions  of  dollars^  and  in  the  following  year 
about  twelve  millions,  making  in  those  two  years,  about  thirty  mill- 
ions ;  while  the  exports  from  the  United  States  to  England,  during  the 
same  time,  were  only  between  eight  and  nine  millions.  This  vast  in- 
iux  of  goods  soon  drained  the  United  States  of  a  great  part  of  the 
specie,  remaining  at  the  close  of  the  war.  Congress,  therefore,  in 
▼ain  made  requisitions  upon  the  States,  to  fill  the  public  treasury. 
Tbe  impoverished  state  of  the  country,  in  consequence  of  the  war, 
the  want  of  regular  markets  for  its  produce,  the  burden  to  which  the 
Suiea  were  subjected,  in  making  provision  for  the  payment  of  their 
own  particular  debts,  the  want  of  uniform  commerical  regulations,  and 
a  jealoosy  which  began  to  exist  among  the  States,  combined,  to  retard 
a  compliance  with  these  requisitions.*  The  interest  of  the  debt  was, 
tlMrofore,  unpaid,  public  credit  gone,  the  debt  itself  considered  of 
little  valoe,  and  was  sold,  at  length,  by  many  of  its  original  holders, 
for  about  one  tenth  6f  its  nominal  value.  Private  credit,  was,  also, 
much  impaired.  During  the  war,  the  collection  of  debts  was,  in  a 
great  measure,  suspended ;  and  on  the  return  of  peace,  goods  were  im- 
ported, by  many  individuals,  far  beyond  their  means  of  payment ; 
aad  the  courts  were  filled  with  suits  against  delinquent  debtors.  The 
iaaporting  States  took  advantage  of  their  situation,  and  levied  duties 
OB  ifliports,  for  their  own  benefit,  at  the  expense  of  the  other  States. 

Tlios  burdened  with  public  and  private  debts,  and  pressed  with  taxes, 
aad  with  a  scarcity  of  money,  some  of  the  States,  in  order  to  remedy 
the  evil,  bad  recourse  to  paper  money  and  tender  laws ;  and  in  one 
State,  there  was  an  open  insurrection,  which  threatened,  not  merely 
the  peace  and  existence  of  that  State,  but  the  peace  and  existence  of 
tha  Union  itself. 

In  this  situation,  all  became  sensible  of  the  ineiliciency  of  the  gen- 
atal  gOTcmment,  and  of  the  necessity  of  vesting  Congress,  with  the 
power  of  regulating  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  of  command- 


*  la  a  report  made  to  Congress,  by  the  board  of  Treasury,  in  September,  1787, 
It  is  Slated,  tbm  the  requisiiions  upon  the  States,  for  the  payment  of  the  interest 
ef  tbe  domestic  debt,  in  the  years  1782, 17&i,  1785,  and  178G,  amounted  to  the  sum 
ol  ^,279,376,27,  and  the  Board  say,  "  it  is  with  regret  we  are  constrained  to  ob- 
serve, ibatto  the  31st  of  March  last,  the  n^gre^Titc  pa3rments,  on  acconni  of  these 
ffeqoisitions,  do  not  appear,  from  any  document  in  the  Treasury  office,  to  exceed 
Ibssamof $1,003,7:25,57 

Leaving  a  balance  due  of  no  less  than  5,275,C50,60 

$6,879,376,37 


32 

ing  the  resources  of  the  nation,  for  the  benefit  of  all.  In  September, 
1786,  in  consequence  of  a  proposition  from  Virginia,  Commissionert 
from  that  State,  and  from  the  States  of  Pennsylvania,  New  York, 
New  Jersey,,and  Delaware,  met  at  Annapolis,  in  Maryland,  **to  take 
into  consideration  the  trade  and  commerce  of  the  United  States,  to 
consider  how  far  an  uniform  system,  in  their  commercial  intercourse 
and  regulations,  might  be  necessary  to  their  common  interest  and  per^ 
manent  harmony,  and  to  report  to  the  several  States,  such  an  act,  rel- 
ative to  this  great  object,  as,  when  unanimously  ratified  by  them,  would 
enable  the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  effectually  to  provide 
for  the  same.*'  Commissioners  were  also  appointed  by  the  States  of 
New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island  and  North  Carolina, 
but  from  some  causes,  did  not  attend.  In  consequence  of  the  partial 
representation  of  the  States,  and  their  limited  powers,  the  Commis- 
sioners present,  did  not  think  proper  to  proceed,  on  the  special  business 
of  their  appointment.  They,  however,  drew  up  a  Report  and  Address 
to  their  respective  State  Legislatures,  in  which,  after  stating  their  rea- 
sons for  not  proceeding  on  the  special  business  assigned  them,  they 
say,  "  deeply  impressed,  however,  with  the  magnitude  and  importance 
of  the  object  confided  to  them  on  this  occasion,  your  Commissioners 
cannot  forbear  to  indulge  an  expression  of  their  earnest  and  unani- 
mous wish,  that  speedy  measures  may  be  taken,  to  effect  a  general 
meeting  of  the  States  in  a  future  Convention,  for  the  same  and  other 
purposes,  as  the  situation  of  public  affairs  may  be  found  to  require.'* 
They,  therefore,  suggest  the  propriety  of  a  meeting  of  Commissioners 
from  all  the  States,  to  be  held  at  Philadelphia,  on  the  second  Monday 
in  May,  1787,  '*to  take  into  consideration  the  situation  of  the  United 
States,  to  devise  such  further  provision,  as  shall  to  them  appear  neces- 
sary, to  render  the  constitution  of  the  federal  government  adequate 
to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union."  This  report  and  address,  was  sent 
to  Congress,  and  to  the  Executives  of  the  several  States  not  repre- 
sented at  Annapolis.  In  consequence  of  this  recommendation,  and  a 
resolution  of  Congress  of  February  21  st,  1787,  a  general  Convention 
was  held  at  Philadelphia,  in  May,  1787 ;  and  on  the  17th  of  Septem- 
ber following,  a  new  Constitution  was  assented  to,  by  the  members, 
composing  this  Convention,  and  being  ratified  by  a  large  majority  of 
the  States,  went  into  operation  on  the  4th  of  March,  1789.  By  this 
constitution,  the  general  government,  among  other  important  powers, 
is  vested  with  power  **  to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts  and 
excises,"  and  *^  to  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among 
the  several  States,  and  with  the  Indian  tribes.^^    Under  this  new  form 


33 


of  government,  with  the  Father  of  his  country  at  its  head,  trade  and  ] 
commerce  soon  revived,  public  and  private  credit  was  restored,  and  a 
new  spring  given  to  agriculture  and  manufactures,  and  new  security 
afforded,  to  the  various  pursuits  of  individual  industry.  Since  that  aus- 
picious period,  the  United  States  have  peaceably  acquired,  as  before 
stated,  a  vast  extent  of  territory ;  and  the  following  pages  will  show, 
we  tnift,  that  no  country  has  ever  increased  more  rapidly,  in  popula- 
tion* and  in  internal  and  external  resources. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Exports^Dividedinto  those  of  Domestic  and  Foreign  origin— Domestic,  derived 
from  the  Sea,  the  Forest,  Agricnlture  and  Manufactures — Products  of  the  Sea 
principally  from  the  Cod  and  Whale  fisheries— State  of  the  Cod  fishery  prior 
to,  and  since  the  revolution — Secured  to  us,  by  the  Treaty  of  peace  in  1783,  bj 
the  firmness  and  perseverance  of  the  American  negotiators — Whale  fishery 
began  at  Nantucket  in  1690— State  of  it  before  the  Revolution — Its  great  in- 
crease of  late  years — Number  of  vessels  engaged  in  it,  in  1833,  with  their  ton- 
nage, number  of  men — Value  of  the  vessels  and  their  outfits,  and  of  their 
produce — Value  of  Export*:,  the  produce  of  the  fisheries,  in  each  year,  from 
1803,  to  1833 — Products  of  the  Forest — viz.  lumber,  naval  stores,  pot  and  pemrl 
ashes,  skins  and  furs,  ginseng,  oak  bark,  and  other  dyes,  value  and  qoantiqr 
of  each,  exported,  from  1803  to  1833. 

In  our  view  of  the  wealth  and  resources  of  the  United  Statest  at 
different  periods,  we  shall  commence  with  the  exports.  These  con- 
sist of  articles,  either  of  domestic  or  foreign  origin.  At  an  early 
period  of  the  present  government,  provision  was  made,  at  the  Treas- 
ury department,  to  ascertain  the  quantity,  as  well  as  value  of  all 
the  exports  of  the  country ;  but  in  the  general  accounts,  no  dicrimi- 
nation  was  made,  between  the  value  of  domestic  and  foreign  articles, 
until  1802.  To  ascertain  the  value  of  the  exports,  the  several  Col- 
lectors, were  directed,  by  the  Treasury  department,  to  add,  in  their 
quarterly  returns,  the  quantity  of  the  various  articles  exported,  and 
also  their  value,  at  the  places  of  exportation. 

The  quantity  of  the  articles  exported  is  furnished,  by  the  export- 
erf,  and  may  sometimes  fall  short,  and  sometimes  exceed  the  real 
quantity.  At  the  Treasury,  an  average  was  made  of  the  prices 
turned  by  the  collectors,  and  the  value  of  the  articles  exported, 
calculated,  from  the  average  prices  thus  ascertained.  Table  No.  I, 
contains  a  statement  of  the  value  of  all  the  exports,  from  each  State 
and  territory,  annually,  from  the  Ist  of  October,  1790,  to  September 
30th,  1816.  Table  No.  II,  exhibits  a  statement  of  the  value  of  ex- 
ports of  domestic  origin,  from  each  State  and  territory,  from  October 
1st,  180%  to  September  30th,  1816,  and  Table  No.  Ill,  a  sUtement 
of  the  value  of  exports  of  foreign  origin,  during  the  same  period. 
Table  No.  IV,  shews  the  exports  of  domestic  and  foreign  origin, 
from  each  State  and  territory,  in  the  years  1817,  1818,  1819,  I^. 
Table  No.  V,  contains  a  statement  of  the  whole  commerce  of  each 
State  and  territory,  in  each  year,  from  1821,  to  1833,  embracing  not 


35 


only,  the  exports,  but,  also,  the  imports,  distinguishing  the  domestic 
from  the  foreign  exports,  and  also,  the  annual  imports  and  exports,  in 
American  and  foreign  vessels. 

The  Taloe  of  all  the  exports  in  each  year,  from  1790  to  1833,  and 
the  ralne  of  those  of  domestic  and  foreign  origin,  since  1803,  was  as 
follows : — 


toBepLSa 

1791 
1793 
1798 
1791 


1796 
1797 
1796 
1799 
^,,J800 
1801 
1802 
1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1819 
1813 
1614 

1S16 
1817 
1818 
1819 
18» 
1821 
1823 
18S3 
1884 


f  • 


Total  vmlue  of  axporti. 

919,012,041 

20,753,096 

26,109,572 

33,026,233 

47,989,472 

67,064,097 

56,850,206 

61,527,097 

78,665,5^ 

70,971,780 

94,115,925 

72,483,160 

55,800,033 

77,699,074 

95,566,021 

101,536,963 

108,343,150 

22,130,960 

52,203,283 

66,757,970 

61,316,833 

38,527,236 

27,855,997 

6,927,441 

52,557,753 

81,920,452 

87,671,569 

93,281,133 

70,142,521 

69,691,669 

61,974,382 

72,160,281 

74,699,030 

75,986,657 


VaL  of  ezp.  of  dom.  origin.     VaL  of  txp.  of  for.  origiii. 


$42,205,961 
41,46^,477 
42,387,002 
41,253,727 
48,699,592 

9,433,546 
31,405,702 
42,366,675 
45,29^,043 
30,032,109 
25,008,152 

6,782,272 
45,974,403 
64,7^1,896 
68,313,500 
73,854,437 
50,976,838 
51,683,640 
43,671,894' 
49,874,079 
47,155,408 
50,649,500 


$13,594«073 

36,231,597 

53,179,019 

60,283,234 

59,643,558 

12,997,414 

20,797,531 

24,391,295 

16,022,790 

8,495,127 

2,847,845 

0,145,169 

6,583,350 

17,138,555 

19,358,069 

19,426.696 

19,165,683 

18,008,039 

21,302,488 

22,286,202 

27,543,622 

25,337,157 


/ 


36 

to  S^pt  30.      Total  value  of  eiporto.      Val.  of  ezp.  of  dom.  origin.      Val.  of  *exp.  of  for.  origto. 


1825      . 

•99,535,388 

$66,944,745 

•32,590,643 

1820      . 

77,r>95,322 

53,055.710 

24,539,612 

1827      . 

82,3^1,829 

58,921,691 

23,403,136 

1828      . 

72,2rhl,686 

50,669,669 

21,595,017 

1829      . 

72,358,671 

55,700,193 

16,658,478 

1830 

73.849,508 

59,462,029 

14,387,479 

1H31 

81,310,583 

61,277,057 

20,033,526 

1832 

87,176,M3 

63,137,470 

24,039,473 

1833      . 

90,140,433 

70,317,698 

19,822,735 

The  exports  of  domestic  origin,  have  been  classed  into  thosey 
which  are — 

Ist.  The  produce  of  the  Sea, 

2d.   The  produce  of  the  Forest, 

3d.  The  produce  of  Agriculture, 

Ath.  Manufactures^  and  those  which  are  uncertain. 

This  division  or  classification  of  the  exports  of  domestic  origin, 
and  the  value  of  the  articles  exported,  under  each  division,  has  been 
ascertained  at  the  Treasury  since  1802. 

It  presents  a  useful  and  important  view  of  the  di0erent  pursuits  and 
employments  of  the  citizens  of  this  extensive  country,  differing  so 
much,  in  climate,  as  well  as  soil ;  and  indicates  the  various  sources  of 
national  wealth. 

Each  of  these  will  be  considered  in  their  order — 

1st,  The  products  of  the  Sea. 

These  are  derived  from  the  Cod  and  Whale  fisheries,  and  from  the 
river  fisheries,  such  as  herring,  sliad,  salmon,  mackerel,  6lc.  The 
Cod  fishery  has  been  an  object  of  great  importance,  to  the  States  of 
Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,  from  their  first  settlement  It 
has  furnished  a  lucrative  employment,  for  many  of  the  inhabitants  of 
these  States,  who  settled  in  its  neighborhood,  along  a  rocky  and  bar- 
ren coast.  It  has  given  employment  also,  to  the  shipbuilder;  and  has 
always  been  considered  as  an  excellent  nursery  for  seamen. 

The  vast  quantity  of  fish,  found,  soon  after  the  discovery  of  North 
America,  along  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  soon  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  Europeans. 

The  inhabitants  of  Biscay  in  Spain,  and  of  Brittany  in  France, 
first  engaged  in  this  fishery.  The  French  and  English  afterwards 
claimetl  an  exclusive  right  to  it,  in  consequence  of  owning  the  adja- 
cent coast. 


37 

Previous  to  the  American  revolution,  this  fishery  gave  employment 
annually,  to  about  four  thousand  American  seamen,  and  about  twenty 
eifht  thunsand  tons  of  shipping ;  and  produced  about  three  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  quintals  of  dsh,  then  valued,  at  more  than  a  million 
of  dollars.  By  the  3d  article  of  the  Treaty  of  peace,  between  the  United 
States  and  Great  Britain  in  1783,  '*  It  is  agreed,  that  the  people  of  the 
United  States,  shall  continue  to  enjoy  unmolested  the  right  to  take 
fish  of  every  kind,  on  the  grand  bank,  and  on  all  other  banks  of  New- 
foundland ;  also,  in  the  gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  at  all  other  placeSy 
in  the  sea,  where  the  inhabitants  of  both  countries  used  any  time  to 
ish ;  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  shall  have  liberty  to 
take  fish  of  any  kind  on  such  part  of  the  coast  of  Newfoundland,  as 
the  British  shall  use  (but  not  to  cure  or  dry  them  on  the  Island  ;)  and 
also,  on  the  coasts,  bays  and  creeks  of  all  other  his  Britanic  Majesty's 
dominions  in  America,  and  that  the  American  fishermen  shall  have 
liberty  to  dry  and  cure  fish,  in  any  of  the  unsettled  bays,  harbors 
and  creeks  of  Nova  Scotia,  Magdalen  Islands,  and  Labrador,  so  long 
as  the  same  shall  remain  unsettled ;  but  so  soon  as  the  same,  or  either 
of  them  shall  be  settled,  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  the  said  fishermen 
to  dry  or  cure  fish  at  such  settlement,  without  a  previous  agreement 
for  that  purpose,  with  the  inhabitants,  proprietors,  or  possessors  of 
eke  ground.'* 

For  this  favorable  article,  in  relation  to  the  fisheries,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  boundaries,  the  Americans  were  indebted  to  the  firmness  of 
fbtir  negotiators,  and  particularly  Mr.  Adams,  who  knew  their  value 
aad  importance  to  his  countrymen.  The  British  negotiators,  for  a 
long  time,  refused  their  assent  to  this  article,  and  particularly  to  that 
pnrt,  relating  to  the  coast  fishery,  and  which  acknowledged  the  right 
of  ibe  Americans  to  take  fish,  on  the  grand  banks,  6lc.  and  at  last 
iBBisled,  on  inserting  the  word  liberty,  instead  of  right.  Upon  this, 
Mr.  Adams  grew  warm,  and  declared  to  the  British  negotiators,  he 
would  put  his  hand  to  no  articles,  without  satisfaction  about  the  fish- 
criea:  be  asked,  ^'whether  there  was,  or  could  be  a  clearer  right? 
b  former  treaties"  he  said,  '^  that  of  Utrecht,  and  that  of  Paris, 
Prance  and  England  have  claimed  the  right,  and  used  the  word. 
VThen  God  Almighty  made  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  at  three  hun- 
dred leagues  distance,  from  the  people  of  America,  and  at  six  hundred 
leaf  ues  distance,  from  those  of  France  and  England,  did  ho  not  give, 
as  good  a  right  to  the  former,  as  to  the  latter  ?  If  Heaven,  in  the 
creation  gare  a  right,  it  is  ours,  at  least,  as  much  as  yours, — if  occu- 
pation, use  and  possession  gives  a  right,  we  have  it  as  clearly  as 


/ 


38 

joa, — if  war*  and  blood  and  treasure  gire  a  right,  ours  is  aa  good  as 
youw." 

"  We  have  certainly  been  fighting  in  Canada,  Cape  Breton  mad 
Nova  Scotia,  for  the  defense  of  this  fishery,  and  have  expended  be- 
yond all  proportion  more  than  you ;  if  then  the  right  cannot  be  deni- 
ed, why  should  it  not  be  acknowledged,  and  put  out  of  dispute!  Why 
should  we  leave  room  for  illiterate  fishermen,  to  wrangle  and  chi- 
cane ?"*  The  British  negotiators  finally  yielded  this  last  point*  and 
agreed  to  the  article. 

The  Cod  fishery  was  almost  annihilated,  during  the  war  of  the  rev- 
olution. Nor  did  it  recover  its  former  prosperous  condition,  from  the 
peace  of  1783,  to  the  year  1790;  at  which  latter  period,  the  Legia- 
lature  of  Massachusetts,  made  a  representation  to  Congress,  of  the 
low  and  embarrassed  state  of  this  fishery.  In  consequence  of  thif 
representation,  and  a  Report  thereon  made  by  the  Secretary  of  StatOt 
a  bounty  was  granted,  by  the  general  government,  on  the  exportation 
f  of  salted  fish,  by  way  of  draw  back  of  the  duty  on  imported  salt ; 
and  afterwards,  an  allowance,  in  money,  was  made  to  vessels  employ- 
ed, for  a  certain  number  of  months  in  this  fishery.  From  this  encoor- 
agement,  and  the  happy  effects  upon  trade  and  commerce,  produced 
/  by  the  establishment  of  the  general  government,  the  Cod  fishery  in* 
creased  until  the  commencement  of  the  embargo,  and  commercial  re- 
strictions in  1808,  and  the  war  between  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain,  which  followed.  The  British  government  considered  the  shore 
fishery,  as  it  was  called,  as  a  privilegCy  granted  at  the  peace  of  1783^ 
and  which  was  forfeited  or  done  away,  in  consequence  of  this  war,  and 
therefore  refused  to,  regrant  it,  without  an  equivalent.  In  the  negolie- 
tions  for  peace,  some  of  the  American  Commissioners  were  disposed  to 
renew  to  the  Britinh,  the  right  of  navigating  the  Mississippi,  as  an  eqoiT- 
alent  for  the  shore  fishery,  but  a  majority  of  them  were  opposed  to  it; 
and  the  Treaty  of  Ghent,  and  the  commercial  convention  which  imme- 
diately followed,  were  both  silent,  on  the  subject  of  the  fisheries. 

Some  American  vessels,  in  attempting  to  carry  .on  this  fishery,  an 
they  had  been  accustomed  to  do,  under  the  Treaty  of  1783»  were 
seized  by  British  armed  vessels ;  and  this  irritating  question  remained 
until  October  20th,  1818 ;  when,  by  a  Convention  of  that  date,  it  wee 
agreed,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States,  in  common  with 
^  those  of  Great  Britain,  should  have  the  liberty  to  take  fish,  on  that 
/     part  of  the  southern  coast  of  Newfoundland,  extending  from  Cape  Raj 

*  Diplomatic  Correspondence,  voL  6.  pages  493  and  495. 


39 


to  the  Rameac  Islands  on  the  western  and  northern  coast  of  New- 
foandknd,  from  Cape  Ray  to  the  Quiepen  Islands ;  on  the  shores  of 
the  Mag^len  Islands,  and,  also,  on  the  coasts,  bays,  harbors  and 
creeks,  from  Meant  Jolly,  on  the  South  of  Labrador,  to  and  through 
the  straits  of  BeUisle,  and  thence  northerly  indefinitely  along  the  coast; 
bat  without  prejudice  to  the  rights  of  the  Hudson  Bay  Company. 
And  the  American  fishermen  were,  also,  to  have  liberty  to  dry  and 
core  fish,  in  any  of  the  unsettled  bays,  harbors  and  creeks,  by  the 
southern  part  of  the  coast  of  Newfoundland  above  described,  and  of 
the  coast  of  Labrador ;  but  where  such  parts  should  be  settled,  were 
Bot  to  dry  or  core  fish,  without  the  liberty  of  the  proprietors  of  the 
ground.  And  by  the  same  Conrention,  the  United  States  renounce 
any  Hberty  before  enjoyed  or  claimed  by  them  or  their  inhabitants,  to 
tnke,  dry  or  cure  fish,  on  or  within  three  marine  miles,  of  any  of  the 
bays,  creeks  or  harbors  of  any  of  the  British  dominions  of 
not  incladed  within  the  above  limits.  They  were,  however, 
pennitted  to  enter  such  bays  or  harbors,  for  the  purpose  of  shelter  or 
fcpeiring  damages,  of  purchasing  wood  and  obtaining  water,  and  for 
other  purpose. 

Tlie  quantity  of  dried  and  pickled  fish  exported  from  1791  to  1833, 
as  foDows. 


Tan. 

Dried  flth— QuinUlt.         1 

Bbli.  of  pickled  flflh. 

KegB  of  pickled  fleh. 

17B1     . 

383.237    . 

.      57,426 

17«     . 

«lu4,cf<IO 

.     48,277 

ins  . 

37%826    . 

.      45,440 

ITOi     . 

436,907    . 

.      36,929 

1796    . 

400,818    . 

.      55,999 

me  . 

377,713    . 

.     84,558    . 

5,256 

mn  . 

406,016    . 

69,782    . 

7,351 

Kve  . 

411,175    . 

.     66,827    . 

6,220 

17W    . 

428,496    . 

63,542    . 

.      15,993 

I«0   . 

392,726    . 

.     50,388    . 

.      12,403 

1801    . 

410,948    . 

.     85,935    . 

10,424 

1802    . 

440,925    . 

.     75,819    . 

.     .13,229 

1808    . 

461,870    . 

.     76,831     . 

.      11,566 

1804    . 

567,828    . 

.     89,482    . 

13,045 

1806    . 

514,549    . 

.     56,670    . 

7.207 

1806    . 

537/457    . 

.      64,615    . 

10,155 

1807    . 

473,924    . 

.      57,621     . 

.      13,743 

1808    . 

155,808    . 

.      18,957    . 

3,036 

1800    . 

345,648    . 

.     64,777    . 

9,380 

40 


VeftTB.                Dried  fish— auiutals. 

Bbls.  of  pickled  fish.         i 

Kep  of  pickled  teh. 

1810    . 

280,864    . 

.     34,674 

5,964 

1811     . 

214,387    . 

.     44,716 

9,393 

1812    . 

169,019    . 

.     23,636 

3,143 

1813    . 

63,616    . 

.      13,833 

568 

1814    . 

31,310    . 

.       8,436 

87 

1815    . 

103,251     . 

.     36,232 

3,062 

1816    . 

219,991     . 

.     38,228 

6,963 

1817    . 

267,514    . 

.     44,426 

15,551 

1818    . 

308,747    . 

.     55,119 

7,400 

1819    . 

280,555    . 

.     66,563 

6,746 

1820    . 

321,419    . 

.      87,916 

7,309 

1821    ..    . 

267,305    . 

.      76,429 

4,162 

1822    . 

241,228    . 

.      69,127 

7,191 

1823    . 

262,766    . 

.      75,728 

8349 

1824    . 

310,189    . 

.     72,559 

12,911 

1825    . 

300,857    . 

.     70,572 

10,636 

1826    . 

260,803    . 

.     85,445 

11,459 

1827    . 

247,321     . 

.     66,123 

7,446 

1828    . 

265,217    . 

.      63,928 

4,205 

1829    . 

294,761     . 

.      61,629 

3,207 

1830    . 

229,796    . 

.      66,113 

6,723 

1831    . 

230,577    . 

.      91,787 

8,594 

1832    . 

250,544    . 

.    102,770 

4,030 

1833    . 

249,689    . 

.     86,442 

3,636 

The  folluwing  is  the  value 

of  dried  and  pickled  fish,  exported 

since  1802. 

Trara.           Dried  fish. 

Pickled  fish. 

Yearfc 

Dried  fish. 

Pickled  fbh. 

1803  $1,620,000 

$560,000 

1816 

$935,000 

$221,000 

1804     2,400,000 

640,000 

1817 

1,003,000 

325,000 

1805     2,058,000 

348,000 

1818 

1,081,000 

317,000 

1806     2,150,000 

366,000 

1819 

1,052,000 

409,000 

1807     1,896,000 

302,000 

1820 

964,000 

538,000 

1808       6,23,000 

98,000 

1821 

708,778 

264,813 

1809      1,123,000 

282,000 

1822 

666,730 

249,108 

1810        913,000 

214,000 

1823 

734,024 

270,776 

1811         757,000 

305,000 

1824 

873,685 

963,019 

1812        592,000 

146,000 

1825 

830,356 

948,417 

1813        210,000 

81,000 

1826 

667,742 

257,180 

1814         128,000 

50,000 

1827 

747,171 

240,270 

1815        491,000 

218,000 

1828 

819,C 

m 

246,737 

41 


Tmm.  DrM  flflh.  Pickled  lltb. 

1829  •747,541  9290,527 

1830  590,600  225,987 

1831  625,393  304,441 


Ymn.  Dried  llth.        Pickled  lltli. 

1832  9749,909   $306,812 

1833  713,317   277,973 


Tables  No.  VI  and  VII,  exhibit  the  state  of  the  fishery  in  Massachu- 
vetts,  from  1765  to  1775;  and  also,  from  1786  to  1790,  and  table  No 
Vni,  shews  the  destination  of  dried  and  smoked  fish,  from  1800  to 
1816,  and  table  No.  IX,  the  destination  of  the  same,  from  1821,  to  1833. 

I%€  Whale  Fishery. 

The  whale  fishery  first  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Americans,  in 
1600,  and  commenced  at  the  Island  of  Nantucket,  in  boats  from  the 
shore.  In  1715,  six  sloops,  of  thirty  eight  tons  burden  each,  were 
employed  in  this  fishery  from  that  Island.  For  many  years,  the  ad- 
ventures of  these  brave  and  hardy  Islanders  were  confined  to  the 
American  coast ;  but  as  whales  grew  scarce  here,  which  was  about 
1750,  they  were  extended  to  the  western  islands,  to  the  Brazils,  and  at 
length,  to  the  northern  and  southern  seas.*  From  1771,  to  1775, 
Massachusetts  employed,  annually  one  hundred  and  eighty  three  Tea- 
sels, of  thirteen  thousand,  eight  hundred  and  twenty  tons,  in  the 
northern  whale  fishery,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  one  vessels,  of 
fourteen  thousand  and  twenty  tons,  in  the  southern,  navigated  by 
four  thousand  and  fifty  nine  men.  The  produce  of  this  fishery  was 
estimated  at  £350,000  lawful  money,  or  81,160,000.t  The  peculiar 
mode  of  paying  the  seamen,  in  these  voyages,  has  contributed  not  a 
little  to  the  success  of  the  voyages  themselves.  Each  has  a  share  in 
the  profits  of  the  enterprise,  and  whether  he  shall  gain  or  lose,  depends 
on  his  activity,  in  managing  the  boat,  in  pursuit  of  the  whale,  and  his 
dexterity  in  directing  the  harpoon.  This  has  led  to  a  spirit  of  enter-  Z- 
prise  and  hardihood,  in  this  class  of  seamen,  never  surpassed,  if  ever 
equalled,  by  those  of  any  nation  whatever. 

This  fishery,  during  the  war  of  the  revolution,  was  destroyed.  On 
the  return  of  peace,  it  recovered  by  degrees;  and  from  1787  to  1789, 
ninety  one  vessels,  of  five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty  tons, 
were  engaged  in  the  northern  fishery,  and  thirty  one  vessels,  of  four 
thousand  three  hundred  and  ninety  tons,  in  the  southern,  with  one 
thousand  six  hundred  and  eleven  seamen.^    The  quantity  of  sperma- 


L^ 


•  See  Collections  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society, 
t  8se  table  No.  X.  X  See  table  No.  XI. 

6 


y 


42 

ceti  oil  taken  annually,  from  1771  to  1775,  was  thirty  nine  thousand 
three  hundred  and  ninety  barrels,  and  of  coramon  oil,  eight  thousand 
six  hundred  and  fifty ;  while  from  1787  to  1789,  the  quantity  of  the 
former  taken  annually,  was  seven  thousand  nine  hundred  barrels,  and 
of  the  latter,  thirteen  thousand  One  hundred  and  thirty. 

Previous  to,  and  for  many  years  subsequent  to  the  American  revo- 
lution, this  fishery  was  carried  on,  principally,  from  the  Island  of 
'/  Nantucket,  where  it  originated,  a  small  island,  about  fifteen  miles  in 
length,  and  three  in  breadth,  situated,  about  thirty  miles  from  the 
coast. 

Before  the  war  of  the  revolution,  this  Island  had  sixty  five  ships, 
of  four  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy  five  tons,  in  the  northern 
fishery,  and  eiglity  five,  of  ten  thousand  two  hundred  tons,  in  the 
southern.  This  fishery  suffered  much,  during  the  late  war,  between 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  having  lost  twenty  four  ships  by 
the  capture  of  the  enemy.  Since  that  period,  however,  it  has  re- 
vived, and,  we  believe,  has  become  more  extensive  than  that  carried 
on  by  all  other  nations. 

From  the  best  accounts,  we  have  obtained,  the  whole  number  of 
vessels  engaged  in  this  fishery,  in  the  winter  of  1834,  was  four  hun- 
dred and  thirty  four,  of  which,  about  three  hundred  and  eighty  four 
were  ships,  and  fifty,  barks  and  brigs. 

The  greatest  part  of  these,  belong  to  New  Bedford,  Nantucket  and 
New  London.  The  following  is  the  number  of  vessels,  in  these  three 
districts,  with  their  tonnage,  and  number  of  men  employed,  furnished 
us  by  the  collectors  of  these  districts. 

No.  of  vessels. 

New  Bedford,  181 

Nantucket,  76 

New  London,  41 

299  94,075  7,392 

The  remaining  number,  being  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  six,  from 
the  best  information  obtained,  belong  to  the  following  ports. 

Sag  Harbor,  .  .     23  Portsmouth,  .  .  6 

Falmouth,  .  .      6  Bridgeport,     .  .  1 

Warren,  .  .     12  Newburyport,  .  3 

Bristol,  .  •  .13  Edgerton,       .  6 

Newport,  .  6  Salem,   ...  5 

Hudson,  .  .11  Boston,     .      .  .4 

Providence,  .  .      2  New  York,     .  6 


Tonnn^e. 

Men. 

56,352 

4,445 

26,472 

1,860 

11,251 

1,087 

43 


Fall  River,    . 

.      2 

Wareham, 

1 

Poughkeepsie, 

.      3 

Portland, 

1 

Plymouth, 

.      5 

Wiscassett,     . 

1 

Gloucester,    . 

.      2 

Greenport,     . 

.      2 

Newburgh,     . 

.      3 

The  number  of  vessels  employed  in  the  sperm  fishery,  from  New 
Bedford,  was  one  hundred  and  twelve,  with  a  tonnage  of  thirty  seven 
thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty  three,  and  two  thousand  eight  hun- 
dred and  twenty  eight  men,  and  from  Nantucket  was  sixty  nine,  with 
m  tonnage  of  twenty  four  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixteen,  and  one 
thousand  six  hundred  and  eighty  four  men.  The  number,  from  the 
other  ports,  in  the  same  fishery,  may  be  estimated,  at  about  eighty, 
making  the  whole  number,  in  the  sperm  fishery,  about  two  hundred 
and  sixty  one,  and  in  the  right  whale  fishery,  about  one  hundred  and 
■erenty. 

The  value  of  the  ships  employed  in  the  former,  with  their  outfits, 
has  been  estimated,  by  those  well  acquainted  with  the  business,  at 
$30,000  each ;  those  in  the  latter,  at  $15,000,  and  the  barks  and  brigs 
nay  be  estimated  at  $10,000.  The  following,  therefore,  may  be 
deemed  the  value  of  all  the  vessels,  employed  in  the  whale  fishery 
firom  the  United  States,  about  the  1st  of  January,  1834,  including 
thdr  outfits. 

261  ships,  in  the  sperm  fishery,  at      $30,000  $7,830,000 

120    '«      in  the  nght  whale  fishery,   *'  15,000  1,800,000 

60  barks,  brigs,  6lc.  10,000  600,000 

Making  $10,130,000 

The  entire  tonnage  of  the  whaling  vessels,  in  the  districts  of  New 
Bedford,  Nantucket  and  New  London,  as  above  stated,  was  ninety  four 
thousand  and  seventy  five ;  and  if  we  estimate  the  tonnage  of  the 
▼easels,  in  the  other  ports,  in  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  vessels,  in 
three  places,  the  whole  tonnage  employed  in  the  whaling  busi- 
may  be  stated  at  one  hundred  and  thirty  six  thousand,  which  is 
not  far  from  one  tenth  of  the  whole  tonnage  of  the  United  States ; 
and  by  the  same  ratio,  the  whole  number  of  men,  employed,  would 
be  about  ten  thousand  nine  hundred.  The  men  usually  have  for  their 
shares,  three  tenths  of  the  earnings. 

From  1815  to  1830,  the  following  quantity  of  spermaceti  oil,  was 
brought  into  the  United  States,  the  produce  of  this  part  of  the  whale 
fishery. 


44 


^ 


Bblf. 

Ymti. 

Bbta. 

3,944 

1823  . 

.   87,230 

7,539 

1824  . 

.   92,380 

32,050 

1825  . 

62,240 

18,625 

1826  . 

.   32,840 

21,323 

1827  . 

93,180 

34,708 

1828  . 

r3,077 

48,000 

1829  . 

.   79,840 

42,900 

1830  . 

.  106,829 

Tean. 

1815      . 
1816 
1817      . 
1818 

1819  . 

1820  . 

1821  . 

1822  . 

The  quantity  of  common  whale  oil  produced,  during  this  period, 
was  about  equal  to  that  of  sperm  oil. 

In  1831,  the  quantity  of  sperm  oil  brought  in,  was  109,200  barrels* 
and  of  common  oil,  114,341,  and  of  whale  bone,  1,029,690  pounds; 
and  the  value  of  which,  was  as  follows,  viz. 

109,200  barrels  of  sperm   oil,     at     822      per  bbl.    is  f  2,402,400 

114,341     do.     of  common  do.    "         8,50    "     "  914,728 

1,020,069  pounds  of  whale  bone,  worth,        .        .        .         171,511 

83,488,630 

The  quantity  imported  in  1832,  was,  we  believe,  rather  less,  than 
in  the  preceding  year.  The  importations  into  New  Bedford  and  Nan- 
tucket, in  1833,  were  as  follows. 


New  Bedford, 
Nantucket, 


Sperm  oil— bbbi. 

47,120 
29,511 


Common  oil — bblt. 

79,174 
5,422 


Whale  bone^lbt. 

680,330 
49,429 


76,631  81,51M3  729,759 

The  value  of  the  produce  of  this  fishery,  brought  into  Nantucket, 
in  1833,  principally  sperm  oil,  which  was  estimated  at  80  cents  per 

gallon,  was 8796,960 

Estimated  value  of  the  same  produce,  brought  into  New 

Bedford,  during  this  year,  at  the  same  rate,  about        .     1,950,000 


Making  for  both, 

Add  the  value,  brought  into  other  ports,  estimated  at 


82,746,900 
l,3(i0,000 


Making 84,046,900 

The  value  of  this  fishery  may,  thorcforo,  be  justly  estimated,  at 
from  83,500,000  to  84,000,000  a  year. 

And  it  is  not  unworthy  of  notice,  that  nearly  the  whole  of  this,  is 
the  produce  of  American  industry.  The  men,  the  thips,  and  must  of 
their  outfits,  are  American ;  and  the  American  farmer,  as  well  as  the 
American  merchant  and  mechanic,  comes  in  for  his  share  of  adran* 
tage  arisiog  from  thii  business. 


45 

In  1830^  it  WM  calculated,  that  the  foUowiDg,  among  many  othet 
•rticleep  were  coofumed,  hy  the  whale  ships. 
36,000  barreli  of  flour. 
30,000    do.     of  beef  and  pork. 
18,000  bolto  of  duck. 
8,000,000  of  staves. 

2,000  tons  of  cordage. 

The  consumption  of  these  articles,  as  well  as  others,  must  have  in- 
craased,  since  that  period. 

About  one  half  of  the  common  whale  oil,  finds  a  market  in  Europe, 
one  quarter  in  the  West  Indies  and  South  America,  and  the  other 
quarter,  in  the  United  States. 

Nearly  the  whole  of  the  spermaceti  oil,  is  consumed  in  this  coun- 
try ;  from  one  quarter  to  one  third  being  used  in  the  cotton  and  wool- 
len OMOinfactories ;  and  in  this  indirect  way,  one  branch  of  domestic 
industry  is  materially  benefitted  by  another. 

And  we  cannot  but  observe  in  this  place,  that  the  temperance  now 
practised,  on  board  most  of  these  whale  ships,  contributes,  in  no  small 
degree,  to  the  success  of  these  long  and  hazardous  voyages.  We  are 
happy  to  be  able  to  state,  that,  in  April,  1834,  no  less  than  one  hun- 
dred and  sixty  eight  of  the  whale  ships  of  New  Bedford,  were,  what 
are  called  temperance  ships,  furnishing  no  spirituous  liquors,  except 
for  the  medicine  chest.* 

Great  Britain  formerly  gave  a  high  bounty  on  vessels,  employed  in 
tbe  whale  fishery;  but  this  bounty  ceased  in  1824.  A  duty,  however, 
•o  foreign  oil,  is  still  continued,  amounting,  in  the  case  of  spermaceti 
oiL  lo  a  prohibition* 

The  South  Sea  fishery  was  not  prosecuted  by  the  British,  until 
about  the  commencement  of  the  American  Revolutionary  war. .  Since 
1814,  thu  fishery  has  declined,  in  that  country — the  greatest  number 
of  sbipa  engaged  in  it,  in  any  one  year,  from  1814  to  1824,  when  the 
hoeoly  ceased,  was  sixty  eight,  tonnage,  nineteen  thousand  seven  bun- 
dled and  fifty  five,  and  employing  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
twenty  seven  men ;  and  in  1830,  only  thirty  one  ships,  with  a  tonnage 
mi  ten  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninety  seven,  and  nine  hundred  and 
durty  seven  men ;  and  these  ships  were  from  the  port  of  London. 

The  principal  whale  fishery,  from  Great  Britain,  is  to  Davis'  Straits. 
In  1820,  the  number  of  ships  in  the  northern  fishery  was  eighty 
nine,  with  twenty  eight  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twcl?e  tons. 

•  See  American  doarterly  Temperance  Magazine,  for  Aogost,  1834,  p.  71. 


L 


J 


46 

In  1830,  ninety  one  were  fitted  out  for  this  fishery,  forty  one  from  Eng- 
land, and  fifty  from  Scotland— of  the  former,  thirty  three  were  from 
Hull ;  and  of  the  latter,  nine  were  from  Dundee,  five  from  Kirkcal- 
dy, seven  from  Leith,  and  thirteen  from  Peterhead.  This  wts  an  qd- 
fortunate  year  for  the  British  whale  fishery,— of  the  eighty  seven  diipa 
which  went  to  Davis'  Straits,  from  18  to  22  per  cent,  were  totally  lost, 
twenty  four  returned  clean,  as  Mr.  McCulloch  affirms,  or  without  a 
single  fish,  and  the  others,  without  a  full  cargo. 

The  quantity  of  oil  taken  in  the  northern  fishery,  in  1829,  was 
ten  thousand  six  hundred  and  seventy  two  tons,  and  that  of  whale 
hone,  six  hundred  and  seven  tons,  the  value  of  both  estimated  at 
£376,150,  or  about  $1,800,000.  The  produce  of  the  southern  fishe- 
ry, during  this  year,  was  about  £52,441,  or  9262,000,  making  the  whole 
value,  for  that  year,  about  $2,062,000. 

It  will  be  noticed,  that  the  whole  number  of  British  vessels  employ- 
ed in  the  whale  fishery,  in  1830,  was  only  one  hundred  and  twenty  one, 
being  sixty  less  than  was  employed  from  New  Bedford  alone,  on  the 
1st  of  January,  1834. 

The  value  of  common  whale  oil  and  bone,  and  of  spermaceti  oil 
and  candles,  exported,  from  1802  to  1833,  was  as  follows. 


Whale  (common) 

Spermaceti  oil 

^ 

Wlialo  (common) 

BpennaceCioQ 

Years. 

oil  and  bone. 

and  candles. 

Yean. 

oil  and  bone. 

■adcandki. 

1803 

$280,000 

$175,000 

1819 

$431,000 

$132,000 

1804 

310,000 

70,000 

1820 

636,000 

113,000 

1805 

315,000 

163,000 

1821 

350,480 

176,117 

1806 

418,000 

182,000 

1822 

311,415 

167.280 

1807 

476,000 

130,000 

1823 

432,115 

2S13W 

1808 

88,000 

33,000 

1824 

168,272 

306.014 

1809 

169,000 

136,000 

1825 

296,425 

310,867 

1810 

222,000 

132,000 

1826 

236,845 

311,681 

1811 

78,000 

273,000 

1827 

223,60i 

364,281 

1812 

56,000 

141,000 

1828 

181,270 

446,047 

1813 

2,500 

10,500 

1829 

495,163 

368,800 

1814 

1,000 

9,000 

1830 

680,693 

387,010 

1815 

57,000 

143,000 

1831 

688,282 

871,366 

1816 

116,000 

59,000 

1832 

1,196,323 

306,404 

1817 

231,000 

112,000 

1833 

1,110,139 

303,040 

1818 

495,000 

29^1,000 

Tables  No.  XII  and  XIII,  show  the  destination  of  common  whale 
oil,  and  Tables  No.  XIV  and  XV,  the  destination  of  spermaceti  oil, 
for  most  of  the  years,  from  1800  to  1833. 


47 

2d.  The  products  of  the  Forest. 

Lumber  of  Tarioos  kinds,  naval  stores,  (such  as  tar,  pitch,  turpen- 
tine and  rosin,)  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  skins  and  furs,  ginseng,  and  oak 
bftrk,  and  other  dyes,  constitute  what  arc  usually  called  the  products  /^' 
of  the  American  forest  The  exportation  of  lumber  commenced  with 
the  fir«t  settlement  of  the  country.  As  the  first  settlers  cleared  their  * 
lands,  the  timber  was  of  little  value,  except  for  exportation.  The 
lumber  usually  exported,  consists  of  boards,  plank,  scantling,  and  tim- 
ber for  masts*  spars  and  buildings,  and  those  of  minor  importance,  as 
gtoTes  and  heading,  hoops  and  poles.  In  1770,  the  official  value  of 
the  different  kinds  of  lumber  exported,  amounted  to  about  £154,637 
aterling  or  MdOveSS.  From  1803  to  1807,  the  annual  average  value  ^  . 
exceeded  two  millions  and  a  half  of  dollars ;  and  from  1820  to  1830, 
was  only  about  one  million,  seven  hundred  and  eighty  four  thousand 
dollars.  Naval  stores,  have  long  been  an  object  with  the  Americans, 
not  only  for  home  consumption,  but  for  exportation.  Great  Britain 
has  always  depended  upon  foreign  countries,  for  these  articles.  Be- 
fore they  were  produced  in  her  North  American  possessions,  she  ob- 
tftined  them  from  the  north  of  Europe,  and  principally,  from  the  pitch 
and  lar  company  of  Sweden. 

About  the  year  1703,  this  company  attempted  to  raise  the  price  of 
thcee  articles,  by  prohibiting  their  exportation,  except  in  the  ships  of 
the  company. 

This  induced  Great  Britain  to  encourage  their  production  in  her 
colonies.  By  the  3d  and  4th  Anne,  a  bounty  of  £4  per  ton  was  given 
on  the  importation  of  tar  and  pitch,  and  of  £3  per  ton,  on  the  impor- 
tation of  rosin  and  turpentine  from  the  American  colonies.  These  i^ 
articles  are  produced,  principally,  in  North  Carolina ;  and  this  bounty, 
no  doubt,  contributed  to  their  production  in  that  province. 

In  1770,  the  value  of  these  articles  exported,  amounted  to  about 
£31,603  sterling,  or  9144,000.  Since  1791 ,  the  quantity  and  value  has 
Taried  in  different  years.  During  the  years  1805,  1806,  and  1807,  the 
aTerafe  annual  value  was  about  8r>00,000 ;  and  from  1S20  to  lb30,  was 
only  about  $-113,000.  Prior  to  the  American  revolution.  Great  Britain 
abo  encouraged  the  production  of  pot  and  pearl  anhes  in  her  colonies, 
being  articles  necessary  in  her  manufactures.  In  1761,  the  society  in- 
etitnted  in  London  for  the  encouragement  of  arts,  manufactures  and 
commerce,  offered  large  premiums,  to  those,  who  should  import  the 
greatest  quantity  of  pot  and  pearl  ashes  from  the  American  colonics. 
Treatises,  giving  directions  as  to  the  mode  of  making  them,  were, 


> 


48 

about  the  same  time,  distributed  among  the  Colonists.  In  1770,  the 
value  of  these  articles  exported,  was  estimated  at  £64,660  9s.  U.  ster- 
ling, or  $290,000.  The  exportation  of  them  has  since  greatly  in- 
creased ;  the  average  annual  value  being,  from  1803  to  1807,  aboat 
•014,000,  and  from  1820  to  1830,  about  1,164,000. 

As  the  American  forests  abounded  in  wild  animals,  whose  akios 
and  furs  were  valuable,  furs  and  peltry  have  always  constituted  a  por- 
tion of  American  exports.  In  1770,  the  official  value  of  these  artielea 
exported,  from  all  the  North  American  colonies,  including  Canada^ 
was  £149,224  \As,  8d.  sterling,  or  about  $670,000.  From  1791  to  1808, 
the  annual  average  value  was  about  $300,000 ;  from  1804  to  1807* 
was  about  $823,000.  It  is  believed,  that  during  this  last  period,  a 
considerable  proportion  of  the  furs  exported  from  the  United  States, 
were  brought  from  Canada.  From  1820  to  1830,  the  average  annual 
value  of  the  same  articles  exported,  was  about  $600,000.  Ginseng,  a 
root  highly  valued  in  China,  has  long  been  known  in  North  America, 
and  has  become  an  export  of  considerable  value.  From  1803  to 
1807,  the  annual  value  of  ginseng  exported,  was  about  $123,000 
and  from  1820  to  1830,  was  about  $157,000.  Oak  and  other  bark 
and  wood,  for  tanning  and  dyeing,  have  also  become  articles  of  export, 
of  some  value.  The  average  amount  from  1803  to  1807,  was  about 
$87,000,  and  from  1820  to  1830,  about  $140,000. 

The  value  of  all  the  exports,  the  produce  of  the  Forest,  from  1803 
to  1833  has  been  as  follows,  viz. 


Yeara. 

Yean. 

1803 

$4,850,000 

1819 

.   $4,927,000 

1804 

4,630,000 

1820 

6,304,000 

1805 

5,261,000 

1821 

3,794,341 

1806 

4,861,000 

1822 

3,815,6«» 

1807 

5,476,000 

1823 

4,498,911 

1808 

1,399,000 

1824 

4,889,646 

1809 

4,583,000 

1825 

4,938,949 

1810 

4,978,000 

1826 

3,961,260 

1811 

5,286,000 

1827 

3,343,970 

1812 

2,701,000 

1828 

3,889,61 1 

1813 

1,107,000 

1829 

3,681,760 

1814 

570,000 

1830 

4,192,004 

1815 

3,910,000 

1831 

4,263,477 

1816 

7,293,000 

1832 

4,347.794 

1817 

6,484,000 

1833 

4.Qe6,38» 

1818 

5,691,000 

49 


The  value  of  each,  daring  the  same  period,  was, 


Lumber  of  all 
kindL 


Naval 
■torea. 


Pot  and  Pearl      Fura  and 
aahea.  akina. 


1803  t%800,000  9460,000 

1804  2,540,000  322,000 
1806  2,607,000  702,000 

1806  2,495,000  409,000 

1807  2,637,000  335,000 
1806  723,000  102,000 

1809  1,843,000  737,000 

1810  2,537,000  473,000 

1811  3,195.000  843,000 

1812  1,638,000  490,000 

1813  636,000  91,000 

1814  258,000  31,000 

1815  1,835,000  455,000 

1816  4,001,000  798,000 

1817  3,196,000  345,000 

1818  2,958,000  537,000 

1819  2,466,000  376,000 
1890  3,203,000  292,000 

1821  1,512,808  314,660 

1822  1,307,670  447,869 
I8S3  1,335,600  457,562 
1824  1,734,586  555,055 
1S25  1,717,571  463,897 

1826  2,011,694  254,491 

1827  1,697,170  402,189 
182B  1,821,906  487,761 

1829  1,680,403  377,613 

1830  1,830,019  321,019 

1831  1,688,976  397,687 

1832  2,196,707  476,291 

1833  2,250,852  483,712 


Oak  bark  an4 
Ginaenf .      other  djea. 


9735,000  9500,000  9100,000  9225,000 

640,000  956,000  84,000  88,000 

776,000  967,000  148,000  61,000 

935,000  841,000  139,000  42,000 

1,490.000  852,000  143,000  19,000 

408,000  161,000  .  5,000 

1,506,000  323,000  136,000  29,000 

1,679,000  177,000  140,000  72,000 

752,000  314,000  79,000  112,000 

333,000  123,000  10,000  107,000 

204,000  58,000  .  118,000 

217,000  22,000  39,000  3,000 

865,000  409,000  10,000  336,000 

1,630,000  553,000  .  308,000 

1,967,000  688,000  102,000  186,000 

1,275,000  808,000  271,000  202,000 

1,419,000  481,000  39,000  146,000 

952,000  575,000  174,000  108,000 

889.348  766,205  171,786  139,534 

1,099,053  501,302  313,943  145,705 

1,770,523  672,917  150,976  111,333 

1,613,796  661,455  229,080  95,674 

1,994,381  524,692  144,599  93,809 

900,458  582,473  137,014  65,120 

043,171  441,690  79,566  79,884 

76L370  626,235  91,164  101,175 

817,434  526,507  114,396  165,406 

1,105,127  641,760  67,852  220,275 

935,613  750,938  115,928  99,116 

930,398  691,909  99,545  52,944 

814,398  841,933  183,194  93,609 


50 


o 

» 

1-9 

< 


6 

o 

.8 

En   OD 

■I « 


I 


•0 


* 


0» 


ODiO 


$i 


s 

^ 


2S 


s 

^ 


3 


g 


i 


si 


CO 


5 


^ 


e 


00  ©  O  ^  1^  3 

^  "•     CO  a  Si 


©  O  t*  CO       Oi  "^  r» 
OD  ^        QD       ©f 


1^ 

3 


S 


it 


8^    PM    ^    ^    A 
O  O  9)  ^  ^ 

»0  O  —  WOi  1^ 
•> •    •>«■>•> 

CO       -^        © 


si 


g  g  g  g  01  lO 

wgpocog  — 


s 


S^3 

'      •>       »      * 

03;© 
aB«2 


*^  "^ 


5  S 

C  CO 

^        •»       •> 

£S  = 

lO  1-^  X 
^        10 


5  S 

^  lO 


kO 


t^  ^  ^* 
of  ©f  OD 

10 


CD       kO 


pg 


CO 


0«  CO  ^ 
01 


3S 


e( 


*^  r*  ^ 


;o      00 


CO 
10 

of 


CO     of 


S22 

•k       •> 

of 


c*  lO 
of 


X  o 


00: 

CO  ^ 


SD<^«09 
01  ^  t^  CO 


^  O  Si  X 
»0  -•  r»  g< 

^  X  ^  X 

^       ^       •»       •» 

CD        CD 


CO  -^x  g 
1^  0*  ^*  w 

^       ^       »      ^ 

S3S  o 


15  t*  Si  X 

^  x:r  i3 

o-r  o  — 
X  —  ©  o 

«  1^  0*  0 

0<  O  CD  O 


?:^ 


T3*  rf*  O^  CD 
CO        kO 

c:  #^  r  01 

CO  CO  (X  o« 
CO        CO 


x  oa  o« 

0«  —  lO 
0«       CO 


of  t^XOi 
»0  01  Oi  lO 
lO  lO^^ 

CO        01 


CO  01  SS 
—  lO  CD  •I' 


CO       of       CO       01 


CD  _r 


M  o 


Of 


aes 


c  *^ 


a 

•'.S 


i>k    1. 

it    4) 


•  c 

J:  t 


"2 

9 


2 

e 


CB 


o 

:9 


^ 


2f 


to 


3 

of 

o 


o 

o      .- 


^T  Efts  o  r  c.2;2-3  g^ 

.  *T  .«  .««     ^     ^     C^     w     u  pC    ^  '^  ^^     ^ 


e5 


51 


o 

H 

e 

k 

•• 

h 

k 
o 

T 


o 

n 


s 


f 


-J    • 


«  ^  —  ^ 
t^  i^  o  *^ 

^       O  CO 


5t*^ 


|0  CO  l9^ 


♦"S 


*»«^gs 


S$^s82 


•k   »   »   •> 

5    l:    2- 


o<  c^  O 


CO  CO  01 


of  CO 


S^ 


O  Ot  "«C9       CO       O 


« 

s 


« 
? 


i 


r*  CO  CO  *^ 

•*   .y    *  _^ 

^^  i3D  r«  lO 
CD  "«  <^ 


*$ 


Mk         ak  ^         Mk  «k         ^      _Jfc    ^Ph         «> 


«0 


CD 


:©? 


•9*  lO  kO  kO 


OD       lO  ^  ©  ^ 

•k       ^  •>        .^    *• 

o       t^       «0  -^ 


•>      •>      ^ 

SStOD 


of 


§ 


.      »       •>       » 

cocf  — 


i§l 


£§ 


:«     of 


S 


CO      o  — 


^ 


0^ 


•>        •>        w 

^  •«  ^ 


W  O  c6  3«  W  CD 

—  ^  —  o  »OTr 
35     -^  «  f^ob 


01 


»   •«  »> 


s 


—  «  O  CO 

O  </)  Ci  t^ 

t^c  off 


lllif 

IS  ot  a  x^j 

3    35^ 

-v     -     of 


oco 

.  CO  « 

'f      o 


g* 


of 


c 

I  b 


c     «  •^ 


e  . 


ir 


8 


if 

s  " 


•»  3  5  2 


I  4* 


II 


o 


es 


•  .S  u  •  > 


o 
c*"^©    ..««    ..r^* 

c^  i:  %  &?  3  o  c  c 


i 


i  i 


CO 


CO     .CO 


i 


^ 


2  s 
^5 


S    S 


2" 


S  o  o 


M 


M 


3 


G? 


o  *^*S 


S  ^ 

S8 


jag;zcuQSD>a5^o:^HQ>Sag?gQ 


/ 


58 


p 

H 

P 


O 


o 


2 


2 


c4 

00 


Qp^g.gO 


t*  C*  W  i*  QD  96  K  9  » 

>o  55  ®  ^  S  !g*  ^ 
— ^       ^       •»  •>  ^  »  »  •« 


g^, 


c»0©  —  —  W 

a  pj  Q  -^  55  lO  lO 
O  CD  vC  ;p  GO  c^ 

10  o 


Sip  o 

lO  -4  o 

^      lO  ^^  o  ^^  o  ^ 


00       CO  f*  5*  W 


§§5 


im 


^ 


^ 

o 

s; 


co^  w 

5 


« 


lO 


££ 

r»cox 

^   ••   *« 

00«-4^ 


OD  5!  lO 

^  cc  Od 

CO  TT  O 


^©co^xo-^t^t^ca^^ 

gSxgS 

J*  »  »  Vk 

iO        lO  —  CO 


'^1 


10 
f.  lO  c^ 


288 

W  —  t^ 


w^ 


CIX 


kO  Of  kO 


3Bi 


i^ 


CO 


o 
♦^ 

o 


Q  -*  X  O 

ig  CO  5?  *^ 
w  CC  O  kO 

3jejco  — 

CO  CO  ^  CO 
01  ^  O  CO 

COp^ 


COQ  f* 

SP  S  s*^ 
t*OI^ 


X  09XCO  ^ 
S3!  —  O  »-* 

wcoo  — « 
cJQ©'a5oi 


©  ^  © 

Srr  3D 
o  o 

CO  ox 
iC  of 


lO 


10  of 


of-; 


C0  0<  lO 

—  ©  *^ 

lO  kO  * 

»>       •>       » 

SxS 

O  lO  CO 

of 


—  O  yj  iC)  kQ 

Sgpg  — 0< 
_    O  COT?  -^ 


S2gg 

©       ©       0( 


Kof 

CO  — 


^x  © 
©  kfi  © 
©o  *^ 

^  © 
to 


CO  f*  —  CO^ 

_  J>  -_*■     »     ^     •« 

CO  X  •—  iC  © 

^     of 


^^  © 

-3S 


s.$> 


•0 

B 
X 


^  S 


«    3 


«  "=   O  St-f- 


c 


o 


E 

s 


C 


c 


o 
c  ^ 

So 


kO 


CO 


kO 

CO 


lO 


O90 


© 


ftO 


kO 


s 


3 
3 


t; 


t*co© 


§5 
©^ 

55^ 


of 


kO 


X 

©  ©  db 
coof  © 


©     -N 

CO        ^ 


X        ^ 


.h  o 

>2; 


.5    U    «C  18 


o       •       •        • 

w  o  o  o 


SI 


8' 


s 


fit's  • 
S  .^  >  "fi  ^  :s  IS  »• 

c5Xi-<OjSsao 


a.s 


c 
S 


^ 


&3 


CI 

IS 


it 

^  •«  s 

8 


SI 


5 


1 


O 


6 

33 


VC    f^    "m^    ^ 


OD       ^       of       Ci       Of^ 


^•f  TS*  ^ 
^  €•  ^ 


2S"2 
5«o  S 


CQ  (.0  9) 


g 


-»»  *  ^     _»»         ^         •>    .»         »  •>        ^  »>  »  •>         ■>   ^Bk 


:d     pi^oJ 


^  ^N  ^       i^  00 


9» 


-•dT     e»5*     ci^^     ^ 


t 


^^       •«       »       •> 


^g 


SI 


2    S 


OD       — 


CO 


QD 


SI    ^ 

Cf 


2f 


of 


i 


CO 


of 


S 


o 
a 

s 

0 
o 

a 

C9 


•a 

a 

9 
.4 

o 

g 

a 
a 

o 
a 


I 


•a 

•s  S 


St 


8  - 


•35 

"3.3 
I 

-     «> 

fl-S 

s  «> 

si 

8.2 
8  § 

H-g 

•  3 


0 


64 


M 

P 

H 

O 

I 


o 


S 


o 


55 


CI 


IS 


9 

Si 


lA 


g®« 


t^  Oi  ^  Oi 


O  Oi  Oi  O 
CO  "^  -^  G< 


coo  —  -^iCG^O        00 
C«        CD        O         ^        GO 


^ 


lAO^OOOOOOCOCO^  —  o 

l*OOCOOiOG<ODO-^COCO 
G«lAOi(^<lACOCDOOOCOQO 

d  —  o-<^      ^i*o      ^ 

CO  CO        (M        ^^ 


o 
o 


C^Ol^O.  ^l*COOOO*OOCOOiOiO 
OCDOOOOO^  —  O9<Or«0«^O 

^ooooooo  —  e^cor^^co^ 

-NiO©|-^00        OOOOOOO        ooco 
CO        OiOi*^^        0»-iCi       CO        t* 

CO  O        d        O  CO 


^  CO  I*  Oi  00  0>  00  Ok  O)  "^  O  C^  O  00 

oo^^o>t^oooo-«r-oooi*i-< 

00O"O^Ol*C0C0C0l*C0c*Ol* 

COG<t^G<COO>t^O'VO»^OOCOO 

gOl^^OO        Ot^i-HOW        ^ 
^Oi-Hi-Ht^       OOCOOkf-4^        Oi 

•^  i-H        COn      CO        O  ©I 


00 
00 


O  <D  O  O 
O  O  t^  O) 

'^  o  -^  ^ 

^       ^       •«       » 

t^  00  o  o 
O  CO  O  O) 


ao>-4^^0GOoooot*c* 

OOv-iOOC^ODOi^OiO 

3!      lr29SJ®©^«>co 

00    ^    OGDtOOOO^O^ 
CO  G<  "V  p^  <0         — 


•  O    COT^  CO 


^- 


CO  ^ 


o 


o 


CO 


r»  o  o  o  00 
O)  c^  o  CO  d 
<o  r*  01  O)  c< 

•«   •»   ^   •»   ^ 

Gt  «ft  -H  r*  o> 

O  O  Oi  i-H  G^ 
Ot    O  00 


00 

o 

00 
00 


90  O  <0  O  CO  <0 
C^  <^  ^  to  00  o 

O  C»  lA  CO  -^  O 

■a  ^  t--  Oi  -•  o  -N 

O  01  <o  —  -N  o> 
CO  O    -N 

CO 

— >■ 


X 


^1  - 

'sic 
;;i  CO 


^  O  Oi  GO  00  0<  O  O  O 

^-^OOOi^-^'^Ot 

^GOOCOO-^OCOCO 
f*  _^  _^  _r»  •»  _•»  •»•*•» 

■^l^CO^OOO'^t* 
00  O  fM  Ot  GO    CO 


o   o 


©^ 


OO©t00-N<OO0DO 
O^nCO'^OOOOt^ 

.f*     •»     •»     •»     •»     •»     •»     •»  ^«» 

2»o^o«  —  ot^oo^ 

9S£:^*^®*'^o^co 

O^OI  CO         -N        c> 
CO        ^ 


•r  - 


5  s 


5  5 


M     C3     ^ 

£  §»  « 

o   ^  ^ 

*     CO 


C8 

c 


CO 

c 


CO 

•a 

•  ^ 
o 

•><•«      •    a.    ft. 

"DO     ^  <o    ec 

J2  b^  w)   -       ^ 


ot 

I* 


o 
o 

CO 

CO 
0« 

I* 


GO 

I* 
o 


of 

oo' 

CO 
O) 


0< 
00 

o 

GO 


00 
0< 

GO 
00 
0« 

o 


O^    Oi 

c>  o 

00    Oi 

CO 

o 


GO 


"^  00 

o 

0^ 


GO 


o* 
o 

GO 


b 

o 


o  o 
T3  -a 


^ 


a> 


•«w 


c 

a 


CO  *.-    m 

>«•     OB 


56 


H 

P 

H 

C 

I 


o 
H 


^ 

s 

•^ 

20,807 

6,127,466 

193,798 

6,799 

6,621,740 

l^Gll^OiO^^Or* 

•^C0t*C0t*<OO>00 
•O^^GlGtO^-Oi    • 

C)  ^  ^  to  (O        CO  »o 

o      o  G^  o      o  r« 

G<         G< 

•0 

»o 

CO 

•0 

id 

t»         (HO         O 

O    '  o  ^    •  o 

00        ©^  CO        o 

CO  o      xr 
•    •»       •    •» 

00      r*      e*  »o  <o  c»  o 

50      G^      Oi  r*  ^  <o  S 

•  CO    'CO    •  00  0  «  Gi^ 

fj        lO         ^        0  G* 

CO 

• 

2 

Ci        G<  Tr  O  CO 
O         Gl  »0  <0  00 

G^    •  r*  CO  CO  o 

O  G<         ^ 

• 

Ck                    00  G« 
.     .        Oi                    G<  t* 

0               ^  »o 

-^                         CO 

•       •        •                •        •        •                         • 

G< 
CO 

00 

Ok 

lo 

• 

2 

^  CO  ^  t* 

O  »0  t*  00 

'     '  00  CO  o  o 

•«        vs        ^        ^ 

^  G<  »0  ^ 

^         Gl         00  00  0 
0         0         0  ^  ^ 

'  '^    •  i^    '  CO  ob  xr    •    • 

f        0              ^  CO 

G4         0                     lO 

CO       0 
•           •     •»    •                       •     • 

0 

00 

C4 

21 

2 

C»  Tf*  Ok  o        ^ 

G<  Tr  O  ^         -M 

O  G^  -^  G^     •  ^ 
•«     •»    M     M           ■« 

O  C^  00  O         00 

O  -H        00 
«              G* 

CO       0  <o  0       ^       ^ 

Oi        CO  Ok  -^        0        0 

•  Gl    •  00  Ci  0     'CO     •  0 

w     S  ®*  •*     "^     0* 

00 
'  00 

• 
• 

Ok 

ocT 

X 

o 

2 

o  00  o  o  op  o 

o  o>  o<  »0  00  -i 
00  t*  00  »o  ^  o 

O              CO 

Ot*»00»0-«»0»-GI 
t'OOOG^OOO^GO 

•o<0'^a>oOG««<o 

»»*^OG^C0^O'^»H 
0  -H  00         CH         ^  ^ 
00        G<                    « 

CO         G< 

00 

0 
• « 

00 

• 
• 

0 

Ok 
0 

r*cot»<ooot»o^^^OG<'*j'^^^ 

GJOt*O»0k0<0<0O.^^00Q0t»r*^ 

o^Gifoor*^t»co*-<<ot»^t»t» 

Oi<O-N<OiO00t^*-OC000OiG^0000 
diOO        -^C0^^-^»O00        o 
®1^        CO        G^       G<^       -^         '^ 
b-              O        O        CO 

00 
CO 

• 
• 

0 

Ok 

2^ 

Ok 
CO 

01 

i 

u 

1 

■a 

s 

s 

3 

■3 

.2 
.5:    •    -*  ^ ^    •  «  «    •  -n 

,.n           CO  _J*                         *«                o           C    e           ^1 
S-       ®   g    3     -  fc**5             ^       T  "P       H 

M     CS             0^2     *>'aLS     2**     «UO     CO     €8 

*  g  8  ®  |>-^  g" S -2  .2 -5  jB 2 'Sb-SP 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

■0-0 

'o« 

.ii 
so 

• 
• 

C8 

G 
CB 

•  mm 

.S 

J 

67 


o 

pa 

< 


IS 

a 


Si 


a 


I 


m 


a  & 


'35    KSsS    {2 


•^  5 1^  ©  -« 
r-  "-•  X  C0 1*  '>o 

S5®'  as 


1^ 


"-««-* 


^1. 


-«  CO 


^ 

E^: 


5 


e  & 
id  if^ 

xiil 

-*  i  s. 


2- 
5| 


A  Js  U  ^ 

CS  O  -i  *? 


©  »f5  — Ci 


QQ       CI 


«  X 


'3  CO  "n*  CO 


-««1» 


00 


«  X»ft« 

oS35S 


COI'-I^X 

Ofoi"!^ 

^      *•      •.      M 

Sl-^CO 
CO      <o 


5S 

X-N 


S3^^ 


—  511^ 

OiCO<j6' 


X 


spnr 


O  OJ  »ft  1^  CO  '7* 


CO 


lis 

5» 


•^-^co 


8"-$ 


^5    5r 

t^       CO 

f    -co 

S    !: 

00 


»0       CO       « 


I-  -,£  4k  -t  -  "**  '^  ?•  56  k--,i :-  rt  it  S  I 

-J  c.  ft  1.^  o  rs  1^  F- 1^  '^  CO  ±  p  a  -3 

C>" »5  p" CT 1'^ K  — "  Ci" «-  X  ©  T^'^mS 


'-•  «      c» 


CO 


X'O 


5« 

X 


■^  'O  »?5  rj  o  'O  »?^  Q  o>  CO  in  •—  5ft  '^  5     s  ^ 


So  X  r- 1^  c*  1?:  Ci  -^  ©  CO  ',£  X  c  o» 
-r  £.  ij  I- 1-  ^  ift  CO  I-  ©  ^  -^  3  « 

-^  0^  Ci  ©  »a  X     I*     u's  <»  ©  ci  'T  — 


o     ©coil-     —-Ti  0*1-0?     ^l?r 
1"    •i.';©©vs    •»5c0'i'i-x    'Sd 

2  g"§"i 


<c         --• 


CO      c* 


—  r:  jr.  CO  I-  X  iJ  —  cc  ^  '^  *-  S*  *^  *^ 

—  01  'X  in  lO  5.     ©     e^  55  ^.  cS  —  5> 


gs 


C9 


»- 

? 


23 

Ci  I- 


T.  r-  '-C  —  ©  CO  r.  «  —  —  o»  X  —  CO  —  cs  •• 
C;  c  —  —  ?.  CO  —  ©  I-  X  ©  ^f  —  —  CO  'I'  O 
iT.  f»  —  T.  01  I-  X  ©  I-  -i£  —  0*  O*  CO  X  1^  Ol 

c  ro  CO  I '  —  ^  I.-5  X  X  I-  r-.  —  13  •*  ©  I-  *^ 

—  T.  T.  i-O  O  '3       1.0       X  %i  I*  r.  Ci  lO       o» 


CO 


o 


1.0  -^  i?5       Cl  X       X 


P    s 


X 


s 


9) 


otr 


s 


/ 


58 


o 
••• 


o 


o 


®  i  & 

S 


Si 


1< 


£ 


CO 


h-op 


(?f 


oi  »-  la 

•>  »   •« 

o  o  9( 
Oi  r»  o 

^  CO  »^ 
CO 


=  £ 


S  S  2 

coo5 
CO  o  x  S  o  t*  _ 

CO       X  X  o  ^ 

m*  9*  mt 

1^       CO       CO 


^  2  KS 

*0  CO  —  o 

8oS2 

•h        »         •« 

r-  o  t^ 


1.^ 


2 

c 


c 

,«■    OB 

la; 


CO  t^ 

o  — 
X 


a 


< 


'4 


•  CO 

CO 
uO 


X 


CO  <^  CO 
^  O  CO 

•>       »       •> 

£2S 


X  Q  Cr  CO  O 
©  -X  CO  T*  ^  *f 

CO  lO  id  X  o 

_»>      ^      •»       «»      •. 

O  C)  iQ  O  CO 

o     co*^  o 


o 

•k 

lO 


CD 


CO 


^S5 

kO  O  Cd 


o 

•k 

^ 


X  w  Q  — ■  CO  *t? 

Ci  c  ^  O  ^  tfl 

<^  1.0  ^  X  ^ 

^        »        ^        ffk        »> 

CO  C  --  Ci  0< 
^        C*  -«  uO 


9  CO  lO 

CO  CO  w 
CO       CO 


sis 


C  CO  «^ 

»       •«       •> 

o  o  o 


•1 


Si 

o 
o 


CO 


—  lO  Cf 

-«  CO  W 
CO 


c^  ^  3  CO  56  ci  05  ^  ^  cS 


CO  t*  iC  Q  O  O  T 

T*  CO  —  l5  O  i^  'T 


X  S  ^ 

Tf  CO  X 


CO  (M  lO^  X  « 

CO  CO  r- -^  •»<  5?  _ 

f^XO"^ 


10 


:3l 


CO 

2 


e^  CO  -^  CO  r^ 

vjh^OO  C  X  ^  CO 
^  CO  W"^  CO  f-^ 

CO 


fi 


1 


©♦ 

'$ 


o 


^ 


•^  —  5J 

SCO 


t-xo  o 

w«   y^*  ^^   ««^ 

coidj^ofg 

S  »^  CO  "-«  w 

X      ococo 

2    "    S 


©f 


.H  g£ 


■=r3r 


gt-  lO  =  lO 
r-x  dS  5  CO 

^  -     -    O  t^  i-O  C  of  CO 


"^       p-       -r? 


s 


1 

E 

V 

H 


-  B  u  ^  ^  ^  ^ 
«*  <9  «  S.2  £<^ 

•3*  2  £  2  =  * 

S  SK  g  >  Ci  C  ST. 


k*  »4 


e 


^ 


59 


K 
O 

I 


H 

^ 

e 


li 


11 

■  I 


^ 

& 
^ 


—  5  « -»* 
»  » "^  1^ 


ococo  c 


s 


Tf  OD  -* 


2*g    52S    J2»*gSSfiS§ 


2 


<<    1 

s  e: 


1 1 


«  w  —  Q  a  lO  -« 

f«  f-4  CO  CO  ^  CO  QO 


*S-?l2^ 


•»  •>  *  ^  •> 

Tj<^  ©I  W  — 


00  . 


lO   -•   »^ 


i  'S 


CO 


s 


CO 


CO 


GD  CO  lO  O 
Od  Od  ^  CD 


2  =  a 


If 


Sf^SwrS-NS^ccS^Scbco^S 

^8  cjs^  g*^sss?s;§52 


i» 


r»i5»ox'rfT<c*«Ci.oi^ooio 


r-co 

o  o 


s 


ss 


lO 


s 


CO 

3 


X) 


60 


1 


s 


O 

-3 


5^ 

S  «  So 
*   2 

O       S      -M 


! 


o 


Si 


ill 


•-4  QO 

1^ 


88| 


SCO  Wi^iOOSJOD 
-*  If!  o  c<  S  c5  t!<  et 
#>  ••  »       »>  »  • 

^  — «  CO        t^  *0  I* 


r*  ^  CD  r* 


^ 

I 


O  »—  »5  r*  0< 

^        «k        ^        •»        •k 


O  CO 
kO  CO 


1 


J  01  CO  1.0  1^      1*  Q  3! 
>  ;t  X  c5  lo    •  o  ®  ^ 


^  Ci  -^  t^ 
CO  ^ 

o 


CO 
CO 


©I 


£  & 

<5: 


^  r-  C)  o  tfi 

50  !-?-«C5  0l 


f^XOiCO  — 

_•»      »       •«      »» 

oco  i^  ** 

f-^  O        CD 


^ 


kO 


X 


X 
CO 


01      -. 


TJ<  X  p-  c< 


kO       O       1-1 


^        CO 


*M    VIM    ^ 

TJ«       x 


kO  ' 

©f 

X 


g 

s 


s 


I 


CO 
X 


CO  o  X 

2553 

V«  »  «h  «k  9» 

coxei  oi  -N 


9 


CO 


k5^ 
uO  ^ 

kO 

CO 


oco 

CO 


^5^  ^  CO  » 

Tf  xoi  wc5 

•»       ••       -^       ^       ^ 

CO  O  X  CO 
O  ©I  kO  -*^ 

—'CO        i>  kO  !*• 


XCOX 


a 


CO 
CO 


o 

CO 

3 


:::g£5 


•i 


CD  Q 


X  rr  ©I 
^  kO  ^ 
f^  CO  o 


cot- 
«co 

©f-r 


x^ 

i 

of 


$  CO  X 


^     ^ 


k.0 


kO  c 
k5  ©5 

CO 


Sis 

t^co 


CO       CO 


t-XCi  X  — 

©Jggg©J 

O  <!J«  kO»X  p- 


2§S 

ii 

CO 


5 
E? 


CO 

3 


X  ^ 


•k  ^  ^  V* 

QD        ^ 


i 

CO 
k-0 


? 


CO  f 


2g 


co©l-^ 

—  CO  o  _^  _ 
O  —  t^  kd  kO 

^        #^        ^        ^        v< 

©  "T  -X:  C5  Ci 
t<-  O  kft  X  X 
"^  <X  ©5  ©>  Ci 

©I 


3i 


i 


^  C"  ^«  CD  r* 


M 


g 


SscSsS^P 

kO  ©5  Tf  ^  CO  X 
r^g     x» 

—•CO       »^ 

X 

CO 


c> 


©*  o 

CO  S 


kO 

Ci 


©I  CO—      X      r? 


-  s 


•  CO 


X  S 


CO 


CO  Ci  —  X 

o  CO  k6^ 
-^  w  cog  ^ 


X 


Si 


o 


CO  ^  00 


i 

00 


s 
i 


(T* 


o 


Its 

a 


53  S  S  S  5 

r^  c  X  —  c  e 

:^        ^        »>        ^        »        ffh        9 

—  CO  CO  O  k.O  t-  -* 


?0 


X        — 


kSCO 

CO 
CO 


^©fcociQcooorcoc  —  coXkij 

—  i^p  —  c:'?*d^-'COXTj«— ix?« 
cococr9x-©ix©i«o     coco 

^  Va  ::;  i  '^  ^  JS  C:  ^  C:  w 

—  ©>©iTf-^l>.CIkOt*X 


■SI 

II 


c 

es 

.5  NN  w  £  o 
5?  5r.  5?  >  Ci 


2  >  9'5  g 


5    e3 

^-t;  :=;  ^  g  * 


o 


61 


m 

m 
o 

1 


o 


1  'S^  '  '^  -^^iS32iS:ss$ 

J       ©•  ^       !*•  ^N  ^  *^  ^  C«  Ct  f*  i* 

t^       lO       O       t^^iOOQ 
...-«.  •-<       Of 


§3  -e  •{:;?«: 

_  •^       ^       CO  ^  %0 1 

^      1^     otf 


»  •»  •    V     *  • 


2: 


siin 


1. 


•i^fij^iO 


e 


O  0>CQ  t^CO  — Q 


*-S 


1 
! 
I 


. 


09 


s 


^ 


^^  .  '''   ^^      ^  '^      ^      ^      ^      «v      ^    -  ---    'mm   »mm      W      A      Qr      O  l"^   afca    "^   _^ 

BSzg>cgc>a5a5tt.QSQ»a5(Ptt>3.<osS 


^ 


i 


63 


1^ 


Q 
H 
P 

H 

O 

T 

>  8 

55  fe 


o 

1^ 


S 
a 


I 


•s.se 


sii 


^  OD 


r* 

^ 


CO 


Cl  Ci  ^  O       CD       OX 

cT     c5 


o 


Ooo  A  A  f  ( 


3 


i| 


I 


3 


id  CD  P^ 
«t    »    •» 


^ 

5 


1^ 


•k 

I 


Iff 


CO  CO  CD  CO 

^ »  *  •> 

CD        -^ 


K    •  OD  F»  S 


\o 


•  CD 


S     ?3 


j^  CO  ip  CO  1 

f       »>       »       •> 

eoooes  — 


I 


o  ^  «-< 

233 


S2JS2  *^ 


^  ®  Cf  lOTfCO       f^ 


of 


^       CO 


«-<«^ 

•> 

^ 


^  CD 
Tl?       CD 


fcCD 

^CD 


§       iS       lO  kD  o  S 
QD     •  ^     'O  Wf-^CO 

o     "^     *^  ^  S  *^ 


^1 


I 


§ 


5 

o 
H 


*^  Tf  kO  ^ 

«*  Cb  35  f^ 
.f^«cD 


C^ 


$2 


c« 


•> 

^ 


Si 


CO       ©f 


CO  TJ« 


.   "•       •»       » 
•k       •« 

co^ 


•>   »  »   » 

S  I^Q  CD 

xcoS 

1^ 


If 

TJ*  ^J<  ^^ 


e 


.a 

I 


CD     'CO 

•k         •« 

•a 


ME 

»  •>  » 
•»       » 

CO      ^ 

to  kO 
CD  «  _ 
COTf  >o 

efoQ 


s-- 


Ff5' 

X  Oi  »^ 

ill 

"CO cox  I 

^«  CD 

•>    ••    — 

g|2 


QD 
S 


2^ 


1^ 


oZ 


off 


CD 


8SS 


kO 


I 

i 

I 


ef^ 


I. 


!^  ©^TC*  CO  ( 
Jkl^XC^Cdi 

Q  t^S  CD  *-  kO 
0  CO  CO       ^  ^ 


O  CO  1«  kO  X  X 


kO 


!:   -    Jj   ^ 


k0  5« 


ox 
of, 

^  CD  O  O  CO  CO 
kO  ^  kO  ^  CO 


0( 

5' 


i 


kO 


II 


a. 

.a 

0)    « 


^  S  ►  9 
S  ^ 


o  «  S><i-> 


c 


.2  o 


^ 


63 


s 

O 

T 


o 


»4 


o 

X 
K 

a** 

a 
5 

K 

a 


3 


^*-'^ 


I  H 


CO     F- 


i4     (x? 


a 

ii 


ll^tCg- 


r 
C 

IS 


I 

S 


1p 

H 


•2 
S 


®  5  ♦^ 

»      »      » 

n  9  o 


-'$' 


SdS 


ti^i^^t'^ 


© 

»      »•     •> 

^  t«  o 

«-8 


f»  ^  C<  <>•  kO  "^  ifl 

O 'Q*  lO  f^  3  »C  CI 


1^ 


2*-^ 


F>  o  ;£  9 

•>  »  »  Vk 


CO     •  lO  GO  O 
•>  »  •« 

to     t^     c» 


01 


•$2 


lO 


sfs^--' 


lO     ef  ©f  go  •* -f  cc  OD  of 


•>      1^      •  •» 


8 

s 


9 


e  «r 


s 


«  JS  ^M 


IS 


>5 


s 


s 

O    9 

g| 


» .z 


••.2 

Jj-r  i  =  w  «fCJCJ 


3 


S    ^ 


.S  5 


ico^QSq  >  S5  cc  ;d  ij -<  o  S  fc 


£f:s 

o 
v  o 


fi 


ifi 


kO 


^ 


lO 


GO 
X) 


s 

© 


© 


s; 
g 


65 


64 


«> 

•< 


O 


a 

H 

P 

H 

O 

I 

> 

o 
Ml 


^1 


1 


6 


•S' 


I 

ia 


11  § 


s 


'^S 


o 


«       0>       rf      «      OD  V«- 


5 

9 


I 


10 


a 
5"^ 


J 


■i 

•k 


tii 
I 

a 


O  lO  QD 


i 


"5^ 

fOC< 
CO 


OD 


i 


lO 


i 

lO 

s 


S8 


•k    » 
^IQCO 


Ess  • 

•>    »    » 

§-8  . 


• 

I 


Sd 


SdC 


Sfl 


®S'2J^£|^ 


lO  ^ 

CO 


CO       CO 


OD 

I 

CO 


00  CO  CD  IQ 

8dS559 

»  »  •» 


e 

if 


I 


•> 

s 


•I 

.»0 


oioiro 
•2    S"^ 


CO 


CO  QD  w ' 


IS 


■k 
eo 


•k        4^         »         » f> 


10 


00       00       00 


tOt^OD 


lO 


s    ^ 


i 

> 


ii 

lO     *  CD 


CO  iO  r*  lO  kO  O  S 

OD  QD  *-«  CO  S  *^  ^ 
CO  kO  *^  CD  GD       lO 


Miff 


i8  J^52a6 

^  lO  O  t>  ■}  ifS 

»^  O  O  W  S  00 


If 


.a 


OD 


28 

10  »- 


I* 

CD 


to 


«»       »       »  ^^       •> 

•k  •>  ^ 

•-  ;s  = 


—  CO 


—       W 


I 


^  d  .2 

I  e  ^  ^  S-S  ^^ 


e9 


i 


S^ 


CD 


3 

ak 

i 
I' 


If 

*^^cd 


i 

i 


I 


jtf 


MtO 


i 


CO     « 

e  S  S  &>'i  i    ' 


.S  o 

ass 


^ 


65 


P 


a 
I 

> 

m 

O 

U 

03 
< 


I 

e 


X 


si 

-a; 


gODag 


O  CO  CO 

S  —  55 


g 


^^i""" 


3S    ^2 


oco«* 


i§ 


(£ 


*-•  M  t^ 

lO  ^*  QD 


5 


ii 


gl8 


•§ 


otT 


»^  »-<  c« 


2  issgii? 


•88 


•^       ftO 


CI  P     S  *-«  ScoS  o  S  o  S^ 

im     .  -•  f*  ©f 


8 


O 


s 


^ 


66 


cs 

§ 


1 


0    u 

as  « 

5  ° 


O 

• 


z  ha 

I 


83 


E 


li 
u 

it 

Q 

I 

9 

i 


C  CI, 


s; 


iM^^^ 


00  IJO  CO  c* 


^^ 


<D  CO  (N       (ff       lO  r*  •— 

••         •*         *■         *         ».    »   jp» 

g    ^    ^    ^    n^ 2^ 


at 


si 


a 


•S 


si 

e 


s 

-^ 


^ 


10 


;^o  d* 

•^     ^M     ^M 
"•^     ^^     ^^ 


£i?Ps§isi 

S*  •"  ^  *  »  •»  *» ••  •»  •> 
^gcoeocf  go o  i* 


CO      ^ 

1^  ^ 


p      ;d      ^      — 

•H  -g  •§  .§ 
I  t  s  ^' 


:9^  CO  CO  ©<  lO 

o  CO  ;?JdD  c* 

of  rf  X  CO  cT  ©I 
IT       ^ 


s 


(fj  (Tj  a 

^  C5  ^ 
©I 


©I 


1^        *^ 


•»    »     •» 

s-s 


Iff 


I 


go 


CD 
•»     »     *     •> 

Sooo  S 

^  -*  W  CO 


«  QDQ  CO  -^ 
_^  OD  i3  X  CO  « 
lO  O  O  Ct  v-«  CO 

*»        ^        ^        »        #b        A 

Oi  "gj  •—  CO  CO 

•-  X  uO  TT  CO 

ifi  o  o      a 


CO  "*  CO 


Q  19  O^ 
5^4^  CO 

CO'T  o 

^        •*        ^ 

CD 


CO        CO 


X  ©I  Q  S 
O  I*  o 


&  • 


O     •  CD 


CD        CD 

OD        ©f 
•  lO    • 


•CO 


» 

^ 


V 


a 


O  to  CD 

3!  ""*> 
X  Tf  -* 

xS 


o 
H 


28 


qBco  ©  Sc8 


oL 


©f  CD 


X 
CO 


O  X 

©f       CO 


%  X  ip 
iO«  o 

^       »       •> 

f^CD  g 
CO  to 


lO  lO 


o 

C  > 


^       lO 

SfifS'cD" 
S  t*  — 

O  lO  ©♦ 

»        »        *> 

O  t^  lO 


^  f-«  CD  r* 
^  "^    ^    •■    »    •■    ,- 

r»  r»  a  t^  -^  X 

Ci       uO 

g  CO  1^ 
•  CO  ;i  <^    • 

X        CO 


lO  g©l 

X^S 

—  t-  CO 

lO  1^  if{ 


lO  ©* 

Si  5^ 

CO  •  ©I 

X  Ci 


••       »       » 

-^^co 
?o3cS 


$>  ;£;  f* 

kO 


01 


CO 

3 

lO 

M 


•>  •«  * 

A  CO  10 


X 

©J 

CO 


CD  X  O 

^       •>       •► 


CO 


e 

S 


iiii 


-*        lO 


3  5  5^"  5 
■x^  ©  4>  £ 

^  »^  ^  V» 

^  t*  C  X 

lO  ©*  —  -^ 

r»      Si 


-r  ©*  c^  —  o  o 
»   ^   *   •>   ^   — ■ 

»-0  ©i  rr  ©I  CO 


O  lO  CD  "^ 


o( 


s 

^ 


ef 


i 


3^ 


e€ 


CD 

S 


rt 


w  1^ 


CO  CO  1^  ^ 

CO  C3 
©f 


5? 


ll 


en 

•  S 


c 
ea 


3 


rti  .— 


c 
o 


O 


C 


O 


u     «     >     « 
4J    C^    CJ    4» 


5   3    «*    3 


s 


S  rf^ 


O.S   es   g 

S  SP  •  §  -: 

X  C5 1-3  <  S 


o 


^ 


67 


O 

I 

O 

CQ 


II 


1=    S 


S 


asg-'SB 


CO|»©»g«BflD 

SnSSSSm 


5 


K 

•< 


1 

a 


X 


CO     S 


o  ^  «-*  t^  o  ^ 

»      «       »       »    ^ 

t*  CO  t*  lO  fcO 


.1^   . 


of     ^ 


.     .CI 


^^   (?f 


cd^^tff  uf  CO  •^ 


8 

4 


a 


2f  ^S 


Cd  GD  O  ^ 


C0«  •-•iC 


10 


''  £;dcf 


1 


I 

t 

s 

t 

I 


& 


E 


CO  o  X  —  *r 


OOC0OC0O50O 

f-^r-xMcodo"^ 


c5 

0     Q) 


3   ^ 

s  ^ 


es   = 


c 

2  V 


e 


S 


» 

s 


^ 


O      i=^ 


c  ^ 


o    >. 


"=   o    -J^ 


o 

tm 


ca 
c 


9    O    9 


ca 


e5 


> 


68 


1 

cs 


I 


§9^ 


WW 

too 


CO 


s 


C9  Od  "^  9  QO  lO  O 
CO       O  ^  ilO  lO  CO 


1 


^       QD       ^  'Q*        t^Tj« 
Of 


8SS 

r*cor* 

sss 


^1 


s 
i 


^^  CO 


5 


^^8 

»       »      » 

CO  —  1^ 

o 


OODCO 
»    •«    •• 


•QD 


§2 
•o5 


5 


p  c)  op  o  gp  f*  -« 

S3?28£$ 

CO 


lO 


'*-  QD 


O       kO       ^ 


£5 


1" 


S 


i 


I 


lias 

—       CO 


**  o»co 


rr  Ci  35 

•»  tfk  9> 

o 


CO 


•^  JL  0< 

—  —  If3 
I**  CO  CO 

CO        ©f 


N  ^  $  « 

S  QD  t^  S 
lO  iOt5<  CO 


il 


s? 


CO       s 

8        1^ 
CO 


X 

-^co 


CO 


CD 


•ca 


si 


o 


c^ 


o 

CO 


•^J  O  C5 
lO  ^  lO 

^  C  JD 

•■ »     • 

^  a  o 


OOD 

o 


CO 


O  CO  lO 

o  n  s 

CO 


§iii 


WtJ<        lO  CO 


f^  0*  i^ 

lO  CO 


on  ift  CO 
co-'i'  r 

»        »•        » 

to  1^  '^ 

CO 

;C  CO  lO  CO 


lO  1^  '^  Q 

wecoco 

r*  ««  »^  «M^ 


5  SSm 

^        »        #>        »h 

O  »-^  QD  -N 
*^        CO  — 


Ci  t*  01  CJ 

oc^  —  Jl 


5S 

lO  lO 


SI 


QD 

eo 


s 


s 


i 


SI 


i 


s 


OD 


f 


O    C*   ^N   fi* 

1" 


^       01 

3    ^-^ 


i 


2 


of 


11 


•> 

S 


^    »-    C    a  T?  ^    «         C    « 

w  ;fc  —  c  s  *-  he 


CO     ^  iPB 


s 


69 


H 

o 

I 

o 
U 


t  ©  »^  r» 


^28 


sss'-'f^-is^^^;^  .sc 


(Z)  vi^ 


ei 


cCaDcoatTa^ 


$■  2  S  ^^  3; 


S52-g-^S^S 

Of 


CO 


gf- 


sf- 


^g 


3 


•s 


•s 


4 


s 

e 


—  J"?    o   *'«i?   o  >is  ;■?  ^  .^ 


/ 


70 


iio 


H 

P 

2SP 


H 

1 


I 


rf  rf  i?  ^  ^  fflf  JJr  2  tf  r? 
gf     fC"     ^  v-^Tf     (£^ 


s 


s 


OD        TJ« 


p  .isii 


s 


s 


CO 


^ 

§ 


li 


»^  CQ 


?i 


3k 


8S* 


CO       CO 


•«       •»       »  -^ 


Si 

II 


$ 


^  CO 


s^ss 


s 


cf 


CO 

s 


If 


Q  ^  t^  (^ 

lO  lO  99  ^ 
*^co 


»>•>•« 

^ii 


•ft  •*  »••••* 


lO  c^ 


I 


I 


w 


00  ^^ 


00        *^ 


^ 

s 


ij 


i 


s 

•> 

SJ 


w*        w^        w 

X  CD  ^ 
5 


•>    »>    ^    »> 


i^ 


I! 


SPh 


s 


^ 


of-* 


->  ce  «s 


ill 

53  CO 


sf 


OD 


i 


$       CO 


1 


s 


(N  9  O  lO 


et 


i 


net 


-8 


t^f- 


sPs 


51 


CO 

i 


p 


Bef"'- 


cf 


1 


^ 


a» 


2i     2-^3  .      .  . 

a       «  S  H    -^  ^.S 


c 


Jill 


O    tt    tt    4>    O 


ea        S 


a 


2S    O    -f  • 

OfcfcO-Q  S  D  >  SC  QD  e  OjJj<S&- 


«    • 

t*  fe  o  'S  J5  -S  %. 


1^ 


71 


Q 
M 
P 
SB 


O 

as 
u 

Q 


s' 


■^ 


i 
I 


ef 


;i 


3 


nf£ 


31 


3 
P 


ffSf 


r^oJ-rf^^ 


^S^ 


f*     r*  •-*  50  cS  S  lO   •  S  »^ 


{:$<§ 


S2 


^= 


^  X  « 

».       ^      ^       ••  _        _ 

^  CO  w  A    •  o  ^4 


CO         eo     ^     ^     t^co^I^     jfeo 

•     •CO  ©••^•CD 


Qp   •    •09^<•r•    •io< 

^      fi    ^    ^ 

•     •  00  • 


£  ^  ri!  c     ©  ^ 
Kef  ^05     gn 


'52 


Ss^l  ^^S^^gf^?^5  •is 


8 


5 


eo 


8'52?S'   if"6'£:S^^5  .$S? 


CO 


9i 

35 


i 


78 


> 


eo 


Q 
H 
P 
SB 

H 
SC 


s 


s 

I. 

6 


"^ 


1 

I 


5 


"1 


§ 


I  if 


FT 


s 


2S 


S  k9  Od 
c*  lO  t^ 


Oi 


^ 


OD 


I. 


Tf  ^  ^^  C*  C*  Tf 

^       00        50  W  »^ 


Tf  «  ;0    'Tf  W 
^    ••    •«        «>    »• 

5  -of 


d  o  ®  « 


S 


t 


w 


» 

s 


^     eo     01 


s 


a 

S  Of 


•© 


Od  $  ^        ^  CD 


$ 


1^ 


« 


04         C»         — 


af 


g 


I 


1^  o  g; 


CO  6oxo 


^2S 


^  »  » 


Tf  »0  Tf  NCO 


(M     eo     eo     eo      oeo^^o 


Si 

11 


sf 


^      »*      ^ 

O  ^  O) 


a 

u 


r-©io 

G»  CO  eo 
^  »>  ^ 


CO 
i-CO 


s 


S*^  ^  w 
1^  ^ 


eoe  S  to  S 

^       •>       •>       ^       » 

I*  so  CO  O  I* 


s 


^  «  I^ODOCi  lO 

o      S5  S  a 

•>       »       *> 

©INN 


»o  '-»  ©  ^  ^ 
^  Ot        50 


o 

s 


? 


II 


© 


El 


2^« 

^-*  Tj*  03  r*  (JU 


*—  ©I  OD 


lO  (3D 

S3 


$ 


fji -sl 


OD 


5^^ 


1^ 


lO 


1:5 

CO 


1^ 

S5 

of 


•  lO 


r^  S  ©  $  S  S  ?• 

^        ^        ^        •»        ff^        «h        ^ 

^  eo  iQ  OD  Qp  ©  '-' 

eo  *-•  OD     ©  ©  lO 


a 

II 


© 


©Od 

'I*  ©  '■» 

©  I*  iS 


1^^  © 
25 1^  © 


^11 

X  ©  N 

•>       »       «> 

li- 
ef 


Tf  (3D 

SkO 
© 

eo  t^ 

S2 


»    ^    •>    •>    » 

©eo  ©  ©  -^ 


9 


I 


0) 


2 
>-  G  o  <^ 

ill  s 


c  ^ 

o  s  ^ 
C    o    V 


0)    o)    «» 


'1 


4-  «  a 


"36 


s' 


s 


i 


1 


^ 


e« 


a^ 


^ 


S 


CO 


© 

i 


C    Q 

S-2-1  2  2-£,i.i 
^a-|55S  1-3.2 


eS 


78 


H 

o 


o 

0 


si  s^islss 


iss'lRsris"  ."^ 


v)  99  ^ 


i 


^999) 


$•"  •S'^-i**3? 


_  lO  o  ^ 


of 
o 


I 


•  CO 


10      c5 


9^SP  fii  ^  *-*   • 


IS 


I 
S 


I 

10 


.5 


r^aS 


.0» 

S 

10^ 


CO 


-'^ 


s* 


i 


I 


S' 


tri:    s 


Tj*  05  ^*     ,  J* 

^  5S  3!     iS 

lO  CO  CO       CO 


^^  o  CO  d  ^  t^  ^  lO  »o     I* 

lO  1— T»<  ^  Tf  Of  »^  OD    •  • 


1 


s 


i 

C 


a 


2      5^-  ^  .-  oca.  .  -c  S 

10 


s 


1  I* 

I 
1 


n 

lt|Sii,i.iii||§|iii||. 

1 

J!^ 

...8.  J.S.I  .g  J.. 5.. 
.  .  .S"  .  .1  .8  .8  .     .S  .  .S  .  . 

I  if 

5    -U 

111 

...s.j.i.i§iiiiis.. 

s 

(6            — ■       «       PS       M       iOtt  — r^ 

I 

UlsMp.lliigiiiiii 

III 

'  J. 
II 

liiiSiiiiillP 

i! 

15 


ft 


IS 


o 

a 


i3i 


eOQD^et^  Q  Art* 


S  —  IS 


to 


tf  59  «r  ♦*  2  ®  C  ®  ^ ' 


OD  ©  t^  ©  ^  1^  r^o 

lO  p^  ^  CO  kO  e<  ^  o 


§ 


ef        ef 


^ 


^ 


5 


00  •  •  Of  OQ  • 


S 


s 


—  $©Sd58S25< 

I*  ?•  X ,- ©  ©  fe  ^  ab  ( 

^      »       »       »      ^       »       «  •> 


9Tf©9CO^Tf©  O 


iOC0t^9(©^©l^©©«^aD 


$35 


SP^S 


& 


© 


B 


•       ••••••••••  jQ       •••••••^« 

rf                                    So 

•     -  S  J'     ^r-"        0     sa               ,«» 
I-    S-2S-^'sS„.,"g     2  2          .    H 

Sz>gcgoaszcuQaeQ>;g(Zg^^oaeE 


^ 


A 


76 


s 


-I 


s 


H     C 


V 


21 2 
Si  § 


Mt     /n     »     Aj 


>.^. 


4)  es  .S 


4)   o   y   w   w  .= 
^  ^.  £  Q  jg  Q 


£pO  Q  c  -2  3 .2 


77 


X 

1 


o 


0 


^  lO  ^  ^  ^ 


|8 

t*  -*  Gt»  CO  <JD 


2^S*^?iS*8^      -• 


S 
S 


^  «-4  ^ 


i- 


*^  1^  ^  2r  55  *2  *w  Q  w* '-' iQ  •^  »  o     ^ 

^  r*  lO  O  OD  CD  T^  QD  lO  ;0  CO  CO  $  ^       1^ 


s; 


»*  »*     JK  ^  S     Sf  C  ®  2  S<  "^  ^ 

5        5         5     ^•'"'co     ^^^cS^^'' 
•      to    0  •  Cf 


•  •      • 


^ 


sr 


ri tO    •copom^c^cE)    .OD 


^ 


CO 


•    •    _^    »  •>  »  V>  •>  »  •>  «.  4^    ^^    *    •«  •«  ^^ 


i 


t 


-•s 


^ -;  iS  a  ift  ift  ^  ®  ^S      ^ 

^ »  »  •> f^  •  ^ •»  •>  «>  »  »■ 

?J-S2§JJS22S     .- 


si 

i 


1 
I 

I    be 


^ 


.A 

6 


6 


> 

V 


C 


S^ 


c 


0) 


•    •  o    •  c 


es 
> 


r 


0) 


§1- 


ft- 


•  ,A_A         MA  ^^      ^^ 


is 


«    B 


5  .1^ 


•3.2 


.Hi 

SE 


r 


78 


.5 

1$ 

C5 


H 

P 

o 


o 
PQ 

-< 


eo 


Ik 
I* 


S 


1 
JO 


^ 


as 


III 


S  S  ^  •-«  8  S  S  9  ?  ^ 


I 


!3S 


li 

I 

IS 


w 


lO  ^ 


01  lOO 


CO 


lOO 

0» 


eo 


of 

QD       ^ 


i 

3 


9f 


s 


:f 


CO 


eo 


^c*f        id 


OD 


2— g 


ef 


SC 


iIBi 


CO  <JD  O  CJ  ^ 
lO        CO 


9» 


la 


!9?  8 


eiiOjr»ocojr2jJ> 
^ eo^ o i«^ o^F-   * 


5P  CP  ^  CD 


I 


"'S 


O  ^  |0  O  QO 
I^^&  ACO 

ed 


of     vS 


to  00 


A^^   ji^t   /IW  f^f\   ^^^ 

r^\     ^^^     23(     '^^^     ^^^ 

eo«^eo     ^of^^ 


I. 

-K  o  ;c  A  0$ 


»      »       ^       •>       *>       •»       •»       •       •»     _»  _^  ^  *        •* 


5^2 


9  ooS 


CO 


eo 


1^  ^«  9  ^  ^  O        CD 

2        g  'S 


Oft 


s 


t 


1^ 


fii.«r 


-c-S  b 


•.55       S^t^S       *> 

OS  a  s>s  s  k^  s  « 


r^    s    M«  ^f"  •■^    ^  a 


•r  ^  .5  S  S  Sd  2  ■  .3  J 


79 


m 


e 


?l 


$®S 


^-^*S*8*?f5ll*l 


CO  C9 


10 


s 


»  _^  ^  ^•k  ^^  _^      *      •  •> 

mm  00 


N 

s 


^ 


I 


o 


33  p 


ai   C  •* 


►  fi 
ft'  « 


S 
B 


w       o  o 


SJ  S  K  R  c-5  S  «  ?5:  ?  2-8  5-= 


c  x 


•§l 


/ 


80 


i 

I 

«9 


SS 


1 


H 

P 

H 


o 

-< 


r 


IS 

So 


QD  0^9  lO^  ^01 
w  lO  O  ^  O)  <p  ^ 


1^ 


s 


5" 


9 

a. 


I 


CO 


I* 


ss 


s 


CO 


CD  OD  O 

cor*  t^ 


cf 


lO  CO  Q 


»^     CD  o     cr 

SS       2 


^^r»i*cor*aDCl 


•r  otT®  cic»5' .  efsf 

$    ^    ^       2 


oT     ^'  •^' 


of 


W 


i 


2f 

0? 


I 


—  ^  w 


l*0  t*  coop  CO 
f«  CO  iP  kO  Q  «^ 
CO  T^  o      o 

Mi        of 


CS2S 

lO  CD  of  QD 
^  Tf  O  CO 

o^^eo 
»  •>  » 

CO  ^^ 


2^8^Sj^«^' 


tCioof^ 


e 

^ 

l; 


11 


2 8 

^   •    -eo 


•PS 

eoK 


1^ 


Q  lO  1^ 
05  Tf 


W 


■?r; 


CO  ©  C^<K> 


s 


1^ 
I 


^ 

& 


^i^iiis 


•s* 


Si 


-^  CD 

»         «»         v^ 

lO  r?  OD 


CD  O) 

CO  ^  00 

CD  — O 
05  t* 


^^ii 


^  lO  CD 


GO  CD 
•>    »    ■• 

JooH 

cf^'co 


CO  ^ 

^©1 


s 


DCO 
^  rt  S 

#>        »        ^ 

CD 


b? 


SS2 


2    2 


•o  r*»  »o  C5  g 

f*  ^  Ob  «  « 


t 

o 


S~22sSS2f5irp^lfMf 

^    •  t^co  o  t*  i^o>  lOO  kO  iS  lO  K  r*^^  —  * 

•>       »  »   «> *•   •>  »   ^  »  «>  ^  ^  *  ^  »  _^ 


CD 

5 


—  kO  —  05 
OJ  ^-  CO  '^ 


kD  ^  ^4  bQ  1"^ 

*-  '^  CD  51 
ef 


S 


12 

©- 


|4 


S5  CD 


GO 

a. 


1^^  © 

JS  =  = 

•>       •>       » 

o  p  t^ 

Tf  ©  — 


^  kO  ©  lO 

»       ^       r>       » 

^  ^  ^  ^ 


1^ 

© 

© 


f 


I 


e  s 

«  o    . 
S  8  S 


s 


1§- 


c  . 

•  *  -^  fci  ^*  '-^  ._• 


09 


J'  €9  a 


X 

1 


^ 


Si 


li  CO       -^  S  «  « 


l|2 


81 


1 


r 


S*S$$2 


I 


•g$«^*^®- 


T(*  QD  iS  i^  «>  09  9S 


ii 


lb  ^  lO  CD  S  S 


<Sb  fV^  A<«»  kK  ■■«  ^n<  VW  a^ 


7  IQf^QdS^^O^' 


^ 


f 


i 


0t^^^^^^ 


*5 


^•  ^  w  o  p5  QO  T9? 
lO  r^  ^  q5  CO  01  ob 


5 


im  ^  Qt  ^^ 


3f   --"h:or5or©"crQf    Jc 

CD        lO        ^^^Kp^^K^^© 


1 


1 


B 
• 

S2; 


^  a 


'2   - 

«    3  J 

•*  o 

c  > 

O  4> 


OS 


SCO' 


a 

9 


a  a 


q    ,  a  a 


2  u 


0)  -a  o 


a 


^ 

SS 


I 


■  |-i.2 


B  8d 


o 


11 


/ 


89 


o  ?    • 


>* 


=•&» 


•     » 


Q 


■e 


•»  •>  »  »       »       »  __y>       •>       ••  ^JP 


i3 


C) 


0 


8 


B 

e 


SI 


S  * SdSS 

^       •       * 


CO    •? 


CO 


01 — ^ 


« 


o 
^ 


s* 


s 


el     ^ 

o   •© 


&0 


CO 


5| 


8 


I 


X 


o 

03  »S  QD 

^        ^        » 

IC 


to 


CO 


«>       ^       »       » 

^■i  CO  1^  TT* 

^Tf  © 

lO        CI 


^' 


^       •>       •> 

iii 

CO        ^ 


CIO 
QOO 


II 


§ 


S" 


lO 


8, 
£ 


I 


CO 

» 

CO 


s; 


xco 


9 


is 


s 


Of* 

SSI 

coo 


S$2 


S2 


«*irf 


h 
I! 


£$ 


co-^ 


coco  w  — 
db  qd  ^  O) 


8  CD 
&0 


!g 


ef 


*   •>   » 

COUD  ^ 

ef     CO 


op 
Sdoo 


C6  t^  J  » 


lO 


SlfJ  = 


I 


CO 


lO  dbo 


^  Cd  O  Q  90 

»^  ^  r*  lO  ^ 

eioD     — » 

CO  ©       ^ 

S    2* 


*^2 


CO  ^ 
10 


>         w*         ^         w 

^  »o5 


3DgW^©JD 

*>       »       •>       » 

lO 

© 


s 

s. 

a 


9 


I" 
li 


IS 


et 


^© 

^  lO 


©  © 

lO  -^ 


S 


gCO 

©  © 


QD  ©  ©  »-* 


OD 


©SomS 

«•      ^      ^      ^      ^      «• 

lO^       © 


i 

r- 

lO 

© 
©• 


a 


■=•5 

si 


kO  tO 
1^  © 


©  ^ 

lO  ^  ©  CO  X     ^• 

•»   »       »       •> 

Of-«       —       © 

^ lO 


r*  © 

•       »       — 


*^S  ft 

S  Sx 

^i^  lO  ^^ 


jh^  CO  QC  ©  ©  ^  © 

»        •>        ^   •        ak       »        » 


?i 


i 


9 


1 


c 

'S 


s 

s 


s 
e 


>* 

^ 


Q>"    •0Q>    .vv 


'Bo  if 


^1 


s  o-S  2 -J  o  « 

S    4>  M   O  •£  M  12 

«0-<  JOh.S 


^ 


83 


1 


as 


'lllil 


OlOl-^**  —  O  —  ^.  MJiO 


iS 


s'^J^'i^-g-s    ffSf^S^^^Cg'*^ 


it 


$ 


s^isjs 


^^ 


I?  .  .S      ^  .gr  .J^«^5^'6'Sf*'^'' 


§ii 


^ 
^ 


5  .s^i*^^^'^?;**^*' 


^§§^^^§^£^^ 


oSSSS 


I 


•» .••  _•   •►   •>   »   •• 


•2  -S^SBSS 

1^     i5  1^  w  o  X  — 

t^       (K  ^  *0  Q  ^  ** 


'  3S X 


r^c^  ej  X 


H 

s 


s.   «^  s 
,5 1 1" 


^    S    «) 


S 
O 


OS 

.-  .s 


»  « 


I 


S 

of 


1* 


> 


15?  « I!  >- 


cf  o  iS  «  ef -- ■—      rf—o  us  tf  —  rf-"  0* 


■ilMiisgiiiiiissi? 


illiiSiSiiilsili 
I  Un-  -■--    -- 


r=- 


5ooaus-fl.«e-.'^ 


1|¥P1 


|2- 


;S">S"g 


IH 


llfllllfflffp"IIIYfl 

a*—      -  of  -^ 


|SS£8SSS  =  *2"°8"2''8»T°^ 


otfttftlw^ar        — 


rf    _-    ^_:^    ^ 


13  J     S  e|  .1 


35Ei£|zJ-EoaigQa;S^Hfl.5gj» 


85 


I 


ir 


•s* 


9 

I 


•& 


I 


! 


^ 

e 


s 


II 


I 


I  I  5.  s  miH 

9        »        »      <S    vVmio 


g     S     fS    8 


s 


u-^ 


n 


7 
31 


I 


-8 


W5^ 


If  ^1 


•>•• 


« 
Mr 


i 


S 


I 

8 


55 


8 


00 


i 

•or 


S8 


s 


I 


BS 


I 


'8 


S^ 


§ 


FT 


W 


S 


*    •  CD 


S^ 


w 


a 


PH^fsijpuf 


i 


if5 
s 


^ 


5 

s 


|-gS-|g'8|—8 


STF^WIP 


c 
o 
a 

lor 


J 


s 


c 


1^ 


« 

ior 


=2 
n 

II 

s. 


9 

8 


& 


bob6f 


3 


s  «  ^ 

^1  a:§ 


s 

1 

i 

id 


M 


.So  Q 

(0  09  M 

.—  M    »    «k 

^  »  QQ  t  w^ 

S    ^  -  -SS9 


*    *  S3  ^  "^ 


00  r-cD 


I 


p 

8 


goo  f  00 
00  "i"  •* 

«cooi 


i 

3 


rs> 


•I- 

•I- 
I  ' 

•2-1 


I   "S 


a 
a 

1^ 


•5   •  2   •   '^   •  •   •  fl  - 


I 


$ 


s 

^ 


I 


t: 


I 


g 


5 


9 


I 
8 


to 


^ 


s 


s 


Cl 

I 


Saota 


I 


IsJa 


A 


86 


a 

3 

9 

or 


^  1 


o 

I 


H 
M 

O 

a 

m 

fi 

o 


OQ 


^       ^       ^       v\ 


0%  0%  ^ 

.<o  o 

^  CO 


w 


•       • 


^  CO  ^ 

--      -^      #*      •»  « 


s  ^  ^ 


=:8 


^  CO  i6  lO  o  ^ 
0>  CO  ^  CO  ^^  CD 

*«         •%         M        ^         M         M 


^  o  ^  r*  00 

««  •«  M  0% 


^lACOTf^COO)^ 
»H  CO  kO        1-^  w  t*  ^^ 


o  ^eo 


28S 

QD       00 


O  O  O)  P 

^       *\       *»       M 


8S 


^      eo 

01       ^ 


s  co« 


CO^  lO 


^y^ 
^  r- 

^•^ 


eo 


•*  f*  ** 

CO  ^  ©  CO 


s 


sp  -"sa^s-^ss 


O     .01 


s  -^« 


o5eo 

S"5 


<P  lO  ^  O) 

M       *k       <^       •» 


s 


eo 


»     1^ 


8—  QD  ^N  ^^  O         vD 
M       rk       vs        «\  •« 


i-N  CO  00 
JO  Tf  Oi 


1" 


r*oi<o 


s  r* 


00 


0|T<0 

r-  Tf  ^ 

<o^io 

rk        rk        ^ 

eo^d 


5  »"  ~ 


I 


S 


I 


I. 


s 


eo 


^ 

K 


m 

s 


■% 


._t> 


2  2  a '3  3  ©  *-  S^S    •* 


87 


s 


e5 

s 


t*  r-  r* 

M  *k  «« 

01  Tf^ 


QD 


lO  ^  sr  © 


CO  ^ 
^  CO 


^ 


CO  lO 

iO  CO 

CO  ^ 


OD 


--g 


O 


#^      ^      ^      ^ 


§ 


So 


I 


Oi 


BT 
$ 


H 
P 

2 

ma 

f 


o 
H 


3 
5 


or 

i 


o 

A 
M 

M 

O 


"lis" 
SB 


o  ^ 


rk       vs        M 

l-OOOt 


COO)  P  QD  01 

pm  'gi  ift  CO  fcO 

^  00  ^  ;0  Tf 
«\    «\ 

t*  CO 


ID 
ID 

O 


Oi  r*  Oi  ( 
ID  co*( 


CO  CO  CO  ^^        ^^ 


^ 


CO 


CO  01 

o  >■* 


Sf — 


S 


ID 


SS  ID     * 

0  CO  ^ 
^    M    ^ 

01  0(  ID     . 

ID 


0( 


^  oco 

©553 

>  M  «\  *« 

coco  © 

CO 

QD  COO) 

I        rk        M        ri 

^  CO  CO 

— gr6f 

^  CO 

t-co 


lO^OI  OQQ 
OiCO  •-•  t-  01 
ID  t*  t-  ^  ^ 

•S         M         ^         ^ 

•^01  ^  »H 


r»  ID 

ID 


TFTK" 


'^  ^  ID  Tf  S  © 

«^        flk         «^  «s 


i 


O%0 


© 


H     £ 


£ 


1 


»« 

s 


S 


0} 
0) 


^'S 


Z^££ 


t^ 


I 


v> 


V) 

0) 

"i 

c 

8 

•c 

E 


0(  01  iD  CO 

CO  pm        f4 

QD  'g'  io5  r*  © 

CO  ©  CO  O)        ID 

•«        as       ^        ^  #s 

coco  ^  01      ^ 


CO 


CO 


CO 


t^co 

ID  r* 

Oi  r» 

CO  ID 


•  CO  0>  O)  ^  ID  ©  CO 

>  r*  Tj<  ^  ©  ^  f  © 

•  ^  COCOQD  Oi        ^ 

•s        rk        M        «\        rk        ^  ^ 

©  CO  OliD        CO 


CO 


93 
0) 


s 


G 

S 


■% 


Oil 

V 


ft 


i 


J 


88 


X 


o 


5 


9 

! 

H 

M 

O 

n 

OB 


o 

Q 

s 

Q 


iioo^ror^      ^      O)      ^Gi 

•S     *00cS  Q 

*-<     ^o  o 

•k      ak      ak 

i 

•ft  ©^  t*  o  oi    •  o»    '  r*    '  lo  CO 

00  O)  G<  O  ^        •-        (O        GO  ^ 

0)  O  O                  •  ^     .  O     •         kO 

•          •  O^  O  o 

.-«    ^                                CO             -H 

1^  lO  -« 

g 

o  G^  CO  o  cx>  CO  o«    •  r*    '  ^  CO 

O  O  O  Q  00 
*  ^  lO  00  O  CI 

o  ^  b- r*  <o  ^  t*      o      0^00 

** 

«  0>  CO                    O     .  O     .        Oi 

•     sss*- 

-H   ©♦                           CO           ^ 

t^^^OOO)       Oi        t*        ooo 

Q  lO  ^  ^  .-< 
'  O  <0  ^  ^  CO 

• 

^^00^            -t*      'O     'O^ 

S 

^.^.^.o«           ^^      CI      ^o«^ 

kO  ^  aO  O  O 

•^ 

1^  0«  GO 

to  ^ 

odo      C0f-4«ooiio      t^^ 

^  1^  CO  OI  o 

_« 

OO^O     '-H        O^t*     '00<O 

•  ^  O  ^  Oi  ^ 

s 

^^.n^^   -^    ^    ®.      <^. 

»0  Oi  ^  00 

"^ 

CI  O  ^     •              Oi        to     m        O) 

00  »o  <o 

©♦  e«              CO 

1*00 

O  O  <N         ^        ^  O  Oi  <0  0«  00 

O  r«  GO  00  Gl 

i 

0<  O  0<     •          •  Oi  i-H  O  1*  o  ^ 

*  1*  00  O  O  GO 

«.^.<5l             <5l<»ci     <^<^. 

^  o  t*  »o  t* 

^^ 

^  CO  t*     .           .  O        1*              CO 

1*  »0  CO  « 
OI  00  ^ 

©<    -H                                to                                         ^ 

^  Oi  Oi      cot^oor*          ^ 

.§S?22 

g 

^80<O      '         t^t^OOi     •     '1* 

^  O  O                    t^  CO  O)              t* 

^  ^  »^  O  K) 

<^      w^      m*       w* 

~* 

CO  ©♦  ©<     .              b-  1-1  O     .     .  O 

•    -"gJSS 

(N  G^                     O                           f-i 

ooo       COOCOtO^       oo 

00  <-H  <o  o«  o 

^ 

©1  ^  ^     •  O  ^  00  CO  »-^     '00^ 

•  ^  lO  GO  »ft  O 

t*00              -<OiOO^        f-iO 

^       •*        ^                                       •»                  •»                             as 

OI  O  1*  CO 

"* 

«-H  to  o    •           o      o    •      o 

•               00  1*  QD 

-N  G^                     ^ 

00  00 

<0«C<G*«Ob-00C0Q-«O 

O  —  O  GO  ^ 

■#^ 

'?<'-^-<-^-<«^-HC0Q-^»O 

*  00  G<  GO  ^  ^> 

F-I  OI  CO  1-4 

§ 

0<^O0«         G^O^OOOOt*!^ 

^^^                                       ^W***^^                        0% 

•«•«•»•» 

^^ 

«  t*  O              G<  CO  0<  O  0«        CO 

o  00  to  e< 

-^    -N                                O                                          -H 

O  ^  >H 

cor*o>o<Oir*<ococo      r*oi 

»0  O  O  lO  ^ 
*  G<  -•  00  00  OI 

• 

Oi  O  Oi  O  ©<  CO  00  CO  Oi     '  O  CO 

§ 

r^^tOG^otoo      o      ooo 

^* 

CO  00  00                  Tf       <o     .       <o 

rm  rm  tti  Q 
Od  ift  ^ 

-^  0<                     1^                           ^ 

'^'OOOOOCOOOOQ^O* 
COCI'-^OCNOOil^'^O^t* 

o  r«  GO  CO  o 

* 

•  CO  ^  ^  ^  •© 
^  ©<  O  i-H  t* 

S 

t*b-b-0        b-^        OOG^^t* 

Xf* 

^M^                           ^^                 ^v^                 •« 

^       M       ak       •« 

"^ 

^•H©<              |*»o        oo^        Ol 

O  QOOl  0^ 

o<  ©^                  t* 

•O  ^M 

-Ht^TfOO     'Oi<OOOt*G^  — 

^4  CO  GO  Ol  ^^ 

f«^ 

•  0<  ^  00  00  ^ 
O  ©11*  OI 

•»           M           •»           •« 

i 

OtTOOG^        G<b-00-H              o 

•^ 

^b-O           .G^r^-HO              Oi 

F^  GO  G<  OI 

^    0^                                <0             -H                       ^ 

00  »o 

0(OG^-N         OtOOCO         OiO 

<0  O  OI  1*  1* 

e4 

OOi-^Tf     •OrfG^t^     '^^ 

'  ©<  r*  o»  F^  — 

« 

o  —  Of-i          r^oico      ooo 

•s        ^       •*                                       •»       M       as                             0% 

G<0  f-i  O  d 

•«         M         •»         «k 

"^ 

b-  CN  CO           .        00  -H  <0     .        O 

•    *5S2 

— 

-« o«               o                    — 

»ftr*<ooi-H       -^^t^       ^o 

O  O  ^  00  GO 
•  O  G<  —  G«  ^ 

•^        •%        •%        0^ 

• 

O  CO  CO  00  O     '  CO  Oi  t*     'OOO 

5 

CO^O*^^           t*-HTf           CO^ 

~* 

00  O  CO                 •  00  to  O     •        C4 

•     ^  •-  r*  OI 

'        -^  G<                      O                            0) 

-  'It  c<-* 

■J 

S  s  «-  "1  •  S  •  8  •  •  i> 
^  ^  X  ^  •      fR      s         ^ 

•      •      • 
•       •       • 

OOO 

M 

u 

o  -o  -o 

•      •      • 

5*1*1  .*  *,-.-•? 

.     .  i 

<2 
1 

S:  SM.tS.t:  fld  oi  c0  cd  u^        ■**c  i*^  ^  S 

89 


o 


^ 

T 


I 


^  =  1 


S 


^cf  ^ 


^ 


XM 


^eit^ 


0>- 


9  ^ 
^  S 


$ss 


'If 


s 


S  9«  •  w 

s^  •       •  ■       * 


It 


•k  • 


«28- 


lO 


^ 


15" 


id 


S88 


^^ 


9 
c5 


•I  fc»  H 


p-  W  W  1*5  ^  ^ 


g  g  O  p-  W  W  1*5 


s? 


I  ' 

6    I 

5 


e 
& 

c 
e 

a 

"5 
? 
4 


i 


s 


S      ^ 
«      I 
c    • 


9 
O 


3  «jQ         TS    X 

S  c-S  go  I  8 

S  B  fiS  Cb  3D  '■ 


p^QUS 


Co 


o 

S2 


CO  ■ 


o 
^. 

K 
1-3 

< 


41©  I 


•     •     •     • 


■  -»»  »         »         Sk 

X  p^  t-4  »-< 


CO 


8§S 

•-<o«co 


3    . 

•-8' 


Sd2 


$Sg2S3 


S  S  •  8   .  S 


I 


H 


X^  lO  91       ^       «-« 


eo 


•  SS 


-:    o€  . 


§ 


lO 


^  •  ^ 
Ill 


—  f-N  ^ 


^etco«* 


12 


90 


o 
H 


a 


J  ^ 


< 


s 


•       •       •       • 


S5  35  CO  Oi^^  ST 

^  .  ^  .  OS  01  o  $  .  p-t 

f-i  o  r-  ^  CO  00  r* 

«\  as  ^        ^       ^        ^              (^ 

^  oi  r-  lO  tr  G«  .00 


»^     '  CO 


00  CO 


8s 


01  ^  o 

^         ^«         ^ 

©  lO  Ol 

1-^  00  1-^ 


0>  O  O) 

r*  "^  lO 

00  ^  o> 

*\         ^         vv 

O  0( 

CO  CO 


^  lO  ©01  CO 
CO  O)  O  !^  CO 
C0«  ^00  jK 

r«       #\       ^       M       ^       ^ 

lo  ^  r«  o  ^  r* 

.M^  ,^^  01  •-< 


CO  Oi  Q 
_    ift  "^  Q 

;o  iO  o>  o 

e«        w        *^        »<< 

CO  I-  -^  Ol 

w^  CO  ^ 


lO  © 

Ol  Tf 

,        e«        e«        #\ 

C5. 


op  CO  CO 
'^  Oi  t- 
Ol  CO  0< 


CO  Oi 


©  ^  lO 
.OIOI  t- 

i-i  00  00 

M         M  M 

,  OiOl  '-^ 

•  ^N  Co  CO 


iO  lO  © 
00  o>  ^ 
^  lO  lO 

•\         vs         *\ 

;0  iO  ^ 


00     .S 


SI 


Ol 

CO 


^  ©  Ol 

CO  CO  ^^ 
CO  01  iO 

M  »N  M 

©  CO  IQ 
COOD  0< 


w*  CO  00  ^ 
©  CO  0«  Of 

0((0  ^  © 
CO  CO 


© 


©  CO  rr  9 

CO  t*  Oi  Oi 
CO  CO  ^  CO 

>        »«        ^        *^        #s 

CO  o  ;p  Ol 
r*  lib  ^ 


00  ^  r- 
Tj;  00  to 

01  O^  00 

e«        *^        ^ 

^  00  00 


^  00  r- 
r-  Tf  CO 

^  CO  lO 

*\       •«       M 

CO  00  CO 

^  CO 


^lo  ©  xn 

0k  •«  0% 


^  ©00  r* 

CO  00  00  © 

^  ©  oi  cB 

e«        ^        e«        r> 

o^oo  r-  © 

^  CO  ^ 


O^  ©  iO 
lO  »ft  ^ 

r-  00  r* 

•*  »\  WN 

oi  r-  o 
oi  ^  r- 


to  lO 
^  CO  Ol 

to  ^  ^ 


CO  00  OQ^  00 

ofiog 


s 


CO  00  CO  CO 

^  CO  to  -^ 
to  ^  00  00 

r\        *\        «\        r> 

Ol  ^ 


©  01  ^ 

»N  *\  ^ 

©00  t- 
■^  F-4  01 


P  00  $ 

r*  CO  ^ 

#\        e«        »\ 


01  to  ©  r* 

^       ^       ^       «« 

^  ^  to  f-i 


Oi 


to  Ol  r- 

CO  S  ^ 

r>        *\        vx 

o<  Oi  r- 


CO  CO  r- 
CO  ©  ?N 

r-  r*  o> 

*«   M   «« 

CO  o>  © 


to  o^  r*  1-^ 
00  ©  to  ^ 
CO  ^  o«  to 

*\        tfs        »v        as 

CO  CO  ©  r- 
^  ^  r*  ^ 


00  r- 

Tf  to 


Oi  CO  t- 

^  r;  00 

CO  Tf  Of 

•>       »v       r» 


01 


9i 

a 


9) 

0) 


o 

c 
c 


9> 


5       fi  s      ^      "^ 

C5     .  .     fc^  ♦^  TS 


en 


c» 


.-^ 


93 


(2(^(2(2 


:g(^ 


.s  ^ 

s  s 

CO  •  rj 

on 


£ 

c  c  c 

Sea 


c 

vS5 


CO 

0) 


a*s  9  ®  «>  o 

*3  9  I  -5  I  I 


Iisf-i 


"S  *  If 


.  .  .g 


O!  lo  o  (*  gt  00  9 
,  CJ  —  —  w  «  c  <^ 

o_«  CD_ui  r-^*  « 
,  to" sf^'w 'f  in  T 


ODuj'toto'oi" 
S  us  M  SI 


rlil'ii'il'ii-iiiilli'ilii 
I.  g,a.{flcocaaaaasb.h.cotfja.s^M| 


^8"  s»|sgs§'  .'-s-ss*  .g-r" 


IMllIia  -iTsinPIIi 


SbIP  11  US 


51125181  .gSi 


TTST'spsTTp 


cS         S    S    SlJiT  3 


r     I 


11 

1 

8 

i 
If 

i 
1 

I: 

s 

1- 

-k 

93 


S 


il 


PC' 


c^oCo© 


^ 


itf 


df     cf 


o 


SI 


-Tef 


90 

S9 


5 


i 


0» 


5 


3 


il 


^  X 


Ij    I 


1^1  -lis 


■  -4^ 


c 


ii 


(C 


I 


E 

c 


C    C8 


afiog 


S  g  S  =  c  =>  «  ^ 


fciC 


.00 


ioc 


■oc 


el 


OD 


S 


8^ 


CO 


o 

s' 


7 

k    :f   0)   n 


0) 


e    Ml  •i*  .-•  r: 


C    ?    lii    -1 


12 


C 


^  ^  k  *=  i 

J?  ^  5  t  »■  *• 


cJ 


s 


s 


0) 


8 


QD 
SB 


5 


c 

be 


«0 

4) 


94 


X 

o 

H 

< 


m 
c 
o 


3 


E3 

s 

H 
CO 


s 


i 


i 


s 


S 


CD 


10 
0( 


CO 


88 


$ 


00 

o 


CO  iO 


CO 


Sot  CO 
CO  00 


lii 


00 


s 


ot 


o 
5 


S! 


& 
S 


r- 

5 


s 


CO 

CO 


o 


o 


lo 

0( 


o 


00 


01 


0> 


s 


lo 


SI 


^ 


s 


0( 


^  kOf-<  00 
C^  0>  lO 

gob  »^    ' 
•«       «\       <^ 


S12S 


0>  CO  CO 


^  *r  *r 

^  OD  ^ 


MI 


00 


s 


Ol 


si  • 

O)  CO 


^  0<  Q^ 
OlOtOl 


SOI 
(0  01 


—  Ol  o 

95  oS 

Olj-« 

'28  . 


a  Of 


If 

^     e9    r< 

i  E  » 


a 
c 


c 


"si 


CO 

0) 


IP 

0) 


0) 


Q 


^        ^  -T    -  8^ 


s 


95 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Prodace  of  agriculmre  divided  into  that,  1st.  which  coDslilotes  vegetable  food ; 
•s  floor,  rice,  Indian  corn,  rye,  &c. — 2d  Of  animals,  as  bc«f,  pork,  butter,  lard, 
cheese,  Ac. — 3d.  Tobacco— 4th.  cotton — and  5th.  others  of  minor  importance — 
dnantity  and  valoeof  these  exported  at  different  periods — The  principal  coon* 
tries,  to  which  floar,  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  beef  and  pork,  are  usaally  exported— 
Amonnt  of  the  kinds  and  value  of  domestic  manufactures  exported — A  com- 
parative view  of  the  value  of  the  produce  of  the  sea,  of  the  forest,  of  agricul- 
cnre,  and  of  manufactures,  exported,  from  1803  to  1833. 

The  principal  employment  of  the  inhabitants  of  North  America, 
has  been  that  of  agriculture.  The  first  emigrants  soon  found,  that 
nothing  promised  such  immediate  and  permanent  advantages,  as  the 
cultivation  of  the  new  lands,  which  they  came  to  possess.  The  labor 
bestowed  in  clearing  and  cultivating  them,  afforded  not  only  the 
sQrett  means  of  subsistence,  but  added  greatly  to  the  permanent  ral- 
fle  of  the  lands  themselves.  The  immense  tracts  of  vacant,  uncleared 
lends  in  the  United  States,  has  always  rendered  it  easy  for  those  pos- 
ecased  of  an  ordinary  share  of  industry,  to  obtain  more  than  enough 
for  cultivation.  The  facility  of  sujfj)orting  families,  has  induced  early 
marriages,  population  has  increased  with  the  means  of  subsistence, 
and  wealth,  as  well  as  health  and  happiness  has  generally  attended 
the  independent  cultivator  of  the  soil. 

The  surplus  produce  of  American  agriculture,  has  been  exchang- 
ed for  those  articles,  either  of  necessity,  convenience  or  luxury, 
which  the  inhabitants  did  not  manufacture  for  themselves,  or  could 
only  be  procured  from  foreign  nations ;  and  the  productions  of  agri- 
cnltore,  both  before  and  since  the  American  revolution,  have  constitu- 
ted mnch  the  largest  portion  of  the  domestic  exports  of  this  country* 

These  productions,  have  been  classed  into  those — 

1st  Which  constitute  vegetable  food,  as  wheat,  fiour,  rice,  Indian 
com,  rye,  peas,  beans,  oats,  potatoes,  dec. 

2d.  The  products  of  animals,  as  beef,  tallow,  hides,  butter  and 
cheese,  pork  and  lard,  or  the  animals  themselves  when  exported. 

3d.  Tobacco. 

4th.  Cotton. 

&th.  Others  of  minor  importance,  as  indigo,  flax-seed,  wax,  dec. 

Wheat,  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  vegetables,  was  brought  to 
America,  by  the  first  emigrants,  and  has  been  cultivated  with  success, 
from  the  first  settlement  of  the  country.     It  has  always  been  the 


i 


96 


great  staple  of  the  middle  and  western  states,  and  was  formerly  pro- 
duced in  those  at  the  east.  For  many  years  past,  it  has,  in  a  great 
measure,  failed  in  New  England. 

The  states  of  Virginia  and  Maryland  have  exchanged  part  of  their 
tobacco  lands,  for  wheat. 

In  1770,  the  quantity  of  wheat  exported  from  the  American  Colo- 
nies, now  the  United  States,  was  seven  hundred  and  fifty  one  thou- 
sand two  hundred  and  forty  bushels ;  and  of  flour  and  bread,  was 
forty  five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  eight  tons,  being  at  ten 
barrels  per  ton,  four  hundred  and  fifty  eight  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  sixty  eight  barrels ;  both  then  valued  at  about  $2,802,190.  Much  / 
the  greatest  part  of  it  went  to  the  south  of  Europe  and  to  the  West 
Indies.  The  amount  exported  from  the  United  States,  from  the  peace 
of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  the  present  national  government, 
cannot  be  ascertained  with  any  degree  of  accuracy. 

The  quantity  exported,  from  1791,  to  1833,  with  the  value  of  the 
same,  since  1803,  has  been  as  follows — viz : 


L 


Yean. 

Wheat—  bushels. 

Flour— barrela. 

Value  of  both. 

1791 

.  1,018,339 

619,681 

1792 

853,790 

824,464 

1793 

.  1,450,575 

1,074,639 

1794 

698,797 

8'46,010 

1796 

141,273 

687,369 

1796 

31,226 

725,194 

1797 

15,655 

515,633 

1798 

15,021 

567,558 

1799 

10,056 

519,265 

1800 

26,853 

653,052 

1801 

239,929 

1,102,444 

1802 

280,281 

1,156,248 

1803 

686,415 

1,311,853 

•9,310,000 

1804 

127,024 

810,008 

7,100,000 

1805 

18,041 

777,513 

8,325,000 

1806 

86,784 

782,724 

6,867,000 

1807 

776,814 

1,249,819 

10,753,000. 

1808 

87,330 

263,813 

1,936,000 

1809 

393,889 

846,247 

5,944,000 

1810 

325,924 

798,431 

6,846,000 

1811 

216,833 

1,445,012 

14,662,000 

1812 

53,832 

1,44^492 

13,687,000 

1813 

288,535 

1,260,912 

13,501/)00 

97 


Ti 

1814 

1815 

1816 

1817 

1818 

1819 

1890 

1821 

1828 

1823 

1824 

1825 

1826 

1827 

1828 

1829 

1890 

1831 

1832 

1833 

Tables  No 


Wheat—boflielt. 

•         • 

17,634 
62,321 
96,407 
196,808 
82,065 
22,137 
25,821 

4,418 

4,272 
20,373 
17,990 
45,166 
22,182 

8,906 

4,007 

45,289 

408,910 

88,304 

32,421 


Flmor^-bttTeb. 

193,274 

862,739 

729,053 

1,479,198 

1,157,697 

750,660 

1,177,036 

1,056,119 

827,865 

756,702 

996,792 

813,906 

857,820 

868,496 

860,809 

837,385 

1,227,434 

1,806,529 

864,919 

955,768 


Value  of  boC&« 

$1,734,000 
7,209,000 
7,712,000 
17,968,292 
11,970,586 
6,108,861 
5,296,664 
4,318,968 
5,106,360 
4,968,036 
5,779,916 
4,230,697 
4,160,142 
4,434,881 
4,283,669 
5,800,023 
6,132,129 
10,461,728 
4,974,121 
5,642,602 


I  and  II,  shew  the  different  countries  to  which  flour  has 
^;?been  exported ;  the  first  from  1800  to  1816,  and  the  second,  from  1821 
to  1833. 

The  West  Indies,  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  occasionally,  Great  Brit- 
ain, hare  been  the  principal  foreign  markets  for  American  wheat  and 
flour.  The  West  India  Islands  have  constantly  furnished  a  market 
for  a  large  proportion  of  them,  and  in  times  of  scarcity  in  Great  Brit^ 
ain  and  in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe,  the  United  States  have  come 
in  competition,  with  the  grain  countries  of  the  North  of  Europe. 

Id  1801«  a  year  of  scarcity  in  Great  Britain,  the  United  States  ex- 
ported to  that  kingdom,  two  hundred  and  sixteen  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  serenty  seven  bushels  of  wheat,  and  four  hundred  and  sev- 
enty nine  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty  barrels  of  flour:  and  in 
l&Olf  six  hundred  and  sixty  nine  thousand  nine  hundred  and  fiAy 
boahela  of  the  former,  and  three  hundred  and  twenty  three  thousand 
nine  hundred  and  sixty  eight  barrels  of  the  latter. 

The  unfortunate  and  distressed  situation  of  Spain  and  Portugal, 
during  the  unprecedented  struggle  for  supremacy  in  those  countries, 
called  for  a  large  proportion  of  American  flour,  not  only  for  the  ordi- 
ffopply  of  the  inhabitants,  but  for  the  support  of  the  allied  ar- 

13 


i 


90 


O 

H 
1-3 


a 
o 


I 


H 
iJ 
-^ 
S 

^ 


S 


S 


CO 


•       • 


55      35      CO  01  ^  CO      5r5" 
^       O       r-^COQD       t-ol 


^     '  CO 


§ 

9 


CO  ^ 
CO 


CM  ^  © 
CX)  Ol  CO 
o  ^  ^ 

rv        »^        #\ 

O  ^  CM 
^  QD  ^ 


© 
CO 


"^  io  g^ 

Tf  Oi  Oi 

•\  »v  •» 

Ol  ©  IC 


CO 


©«      ^ 


^  lO  © 
CO  Oi  © 
CO  CO  ^ 

^  Vk  M 

pm  r-  CO 
CO  »^»-« 


01  CO 


00 


CO  Oi 
CO  L'^  o 

w         rv        w 

CO  r-  "^ 

^^  CO  '^ 


01 

01  Ci 


s  • 


iO  iO  © 
00  o>  — « 
^  lO  O 

r«        M        *\ 

^  iti  rf 
\0 


o  r-  QQ 

TT  CO  TT 

TP  00  Ol 

•>        M        r> 

"^  CM  -^ 
^  CO 
CO 


CO  CO 

CO  0< 

lO  CO 
Oi  CO 


©  ^  lO 

2g£ 

M  M  •« 
o>  Ol  -^ 
'^  CO  CO 


.£ 


© 


©CO  i^ 

CO  r*  Oi 


©00 
CO  CO  ^  CO  oi 

rv        M        rv        »«        r> 

;0  01  CO 
|J5  '-^  01 


.  ^  CO 
lO  CO 

l-o  © 

•  0«  CO 

..C5>_  _ 

r-  CO 

Ci  00  '-^ 


2JS 

lO  © 


CO  CO 


§g 


CO  Oi 


00 


CO 


M  »N  M 

00  CO  "^ 
CO 


lO  ©  iJd 

«'8 


CO 


s 


CO  00  00 
^  ©  Ol 


O^  00 


gp  ©  lo 

^  »\ 
oi 

Ol 


00  r-  © 

^  CO  ^ 


CO  00  CO 

TP  CO  lO  TJ»  I- 

lO  ^  00  00  © 

m\        m%        0S,        ^K        m% 

^  0<  ^  00  © 
Ol  ^  ^ 


i-H 

00  r- 

Ol  ^ 

2SSJ 


'^  ir  Q  ©^  ^  o 

iO  05  00  '-^  00  t» 
10  lO  CO  00  00  00 


g£5 


I-  00 

r-  CO 

•\        as 
©    -^ 

Ol  lO 


1^^ 

"^  Ol  lo  ©  r- 

#\      #\      »\      #%      •« 

00  Tf  ^  lO  ^ 


CO 


Ol 


f  M.S  V.S3  ^x: 
I  j  I  S  «  »  c  c 


lO  01  g 

•K        r>        •!» 

01  Ci  r- 


CO  ^  r- 
w  ©  01 

r-  r*  Oi 

M   M   «« 

CO  o>  © 


iO"Oi 

coco 


s 


©  r- 


CO 
00 


CO 
00 


en  • 
OP 


c^ 


•      •      • 


•      •      • 


9> 

o 

c 


c 


rt  mm  ^2  ^M 


00  r- 


01 


c 


CO 

0) 


:3 

s 


I 


I 1111 J r 


J3 


s  «rf  S\  «rf  c  z: 


9i 


P 
H 
D 
K 

h 

2 
O 


O 


I  2-- 


X    o    - 


Ed 

< 


1  .Sftf   S-g2§Sg;  .""S-BS-  ,8'B 

,  .8p§M8P«Siiip,=|||| 

,  ||^l!||l|lipii!IIS 

::|=|l|| 

«IIPI!-|II 

i  !sl  -gag 

*.S     .'SB 

:|li|l||l:|l| 

tpm 

lipPIP 

S  .  .  .     ."g" 

|i-2|;|55-  .III 

lUf  :!|| 

-??Pil|i 

s  .2X-    --;:;ii-5;.«3»s-"  -s-ig 

'if   S-S3SS  ■    S2SS    S— ■  .3SS 

-  ^  iiisss  ■  n?iiip  III 

...|t.s.!..rt..s.|..l.... 

lilliiiLlliilM 

93 


c 


i 


%Q  ^  m0  mm  ^ 


of  of  oa 


^ 


ef    ef 


ef 


0« 


^      .-'cf 


li- 


as 
$9 


$ 


s 

o 


<» 


'O 


3 

IS 


;e;,  ' 


S8i:§  -828 

S  Si  f*  5       S  .3D  S 

of^of     of  o5tf 


|J2 


-  ^  mm    a         ^ 


I 
I 


t 


^ 

&» 


V    «    « 


9 

Q 


« 


tc 


^     •    c 

S         M 


^ 


^ 

S 


c^ 


el 

pas 


^ 


e 

c 

w 

8 


P    4»   w 


'S. 


cuo 


£s^ 


CO 


H 


i 


8^ 

8 


^ 


CO 


o 


M 

-^  J. 

c   « 

90  J- 

S.S 
c  c 

V    0    5 


C 


S2 

e« 


0)      •  i^ 


3 


CO 


s 


s 


.^   <0   0)    f    «    i-   2 


OD 


^ 


«> 


5 
to 


a 


0) 

C 

tMD 


S 

C 


/ 


94 


C 
O 


X 

o 

< 


^ 


^ 


s 


S 


i 


s 


S 


o  r- 

22s 


00 


10  t- 

»0  CO 


•  01 


kO 

^ 


8gS 

01 


CO 


CO  CO 


01  CO 


s 


01  o 


^ 


5 


s 


CO 


o 


o 


s 


o 


00 


•s 


10 


gl 


^ 


s 


^  kO  »M 


kO 


8    - 


S 


©I 


>  ill 


e 


O^  ^  kO 

Sob  ^    • 
#k  M  M 

r-  lA  10  ^ 

o>  c^co 


^  f  f 


Iff 

a"- 


8- 


3S 


a  CO 


^  01  p  ^ 
oiot  01 


•f'i  ?  I 


a 


£  .-g  a  5  *  3  5 


9) 


95 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Prodoce  of  agricQltore  divided  into  that,  1st.  which  coDsiiiotcs  vegetable  food ; 
as  floor,  rice,  Indian  com,  rye,  dx. — 2d  Of  animals,  as  be«f,  pork,  butter,  lard, 
cheese,  ftc.~3d.  Tobacco — 4th.  cotton — and  5th.  others  of  minor  importance — 
Uoantity  and  valae  of  these  exported  at  different  periods— The  principal  coon- 
tries,  to  which  floor,  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  beef  and  pork,  are  usually  exported— 
Amount  of  the  kinds  and  value  of  domestic  manufactures  exported — A  com- 
parative view  of  the  value  of  the  produce  of  the  sea,  of  the  forest,  of  agricul- 
core,  and  of  manufactures,  exported,  from  1803  to  1833. 

The  principal  employment  of  the  inhabitants  of  North  America, 
has  been  that  of  agriculture.  The  first  emigrants  soon  found,  that 
Bothing  promised  such  immediate  and  permanent  advantages,  as  the 
caltivation  of  the  new  lands,  which  they  came  to  possess.  The  labor 
bestowed  in  clearing  and  cultivating  them,  afforded  not  only  the 
forest  means  of  subsistence,  but  added  greatly  to  the  permanent  val- 
9t  of  the  lands  themselves.  The  immense  tracts  of  vacant,  uncleared 
lands  in  the  United  States,  has  always  rendered  it  easy  for  those  pos- 
sessed of  an  ordinary  share  of  industry,  to  obtain  more  than  enough 
for  cultivation.  The  facility  of  suj^orting  families,  has  induced  early 
marriages,  population  has  increased  with  the  means  of  subsistence, 
and  wealth,  as  well  as  health  and  happiness  has  generally  attended 
the  independent  cultivator  of  the  soil. 

The  surplus  produce  of  American  agriculture,  has  been  exchang- 
ed for  those  articles,  either  of  necessity,  convenience  or  luxury, 
which  the  inhabitants  did  not  manufacture  for  themselves,  or  could 
only  be  procured  from  foreign  nations  ;  and  the  productions  of  agri- 
cnltore,  both  before  and  since  the  American  revolution,  have  constitu- 
ted much  the  largest  portion  of  the  domestic  exports  of  this  country* 

These  productions,  have  been  classed  into  those — 

1st  Which  constitute  vegetable  food,  as  wheat,  flour,  rice,  Indian 
eom,  rye,  peas,  beans,  oats,  potatoes,  dec. 

2d.  The  products  of  animals,  as  beef,  tallow,  hides,  butter  and 
cbeete,  pork  and  lard,  or  the  animals  themselves  when  exported. 

3d.  Tobacco. 

4th.  Cotton. 

5th.  Others  of  minor  importance,  as  indigo,  flax-seed,  wax,  dLC. 

Wheat,  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  vegetables,  was  brought  to 
America,  by  the  first  emigrants,  and  has  been  cultivated  with  success, 
from  the  first  settlement  of  the  country.     It  has  always  been  the 


/ 


96 


great  staple  of  the  middle  and  western  states^  and  was  formerly  pro- 
duced in  those  at  the  east.  For  many  years  past,  it  has,  in  a  great 
measure,  failed  in  New  England. 

The  states  of  Virginia  and  Maryland  have  exchanged  part  of  their 
tobacco  lands,  for  wheat. 

In  1770,  the  quantity  of  wheat  exported  from  the  American  Colo- 
nies, now  the  United  States,  was  seven  hundred  and  fifty  one  thou- 
sand two  hundred  and  forty  bushels ;  and  of  flour  and  bread,  wai 
forty  five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  eight  tons,  being  at  tea 
barrels  per  ton,  four  hundred  and  fifty  eight  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  sixty  eight  barrels ;  both  then  valued  at  about  $2,802,190.  Much  / 
the  greatest  part  of  it  went  to  the  south  of  Europe  and  to  the  West 
Indies-.  The  amount  exported  from  the  United  States,  from  the  peace 
of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  t}\e  present  national  govemmenl» 
cannot  be  ascertained  with  any  degree  of  accuracy. 

The  quantity  exported,  from  1791,  to  1833,  with  the  value  of  the 
same,  since  1803,  has  been  as  follows — viz : 


L 


Tean. 

Wheat— busbeli. 

Floor— barreli. 

ValiMof  boCh. 

1791 

.   1,018,339 

619,681 

1792 

863,790 

824,464 

1793 

.   1,460,575 

1,074,639 

1794 

698,797 

846,010 

1795 

141,273 

687,369 

1796 

31,226 

725,194 

1797 

15,655 

515,633 

1798 

15,021 

567,558 

1799 

10,056 

519,265 

1800 

26,853 

653,052 

1801 

239,929 

1,102,444 

1802 

280,281 

1,156,248 

1803 

686,415 

1,311,853 

$9,310,000 

1804 

127,024 

810,008 

7,100,000 

1806 

18,041 

777,513 

8,325,000 

1806 

86,784 

782,724 

6,867,000 

1807 

776,814 

1,249,819 

10,753,000 

1808 

87,330 

263,813 

1,936,000 

1809 

393,889 

846,247 

5,944,000 

1810 

325,924 

798,431 

6,846,000 

1811 

216,833 

1,445,012 

14,662,000 

1812 

53,832 

1,44^492 

13,687,000 

1813 

288,535 

1,260,942 

13,691JOOO 

97 


Ti 

1814 

1815 

1816 

1817 

1818 

1819 

1820 

1821 

1822 

1823 

1824 

1825 

1826 

1827 

1828 

1829 

1830 

1831 

1832 

1833 

Tables  No 


Wbeat-4>ailielt. 

•         • 

17,634 
62,321 
96,407 
196,806 
82,066 
22,137 
25,821 

4,418 

4,272 
20,373 
17,990 
45,166 
22,182 

8,906 

4,007 

45,289 

408,910 

88,304 

32,421 


Roor— iMrTcli. 

193,274 

862,739 

729,053 

1,479,198 

1,157,697 

750,660 

1,177,036 

1,056,119 

827,865 

756,702 

996,792 

813,906 

857,820 

868,496 

cJuO,oil9 

837,385 

1,227,434 

1,806,529 

864,919 

955,768 


Value  of  hoSb, 

$1,734,000 
7,209,000 
7,712,000 

17,968,292 

11,970,586 
6,108,861 
5,296,664 
4,318,968 
5,106,360 
4,968,036 
5,779,916 
4,230,697 
4,160,142 
4,434,881 
4,283,669 
5,800,023 
6,132,129 

10,461,728 
4,974,121 
5,642,602 


I  and  II,  shew  the  different  couDtries  to  which  flour  has 
'^Jbeen  exported ;  the  first  from  1800  to  1816,  and  the  second,  from  1821 
to  1833. 

The  West  Indies,  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  occasionally.  Great  Brit- 
ain, bare  been  the  principal  foreign  markets  for  American  wheat  and 
iour.  The  West  India  Islands  have  constantly  furnished  a  market 
tor  a  large  proportion  of  them,  and  in  times  of  scarcity  in  Great  Brit- 
ain and  in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe,  the  United  States  have  come 
in  competition,  with  the  grain  countries  of  the  North  of  Europe. 

In  1801,  a  year  of  scarcity  in  Great  Britain,  the  United  States  ex- 
ported to  that  kingdom,  two  hundred  and  sixteen  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  seventy  seven  bushels  of  wheat,  and  four  hundred  and  sev- 
eDty  nine  thousand  seven  hundred  and  twenty  barrels  of  flour:  and  in 
1807,  six  hundred  and  sixty  nine  thousand  nine  hundred  and  fiAy 
boihela  of  the  former,  and  three  hundred  and  twenty  three  thousand 
■ioe  hundred  and  sixty  eight  barrels  of  the  latter. 

The  unfortunate  and  distressed  situation  of  Spain  and  Portugal, 
during  the  unprecedented  struggle  for  supremacy  in  those  countries, 
called  for  a  large  proportion  of  American  flour,  not  only  for  the  ordi- 
sQpply  of  the  inhabitants,  but  for  the  support  of  the  allied 

13 


/ 


96 

mies.  During  the  years  1811,  1812,  and  1813,  the  following  quanti- 
ties of  wheat  and  flour  were  shipped  to  those  countries. 

To  Spain.  To  PortugaL 

Whfla^-buflheli.         Fknir— barreli.  Whett— busbelt.        Floar-tamli. 

1811  .    21,199       .      a06,074  66,033      .      629,106 

1812  .      8,866      .      381,726  33,691      .      667,218 

1813  .    74,709      .      430,101  214,126      •      642,300 

Making  no  less  than  nine  hundred  and  seventy  two  thousand  five 
hundred  barrels  of  flour  to  the  Peninsula,  in  the  year  1813 ;  the  val- 
ue of  which,  together  with  that  of  wheat  sent  there  the  same  yeaTf.  was 
about  $11,213,447,  at  the  place  of  exportation. 

In  Great  Britain,  various  regulations,  at  different  times,  have  been 
made,  relative  to  the  exportation  and  importation  of  grain.  The  ob- 
ject of  these  regulations  has  been,  the  encouragement  and  protection 
of  domestic  grain ;  and  in  ordinary  times,  foreign  grain  is  excluded 
from  the  domestic  market.  The  policy  of  these  regulations  hat  been 
questioned  by  some  British  Statesmen,  and  political  Economists,  bat 
it  still  continues ;  and  foreign  grain  for  consumption,  is  excluded,  by 
high  duties,  until  the  price  of  domestic  grain  is  such,  as  to  threaten  a 
scarcity. 

The  scale  of  duties  on  wheat,  which  went  into  operation,  July  16tli, 
1828,  and  which  varied  according  to  the  price,  was  as  follows. 

When  the  average  price  is  not  under  61«.,  and  under  >  ^*'  e?*^> 
e2s.  per  quarter,  the  duty  is  \  ^*    ^*  ^** 

When  62s.  and  under  63^.  "  " 

cc  09      "        "70  "  " 

it  ^\      4(        <(     <22  "  ** 

u  72      "        **     73 


«  4< 


at  or  above  73  " 


cc 


1    4 

8 

0  13 

8 

0    6 

8 

0    2 

8 

0    1 

0 

Wheat,  therefore,  cannot  be  imported  into  Great  Britain  for  con- 
sumption, without  paying  a  duty  of  more  than  three  shillings  sterling, 
or  about  seventy  cents  per  bushel,  unless  the  price  is  about  eight  ahil- 
lingrs  sterling,  or  about  one  dollar  and  eighty  cents  per  bushel. 

How  far  the  United  States  have  come  in  competition  with  the  grain 
countries  situated  around  the  Baltic,  in  the  articles  of  wheat  and  floor, 
will  appear,  on  comparing  the  exports  of  these  articles,  from  those 
countries  respectively. 

The  whole  quantity  of  wheat  exported  from  all  the  ports  of  the 
Baltic,  in  the  years  1801  and  1802,  being  years  of  great  exportation, 
was,  for 


1  .■ 
•J 


99 

1801 994,609  quarters 

1802 1,032,911     do.* 

being,  on  aq  average  of  these  two  yearn,  about  one  million  of  quar-1 
tersv  or  eight  millions  of  bushels.  The  average  quantity  exported 
from  the  United  States,  in  the  same  years,  (allowing  five  bushels  of 
wheal  to  make  a  barrel  of  flour)  was  about  ^yc  millions  nine  hundred  t 
thousand  bushels,  falliug  ^bout  two  millions  short  of  the  quantity,  ex- 
ported from  all  the  extensive  grain  countries  of  the  north  of  Europe. 
The  Talue  of  graiu,  (including  rice)  shipped  from  the  United  States, 
on  an  average  of  the  years  1805,  1806  and  1807,  was  about  twelve 
and  a  half  millions  of  dollars ;  and  in  the  years  1811,  1812  and  1813, 
was  as  follows : 

1811 (20,391,000 

1812 17,797,000 

1813 ,        .        19,041,000 

This  increase,,  it  will  be  borne  in  mind,  was,  occasioned  by  the 
great  demand  for  grain,  as  well  as  all  kinds  of  provisions,  in  Spain 
and  Portugal,  during  these  years,  and  the  enhanced  price  of  the  arti- 
cles themselves. 
In  1811,  the  value  of  wheat,  flour  and  biscuit,  was     $14,662,000 
of  Indian  com  and  meal, 
of  rice,  .... 

of  all  other,  rye,  oats,  dec.    . 


2,896,000 

2,387,000 

446,000 


Making,  .    $20,391,000 

The  great  foreign  demand  for  grain  in  1817,  occasioned  a  greater 
exportation  (especially  of  wheat  and  flour,)  in  quantity,  and  much 
greater  in  value,  than,  in  any  preceding  or  subsequent  year,  being  in 
the  whole,  not  less,  than  about  twenty  three  millions  of  dollars.  Of 
this  som,  the  value  of  wheat,  flour  and  biscuit,  was  $18,432,000 
of  Indian  com  and  meal,        ....         1,329,000 

of  rye  and  meal, 627,000 

of  rice, 2,379,000 

of  all  other,  as  oata,  dec 187,000 


$22,954,000 

This  increase  in  value  was  owing,  principally,  to  the  increased  price 
of  these  articles,  that  of  flour,  bein;^  between  eleven  and  twelve  dol- 
lars per  barrel. 

*  Vol.  2  of  Oddy'x  European  Commerce. 


/ 


100 

From  1803  to  1813,  the  value  of  wheat  and  flour  exported,  was 
•99,021,000,  while,  froin  1820  to  1830,  the  value  was  only  $60,351,343. 

RICE. 

The  culture  of  this  valuable  and  most  nutricious  vegetable,  was  in- 
troduced into  South  Carolina,  about  the  year  1694.  Different  ac- 
counts have  been  given,  as  to  the  manner  .of  its  first  introduction* 
The  account  given  by  Dr.  Ramsay,  in  his  valuable  history  of  South 
Carolina,  published  in  1809,  is  probably  the  most  correct,  and  which 
we  shall  give  in  his  own  words. 

*'  Landgrave  Thomas  Smith,  who  was  Governor  of  the  Province  ia 
1693,  had  been  at  Madagascar,  before  he  settled  in  Carolina.  There 
he  observed,  that  rice  was  planted  and  grew  in  low  and  moist  ground. 
Having  such  ground,  at  the  western  extremity  of  his  garden  attached 
to  his  dwelling  house  in  East  Bay  street,  he  was  persuaded  that  rice 
would  grow  therein,  if  seed  could  be  obtained.  About  this  time,  a 
vessel  from  Madagascar,  being  in  distress,  came  to  anchor  near  Sul- 
livan^s  Island.  The  master  of  the  vessel  enquired  for  Mr.  Smith  as 
an  old  acquaintance.  An  interview  took  place.  In  the  course  of  con- 
versation Mr.  Smith  expressed  a  wish  to  obtain  some  seed  rice  to 
plant  in  his  garden,  by  way  of  experiment.  The  cook  being  called, 
said  he  had  a  small  bag  of  rice  suitable  for  that  purpose.  This  was 
presented  to  Mr.  Smith,  who  sowed  it  in  a  low  spot  in  his  garden, 
which  now  forms  a  part  of  Longitude  lane.  It  grew  luxuriantly. 
The  little  crop  was  distributed  by  Mr.  Smith  among  his  planting 
friends.  From  this  small  beginning,  the  first  staple  of  South  Caro- 
lina took  its  rise.  It  soon  after  became  the  chief  support  of  the 
Colony/'* 

Its  introduction  contributed  much  to  the  prosperity  of  that  part  of 
North  America.  It  became  valuable,  not  only  for  consumption  at 
home,  but  as  an  article  for  exportation.  By  an  act  of  Parliament,  of 
the  3  and  4  of  Anne,  (1706)  rice  was  placed  among  the  enumerated 
commodities,  and  could  only  be  shipped  directly  to  Great  Britain ;  but 
afterwards,  in  the  year  1730,  it  was  permitted  to  be  carried,  under  cer- 
tain limitations  and  restrictions,  to  the  ports  of  Europe,  lying  south 
of  Cape  Finistcrre.  Its  culture  had  so  increased,  that  as  early  as 
1724,  eighteen  thousand  barrels  of  it  were  exported,  and  from  No- 
vember 1760  to  September  1761,  no  less  than  one  hundred  thousand 
barrels  were  shipped  from  South  Carolina.! 

•  Doct.  Ramsay's  History  of  South  Carolina. 
t  MacphersoD*s  Annals  of  Commerce. 


Tew.        Tierce*. 


Value. 


Yeara.       Tierces. 


Vtt: 


In  1770,  the  ralue  of  this  article  exported,  being  in  quantity  about 
•ae  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  barrels,  amounted  to  $1,530,000. 
The  quantity  exported  from  1791  to  1833,  and  its  value  since  1803, 
follows, 

VihiA. 

$3,021,000 
230,000 
2,785,000 
3,555,000 
2,378,880 
3,202,607 
2,142,644 
1,714,023 
1,494,923 
1,553,482 
1,820,985 
1,882,982 
1,925,245 
1,917,445 
2,343,908 
2,620,696* 
2,514,370 
1,986,824 
2,016,267 
2,152,631 
2,774,418 


1791 
1792 
1793 
1794 
1795 
1796 
1797 
1796 
1799 
180O 

iST 

1808 
1808 
1804 
1806 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1800 
1810 
i811 
1812 


96,980 
141,762 
134,611 
116,486 
138,526 
131,039 

60,111 
125,243 
110,599 
112,056 


y 


94,966 

79,822 

81,838 

78,385 

56,830 

102,627 

94,692 

9,228 

116,907 

131,341 

119,356 

77,190 


$2,455,000 
2,350,000 
1,705,000 
2,617,000 
2,367,000 
221,000 
2,104,000 
2,626,000 
2,387,000 
1,544,000 

Table  No.  Ill,  will  inform  the  reaaer,  of 
tide,  from  1800  to  1816,  and  Table  No.  IV, 


\ 


1813 
.4814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


120,843 

11,476 

129,248 

137,843 

79,296 

88,181 

76,523 

71,663 

88,221 

87,089 

101,365 

113,229 

97,015 

111,063 

133,518 

175,019 

171,636 

130,697 

116,517 

120,327 

144,163 


\ 


V 


\ 


the  destination  ox   this  ar-  ,  ^  . 


from  1821  to  1833. 


INDIAN  CORN  AND  MEAL,  RYE,  J^C. 

com  or  maize,  was  found  among  the  natives,  on  the  first  dis- 
covery of  this  country,  and  from  them  received  its  name.  It  was  cul- 
tivated for  food  by  the  Indians,  both  in  North  and  South  America. 
It  fonDed  a  very  valuable  addition  to  the  vegetable  productions  of  the 
new  inliabitants  of  the  country.  It  is  exported  in  large  quantities,  in 
a  raw  state,  or  when  manufactured  into  meal.  Before  it  is  manufac- 
tured, into  meal,  it  is  dried  by  a  fire,  in  a  kiln  prepared  for  that  pur- 
pose. 

By  this  process,  the  meal  is  much  less  liable  to  become  sour  on  the 
▼oyi^g^  *im1  can  be  preserved  much  longer  in  a  warm  climate. 


> 


102 


The  following  quantity  of  Indian  corn  and  meal,  waa  exported  from 
1791  to  1833,  with  iu  value,  from  1803. 


Yean. 
1791 

1792 
1793 
1794 
1796 
1796 
1797 
1796 
1799 
1800 
1801 
1802 
1803 

.1804 
1806 
1806 
1807 
1806 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1816 

•18I6 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1826 
1826 
1827 
1828 


Corn— boshels. 

1,713,241 

1,964,973 

1,233,708 

1,606,977 

1,936,346 

1,173,662 

804,922 

1,218,231 

1,200,492 

1,694,327 

1,768,162 

1,633,283 

2,079,008 

1,944,873 

861,601 

1,064,263 

1,018,721 

249,633 

622*047 

1,064,262 

2,790,850 

2,039,999 

1,486,970 

61,261 

830,616 

1,077,614 

387,464 

1,076,190 

1,086,762 

633,741 

607,277 

609,098 

749,034 

779,297 

869,644 

606,381 

978,664 

704,902 


Meal— Imrreb. 

361,096 

263,406 

189,716 

211,670 

612,445 

640,286 

254,799 

211,694 

231,226 

338,106 

919,366 

266,816 

133,606 

111,327 

116,131 

106,342 

136,460 

30,818 

67,260 

66,744 

147^426 

90,810 

66,621 

26,438 

7%3&1 

89,119 

106,763 

120,029 

136,271 

146,316 

131,669 

146,226 

141,601 

162,723 

187,266 

168,662 

131,041 

174,639 


VahM. 


$2,026,000 

2,600,000 

1,442,000 

1,286,000 

967,000 

296,000 

647,000 

1,136,000 

2,896,000 

1,939,000 

1,836,000 

170,000 

1,140,000 

1,616,000 

1,326,622 

2,336,405 

1,423,702 

643,025 

606,279 

900,656 

090,485 

736,340 

676,073 

1,007,321 

1,022,464 

622,858 


103 


Tnn. 

Cora— butheli. 

Meal-twiTels. 

Value. 

1889 

897,656 

173,776 

$974,536 

1830       . 

444,107 

145,301 

607,119 

1831 

671,312 

207,604 

992,051 

1832 

451,230 

146,710 

758,776 

1833       . 

437,174 

146,678 

871,814 

iDdiao  corn  and  meal,  generally  find  a  market,  in  the  West  Indies,  *-\ 
Spain  and  Portugal. 

The  other  articles  of  vegetable  food,  exported,  are  rye,  and  rye 
meal,  oats,  peas,  beans,  potatoes,  dec.  These,  however,  constitute 
bot  a  small  part  of  the  value  of  American  exports.  Rye  is  used  for 
bread,  or  is  distilled  into  spirits  at  home. 

The  distillation  of  grain,  until  lately,  has  increased  in  the  United 
States.  In  1801,  the  quantity  of  spirits  distilled  from  grain  and  fruit,  ^ 
was  entimated,  ai  ten  millions  of  gallons.  By  the  returns  of  the  mar- 
shalls,  containing  an  account  of  the  manufactures  of  the  United  States 
ia  1810,  it  appears,  that  the  quantity  distilled  from  grain  and  fruit,  du-  ^ 
ring  that  year,  exceeded  twenty  millions  of  gallons.  Much  the  great- 
est part  of  this,  probably  about  three  tjuarters,  was  from  grain.  It  is 
calculated,  that  a  bushel  of  rye  or  corn,  will  produce  from  two  and  a 
half  to  three  gallons  of  spirits.  In  1810,  therefore,  between  five  and 
fix  millions  of  bushels  of  rye  and  corn,  must  have  been  made  into 
•ptrita.  In  Pennsylvania  alone,  in  that  year,  there  were  three  thou- 
sand three  hundred  and  thirty  four  distilleries,  producing  no  less  than 
six  milllobs  five  hundred  and  fifty  two  thousand  two  hundred  and  eigh- 
ty foar  gallons  of  spirits,  principally,  from  grain. 

The  whole,  or  nearly  the  whole  of  this,  was  consumed  in  the  Uni- 
ted States.  When  we  add  to  this,  the  quantity  then  distilled  in  this 
country  from  molasses,  and  that  which  was  imported  and  consumed 
here,  we  find,  that  the  annual  consumption  of  spirits  in  the  United 
Slates,  at  that  time,  was  no  less  than  about  thirty  one  millions  seven 
hundred  and  twenty  five  thousand  four  hundred  and  seventeen  gallons. 

Spirits  distilled  in  1810,  from  foreign  and  domestic 
materials,  by  the  returns  of  the  marshalls,  (above  ^ye        caik. 
millions  from  molasses,)      ....  25,499,382 

Exported,  during  that  year,  spirits  distilled 

from  foreign  materials,        .  .  474,990 

do.       do.        from  domestic  materials,  133,S53 

: fJ08,W3 


Leaving  for  consumption,  24,^90,539 
The  average  quantity  of  spirits  imported  and  consum- 
ed, from  1801  to  1813,  inclusive,  was  6,834,878 

Making,                         .    .  31,r26,417 


A 


104 

about  four  and  a  half  gallons,  for  erery  pers9B,  then  in  At  United 
States.  We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining,  with  any  degree  of  accu- 
racy, the  quantity  of  spirits  distilled  in  the  United  States,  dther  from 
foreign  or  domestic  materials,  since  1810.  The  importation  and  con- 
sumption of  foreign  spirits,  of  late  years,  has  certainly  greatly  dimin- 
ished— the  quantity  imported  and  consumed  in  1833,  was  only  two 
millions  eight  hundred  and  seventy  four  thousand  five  hundred  and 
ninety  five  gallons. 

This,  has  been  made  up,  in  some  measure,  by  a  greater  importatibn 
and  distillation  of  molasses,  in  consequence  of  the  high  duties,  on  for- 
eign imported  spirits.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  tfte 
greaf  and  successful  exertions  lately  made,  to  prevent  the  evils  of  fn- 
temperancc,  have  greatly  lessened  the  consumption  of  ardent  spirita 
in  this  country. 

These  evils,  heretofore  deemed  irremediable,  had  become  so  great, 
not  merely  to  individuals,  but  to  society  in  general,  as  to  suggest  en- 
tire  abstinence,  as  the  only  certain  means  of  ultimately  preventing 
them. 

Influential  individuals,  in  dififerent  parts  of  the  United  States,  there^ 
fore,  have  set  the  example,  and  numerous  associations  have  beeo 
formed,  composed  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  persons,  upon  the 
plan,  of  abstaining  from  the  use  of  ardent  spirits,  except  as  a  medicine. 

The  appalling  facts,  brought  to  light  by  enquiries,  made,  in  conae* 
quence  of  these  associations,  have  given  a  decided  tone  to  ]{ublic  opin- 
ion, in  favor  of  the  principles  adopted  by  them.  These  enqoiriea 
have  demonstrated,  that  the  evils  of  intemperance  had  affected,  not 
merely  the  lives,  and  happiness  of  individuals,  but  the  morals,  intor- 
ests,  and  happiness  of  the  community  at  large,  to  a  greater  extent* 
than  any  one  ever  had,  or  could  before,  have  imagined-^that  not  only 
thousands,  but  tens  of  thousands  in  the  United  States,  had,  orery 
year,  become  the  victims  of  intemperance;  but  that  about  three  qnar^ 
ters  of  all  the  crimes,  and  all  the  pauperism  of  the  country,  bad  been 
occasioned  by  it.  The  success,  which  has  attended  these  humane  and 
patriotic  exertions,  has  been  unparalleled ;  and  permits  ns  to  hope, 
that  the  time  is  not  far  distant,  when  this  slow,  but  sure  pouon  will, 
like  other  poisons,  be  no  longer  used  in  the  United  States^  but  in  con- 
sequence of  the  prescription  of  physicians. 

But  we  must  return  from  this  digression,  and  infoun  the  reader, 
that  the  following  is  the  aggregate  value  of  all  the  exports,  the  pro- 
duce of  agriculture,  constituting  vegetable  food,  from  1802  to  1833  >— 


105 


tmn. 

Value. 

Ymn* 

▼■Ttur. 

IWZ    . 

.  812,700,000 

1818  . 

.  $19,048,00a 

]§03  . 

.  14,080,000 

1819  . 

.  10,473,000 

1804  . 

.  12,250,000 

1820  .  . 

8,401,000 

1806  . 

.  11,752,000 

1821  . 

6,750,486 

1806  . 

.  11,860,000 

1822  .  . 

7,976,249 

1807  . 

.  14,432,000 

1823  .  . 

8,151,892 

1808  . 

.   2,550,000 

1824  . 

8,868,484 

1809  . 

.   8,751,000 

1825  .  . 

7,626,718 

1810  . 

.  10,750,000 

1826  .  . 

7,627,257 

1811  . 

.  20,391,000 

1827  .  . 

8,222,140 

1812  . 

.  17,797,000 

1828  .  < 

8,093,432 

1813  . 

.  19,011,000 

1829  .  , 

9,709,762 

1814  . 

2,179,000 

• 

1830  .  . 

9,121,345 

195  . 

.  11,234,000 

1831  .  . 

13,997,472 

1816  . 

.  13,150,000 

1832  .  . 

8,352,404 

1817  . 

.  22,9r>l,000 

1833  . 

9,839,468 

PRODUCE   OF   ANIMALS. 

Beef,  pork,  tallow,  hams,  butter  and  cheese,  lard,  live  cattle,  and 
horses,  have  long  been  articles  of  export,  of  no  inconsiderable  value. 

The  following  quantities  of  beef  and  pork  were  exported  from  1791 
to  1833. 


TCWIL 

Beef— bbta. 

Pork-^bli. 

Year*. 

Beef— bbls. 

Pork-bbb. 

1791 

#62,771 

27,781 

1809 

28,555^ 

42,662 

1792 

74,638 

38,098 

1810 

47,699 

37,209 

1793 

75,106 

38,663 

1811 

76,743 

37,270 

1791 

100,h06 

49,442 

1812 

42,767 

22,746 

1795 

96,149 

88,193 

1813 

43,741 

17,337 

1796 

92,521 

73,881 

1814 

20,297 

4,040 

1797 

51,812 

40,125 

1816 

13,130 

9,073 

179N 

89,000 

33,115 

1810 

33,239 

19,280 

1999 

91,321 

52,208 

1817 

37,889 

14,462 

1800 

75,015 

65,167 

1818 

36,876 

17,663 

1801 

73,331 

70,779 

1819 

34,966 

28,173 

1^02 

61,520 

78,239 

1820 

53,191 

44,001 

1803 

77,9W 

96,602 

1821 

66,887 

66,647 

1801 

134,896 

111,532 

1822 

97,610 

68,362 

1S05 

115,532 

57,925 

1823 

61,418 

659i29 

1^06 

117,419 

36,277 

1824 

66,074 

67,229 

I'W 

81,209 

39,5M7 

1825 

88,026 

86,709 

180» 

20,101 

16,478 

1826 

72,886 

88,994 

u 


106 


Yean. 

Beef— bbl8. 

Pork— bbl8. 

Yean. 

Beef— bbte. 

Porii-^blt. 

1827 

90,685 

73,813 

1831 

60,770 

51,263 

1828 

66,640 

53,836 

1832 

• 

55,507 

88,625 

1829 

51,100 

59,539 

1833 

64,322 

105,870 

1830 

46,b42 

45,645 

The  value  of  the  exports,  the  produce  of  animals,  from  1803  la 
1833,  was  as  follows,  viz. 


Beef,  tallow,  hidf^B, 

Butter  nnd 

Pork,  bacon,  Inrd, 

IIorscH  and 

Years. 

and  live  cattle. 

choc«e. 

and  live  hoge. 

uiules. 

Sherp. 

1803 

91,145,000 

$585,000 

$1,890,000 

$460,000 

$55,000 

1804 

1,520,000 

490,000 

1,990,000 

270,000 

30,000 

1805 

1,545,000 

415,000 

1,960,000 

220,000 

1,500 

1806 

1,360,000 

481.000 

1,093,000 

321,000 

16,000 

1807 

1,108,000 

490,000 

1,157,000 

317,000 

14,000 

1808 

265,000 

196,000 

398,000 

105,000 

4,000 

1809 

425,000 

264,000 

1,001,000 

113,000 

8,000 

1810 

747,000 

318,000 

907,000 

185,000 

12,000 

1811 

1,195,000 

395,000 

1,002,000 

254,000 

20,000 

1812 

524,000 

329,000 

604,000 

191,000 

9,000 

1813 

539,000 

95,000 

457,000 

8,000 

2,000 

1814 

2^11,000 

59,000 

176,000 

1,000 

6,000 

1815 

407,000 

242,000 

498,000 

155,000 

30,000 

1816 

738,000 

223,000 

719,000 

364,000 

49.000 

1817 

845,000 

213,000 

537,000 

432;00Q 
280,000 

42,000 

1818 

648,000 

195,000 

754,000 

50,000 

1819 

598,000 

297,000 

1,009,000 

100,000 

21,000 

1820 

858,000 

302,000 

1,179,000 

85,000 

23,000 

1821 

698,323 

190,287 

1,354,116 

59,830 

^175 

1822 

^4,534 

221,041 

1,357,899 

93,753 

W,276 

1823 

739,461 

192,778 

1,291,322 

123,373 

15,029 

1824 

707,299 

204,205 

1,489,051 

213,396 

14,038 

1825 

930,465 

1M7,7H7 

1,832,679 

283,835 

20,027 

1826 

733,430 

207,765 

1,892,429 

2^47,543 

17,003 

1827 

772,636 

18^1,049 

1,555,698 

173,629 

13,586 

1828 

719,961 

176,351 

1,495,830 

185,&12 

7,499 

1829 

674,955 

176,205 

1,493,629 

207,868 

10,U4 

1830 

717,683 

142,370 

1,315,^5 

182,244 

22,110 

1831# 

829,982 

2f5l,796 

1,501,6^14 

218,015 

14,499 

1832 

774,087 

290,820 

1,9*28,196 

161,034 

22,385 

1833 

958,076 

2o8,'162 

2,151,558 

167,330 

21, 4M 

The  following  is  the  aggregate  value  of  these  articles,  from  1803 
10  1816. 


107 


YMra. 

Valaf. 

1803 

84,135,000 

1801 

4,300,000 

1805 

4,141,000 

1806 

3,274,000 

1807 

3,086,000 

1808 

968,000 

1809 

1,811,000 

Yean. 

Value. 

1810 

82,169,000 

1811 

2,866,000 

1812 

1,667,000 

16!3 

1,101,000 

1814 

482,000 

1815 

1,332,000 

1816 

2,093,000 

T}ie  ralue  of  the  exports,  the  produce  of  animals,  on  an  average 
of  years,  from  1821  to  lrt33,  was  about  82,500,000. 

Tables  Nos.  V,  VI,  VII  and  VIII,  shew  the  destination  of  Beef 
and  Poik,  exported  from  1800  to  1816,  and  from  1821  to  1833. 

TOBACCO. 

Tobacco  has  been  the  great  staple  of  the  states  of  Virginia  and 
Maryland,  from  their  tirst  settlement.  This  plant  is  a  native  of 
America,  and  was  introduced  into  England  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh, 
about  the  year  1581.  It  soon  got  into  general  use,  and  became  the  sub- 
ject of  regulation,  by  royal  proclamations  and  by  acts  of  Parliament. 

About  the  year  1624,  it  became  a  royal  monopoly,  and  afterwards* 
in  order  to  encourage  its  growth  in  the  Colonies,  and  thereby  increase 
the  rerenue  of  the  crown.  Parliament  prohibited  the  planting  of  it,  in 
England.  The  average  quantity  shii>ped  from  the  North  American 
Colonies,  to  the  Parent  country,  for  ten  years  preceding  the  year 
1709,  was  about  twenty  nine  millions  of  pounds. 

For  tome  years  prior  to  the  American  revolution,  about  eighty  five 
thoosand  hogsheads  were  exported,  then  valued  at  a  little  more  than 
foar  millions  of  dollars,  and  constituted  nearly  one  third  in  value,  of 
all  the  exports  of  the  British  North  American  Colonics.  The  quan- 
tity exported,  since  the  establisjhment  of  the  present  national  govern- 
ment, has  not  exceeded,  if  it  has  equalled,  the  quantity  exported  prior 
to  the  American  revolution,  althougli  with  other  articles  it  has  risen 
in  price.  The  average  annual  value  may  be  estimated,  at  about  six 
millions  of  dollars:  although  in  the  years  l><15,  1816,  1S17,  f818, 
1S19  and  1^)20,  the  average  value  wus  between  nine  and  ten  millions, 
occasioned,  in  part,  by  the  accumulation  of  the  quantity,  during  the  war 
of  t*^\2i  but  principally,  by  the  ^rreat  increase  in  price,  during  those 
years*  being  81^5  per  hoj:?*licad  in  l^I'i.  Frnin  1^2^)  to  IKJO,  tobac- 
co constituted,  about  one  ninth,  in  value,  of  all  the  domestic  exports 
of  the  United  States. 

It  finds  a  market,  principally,  in  (Ireat  Britain,  France,  Holland 
and  the  North  of  Elurope.     (See  Tables  No.  IX  and  X.) 


106 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  quantity  exported,  from  1*701  to 
1833,  and  its  value  since  1802. 


Ymn. 

Number  of  hbdi.    Valne.  • 

Yean. 

Number  of  hhds.    Value. 

1791 

101,272 

■.  ■ 

1813 

5,314 

•319,000 

1792 

112,428 

/"», 

1814 

3,125 

232,000 

1793 

59,947 

• 
• 

1815 

85,337 

8;235,00Jr 

1794 

76,826 

»   A 

1816 

69,241 

12,809,000 

1795 

61,050 

1 

1817 

62,3(55 

9.511,529 

-'    1796 

69,018 

1818 

a4,337 

10,241,301 

1797 

58,107 

1819 

69,427 

8,874,167 

^   1798 

68,567 

1820 

83,940 

8,118.188 

1799 

96,070 

1821 

66,858 

^lir798,046 

^    1800 
^    1801 

78,680 

1S22 

83,169 

6,380,020 

103,758 

1823. 

99,009 

6,437,627 

1802 

77,721 

•6,220,000 

1824 

77,883 

5,069,355 

1803 

86,291 

6,209,000 

1825 

75.984 

6,287,976 

1804 

1  >  '» 

83,343 

6,000,000 

1826 

64,098 

5,347,208 

\  *•   1805 

71,252 

6,341,000 

1827 

100,025 

6,816,140 

1806 

83,186 

6,572,000 

1828 

96,278 

5,480,707 

1807 

62,186 

5,470,000 

1829 

77,131 

5,185,370 

»  1808 

9,576 

26,000 

1830 

83,810 

5,833,112 

1809 

53,921 

3,774,000 

la^i 

86,718 

4,892,388 

1810 

84,134 

5,048,000 

1832 

106,806 

5,999,769 

il     1811 

35,828 

2,150,000 

1833 

83,153 

5,755»068 

1812 

26,094 

1,514,000 

COTTON 

1". 

• 

• 

If  /:>v. 

Cotton  is  a  native  of  the  tropical  regions,  in  every  quarter  of  the 
world.  It  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus,  as  growing  in  India,  at  the 
time  he  wrote  his  celebrated  history. 

It  was  found  among  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians,  on  the  discovery 
of  America  ;  and  among  the  latter,  the  manufacture  of  it  was  carried 
to  a  ^^considerable  extent.  Prior  to  tlic  American  revolution,  it  was 
cultivated  in  the  Southern  colonies,  for  domestic  use.  Soon  aAer 
the  peace  of  1783,  small  quantities  were  exported  from  Georgia.^ 
It  was  not,  however,  cultivated,  to  much  extent,  for  exportation,  in 
the  United  States,  until  about  the  year  1791  ur  1792. 

Soon  after  that  period,  it  became  the  great  staple  of  South  Caro- 
lina and  Georgia,  and  lately  of  the  new  States,  at  the  South  west; 
and  is  now  the  most  valuable  of  all  the  export<«  of  the  United  States. 


•  Ramsay '<  History  of  South  Carolina. 


109 

American  cotton  has  been  generally  known,  by  the  names  of  Sea 
Island  and  Upland.  The  former  grows  along  the  sea-coast,  has  a 
black  seed,  long  staple,  and  is  easily  cleaned  or  separated,  from  the 
teed;  the  latter  grows  on  the  upland,  at  a  distance  from  the  coast,  haa 
a  green  seed,  short  staple,  and  before  the  invention  of  a  machine,  for 
that  purpose,  was  so  difficult  to  be  cleaned  or  separated,  from  the  seed, 
•8  to  be  hardly  worth  the  trouble  and  expense  of  cultivation.  This 
machine  was  invented  by  Mr.  Eli  Whitney,  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  ' 
m  gentleman  of  liberal  education,  and  of  great  mechanical  talents, 
who  was  ac(^^nta]ly  in  Georgia,  in  17()3.  This  machine  soon 
enriched  the  southern  planter,  and  enabled  him  to  cultivate,  to  the 
greatest  advantage,  one  of  the  most  valuable  staples,  in  the  world. 

It  has  rarely,  if  ever,  occurred,  that  the  invention  of  a  single  ma- 
chine, has  given  employment  to  so  many  millionit  of  people,  and  has 
added  so  much  to  the  real  wealth  and  resources  of  a  nation.  That  of 
Arkwright,  for  spinning  cotton,  and  of  Fulton  for  propelling  vessels 
by  steam,  can  alone,  in  these  respects,  be  compared  with  it. 

These  inventions  haw;  done  more,  to  increase  the  wealth  and  re- 
sources of  the  countries,  to  which  the  inventors  rcnpectivcly  belong- 
ed, than  all  other  inventions  of  modem  times.  They  have  contributed 
more,  however,  as  generally  happens,  in  such  cases,  to  the  interest  of 
their  respective  countries,  than  to  that,  of  the  inventors  themselves.  Mr. 
Arkwright,  indeed,  after  struggling  with  many  difficulties,  was  finally 
rewarded  with  a  handsome  fortune.  But  it  must  ever  be  a  subject  of 
deep  regret,  that  Fulton  died  poor,  and  left  his  children  dependent  on 
charity,  for  support. 

Mr.  Whitney  obtained  a  Patent  for  his  invention,  at  an  early  peri- 
od, under  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  the  benefits  of  which  he  was 
to  share  equally,  with  his  partner  in  the  business,  Mr.  Miller.     South 
Carolina  gave  them  $50,000,  for  the  right  of  using  the  machine  in  that 
state ;  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee,  made  them  some  compensation 
for  the  same  privilege.     But,  in  the  State  of  (leorgia,  where  the 
benefit  of  the  invention  was  the  greatest,  Mr.  Whitney's  right  to  the 
iarention  was  disputed,  and  his  machine  was  used  by  the  people  of 
that  state,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  individuals,  without  making  him 
any  componsatton.     He  was,  tlierefore,  compelled  to  have  recourse  to 
the  judicial  tribunals  for  redress ;  owing,  however,  to  a  defect  in  the 
first  patent  law,  and  the  powerful  interest  opposed  to  him,  his  first 
ittits  entirely  failed ;  and  before  he  was  able,  under  a  new  patent  law, 
made,  in  some  measure,  to  reach  his  peculiar  case,  to  obtain  a  decis- 
ion ia  his  favor,  thirteen  years  of  his  patent  had  expired.     This  decis- 


J 


no 

ioD  was  obtained  before  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States,  in 
which  Judge  Johnson  of  South  Carolina,  lately  deceased,  presided. 
In  his  charge  to  the  Jury,  the  Judge  did  ample  justice  to  Mr.  Whit- 
ney, as  the  original  inventor,  as  well  as  to  the  great  importance  and 
utility  of  the  invention  itself. 

No  inconsiderable  part  of  the  money,  received  from  other  states, 
was  expended,  in  this  long  contest  with  the  Georgians.  The  final  de- 
*  cision  in  his  favor,  came  too  late,  to  enable  him  to  derive  any  advant- 
age from  it.  In  1812,  Mr.  Whitnry  applied  to  Congress  for  a  renew- 
al of  his  patent,  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  and  a  Committee  of  the 
House  of  Representatives,  made  a  report  in  his  favor;  butj  in  conse- 
quence of  the  strong  opposition  of  Georgia,  and  the  peculiar  situation 
of  Congress,  then  preparing  for  war  with  Great  Britain,  the  subject 
was  not  finally  acted  upon.  Georgia,  therefore,  has  had  the  immense 
benefit  of  this  invention,  without  making  any  compensation  to  the  in- 
ventor. And  we  would  here  observe,  that,  during  the  long  continu- 
ance of  that  disease,  which  finally  terminated  his  existence,  Mr.  Whit- 
ney invented  an  improvement  in  his  machine,  which  he  was  satisfied^ 
as  he  has  often  informed  the  writer  of  these  ])ages,  would  so  much 
facilitate  tlie  cleaning  of  upland  cotton,  as  to  benefit  the  planter,  about 
two  cents  on  every  pound.  He  would  not,  however,  apply  for  a  pat- 
enk-for  this  improvement,  unless  he  could  previously  receive^  from 
those,  who  would  be  benefitted  by  it,  the  most  unequivocal  security, 
that  his  children  should  have  some  remuneration  for  it,  without  the 
trouble  and  expense  of  an  infinity  of  law  suits.  By  his  death,  both 
his  country,  and  his  family,  lost  the  advantage  of  this  improvement. 

The  value  of  this  invention  to  the  United  States,  can  only  be  duly 
appreciated  but  by  adverting  to  the  facts,  that  in  lb07,  thirteen  yeara 
after  this  machine  got  into  use,  fifty  five  millions  of  pounds  of  up- 
land cotton,  were  exported,  valued  at  911,500,000;  and  that,  on  an 
average  of  four  years,  from  1^27  to  1S30,  inclusive,  more  than  two 
hundred  and  seventy  millions  of  pounds  were  annually  exported,  Tal- 
ued  at  about  824,000,000  in  each  year,  constituting  nearly  one  half 
of  the  average  value  of  all  the  domestic  exports  during  these  four 
years ;  and  that  in  1833,  the  quantity  exported,  was  three  hundred  and 
thirteen  millions  five  hundred  and  fifty  five  thousand  stx  hundred  and 
aeventeen  pounds,  valued  at  about  $32,000,000.  It  should,  also,  be 
borne  in  mind,  that,  during  this  period,  from  sixty  to  seventy  millions ; 
and  in  1833,  not  less  than  about  one  hundred  millions  of  pounds,  of 
this  species  of  cotton,  was  manufactured  in  the  l-nited  States. 


Ill 


^-^  The  rapid  increase  of  the  culture  of  cotton,  in  this  country,  will 
appear,  from  tlie  following  account  of  the  quantity  exported,  from 
1791  to  1833,  and  the  value  of  that,  of  domestic  growth,  since  1802. 


rotionof  allkindi* 
rean.     exp<»rtiMl  fruiu  1791 
U>  1:4.M— Jhitllhlll. 

r«»tl<>n  of  nil  kinilR     Value  of  cot- 
Years.   «'xpiirtid  froui  1701    ton  of  dotnca-             J 
tu  IKM— piiunds.       tic  growth.             ' 

1791 

]H9,316 

1708      9,3(50,003 

,       1792 

1:H328 

171K)      9,332,2(53 

•1793 

4S7,(K)0 

'TSoO     17,789,803 

^'      1791      1,001,760 

IHOl     20,911,201                          1 

^     1793      6,276,300 

1802    27,501,075  $5,250,000 

1796      6,10(J,729 

1803    41,105,(523     7,920,000 

1797      3, 

788,429 

1804    38,118,041     7,650,000 

Cotton  of  domestic  growth  exported,  from  1805  to  1833. 

-J       Tean. 

Soa  blaml— fiounds. 

rjilaiul— pmindf. 

Value. 

1803      . 

.^      8,7h7,(559 

2^),(502,t28 

99,145,000 

180(S 

.*       8,09<J,a« 

29,5(51,383 

8,332,000 

1807 

8,026,011 

53,01»,418 

•                       • 

14,232,000 

1808 

949,a"jl 

T  9,681,391 

2,221,000 

1809 

8,634,213        . 

42,32(5,^12 

8,516,000 

1810 

8,(501,078     ^  ■ 

\       81,657,384 

15,108,000  ;  .  j 

1811 

8,029,570    '    . 

64,028,(560  , 

9,652,000';    '^ 

l*iI2 

4,367,806 

24,519,571   i. 

3,080,000         * 

1813 

4,134,H49 

14,975,1(57/'     , 

2,.324,000 

1814 

2,520,:«S 

15,268,669/ 

2,683,000 

1815 

8,419,951 

74,r>4%796 

17,529,000 

1H16 

9,900,:}2t) 

72,04(5,790 

24,106,000 

1817 

KIOI.SHO 

77,547,448 

22,(528,000 

1818 

6,437,3:i5 

.-    86,01.3,H43 

31,334,000 

1819 

7, 14%775 

80,508,270 

21,0H2,000 

ISiO 

\\MK^SS\:y 

11(5,291,1.37 

.      22,309,000 

1821 

ll,314,0(m 

1 13,.>49,339 

20,137,4H4 

1H22 

11,230,(533 

133,121,460 

24,033,058 

IH83 

.       12,i:^5,()SH 

161,3s0,3vj 

20,445,520 
2l,im,401 

18^ 

9,523,722 

132,s  13,911 

1825 

9,6(5.5,278 

UV(5,7Hl,r>2t) 

36,H4(5,(VI9 

1«Q6  ■ 

5,9r2,s32 

19H„5(52,5a3 

.      25,025,214 

\>fn 

15,I1(N71H 

279,1(59,317 

29,:J59,645 

IrtjH 

ll,2svl19 

199,302,011 

22,487,229 

iNiSi 

12.S53307 

.       232,00:J,S79 

2(5,575,31 1 

1N30 

8,117.163 

.      290,311,937 

.      29,674,883 

1831 

8,311,7(52 

2(V8,66^022 

25,289,492 

4 


'/ 


118 


Yean. 

Sea  bland— pounds. 

Upland-'ponnda. 

VakM. 

1832 

8,743,373 

313,471,749 

.    831,7^06^ 

1833 

.       11,142,987 

313,553,617 

36,19140& 

Tables  No8.  XI,  XII,  XIII,  and  XIY,  show  the  countries,  to 
which  cotton  has  been  exported,  from  1800,  to  1833.  Great  Britain 
has  consumed  much  the  greatest  part  of  it.  In  1807,  more  than 
fifty  three  millions,  went  to  that  country,  leaving  about  thirteen, 
for  all  other  parts  of  the  world;  and  in  1830,  more  than  seven 
millions  of  Sea  Island,  and  more  than  two  hundred  millions  of  up- 
land cotton  wenl,  to  England  and  Scotland ;  and  about  seventy  four 
millions  to  France. 

The  late  increase  in  the  culture,  manufacture  and  consumption  of 
cotton,  not  only  in  this,  bnt  in  other  countries,  has  been  very  great ; 
and  to  trace  its  progress,  is  not  a  matter  of  idle  or  useless  curiosity. 
From  1768  to  1779,  the  quantity  of  cotton  annually  ^ported,  into 
England,  did  not  exceed  about  five  millions  of  pounds.  From  1784 
to  1787,  the  quantity  imported,  into  Great  Britain,  was  as  follows. 

Yeara.  Pounds.  Ycare.  Poanda. 

1784  .        11,280,338  1786        .        19,151,867 

1785  17,992.888  1787        .        22,600,000 

That  imported  in  1787,  is  supposed  to  have  come,  from  the  follow- 
ing places. 

Poonda. 

British  West  Indies,       ....  6,600,000 


French  and  Spanish  Colonies,   . 
Dutch,     .  .  do. 

Portuguese,         .  do. 

East  Indies,  procured  from  Ostend, 
Smyrna  and  Turkey, 


In  1800,  the  quantity  imported  into  England,  was 
Into  Scotland,  .... 


6,000,000 
1,700,000 
2,500,000 
100,000 
5,700,000 

22,600,000 

42,806,507 
13,204,225 


Making      56,010,732* 

In  1807,  the  following  number  of  bales  of  cotton  was  imported 
into  London,  Liverpool  and  Glasgow.f 


•  MacphersoQ^s  Annals  of  Commerce. 

t  Sir  Alexander  Baring's  inquiry  relative  to  the  British  orders  in  comicil, 
&e.'1806. 


113 


From  the  United  States, 

The  British  West  Indies,     . 

The  Colonies  conquered  from  the  Dutch, 

Portugal,       .... 

East  Indies, 

All  other  parts, 


Bale*, 

171,267 
28,969 
43,651 
18,961 
11,409 
8,390 

282,667 


The  following  quantity  was  exported,  from  the  United  States  to 
Great  Britain,  from  1800  to  1816. 

Pounds. 

16,179,513 


Yean. 

1800 
1801 
1802 
1808 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1907 
1808 


18,953,065 
. .  23,473,925 
27,767,307 
25,770,748 
32,571,073 
2^1,256,457 
53,180,211 
7,992,593 

Quantity  and  value  exported  to  Great  Britain,  from  1821  to  1833, 
distinguishing  the  amount  of  Sea  Island  and  Upland. 


Yean. 

Pound*. 

1809 

13,365,987 

1810 

36,171,915 

1811 

46,872,452 

1812 

26,087,179  ^   / 

1813 

•     •    • 

1814 

.  ,'  ; 

1815 

45,669,092 

1816 

57,793,213 

Team 

I8S3 


0ca  bland— pounds. 

10,847,433 

10,622,758 

11,489,132 

9,217,103 

9,278.480 

5,112,818 

13,480,287 

9,488,931 

11,032,037 

7,022,962 

7,980,224 

7,331,229 

9,422,732 


Upland — pounds. 

76,871,393 
103,841,388 
128,695,065 

91,963,563 
131,434,454 
128.766,003 
199.227,194 
137,343,921 
163,527,509 
202,807,459 
212,836,622 
221,676,043 
228,802,596 


Value  of  boUL 

914,141,576 
19,752,286 
16,217,111 
15,300,132 
30,463,868 
15,829,651 
20,872,299 
15,626,910 
17,514,389 
20,678,627 
20,117,355 
22,429,050 
26,253,205 


As  the  direct  intercourse,  hctwcen  the  United  States  and  Great 

^Huin  was  open,  but  a  part  of  the  year  1810,  about  thirty  six  roill- 

Voiu  of  pounds  only  was  shipped  directly  to  that  country.     During 

^t  year,  however,  more  than  Ave  millions  was  shipped  for  Sweden^ 

15 


..  A 


I    ► 


if" 


I     ■ 


*>  ^ 


A 


1 

4 


114 


** 
s 


'■> 


i 

) 


"N 


Sl^ 


..     \ 


\ 


■  -.  K. 


r 

J'     §    ■* 


.  »^ 


<4      i 


(^ 


more  than  fourteen  millions  for  Denmark  and  Norway,  about  nine 
for  Spain,  Portugal  and  Madeira,  four  millions  for  the  Azores,  and 
ten  millions  for  the  Floridas  ;  the  most  of  uhich,  no  doubt,  found  its 
way  to  Great  Britain. 

Europe  has  been,  and  always  must  be  dependent  upon  other  quar- 
ters of  the  world,  for  a  supply  of  cotton.  Jlcr  climate  is,  generally, 
too  cold  for  the  production  of  this  plant.  Some  small  quantities  have 
been  produced  in  the  southern  parts  of  Spain  and  Italy.  The  French 
government,  during  the  reign  of  Bonaparte,  attempted  its  culture  in 
France  ;  and  for  that  purpose,  sent  for  seed  to  the  United  States*and 
other  countries ;  and  offered  a  premium  of  one  franc  (about  20  cents) 
for  every  kilogramme*  (two  pounds)  of  cotton  raised  and  cleaned, 
ready  for  spinning.  The  experiment,  however,  failed.  France,  at 
that  time,  received  a  great  part  of  her  cotton  fabrics,  especially  those 
of  a  finer  kind,  from  Great  Britain.  In  180<>,  the  value  of  cotton 
goods  carried  from  that  country  to  France,  was  03,000,000  of  francs, 
or  about  $13,000,000.* 

The  average  quantity  of  all  the  cotton  imported  into  France,  from 
1790  to  1806,  was  only  fifteen  millions  seven  hundred  and  ninety  four 
thousand  and  eight  hundred  pounds. 

From  1801  to  1816,  she  received,  from  the  United  States  the  fol- 
lowing quantity. 

Tears. 

1801 

1802  . 

1803  . 
1804 
1806 
1806 
1807 
1808 


Pounds. 

Years. 

Pnunils. 

844,r^ 

1809 

.     none  dir^iH, 

1,907,819 

ISIO 

do. 

3,83 1,&«) 

1811      . 

do. 

6,W6,818 

1812      . 

.       .        913,433 

4,604,329 

1813 

.    10,200,318 

7,082,118 

1814 

.     1,661,085 

6,114,368 

1815 

.       .   19,978,143^ 

2,087,450. ) 

1816 

.       .    18,024,66rv 

The  quantity  and  val 
1833,  distinguishinfiMca 


Ymfb. 

1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 


k 

IMbttotton  shipped  for  France,  from  1821  to 
rtslsid  from  upland. 


{land. 

496,733 

65^,977 

647,656 

1,278,619 


Uiiland. 

26,943,275 
20,882,227 
24,345,913 
39,419,523 


Value  of  both. 

94,531,861 
3,927,6(M 
3,267,461 
6,436,497 


*  Lasteyric's  Du  Cottonier  ct  dc  sa  culture. 


■  ( 

•V- 


115 


Tear*. 

8eakland. 

Upland. 

Value  of  both. 

1825 

.       2^,261 

29,708,886 

85,915,639 

1826 

.       W3,649 

61,321,795 

8,173,393 

1827 

.     1,646,489 

67,8r>4,191 

7,349,304 

1828 

.     1,792,268      . 

51,681,356 

5,902,096 

1829 

.     1,796,836 

65,406,982 

6,830,766 

1030 

.     1,114,850      . 

.      73,991,093 

7,646,047 

1831 

330,912      . 

45.797,575 

4,2^,739 

.    1832 

.     1,276,004 

76,191,603  ^^^i; 

"   7,722,875 

'    1833 

1,713,265      . 

73,119,894 

a846,359 

/ 


Duriog  the  continuance  of  the  embargo  and  commercial  restrictions, 
and  during  the  war  of  1812,  between  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain,  the  manufacture  of  cotton,  as  well  as  of  wool  and  other  arti«^ 
cles,  increased  very  rapidly  in  this  country. 

Additions  were  made  to  old  manufacturing  establishments,  and  many 
new  ones  made,  in  almost  every  part  of  the  union. 

On  the  return  of  peace,  these  establishments  were  much  depressed, 
in  consequence  of  the  vast  influx  of  foreign  goods,  and  especially, 
from  Great  Britain  and  the  East  Indies.  The  American  manufactur- 
ers, therefore,  applied  to  Congress  for  aid  and  protection,  by  the  im- 
position of  additional  duties,  on  foreign  cotton  and  woollen  goods;  and 
in  the  tariff,  established  in  1816,  duties  were  imposed  on  woollen,  col- 
ton,  and  some  other  foreign  articles,  to  aflford  encouragement  and  pro- 
tection to  the  American  manufacturer.  This  system  has  been  since 
continued,  and  its  eflfects  on  the  manufacturing,  and  other  interests  of 
the  United  States,  will  be  noticed,  in  a  sut>sequcnt  chapter. 

The  other  articles  of  export,  the  produce  of  agriculture,  are  flax 
seed,  indigo,  flax,  6lc.  The  most  considerable  of  these  is  flax  seed. 
The  quantity  of  this  kind  of  seed  exported,  since  1791,  has  varied,  from 
about  two  hundred,  to  three  and  four  hundred  bunhcls,  annually;  and 
of  late  years  has  considerably  diminished.  Large  quantities  of  In- 
digo, were  formerly  produced  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia;  but 
since  the  introduction  of  cotton,  the  culture  of  it  has  almost  ceased 
in  those  States. 

MANUFACTURED  ARTICLES  EXPORTED. 

Manufactured  articles  have  long  constituted  a  part,  and  for  a  few 
vears  ]»st,  no  inconsiderable  part  of  American  exports.  The  manu- 
factures exported,  are  derived, 

1st.  From  domestic  materials. 
2d.  From  foreign  materials. 

\ 


\ 


V 


\ 


ft 

I 


i 


116 


Previous  to  1826,  the  general  value  only,  of  manufactured  article* 
exported,  was  ascertained,  distinguishing  the  value  of  those  derived 
from  domestic  and  foreign  materials.  Since  that  period,  the  value  of 
the  several  articles  themselves  has  been  ascertained. 

The  value  of  manufactures  exported,  from  1803  to  1816. 


1803 
1804 
1805 
1806 
1807 
1808 
1809 
1810 
1811 
1812 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1816 


From  domestic 
materials 

9790,000 
1,650,000 
1,570,000 
1,889,000 
1,652,000 
309,000 
1,266,000 
1,359,000 
2,062,000 
1,135,000 
372,000 
233,200 
1,321,000 
1,415,000 


From  forei^ 
materials. 

8565,000 

450,000 

721,000 

818,000 

468,000 

35,000 

240,000 

558,000 

314,000 

220,000 

18,000 

13,100 

232,000 

340,000 


Value  of  boUL 

$1,355,000 

2,100,000 

2,300,000 

2,707,000 

2,120,000 

344,000 

1,506,000 

1,917,000 

2,376,000 

1,355,000 

390,000 

246,300 

1,553,000 

1,755,000 


The  value  of  manufactures  from  domestic  and  foreign  materials, 
and  those  which  are  uncertain,  from  1817  to  1825,  inclusive. 


Domestic 

Years.  materials. 

1817  91,517,000 

1818  2,039,000 

1819  1,624,000 

1820  1,616,000 

1821  1,827,146 

1822  2,229,604 

1823  2,152,887 

1824  2,934,948 

1825  2,774,465 


Forelifn 
materials. 

9685,000 
400,000 
320,000 
403,000 
435,476 
253,388 
204,640 
329,473 


Uncertain. 

9349,000 
338,000 
301,000 
3^,000 
492,009 
637,978 
782,071 
1,576,962 
2,560,682 


Total  Tslue. 

92,551,000 
2,777,000 
2,245,000 
2,343,000 
2,764,631 
3,121,030 
3,139,598 
4,841,383 
5,729,797 


394,660 

An  account  of  the  various  manufactured  articles^  exported,  with 
their  value,  in  the  years  1827, 1828,  1829, 1830, 1831,  1832  and  1833, 
will  be  found  in  Table  No.  XV. 

The  total  value,  for  each  year,  from  1826  to  1833,  was  as  follows,  viz. 

Tears.  Value.  Years.  Value. 


1826   . 

.  96,100,985 

1830 

.  96,268,131 

1827   . 

.  6,680,225 

1831   . 

.  7,147,364 

1828   . 

.  6,241,391 

1832 

.  6,461,774 

1829   . 

.  6,025,200 

1833   . 

.  6,023,922 

117 


It  win  be  noticed,  that  the  amount  of  domestic  gold  and  silver  coins, 
IS  included  in  the  above  account  of  the  exports  of  manufactured  ar- 
ticles ;  if  this  item  is  excluded,  the  value  of  domestic  manufactures, 
exported,  in  each  of  the  above  years,  will  be  as  follows : — 


Yean. 

Value. 

Years. 

Value. 

1826 

.  95,495,130 

1830 

.  95,320,980 

1827 

.  5,636,651 

1831   . 

5,088,890 

1828 

.  5,548,354 

1832 

.  5,050,833 

1829 

.  5,412,314 

1833   . 

.  6,557,080 

Having  completed  a  view  of  the  domestic  exports  of  the  United 
States,  we  here  present  the  following  table,  exhibiting  the  value  of 
tbe  produce  of  the  sea,  of  the  forest,  of  agriculture,  and  of  mannfae- 
tores,  exported,  in  each  year,  from  1803  to  1833,  by  which  the  pro- 
portion of  each,  can  be  seen,  in  one  view,  during  that  period. 

Yean.  Of  Uie  aea.  Of  Ui«  forest  Of  africulture.        Of  manufacturat. 

1803   92,635,000   94,850,000   932,995,000   91,355,000 


1804 

3,420,000 

1805 

2,884,000 

1806 

3,116,000 

1807 

2,804,000 

1808 

832,000 

1809 

1,710,000 

1810 

1,481,000 

1811 

1,413,000 

1812 

935,000 

1813 

301,000 

1814 

188,000 

1815 

912,000 

1816 

1,331,000 

1817 

1,671,000 

1818 

2,187,000 

1819 

2,024,000 

1820 

2,251,000 

1821 

1,499)188 

1822 

1,384,589 

1823 

1,658,224 

1824 

1,610,990 

1825 

1,595,065 

1826 

1,473,388 

1827 

1,575,332 

1828 

1,693,980 

4,630,000 
5,261,000 
4,861,000 
5,476,000 
1,399,000 
4,583,000 
4,978,000 
5,286,000 
2,701,000 
1,107,000 
570,000 
3,910,000 
7,293,000 
6,484,000 
5,691,000 
4,927,000 
5,304,000 
3,794,341 
3,815,542 
4,498,911 
4,889,646 
4,938,^9 
3,951,250 
3,343,970 
3,889,61 1 


30,890,000 
31,562,000 
30,125,000 
37,832,000 

6,746,000 
23,234,000 
33,502,000 
35,556,000 
24,555,000 
23,119,000 

5,013,000 
38,910,000 
53,354,000 
57,222,000 
62,897,000 
41,452,000 
41,485,000 
35,407,992 
41,272,379 
37,646,726 
38,995,198 
54,237,751 
41,253,001 
47,065,143 
38,610,924 


2,100,000 
2,300,000 
2,707,000 
2,120,000 
344,000 
1,506,000 
1,907,000 
2,376,000 
1,355,000 
399,000 
246,300 
1,553,000 
1,755,000 
2,551,000 
2,777,000 
2,245,000 
2,342,000 
2,754,631 
3,121,030 
3,139,598 
4,841,383 
5,729,797 
6,100,986 
6,680,225 

6,24131 


i 


118 


Yetrt. 

Of  tbeiea. 

Of  the  fofMt 

Of  tgricoltora. 

Of  maaiifaetani. 

1829 

$1,817,100 

$3,681,759 

$43,954,584 

$6,025,200 

1830 

1,725,270 

4,192,004 

46,977,332 

6,258,131 

1831 

1,889,472 

4,263,477 

47,261,433 

7,147,364 

1832 

2,&58,538 

4,347,794 

49,416,183 

6,461,774 

1833 

2,402,469 

4,906,339 

55343,421 

6,923,922 

On  an  average  of  eight  years,  from  1803  to  1811,  the  produce  of 
agriculture  constituted  about  three  quarters,  in  value,  of  all  the  domes- 
tic exports  of  the  United  States ;  of  the  forest,  about  one  ninth ;  of  the 
sea,  about  one  fifteenth ;  and  of  manufactures,  about  one  twentieth ; 
and,  on  the  average  of  ten  years,  from  1821  to  1830,  the  produce  of 
agriculture  constituted  a  little  more  than  three  quarters,  in  value,  of 
the  same  exports ;  of  the  manufactures,  about  one  twelfth ;  of  the  for« 
est,  about  one  thirteenth ;  and  of  the  sea,  about  one  thirtieth. 


119 


i 


i 


^. 


k 


o 
P 


o 


f 


^  f^  r-  01  QD  ^ 

Ci  .  kO  .  •-<  ©I  '^J*  »^ 

^  p^  CO  Oi  50  lO 

^  ^  ^       •%       •%       ^ 

©I  «  »^  ©I  Ci  o 


Oi  Oi  QD  ^N  ^  Oi 

5i  ^  r-  <o  0^  CO 

r\        0\        0\        0\        0\        r\ 

^  O^  '^  QD  CO 
CO  CO  '^  ^ 


•  CO  ^  o  ^  o 
^  Oi  r-  ©I  CO 

•-I        ^     •        05  »15  -^  ^ 


CO  (N    ^      .^ 


CO  '^  t*  »o 
^  00  ^  CO 

»x  ^  ^  ^  v\  «% 

^  CO  ^  r»  '^  ^ 


01      CO  r»  ^  Ci  Ci 
s*    •  5?  t!  ^  "-"  ^ 

Oi       Ci  00  O  ^  Tf 

r-      ^F-<ior-oo©i-^ 

•  CO        »-^  C<  Tf  CO  ©I 


©I  OGD  CO  o^ 

•S  (N  •»  (N  ^  ^ 

©I  Oi  CO  ^^00 
00  '^  ^  o>  0< 


si 

CO 


00 


S©l  ©I  50  00 
,  ^  115  PM  o 

lo     ;o  i^  00  ;o 

^  ^  m^  «^  «^ 

•s 


Rgg"* 


115  50  ^  r» 

CO  00  »^ 


a 

i-N  115  CO 

v\  v\  v^  v\  ^  ^  ^ 

t-  CO  '^  ©I  CO  5  ^ 

o  o  CO  ©I  ©5  ^ 


op    .  ©I 

00        ^ 

^     •  CO 


CO 

•  CO 


$s 


o 

^  115  r- 


co    •      io  o 


^  X  CO  '^J'  -^ 

r-  ^  1(5  o  "^^ 

O  CO  0<  O)  o 

rs        rs        «\        VN        VH 

CO  Tf  »-N  Q  CO 
Ci  lO  ^  iO 


©r 

00 

©I 


.  ^    .  ^ 


o 


©I 


o  'T  »^  lO 

kC  ©I  O  "S" 
»15  CO  00  O 


=  .g 


©I 

00 


•S  -2 


^  O  <^  O) 


00  r-  Tf 

^  50  Tf 


CO 
CO 


"^  lO  CO  00 

v\        rs        •% 

Tf  ©I  CO 
©I  CO 


^  l^  ^ 

^  ^  Ci 
•  p^  lO  i« 


00  ^  lO  ^  ID 
GO  P  i6  kid 
l^  ©I  l^  o 

..        rs        •%        (N        ^ 

O  kO  00  p  o 

r*  00  ©I  ©I  ^ 


o 

CO  — 
•  O  f^ 


•  s*^ 


Ci  01  -«  P^ 
l^  •-<  Ci  ^ 
kl5  <0  '^  © 

.  ^  VV  VN  •% 

SCO  Oi  t* 


CO 
.  CO  -^ 
?0  k.0 


Oi  CO  "00 '00" 

•N         •%        r»        •% 

gkjpww 


c 


xn 

c 


3  ti^ 


to  t3   w 

\  Qi    O    G    GZS   a 
i  ^    ^    O    cs    O    3 


.S  -- 

3    if; 

«^ 

on 


CO       • 
O 

|i 

§« 
E    . 
•c  e 

E   „ 
<  EP  . 

•c  5  e 


•  cs 


CO 

O 


CO 

C 


CO 

> 


f2  o 


CO 

O 


g    C  •£    3    Q   ♦-    g* 


£  (A^dd  CU  SS  ^  U 


.2  D-  a.5  ^  ^  3 


S) 
^ 

u 
^ 


190 


"^  00  p  *-    •  00  i^  Oi  OD^  CO  «  G«  §  in  p  eo  o 

-if  fM  e!|  ^        O^  iO  ^  lO -^  Gsl  CO  Oi  ^  Oi  W  ^  l^ 
115  lO  ^  Tf ^  -.*  .-. 


(N        CO 


O  COCi  ^  CO 

(N  '^  ^  l^  © 

01  »^  l^  f-N 


^  O  (N  ^  "^00 

^   O   O  Tf  »^ 


"^  00  01  ^ 


io  ^  r- 

O  »15 
00  o 


S^  ;0  00  CO 
lO  ^  lO  <o 


^  r»  ic  r»  o  fco  01 

i»  ;o  Tf  "^  ^  r- 


M 

P 

H 

O 


H 


09 

tm 

u 

& 

I 

o 

(S4 


cg-cgcua^M 


121 


o 

< 


& 
I 

O 
fa 


S 


O       Ot        C*  ^  •^  O  O  ^^  OD  OQ  ^^       ^^ 


*  s  -SJSSS;"!^ 


e 


g 


CO  ^  o  lO  ?o  Q  2!*^liO  ^  ^  S!  ^ 

2    g'"2ft8S^Sf3 


CO 

IS 


FT 

o 


if 


CO 


^    2 


o 


CO  oo 


^co  O 


qdS 


X) 

s 


S"S'S^E^ 


tfS^sJg' 


S  lo  s  «-• 


O  lO  CD  «-•       O 


^  Tf  lO 


8*S 


r 


<D  *^       li^       Tp  CO 


1^  dS       O  T^  ?1!  2  €0 

O  ^     .  ^  <^  O^  9  ^ 


•  S     SR     '^  ^  S  S  t^  CO  o  OD 

^3      gD^©iiooiOi^ip5P  ©.^  ^  ®^  !fi 


CDiO 


S2 


*S26 


k 


P  P  00  cr^ 


Q 
C«       O     ,  CO  «^ 

<S  ^  OS 


00       CO        X  CO 


•^  ^  »o  -^ 


Cb  CO  ^  CO  0 

^  ^  lO  1-4  ^ 


IIIIl 


•>      ^      •>  •>     _,- 


CI  00^ 

^       »       •> 


CO  p  lO      ci  d  lO  lO  X 


is  .ggg= 


w  ;*2      .  lO  lO  _^ 

^  CO  i^  f^  \Q  ^m 

1-1  •        ^       ^  lO^ 


CC^«^*«^55'5'!R2?^ 


15^ 


"T" 


9 


^        QD       POOf*^«*^W^^C0C0       OiP< 

8  -i    ??2J«S      "    ^«^«2  -l]:!^ 


122 


^        CM  O                    G«  •-  00 

^    -COO    •    •    •  00  r^  o    •    •    •    • 

*                          00       o  ot                o  o  o 

•        •••••                 •                          •••                                  •••• 

• 

0>     '  G^     •  O  Oi  O     •  ©<  O  ©<  CO  O  CN  -^  o  o  ©♦ -^     • 

• 

0« 

i 

TTOr*         C«OOOOOiO«t^OOOG<CO 
OO-H         C<0<Cp00C0(M00OO<0C0 

^                    ^                    ^        tf\  ^^            •»        ^        #^        ^        ^                    ^ 

•     •     •     *            ^     •  CO             0* 

G< 

i 

•^     •     -i^OO  —  COr^GOOOOOOOCD     'CO-^     • 

0*           r^oDocooc^^»o»-oootx>      i>ci 

©<              CO        CO        a  rf        CO^GI^O 

•               •       •                                   ^^                                                               •                       • 

1 

<o      CO  r^  r*  ro  G<  ci  o^  0'Tf»«0"^r*^Tj--* 
•  r^    •  o  CO  o  *o  t^  o  o#*  oi-"Or^»^cNOr^o 

i«         ^  O  00  t>  O  -^  O^    OOCO'^OOOCOOt 
^00     ^        0^«0-»'^0     ^C0<O^C0G<         •^-H 

No.  HI. 
-Tierces. 

i 

o           ooo'Nr^oo      cooooooi'^'^r^r^ 

•O      •      •G«<00'^i«r^C^     •C0-^G<<N»000'^CO 
O               OOCk-^OO         O^CiOOOG^-'G^OO 

o          ^      o      o<o      r^coco*^          -» 

•  •       •     •               •          G^           '  ^ 

i 

r^-^oooioox      '^ot^G^O'^r^oo 

•     •     •COttOO'^OOO      •lOOOOOO^Ot^'^G^ 

^                           ^                           •»•»                           ^M«««NM                                                           M 

^        ^        OOO         OI>G^G<C0                    0< 

•    '    •                         e^         •  ^ 

1     ^ 

n    o 

i 

'     •     'OO^COOtft-     •GOG^OOG^CO'^     *« 
•^OiOOiCOO^        Or^'-OOGO*©©*        ift 

^                 a^^                 MMa»                 ^                 M                 ^ 

^         O^        OG<0<        l>        G<        •-* 
•      •      •                                    lO  ^      • 

— 

•     •     '^G^G^OOTf-^CO     'O     ••^r^OOTj-G^     -o 
^OWOD^O-V*--^        O         OC^OCO-^        O 

^V*                                           ««^                           0k                           ^«>M««M                           •» 

0^  ^               00  Oi         O         ^  Tf  Oi  ©<  G<         ^ 

•    •    •                        o  ^    •  #     •           # 

1 

•        .*-.----_-^*                 *----_- 

Russia, 

Prussia, 

Sweden, 

Swedish  West  Indies, 

Denmark  and  Norway,     < 

Danish  West  Indies,^ 

Holland, 

Dutch  West  Indies, 

Great  Britain, 

British  West  Indies, 

British  American  Colonies 

Hamburg,  Bremen,  kc.    . 

France, 

French  West  Indies, 

Spain,    •         .         .         . 

Spanish  West  Indies, 

Portugal, 

Madeira, 

West  Indies,  (generally)    , 

Europe,           .       do. 

las 


it 

X 


It 


CO 


ri 


c4 

X 


O 


Q 
H 


^    s 


O 
0< 


0» 


o 


=    .1' 


O 


o 


ff 

'* 


to 


t«v^Ot^«AOOOOGOOOOlGIO^*^»HaOGO 
OC0O^»0<0Ol*k0<0C0^pH»C0<0C^^ 

«      CO      CO      ^  00  •-^  o  r*  •H  ^  t*  CO  ^  ©^  o 


00 
0< 


00  Q  Oi  »ft  ^  Tf  OCOOOGOOOOCOG^ 

•-^oc<oo^coooocD»o»oaoco»o 


©^  t^  00  O  00 

•^t*QO         Oi»HO^OOO^»OCO^-^OOCi 
^        ^        ^        0>  00        t*  00  ^  •H  O  ^  CO  ^  o 

«      ©^  ^  ^  ^ 


o 


O  '^ 
•  00  CD     • 

CM  ^ 


Oi  b*  <0 

to  o  o 
^  ^  fM 


CO  to 

CO  ^ 


o  ©<  o 
r-  QO  O 

00  «A  CO 

CO  «C  00 


00  00  00 
^  CO  00 
O  00  o 

ms       ^       9s 

O  CO  ^ 


9)   ca 

^   


o 

CO 


CO 

<M 


to  to  o 

Oi  o  ^ 

00  ^  CO 

00  G< 


Tf  —  ^ 

CO  •H  CO 
to  ^  I* 


•ft  ^ 
to 


o 


^      r^  o  o  ^  to 
CO    •  G<  oi  r*  CO  -^ 

»ft  CO  to  «ft  kft  •H 

•»      ^      M      •« 

O   Ift   C<   -H 

•  »ft       »ft 


^  o  o  Ok  r^  CO  G< 

O  CO  o  t^  ^  to  t* 
Oi         CM  to  t*  to  CO 

•«  ^       •«       ^       •« 

•-<         to  ^  00  ^ 
«        01 


to  «ft  t^  o> 
C<  00  o  o 
t«  tft  CX>  »ft 

00  to 
<M 


S  to  00  CO 
0>  O  CO 
•o  t*  t^  CO 

GO  C<         ^ 
CM 


^ 


M 

-5 

c 


en 


^1 


CO 


s  s  «  «  i 

3    w    S    S    V 


^  c    «    C 

C  w   *-  -i 


^  C^  O  O  »ft  to 
0>  •H  00  CM  -^  »ft 
O  CO  O  to  «ft  o> 


o  ^  Th 


CM 


o 

G« 


t*  to  to 

CO  CO  C3i   , . 

t*  »ft  e*  ^ 

•k       ^      •«      •« 

O  t*  Oi  o 

<M        ^ 


to  O  GO 

CM  —  to 

00  »o 


CO  to  CO  O) 
0>  I*  I*  CD 

Tf  o  ^  o> 

•»      •«       ^       •« 

to  O  G<  to 


80 


m 

» 


B      Jg 


o 

G« 


00 


e  6 


CD 


=  £c 


s  £  a.a.fei 


cgcucgcgQQgaoaga:trb.facoc/30ug^M 


124 


OB 

H 


^  pi 


U 

s 


i 

3 


8 


t    •  f  c-oB Q  o  6i 2  o «  h-3^ a Q 5f  —  3gD  ** 

m^     .  kO -^  O       00  lO '^  O  fr*  *^  ©© 


G*0*^*00QDCQr*C3r*CQOr»QDCv"*r»  ©c 

»  ^       •>       *  •>       •>       #>       a^       •«       #>  ^ 

r-^       •I*  01  QD       ^*  ^  *-N  O  O  "^                •       00     • 
00 »-^  ♦^ ^^ 


1 


^  O  •H  C6  lO  W  QD  00  O       O  ^«  r*  ^  00 


00  00  9 

o 


J2 


i 


i«<f  CO 

r*  oco 

— «s 


CO 
00 


Si 


«  lO^ 


§i 


11 


^ 
^ 


g  --giS 


lO     cd  lid  lO 


^  ^  •» 


00 


00  00 


»5 


0»  — 


^  ^  ^  F-35 


ji  ^ 

ss 


•>  »>  » 
oodo 


i 

2    ?§ 


§(D  COW  »-<  CO 
COODGD  t^^ 


00  e^w 


2    S 


00 


CO  00 


s 


o>  —  s  5<  lO 

^  O  CO  Ci  "^ 

^  lO  —  00^  N  « 

r-         •*        ^ 

uO-*iO 


S 


00  QD 
^f  — 


_.s 


Tf  CO  Oi  CO  ^  CO 


s 


QD 


5  5^35  w 


g 


S5 

ib  •^  C35  f-  &  fr* 

^        ^        ^        •k 

lO  •^  ifi  o 


§« 


CO  kO  oc«  *-« 


lO 


s 

ko 


-=  8 


— '*  — x^ 

^     ^  01  •-N 


00 


lO 


te 


1 


L  . 


•Si? 


O 


s 


O  O  Ci  :c  X 
O  T  CO  f^  o 

T  r*  ci  c  r* 

•>       •«       » 

^      o      ,-N 


CO      r»  05  ^ 

•        CO  CO 


COiOl^^ 
of  CO  t^ 


1^ 

X 


5i  lO  »K}^ 


s 


coo  -^ 


TfOO 


M 

o 

w 


.7 


a>  >.  « 

;s  r  «    • 

c  c  -a 

V  c    « 


CD 

c   « 
C   «i«    ^ 


4) 


B     JS 


s 

3 


.5  S.2  £ 


CD 


E 


(90 


CD 
O 


(D 


c 
be 


CD 


ID     « 


2    U    ««    «« 


S  V  a>  c  c^ 


-O   u   u 

gee 
S  g  « 


•>  w)   bc.5 
•^  >■  «*  •«« 

CS    «3    »• 

0.0.  o 


•a 


»  p 


125 


t 


o 

•J 


i 

•••1 

t^        QO       O^             t^  O  ^  O  CO  ^       <o 
•  ^     •  <©     •  G4  lO     •     •  O  ^  00  W  Oi  ©<     •  01 

r^      o>      »-              CO  o  CO  ©♦  00  »c 

•o                 o       ^            ©< 

•                 •                 •                         •        •                                                             • 

• 

o 

• 

o 

• 

O  O  <0  ^  »0  ^  ^  O        »0  ^  ^  CO  G«  ^  »0  ^  CO 

•     •     •  CO  ^  <0  <0  O  CH  <0  r-     •  0»  ^  O  5  Oi  <0  CO  ©^  GO 

00        GO        t«         »«  ^        ©1  ^  ^  O  ^  00  t*         ©^ 

^      id      e\      o  ^          cob-i-ii-i»- 
•    •    •                             c«         •      01                    ^ 

i 

O  O  00  C<  G^  »ft  <0  ^        t^  I*  ^  CO  CO  O  ^        I* 

•  •     •»ftCt»-^^Ot*l*Oi     'iftCOr^OOOO     -GO 

<0        »C        O        ^  -^        C<  CO  00  -^  0>  00  00        •H 

^        to        ^        ^  ^              0"^^0^ 

•  •     •                                   CO          •        <M        01              ^     • 

• 

o 

i 

o           — 

i*<ooor*oo»ft^o©<©^r*Oi05^»Hb. 
O       <0  CO  CO  G«       t*  ^  <o  r*  o  o  o>  CO  <o 

CO                ^       «           ot 

• 
• 

1 

O  t*  <0  0>  O  kO  I*  O  00        t^  ©^  ^  <o  C^  •«  CJ  ^  G< 

•     •OOOt^OOt-'^kOOO     ••OOCOOit^OOQOOi 

©^  ^  O        cO  CO  O  O        CO  •-  ©i  00  GO  CO  Oi        o 

"^        »ft        ^  CO  »ft  ^              O  CO  CO        G<  00 

• 
• 

i 

0>  O  kO  ^  ©^  O  00  ^        <0  O  CO  O  00  CO  <o  ^  ^ 

•  •     't^^HOOCIl^COOi^     'C0O00*O»«t^C0O»O 

Oi        00        GOOiOO        ^Oi^OiOi»0<0-< 

(M^-^^C0O0<                    ©< 

•  •     •                         ^        0^           .        ^                         ^ 

• 
• 

g 

•   •    .  o 

oooGOcooci      r-<ooto>oci^©t'- 

•  O  05  O  fM  C>  CO     •  O  ^  ©<  ^  ©^  t*  CO  O  00 
I*  ^  <o       <o  »o       c<  <o  O  O  ^  CO  O  CO  &( 

^            ^            -^                              -^             »ft    •H            O 
0<                 •             *H 

1 

• 
• 

• 
2 

GO 
•      •     •  CO 

.    .    .  ^ 

t^oo<or-o»r5co^^  —  r^oo^       •h 

•  »0  ^  —  «  ©«  <0  d        ©*  t*  5*  <0  Oi  t^     •  I* 

<0        0»0»C©<              O^OGtOOO         ^ 

^^cor^-H          i*o>          ©t 

CO 

• 
• 

.    .    .  "^ 

OOOCO^COO*        0*-nG^OOO>        o 

•GOCO^^^TTt-      'i-COl^-^OO      -iC 

l^         ^  —  O  ©1               OOGfTfCOOCO         O 

• 
• 

1 

1 

•i'^l^  li  j-g  sill  g  g.s-i  s:g^  |-s 

126 


H 

P 

as 

H 

as 

o 

'i 


O 


tm 
tm 


s 

O 

•    • 

819 

12 

1,461 

504 

99 

1,528 

1,678 

•  • 
25 

3,748 
1,346 
6,730 
121 
1,601 
6,769 

•  • 
273 

o 
©^ 

3 

• 
• 

O  t*  "C  c< 
0»        00 

•  ^  —  <o  <o    •    •,-  — co^o-^    -co 

•«                             ak                  •«                             ak 

^     .     ,G^        CO              C^     ^ 

CO 

• 

00 

00 

00  t* 

•k 

CM 

•                         •        • 

00                          <0  Q  CO  O  O 

OtOCOO^O**' 

00  00  C^  O  00 

•«         •«         Vk 

G^  »0  O 

•        •                 ••••                                                    ••• 

o 

• 
• 

o 

•k 

O  Oi  t^  ©1  CO  o 
•     ♦ d  "^  b- O  00  O     •     • 

©<  00  00  t*  00 

^          ••          M          M 

t*  I*  o  ^ 

• 
• 

00 

•c 

o  «rd  00  t« 
•  o  o  Oi  r* 

*H  00  00 

^  C<  C<               O  *0  ^  •-^  C<  0>         CD 

•     •  00  ©<  C<     •     •  00  O  i«  00  Oi  <0     '  '(f 

t*  ^              00  00  O  O  Oi  •©        •H 

•k       ak                                     ^       •«       ak       ak       •« 

©<©<••        <H^CM»H«^^ 

• 
• 

• 

t^  O  GO  O  O  CO 

o>  -^  t*  r*  "^  Tf 

^              00  "^  ©< 
CO 

O— <0         TfG^©<O-*C0O^O 

•     •  ©^  <0  OO     •  00  I*  GO  CO  00  CO  "^  Oi  ©^ 

CO  ©1  "^        »-  ^  ^  05  CO  o  <o  ^  ^ 

•k«k                                    •kVk^MVkVk 

<0  ©1     ^        ^  O  t*  "^ '(f  »o 

• 

2 

CO 

00  t^  00  o 

•  CO  '(fC*  CO 

CI -.00 

• 

O       ^^            Tf  O  CO  00  ©t  <o  o<o 

•— «     "O^ft     •     'OOiOiOit^OO^ 

CO        ©«Oi              *-M"^l-.Ot^OO»HOO 

•k                                               »k       •«       ak       M 

CO                           00  O  »A  ©t 

•                 •                         •        •                     ^^ 

• 

1 

0« 

(O  <M  <o 

•k 
•                               • 

O^OOQOOCO       ooi^ooor^oo 

CO  ^H  O  O  ©1     •  •«  »ft  CO  ^  —  00  00  V 

00                    ^,-.0'-^»0©<-^i-« 

^                                               M       ^       ^       ^ 

1-1                        CO  <o  •H  ©1 

• 

• 

o 

• 

_ 

•k 

1 

.     • 

,    ,  f 

• 

••••••••••••••1 

(0 

•          •••                     •••••    ,mm                     ••••••   ^i^s       •          • 

ii1gJi'i|£:H-Hiii-is.i||i| 

127 


o 

S5 

& 

H 

«J 

U4 

CQ 

u 

< 

u 

H 

p 

'i 


% 


5? 


^  I'i  F-  rj«  O       ^ 

CO  5^        Cf  O     . 


?! 


f  w  ^  T?  O  ^  i-C  ift 

•g«  ic  ^  ^  3fc  r* 

r-  "?!  T  9i  3d    •  — 


8f    - 


'T  of 

»■  #k  Vk  ^  v^ 

»C  CO        »0        »^        ^ 


SS 


S2S 

O  01  ftO 


lO   ^   v.,      i 

r*  r*  »-^  t6 

^   »    •» 

^^  CO 


i6 


CO 


§  —  ©llfj  o      1«      ^ 
or  lO  01  -^    . 


r?<  ^  O 


1^  Oi 


of       CO 


.  01  X  -^  ^  o       ^       ^ 


|>^  A^  •^  >/^'         wm  ^m 


0^^^ 


QD       CO 


X  oj  i-c$"co2! 
o«  r  of  — 


I   iQ  'S  iS  —  —  It 
•*^  X  2!  3  —  ®  3    • 
Of©  t^co  —  ^ 


cTof 


0*  t*  OICO 


I 


^  £  <r  9  ^  s  ^'"^  0?  —  * 

O  -^  ©  r*  lO  X  T}< 


in 


i 


I^^Tco 

O        QD 

of 


Ot}< 


01  ©CO        f- 


X 


?:co  —  o  «  01     01 
—  « la  of     1^   . 


01  c 


s$ 


♦*  ss  *^ 

^  ^  0) 
CD  "-^  CO 


CO  t^CO        01 


n  X  f^  o  2  kS    •  f^  o  ^  f^ 

C00f^id9iO        t^^O 
—  lO  «  ^       -N    .       o  » 


of    .-^ 


r 


is  r- 


I 

( - 


X  — 

S  o  2  kd  CO  lO 

—  lO  iC  -^ 

CO  X  f^  pi^      of   . 


CO 


3  -i 

CO    .  of 


X 


X  O     •  lO 


CO     •  CO 


lO  01  o» »--      c 
•focoof     of   . 


CO 


Tf  rj«  €-• 


of    .  -^    .CO 


k 


■2 

.5" 

9/ 

!  •- 


it:  C* 

■T3   .mm 


.2  CD 

c  s 
c  2 


rj    u 


C 
(0 


c 

10 

c 


O    r  'JI 


-  c~ 


-^ 


V^Q 


is 

'C  « 

Qcgaaa 


p6    si 


(A 


•  • ». 


;s  e 
3  be 


N     ^     lb 


138 


o 
Ed 


tm 
tm 


PS 
o 


10 


05       00        *^ 

Oi      oi      \o 


t'.      r»      \o      CD  CO 


lO 


X  — 


ift  CD  GDX 

$-6 


^'ii 


P-*  ^  £1  *-N  $9  lO       10 

IS  rH  o5  CO  T»*  t* 


00  Q  ^  CO 
1-4  ^  &0  Cc 

r^^  h^  ^^  C& 


2| 


lO  •—  CO  »^ 


06 


®  1^  fi^  CO 


•$ 


X 


^      9^  9  9  ^ 


CO 


^  t*»H 


CD  ^XCOO 


$g 


8 


1^ 


§ 


CO 


©f     c5 


CD  CD  f*  CO 


^^  lO  lO  O  O  CO 

^        ^  »-«  —  X 

o      ^* 


t^cD  e  6 

CO  '^ 


g 


Os        X  u3  CO 


lO 


•>      »     •>  ^      ^ 


§iO  CD  X 

t*  ^  *-*  ^ 


ss* 


P»o»o^cdSi-« 


o 


^  X  ^ 


JJ«^ 


7^ 


of     « 


8SJS2SS*  -I 

lO     CO     oTof         ©€ 


X S t^S  • 

co^  *-« 


•# 


09 


=  ^  S 


o 


« 


C 


4'ii 


s 


o 


9 

be: 


S.S 
QOQO 


C   B 


O    9 


o 

B 


a 


CD 


(D 


O      J5 


s 


«>    •>    #^ 


•c 


be 

c 


(A 


(D 
0) 


03 

v  o  o 
bA 


189 


H 
P 

H 
K 

O 


1    «2 


O 

•J 


i4 

CO 


"    gSJ 


•i" 


s  « 


ss 


©f 


^  C0  9  C0  90 


lO  So 


CO  o 


SS2 


"ii 


S|gS      ' 


s 


s 


SI 


SI 


8 

OD 


10 


•  vg      • 


^'^^tf^'ef  . 


^ 


©f       .  c6 


2  '8§§i§^&g 


^ 


M 

5  • 


•       •       • 


•       •       •       • 


•       • 


>  S 


if 

0) 


130 


t      • 


O 


I 

pes 
O 


10 


^sil 


SiO 


of  COO 
CO 


^  f*  h-CO  »0 


(?f 


s 


lO  — 


s 


Sffi  P 

of     ■^'' 


CO  lO 


-^        lO 
&0 


<s  -g 


-«   .« 


'♦S5 


CO 

*^         v»         ^  ^ 

TJ<  lO  »-N      .  O 


'^  lO 


?1 


aSgSS 


5  ^  *5Vft 


kO  Q  kO 


3!  »o 

—  lO 


^^  CO  00 


8C0  lO  fr* 
COi-  o 

cfof^^ 


©fof     (£ 


xo 


82S 


coo     o 

S^   •  o 


o  W 


10 


$ 


X 


01  lO 
O  1^ 


8?$ 

CO       e 


0« 


»-N  r» 


f-<^ 


CO       o 


•>       *>       » 


s 


25 

CO  ^ 


of     0*  o»x 


o  o  ^ 

f  Q  »0 

co5  t^ 


c 


•3 

a 


KB 


V  to 
e  ^ 

l-l    s 

0)    09     2 


00 

a 


«> 


CD  JZ 

s  «« 
10    s 

QQ 


10 

E 


C 


69 


» 


CD 


e  V 

so: 


g-o 
QD  25  t* 


O  JO  f* 


01 


»-^  o 

-8 


1*3  v«  ^^ 

*>       a^       »■ 

f-  o»o 


c 


OB 


CO        "ts 


131 


X 


o 


m 

bo 

o 

I 

O 
O 

P 

o 


rl 

v  I 


•O 


•S2  •  -Si^ 

^CO  lO  w  — 


«     w 


S  r  3  r  3!  5  *" ;;:  t: ' 


I^OD  W  W  M 

8    ^- 


*-*  of      « 


OD 


CO 


1^ 


r»oi 


gxx 

kO  lO  w^ 


^  o  o  C5 


CO 


?^- 


O  C*  W  lO 


£    g- 


S 


oDcoSmo 

"^  O  C«  ©I  *^ 


t*o      f-^ 


O  04      cf 


00  lO 

00  oB 


II- 


o  « 


S5  -2 


o  o  ^  ^  •- 


is  •?<  «^  a  —  --^ 


CO  -< 


S2  ^  « 


s 


c 


'5 

o 

ce 


.us 

r 


i  » 


c 

09 


en 


09    ^ 
CO  •*• 


c 

s 


E 


<*       -»      k*      k.      ^ 


bo 


W 
V 

^ 


s 


£ 


QD 


ag 


(rf 


• 


^ 

^ 


s 

^ 


CO 
CO 


$ 

s 


S2 


500 
bo 


v 


3  'S  P   w  — 


C   .r 


.2  g  .*  g  ^ 
*  5  5  c  S 

ft- » aDpp_S ft p ffl_fia 5PhfaqDQDa<g>M<   J 


C;    09    iO    t 
-      Q.DU  C 


0)      » 


ft. 


124 


OB 

H 


g 


f'S"^^2"S's"£2  S  8  ^  2  S  8  8  S  S  S  S  S 

?ff       Q5"^Mfi"^^"g"iO  sir  P  O~?0~ifi  QD  O  CD  3<  h- 


IS 


f 


3jo5co»oc>t*^sr»«h-coo5 
^eoaDc*5r»coKwof^aDco  —  t^ 


CO 


^       'tdX 


I 


CO '■^  *■* 


CO 


CO  CO  9 

O 


^ «  ®  CO  1^ © cocoio     oco^xt^io     9dSifb 
-^1—  cocoo     oV-N(j5cf  "-^ 


^ 


8  § 


Ci^ 


•-^w©^^5i'--^oiococDODt^^(S^c«a5aD 

^ *^        CO  »-• . 


i-^"-<C0»^^XCiO5»iJ^"r*Oi»^C0        CO^WXTT 
COWJlgt^OCO  oco 


•-^lO  ^CO"^  5l  O^  CO  »  W'I'CO   oi  ol 


00 


s 


^•^       ^       0*       ^       9*       m-  jh 

Q  lO  •-«  kO  lO  C« 


^rf 


*   W  »0  O  C*  •— Oi  »»  »-- ^9* '^  X  rf 

-=  g^^  =2- 


CO 


lO 


« 


•"4    •  coco-r  o^^  coi^o    • -«    •  o  5i  db 


^ 


OCO 


^      ^     ^  • 

WCO  1^       h- 


CO  o  -^ 


rfOO 


n    c9 


s 

3 


S  £  S  = 

C  ^  ^  0) 


-^  >  CQ 


4) 


CD 

'5 

U 

c 
« 

.Si  • 


•9 


c 

w       w        e 


e 


«c   « 


«  2 


«  o  3  2 


n      S 

gee 
=  -  Q 


u 
if 

G 

be 


V 


-  £ 


5'5  5  « 


125 


o 
H 


1 

©t      t*      «      o>  »o 

C^       I*       Ci        .-• 

•      •      •            •            •            •                  • 

t^  <0  *0  <0  CO  "^        0 

•  2  •^  S  CO  oi  c<    •  01 

€0  0  CO  G«  CO  0 

0             *H                     ©< 

.                                                             • 

0 

. 
0 

• 

1 

CO        00        r*        ^  rf 

•«                 .»                 •»                 ««       •« 

-<       »ft       «       o  ^ 

...                           cr<        • 

»O^^C0G«^»O"^C0 
O>^O5«0i<O00G^00 

CO        t*        ^  ^        ,- 

1 

<0        »ft        Oi        ^  -< 

•k                 ^                 ^                 »       •« 

•     •     "                                   CO          • 

t*l*'^00C0O^        I* 
kOC0b-OO*OO>     -00 
G^COGO-^OiCOGO        ^H 

M                       M                      MM                      M 

0  ^         ^  lO         ^ 

01  01            ^     • 

0 

i 

o          —      r-<ooor»ooo^oG<c*t^o>05»-^^t* 

^     •     -to     •O^»0Ol^C?t»H-<-*0<0»»C0i^0iC0 
<0        O        <0  CO  CO  G«        t*  ^  <0  I*  O  Oi  o»  CO  <o 

•     •           •                          CO                    «        „              01 

• 
• 

1 

•    •  CO  <o  r*  o  <o  15 -^  o  00    • 

©«  •H  <o       C^  CO  o  o 

.k                      •«                       W^         9^          0»          9^ 

^         »C         ^  CO  O  •H 

OOCOC^C^OOOOO) 
CO  ^  CiOO  00  CO  Oi        kO 

M          *»          •»                         MM 

0  GO  GO        G«  GO 

• 
• 

i 

OiOkO^C^OiOOTf 
•     •     'l^^OOG^l^COO^     • 
C^       00       00  o  o  o 

M                         M                         •«          .« 

0^        ^        -.  ^ 

•    •    •                 ^      ©^       . 

O»ftC0O00C0O^^ 

Gooooo^r^cooko 

M         M         M                                                 M 

CO  0  G^                    G< 

• 
• 

O        00  O  00  00  o  ©< 
•     •     -o     -oOiO^HOCO     • 

^               n               •« 

^      ^      ^ 
....                   c<        • 

t^OGtOiOOJ-^Gjl-* 
O^G^TfGll*C0O00 
©|<OO>Oi-^G0O»C0©l 

M                       MM                      M 

^            0    •H            <0 

1 

• 

• 

* 
Wit 

s 

1 

■s 

'i 

00      t^oo<or-o»ocO"^"^  —  r^oo-^      -< 
*    •    'CO    • ««  ^  •-^  «  ©1  o  G<      e*  t^  5*  o  Oi  r-    •  i* 

—        O        OiO^G^             O  *H  O  ©1  CO  o        ^ 

G^^^COl^-H              t^Oi              ©< 
....                          CO 

• 

c<      o>^ooco^coc^^ 

•      •      'CO      •OOCO'^^^TTt* 
^         t^         -TJ*  —  O  ©1 

^                   ^                   ^                    ^        ^ 

^      »«      o       o  -< 

.     •     •           .                         JO 

0  ^  (N  0  0  o>      0 

•  «-  CO  l^  TT  0  0      •  0 
00  G«  -Tf  CO  0  CO         0 

M          M          M                         M 

t»  -N  0          » 

•    r 

• 

M 

r 

lll^  il-2l  gill  s  -fs  2:g^  |s 

126 


• 

s 

1 

» 

O 

•       • 

819 

12 

1,461 

504 

99 

1,528 

1,678 

•       • 

25 

3,748 
1,346 
6,730 
121 
1,601 
6,769 

273 

o 

2 

• 
• 

o  t*  •©  c< 

0»        00 

>«  o  t*  o 

'  ^  —  <o  <o    • 

^      ^  o 

Oi  <0  O  Oi  ^  -<       o 

• »-  --  CO  ^  o  -<    -co 

o>  Ol  —       ©1  <o 

,  cf     CO          erf  ^ 

CO 

1-^ 

• 

2 

00 

00  t* 

•o    •    • 

•                         •        • 

00 

•  •               •       •       • 

•  •              •      •      • 

<0  Q  CO  O  O 
•  CM  O  CO  ©<  O     •     •     ' 
(X>  00  0>  O  00 

»k       •«       ak 

o(  »o  <o 

•                                                    •        •       • 

o 

• 
• 

.  .2  •  • 

o 

•     *•••• 

O  o  r*  G<  CO  o 

•  d  ^  b-  O  CO  <0     •     • 
©1  CO  00  I*  00 

t*  I*  »ft  ^ 

• 
• 

•c 

O  «n  00  t« 

•  o  o  Oi  r* 

^  00  «0 

^  C<  CM 

•  •  00  CM  (M     • 

•  • 

O  *0  ^  •H  0<  0>        00 

•  CO  <0  »«  00  Oi  o     •  ^ 

00  00  O  O  O)  o        «-• 

»«       •«       ^       •>       •» 

CM  ^  ©^  •^  ^ 

• 
• 

• 

H 

P 

as 

• 

t^  O  QD  O  O  CO 

o  -^  t*  r*  -^  ^ 

^              CO  "^  01 
CO 

o  ^  <o 

•  •  «  <0  CO     • 

CO  CM  ^ 

<0  CM 

•  •                      • 

^CM©<0>-*C0»ft'TfO 
00t*C0C00DC0^O>©t 
^i-.^CiCOOO-^'^f 

•S          .»          ^          M          •«          M 

„  O  I*  "^  ^  o 

• 

as 

1 

d 
2 

•>4 

0« 

CO  t*  00  o 

•  00  ^  Ct  CO 

CI -.CO 

• 

•  -<    •  <o  o    • 

CO        CM  Oi 

co-^ 

•                   •                             • 

^*OCOOO©<<00«0 

•OOiO»Ot^OO»-< 

•-^Tfl^Ol^OO— <co 

*«       ^       »       A 

00  O  O  CM 

• 

• 
o 

O  G«  O 

•  ^  "5!  ^    • 

•                                  • 

»0  "^  00  00  O  CO 

CO  *H  o  o  c< 

00 

oot^ooot^oo 

••ftOCO— <'-<00COV 
,-i,-N0-<O©t.-^^ 

M       ^       »       ^ 

CO  o  •-*  ©t 

• 

• 

o 

r 

1-3 

• 

M 

2 

eS 

.     • 

f 

• 

1 

Russia,        .         .         .         . 
Prussia,       .         .         .         . 
Sweden,      .         .         .         . 
Swedish  West  Indies,    • 
Denmark  and  Norway, 
Danish  West  Indies, 
Holland,      .         .         •         . 
Dutch  West  Indies, 
Great  Britain, 
British  West  Indies, 
British  American  Colonies, 
Hamburg,  Bremen,  be. 
France,        .         .         .         . 
French  West  Indies, 
Spam,          •         •         •         . 
Spanish  West  Indies,     . 
Portugal,      .         .         .         . 
Madeira, 

West  Indies,  (generally) 
Europe,             do. 
Africa,               do. 

127 


o 
< 


CB 
P 


P 


<2  lOg  —  —  g 

_  »■  ^  »•  » 


CI  o<  o      C5  lO  r»      •— 

L I  $  g P12  "^  ^"ilTSsl I  i 


'§ 


g 


CO  5^        WO 


cf     gf     ^- 


i-*  O  »-^  T  fcO  ^  i5  »ft  X  Q 

•g«K^^Qfc*>-  oW 


lO       ^       ^ 


5 


— -rj'CO       .- 


-^  C*  lO  o 
W  lO  c*  *-« 


s 

■^ 


i 


s§ 


r*  55  O  ^ 


O  wd  S  ^  1-^  ^ 

—  -^  3b  CI       o 
CI  X  d  ^ 


^  f-<  f-i  Q  -*  C^  ^  ■^  ^ 

QD  T^        »»        Cf       CO 


53  ^  9^  5J2-T^**  05 


^  CO  c* 
CO  CO  QD 


lO  ^  CO  01  9« 

^  »>       •>       ^  •> 

r*  •-<  ^^      *^ 


r>       ^       #k  »»       ^       ^  •« 

•-N  Ci  C<       S*^^       ^ 


§ 


cow  — ©«0»        01  O -«        ,-^©-^00 
—  «  lO  01        f*     .        01  5C        COf^CO        01 


CO  0«O  S  9  2 

—  lO  «  —       -N 


r»c5  o  o  o     7?      o 

O  t9        QO     •  01     •  ^^ 


*  ^'5  r-  c  «r;i        5r^  ~ 


$  o  iS  k6  CO  lO 


,  -^      0«      ^      © 

•   O^Od        aCO        aCO        •Ox 


^ 


WC5  » 
Si  lO  — 


r^t^ 


CO 


S 


-*      o 

X     •  f^     • 


«  X  K  ^     of 


»-4  o 

ad o   -lb    .CO    .CO 


S 


TiOCOOf       of    .       OiO       of    .-^"    .W 


M 
O 


0) 


S  5 

«    O    O 

c   o   »« 
O  2  «-•    « 

O  fc  =5  Si 


^     ^iV         U  BM         »•         I"*-         V         tarf 

*     .   ~    •     .  •—   «  w  — 


5  'S  w  2-2 
^  «  s  rs  X 


•  g  «-  w 


c 
•  c 

10 


'^  £  9  § 


;=:  e 
•  J- 


N     ^     lb 


138 


o 
Ed 

m 

< 


U 
tm 

I 

PS 
o 


CO 


lO 


S    s 


t*        r*        \Q        CD  CO 


00       CO 


0^       m^       ^ 


»-N^    lO  lO 


2gS 


s 


lO  -*co 


OD 


•s 


X 


s 
s 


^ss 


CO 


^     K-i 


H 


S 


8 


©f     ^5     e  o  t*co 


•k  •>  »       »      »  ^ 

«       ^        O  «^QO 


g 


S|s 


COCO 

^        ^        #l»       ^ 


^  d  ©     ^^ 


§iO  o  X 

•>      •»      ^      ^ 


SSi 


$ 


coxg 


11^ 
^ 


O  X  r*  ©I 

1^  ^D  ^^ 

•»     •>     ^ 


r^ 


S     cf 


lO       CO       0)0^ 


of 


o  co^  ^-<      ^ 


•# 


as 


« 
0; 


s 

QOQO 


*  >» 


o 


•^•«i 


«0 


a  <B 


S.S 

a  B 

(§2 


S 

•c 

OQ 


o 
O 

G 

8 

X 
a; 

8 


•c 


o 

s 
n 


»     tfi 
S     J 


(A 


0) 


be 

.A    C    U 
0   0   C 

S  e 


<  .5 


09 

o  o  o 

bA 


OB 


1^ 


c  'S  2  i2  -  o  5 


*S.^5||S^ 


ISO 


H 
P 

H 
K 

O 


o 
•J 


I 

o 


«  gag 


i6 

s 


•i" 


S5 


Of 

s 


^  ko 


90 


o 

^ 


ss 


©f 


?5$ 


©f 


X 


^  C0  9  CD  90 


^§1 

CO  lO 


Sod 

10^ 


Qfei 


"gg 


^SeoSSS 
^  oD  •^  ^  r* 


s 


s 


SI 


8 

QD 


10 


^^^^e(  . 


^ 


I 


I 


CO  •       ^  O  CO  CO 


^ 


•       •       • 


•      •      •      • 


.  « 


s 


eg 


c     • 


•^ 

^ 

s 


••coo 


4^ 


e.s 

a  c 


17 


130 


o 


I 

o 


131 


X 


o 


& 

o 

i 

o 
o 
< 

CQ 

o 


I? 


*H      55      lO  CO  low  — 

eo     ©I  ^ 


•s 


»fi  — «  O  CO  CO 

•  8    S- 


•k  •>  •>  a^ 


o 

s 


1^ 


OODX 


QD 


f*SaDc6 
of     K^^ 


5  co^S 


S-" 


p 

w 


kO 


\o 


1«  CO 

^  CO  6i 


S  r^  § 


^coco 


$ 


QDtj<       0«0« 


QD  19  g  O  br 


0  0  0*^^ 
Xi9       CC 


O  CO  O  lO  o>  o 
-  is  **  I*  i5  -<  ^ 

CO  ^ 


•       •  •»■ 


•4 

It 


"o  »-  .2 

•     CO  -3    ^ 

c»   c    « 


o 

C 


0) 


^  .2 


2  S  «  «  -c 

•  -3T3  e.zj 

3    ?*    g    C    C 


•^^ca 


c 


CO  "s 


^  a 
c  g 

cs    s 

E    - 

-•3  «; 

•  -2  Si 
-eg 


0 


ft; 

•3 

e 


«D 


s 


S5 


3B 


of 


SI 


s 


s 
^ 


^  S  S  ^  es 
fax  XfaS 


S  o  o 


•    O    ^ 
^    3  U. 


ft. 


i 


188 


o 


-  s  s 


1^  TJ<  f-« 


£ 


4 

op 


$ 


|||SS9| 


^   t      d 


qpgpmv 


C^  CO  i9  QD 

8=    S 

-'ef    efef-T 


2   ,$ 


IS 


•S$S2  -s  •  Jg 


s 


n 


odSSSo   *S   •    * 


$ 


i! 


§ 


s 


§S|| 


00 


SS 


tM  le  f<  « 


SIS 


s 


-     «?     (jS 


§1' 


800"^  Olio  00  "-• 


;Df-«^  ^ 


8 


CO 


JS 


ot^ 


SSSSo  '£ 


I  Si  ^  lal-  i  I    I 

M  kZ  ^       »a       ^  2  a       ^        O  « 


•    • 


o  e 


I 


•  • 


<■;■ 
•♦^ 


138 


I/* 


►"» 


^ 


o 
-< 


no 


O 

I 


O 


2 


S 


id 
?2 


i 


--0 


(N 


9)0 
JTiO 


ef  g    ^ 


2  S^S  o 

O)  ^     CO     O 
^    •»       •>       • 


i-i^ 


coo 

ii 


Si 


-•  'jd   ip    f"  »o  r*  S  ^ 

•k  »  Vk  »  ^ 

^  PN     O     CD       f* 


©f 


2S 


SI 


kC  9  X;  k9 


lO 


O     OD 


S 


1^  ifi 


-'iff 


J^^ 


SI  £: 

K  c^ 


eo 


S  ^  g  S    g    z  ^ 


\a 


99 


OD 


8  2«" 


©I 


^gj2 »o  2 


w  Tf     ^ 


—  CO 


ggj" 


7^    CT 

o   eo 


is  2 

f  TJ<  0« 


if 


o 


•S  I 


O  g 

r  .2  •   •    . 

o  .Si  £  - 

CU  *I3  w  u 

"^  .  0  Qj  a    •    • 

00  c>   ft)  ^  .X 

c-^-g  2^  E  0)  «  o  S  cT 


'>> 


.  y    ' 


/ 


134 


c 
p 

1 

;3 


d 
s 


of 

S 


3§ 


8- 


OD 


eott 


•e 


*      at 

OD         


3S 


to        M 


S§|S 


•s 


•I 

■I 


1^1 


•i 


M        M        «        • 


eo 


09 


£ 


i 


'3 


CO 


s 


'0> 


•g 


to 


04 


S 


SiOCl 

*     *     ik 

09 


M  Ol 
CO  t* 


-•  to 

Olio 


3SS 


QO 


9 

^ 


rs 

a 


S3 


3 


a 

.X 


f-  1"  t* 


o  s  A 

89? 


%ms% 


e 

P 


V  a 


2 


lO 
01 


9 


u 

o 


U      S  k  k  S'3  S  e  S.S.i3  aJ  a  •£ 


C 
9 
O 

i 

(0 

< 
H 

o 

I: 

O 


X 

o 


0)01 

oo 


e  eo 


CO 


3 


O  60  O)  09 

M    *    «k    «k 

eo;o  co^ 
^co 


s 


§ 


s 


s. 


CO  ^ 
^  QO 


oo2 


OO 


005 

•k         «b         M         « 

M  0)00  ^ 

S3 

e 


i 


01  09 

O  A 
•  O  •* 

O) 


01 


09 

3 


§1 

09«2 


O)  -« 
00 


01 

o> 


I* 

01 

* 


CO 

3 


09 


•• 


10 


•*  I*  Ol 

pnco  3" 

QO 


o> 
01 


iO  ^ 
c  »• 


10 

3 


^oo 

5.S  • 


O) 


2.1 


s 
s 


S  s  « 


o  a 

si 

b.2 


135 


no 


o 


< 

•■« 
I 

< 

H 

•0 

a 

H 

o 
< 

Q 

« 
I 

U 

CO 


t 


i 


'4 


i 


I  ^5 


:?' 


•>    *    »    1^ 


3J  ae  Oi  ©»  O 

•k    »    »    •>    •> 
A|  CS  Ct  C^  lO 

00*5*        lO 


^  n*  o  o 

_^      »      ».      •» 


COOD 


3S 


^ 


is 

lO  p  ^  «  ( 
^  f*  CO  Ob  I 

•if 


-^ 


»-« 00  r»  t»  OD 


J5 

•k 


CO 


'q*  »  lO  QD  ^ 
X  'q*  ^  » 


r  CO  O  'T  O 

b  lis  1^  rr  OD 


w«  C^  (iw 

^   »■   » 

Ci  Ci  1^ 
!>•  1^  Ci 


4> 


i=±. 


e 
o 

S 


(0 


s 


3 


81 


c 


.2  £  *  «  c  *^ 


s 

^    IB    09    <R      •>  B 


1  'ag<LqoT)Q5:;5afa  x  «  a-  S  b  u  eS 


<  ^ 

eg 

12 


a 


a 
o 

S 
5 

w 

> 


.s 


a 

9 

I 

o 

O 

u* 

o 

s 


p 


a 
S 

u 

a     . 
■^   o 

o  B 
H  ^ 


/ 


136 


o 

H 

P 

H 

as 

o 

I 

o 

< 


o 

9 


i 

as 

Cfi 
I 

M 

tt 

< 
H 
H 

P« 
H 

a 

H 

O 

O 

o 


^ 

s 


^    2 


^ 

s 


(;0  O 


CO 


lO  ^  t^  0> 


OD  00  lit  i^ 


GO  lO 


t^  ^  ca 


^f5  35  ^  ar 

i228 


-i* 


s 


00  ^ 


I 


(?f 


io  ej  r-  ^  Tj< 

•»    •>    '^    ^  ^ 


o 


3$   s   i:  s   ^ 

O  QQ       QD       ^       V       9 


^ 

e 


^' 


§  ^  CO  '5  'S  iS 

•>    ^    «•  ^  "^    *» 

•^  00  wb  Cx  CD  3 

C^  ei  N  r*  O  QD 


S  3582:  IE 


■2 

t 

i* 

2 


^  ft* 
c  o 


O 

s 


•    •    • 


5 


5 


5 
00 


2 


O  ^*  »^  r»  ©  Ot  O 

•«  ^  ^>  J-  ^  ^^    •■ 

^     ef  ©to  f-*^ 


5 


11^ 


j 
o 


0) 


9) 
0) 


s 


1^ 

s2 


i 

S* 
^ 

^ 


9 

la: 


CO    3    flj 

«  s  s 


ca 


.S  S.S  g  c 

•  nans   S   * 

S  0)  0^  eS 
P^^Sog;fl8CQ,^e^JS9«i 


<0    4    b 


8  JO 


1: 
it 


187 


>; 

o 

CQ 

< 


9 
O 

i 

I 

< 


X 

^ 


H 

a 

H 
O 

O 

o 


Si 


ISRSIHIRSI 


»»«iO  •? 


^  A  '^  '^MttiM     • 


§ 


V  ^m      m  ^*      •>      •      •      •       • 

m^       iM  ^  05  00  M  lO  e  3 

•      •»      m      m  m 


^ 


s  38|S|9p 


•      m       m      *  ^»       »       *       «i      »       »  ^V       » 


99 


M 


8 


VttiOM 


•5 


<0 


»8  8^<* 


§ 


S 


SI 


S 


8 


s 


wee 


2S    ^6 


00       ^ 


IS 


i 


18 


Bhlfc 


i 


188 
TABLE  No.  XV, 


A  sUUement  of  tke  various  manufactures  of  the  United  States^  exported  in  1827, 

together  toith  their  value. 


Soap  and  tallow  candles, 

Leather,  boots,  and  shoes, 

Saddlery, 

Hats,       .  .  . 

Wax, 

Spirits  from  grain,  beer,  ale,  and  porter. 

Wood,  (including  coaches  and  other  carriages,) 

Snuff  and  tobacco, 

Lead, 

Linseed  oil  and  spirits  of  turpentine, 

Cordage, 

Iron, 

Spirits  from  Molasses, 

Sugar  refined,     . 

Chocolate, 

Gunpowder, 

Copper  and  brass, 

Medicinal  drags, 


sold  per  pound. 


Cotton  piece  goods : 

Printed  and  colored. 

White,    . 

Nankeens, 

Twist,  jrarn,  and  thread. 

All  other  manufactures  of. 


Flax  and  hemp : 

Clotn  and  thread, 
Bags  and  all  manufactures  of, 
Wearing  apparel. 
Combs  and  buttons, 
Brushes,, 

Billiard  tables  and  apparatus, 
Umbrellas  and  parasols. 
Leather  and  morocco  skins,  not 
Fire  engines  and  apparatus. 
Printing  presses  and  type, 
Musica  1  instruments. 
Books  and  maps, 
Paper  and  other  stationary, 
Pamts  and  varnish. 
Vinegar, 

Earthen  and  stone  ware. 
Manufactures  of  glass, 

tin, 

pewter  and  lead, 

marble  and  stone, 

gold  and  silver,  and  gold  leaf, 
Gold  and  silver  coin, 
Artificial  flowers  and  jewelry. 
Molasses, 
Trunks, 
Brick  and  lime, 


^45,120 

951,001 

14,750 

11,175 

137,368 


$901,751 

388,525 

57.717 

28^,624 

123,354 

144,832 

574,751 

239,024 

3,761 

20,704 

63,074 

273,158 

97,003 

34,012 

1,350 

176,229 

52,341 

119,390 


1,159,414' 

11,084 

5,364 

94,768 

33,415 

7,334 

3,191 

49,138 

119,545 

2,513 

33,713 

14,844 

54,012 

37,716 

29,664 

8,182 

6,492 

59,307 

2,967 

6,183 

3,505 

3,605 

1,043,574 

22.357 

1,511 

12,483 

3,365 


S3,557,600 


Uncertain, 


2,829,246 
293,379 


86,680,225 


189 
TABLE  No.  XV.— CoNTiNUBD. 


A  tiatemenl  of  the  various  manufactures  of  the  United  States^  exported  in  1898, 

together  wiih  their  value. 


Soap  and  tallow  candles, 

Leather,  bouts,  and  shoes, 

Saddlery, 

Hats, 

Wax, 

Spirits  from  grain,  beer,  ale,  and  porter, 

Wood,  (including  coaches  and  other  carriages,) 

Snuff  and  tobacco, 

Lead, 

Linseed  oil,  and  ^irits  of  turpentine, 

Cordage, 

Iron, 

Spirits  from  molasses, 

Sugar  refined, 

Chocolate, 

Gunpowder, 

Copper  and  brass, 

Medicinal  drugs. 


Cotton,  piece  goods: 

Printed  and  colored, 

White,    . 

Nankeens, 

Twist,  yam  and  thread, 

AH  other  manufactures  of, 


Flax  and  hemp: 

Cloth  and  thread,  . 
Bags  and  all  manufactures  of. 
Wearing  apparel, 
Cumbs  and  Buttons, 
Brushes, 

Billiard  tables  and  apparatus,    . 
Umbrellas  and  parasols. 
Leather  and  morocco  skins,  not  sold  per  pound 
Fire  engines  and  apparatus, 
Pnnting  presses  ana  type. 
Musical  mst rumen ts, 
Books  and  maps, 
Paper  and  uiher  stationar}'. 
Paints  and  varnish, 
Vinegar, 

Karthen  and  stone  ware, 
Manufactures  of  ^lass, 

tin, 

pewter  and  lead, 

marble  and  stone, 

gold  and  silver,  and  gold  leaf, 
Gold  and  silver  coin, 
Artificial  dowers  and  jewelry, 
Molav»c«, 
Trunks, 
Brick  and  lime,  . 


876,012 

887,628 

5,149 

13,570 

28,873 


S91S,323 

401,959 

49,758 

326,294 

134,886 

203,780 

611,196 

210,747 

4,184 

22,119 

20,030 

231,234 

185,096 

38,207 

3,344 

181,384 

60,452 

95,083 


$3,691,375 


1,010,232  ^ 

5,335 

3,365 

143,253 

60,957 

6,372 

2,210 
21,703 
81.221 

2.384 
40,199 
10,011 
46.jm 
32,0i>6 
26.229 

5,H84 

5,595 
51,452 

5,(M9 

5,545 

3,122 

7.505 

693,037 

18,195 

601 

6,0fM 

4,573 


Uncertain, 


2,302.096 
247,990 


96,241,391 


140 


TABLE  No.  XV.— CoNTiMuxD. 

A  sidUwunt  0f  tk4  vaHous  manufactures  of  the  Visited  States^  exported  in  1829, 

together  with  their  value. 


Soap  and  tallow  candles, 

Leather,  boots,  and  shoes, 

Saddlery, 

Hats, 

Wax, 

Spirits  from  grain,  beer,  ale,  and  porter, 

Wood,  (inclnding  coaches  and  other  carriages,) 

Snuff  and  tobacco. 

Lead, 

Linseed  oil  and  spirits  of  turpentine, 

Cordage, 

Iron, 

Spirits  from  moUmes, 

Sugar  refined,     . 

Chocolate, 

Gunpowder, 

Copper  and  bram, 

Medicinal  drugs. 

Cotton  piece  goods : 

Printed  and  coldred,  .  $145,024 

White 981,370 

Nankeens,  ....        1,878 

Twist,  yam,  and  thread,  3,849 

All  other  manufactures  of         .  127,336 

Flax  and  hemp :  

Clotn  and  thread, 

Bags,  and  all  manufactures  of 

Wearing  apparel, 

Combs  and  Duttons, 

Brashes, 

Billiard  tables  and  apparatus. 

Umbrellas  and  parasols. 

Leather  and  morocco  skins,  not 

Fire  engines  and  apparatus. 

Printing  presses  ancl  type. 

Musical  instruments. 

Books  and  maps. 

Paper  and  other  stationary, 

Pamts  and  varnish. 

Vinegar, 

Earthem  and  stone  ware. 

Manufactures  of  ^lass, 

tm, 

pewter  and  lead, 
marble  and  stone, 
§[oId  and  silver,  and  gold  leaf. 

Gold  and  silver  coin. 

Artificial  flowers  and  jewelry, 

Molasses, 

Trunks, 

Brick  and  lime. 

Salt, 

Uncertaia, 


sold  per  pouud 


$692,691 

356,658 

35,765 

270,790 

132,939 

215,494 

501,946 

202,396 

8,417 

30,442 

7,!704 

223,705 

166,740 

50,739 

1,759 

171,924 

129,647 

101,524 


1,259,457 

2,166 

14,954 

91,106 

76,250 

3,150 

3,443 

22,067 

80,173 

2,832 

12,908 

8,868 

29,010 

25,629 

21,133 

5,953 

5,592 

49,900 

1,757 

5,185 

2,647 

11,250 

612,886 

21,627 

1,992 

11,248 

3,717 

27,648 


$3,301,560 


2,414,560 
309,106 

$6,025,206 


141 
TABLE  No.  XV.— CoNTiNuiD. 

A  siiiUnent  of  the  various  manufadurts  of  the  Unittd  SiaUSy  txporUd  in  1630, 

together  with  their  value. 

Soap  and  tallow  candles,          ....  $619,238 

Leather,  boots,  and  shoes,         ....  338,603 

Hoasehould  furniture,  .....  939,463 

Coaches  and  other  carriages,    .           .           .            •  61,190 

Haut, -  309,362 

Saddlery, 36,651 

Wax, 153,666 

Spirits  from  grain,  beer,  ale,  and  porter,          -            -  925,357 

Snuff  and  tobacco,        .....  946,747 

Lead, 4,831 

Linseed  oil,  and  spirits  of  turpentine,              •            -  35,039 

Cordage, -  4,135 

Iron,  pig,  bar,  and  nails,           ....  96,189 

castings,    .....            .  35,408 

all  manufactures  of,         ....  177,876 

Spirits  from  molasses,  .....  49,798 

Sugar,  refined,             .....  193.064 

Chocolate,          .....            .  993 

Gunpowder,       .           >           .           <           -            -  128,695 

Copper  and  brass,          .....  36,601 

Meaicinal  drugs,           .....  92,154 

Cotton,  piece  goods :  93,074,910 

Printed  and  colored,    -  -  .     961,800 

White,  ....      964,196 

Nankeens,        ....         1,093 

Twist,  yam,  and  thread,         >  .       94,744 

All  other  manufactures  of,     .  >     966,350 

Flax  and  hemp:                                                  1,318,183" 

Cloth  ana  thread,             ....  9^11^3 

Bags,  and  all  manufactures  of,     .           >            .  1,779 

Wearing  apparel,         .....  102,977 

Combs  and  buttons,       .....  124,589 

Brushes, 6,116 

Billiard  tables  and  apparatus,  -           .           .            •  315 

Umbrellas  and  parasols,           ....  25,796 

Leather  and  morocco  skins,  not  sold  per  pound,           .  70,968 

Printing  presses  and  type,         ....  13,274 

Musical  mstruments,    .....  10,961 

Books  and  maps,           .....  32,004 

Paper  and  other  stationary,       ....  40,994 

Paints  and  yamish,       .....  13,716 

Vmegar, 6,690 

Earthen  and  stoneware,            ....  9,773 

Manufactures  of  glass,             ....  60,980 

tin, 4,497 

pewter  and  lead,        .           .  4,172 

marble  and  stone,      ...  4,655 

gold  and  silver,  and  gold  leaf,           .  3,561 

Gold  and  silver  coin,     .....  937,151 

Artificial  flowers,         .....  13,707 

Molasses,  .-.---  3,966 

Trunks, 6,654 

Bnck  and  lime,             .....  2,482 

fi^t. 22,978 

f      -.  2335,9« 

Uncertmm,        ........         347,998 

t6,968,lll 


142 
TABLE  No.  XV.— CoNTiNVBD. 

A  statement  of  the  various  manufactures  of  ike  United  Slates^  exported  in  1831, 

together  vfith  their  value. 


Soap  and  tallow  candles, 

$643,252 

Leather,  boots,  and  shoes. 

890,937 

Household  farnimre,     . 

229,231 

Coaches  and  other  carriages,     . 

49,490 

flats,       •           •           •           .           . 

353,013 

Saddlery,            .... 

^ 

39,440 

vVaz,      ..... 

114,017 

Spirits  from  grain,  beer,  ale,  and  porter. 

141,794 

Snuff  and  tobacco, 

292,475 

7,068 

Linseed  oil  and  spirits  of  turpentine,    . 

54,002 

Cordage,            .... 

6,109 

Iron,  pig,  bar,  and  nails, 

62,376 

castings,     .... 

21,827 

all  manufactures  of, 

149,438 

Spirits  from  molasses,    . 

34,569 

Sugar  refined,     .... 

215,794 

Chocolate,          .... 

1,965 

Gunpowder,        .... 

102,033 

Copper  and  brass, 
Medicinal  drugs. 

55,755 
104,760 

Cotton  piece  goods : 

Printed  or  colored, 

92,969,43! 

.     896,931 

White,     .... 

.     947,932 

Nankeens,           .    *       . 

2,397 

Twist,  yam,  and  thread. 

17,221 

All  other  manufactures  of 

61,832 

• 

Flax  and  hemp :             ... 
Clotn  and  thread, 

1,126,313    ^ 

231 

Bags,  and  all  manufactures  of 

2,599 

Wearing  apparel,          .           .           .           . 

59,749 

Combs  and  buttons,        .           .           .           . 

120,217 

Brushes,              .           .           .           .           . 

3,947 

Billiard  tables  and  apparatus,    . 

t                                          4 

2,343 

Umbrellas  and  parasols, 

29,580 

Leather  and  morocco  skins,  not  sold  per  pounc 

1,          '■ 

58,146 

Printing  presses  and  type. 

Musical  instruments,      .           .           .           . 

8,713 

10,906 

Books  and  maps,            .           .           .           . 

35,609 

Paper  and  other  stationary. 

55,121 

Pamts  and  varnish,                  .           . 

22,022 

Vinegar,             .           .           .           .           . 

7,178 

Earthern  and  stone  ware, 

7,378 

Fire  engines  and  apparatus. 
Manufactures  of  ^tass. 

5.630 

102,736 

tm,      . 

3,909 

pewter  and  lead, 

6,422 

marble  and  stone,      • 

3,588 

gold  and  silver,  and  gold  leaf 

1                    • 

3,464 

Gold  and  silver  coin,     .          .          .          . 

• 

2,058,474 

Artificial  flowers  and  jewelry. 

11,439 

Molasses,            •           .           .           .           . 

948 

Trunks,              .           .           .           .           . 

5,326 

Brick  and  lime, 

4,412 

Salt, 

26,848 

3,7834M8 

Uncertain, 

a 

394,681 

•7,147,364 


TABLE  Nft.  XV.— ConTiMiiM. 


I  mawifMlMra  tf  tlu  UniUi  SaUi,  txparUd  i%  1639, 
t«gitMr  mtk  their  tal*e. 


Soap  and  tallow  casdles, 

Leatbrr,  boou,  and  shvea, 

Housrhold  ruraiture,    - 

CvaGbes  and  other  carriage!,    • 

HaiN      -  -  .  - 

SndJIcrr, 

Wai,    ".  -  -  - 

SfiiriLi  from  Eiain,  beer,  ale,  and  poner, 

Sous'  and  tobacco, 

Lead,      .  -  .  . 

Linwed  oil  and  spirits  of  IDrpenline,   • 

Cordage, 

Iron,  pis,  bar,  and  nails, 

castingi,    .  -  . 


Spirits  from  moloKeii, 

Sa^r.  refined,   - 

Choculatr. 

Onnpovder,       ... 

Copper  and  brass, 

Medicinal  drags, 

Colloii,  picL-e  TOOdi : 

Primed  or  colored. 

White,  - 

Nanlceens, 

Twi.'t,  yam,  and  thread, 

All  other  mtumfactDrcs  of. 


Bans,  and  all  maalactiirM  uf, 

■Wearing  apparel. 
Coinbi  ond  bmtuiis, 


Billiard  tablfs,  - 
tTmbrellaa  and  paraso  Is, 
Lealber  and  morocco  skins,  u 


TVI  u-iicaT  jBstrumeDta,    - 
Bouks  and  mapt, 
Papet  and  oifaer  sialioDBrj, 
raiiit>  and  varnish, 

Vinepar, 

Ennhem  and  itone  ware, 
Fire  ftujinn  and  appiratos, 
Mannlaclures  of  ^lass, 

pewter  and  lead, 

marble  and  stone, 

guld  and  silrer,  and  gold  leaf, 
Gold  sod  siWer  coin, 
Artificial  dowers  and  jewelry. 

Tracks,' 
Brick  and  lime, 
Uvmeiitic  ull,    • 

UneertaiD, 


«,8r7 
310,!II3 
29,573 


33,304 
13.S63 
65,979 
26,629 
190,823 
38,331 

7*,era 

8,35S 


1,229,574  ' 
1,670 
8,6M 
80303 
194,305 
4,754 
1,310 
30,361 
42,566 
33,558 
4,953 
29,893 
G1,M7 
94,611 
4,677 
6,333 


3,455 
653 
1,410,941 
14,853 
3.493 
5,314 
3,503 
97,914 


/ 


144 
TABLE  No.  XV.— Continued. 


A  staUment  of  the  various  manufactures  of  the  United  States^  ezported  in  1833^ 

togetker  toitk  their  value. 

Soap  and  tallow  candles,          ....  $673,076 

Leather,  bootf,  and  shoes,        ....  213,510 

Hoasehold  furniture,    -           -           .           .            .  900,635 

Coaches  and  other  carriages,               ...  28,830 

Hats, 343,271 

Saddlery, -  33,051 

Wax, 178,748 

Spirits  from  gnrain,  beer,  ale,  and  porter,         -            •  144,069 

Snuff  and  tobacco,        .....  ^,973 

Lead, 5,685 

Linseed  oil  and  spirits  of  turpentine,              -           -  30,293 

Corda^, 23,140 

Iron,  pig,  bar,  and  nails,          ....  72,177 

castines,              -          -          .          .           .  48,009 

manufactures  of             ....  113,626 

Spirits  from  molasses,              ....  28,463 

Sugar  refined,               .....  40,327 

Chocolate, -  2,148 

Ghinpowder,       .....            .  139,164 

Copper  and  brass,         .....  203,860 

Medicinal  drugs,          .....  126,355 

Cotton  piece  goods:  $2,837,430 

Printed  or  colored,       ...    $421,721 
White,  -  -  -  1,802,116 

Nankeens,        ....         2,054 
Twist,  yam,  and  thread,  -  -      104,335 

All  other  manufactures  of,       -  -      202,291 

Flax  and  hemp:                                                   2,532,517 

ClotJi  and  thread,     ....  5,964 

Bags,  and  all  manufactures  of,        -           -  18,985 

Wearing  apparel,         ....           .  .   43,943 

Combs  and  buttons,      .....  142,970 

Brushes,            -           -           -           -           -            -  3,157 

Billiard  tables  and  apparatus,  ... 

Umbrellas  and  parasols,           ....  21,380 

Leather  and  morocco  skins,  not  sold  per  pound,          -  38,267 

Printingpresses  and  type,        ....  16,599 

Fire  engines  and  apparatus,     ....  9,791 

Musical  instruments,    .....  5,400 

Books  and  maps,          .....  48,946 

Paper  and  other  stationary,      ....  46,484 

Paints  and  varnish,       .....  22,552 

Vinegar, 3,347 

Earthen  and  stone  ware,           -          •          -           -  12,159 

Manufactures  of  glass,            ....  93,494 

Sn, 2,928 

pewter  and  lead,       ...  2,010 

marble  and  stone,     ...  5,087 

gold  and  silver,  and  gold  leaf,          -  381 

Gold  and  silver  coin,    .....  366,842 

Artificial  flowers  and  jewelry,             ...  10,433 

Molasses, -  2,279 

Trunks, 7,608 

Brick  and  lime,            .....  3,866 

Domestic  salt,               .....  18,211 

3,485,600 

UneerUin, 600,899 


145 


CHAPTER  V. 

Trade  of  the  United  States  increased  by  the  wars  in  Earope^^reater  in  fofeigfl 
than  in  domestic  produce,  in  ld06,  1806  and  1807 — Cluantity  of  sugar,  coffeei 
cocoa,  pepper,  goods  free  of  duty,  and  paying  duties,  imported  and  exported  at 
different  pcriods-^Amount  of  gold,  silver  and  bullion  imported  and  exported 
•  from  1821  to  1833,  and  the  countries  from  and  to  which  it  was  imported  and  ex« 
ported  during  the  same  period. 

The  war  between  France  and  Great  Britain,  which  commenced  in 
1703«  and  which  continued,  with  bat  a  short  interval,  for  many  years; 
and  until  it  involved  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  and  principally,  on  the 
side  of  France,  against  Great. Britain,  threw  into  the  hands  of  the 
Americans,  no  small  portion,  of  the  trade  of  the  world.  The  vast  su- 
periority of  the  naval  force  of  England,  rendered  the  intercourse  of 
the  European  nations,  with  their  colonies,  extremely  difficult  These 
nations,  therefore,  were  obliged  to  depend  upon  neutrals,  to  carry  on 
this  trade,  between  them  and  their  distant  possessions.  The  ralu- 
able  productions  of  the  French,  Spanish,  and  Dutch  colonies,  coold 
find  their  way  to  Europe,  in  no  other  mode,  than  under  a  neutrtl 
flag. 

The  local  situation  of  the  United  States,  in  relation  to  the  West  In« 
dia  Islands,  naturally  threw  a  great  proportion  of  the  trade  of  those   L 
Iiclands,  into  the  hands  of  the  American  merchants ;  and  the  great 
increase  of  the  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  the  spirit  and 
enterprise  of  their  citizens,  led  them,  also,  in  the  progress  of  the  war,   ^ 
to  engage  in  the  more  distant  trade  of  the  East  Indies,  and  every  oth* 
er  part  of  the  world.    The  valuable  articles  of  colonial  produce,T8Qch 
as  sugar,  coffee,  spirits,  cocoa,  indigo,  pepper,  and  spices  of  all  kind,  ^ 
were  carried  by  them,  either  directly  to  Europe,  or  brought  to  tlie  ^ 
United  States,  and  from  thence  exported  in  American  vessels.    These 
and  other  articles  imported,  were  allowed,  under  certain  regulations, 
to  be  exported  with  a  drawback  of  the  duties  upon  them.    The  manu- 
factures of  Europe,  and  particularly  those  of  Great  Britain,  as  well  as 
the  manufactures  and  produce  of  the  East  Indies  and  China,  were,  al-*  I 
so,  imported,  and  again  exported  in  large  quantities,  to  th^  West  In- 
dies,.iSouth  America  and  elsewhere.    This  trade,  called  tife  carrying  . 
trade,  in  some  years,  exceeded  in  value,  the  trade  of  the  United  Statest 
in  articles  of  domestic  produce ;  and  was  tlie  means,  not  only  of  iav 

19 


•/ 


146 

creasing  the'American  tonnage,  but  of  adding,  to  the  wealth  of  the  na- 
tion, as  well  as  to  that  of  individuals. 

The  value  of  the  exports  of  the  United  States,  both  of  foreign  and 
domestic  origin,  are  presented  in  Chapter  III.  In  the  years  1805, 
1800  and  1807,  the  value  of  domestic  exports  was  *1 34,590,552,  on 
an  average  $44,863,517  per  year,  while  the  value  of  foreign  exporta 
was  $173,105,813,  being,  on  an  average,  each  year  ©57,701,937,  ma- 
king a  difference,  in  favor  of  the  latter,  of  $38,515,261,  or  $12,838,420 
per  year. 

The  following  quantities  of  sugar,  coffee,  pepper,  cocoa,  and  manu- 
factures principally  paying  duties  ad  valorem,  were  exported  from 
1791  to  1816. 


k'eara. 

8agar— lbs. 

Coffee— lbs. 

Pepper— lbs. 

Cocoa— Ibe. 

Goods  mosUr 
paying  ad  val. 
duties. —dolib 

1791 

74,504 

962,977 

.  492 

8,322 

2,810,310 

1792 

1,176,156 

2,134,742 

5,046 

6,000 

3,560,119 

1793 

4,539,809 

17,580,049 

14,361 

231,875 

4,110,240 

1794 

20,721,761 

33,720,983 

23,884 

1,188,202 

4,976,120 

1795 

21,377,747 

47,113,179 

301,692 

523,132 

5,670,260 

1796 

34,848,644 

62,385,.117 

491,330 

928,107 

6,794,346 

1797 

38,366,262 

44,521,887 

1,901,130 

875.334 

7,835,456 

1798 

51.703,963 

49,580,927 

501,982 

3,146.U5 

8,967,828 

1799 

78,821,751 

31,967,088 

411,312 

5,970,590 

18,718,477 

1800 

56,132,516 

38,597,479 

635,819 

4,925,518 

16,076,^48 

1801 

•  97,565,732 

45,106,494 

3,153,139 

7,012,155 

17,159,016 

1803 

61,061,820 

36,501,998 

5,422,144 

3,878,526 

14,906,081 

1803 

23,223,849 

10,294,693 

2,991,430 

367,177 

5,351,524 

1804 

74.964,366 

48,312,713 

5,703,(>16 

695,135 

9,377,805 

1805 

123,031,272 

46,760,291 

7,559,224 

2,425,680 

15,201,483 

1806 

145,839,320 

47,001,602 

4,111,983 

6,81(;.758 

19,016,909 

1807 

143,136,905 

42,122.573 

4,207,Uk; 

8,510,524 

18,971,539 

1808 

28,974,927 

7,325,448 

1,701»,9:8 

1,896,990 

4,765,737 

1809 

45,248,128 

24,361,099 

4,722,098 

2,029,336 

5,889,669 

1810 

47,038,125 

'31,423,177 

5.916,3:>6 

i,2m;.oio 

8.438,349 

1811 

18,381,673 

10,261,442 

3,057,456 

2,221,462 

8,815.291 

1812 

13,927,277 

10,073,722 

2,521,003 

752.148 

3,591,755 

1813 

7,347,038 

6,568,527 

99.6;;0 

108,188 

368,603 

1814 

762 

220,591 

Donc. 

27,:i86 

41,409 

1815 

3,193,908 

7,501,384 

746,319 

1,065,582 

3,486,178 

1816 

17,536,416 

8,948,713 

709,329 

531,571 

8,103,734 

1  ' 


This  trade,  brought  the  United  Slates,  into  collision  with  some  of 
the  European  powers,  and  particularly  Great  Britain  and  France;  and 
in  eonscqii^nce  of  the  celebrated  decrees  and  orders  of  those  twp  na- 
tions, (some  notice  of  which  will  be  taken,'  in  a  subsequent  chapter,) 
Ihe  embargo  was  laid  and  commercial  restrictions  commenced  with 


147 


Yean. 

Ru^r^Poumk. 

Ib21 

20,031,012 

1822 

1 1,4 16,810 

lb23 

21,45«,570 

1824 

11,110,082 

Idi^ 

21,830,511 

1826 

21,140,850 

1827 

10,081,132 

1828 

i5,:m,oio 

1829 

12,313,478 

1830 

9,907,812 

1831 

22,5*50, 116 

1832 

iriss,015 

1833 

0,477,203 

Pepper— Pounds.  Cocoa— Poondc 

680,425        1,504,872 


these  nations ;  and  which  finally  ended  in  a  war  between  the  United 
Slates  and  Great  Britain.     During  the  war,  this  trade  was  annihilated.  / 
On  the  return  of  peace  in  Kuro])e,  as  well  as  in  Aoi^rica,  this  trade  in 
foreign  articles,  was,  of  cuursc,  greatly  diminished. 

The  following  account,  however,  of  exports  of  sugar,  coffee,  pep- 
per, cocoa,  and  of  goods  free  of  duty,  a«i  well  as  those  paying  specific 
and  ad  valorem  duties,  from  1821  to  1833,  will  shew,  that  the  United  ^ 
States,  have  enjoyed  no  inconsiderable  share,  of  the  carrying  trade, 
during  this  period. 

An  account  of  sugar,  coffee,  pepper  and  cocoa,  exported  from  1821 
to  1833. 

Coffee— Poiindt. 

9,387,5<.K3 

7,267,119 
20,900,(^9 
19,427,227 
24,512,5(58 
11,581,713 
21,697,789 
l(>,a37,964 
ls,0JS.3,H13 
13,124,560 

(5,056,()29 
5.5,251,158 
21,8:)7,114 

Value  of  merchandise,  free  of  duty,  and  paying  ad  valorem  and  spe- 
cific dutios,  exported  from  1^21  to  1*<W. 


K5(),529 

4,4^s8,512 

2,2:36,933 

2,0(57,010 

2,803,281 

3(V1,169 

914,294 

654,940 

2,160,889 

6:35,850 

l,8i)8,502 

2,970,231 


2,520,869 
1,633,460 
1,908,026 
2,926,012 
2,502,665 
4,319,688 
4,049,648 
3,262,221 
1,867,847 
1,783,003 
1,418,352 
1,(574,121 


1H22 

1S23 

Ih21 

1S25 

lS2f5 

1^27 

1^2S 

1*^^9 

1830 

1831 

1832 

1833 


Pnyinir  ihitirA 

84,595,090 
4,(5I»9,Nll 
S,.V>2,3-i<) 

ihTZ  i,or.j 

12,551,40*1 

11,27(5,5:38 

M:39.271 
7,(W\:3si 

5,(5:]J,:309 
7,051,2N> 
K2:«,916 
7,6  i9,S)5 
8.260,381 


Puy'ii*  jpiV.fli:        Tofnl  piyin*;  Frrp  of 

Until «.  diiiii'ri.  dutv. 

85,912,611  810,5:37,731  810.7(^1,757 
(;,  101,4(52     11,101,306    11,1S1,S96 
19,s  1(5,^73     7,69(5,749 


11,:M1.511 
7,49%002 

lo,i.vj,:ji;5 

8,127,9')8 
7,n>.715 
5,  n7,9.')> 
.•>,796  !V.»2 
5,()l2.->76 
4,2(H>,5:37 
10,71K),a52 
4,161,588 


17.v:-.^i,075 
22,71)  i,>0:3 
19, 101,561 
15,(517,9M5 

i:3,i(57,:3:39 

11,427,101 
12,(m7,l(>2 
I2,1:M,4*<3 
lMi\S37 
12,411,969 


8,115,a^2 
9,SS5,M0 
5,135,ia8 
7,7n5,150 
S,  127,(578 
5,231,077 
2,320,317 
7,590,013 
5,590,616 
7,410,766 


T«)U1  value. 

821,302,486 
22,286,202 
27,543,622 
25,337,167 
32,590,613 
24,530,612 
23,403,136 
21,595,017 
1(5,668,478 
14,387,479 
20,033,043 
2^1,039,473 
19,822,735 


148 

We  would  here  remark,  that  mach  the  greatest  part  of  the  etportSf 
free  of  duty,  consisted  of  gold  and  silver  coin  and  of  bullion.  Until 
1821,  no  official  •documents  furnished  an  account  of  the  imports  and 
exports  of  Specie.  We  here  subjoin  a  statement  of  the  gold  and  sil- 
Ter  coin,  as  well  as  bullion  imported  and  exported,  from  1821,  to 
1833;  and  Tables  Nos.  I  and  II,  will  shew  the  countries,  from  and  to 
which  the  same  has  been  imported  and  exported,  during  the  same 
period. 


Gold  and  silver  coin. 

Gold  and  silver  coin. 

Bullion. 

Ballion. 

Taara. 

Imports  of 

EzpcHlsof 

Imports. 

Exports. 

1821 

$7,980,000 

$10,477,969 

$84,890 

$90 

1822 

2,958,402 

10,781,932 

411,444 

28,248 

1823 

4,867,125 

6,371,187 

230,77J 

1,800 

1824 

8,047,678 

7,014,552 

319,451 

•       • 

1825 

5,630,918 

8,786,206 

519,847 

10,849 

1826 

7,302,685 

4,057,940 

578,281 

40,738 

1827 

7,637,476 

6,959,459 

513,654 

11,847 

1828 

6,955,028 

7,494,188 

474,713 

56,251 

1829 

6,455,867 

4,072,043 

947,745 

239,091 

1830 

6,991,354 

1,206,831 

1,164,610 

34,791 

1831 

6,453,471 

6,731,195 

852,473 

225,262 

1832 

5,068,772 

3,982,267 

838,732 

262,132 

1833 

6,624,261 

2,218,086 

346,107 

26,773 

The  imports  of  specie,  from  1821,  to  1830,  a  period  of  ten  years, 
was  about  sixty  four  millions,  eight  hundred  thousand  dollars,  being 
about  six  and  a  half  millions  a  year ;  and  the  exports  about  sixty 
seven  millions,  three  hundred  thousand  dollars ;  about  six  miUions 
and  three  quarters  a  year.  It  ought  to  be  noticed,  also,  that  since 
the  year  1826,  from  seven  hundred  thousand,  to  a  million  of  dol* 
lars,  of  domestic  Gold  and  Silver,  coined  in  the  United  States, 
has  been  annually  exported  ;  and,  as  before  stated,  has  been  included 
among  the  exports  of  domestic  manufactures.  The  amount  of  spe- 
cie imported,  from  December  1st,  1833,  to  August  12th,  1834,  was. 
$12,653,691 ;  and  the  amount  exported,  during  the  same  period,  was 
only  $950,815. 

SUGARS. 

The  whole  quantity  of  Sugar,  imported  into  the  United  States,  in 
1806  and  1807,  the  years  of  greatest  importation,  was 

In  1806  200,737,940  pounds. 

1807  .  215,836,202 


149 

About  fourteen  mUlionfl  of  pounds,  in  1807,  came  from  Asia  and    / 
Africa,  and  the  residue,  from  the  West  Indies,  and  South  America.  ^ — " 
In  the  same  year,  it  was  shipped  to  the  following  places — viz. 


To  Russia,  .  .  .  52,852 
Sweden,  .  .  .  179,587 
Denmark  and  Norway,  2,286,608 
Holland,  .  .  48,012,198 
Great  Britain,     .  2,015,765 

Hamburg,  Bremen,  ^c.  2,192,991 


France, 

Spain, 

Portugal,   . 

Italy, 

Europe,  generally, 


27,831,968 
6,906,740 

178,643 
14,074,935 

184,798 


Clayed— Iba. 

297,844 

133,949 
1,267,227 
8,719,529 

640,231 
1,066,943 
7,029,202 
5,524,852 

188,356 
9,476,602 

159,479 


In  1825,  the  sugar  exported,  was  principally  shipped  to  the  follow- 
ing places,  yiz. 


Brown— Ibt. 

313,081 

1,086,206 

1,844,189 

4,726,036 


To  Russia,     .... 
Sweden  and  Norway, 
Denmark, 
Holland, 

England,  Man,  and  Berwick,  83,343 

Gibraltar,  ^18,476 

The  Hanse  Towns,  &^c.    .  2,695,205 

French  Atlantic  porU,       .  958,896 

French  Mediterranean  ports,  541,957 

Spain,       ....  202,359 

luly  and  Malta,        .         .  834,796 

Trieste,  &c.     .        .        .  910,575 

Turkey,  Levant,  Ac.         .  200,5-18 


Clayed— Iba. 

412,334 
66,721 

1,065,149 
286,862 
120,570 
258,292 
500,794 
301,167 
980,356 
13,322 
758,464 

1,345,985 
269,983 


Tables  No.  Ill,  IV,  V,  and  Vf,  shew  the  countries  and  places,  to 
which  sugar  was  exported,  from  1800  to  1816,  and  from  1821  to  1833. 


COFFEE. 


The  quantity  of  thia  article  exported,  on  an  average  of  the  years 
1801,  1805,  1806,  and  1807,  exceeded  forty  five  millions  of  pounds; 
and  in  tlie  year  1807,  principally  to  the  following  places,  viz. 


150 

Poondt. 

To  Russia, 149,271 

Denmark  and  Norway,           .         .         .  756,511 

Holland 21,833,438 

Great  Britain, 1,052,075 

Hamburg,  Bremen,  6lc.         .        .        .  2,644,511 

France,         .        .        .        .        .        .  11,088,529 

Spain, 456,428 

Portugal, 44,801 

Italy, 3,490,496 

The  average  quantity  exported,  during  the  years  1826,  1827,  1828, 
1829,  and  1830,  was  sixteen  millions  of  pounds;  and  in  1827,  to  the 
iullowing  countries,  viz.  • 

Pounds. 

To  Russia, 572,076 

Sweden  and  Norway,      .        .        .        .        261,375 

Denmark, 761,738 

Netherlands, 2,422,173 

Gibraltar, 965,758 

Hanse  Towns,  and  other  ports  of  Germany,  5,406,374 
French  Atlantic  ports,  ....  4,047,204 
French  Mediterranean  ports,  .  .  .  *  2,284,823 
Italy  and  Malta,  .  .  *  .  .  .  1,417,061 
Trieste,  and  other  Austrian  ports,  .         .      1,052,951 

•     Turkey,  Levant,  and  Egypt,   .         .        .      2,266,576 

The  whole  exported  during  the  year  1827,  exceeded  twenty  one 
millions  of  pounds. 

Tables  No.  VII  and  VIII,  shew  the  countries  to  which  cofiee  was 
chipped,  from  1800  to  1816,  and  from  1821  to  1833. 

While  the  Americans  were  thus  carrying  to  Europe  the  rich  pro- 

V  ducts  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  ihey  brought  back  in  return,  great 

''^quantities  of  manufactured  goods,  principally  from  Great  Britain, 

which  they  again  exported,  to  different  parts  of  the  world,  especially, 

lo  the  West  Indies  and  South  America. 

The  amount  of  goods,  free  of  duty,  and  paying  duties  ad  valorem, 
embracing  woollens  and  cottons,  exported  in  1806,  was  $18,571,477; 
and  in  1807,  $18,564,507. 

The  whole  amount  of  goods,  paying  ad  valorem  duties,  imported 
the  same  years,  was,  • 

In  1806         ......       $54,461,957 

1807 58,655,917 


151 

Between  one  third  and  three  qaarters,  therefore,  of  all  the  goods, 
paying  those  duties,  imported  in  these  two  years,  were  again  exported. 
These  goods  came  from  different  quarters  of  the  world,  in  1807,  in 
the  following  proportions,  viz. 

From  Europe, $50,915,135 

Africa, 108,607 

Asia, 6,392,592 

West  India  Islands,  and  American  Colooies,     1,239,583 

$58,655,917 

Of  which  $43,525,320  came  from  the  united  kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland  and  dependencies ;  $3,812,065  from  France  and  depen* 
dencies;  and  the  residue,  being  $11,318,532,  from  other  coontriea 
and  places. 

The  other  articles  of  foreign  produce  ond  manufacture,  of  conside* 
rmble  value,  exported,  prior  to  1808,  were  wines,  teas,  spices  of  all 
kinds,  paints,  lead,  and  manufactures  of  lead,  iron,  fish,  ind  many 
others  of  minor  importance.  On  an  average  of  the  years  1805, 1806, 
and  1807,  the  annual  quantities  of  wines,  spirits,  teas,  cocoa,  and  pep- 
per, exported,  were. 

Wines, 3,423,485  gallons. 

SpiriU, 1,600,^1      do. 

Teas, 2,151,385  pounds. 

Cocoa, 5,937,654     do. 

Pepper, 5,292,791      do. 

That  this  extensive  foreign  commerce,  usually  called  tlie  carrying 
trade,  was  highly  beneficial,  and  added  much  to  the  wealth  of  the 
United  States,  cannot  be  doubted.  While  it  greatly  increased  their 
commercial  tonnage,  it  enriched  the  public  treasury,  as  well  as  indi- 
viduals. 

Many  of  the  goods,  thus  exported,  had  paid  the  duties,  and  were  * 
not  entitled  to  a  drawback,  in  consequence  of  the  exporters  not  hav-' 
ing  complied  with  the  law,  on  that  subject.    The  amount  of  duties 
thus  paid,  on  articles  exported,  without  the  benefit  of  drawback,  dur- 
ing the  years  1805,  1806,  and  1807,  amounted  to  the  following  sums, 
Tiz. 

Inl8(^ $1,531,618 

1806 1,297,535 

1807 1,393,877 

Making,         ....       $1,223,003 


k 


152 


When  we  add  to  this,  the  amount  of  the  three  and  a  half  per  cent 
retained,  on  all  the  drawbacks,  and  which,  during  these  three  years, 
was  $1,030,677,  we  find,  that  the  whole  amount  received,  into  the 
public  treasury,  in  these  three  years,  for  duties,  in  consequence  of  this 
trade,  and  which  was  not  paid,  by  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
was  $6,253,697,  being  about  one  ninth  of  all  the  duties  collected, 
during  the  same  period.  The  amount  this  trade  added,  to  the  wealth 
of  the  nation,  and  to  individuals,  cannot  be  ascertained,  with  precis- 
ion :  it  must  have  been  many  millions  a  year. 

The  annual  amount  of  foreign  goods,  paying  duties  ad  valorem, 
from  1826  to  1830,  inclusive,  being  five  years,  was  about  eight  mill- 
ions, and  the  average  quantity  of  wines,  spirits,  teas,  cocoa,  and  pep- 
per, exported,  during  the  same  period,  was. 

Wines, about  570,000  gallons. 


Spirits, 
Teas, 
Cocoa, 
Pepper, 


500,000     do. 
2,000,000  pounds. 
3,400,000     do. 
1,300,000     do. 


TABLE  No.  L 
raii'V  Sift.  ia./Ttu  1691  (*  1896,  indium. 


TABLE  No.  I.— Continued. 


aMandSilKr,  inBiMvinandCoiit,  inpi/TUd  inlalit  Uniud  SaUi,  in  tie  flan 
esdiHf  Sept.  30,  frm  1837  le  1830,  iiulutin. 


»<rKUili  W««  InilLM^ 


Briitah  kmaiit 

OUMr  HFiMh  Colonlt^ 
■mw  TWm  and  Omu 
rnmn  «  Uia  Ailwtte, 


BpMiih  Wrrt  Indlf*. 

^pifllili  SouUi  Amcrlcu  Cola 

Itril  *ad  Hlwr  Anna, 
CpedFVrrdUlintfa, 
Pgnqgune  Alrlua  Pnru, 


rnrhe;,  L<ituii,  EfTpi,  Ac. 


Diuil 


nifi07   I 


I    !4T,3U    MlVt 


its 

3  lipase 


ETa.GSe     3fi3,8S0     3(19,0M 


eoiima-E 


13,000 
U,38l 


■tlBH3t|f,«9».»0I?,«M,ftl8li.ltB,»6H7J(6,Wtl»,W.KH 


TABLE  No.  II. 


,  in  B^iunand  Coim,  tXfoTted  frtm  tkt  {7ntlti  SMu,  i 
niing  Sifl.  XJnm  1831  (#  18S6,  itKiwitw. 


—Eism 

'  IK 
1S.0OO 

ai,i«i 

».» 

iin,a»' 

4.000 
WsSW 

i,iM,a» 

— n33- 

-rm- 

M 

J,9M 

7:319 
i,Boo 

l,SI6 

I0i,6»7 

363,406 

«,800 

3,SM.I» 

n 

B3n!i87 

-raa- 
ni.s«s 

3,000 

!K8 

2,180 

8,!M 

i,ft» 
Bi,4« 

2,877 

ai,9](i 

IBBT 

-nar 

^^  ;  ;  i 
lis?  : 

IhnctiEMlndK?. 

aai    :     :     : 

K^       ■ 
Brilbh  AOle^D  P«t<, 

rium  Ch>  India, 

TlUihWallBdli^ 

nsclrbM  India. 

Htm  Prpnch  A  ritciD  Poru, 

riocrun-  uJ  culler  Cn«ri~, 

Mat  PonucirH  Alrlcan  Pwti, 

TNrk>7.  Uinni,  Efjpl.  *o. 
Vupr  uf  Good  Hop*." 

sJiu  AiBCTla.  (minll;, ' 
(orthWalCau.  . 

V 

fir' 

6,000 

■lAwa 

88,000 

is: 

a,»60 

iai.Mi 

aim 
14.000 

187,008 

»I3.7» 
'  WO 

ssss 

148,987 

8«8,ra 

H,0« 

so,aa 

8.«» 

J6.000 

ai.ioo 

ia,aii 

U7,ai6 
E3,(l» 

3,000 

i 

'  n 

<H3S 

lo^m 

iSDO 

1»,I18 

is 

40330 
lilK 

..88^ 

liitSSa 

U,UI 

Tout-dallui, 

M^CT^BWIMU^IW 

7rflM.«li 

»,797fl8* 

156 


TABLE  No.  IL— Continued. 


GM  tuU  SUvtr,  in  BuUi&n  and  Coin,  exporUdfrom  the  UniUd  SUUes,  in  Hk  femti 

ending  Sept,  90,fnm  1897  to  1832,  inclnnve. 


udio 


K5iG, 


SwedtaU  West  Indies, 

Dmunaj^ 

Diiilih  WMl  Indifli, 

Duiteh  Eaat  Indies, 

HoDsad,  ■. 

Dmcli  west  Indies, 

DMbhSMftlBdles, 


f.^'i)^, 


Irsluid, 


BHUsh  AJMesB  Pons, 

•rUsli  E«rt  IMies, 

Mtlih  West  Indlc^. 

Nswftvvadlsnd, 

Bffllistk  American  ColoQles^ 

Ocber  British  Colonics, 

Hsose  Towns, 

Fkiace  on  the  Atlsntle, 

Flpsnee  on  the  M editemnesn, 

Fkwch  West  Indies,  . 

FMBch  East  Indies.     . 

Bourtwm  snd  M  surttios. 

Other  French  African  Ports, 

Hsjti, 

Spain  on  the  Atlantic, 

'    on  the  Mediterranean, 
illb  and  other  Canaries, 
MsnOla  and  PhUltppine  lalands, 
Florldas, 
Cabs, 
Othsr  Spanish  West  Indies, 

Ish  South  American  Uiloniea, 


Ports, 


Fkjral  and  other  Azores, 

Cape  de  Verd  Islands, 

Otosr  PortQguese  African 

SicUy,    . 

Italy  and  Malta, 

Trieste,  Ac. 

Torkey,  Lerant,  Egypt,  dec 

Morocco,  Ac 

Csps  of  Good  Hope,    . 

duns,   . 

Onatemaia, 

Honduras,  Cpmpeachy,  Ac 

Odoabla, 

■ncll, 

Bueaos  Ayres, 

Arfsntlne  Eepublie,  . 

OWI,     . 

Psni« 

Ssvth  America,  generally, 

Wast  Indies,  generally, 

Asia,  geacrally, 

■orops,  generally, 

Africa,  generally, 

Sooth  Seas, 

Nofth  West  Coast, 

Uttssitaln  Ports, 


1827. 


182S. 


m 

600 
47,3601     66,209 

740     4,aao 

017 

96,88B(  966^400 
19()^10l|9,809,776 

• 

86,000 


3,000 
672,lf 

27,660 


tWHtoUM% 


2,000 

l,64a913|2;396,690l  1,677,000 
1,600       6,862  •  •    3,380 
600  600  025 


4,316 


873^296 
2,000 


14,000 
8,000 


630,980 

i;8eo 

63,270 


1829.   I 
lO^ia 


1630. 


lO^ia     28,700 


61,200 

16^461 

149,660 
613;833 

• 

10,672 

297,301 
4,878 

40,263 


183). 


VQ,423 


773 
20^187 


2,260 

62,600 

102,229 


69,860 

160,641 
1,761 

19^321 


1832. 


iro.  I 


136^118  9;9e0,609 


6,602 


20,663, 
33,600' 

2,360 
101,000 

784,978 
1,960 


1,167 


25,000 


60,000 
>13.318    464 


2,613,31 


800 


86.146 


20,781 
6,000 

6,671 
600^880 

16,610 


464,5001 

4,860 


29.200 
136^183 


10,641 
160,360 


2,000 


8,438 
60,000 

6,612 
20,062 

682,144 
31,606 


600 


83,672 


601,493 
4,640 


880 
73,613 


161,600 

i.ooo 


276,687 
21,660 


1,638 


79,964 


10,600  18,000 
40^3ra     38,646 

^  : 

480^976  426^698 
1,616^643  1, 112;2>8 

•  • 

20,000  njM 

486,087  2li8B6 

1,600  10,819 


26,900 


14.611 
3,842 


11,032 
4,000 


3,000 

300,500 

36,683 


9,600 


367,024 
24,210 


1,470    216,376 


63,648 
21,362 


1(9;630 


1,100 


M7Ua06t7,66^439K»ll,ia4il.au,6iBlM66>4i7|i9lMW 


900 
174,900 


16^961 


460,779 
11^000 


'800 
9;060 

6,975 
68,000 

189.IB2 
42,^ 


40O 

660 
2,100 


462,119 

1,000 

51,990 

56,798 
381,608 

• 

73,877 
100^709 


946| 
404,661 


100       8,000 


^mm 

:f 

riSiiliP 

il;P|lf 

2S 

"ii 

!  §l|||||||||. 

5 

.iS|lli|§..||§ 

-  "S  "a-  ■     " 

i;l;::» 

i  5  .iiiip  .3  .p 

jg.p....|. 

,|l- 

ill  s      f 
r 

:H 

.sjMiiM.i-y. 

'  tl" 

if 

■li--i:-i 

mMm 

! . .  .H-  in 

:l: 

llllilllU 

flii 

158 


1 

i 

O 


e 

as 

0 


S 


i$ 


g 


i 


?aD  Id 


r?  $  ®  eJK 


ooi«* 


s 


COCDOI>CiwO 
W     •  OD  QD  O  4^^iO  3D  iO  CO  r*  »-^ 


CO  cb  id 


lO 


!-•—  ^ 


ef 


to 


fit  9  ^       9  @  ^  £r  Q  S  CO 
^     •  CO  %0  ^^  ^^  ^  *0  '^ 


>-'    ef    >•: 


ti 


.ool 


S88s>853dio8SSS 

g^*ii«tDCj09^0liO^gQe3 

§228    S228SS 


1^5      r«d>COg^ 


s 


3  .SSSSziP  -iSSSS 

v*l82 


^  !*• 


^ 


B 

8 


■B    S    « 

B'5.5 

*>  .v*  O    C    B 

•SeJ^g  I  s  6 
-  g  $  B^  ^^  S  i'S 


JbSU 


g 


e*     efwtf    off 


•^ 


5  •  = 


^  CO  lO  lO  lO  9 


x>  ■  n  "  IS  o  oc  X  cb  X 


^       rf 


S 


8     •'S'OQD     •rfODf^r-C 


S  •  S 2? S^ S^ cdS SS 

O  IQ  59  &  55  Rj 

^  ^  r*  kO  V  ^ 


•»      •»     ^      • 


•  o  'PS 


^S 


^ Tf 


55   •  ©  OD  TT«  o  c«  io  el  w  OD  a^»-« 

^  ■>    •>    »  • 


©f^-- 


*  a   B    *- 

-S  *s  ^  i 

0    ft*    ^    V 


-2-2  g 


s 
.g 

.^  is 

v'  21 
B  ••• 

Vis's 

«B    4»    « 

B^  JS 

^"':; 

O   6   B 
^   O   O 

V    S     . 

B  ei 


a"- 


B   _ 
"5X9 


169 


o 


O 

O 
Q 

u 


J 

J 


1 


•J 


»'•       f* 


I 


•  • 


s 


i 


S9 


3 


—  '^^ 


_*k   •>   »   » 


O  t»g  —  CO 

•w  S  rr  5  2  2  <^  «>  ?•  _ 

•  _*  w-       w       m  m- 


•       * 


I 


Ifi  lO  7C  db  ^ 
rp  ift  ^  — 

C>  TT   W  -SJ* 

»       •>       »      » 

e^  3D  —  >■* 

cokb 


c-  w  lO  ^  — 


X 


r«  o  o  o 


Sd  '®  S^  5 

>0  CO       00 


®  Tf  S  5  cc 
©*  co^coo 

-c^ 

iOCO 
'Si 


Id 


\^ 


CO  — 


'.%'   >jg  VJ  —  "TT 

•  —  j6  w  §1 S 

»       »       •>       ^    a 

•  —  O  01       o 


•OD 


i5" 

'■■» 

JO 


kO 


.^ 


w 


!•» 


9^ 


8^ 


8' 


CO  o  ob  ot  F* 
22     CO  ^  CO 


to 


g. 


l« 


r 


2  fc 


I 
I  ■ 

c 

I? 

5 
i5 


\x6     c^«  1- 


o 


c 
E 


C9  O 


i 


si 


E 

c 

o 


SC3 


n 

Sb. 


C    9 


o 

B 


e 


i  Misuse 


<B    B 

6  J 

B  -r 


B 

a  .  . 


& 


iQESa« 


OCCk 


i^ 

££ 


-I 


160 


i 


z 

m 
e 


§b 


of 

< 

9 


2*. 


S 


g 


I 


5 


i 


i]^ 


'f 


I* 

5 


IS 

s 

s 


f 


1^ 


iS 


So   'iS 


^^  VR  CQ 


C*  w  ^*  9  9 
®  ^  ^ 


CD 


25 


S  (K  9d  GO  S 
c!7  S     ^ 


r^\    w^M    ^^M    ftr^    #9k    f^K    ^^M   ^M^ 


6 


•»    ^    ^    ^ 


•>•>*•>   •»       ^       •>  _^  _^  _^ 

r*  CO  ff*  *o  vJD  00  ^ 


1^ 


^e' 


I 


^&8 


QD  ^  V  CP  w 


"S — s"^ 

•  9  9 


c 
c 

(0      • 

•s  «> 

9n 


J 


O    C    C         tQ 


a 


«  e 


I 


^ 


OD 


e 

IB 

► 

4) 


9 


•k 

$ 


i 


_2L 


3 


« 
I 


8  "8  'S  •©«  'S? 
t    ^    5     tZ^    ^S 


OD    •  O     •    •  85    •  CO    •     '  • 
•-*       OD  .CO     .S     .     .^ 


rt*  t^O  Of 


.S8PgS'gj|=g| 


2S 


cot*© 

•>      •>      » 

©S  St 


SI 


9 


?•  r»  ©  »^  W  W  Ot 


t*  i*©  ssgb 

^  p-  -««© 

05  -  ----^ 


^-«iO-« 


•      •      • 


•       •       • 


•       •       • 


•      •      • 


•0 


a 

ATS 


•      » 


« .s  S  g  c  g  « 

S  S  S^  °^  ^S 


I  tefijqp 


n  V  «•=: 


a  c 

"O  o 

«  • 

o  o 


i 


.  fi 


161 


mi    «S 

^  i 


ci 


IT*     O 


II 


i 


li 


I 


CO 


»  »  »   ^ 


-^^ 


•$o 


•       •» 


CO  ® 

^5r?r25^-cs 


r*r«x 


CO  -«  O  3)  A 

XC  ^M  Zl  SnI  -Z 
91  Cf  v«  r«  »-* 

W  3D  ^  f^ 

aDoxco5<^»-*fO 


f 

o 


i 


8 


9^ 


Sc  S  CI  S  lO 

5S3SS     SSco 

Cf       CO—  — 


••       ^w  ^  »*  ^  ^  •»  v^  ^ 


Ci  ^  o  r* 


eo 


5S  =  i§£fS?§ 


•^  •?*  O  *T  lO 
»     »     ^     » 

CO  Ci  r*  C« 


7:1 2i  ^  ^  *4  ^  3  t**     **  ^- 


coiOiO--j»5ir»^ 
1*  ;0  «^  •r      — 


O 


c 

s 

c  ^ 

•-  ca 


CI 


S 

3 

X 


.2  g  «  c  -^  3  cT    .  §D 


E 

c 
be 


H 

s 


CO 

»o 


-•      -C^ 


^ 


II 


i 


•      • 


-'if 


5^  ggx 


§ 


•^ 


■J $885    o  g 


•r  -*  r-T 


X? 


ti 
s.' 


»4 
I  O 

'  %m 

i    i* 


^  »  •>  » 

•*  CO  f^  o  cj 

-  lO  lO  ©  1 


s?  §  g  ^ 


QD 


SO. 


5*  "T  <^ 

_•■    ••  ^  » 

—  ^  -•d  CO  © 
C^ 


ocooS 


*JoS2 


^-  a  .= 


a    r 


3 


T3 


o 

E 


o 

C 


CO 


21 


4>   ..  & 
g  •  --g  gas 


.1 

B 

& 

±•2 


16S 


B 
9 


6  Pj« 


i 


«  ^ei  ^  -»©i 


§c- 


i 


lo  ?  S  $.35  r- ffi  5  S  $  S.5  8  —  S 

•  P-4CI  O  A -^  I*  <P  9  O  l«  ^  CI        ^ 


;o 


SSSSSSi&Sfl  .s 

CI  —  ^  t*  •f  —  ©  0>  Pi*  06  O        ^ 

«o  oci  —  a  ^^«  lO      ^ 


00  « 


M  p«eo 


CI  CI 


§ 


r^        »iNeOCICI»"CI-* 


iMteat-Acier-'Wtoeo^ 
-coMcici  o  «t  •-•  or  c  ^  r  oo 

P       CI  AO  *M  le  eb  lO  §5  t«  t^  I 
b        M        M^A5l«C^Ad)i 


CI  Of  M        piN  ^ 


s 


cD»e  -N 
.  -f  •-  ^ 

t  CI  w 


«9  0>  ""f  -N 


*«  go  lo  Q  ic  OO  d 
«e  A  9:  M  —  o  ^ 

»       »       •       »       »      »      «i 

Sie  m  or  CD  —  o 
-« ir»  00  9i  00  o 
^  fM  C0  (.N  r-  S  o 


«        to  ^O  CIM  AQO -«  t« 

3«    .  Of  «  *«  00  A  »-*  o  e  09 

9        ^  fM  ;0        lO  ;e  A 


I 


M 


1  - 


«     g     « 
III 


11 


.         .      Q 

c|1 

•T  «  « 
a.c.c 

>  o  c  c 
^  o  o 

Sv  « 
a  e  a 


V 


a    * 


^ciis  «>C4  —  00  X  <N  o  Sci    .A 

O  |«  O  CI  Of  O  CI  C9  00  00  QD  «f  f        ^ 

^  00  CI      «o  evi -•  ^ -• -^ 


s 


M    •  QOe  a  ^  c  2  CI  X  00  goM    .^ 
A      M  —  cie  or  o)&  00  »  o  ^      a 

8      S  t  8S  or  Of  55  So  ©  S      I!^ 


00 


o 


i 


CI 

eo 


I 


CI 


a 


r 
5. 


'    - 


I  CI  r«  0>  <e  or  <o -4  lO  r- 1*      lo 

2  AC  00  Of  e  So  <5  ^  ^      ^ 

»•*       »»»«>»•• 

••  »  or      i«xt«ci«^ 


tooociciceeooaocieQQSSO 
•-<e^io©**»--"*o»i*2acr- 

^eoiQAooor^eco^e  —  oy 

^   »   •   >    »   #♦   ♦   •    #k#i«fc_» 

at  00  00  A  00  A 

n  (e  A  M  r«  CI 


»      »      #      «k      •>      * 

I*  •»  t* 

•»      •      «k 


piN  ^Cl  MM 


Qc  le  le  CI  « 
^  A  c  -  2 

A  M  2  (Xl^m 


lO  A  ^ 


•III 


gS^?!^*^'?*^*^ 


^    00  lO  f 
CI        mOO 


S5  .2 


8- 


OIOgQQ«-CIOA*" 
CI«CliQk9r*  — lO 
A  •*  r-  CI  CI  t*  A  •* 


A  ^  ^  O  C  •* 

»^  ^  A  "         ~ 


00  e  « 
9s  "»•  5 

M  A  00 

V  V"  ^  ^  V-  ^  ^  ^  9  ^^ 

oer«ecior««'CiA 

•      •      *      * 


^  M  00  CI 


lO  eo  00 


^  00  -•  c  00  or  — 
.  lO  •. — 

CI  r*  •* 

00  -^  lO 

A  or  CI 


2«S     ^  2  ■"  ®  * '*' —  S*' 


^sssas 


•r  CI 


00 


e 
*S 


m 

i 

o 
m 


9 
•   •  c 

-I 

4<S 


SJJ5     t 


163 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Value  of  imports  into  the  United  States,  at  different  periods— Mode  of  eslimating 
the  value  of  impurts  and  exports,  in  the  United  States  and  in  Great  BritaiD— 
Amount  of  American  trade,  with  different  countries,  at  difierent  periods,  from 
ihe  commencement  of  the  present  general  government — A  brief  history  of  the 
trade  with  the  British  West  Indies,  of  the  disputes  respecting  it,  and  the  effect 
of  the  arrangement  in  relatli.n  to  it,  made,  in  1831,  upon  American  navigation 
and  the  carrying  trade — Comparative  view  of  imports  and  exports,  at  different 
periods — Origin  of  the  American  trade  with  China,  and  the  amount  of  trade 
viih  this  country  from  American  and  British  accounts — Cluantity  of  teas  im- 
ported, from  China,  in  different  years — Amount  of  woollen,  cotton,  and  other 
goods  imported  from  Great  Biitain.  at  different  periods. 

Hating,  in  the  preceding  pages,  given  an  account  of  the  exports 
of  the  United  States,  we  shall  now  present  a  view  of  their  importi 
together  with  the  extent  of  their  commercial  intercourse  with  different 
nations,  as  far  as  practicable,  from  the  commencement  of  the  goT- 
ernmeut.  We  would  here  remark,  that,  prior  to  1821,  no  official 
documents  enable  us,  to  give  the  value  of  tlie  various  imported  arti- 
cles— the  value  of  none,  but  those  paying  ad  valorem  duties,  being 
returned  to  the  Treasury  department,  by  the  several  collectors  of  the 
customs.  The  value  of  these,  prior  to  1816,  was  ascertained,  accord- 
ing to  the  provisions  of  law,  in  the  following  manner,  viz.  **  by  add- 
ing twenty  per  cent  to  their  actual  cost,  if  imported,  from  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  or  from  any  place  beyond  the  same,  and  ten  percent, 
on  their  actual  cost,  if  imported,  from  any  other  place  or  country, 
including  all  charges,  commisssions,  outside  packages  and  insurance 
only  excepted." 

The  National  Legislature,  intended,  no  doubt,  by  this  general  rule, 
to  fix  what,  might  be  supposed  the  general  value  of  these  articles,  at 
the  place  of  importation.  But  it  might  sometimes  fall  short,  and 
sometimes  exceed  the  real  value,  as  this  would  depend,  not  on  any 
general  rule;  but  on  the  quantity  in  market,  the  slate  of  the  demand, 
and  various  other  circumstances.  The  law,  establishing  the  tariff  of 
duties,  in  1816,  varied  this  rule,  and  directed,  that  the  value  of  tlie 
imports,  of  this  description,  should  be  calculated,  **on  the  net  coet 
of  the  articles,  at  the  place,  from  whence  imported,  exclusive  of  pack- 
ages, commissions,  and  all  charges.*' 

The  goods  or  merchandize,  paying  ad  valorem  duties,  then  em- 
braced, with  few  exceptions,  all  the  woollen,  cotton,  linen,  silk,  metal, 
eerthen,  and  peper  manufactures,  with  othen  of  minor  importanee. 


> 


^ 


f 

I 


V 

164 

•  ■ 

The  valwt  of  tbese  kind  of  goods,  but  not  their  quaniiiy^  wu  re« 
turned  to  the  Treasury  department.  Of  all  the  other  various  articles, 
whether  duty  free,  or  paying  specific  duties,  the  quantity^  hiid  not  the 
valuCf  was  returned.  The  Treasury  document^*,  therefore,  prior  to 
1831,  do  not  shew  the  value  of  the  imports,  as  they  do,  the  exports 
of  the  United  States. 

Sensible  of  the  advantage  and  importance  of  obtaining  more  accu- 
rate official  information,  respecting  the  external  commerce  of  the 
country.  Congress,  in  1820,  J^y  wisely,  made  provision,  '*  for  ob- 
taining accurate  statements  of  the  foreign  commerce  of  the  United 
States.*'  The  secretary  of  the  Treasury  was  directed,  annually,  to 
prepare  statistical  accounts,  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States* 
with  foreign  nations,  including  the  kinds^  quantities  and  value^  both 
of  tlie  imports  and  exports ;  and,  also,  of  the  navigation,  employed  in 
foreign  trade.  The  exports  were  to  be  valued,  at  their  cost,  or  real 
value,  at  the  jdace  of  exportation — the  imports^  at  their  cost  or  worth, 
at  the  foreign  ports^  from  whence  they  wqfe  exported,  for  importa- 
tion into  the  United  States.  Since  the  adoption  of  this  rule,  the  Talae 
of  the  imports^  as  well  as  the  exports^  has  been  ascertained,  at  the 
national  Treasury.  In  addition  to  this  important  object,  the  amount 
of  the  trade  and  navigation  of  this  country,  with  each  foreign  nation 
and  its  dependencies,  is  also,  ascertained.  We  would  here  state,  that 
with  respect  to  imports,  subject  to  ad  valorem  duties,  Congress,  in 
1823,  directed  the  20  and  10  per  cent  to  be  added,  to  their  actual  cost ; 
and,  in  1832,  again  varied  the  rule,  and  ordered  the  charges  only  (in- 
•  Borance  excepted)  to  be  added. 

In  Great  Britain,  it  is  well  known,  that  the  value  of  imports  and  ex- 
ports, is  made  out,  in  two  different  ways ;  one,  called  the  official^  and 
the  other  the  real  or  declared  value ;  and  the  want  of  attention,  to 
this  distinction,  has  sometimes  led  to  mistakes,  respecting  the  com- 
merce of  that  country.  The  former,  is  the  value  settled  as  early  as 
1006;  and  by  which  all  the  articles  of  export  are  ascertained,  with- 
out regard  to  any  subsequent  variation  in  the  market  price  of  the  ar- 
iitei  themselves — the  other  is,  the  reah  or  supposed  actual  value,  at 
the  time  and  place  of  importation  or  exportation.  The  official  ra/ue, 
therefore,  generally  varies,  from  that  of  the  real.  Any  variation  in 
the  former,  infallibly  indicates,  either  an  increase  or  decrease  of  the 
quantity  of  the  articles  imported  or  exported  ;  while  a  variation,  in 
the  latter,  may  indicate  an  increase  or  decrease  either  of  the  quantity 
or  falue,  of  the  tame  articles,  or  of  both. 

An  examination  of  the  British  tables  of  exports,  for  the  last  thirtj 
four  yieari,  from  1796  to  1832,  will  shew,  that  a  great  variation  has 


* 


165 

taken  place,  between  die  official  and  declared  value  of  the  exports 
of  that  country,  during  this  period.  From  1798,  to  1809,  the  aver- 
age official  value  was  about  £24,500,000  sterling  a  year,  the  declared 
Talue  about  £40,700,000— from  1808,  to  1814,  the  former,  was  about 
£32,000,000,  and  the  latter,  about  £4'l,000,000'from  1814,  to  182Qp 
the  valuations  approached  nearer  to  each  other,  the  declared  value  not 
exceeding  the  official,  more  than  about  three  millions ;  and  from  1820, 
to  1832,  the  exports  seemed  to  decrease  in  value,  in  proportion  as 
they  increased  in  quantity.  In  1820,  the  official  value  of  exportSt 
was  £38,718,036,  and  the  declared  value  £35,508,670,  and  in  1832,  the 
former  was  £65,026,702,  and  the  latter,  £36,444,524,  making  a  differ^ 
ence,  in  the  last  year,  of  £28,582,178;  shewing,  an  astonishing  de- 
crease in  the  declared  value  of  the  exports  of  that  country,  during 
that  period.  This  was  occasioned,  in  a  great  measure,  by  the  VMt 
increase  of  cotton  goods,  and  a  consequent  reduction  of  price — the 
consumption  of  cotton,  haying  nearly  doubled,  in  that  country,  during 
this  last  period.* 

The  value  of  the  imports  and  exports  of  the  United  States,  ascer- 
tained in  the  manner  before  stated,  is  not,  as  it  will  be  perceived,  a 
sure  criterion,  of  the  balance  of  trade  between  this  country  and  the 
rest  of  the  world,  particularly,  in  any  one  given  year. 

It  cannot  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the  reader,  that,  from  the 
mode,  by  which  the  value  of  the  imports  and  exports  has  been  as- 
certained^ in  the  United  States  ;  the  value  of  the  former  must,  gener- 
ally, in  a  series  of  years,  exceed  that  of  the  latter,  unless  the  balance 
is  against  this  country.  According  to  the  mode  of  valuation,  prior 
to  1821,  the  excess  in  the  value  of  imports,  must  have  been  greater, 
than  since  that  period  ;  because  the  value  both  of  the  imports  and  ex- 
ports, was  ascertained,  at  places  in  the  United  States ;  and  that  since 
1821,  the  exports  only  are  valued  in  this  country  ;  and  the  imports  at 
the  various  places,  from  whence  they  come.  It  is  very  obvious,  in- 
deed, from  both  modes  of  valuation,  that  unless  the  value  of  the  im- 
ports, purchased  by  the  avails  of  the  exports,  should  exceed  that  ^ 
the  latter,  the  exporter  must,  in  both  cases,  lose  the  cost  and  of 
pense  of  carrying  his  goods  to  a  foreign  market ;  and,  in  the  first 
mode  of  valuation,  must,  also,  lose  the  cost  of  bringing  home  the 
goods,  procured  by  the  avails  of  the  exports.  We  here  speak,  it  will 
be  remembered,  of  the  imports  procured  solely,  by  the  avails  of  the 
exports.  If  the  former  are  purchased  on  credit,  or  in  any  other  way, 
than  by  means  of  the  latter,  in  any  one  year,  the  case  will  be  varied. 

•  See  table  No.  1. 


J 


166 

In  a  particular  year,  according  to  the  present  mode  of  valuaUoiif 
the  imports  may  be  less  than  the  exports,  because  all  the  avails  of  the 
latter,  may  not  have  been  returned,  during  the  year,  the  exports  were 
made ; — or  they  may  have  been  applied,  in  payment  of  imports  of  the 
preceding  year;  or  a  part  of  them,  may  have  been  sent  to  some  for- 
eign country,  and  of  course,  would  not  appear  in  the  custom  house 
books  at  home.  It  is  well  known,  that,  for  some  years  past,  Amer- 
ican merchants  have  purchased  goods  in  England,  and  sent  them  di- 
rect to  Canton.  In  1827,  cottons  and  woollens,  to  the  value  of 
$893,836,  were  purchased  in  that  country,  and  shipped  directly  to 
China.  In  some  years,  tlie  value  of  the  imports  may  be  less  than 
that  of  the  exports,  because  some  particular  articles  of  export,  may 
bring  much  less,  in  a  foreign  market,  than  their  estimated  value  at 
kome.  This,  we  believe,  was  the  case  with  cotton,  in  1825,  the  year 
•f  great  speculation  in  this  article.  In  that  year,  the  value  of  cotton 
exported,  was  nearly  $15,000,000  more,  than  in  the  preceding  year, 
and  about  $12,000,000  more,  than  in  1826,  although,  in  the  latter 
year,  the  quantity  exported,  exceeded  that  exported  in  1825,  more 
than  thirty  millions  of  pounds.  This  great  increase  in  the  custom 
house  value  of  exports,  in  1825,  was  occasioned  by  the  bubble  specu- 
lation in  that  article ;  and  the  bubble  burst,  before  the  cotton  was  all 
told,  in  a  foreign  market,  where  the  avails  were  less,  than  the  estima- 
ted value  at  home.  The  whole  exports  in  that  year  amounted,  to 
$99,535,388,  and  the  imports,  to  $96,340,075.  In  1830,  tha  importo 
were  less  than  the  exports ;  and  the  difference,  may,  no  doubt,  be  at- 
tributed, in  no  small  degree,  to  the  diminished  value  of  invoices  sent 
to  this  country,  in  order  to  efade  the  duties  under  the  tariff  of  1828. 

But  whatever  opinion  may  be  formed,  respecting  any  particular  year, 
we  think,  that,  if,  for  a  series  of  years,  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
commercial  hvsiness^  the  value  of  the  imports  should,  according  to 
the  present  mode  of  valuation,  be  less  than  that  of  the  exports,  the 
balance  must  be  against  the  United  States.  From  1821,  to  1830,  in- 
dusive,  the  aggregate  value  of  the  imports  was  about  $798,000,000* 
Rd  that  of  the  exports,  about  $765,000,000,  making  a  difference  in 
£ivor  of  the  former,  of  $33,000,000.  Was  this  balance  for  or  against 
the  United  States  ?  When  it  is  considered,  that,  during  this  period* 
the  commercial  business  of  the  country,  did  not  generally  vary  from 
its  ordinary  course,  and  that  the  difference,  would  only  give  about 
$3,000,000  a  year,  for  carrying  the  exports  to  a  foreign  market,  and 
that  this  was  done,  principally,  on  American  account ;  there  can  be  no 
doubt*  that  the  imports  were  generally  procured,  by  the  avails  of  the 
exportMt  and  that  the  balance  was  in  favor  of  the  United  Statea.    In 


167 

the  years  1831,  1832,  and  1833,  the  imports  hare  greatly  exceeded 
the  exports ;  and  this  excess  has  been  so  great,  as  to  lead  to  the  con- 
clusion, that  the  same,  could  not  have  been  all  paid'for,  from  the  aTaih 
of  the  exports,  during  these  years ;  but  that  a  greater  proportion  of 
them  were  procured  on  credit,  or  sent  here,  on  foreign  account,  than 
in  the  preceding  years. 

With  these  brief  remarks  on  the  vexed  question  of  the  balance  of 
trade,  which,  hitherto,  has  so  much  puzzled  economists,  as  well  aa 
others ;  and  is,  indeed,  so  difficult  to  solve ;  we  proceed  to  inform  the 
reader,  that  although  we  have  not  the  benefit  of  regular  official  ac- 
counts of  the  value  of  the  imports,  prior  to  1821,  yet,  previous  lo 
this  time,  official  returns  have  occasionally  been  laid  before  the  na^ 
tional  Legislature,  shewing  the  value  of  imports,  and  the  extent  of 
th^  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  for  certain  periods.  From  these 
returns,  and  other  sources,  we  shall  be  able,  we  trust,  to  present  a 
satisfactory  view  of  the  Imports  and  trade  of  the  United  States,  with 
foreign  nations,  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  time,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  government. 

By  a  report  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  of  the  16lh  of  December* 
1793,  having  reference  to  the  preceding  year,  it  appears,  that  the 
nations,  with  which  the  United  States,  at  that  time,  had  their  prind-. 
pal  intercourse,  were  Spain,  France,  Great  Britain,  the  United  Neth- 
erlands, Denmark  and  Sweden,  and  their  dependencies ;  and  that  the 
articles  of  export,  constituting  the  basis  of  that  commerce,  with 
their  respective  amounts,  were  as  follows  : — 


and  bread,  to  the  annual  amount  of          )    $7,649,887 

*  Tobacco,     .... 

4,^9,567 

«Rice,           .... 

1,763,796 

Wood,         .             .             .             , 

1,263,634 

Salted  fish. 

941,606 

Pot  and  Pearl  ashes. 

839,003 

Salted  meats, 

690,130 

Indigo,        .... 

637,379 

Horses  and  mules. 

339,753 

•  Whale  oil. 

262,601 

Flax  seed. 

236,072 

Tar,  pitch,  and  turpentine. 

217,177 

^  Live  provisions. 

137,743 

^  Foreign  goods. 

620,274 

$10,737,692 

168 


The  proportion  of  these  exports,*  which  went  to  each  of  the  iia* 
tions  before  mentioned,  the  Secretary  states,  as  follows : — 

To  Spain    and    dominions,  .  $%006,907 


1,283,462 
4,698,735 
0,363,416 
1,963,880 
224,415 
47,240 


Portugal  and  do. 

France  and  do. 

Great  Britain  and     do. 
United  Netherlands  and  do. 
Denmark  and  do. 

Sweden  and  do. 

The  imports  from  the  same  countries,  are,  in  the  same  report*  stated 
to  be, 

From  Spain    and    dominions,  $335,110 

Portugal  and  do. 

France  and  do. 

Great  Britain  and    do. 
United  Netherlands  and  do. 
Denmark  and         do. 
Sweden  and  do. 


505,763 

2,068,348 

15,285,428 

1,172,602 

351,364 

14,325 


$10,823,030 

The  aboTe  account  of  exports  for  1702,  does  not  include  the  whole 
amount,  as  many  articles  of  smaller  value,  are  not  embraced  in  it. 

Tables  Nos.  II  and  III,  present  a  view  of  the  commercial  inter- 
course of  the  United  States,  with  foreign  nations  and  their  dependen- 
cies, from  1705  to  1801,  iuclusive,  exhibiting  the  value  of  the  exporter 
to  each  nation  and  its  dependencies,  and  the  value  of  the  imports 
from  the  same,  during  that  period.  The  value  of  the  exports  was 
taken  from  the  custom  house  books,  and  that  of  the  imports  was 
made  out,  with  great  care  and  labor,  from  the  prices  of  the  various 
articles  imported,  (except  those  paying  duties  ad  valorem)  at  the 
place  of  importation.* 

From  these  tables,  the  following  was  the  amount  of  the  Exports 
and  Imports,  in  each  year,  from  1705,  to  1801 : — 

Years.  Exports.  Imports. 

1705  .   847,855,556  .  .      860,756,258 

1706  67,064,097  81,436,164 

1707  .   56,850,206   .   .   75,370,406 


•  For  these  and  other  yalaable  Tables,  we  are  indebted  to  a  gentleman,  who 
had  been  long  one  of  the  principal  clerks  in  the  Treasury  Department,  but  who 
it  now  deceased. 


109 


tmn. 

Cipom. 

nnpcrtiL 

1798 

661,527,097 

•68,551,70a 

1799 

78,065,522 

79,069,148 

1800 

70,971,780 

91,252,708 

1801 

93f020,573 

111,363,511 

Duriog  the  session  of  Congress  in  1806,  the  Secretary  of  tlie 
Treasury,  furnished  the  House  of  Representatives,  with  several  valua- 
ble statements  and  documents,  relative  to  the  trade  of  the  United  Slates^ 
with  different  parts  of  the  world,  in  the  years  1802,  1803,  and  1804. 

These  statements  were  called  for,  by  the  House,  while  varioua 
propositions  were  under  consideration,  as  to  a  total,  or  partial  non- 
intercourse  with  Great  Britain  and  her  dependencies,  for  the  purpose 
of  ascertaining  the  amount  of  the  trade  of  the  United  States,  with 
that  kingdom,  in  comparison  with  the  rest  of  the  world  ;  and  to  enable 
the  House  to  see,  to  what  extent  the  commerce  and  revenue  might  be 
affected,  by  a  non-intercourse  with  the  British  dominions* 

The  annual  value  of  the  imports,  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  ae 
appears  by  these  statements,  on  an  average  of  these  three  yearSf 
amounted  to  875,316,937;  and  of  the  exports,  to  •<^,461,000.  The 
value  of  the  imports  was  made  out  by  the  same  rule,  as  goods  then 
paying  ad  valorem  duties  ;  that  is,  by  adding,  from  ten  to  twenty  per 
cent,  to  the  prime  cost  and  charges,  at  the  places  from  which  the  ar- 
ticles were  imported ;  and  the  value  of  the  exports,  from  the  castom 
house  books. 

The  value  of  the  principal  imports,  was  estimated  as  follows :— - 

^  Merchandize  paying  12i  per  cent  ad  valorem,     830,732,069 


do. 

do.     15 

i 

Jo. 

8,303,770 

do. 

do.     20 

{ 

do* 

453,751 

Nails  and 

spik 

kCS,      . 

•            < 

479,041 

Lead  and  manufactures  of  lead. 

227,002 

Steel, 

• 

. 

147,967. 

Beer,  ale  and 

porter, 

76,020 

Cheese, 

• 

• 

77,150 

Boots  and  shoes, 

101,300 

Coal, 

36,407 

•  Salt, 

771,996 

*  Rum, 

3,881,089 

Geneva, 

675,430 

^  Brandy, 

2,077,601 

*  Wines, 

2,962,039 

''Teat, 

2,360,507 

22 


170 


^  Coffee, 

•8,37%712 

^  Sugar, 

7,794,264 

^  Molasses, 

1,930,502 

Cotton, 

804,125 

Pepper, 

633,041 

Indigo, 

436,941 

Cocoa, 

310,773 

Pimento,     . 

71,927 

Hemp, 

919,443 

All  other  ar 

tides,    . 

» 

660,000 

•75,316,987 

The  following  was  the  estimate  of  the  commerce,  with  the  different 
parts  of  the  world,  the  same  period. 

I.  With  the  dominions  of  Great  Britain  in  Europe,  (Gibraltar  fx- 

cepted,) 

The  annual  exports  were  estimated  at  about  $15,690,000,  viz : — 

DometUc  produce. 

Cotton,     ....  95,640,000 

Tobacco,              .                        .  3,220,000 

Provisions,                       .            .  2,160,090 

Lumber,  naval  stores,  and  pot  ashes,  1,510,000 

All  other  articles  of  domestic  produce,  900,000 


Foreign  merchandize,       .... 

The  annual  imports,  at  $27,400,000,  viz  : — 

In  merchandize  paying  duties  on  its  value,  embracing, 

with  inconsiderable  exceptions,  all  the  woollen,  cot- 

ioh,  linen,  silk,  metal,  glass,  and  paper  manufactures. 

All  the  articles  paying  specific  duties,  and  consisting 

principally  of  salt,  steel,  lead,  nails,  and  porter, 

^11.  With  the  British  East  Indies. 

Annual  exports,  viz : — 
Doniestic  produce,    .... 
Foreign       do.         . 


$13,430,000 
2,280,000 

$15,690,00a 


$26,060,000 

1,340,000 
$27,400,000 


$47,000 
83,000 


$130,000 


1 

Imports^  $3,530,000,  viz  :— 
In  merchandize,  paying  ad  Talorem  duties,  and  coniitt* 

ing,  principally,  of  wliite  cottons,     .  •  •      §2,060,000 

lo  all  other  articles,  consisting,  principally,  of  sugar, 

pepper,  and  cotton,  ....  680,000 

^  •  $3,630,000 

HI.  With  the  Northern  British  Colonies  in  America^ 

The  annual  exports  amount,  to  $1,000,000,  and  consist  of  the  fol- 
lowing articles^  vfz : — 

Domnftc  prodacc. 

Provisions -and  live  stock,  .  $530,000 

Lumber,  naval  stores,  and  pot  ashes,  90,000 

Skins  and  furs,  160,000 

All  other  articles,    ....   60,000 

$840,000 

Foreign  merchandize,        .  •  .  •  100,000 

$1,000,000 

The  annual  imports  amount,  to  $540,000,  viz : — 
In  ^oods  paying  ad  valorem  duties,  and  consisting,  prin- 
cipally, of  merchandize,  for  the  Indian  trade,  and  of  fish,    $480,000 
All  articles  payiug  specific  duties,  .  •  •        60,000 

"$640,000* 

IV.  With  the  British  West  Indies. 

The  exports  consisted  of  the  following  articles,  viz : — 

Provisions  and  live  stock,  $4,720,000 

Lttmber,  090,000 

All  other  articles,        .....  340,000 


$0,060,000 


And  the  imports  as  follows,  viz : — 

Spirits,                           .....  2,400,000 

Sugar  and  Coffee,          .....  1,480,000 

All  other  articles,          .....  060^)00 


$4,590,000 


Importations  from  all  parts  of  the  world. 

The  annual  value  of  imports,  calculated,  on  an  average 

of  three  years,      .....        $75,316,000 
Of  which  the  value  imported  from  the  dominions  of  Great 

Britain,  amounts  to  ...  .        $35,970,000 

•  Not  ioclading  Plaister  of  Paris. 


172 

And  that  imported*  from  all  other  coontriet  as  follows,  viz  y— 

From   tlie  northern  powers,    Prussia  and 
Germany,  .        $7,094,00 

From  the  dominions  of  Holland,  France, 
Spain  and  Italy,  25,475,000 

From  the  dominions  of  Portugal,  1,083,000 

From  China,  and  other  native  powers  of  Asia,  4,856,000 

From  all  other  countries,  including  some  ar- 
ticles not  particdarly  discriminated,      •  838,000 

$39,346,000 


$75,316,000 
The  value  of  the  several  species  of  merchandize,  thus  imported, 
was  arranged,  as  follows,  viz : —  • 

1st.  Articlea,  principally,  imported  from  the  dominions  of  Great 
Britain,  viz: — 

Merchandize  pa3dng  duties  on  its  value,  $39,489,000 

fialt,  nails,  lead,  steel,  beer,  cheese,  shoes  and  boots,  1,917,000 

Rum,  ••....  3,881,000 


$45,287,000 
Of  which  were  imported,  from  the  dominions 

of  Great  Britain,  $33,461,000 

And  from  all  other  countries,    .  11,826,000 


$45,287,000 

2d.  Articles,  principally,  imported  from  other  countries,  viz : — 

Cofiee,  $8,373,000 

Sugar,  7,794,000 

Molasses,      ......  1,930,000 

Cotton,  indigo,  pepper  and  pimento,                         .  2,257,000 

Hemp,  soap,  candles,  and  all  other  articles,  (wines,  )  ^^  ^^ 

leas,  gin  and  brandy  excepted,)                                )  *      * 

$21,954,000 
Of  which  were  imported,  from  the  dominions 

of  Great  firiuin,       .  .  $2,476,000 

And  from  all  other  countries,    •  •  19,478,000 

$21,954,000 
3d.  Articles  only  incidentally  imported  from  Great  Britain,  viz : — 
Brandy  and  Geneva,  ....  $2,753,000 

Winaa, 2,962,000 

Teas,  2,360,000 

$8,075,000 


178 

Of  which  were  imported  from  the  dominions 

of  Great  Britaio,  .  •  $33,000 

From  all  other  countries,  .  .  8,042,000 


$8,075,000 

Exports  to  all  parts  of  the  xoorld. 

I.  Domestic  produce. 

The  annual  value  of  the  articles  of  domestic  produce, 
exported  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  on  the  average  of  three 
years,  was  computed  at     •  .  •        $30,928,000 

Of  which  the  amount  exported  to  Great  Britain,  was  20,663,000 

And  that,  to  all  other  parts  of  the  world,  viz: — 

To  the  northern  powers,  Prussia  and  Ger- 
many, ....  $2,918,000 

To  the  dominions  of  Holland,   .  .  12,183,000 

To  the  dominions  of  Portugal,  .  1,926,000 

To  all  other  countries,  including  also  some 

articles,  not  particularly  discriminated,         2,249,000 

$19,275,000 

Considered,  in  relation  to  the  several  quarters  of  the  globe,  without 

reference  to  the  dominions  of  any  particular  power,  those  exported* 

were  distributed  in  the  manner  following,  viz : — 

Exported  to  Europe,  ....        $22,957,000 

to  the  West  Indies  and  other  American  colonies,  15,607,000 

to  Asia,  Afiica,  and  the  South  Seas,  .  1,364,000 


$39,928,000 
And  the  several  articles,  of  which  these  exports  consist,  were  val- 

aed  as  follows,  viz : — 

Provisions,  Hour,  wheat,  corn,  rice,  and  every  other  spe- 
cies of  vegetable  food,       ....        $13,040,000 

Dried  and  pickled  fish,  ....  2,848,000 

Beef,  pork,  butter,  cheese,  and  every  species  of  animal 
food,  ......  3,728,000 


$19,616,000 
Cotton,  ......  6,940,000 

Tobacco,       ......  6,143,000 

Lumber,  naval  stores  and  pot  ashes,  .  .  .  4,387,000 

All  other  articles,  2,842,000 


$39,928,000 


174 

IL   FOEBIGK   PEODUCB. 

The  annual  value  of  foreign  produce,  re-exported  to  all 
parts  of  the  world,  on  the  average  of  the  same  three 
years,  was  estimated  at      .  .  .  .        $28,533,000 

Of  which  the  amount  exported,  to  the  dominions  of  Great 

Britain,  was  •  .  .  •  .         $3,054,000 

And  to  all  other  parts  of  the  world,  viz : — 

To  the*  northern  powers,  Prussia  and  Ger- 
many, ....  $5,051,000 

To  the  dominions  of  Holland,  France,  Spain 

and  Italy,       ....  18,495,000 

To  the  dominions  of  Portugal,  •  .  396,000 

To  all  other  countries,  including,  also,  some 

articles,  not  particularly  discriminated,  1,537,000 


$25,479,000 


$28,533,000 

Considered,  in  relation  to  the  several  quarters  of  the  globe,  these 
exports  were  distributed  as  follows,  viz : — 
To  Europe,  ......        $20,648,000 

To  the  West  Indies  and  American  colonies,  6,688,000 

To  Asia,  Africa,  and  the  South  Seas,  .  •  1,197,000 


$28,533,000 

The  several  articles  of  which  these  exports  consisted,  were  re- 
spectively valued,  as  follows,  viz : — 
Merchandize  paying  duties  ad  valorem,  .  $9,772,000 


Cofiee,           ...... 

7,302,000 

Sugar,           ...... 

5,775,000 

Cotton,  wool,  indigo,  pimento  and  pepper,   . 

2,490,000 

M.  eas,             •            .            .            .            .            1 

1,304,000 

Wines,          ...... 

1,108,800 

Bpirits  of  every  description. 

642,000 

All  other  articles,      .            .            •            •            . 

140,000 

$28,533,000 

General  Balance, 

Annual  value  of  imports  estimated  at  •  •        $75,316^000 

And  that  of  exports  of  domestic  produce,     $39,928,000 

foreign       do.  28,533,000 

$68,461,000 


$6,865,000 


175 

LeaTing  an  apparent  balanee^  against  the  United  Statea,  of  nearly 
f7,000,000. 

During  the  years  1806, 1806  and  1807,  the  imports  as  well  as  the  ex- 
ports, were  much  greater,  than  in  any  former  years. 

Table  No.  IV,  shews  the  quantity  and  value  of  all  the  articles  of 
import,  from  October  1st,  1806,  to  September  90th,  1807.  The  ralna 
of  the  articles  (except  those  paying  ad  ralorem  duties)  was  ascertained 
from  the  prices,  at  which  the  same  articles  were  valued  at  the  Treas- 
ury, during  the  same  year,  ou  their  exportation.  The  value  of  the 
imports,  thus  ascertained,  for  this  year,  amounted  to  $138,574,876. 

The  principal  articles,  were. 


Goods  papng  duties  ad  valorem, 

•58,665,017 

Malmsey  and  Madeira  wine. 

1,023,321 

Burgundy                       do. 

59,279 

Sherry                           do. 

353,672 

All  other                        do. 

3,05137 

Foreign  spirits  from  grain,   . 

1,477,679 

Do.      do.     from  other  materials, 

9,221,175 

Molasses,     .            .            •            . 

3,064,044 

Bohea          tea. 

< 

493,946 

Souchong     do. 

t           < 

1,250,029 

Hyson          do. 

i 

1,251,367 

Other  green  do. 

» 

2,117362 

Coffee, 

t 

16,470,947 

Cocoa, 

< 

2,297,961 

Sugar,  brown, 

» 

17,511,061 

Do.    clayed, 

1 

5,901,804 

Raisins,  in  jars  and  boxes. 

. 

138,307 

All  other. 

• 

291,807 

Candles,  tallow. 

■ 

98,538 

Cheese, 

• 

288,299 

Soap, 

1 

276,222 

Tallow, 

• 

262,541 

Pepper, 

1 

804,869 

Pimento, 

t 

263,172 

Indigo, 

* 

1,849,529 

Cotton, 

1 

1,007,139 

Gunpowder, 

■ 

97,406 

Iron,  anchor  and  sheet. 

> 

70,368 

Do.    slit  and  hoop,  . 

1 

77,301 

Do.    nails  and  spikes. 

> 

544^28 

176 


White  and  red  lead, 

•420,613 

Lead  and  manufactures  of  lead, 

270,147 

steeJf            •            •            •            •           • 

205^505 

Hemp,          ..... 

2,116,605 

Coal,             ..... 

132,511 

Salt,  (weighing  more  than  56  lbs.  per  bushel) 

1,387,903 

Do.    (weighing  56  lbs.  or  less  per  bushel)    • 

288,791 

Glasis  black  quart  bottles,    • 

184,455 

Window  ghiss,  not  above  8  by  10  inches,    • 

261,266 

Do.                not  above  10  by  12    do. 

46,335 

Do.                all  above  10  by  12    do. 

73,202 

oegars,         ..... 

256,240 

le  amount  of  exports,  for  the  same  year,  was, 

Domestic  produce, 

948,699,592 

Foreign     do.         .  .         . 

59,643,558 

Making, $106,343,150 

Leaving  a  difference  between  the  value  of  exports 
and  imports  for  that  year,  of  .  .        $30,231,726 

During  the  continuance  of  the  restrictive  system,  and  the  war  of 
1812,  the  imports  were  small  in  amount.  Immediately  after  the  close 
of  this  war,  the  United  States  were  deluged  with  foreign  goods,  es* 
pecially  woollens  and  cottons,  and,  principally,  from  Great  Britain. 
The  treaty  of  Ghent  was  concluded  in  December,  1814,  and  the  fol- 
lowing was  the  value  of  imports,  for  the  years  1815,  1816,  and  1817, 
ending  in  each  year,  on  the  30th  of  September,  viz : — 

1815  ....   $83,080,073 

1816  ....    155,302,700 

1817  ....     98,758,373* 

In  consequence  of  the  double  duties,  which  were  continued,  for 
some  time  after  the  war,  and  from  other  causes,  the  price  of  many  of 
the  articles,  imported  in  1815,  and  1816,  (except  those  subject  to  ad 
valorem  duties)  was  higher  than  in  1807.  From  1818  to  1820,  incla* 
five,  we  have  no  official  documents,  shewing  the  value  of  imports. 

Subsequent  to  that  period,  agreeable  to  the  Legislative  provision, 
before  alluded  to,  the  value  of  the  imports  has  been  officially  ascer* 
tained ;  and  the  amount  of  the  foreign  commerce  of  the  United  States, 
with  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  with  each  particular  nation,  has  been 
annually  stated,  with  as  much  accuracy  perhaps  as  in  any  country. 


♦  See  Table  No.  V. 


177 

li  will  be  borne  in  miDd  thut,  by  this  legislative  rule*  the  imports 
valued,  at  the  foreign  ports,  from  whence  brought ;  and  that  in  the 
official  accounts  both  of  the  imports  and  exports,  the  amount  of  for- 
eign gold  and  silver  coin  is  included. 

Table  No.  VI,  shews  the  value  of  imports  from,  and  exports  to,  all 
parts  of  the  world,  and  from  and  to  each  nation,  from  1821  to  1888» 
with  the  amount  of  American  and  foreign  tonnage,  employed. 

And  we  here  present  a  general  view  of  the  imports  and  acports,  for 
each  year,  during  this  period. 


Year*. 
1821 

1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


Importii. 

•62,585,724 
83,241,541 
77,579,267 
80,549,007 
96,340,075 
64,974,477 
88,509,824 
79,484,068 
74,492,527 
70,876,920 
103,191,124 
101,029,266 


Eipoflti 

•64,974,381 
72,160,281 
74,699,090 
75,986,657 
99,535,388 
77,595,322 
82,324,829 
72,264,686 
72,358,671 
73,849,508 
81,310,583 
87,176,943 
90^140,433 


.      108,118,311 

The  extent  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States,  with  each  for- 
eign nation,  with  which  they  have  any  considerable  intercourse,  will 
next  claim  our  attention,  together  with  a  general  view  of  their  trade 
with  each  quarter  of  the  world. 

I.  Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 

By  the  Treaty  of  1783,  the  United  States  in  relation^  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, became  a  foreign  nation ;  and  of  course,  subject  to  the  navigatioB 
laws  and  alien  duties  of  that  country.  She  deemed  it  her  interestf 
however,  in  some  degree,  to  relax  these  laws,  in  favor  of  her  former 
colonies. 

By  an  act  of  Parliament,  of  April,  1783,  (23  Geo.  III.  chap.  39) 
the  King  and  council  were  authorized  to  regulate  the  trade  between 
the  two  countries.  This  act  was,  at  first,  limited  to  a  short  period* 
but  continued  in  force,  by  subsequent  acts. 

The  King  and  council,  by  orders  made  in  pursuance  of  this  actf 
prior  to  1791,  permitted  any  goods,  being  unmanufactured^  (ezeepi 
fish,  oil,  blubber,  whale  fins,  and  spermaceti,)  and  also,  any  pif  iron, 

23 


178 

btr  iron,  pitch,  Ur,  turpentine,  rerin,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  indigo, 
masts,  yards  and  bowsprits,  being  the  growth  or  production  of  any 
of  4he  territories  of  the  United  States,  to  be  imported  directly  from 
thence,  into  any  of  the  ports  of  Great  Britain,  upon  payment  of  the 
■ame  duties,  as  the  like  sort  of  goods  were  or  might  be  subject  to,  if 
imported  from  any  British  island  or  plantation,  in  America.  They, 
also,  ordered  and  directed,  that  fish  oil,  blubhcr,  whale  fins,  and  sper- 
maceti, and  all  other  goods  not  enumerated,  being  the  growth,  pro- 
duction or  manufacture  of  the  United  States,  might  be  imported, 
upon  payment  of  such  duties,  of  custom  and  excise,  as  were  payable 
on  the  like  goods,  on  their  importation  from  foreign  countries;  and 
that  in  cases  where  different  duties  were  imposed  upon  the  like  goods 
imported  from  different  foreign  countries,  then  upon  payqent  of  the 
lowest  of  such  duties.* 

The  same  orders,  regulated  the  intercourse  between  the  United 
States,  and  the  British  West  Indies,  and  will  lie  noticed  hereafter. 
The  intercourse  between  the  two  countries,  was  regulated  by  these 
orders,  of  the  King  and  council,  until  Nov.  19th,  1704,  whena  treaty 
of  amity,  commerce,  6lc,  was  finally  concluded.  By  this  treaty, 
liberty  of  commerce  was  established,  between  the  British  dominions 
in  Europe,  and  the  United  States,  subject  to  the  laws  of  the  respec- 
tiTe  coontries ;  and  by  the  15th  article,  no  higher  duties  were  to  be 
paid  by  either,  than  were  paid  by  all  other  nations ;  the  British  gov- 
ernment reserving  to  itself,  the  right  of  imposing  on  American  ves- 
•elf,  entering  into  the  British  ports  in  Europe,  a  tonnage  duty,  equal 
to  that,  which  should  be  payable  by  British  vessels  in  the  American 
ports ;  and  also,  such  duty  as  might  be  adequate  to  countervail  the 
difiTerence  of  duties  payable  on  goods,  imported  into  the  United  States, 
in  British  or  American  bottoms. 

The  commercial  part  of  this  Treaty,  expired  in  1804.  It  had  long 
been  a  favorite  object  of  the  British  government,  to  equalize  the  ton- 
nage, and  other  duties,  between  the  United  States,  and  the  British  do- 
minions in  Europe,  as  will  be  more  particularly  noticed  hereafter.  The 
American  government,  however,  for  a  long  time,  declined  acceding  to 
any  proposition  of  this  kind.  In  the  treaty  negotiated  by  the  Ameri- 
ean  commissioners,  in  1800,  an  equalization  of  these  duties,  was  agreed 
upon ;  but  this  treaty  was  rejected  by  the  President,  without  even 
consulting  the   Senate.     The   American   government,  however,  in 


•  Aebesoa't  collection  of  papers,  dx.  concerning  the  cavigaiion  and  trade  of 
Great  Britain. 


179 

its  commercial  convention  with  Great  Britain,  of  the  3d  of  Joly, 
1815,  agreed  to  equalize  these  duties,  between  tlie  United  States^  and 
the  Britiah  dominions  in  Europe.  The  amount  of  the  commerce  be- 
tween the  two  countries,  in  each  year,  from  1781,  to  1790,  taken  from 
British  accounts,  we  have  before  stated  in  Chapter  II.  In  1702,  ac- 
cording to  the  estimate  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  American  ex- 
ports to  Great  Britain  and  her  dominions,  amounted  to  more  than 
nine  millions  of  dollars ;  and  the  imports  exceeded  fifteen  milliona. 
Much  the  greatest  part  of  the  imports  was  from  Great  Britain,  ezclu- 
rive  of  her  dependencies. 

From  1795,  to  1801,  thn  value  of  exports  to  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 
land, and  of  the  imports  from  the  same,  was  as  follows,  viz : — ^ 

Yean.  EzporU.  Importi. 

1795  90,3^,066  $23,313,121 


1796 
1797 
1798 
1799 
1800 
1801 


17,143,313 
6,637,423 
11,978,870 
19,930,428 
19,085,603 


31,928,685 
27,303,067 
17,330,770 
29,133,219 
32,877,059 
39,519.218 


30,931,121 

The  exports,  on  an  average  of  the  years  1802,  1803,  and  1804,  as 
estimated  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  were  in  value 

Domestic  produce,  .  .  .  913,430,000 

Foreign  merchandize,  .  .  2,200,000 

•15,C93,000 

And  the  value  of  the  imports  on  an  average  of  the 

same  years,  was      ....  $27,400,000 

From  1805  to  1820,  (excluding  the  years  1813  and  1814,  of  the 

late  wai^ftbe  valu^  of  the  exports  to  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  was 

as  folloMBIistinguishing  the  value  of  domestic  produce,  from  that  of 

foreign,  viz  : — 


Yeart. 

Domotttc  prodoce. 

1805 

$13,939,(563 

81,472,600 

1806 

12,737,913 

2366,683 

1807 

21,122,332 

2,027,660 

1808 

:j,093,978 

106,327 

1809 

5,326,194 

239,406 

1810 

11,388,438 

892,435 

*  See  Tables  Nos.  II  and  III. 


i 


1811 
1812 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 


180 

DooMMie  prodneew 

$13,184,553 
4,662,296 
17,628,836 
29,350,807 
32.209,124 
37,071,497 
22,153,498 


•554,757 

37,187 

51,620 

544,946 

823,611 

1,239,254 

1,381,069 

317,936 


23,265,622 

The  imports  from  these  countries,  consist,  principally,  of  the  vari« 
QU8  manufactures  of  wool,  cotton,  silk,  flax,  brass  and  copper,  of 
glass  and  earthen  ware,  haberdashery — manufactures  of  iron  and 
steel,  lead,  and  manufactures  of  lead,  hats,  salt,  tin  and  pewter,  coal, 
beer,  ale  and  porter.  We  have  no  official  documents,  shewing  the 
ralue  bf  the  imports,  during  this  period,  but  much  the  greatest  part  of 
them,  were  then  subject  tu  the  payment  of  the  ad  valorem  duties ; 
and  the  following  is  the  amount  of  goods,  paying  these  duties,  from 
1805  to  1813 :— 


YeariL 

Value. 

Yean. 

Value. 

1805 

$31,556,159 

ISIO 

829,123,605 

1806 

35,779,245 

1811 

25,338,044 

1807 

38,901,838 

1812 

7,063,179 

1808 

18,818,882. 

1813*      . 

11,298,285 

1809 

17,647,542 

Tables  Nos.  YII  and  YlII,  contain  the  British  accounts  of  the  trade 
between  the  two  countries,  (exclusive  of  Scotland)  during  the  years 
1806,  1807,  and  1808,  ending  on  the  10th  of  October  in  each  year. 
From  these  it  appears,  that  the  real,  or  declared  valu(f  of  British  pro- 
duce and  manufactures,  and  of  foreign  merchandize,  exported  to  the 
United  States,  in  those  years,  was  as  follows  :-»- 

1806.  1807.  ^^1806. 

British  produce  and  >  ^^ 

manufactures,        \         £11,716,620      £11,119,048      £5.718,615 

Foreign  Merchandize,  458,875  253,822  65,788 


Total  exporto   .  £12,175,495       £11,372,870     £5,784,403 

And  that  the  real  or  declared  value  of  the  imports,  from  the  Uni- 
ted States,  into  Great  Britain,  was — 

In  1806.  1807.  1808. 

£3,580,480  £5,201,909  £2,804,707 


•  Importations  in  consequence  of  the  repeal  of  the  orders  in  coancili  and  ad- 
mittsd. 


181 

We  would  here  statCt  that  on  an  arerage  of  the  years  1806  and 
1807,  the  amount  exported  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  was  about 
£40,000,000  sterling,  or  about  9180,000,000;  and  the  real  value  of 
the  same  produce ^aud  manufactures,  exported  to  the  United  Statett 
on  an  average  of  the  same  two  years,  was  £11,417,834,  or  about 
$50,  000,000 ;  making  between  one  quarter  and  one  third  of  all  the 
British  exports,  during  those  years. 

Much  the  greatest  part  of  the  imports  from  Great  Britain,  consbti 
of  woollen  and  cotton  goods  ;  and  for  the  value  of  these,  as  well  u 
other  articles,  during  this  period,  we  roust  have  recourse  to  British 
accounts ;  and  from  Table  No.  VII,  we  here  give  the  real  value  of 
the  various  articles  of  British  produce  and  manufactures,  exported  to 
this  country,  in  the  year  1806 : — 

Brass  and  copper  manufactures,        ...        £84,004 

Cotton  goods, 4,401,112 

Glass  and  earthen  ware,  ....         103,242      * 

Haberdashery, 209,040 

Hats, 90.389 

Iron  and  steel, 061,332 

Lead, 46,756 

Salt, 93,664 

Silk  manufactures, 447,484 

Linens, 125,015 

Tin  and  pewter, 68,498 

Woollens, 4,894,008 

Other  articles 342,076 

Total,        £11,716,620 
The  average  amount  of  cottons,  for  the  years  1806 

and  1807,  was      .  £4,393,449 

And  of  woollens,     .....  4,591,437 

Making,  £8,984,886 
sterling,  or  about  939,500,000,  as  valued  in  England,  being  more  thiD 
nineteen  millions  of  cotton  goods,  and  about  twenty  millions  of  woollen. 

We  would  here  remark,  that  the  imports  and  exports  of  the  United 
States,  during  those  two  years,  were  greater  than  in  any  former 
years ;  and  that,  probably,  about  one  third  of  the  goods,  imported  in 
those  years,  especially  in  1806,  were  re-exported  to  the  West  Indiea, 
South  America,  and  elsewhere. 

Of  the  vast  amount  of  goods,  with  which  the  United  States  werw 
flooded,  in  1815,  Great  Britain  and  dependencies  famished  i82»871t660; 


J 


182 

and  of  this  amount,  more  than  seventy  one  millions,  paid  the  ad  ?a- 
lorem  duties,  being  principally  woollens  and  cottons  from  England. 

Since  the  year  1820,  the  value  of  the  imports  from,  as  well  as  the 
exports  to.  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  as  ascertained  by  the  rule  then 
adopted,-  has  been  as  follows,  viz : — 


Yean. 

Imports. 

Exports. 
Domestic  produce. 

Exports. 
Foreign  produce. 

1821 

825,087,108 

$18,634,134 

82,143,346 

1822 

34,800,287 

23,518,136 

1,040,211 

1823 

27,936,141 

20,840,717 

1,026,222 

1824 

28,106,317 

20,323,592 

1,291,587 

1825 

36,713,246 

35,043,466 

2,069,512 

1826 

26,131,969 

20,413,216 

1,578,669 

1827 

32,811,210 

25,487,710 

904,606 

1828 

30,287,113 

20,091,671 

<6,ilOO,llllO 

1829 

25,279,489 

22,501,377 

1,787,316 

1830 

2^1,519,214 

25,499,918 

829,464 

1831 

44,093,717 

30.616,513 

2,372,006 

1832 

36,921,263 

27,910,879 

2,900,116 

1833 

37,845,824 

30,889,624 

1,473,826 

The  ralue  of  manufactured  articles,  imported  into  the  United  States, 
from  Great  Britain,  has  far  exceeded  that  of  the  same  articles,  from 
all  other  countries ;  and  it  is  not  a  little  interesting,  to  the  American 
Economist,  as  well  as  Statesman,  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  this 
trade ;  and  particularly,  in  the  manufactures  of  wool,  cotton,  flax, 
silk,  and  iron,  since  1814. 

The  British  accounts,  in  connection  with  those  of  the  United 
States,  will  enable  us  to  do  this ;  and  will,  likewise,  shew  the  extent 
of  the  trade  of  this  country,  with  Great  Britain,  in  comparison  with 
that  enjoyed  by  other  nations. 

With  this  view,  we  refer  the  reader  to  Tables  Nos.  FX,  X,  XI  and 
XII,  annexed  to  this  chapter. 

The  IXth  exhibits  the  declared  value  of  British  produce  and  man- 
ufactures, exported  to  the  United  States,  from  1814  to  1831,  together 
with  the  imports  from  the  latter,  into  Great  Britain,  during  the  same 
period — the  Xth,  the  quanties  and  declared  value  of  all  the  principal 
articles  of  British  produce  and  manufactures,  exported  to  the  United 
Sutes,  for  the  years  1827,  1828,  1829,  and  1830— the  Xlth,  the  de- 
clared value  of  the  different  British  manufactures  of  cotton,  wool, 
flax  and  silk,  with  the  aggregate  value  of  all  other  articles,  exported 
to  all  parts  of  the  world,  in  each  year,  from  1814  to  1829,  with  the 


183 

official  Talue  of  the  same,  in  each  of  the  veara  1814  and  18S0— tha 

Xllth,  the  quantity  and  real  value  of  all  British  produce  exported^ 
from  Great  Britain,  in  1832.* 

It  will  be  perceived,  by  comparin£r  Tabic  No.  I  with  No.  IX,  thmt 
the  average  value  of  exports  of  British  produce,  to  all  parts  of  the 
world,  in  the  years  1815  and  1816,  was  about  £45,000,000  sterling, 
and  the  average  value  of  the  same,  exported  to  the  United  States,  the 
mme  years,  was  about  £11,400,000,  being  a  little  more  than  one  quar- 
ter of  the  whole — that  from  1820  to  1827,  the  average  value  exported 
to  all  parU,  was  about  £36,000,000,  and  to  the  United  States,  about 
£6,000,000,  being  one  sixth  of  the  whole.  In  1831,  however,  the  ex- 
ports to  the  United  States,  wa>^  £9,053,583,  being  about  one  fourth  of 
British  exports  of  domestic  produce,  in  that  year. 

The  other  tables  shew,  that,  on  an  average  of  the  years  1827,  1828 
and  1829,  the  whole  value  of  British  woollens  exported  was,  about 
£5,000,000,  and  to  the  United  States  £1,127,000,  being  a  little  more 
than  one  fifth. 

The  total  value  of  British  cotton  fabrics,  and  of  cotton  yam,  ex- 
ported, to  all  quarters  of  the  world,  and  the  quantity  and  value  of  the 
same  to  the  United  States,  for  1827,  1828  and  1829,  as  the  same  tablea 
•hew,  was  as  follows  : — 

To  all  parts  of  the  world. 

Team.  Cotton  (roods.  r<)tti>n  jam.  Total  Talne. 

1827  .       £13,956,825  £3,.545.568  £17,502,393 

1828  .         13,545,(538       .        3,5M,945  17,140,583 

1829  .         13,430,&14  3,974,039  17,404,583 

To  the  United  States. 

Ycani.  No.  of  Yards.  Value.  Cotton  yarn— Pounds.         Value. 

1827  .     52,856,809    .  £2,257,955     .        8,914      .       £1,547 

1828  .     36,200,427    .       1,612,46(J    .     100,285      .         6,516 

1829  .     32,552,002    .       t31(),023    .      30,182      .         1.928 
It  will  be  noticed,  that  the  value  of  cotton  goods  exported  to  the 

United  States,  was  a  little  more  than  one  tenth  of  all  the  British  cot* 
ton  goods  exported,  during  this  period. 

The  above  cotton  manufactures,  exported  to  the  United  States,  does 
not  include  cotton  hosiery. 


•  These  Tallies  wiih  some  others,  were  Jnlfen  from  Mnrsbairs  valuable  Digest 
of  the  commerce,  pi»i.ulaiion,  resources.  &c.  of  Great  Britain,  published  in  1833, 
under  the  patrunnr^c  of  Parlinmeiit ;  and  from  tables,  rei>pccting  British  com- 
merce, 6lc.  prepared  by  the  board  of  trade  in  1833;  both  of  which  statistical  works, 
were  obligingly  loaned  to  U5  from  the  Treasury  department  at  Washington. 


184 

The  number  of  yards  of  British  cottons,  ezported,  in  1820* 
four  hundred  and  two  millions  five  hundred  and  seventeen  thousand 
one  hundred  and  ninety  six,  valued  at  £12,516,247;  and  the  pounds 
of  cotton  yam  was  sixty  one  millions  four  hundred  and  forty  one 
thousand  two  hundred  and  fiAy  one,  valued  at  £3,976,874;  and  of 
these  goods,  about  fifty  million  yards,  went  to  the  Brazils,  being  more 
than  to  any  other  country ;  and  of  the  yarn,  twenty  four  millions 
and  fifty  five  thousand  four  hundred  and  thirty  three  pounds  went  to 
Germany,  and  seventeen  millions  nine  hundred  and  twenty  one  thou- 
sand three  hundred  and  sixty  nine  to  Russia. 

In  1832,  the  number  of  yards  exported,  was  four  hundred  and  sixty 
one  million  and  forty  six  thousand  four  hundred  and  three,  Taloe, 
£11,500,630,  and  the  pounds  of  cotton  yarn,  seventy  five  millions  six 
hundred  and  sixty  seven  thousand  one  hundred  and  fifty,  value, 
£4,722,759. 

The  average  value  of  British  linen  manufactures,  exported,  in  the 
same  three  years,  was  about  £1,930,000,  and  to  the  United  States, 
about  £666,000. 

The  following  is  the  value  of  hardware  and  cultery,  together  with 
the  value  of  this,  and  all  other  kinds  of  iron  wrought  and  unwrought, 
and  of  steel  exported,  from  Great  Britain,  during  the  same  period ; 
and  the  quantity  and  value  of  the  same,  exported  to  the  United  States. 

To  all  parts  of  the  world. 


« 

Tean. 

Hardware  and  cutlery. 

Total  of  hardware,  Ac,  and 
all  oUicr  kinds  of  iron. 

1827 

£1,392,880 

£2,636,818 

1828 

1,306,617 

2,609,753 

1829 

1,389.506 

2,550,443 

To  the  United  States. 

Hardware  and 
cutlery. 

Value. 

Iron  and 

SteeL 

Ti^af  v«1nA 

ttm. 

Tons. 

Value. 

1  ocai  Taiuo 
of  boih.  . 

1887 

142,372 

£753,299 

14,739 

£156,802 

£910,101 

1828 

124,569 

704,679 

16,t50 

175,400 

880,079 

1890 

122,009 

669,871 

11,325 

110,839 

780,710 

In  1832,  the  quantity  and  value  of  hardware  and  cutlery  to  all  parts 
of  the  world  was,  fifteen  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  four  tons, 
value,  £1,433,279 ;  to  the  United  States,  seven  thousand  eight  hun- 
dred and  seventy  four  tons,  value,  £730,015. 

The  average  value  of  British  silks  exported,  in  the  same  years,  was 
about  £250,000,  and  to  the  United  States,  about  £60,000. 

The  exports  of  British  wove  fabrics,  on  an  average,  from  1820  to 
1829,  inclusive,  amounted  to  about  £25,000,000,  and  all  other  exports, 
during  the  same  period,  from  £10  to  1 1,000,000. 


vies  { 


V. 


And,  the  reader  cannot  fail  to  notice,  that  the  fabrics  of  coitoDf 
•ttd  cotton  yarn,  during  this  period,  exceeded  £17,000,000,  being  hi 
▼mine  nearly  one  half  of  all  the  exports  of  British  produce  and  man- 
ufacture. 

II.    Trade  m'^ith  the  British  East  Indies. 

A  commercial  intercourse  between  the  United  States,  and  tl\e  Brit- 
ish Eadt  Indies,  commenced  soon  af\er  the  peace  of  1783.  In  1788 
or  1789,  Earl  Cornwallis,  then  governor  and  commander  in  Indiai 
gave  orders,  that  American  vessels  should  be  treated  at  the  company*! 
settlements,  in  all  respects,  as  the  most  favored  foreigners ;  and  the 
ship  Chesapeake,  one  of  the  first  vessels,  that  displayed  the  American 
flag,  in  the  Ganges,  ivas  exempted  by  the  supreme  council  of  Bengal, 
from  the  government  customs,  which  foreign  vessels  were  bound  to 
pay.* 

This  intercourse  was  regulated  by  the  treaty  of  November  10th, 
179-1 — by  the  thirteenth  atircle  of  which, 

'*  Ilis  Mujesty  consents,  that  the  vessels  belonging  to  the  citizena  of 
the  United  State's  of  America,  shall  be  admitted,  and  hospitably  re* 
ceived,  in  all  the  sea  ports  and  harbors  of  the  British  territories  in 
the  East  Indies.  And  that  the  citizens  of  the  United  States  may  freely 
carry  on  a  trade  between  the  said  territories  and  the  said  United  States, 
in  all  articles,  of  which  the  importation  or  exportation,  respectively, 
to  or  from  said  territories,  shall  not  be  entirely  prohibited.  Provided 
only,  that  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  them,  in  any  time  of  war  between 
the  British  government  and  any  other  power  or  state  whatever,  to  ex* 
port  from  the  said  territories,  without,the  special  permission  of  the 
British  government  there,  any  military  stores,  or  naval  stores,  or  rice. 

The  citizens  of  the  United  States  shall  pay  for  their  vessels,  when 
admired  into  the  said  ports,  no  other  or  higher  tonnage  duty,  than 
shall  be  payable  on  British  vessels,  wlfen  admitted  into  the  ports  of 
the  United  States.  And  they  shall  pay  no  other  or  higher  duties  or 
charges,  on  the  importation,  or  exportation  of  the  cargoes  of  the  said 
vessels,  than  shall  be  payable  on  the  same  articles  when  imported  or 
exported  in  British  vessel.^.  But  it  is  expressly  agreed,  that  the  Tea- 
sels of  the  United  States  shall  not  carry  any  of  the  articles  exported 
by  them,  from  the  said  British  JMritories  to  any  port  or  place,  except  to 
some  port  or  place  in  America,  where  the  same  shall  be  unladen ;  and 
such  regulations  shall  be  adopted  by  both  parties,  at  shall  from  time 
to  time  be  found  necessary  to  enforce  the  due  and  faithful  observance 


*  Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce. 

21 


s 
186         /'^     . 

of  this  stipuJatien.  It  is,  also,  understood,  that  the  permission,  gnnU 
ed  by  this  article,  is  not  to  extend  to  allow  the  vessels  of  the  United 
S^tes  to  carry  on  part  of  the  coasting  trade  of  the  said  territories ; 
but  vessels  going  with  their  original  cargoes,  or  part  thereof,  from 
any  port  of  discharge  to  another,  are  not  to  be  considered  as  carrying 
on  the  coasting  trade.  Neither  is  this  article  to  be  construed  to  allow 
the  citizens  of  the  States,  to  settle  or  reside  within  the  said  territories, 
or  to  go  into  the  interior  parts  thereof,  without  the  permission  of  the 
British  government  established  there ;  and  if  any  transgression  should 
be  attempted  against  the  regulations  of  the  British  government  in  this 
respect,  the  observance  of  the  same  shall  be  enforced  against  the  cit- 
izens of  America,  in  the  same  manner,  as  against  the  British  subjects 
or  others  transgressing  the  same  rule.  And  the  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  whenever  they  arrive  in  any  port  or  harbor  in  the  said  territo- 
ries, or  if  they  should  be  permitted,  in  the  manner  aforesaid,  to  go  to 
any  other  place  therein,  shall  always  be  subject  to  the  laws,  govern- 
ment and  jurisdiction  of  whatever  nature  established,  in  such  harbor, 
port  or  place,  according  as  the  same  may  be.  The  citizens  of  the 
United  IStates  may,  also,  touch  for  refreshment  at  the  Island  of  St.  He- 
lena, but  subject  in  all  respects  to  such  regulations  as  the  British  gov- 
ernment may,  from  time  to  time,  establish  there.** 

This  article  expressly  provides,  that  the  goods  exported,  from  the 
*  East  Indies,  should  not  be  carried  to  any  other  port  or  place,  *'  except 
^7  to  some  port  or  place  in  America.**     It  is  less  explicit,  as  to  the  out- 

ward cargo ;  and  under  this  article,  American  vessels,  with  their  car- 
goes, went  directly  to  the  East  Indies,  from  Europe,  and  other  places. 
The  commercial  part  of  this  treaty,  as  before  stated,  expired  in  1804. 
1^^  This  trade,  however,  was  suffered  to  continue,  on  the  same  footing, 

generally,  as  under  the  treaty,  until  April  30th,  1811,  when,  in  pur- 
suance of  powers  vested  in  the  East  India  Company,  by  an  act  of 
Parliament,  passed  the  37th  of  Geo.  Ill,  chap.  107,  that  company 
established  regulations,  "  for  the  conduct  of  the  trade  of  foreign  na- 
tions, to  the  ports  and  settlements  of  the  British  nation  in  the  East 
Indies,  and  also  for  defining  the  duties  to  which  such  trade  shall  be 
subject,''  ^c. 

By  these  regulations,  the  vessels  of  the  United  States,  were  obliged 
to  proceed  direct  from  American  ports,  to  the  British  East  Indies, 
without  touching  jat  any  other  port,  in  the  outward  voyage,  except 
from  necessity,  refreshments,  or  repairs,  &c.  While  there,  they  were 
not  to  be  .employed  in  the- coasting  trade  ;  nor  were  they  permitted, 
either  with  or  without  a  cargo,  to  proceed  to  the  settlements  of  any 


187 

other  European  nation  in  India,  or  to  any  part  of  India,  or  to  Chintf 
nor  to  any  place  on  the  river  Ganges,  except  Calcutta.  They  were 
obliged  to  return  direct  to  some  port  in  the  United  States,  and  to  gire 
bond  to  deliver  iheir  cargo,  at  the  port  for  which  their  clearance  WM 
made ;  and  were  subjected  to  double  the  duties  paid  by  British  vessels. 
In  consequence  of  these  regulations,  the  owners  of  some  American 
vessel?,  employed  in  tliis  trade,  were  placed  in  an  unfortunate  situa- 
tion, on  the  arrival  of  their  vessels,  in  the  United  States,  during  the 
operation  of  the  non-intercourse  law.  They  had  given  bond  in  Indity 
to  land  their  cargo,  in  the  United  States;  on  their  arrival  here,  the 
non-intercourse  law  prohibited  the  landing  of  their  cargoes,  becaase, 
coming  from  a  British  port, — if  landed  in  the  United  States,  both  ves- 
sel and  cargo  were  forfeited ;  and  if  carried  to  a  foreign  port,  the 
bond  given  in  India,  was  forfeited.  Thus  situated,  the  owners  were 
obliged  to  apply  to  Congress  for  relief;  and  special  permission  was 
granted  them  to  land  their  goods,  and  to  dispose  of  them  for  their 
own  use. 

On  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  East  India  Company,  some 
years  since,  the  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain,  as  is  well  known,  were 
permitted  to  trade  with  certain  ports  in  the  East  Indies,  under  certain 
regulations. 

By  the  commercial  convention  of  July  3d,  1815,  the  trade  between  ^ 
the  United  States,  and  the  British  East  Indies,  is  confined  to  tlie  same 
ports.  By  the  third  article  of  this  convdhtion,  **  His  Britannic  Ma- 
jesty agrees,  that  the  vessels  of  the  United  States  of  America,  shall 
be  admitted,  and  hospitably  received,  at  the  principal  settlements  of 
the  British  dominions  in  the  East  Indies,  videlicet,  Calcutta,  MadrAs, 
Bombay,  and  the  Prince  ef  Wales*  Island;  and  that  the  citizens  of 
the  United  Slates,  may  freely  carry  on  trade,  between  the  said  princi- 
pal settiemcntj,  and  the  said  United  States,  in  all  articles,  of  which 
the  importation  and  exportation,  respectively,  to  and  from  said  terri- 
tories, shall  not  be  entirely  prohibited,*'  dec.  The  other  provisions  in 
this  article,  are  nearly  the  same  as  in  the  treaty  of  1704.  Amerietn 
vessels,  in  the  course  of  their  voyage  to  and  from  the  British  terri- 
tories in  India,  or  to  or  from  China,  were  permitted  to  touch  for  refresh- 
ment, but  not  for  commerce,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  the  Island 
of  St.  Helena,  or  such  other  places  as  may  be  in  the  possetfsion  of  ' 
Great  Britain,  in  tlie  African  or  Indian  seas ;  and  in  India,  the  ton- 
nage and  other  duties  on  American  vessels,  were  to  be  the  samey  as 
those  paid  by  the  most  favored  European  nations. 


i 


188 

Tbe  amount  of  th€  American  commerce  with  the  British  Ea«t  In* 
diet,  haa  heen  different  at  different  periods.  From  1795  to  1801,  the 
Talae  of  the  imports  and  exports,  was  as  follows : 

Imports.  '  Exports. 


i 


M.  •  W                    • 

1796 

2,427,717       . . 

.        966,316 

1797 

.    1,764,290 

21,325 

1796 

2,977,324 

39,075 

1799 

1,521,213 

7,296 

1800 

3,391,027 

130,461 

1801 

5,134,456 

71,617 

V 


On  an  average  of  the  years  1802, 1803,  and  1804,  as  befqre  stated^ 
the  value  of  the  imports,  was,  $3,530,000 

And  the  value  of  the  exports,  130,000 

From  1821  to  1833,  the  following  was  the  value  of  imports  and 
exports. 

JSjrportfl. 


Veaix 

Imports. 

■^         1821 

,  *    $1,530,799 

-.       1822 

1                                  • 

3,272,217 

3,265,961 

1824 

441,867 

I»26 

1,756,484 

1826 

2,510,606 

1827 

569,056 

1828 

1,542,736 

.     1829 

1,229,569 

1830 

1,372,297 

1831 

1,544,273 

1832 

2,538,938 

1833 

l,b32,059 

Domestic  produce. 

Foreign  produce. 

$32,089 

.     $1,934,190 

67,979 

1,968,365 

10,642 

307,738 

34,354 

927,716 

.      206,450 

781,629 

24,226 

418,042 

32,717 

1,051,450 

51,199    ^  ; 

795,682 

69,070 

477,629 

93,731     ' 

553,126 

.       132,4^12 

675,390 

.       189,218 

339,235 

.       136,156 

188,813 

Prior  to  the  year  1816,  much  the  greatest  part  of  the  imports  from 
the  British  East  Indies,  consisted  of  low  priced  cotton  goods.  During 
the  years  1802,  1803,  and  1804,  tlie  value  of  white  cottons,  from  this 
country,  was  estimated,  on  an  average,  at  about  $2,950,000.  By  the 
tariff  of  1816,  all  cotton  gootls,  the  original  cost  of  which,  at  the  place 
from  whence  imported,  (except  nankeens,  directly  from  China,)  was 
leas  than  twenty  five  cents  per  square  yard,  were  to  be  taken  and 
deemed  to  have  cost  that  sum  per  square  yard,  and  charged  with  duty 
accordingly.  This  minimum  price  was  fixed,  for  the  purpose  of  ex* 
eluding  entirely  from  the  American  market,  the  low  priced  India  cot- 


..f 


169 

tons,  and  thereby  afford  protection  and  "encouragement,  both  to  the 
American  cotton  manufacturer,  and  the  American  cotton  planter. 
This  duty  had  the  intended  effect,  and  since  that  period,  few  India 
cottons,  of  ihis  description,  have  been  brought  into  the  United  States. 

The  principal  articles  since  imported  from  the  British  East  Indieif 
have  been  indigo,  and  silks.  Very  little  domestic  prbduce  has  ever 
been  carried  to  India ;  some  flour,  whale  oil,  spermaceti  and  tallow 
candles,  hewn  timber,  and  other  kinds  of  lumber,  manufactured  to* 
bacco,  and  some  other  articles,  have  occasionally  gone  there.  The 
apparent  balance  against  the  United  States,  prior  to  1821,  was  greats 
as  no  account  of  specie  shipped  there,  was  kept  at  the  Treasury, 
prior  to  that  period ;  and  the  foreign  produce  exported  to  that  coim« 
try,  since  1821,  has  consisted  principally  of  forrign  gold  and  silver 
coin ;  and  of  late  years,  bills  have  been  substituted,  for  specie. 

The  quantity  of  rtpecie  exported  to  the  British  East  Indies,  in  each 
year,  from  1821  to  1833,  was  as  follows: 


Vevs. 

Value. 

Ytmn. 

Value. 

1821 

.  81,8H1,M9 

1828 

8626,880 

1822 

.   1,930,376 

1829 

297,301 

1823 

283,052 

1830 

100,641 

1821 

782,386 

1831 

436,027 

1825 

665,523 

1832 

212,386 

1826 

354,557 

1833 

98,510 

1827 

872,183 

■ 

111.  Trade  with  the  British  West  Indies  and  North 

American  Colonies. 

The  commercial  intercourse  between  the  United  States,  and  the 
British  West  Indies  and  North  American  Colonies,  has  been  a  aub- 
ject  of  serious  di.^putc,  since  the  peace  of  1783.  The  new  relatione, 
between  Great  Britain  and  her  former  Colonies  in  America,  produced 
by  the  provisional  Treaty  of  November,  1*82,  required  some  new 
Parliamentary  acts,  to  regulate  the  intercourse  between  them. 

In  March,  1783,  the  celebrated  William  Pitt,  then  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer,  brought  into  Parliament,  A%ill,  for  the  temporaiy 
regulation  of  this  intercourse,  founded  upon  liberal  principles. 

With  respect  to  the  trade  now  in  question,  it  admitted  vessela,  be- 
longing to  citizens  of  the  United  States,  into  the  ports  of  the  Weet 
India  islands,  with  goods,  or  merchandize,  of  American  growth  or 
produce ;  and  permitted  them,  to  export  to  the  United  States,  wij 
merchandize  or  goods  whatever ;  subject  only  to  the  same  datiea  end 


^... 


i 


190 

charges,  as  if  they  had  been  the  property  of  British  ^natural  born  sab* 
jects,  and  had  been  imported  and  exported,  in  British  vessels.* 

Violent  opposition  was  made  to  this  bill,  by  the  navigating  interest, 
at  the  head  of  which  was  Lord  Sheffield ;  and  the  administration,  of 
which  Pitt  was  a  member,  being  soon  aftei  dissolved,  the  bill  itself 
was  laid  asid^;  and  the  power  of  regulating  the  commercial  inter- 
course, between  the  two  countries,  was,  by  the  succeeding  adminis- 
tration, lodged  with  the  King  and  Council.  By  orders,  soon  after  is- 
sued, in  pursuance  of  this  authority,  American  vessels  were  entirely 
excluded,  from  the  British  West  Indies ;  and  some  of  the  staple  pro- 
ductious  of  the  United  States,  particularly,  fish,  beef,  pork,  butter, 
lard,  &c.  were  not  permitted. to  be  carried  there,  even  in  British 
bottoms. 

This  order  was  the  commencement  of  that  system  of  policy,  res- 
pecting this  trade,  which  the  British  government  has  ever  since  pur- 
sued ;  and  from  which,  it  has  never  relaxed,  except,  from  the  pres- 
sure of  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  the  necessities  of  the  colonies 
themselves,  or  from  the  proceedings  of  the  American  government. 
The  object  of  this  policy  has  been,  to  secure  to  British  shipping,  a 
monopoly  of  the  commerce,  between  the  United  States  and  the  West 
India  Islands.  This  policy,  to  which  it  has  so  uniformly  and  tena- 
ciotfsly  adhered,  was  founded,  not  merely,  on  the  advantages  of  this 
direct  iutercourse ;  but,  for  the  additional  benefit  of  the  circuitous 
trade,  from  the  British  European  dominions,  to  the  West  Indies,  by 
'  the  way  of  United  States. 

The  reasons  of  this  policy  are  obvious, — Great  Britain  has  few  ar- 
ticles to  carry  from  Europe,  to  supply  her  West  India  possessions — 
her  vessels,  therefore,  in  the  direct  voyages  to  these  Islands,  roust 
necessarily  go  nearly  empty,  and  of  course,  can  cam  little  freight. 
But,  by  bringing  a  cargo,  or  even  a  part  of  a  cargo,  to  the  United 
States,  and  from  thence,  carrying  supplies  of  American  produce  to 
the  West  Indies,  and  there  loading  with  colonial  products  for  Europe, 
her  vessels  can  earn  two  or  three  freights,  instead  of  one. 

The  advantages  of  this  circuitous  trade,  are  particularly  noticed, 
bj  the  committee  of  the  British  council,  acting,  as  a  board  of  trade, 
in  a  report  made,  as  early  as  1784. 

**  It  has  been  observed  to  them,''  say  the  committee,  ^*  that  the 
owners  of  British  vessels,  concerned  in  the  West  India  trade,  have 
long  labored  under  great  disadvantages,  from  the  difficulty  of  procu- 
ring OiUward  freights,  for  their  vessels  ;  but  that  now,  by  first  going 
to  North  America,  and  from  thence,  to  the  West  Indies,  and  so  home. 


'«- 


n 


191 

they  will  be  sure  of  two  freights,  and  perhaps  tliree,  instead  of  Kttla 
more  than  one  :  and  it  is  alleged,  that. they  will  reap  this  benefit,  with 
Tery  small  additional  charges,  in  the  paynaent  of  seamen^s  wageSf 
and  port  charges.*' 

In  1785,  Mr.  Adams,  then  American  Minister  at  London,  submitted 
td  the  British  government,  the  form  of  a  commercial  treaty,  embra- 
cing the  principle  of  reciprocity,  throughout  the  dominions  of  both 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Sensible  of  the  weakness  and  inefficiency  of  the  American  Confed- 
eracy, and  of  the  impossibility  of  all  the  States  uniting  in  counter- 
vailing measures,  the  British  government  refused  to  accede  to  this,  or 
any  other  commercial  treaty ;  being  satisfied  with  having  the  Ameri- 
can trade,  in  their  own  hands.  In  this  depressed  condition  of  the 
commerce,  of  the  United  States,  Mr.  Adams,  while  at  the  court  of 
London,  constantly  urged  upon  Congress  and  the  States,  the  impor- 
tance, and  the  necessity  of  taking  measures,  to  counteract  this  sys- 
tem of  British  policy.  In  his  letter  tu  the  American  S^rctary  of 
foreign  affairs,  (Mr.  Jay,)  of  the  21st  of  October,  1785,  referring  to 
this  subject,  he  say^  :  ''  Tliis  being  the  state  of  things,  you  may  de- 
pend upon  it,  the  commerce  of  America  will  have  no  relief,  at  pres- 
ent, nor,  in  my  opinion,  ever,  until  the  United  States  shall  have  gen- 
erally passed  navigation  acts.  If  th|^ measures  is  not  adopted,  we 
shall  be  derided  ;  and  the  more  we  suffer,  the  more  will  our  calamities 
be  lausrhed  at.  My  most  earnest  exhortations  to  the  States  then,  are 
and  ought  to  be,  to  lose  no  time  in  passing  such  acts."* 

Some  of  the  States  passed  acts  of  the  character  recommended  by 
Mr.  Adams  ;  but  the  others  not  concurring,  they  were  unavailing,  and 
were  repealed.  Nor  would  all  the  States  concur,  in  vesting  CongreM 
under  the  Confederacy,  with  the  power  of  regulating  the  general 
commerce  of  the  country. 

This  unfortunate  state  of  American  commerce  it  is  well  known,  wai 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  adoption  of  the  present  Constitu- 
tion. The  acts  passed  by  the  first  Congress  that  met,  under  the  new 
fi»rm  of  government,  imposing  the  discriminating  tonnage,  and  other 
duties,  did  not  escape  the  particular  notice  of  British  statesmen* 
Their  injurious  effects,  upon  the  navigating  interest  of  Great  Britain« 
were,  at  once,  perceived  by  tl)em.  They  saw,  that  American  com- 
merce was  no  lon<rcr,  at  the  mercy  of  tliirtecn  distinct  legislative 
bodies,  nor  subject  to  the  control  of  the  King  and  council.     As  early 


«  4ib  Vol.  of  Diplomatic  CorrespoDdcDce,  from  1783  to  1789,  p.  376. 


i 


192 

ts  September  90th,  1789,  therefore,  the  acts  imposing  those  duties, 
were  referred  to  the  Lords  of  the  committee,  acting  as  a  board  of 
trade,  to  consider  and  report  thereon. 
The  same  committee  was  afterwards  instructed  to  consider  and  re- 

m 

port,  ••  what  were  the  proposals  of  a  commercial  nature,  it  would  be 
proper  to  be  made,  by  their  government  to  the  United  States." 

In  January,  1791,  this  committee  made  a  report,  not  only,  on  the 
subject  of  the  American  duties.;  but  also  upon  the  general  subject  of 
the  commercial  relations  between  th^  two  countries.  This  celebrated 
report,  drawn  up  by  Lord  Liverpool,  clearly  developed  the  Britiah 
system  of  policy,  respecting  the  commercial  intercourse  with  the 
United  States,  previous  to  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  which  soon  after 
followed ;  and  has  been  the  foundation  of  the  policy  pursued  by  the 
British  government,  since  the  termination  of  those  wars. 

As  to  duties,  the  committee  recommend,  an  attem];ft  to  settle  the 
question,  by  negotiation,  before  resorting  to  retaliatory  measures. 
On  the  subject  of  a  commercial  treaty,  especially,  in  reference  to  nai> 
igationj  the  committee  say,  *'  after  full  consideration  of  all  that  has 
been  offered,  on  the  subject  of  navigation,  the  committee  think^  that 
there  is-but  one  proposition,  which  it  would  be  advisable  for  the  min- 
iftrrs  X>f  Great  Britain  to  make,  on  this  head,  to  the  government  of 
the  United  States,  in  a  negotiation  for  a  commercial  treaty,  between 
the  two  countries,  viz. — that  British  ships,  trading  to  the  ports  of  the  i 
Uniti^  States,  should  be  there  treated,  with  respect  to  the  duties  of  I 
tonnage  and  imports,  in  like  manner,  as  the  ships  of  the  United  f 
States  shall  be  treated,  in  the  ports  of  Great  Britain." 

The  committee  add,  however,  *'  If  Congress  should  propose  (as 
they  certainly  will)  that  tliis  principle  of  equality  should  be  extended 
to  the  ports  of  our  colonies  and  islands,  and  that  the  ships  of  the  Uni-  < 
ted  States,  should  be  there  treated,  as  British  ships ;  it  should  be  an* 
•wered,  that  this  demand,  cannot  be  admitted,  even  as  a  subject  of 
negotiation.^* 

Referring  to  the  advantages,  this  circuitous  trade  would  secure  to 
British  shipping,  the  same  committee  say,  ''  Many  vessels  now  go, 
from  the  ports  of  Great  Britain,  carrying  British  manufactures  to  the 
United  States  ;  there  load  with  lumber  and  provisions,  for  the  British 
islands,  and  return  with  the  produce  of  these  islands,  to  Great  Britain. 
The  whole  of  this  branch  of  trade,"  they  add,  **  may,  also,  be  con- 
sidered, as  a  hew  acquisition,  and  was  attained  by  your  Majesty^s 
order  in  council,  before  mentioned ;  which  has  operated,  to  the  increaie 
of  British  navigation,  compared  with  that  of  the  United  States,  in  a 


193 

double  ratio ;  but  it  hvs  taken  from  the  United  States,  more  than  it 
has  added,  to  that  of  Great  Britain/'* 

This  equality  of  duties  was  not  agreed  to,  in  the  treaty  concluded 
>  by  Mr.  Jay,  in  1794     It  was,  at  that  time,  of  less  importance  to  Great 
Britain,  as,  in  consequence  of  the  pressure  of  the  war  then  exiatiof,         ^ 
she  was  herself  obliged,  occasionally,  to  open  her  West  India  porta, 
to  the  Americans,  for  necessary  supplies.    With  respect  to  the  Weal 
India  trade,  the  12th  article  of  this  treaty,  declared  that  American 
ressels,  <*  not  being  above  seventy  tons,''  were  placed  on  the  same  \  ~ 
footing  with  British  vessels,  on  the  condition,  however,  that  they        \ 
were  not  to  carry  molasses,  sugar,  coffee,  cocoa,  or  cotton,  to  any 
part  of  the  world,  except  the  United  States,  either,  from  the  ialanda, 
or  from  the  United  State's. 

As  this  article  included  the  cotton  of  this  country*  which,  about 
that  time,  was  becoming  one  of  the  exports,  it  was,  on  this  account, 
as  well  as  othern,  not  agreed  to,  by  the  United  States,  and  the  treaty 
was  ratified,  by  both  governments,  without  retaining  it. 

By  this  treaty.  Great  Britain  reserved  the  right  of  imposing  coun* 
tervailing  duties,  equal  to  those  imposed  by  the  United  States ;  and 
afterwards,  such  duties  were  laid,  as  were  supposed  more  than  suffi- 
cient to  countervail  those  imposed  by  the  American  governmentp 
Soon  after  the  peace  of  Amiens,  the  British  parliament  proposed  m 
-  mutual  abolition  of  the  discriminating  and  countervailing  duties  of  the 
two  countries.  Thi)4  proposition  was  laid  before  Congress,  by  the 
President,  on  the  15th  of  December,  1802;  and  in  the  House,  the 
committee  of  commerce,  to  whom  the  subject  was  referred,  reported* 
in  favor  of  acceding  to  it.  The  American  merchants,  however,  were 
generally  opposed  to  it,  and  forwarded  memorials  to  the  Hooset 
against  adopting  the  report  of  the  committee. 

The  Chamber  of  commerce  of  the  city  of*  New  York,  in  a  memo- 
rial, sent  to  Congress,  say,  that,  if  the  British  proposition  should  be 
acceded  to,  **  British  vessels  would  then  bring  a  cargo,  from  their  own 
country  to  this,  take  a  freight  here,  to  their  colonies,  where  our  Tea- 
sels are  not  admitted  ;  and  from  thence,  a  third  freight  home,  making 
thus,  three  freighta,  in  one  voyage.*'  This  memorial,  which,  as  the 
reader  will  perceive,  views  the  subject  in  the  same  light,  as  the  board 
of  trade  in  England,  in  conclusion,  says,  **  aAer  all  that  has  been  said, 
it  needs  hardly  to  be  added,  that,  if  our  porta  are  thrown  open  to  for- 
eigners»  on  the  same  terms,  with  our  own  vessels,  as  by  the  repeal,  ia 


•  AchesuD's  colleetion  of  Reports,  Ac.  oa  British  aavigatioa. 

25 


194 

contemplated,  (for  it  is  vain  to  confine  the  measure  to  the  Britiahy) 
they  will  crowd  our  wharves,  underbid  our  freight^  monopoliie  our 
markets,  and  leave  the  American  vessels  idly  to  rot,  in  onr  docks.** 

In  consequence  of  these  remonstrances,  the  report  of  the  committer 
was  laid  aside. 

At  the  close  of  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  however,  Great  Britain  at«  ^ 
tained  her  favorite  object. 

In  the  commercial  Convention,  between  the.  two  countries,  of  July 
3d,  181 5,  the  United  States  agreed  to  the  equalization  of  duties,  in. 
their  intercourse  with  the  British  European  dominions,  while  thai 
with  the  British  West  Indies  and  North  American  Colonies,  was  left 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  British  government.  The  policy  of  thia 
measure,  was  then  questioned,  by  the  intelligent  American  merchants^ 
as  well  as  by  others.  Trusting  to  the  enterprise  and  industry  of  the 
citizens  of  the  United  States,  little  fear  was  entertained,  by  any  one^ 
for  American  navigation,  under  equal  circumstances.  But  it  was  feared 
by  many,  that  the  monopoly  of  the  West  India  commerce,  enjoyed  by 
British  vessels,  would  give  them  an  advantage,  in  the  direct  trade^  be- 
tween the  United  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Subsequent  to  the  convention  of  1815,  the  British  government,  at 
peace  with  all  the  world,  returned  to  its  old  colonial  policy ;  and  en- 
tirely excluded  the  Americans,  from  any  participation,  in  the  West 
India  trade.  This  insured  to  Great  Britain,  the  full  benefit  of  the  cir- 
cuitous trade  before  alluded  to,  sp  long  the  object  of  her  wishes. 

The  consequences  were  soon  felt,  by  the  American  merchant  and 
ship  owner ;  and  this,  among  other  general  causes,  tended  greatly,  to 
the  depression  of  American  shipping,  at  that' period.  Such  was  its 
eflfects  on  American  navigation,  the  President  of  the  United  States^ 
thought  proper,  to  bring  the  subject  to  the  notice  of  Congress,  at  the 
opening  of  its  session,  in.December,  1816. 

"The  depressed  state  of  our  navigation,'*  says  the  President,  "la 
to  be  ascribed,  in  a  material  degree,  to  its  exclusion  from  the  colonial 
ports  of  the  nation,  most  extensively  connected  wilh  us  in  commerce, 
and  from  the  indirect  operation  of  that  exclusion.**  In  the  same  mea- 
aage,  the  President  particularly  alludes  to  "  the  advantages  given  to 
the  British  competition,  over  the  Americans,  in  the  navigation  be- 
tween our  ports  and  the  British  ports  in  Europe,  by  the  circuitouM 
voyages^  enjoyed  by  the  one,  and  not  enjoyed,  by  the  other.'*  The 
advantages  thus  secured  to  British  shipping,  are  more  particularly  sta- 
ted, in  a  memorial  presented  to  Congress,  in  January,  1817,  by  the 
ship  owners  of  the  city  of  New  York.  **  As  we  are  now  situated/* 
say  these  ship  owners,  **  foreign  ships  may  load  cargoes  in  Europe, 


195 

and  proceed  with  them,  to  the  United  States,  on  the  tame  terms,  as 
oar  Yessels ;  afier  which,  they  may  take  on  board,  articles  of  Ameri- 
can produce,  carry  them  to  their  colonies,  and  there  lade  cargoes  of 
colonial  goods,  and  return  with  them,  cither  to  the  United  States*  or 
Europe ;  thus  enabling  them,  by  coupling  the  two  voyages,  to  cany 
three  cargoes,  at  a  rate  much  too  low^  to  defray  the  ordinary  expenses 
of  our  vessels,  while  confined  to  a  participation  of  xhe  single  voyage. 
We  are,  therefore,  not  only  deprived  of  the  one  half  of  our  foreign 
commerce t  but  the  other  half  is  rendered  of  little  t?a/i/e."  The  ex- 
tent of  the  advantages,  thus  given  to  British  navigation  will  appear, 
from  the  following  account  of  American  and  British  tonnage,  employ- 
ed, in  the  commerce  between  the  United  States  and  the  British  pos- 
sessions in  Europe^  and,  also,  in  that,  between  the  former,  and  the 
British  West  Indies  and  North  American  Colonies,  in  1816. 

The  amount  of  American  tonnage,  which  entered  the  ports  of  the 
United  States,  in  1816,  from  Great  Britain,  Ireland  and  Gibraltar,  was 
one  hundred  and  thirty  four  thousand,  one  hundred  and  ninety  eight, 
and  the  British  tonnage,  which  entered,  the  same  year,  from  the  Brit- 
ish European  dominions,  was  one  hundred  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
forty.  The  American  tonnage,  entering,  from  the  British  West  In- 
dies, was  twenty  six  thousand  three  hundred  and  twenty  one,  and  from 
the  British  American  colonies,  seventy  five  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  seven,  making,  from  both,  one  hundred  and  two  thousand  one 
hundred  and  twenty  three  ;  while  the  British  tonnage,  from  the  West 
Indies,  was  seventy  five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  four,  from  the 
British  American  colonies,  eighteen  thousand  three  hundred  and  sev- 
enty eight,  and  from  other  places,  seventeen  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  sixty  seven,  making,  one  hundred  and  eleven  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  forty  nine.  ^ 

The  British  tonnage,  therefore,^  in  the  circuitous  trade  between 
Great  Britain  and  her  West  India  possessions,  by  the  way  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  was  one  hundred  and  seventy  six  thousand  hwe  hundred 
and  forty  four,  while  the  American,  was  only  one  hundred  and  sixty 
thousand  five  htmdred  and  nineteen,  being  in  favor  of  the  former,  six- 
teen thousand  dve  hundred  and  nineteen.  The  whole  amount  of  Brit- 
ish tonnage,  which  entered  the  United  States,  in  1815,  was  one  hun- 
dred and  forty  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ten,  and  in  1816,  it  in- 
creased to  two  hundred  and  twelve  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eighty 
nine,  an  amount,  about  equal  to  the  British  tonnage,  in  the  American 
foreign  trade  in  1790;  and  nearly  double  that  in  1802,  after  the  peace 
of  Amiens ;  and  constituted,  about  one  fifth  of  the  whole  tonnage,  em- 
ployed, in  the  foreign  commerce  of  the  United  States,  in  that  year. 


/ 


196 

We  would  here  obsenre,  that,  in  addition  to  the  advantages,  thai 
secured  to  British  shipping,  by  this  circuitous  trade,  the  British  gov- 
ernment, about  the  same  time,  imposed  heavy  duties,  (amounting  to  a 
prohibition,)  on  certain  articles  imported  from  the  United  States  into 
Great  Britain,  such  as  masts,  spars,  hewn  timber  and  lumber  of  all 
fciods ;  and  very  light  duties,  on  the  same  articles,  from  the  North 
American  colonies  ;  and  in  consequence  of  this,  these  articles  were  ^^ 
first  carried  to  these  colonies,  and  from  thence,  to  Great  Britain,  in 
British  vessels.  The  North  American  colonies,  also,  encouraged  tlie 
importation  of  these  and  some  other  articles,  by  allowing  them  to 
come  in,  duty  free.  As  early  as  May,  1815,  by  an  order  in  council  io 
CSanada,  **  all  kinds  of  wood  and  lumber,  seedy  ^nd^rain  of  eveypy  aoru 
all  kimU-'^HW^^i^^B  and  live  stock,  fiour,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  furs* 
skins,  and  pig  iron,  might  be  imported  duty  free.''  And  in  February* 
1816,  the  Governors  of  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick,  by  their 
proclamations,  admitted  duly  free,  for  a  limited  period,  '*  horses,  neat 
cattle,  sheep,  hogs,  poultry,  boards,  heading,  hoops,  plank,  scantling 
and  square  timber.*' 

The  practical  effect  of  these  duties  and  regulations,  as  to  the  desti- 
nation of  many  valuable  articles,  exported  from  the  United  States* 
was  soon  apparent.  In  1816,  the  value  of  articles  of  domestic  pro- 
duce, exported  to  the  British  North  American  colonies,  was  93,323, 18S2, 
an  amount  nearly  three  times  as  large  as  in  any  previous  year.  Amoni^ 
these  articles,  were  masts  and  spars,  valued  at  9106,203 — thirteen 
thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy  seven  tons  of  hewn  timber — four 
millions  seven  hundred  and  twenty  one  thousand  feet  of  boards  and 
plank,  and  one  hundred  and  fourteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  thirty  w^ 
two  barrels  of  flour:  and  in  1817,  the  value  of  the  exports  to  the 
same  colonies,  was  $3,691,202.  # 

To  counteract  the  advantages,  soured  to  British  navigation,  by  the 
Convention  of  1815,  Congress,  in  'January,  1817,  laid  a  duty  of  two 
dollars  a  ton,  on  all  British  vessels,  arriving  from  the  West  Indies ; 
and  the  next  year,  took  the  broad  ground,  of  shutting  the  American 
ports,  against  all  British  vessels,  coming  from  places,  from  which 
American  vessels  were  excluded.  The  ''  Act  concerning  navigation,'^ 
passed,  in  April,  1818,  declared,  that  the  ports  of  the  United  States,  \ 
should  be  closed  against  British  vessels,  coming  from  any  British  col- 
ony or  territory,  that  was,  **  by  the  ordinary  laws  of  navigation  and 
trade,'^  closed  against  American  vessels. 

The  bill  for  this  act,  was  introduced  into  the  Senate,  by  Rufus  King, 
wiio  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  British  policy  on  the  subject 


19T 

of  naTigatioD,  and  whose  knowledge  of  the  commercial  interetU  of 
hit  own  country,  was  not  surpassed  by  that  of  any  one ;  and  was 
supported  by  his  commanding  eloquence. 

He  took  the  ground,  dicUted  alike  by  national  pride  and  national 
interest*  that  the  United  States,  ought  no  longer,  to  permit  the  vesselst 
of  any  foreign  nation,  to  enter  their  ports,  from  any  place,  from  which 
American  vessels  were  entirely  excluded — that  the  time  had  arrifedy 
when  the  United  Slates  should  no  longer  sufier  their  trade  with  the 
British  West  Indies,  to  be  regulated,  solely,  by  the  British  govern* 
ment,  and  for  the  interest  of  British  navigation ;  and  in  this  view,  ha 
was  supported  by  great  majorities  in  both  houses ;  two  votes  only  be* 
ing  against  the  bill,  in  the  Senate,  and  sixteen  in  the  house. 

After  the  passage  of  this  act,  it  was  found,  that  West  India  produce* 
was  brought  into  the  United  States,  in  British  vessels,  through  Novm 
Scotia  and  certain  other  British  ]iossessions ;  and  to  prevent  this  eva* 
sion  of  the  act.  Congress,  in  May,  1823,  prohibited  this  circuitous 
trade  with  the  British  West  Indies ;  and  declared,  that  no  goods  should  ( 
be  imported,  from  Nova  Scotia  and  other  Brilish  possessions  mention- 1 
ed,  in  the  act,  (with  the  exception  of  Lower  Canada,)  except  sucm 
only,  as  were  wholly  the  produce  of  the  colony  or  place,  where  thslL/^ 
same  were  laden,  or  from  whence,  they  should  be  directly  imported 
into  the  United  States.  These  acts,  and  particularly  the  latter,  pro- 
duced no  little  distress,  among  the  West  India  planters,  now  deprivedy 
both  directly  and  indirectly,  of  their  usual  supplies,  from  the  United 
States;  and  they  made  loud  complaints,  to  their  government,  on  the 
subject  These  complaints  produced  an  act  of  Parliament,  of  June 
22d,  1822,  opening  certain  specified  ports,  in  the  West  Indies,  and  the 
British  colonies,  both  in  North  and  South  America ;  for  the  importa- 
tion of  certain  enumerated  articles,  frofti  any  foreign  country,  on  the 
continent  of  North  or  South  America,  or  from  any  foreign  island,  in 
the  West  Indies,  cither  in  British  ships,  or  in  vessels  belonging  to  the 
sovereign  state,  of  which  the  imported  articles  were  the  growth  or 
produce;  and  on  the  condition,  that  such  importation  should  be  di-| 
rect,  from  the  country,  of  which  they  were  the  products.  By  the 
same  act,  foreign  vessels  were  allowed  to  carry,  from  those  specified 
ports,  the  produce  of  such  British  possessions,  or  other  articles  legally 
imported  into  the  same,  direct  to  the  country  to  which  the  vessel  be- 
longed. The  privileges  of  the  act  were  confined  to  the  vessels  *of 
such  countries  only,  as  should  grant  like  privileges,  to  British  vesselst 
in  their  ports ;  and  the  King  and  Council  were  empowered,  to  prohiUl 
this  trade,  with  any  country,  whenever  it  should  appear,  thai  redpro- 
cml  advantages,  were  not  allowed  to  Britbh  ships,  in  such  country. 


198 

In  anticipation  of  this  act,  Congress,  on  the  6th  of  May,  1S28,  au- 
thorized the  President,  upon  his  being  satisfied,  that  the  British  colo- 
nial ports  were  open  to  the  vessels  of  the  United  States,  to  open  the  ^ 
Anerican  ports  to  British  vessels,  upon  terms  of  reciprocal  advan* 
iage — and  the  President,  on  the  receipt  of  the  said  act  of  Jane,  by 
proclamation,  opened  the  American  ports,  to  British  vessels,  in  the 
colonial  trade,  subject  to  a  like  restriction,  and  on  terms,  deemed  by 
him,  of  equal  and  reciprocal  advantage — but  he  did  not  consider  him- 
self authorized,  to  dispense  with  the  discriminating  duties. '  Of  this, 
however,  the  British  government  complained,  insisting,  that  this  was 
one  of  those  equal  and  reciprocal  advantages,  contemplated,  in  this 
legislative  arrangement.     To  this  the  President  did  not  agree ;  and 
on  the  1st  of  March,  1823,  Congress,  by  a  special  act,  opened  a  di- 
rect trade,  with  the  enumerated  ports;    and,  also,  authorized  the 
President,  upon  prooC  that  no  other  or  higher  duties  of  tonnage  or 
impost,  or  charges  upon  American  vessels,  or  upon  the  goods  import- 
ed therein,  were  exacted,  than  upon  British  vessels ;  or  upon  the  like 
goods  imported,  from  elsewhere ;  to  issue  his  proclamation,  declariog« 
that  no  higher  duties  should  be  levied  on  British,  than  on  American 
vessels,  or  cargoes,  in  the  same  trade.    The  word  elsewhere,  was  in- 
serted in  this  act,  for  the  express  purpose,  of  preventing  an  evasion 
of  the  proposed  equality,  in  this  intercourse.     For,  it  was  then  fore- 
seen, that  Great  Britain  might  indirectly  secure  to  her  own  shipping^i 
nearly  the  whole  advantage  of  the  carrying  trade,  with  her  West  In-  j 
dia  islands,  by  imposing  high  duties  on  articles,  coming  direct  from ; 
the  United  States,  and  permitting  the  same  articles,  to  come  dtUyfree^^ 
from  her  North  American  colonies ;  thus  forcing  the  American  trade    ^ 
with  those  islands,  through  Canada,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Bruns- 
wick, in  which,  American  ves^ls  would  have  but  a  small  share.    The 
British  government  refused  to  accede  to  these  terms;  and  on  the  218^^ 
of  July,  1823,  an  order  in  council,  imposed  countervailing  duties,  on  ^ 
American  vessels,  entering  the  colonial  ports. 

Since  that  period,  the  intercourse,  between  this  country,  and  the 
British  West  Indies,  has  been  regulated  by  legislative  acts,  or  by  royal 
orders,  and  Presidential  proclamations ;  and  by  these,  the  West  India 
ports  hare  been  sometimes  open,  and  sometimes  shut ;  and  the  trede 
has  been  carried  on,  through  neutral  ports,  in  the  West  Indies. 

In  the  mean  time,  attempts  were  made,  to  arrange  it,  by  treaty,  bat 
without  success.     **We  declared,"  says  Mr.  Rush,  *Uhat  we  could 
agree  to  no  proposals  for  regulating  the  intercourse  with  Nova  Scotia    {^^ 
and  New  Bmnswiek,  unconnected  with  the  Islands.*'    **  Their  propo- 


199 

,'^  he  adds,  **  adhered  to  the  principle  of  protecting  the  prodoe* 
tione  of  the  North  Americaa  Colonies,  by  laying  higher  duties^  on 
atmilar  productions,  from  the  United  States ;  and  they,  also,  claimed 
the  right,  for  British  vessels,  sailing  from  the  European  dominions  of 
Great  Britain,  to  touch,  at  ports  of  the  United  States,  for  the  purpose 
of  taking  in  cargoes,  for  the  West  Indies.*' 

It  is  not  our  intention,  to  follow  both  governments,  in  their  varioos 
separate  regulations  on  this  subject,  or  in  their  more  formal  negotia^ 
tioDs.  We  cannot,  however,  but  observe,  that  the  British,  by  an  aet 
of  July  5th,  1825,  in  some  measure,  changed  the  old  colonial  policy; 
mod  indicated  a  plan,  of  obtaining  supplies,  for  the  West  India  islands, 
independent  of  the  United  States.  It  opened  the  trade,  with  these 
blends  and  the  British  North  American  colonies,  to  all  foreign  na» 
tians^  on  certain  conditions ;  making  a  difference,  however,  between 
those  nations  who  had,  and  those  who  had  not,  colonies.  The  condi- 
tion of  enjoying  the  privilege  thus  granted,  by  nations  having  no  co- 
lonial possessions,  was,  that  they  should  place  the  commerce  and  navi- 
gation of  Great  Britain  and  her  possessions  abroad,  **  on  the  footing 
of  the  most  favored  nation  ;*'  and  these  conditions  were  to  be  com- 
plied with,  in  one  year,  from  the  passage  of  the  act. 

The  United  States,  having  no  colonies,  could  not  confer  upon  Great 
Britain,  privileges  they  had  granted  to  other  nations,  for  equivalents 
received  from  them  ;*  and  the  condition  of  the  act  was  not,  therefore, 
complied  with,  on  their  part;  and  a  royal  order  of  the  27th  of  July, 
1626,  issued,  declaring  this  fact,  and  shutting  the  colonial  ports  against 
American  vessels.  After  the  issuing  of  this  order,  the  British  cabinet 
declined  any  farther  negotiations  on  the  subject.  In  the  winter  of 
1827,  this  subject  again  came  before  Congress ;  hot' that  body,  not 
being  able  to  agree,  upon  any  farther  act  respecting  it,  the  President, 
on  the  17th  of  March,  1827,  issued  another  proclamation,  declaring^ 
the  trade,  between  the  United  States,  and  the  British  colonies,  allow- 
ed by  the  act  of  Pariiament  of  June,  1822,  to  be  prohibited,  and  the 
American  acts  of  1818,  1820,  and  1823,  to  be  in  force. 

The  direct  trade  between  the  United  States  and  the  British  West 
India  possessions,  remained,  in  this  situation,  until  opened,  under  an 
act  of  Congress  of  the  29th  of  May,  1830.  The  first  section  of  this 
act  declared,  that  when  the  President  should  receive  satisfactory  erl- 
deoce,  that  Great  Britain  would,  for  an  indefinite  or  limited  time,  open 
the  ports,  in  her  colonial  possessions  in  the  West  Indies^  on  the  con- 
tinent of  South  America^  the  Bahama  Islands^  the  Caicoe^  and  the 
Bermuda  or  Somers*  Islands^  to  the  vessek  of  the  United  Slates,  os 


900 

terms  of  equality^  m  to  duties,  charges,  and  articles  of  import,  witb 
British  vessels ;  and  wonld,  also,  permit  American  vessels,  to  carry 
from  said  ports,  to  any  country  whatever,  other  than  the  dominions 
of  Great  Britain,  the  same  articles,  as  might  be  carried  in  British  ves- 
sels, ^^ leaving  the  commercial  intercourse  of  the  United  States  vnth 
all  other  parts  of  the  British  dominions  or  possessions,  on  a  footing 
not  less  favorable  to  the  United  States,  than  it  then  was ;"  the  Presi- 
dent was  authorized,  to  issue  his  proclamation,  declaring  he  had  re- 
ceived such  evidence ;  and  from  that  time,  the  ports  of  the  United 
States  were  to  be  open,  to  British  vessels,  coming  from  the  said  Brit- 
ish colonial  possessions.  On  terms  of  equality,  as  to  duties  and  charges, 
with  American  vessels,  arriving  from  the  same  places ;  and  British 
Tessels,  might  import,  into  the  United  States,  and  export  therefrom, 
any  articles,  which  might  be  imported  and  exported,  in  vessels  of  the 
United  Stetes;  and  the  American  acto  of  1818,  1820,  and  1823,  be- 
fore mentioned,  were  thereupon  to  be  suspended  or  repealed,  as  the 
ease  might  require. 

The  second  section  declared,  that  whenever  the  ports  of  the  United 
States  should  be  opened,  to  the  places  mentioned  in  the  first  section, 
British  vessels  and  their  cargoes  should  be  admitted  to  entry,  in  the 
ports  of  the  United  States,  '*  from  the  islands,  provinces  or  colonies 
of  Great  Britain,  on  or  near  the  North  American  continent,  and  north 
and  east  of  the  United  States.** 

It  will  be  noticed,  that  this  act  consists  of  two  parts ;  the  first,  re- 
lates to  the  British  West  Indies  and  South  American  possessions,  and 
some  other  small  islands  in  that  quarter  of  the  world,  and  prescribes 
the  term^  and  conditions,  upon  which  the  American  ports  are  to  be 
opened,  to  British  vessels  coming  from  those  places. 

The  second  merely  declares,  that,  when  this  shall  be  done,  in  p«r- 
snance  of  the  authority  there  given,  then  British  vessels  with  their 
eargoest  shall  be  admitted  to  entry,  in  the  ports  of  the  United  States,! 
from  the  British  dominions,  on  the  North  American  continent,  and 
Borth  and  east  of  the  United  States ;  without  prescribing  any  terms  \ 
or  conditions,  on  which  such  entry  shall  be  made,  or  giving  the  Pres-  \ 
Ident  power  to  prescribe  any. 

In  communicating  this  act  to  the  British  government,  the  Americmn 
Minister,  at  the  court  of  London,  held  the  following  language :  **  It 
eoncedes  all  the  power  in  the  regulation  of  the  colonial  trade,  and 
aotborises  the  President  to  confer  on  British  vessels,  all  those  privile- 
ges, as  well  in  the  circuitous,  as  the  direct  voyage,  which  Great 
Biritaia  bas^  at  any  ttm^,  demanded  or  desired,** 


-/ 


201 

Lord  Aberdeen,  however,  was  unable  to  0ee,  in  (he  wwrdti  oi  1I10 
act,  the  grant  of  power  so  extensive,  as  that  mentioned  by  the  Amer* 
ican  Minister ;  and  in  his  reply  to  the  above  commanieation  of  the 
Utter,  he  said,  that  this  would  depend  on  the  constmction^  which 
■hould  be  given  to  the  act;  some  parts  of  which,  he  obsenredf 
**  appeared  obscure,'**  and  required  .some  explanation,  as  to  what 
would  be  the  practical  construction^  on  the  part  of  the  Ameri- 
can government.  And  among  the  things  requiring  explanation,  he 
particularly  referred  to  that  part  of  the  act,  permitting  the  entry 
of  vessels  from  the  North  American  colonies.  **  These/*  he  saidy 
•*  are  not  placed  in  the  terms. of  the  act,  on  the  same  footing,  as  the 
ships,  from  the  colonies  of  the  West  Indies.**  He,  however,  added* 
**ii  must  be  presumed^  that  vessels,  from  these  colonies  (viss.  north 
and  east  of  the  United  States,)  are  intended  to  be  admitted,  upon  like 
samt  terms^  in  all  respects,  and  to  be  entitled  to  the  same  privilegeti 
as  British  ships,  from  any  other  British  colony.^'  In  this  strange 
construction,  or  rather,  as  we  conceive,  in  this  amendment  of  the  aet> 
the  American  Minister,  and  the  American  Executive  fully  concurred* 

The  President,  therefore,  with  this  full  understanding,  as  to  what 
should  be,  the  practical  operation  of  the  act,  issued  his  ProclamatioDy 
bearing  date  th^  5th  of  October,  1830 ;  declaring,  that  the  terms  of 
the  first  section  of  the  act,  liad  been  complied  with,  on  the  pari  of 
the  British  government ;  that  the  American  ports  were,  therefore,  open 
^^  British  vessels,  coming  from  the  places  therein  mentioned,  on  equal 
terms  with  American,  and  that  the  acts  of  1818,  1820,  and  188Sr 
were  absolutely  repealed.  With  respect  to  vessels,  coming  from  the 
North  American  colonies,  the  Proclamation  simply  declared,  that 
they  were  **  admitted  to  entry  in  the  ports  of  the  United  States,**  in 
the  very  words  of  the  second  section^  and  was  entirely  silentf  as  to 
the  terms  of  such  admidsion. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  however,  in  his  circular  instrvc* 
tious  to  the  Collectors,  dated  October  0th,  1830,  was  explicit  on  thie 
subject ;  and  directed  the  admission  of  British  vessels,  from  the  North 
American  colonies,  on  the  same  terms,  as  those  from  the  British 
West  Indies ;  and  he  said,  that  those  directions  '.vere  given,  **  By 
virtue  of  the  authority  of  the  Proclamation,  and  in  conformity  with 
the  arrangement,  made  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britaio» 
and  under  the  sanction  of  the  President.*' 

We  are  unable  to  see,  by  what  legal  authority,  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  admitted  British  vesseU,  from  the  British  possessions  north 
and  east  of  the  United  States,  on  the  same  terms,  aa  Americao  Tea- 

26 


20S 

selfl.  Neither  the  act  itself,  nor  the  proclamation  of  the  President* 
as  we  understand  them,  authorise  it;  and  it  must  rest  on  the  sanctum 
of  the  President  alone. 

And  we  may  here  ask,  whether  this  was  *'  leaving  the  commercial 
intercourse  of  the  United  States,  with  all  other  parts  of  the  British 
dominions,  on  a  footing  not  less  favorable  to  the  United  States,*'  as 
required  by  the  first  section. 

In  communicating  to  the  Senate,  the  documents,  in  relation  to  this 
arrangement,  by  a  message  of  the  4th  of  January,  1S31,  the  President 
gives  his  understanding  of  the  act,  under  which  it  was  made,  or  rath- 
er, his  understanding  of  \vhat  it  ought  to  have  been.  '*  It  will  appear 
from  these'  documents,^'  says  the  President,  '^  that,  owing  to  the 
omission  in  the  act  of  the  29lh  of  May  last,  of  a  clause  expressly 
restricting  importations  into  the  British  colonies,  in  American  vessels, 
to  the  productions  of  the  United  States — to  the  amendment  engraft^ 
ed  upon  that  act,  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  providing,  that, 
when  the  trade  with  the  British  West  India  colonies  should  be  open- 
ed, the  commercial  intercourse  of  the  United  States,  with  all  other 
parts  of  the  British  dominions  or  possessions,  should  be  left,  on  a 
footing,  not  less  favorable  to  the  United  States,  than  it  now  is — and 
to  the  act  not  specifying  the  terms,  upon  which  British  vessels,  com- 
ing from  the  northern  colonies,  should  be  admitted  to  entry,  into  the 
ports  of  the  United  States,  an  apprehension  was  entertained  by  the 
gOTernment  of  Great  Britain,  that,  under  the  contemplated  arrange- 
ment, claims  might  bo  set  up,  on  our  part,  inconsistent  with  the  prO" 
positions  submitted  by  our  Minister;  and  with  the  terms  to  which 
she  was  willing  to  agree ;  and  that  this  circumstance  led  to  explana^ 
tions  between  Mr.  McLane  and  the  Lord  Aberdeen,  respecting  the 
intentions  of  Congress,  and  the  true  construction  to  be  given  to  the 
act  referred  to.  To  the  interpretation  given  by  them  to  that  act,  I 
did  not  hesitate  to  agree." 

**  It  was  quite  clear,  that,  in  adopting  the  amendment  referred  to. 
Congress  could  not  have  intended,  to  preclude /t/ti/re  alterations,  in 
the  existing  intercourse  betwen  the  United  States,  and  other  parts  of 
the  British  dominions  :  and  the  supposition,  that  the  omission  to  re- 
strict, in  terms,  the  importations,  to  the  productions  of  the  country, 
to  which  the  vessels  respectively  belong,  was  intentional,  was  preclu- 
ded by  the  propositions  previously  made  by  this  government,  and 
which  were  before  Congress,  at  the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  act ; 
by  the  principles  which  govern  the  maritime  legislation  of  the  two 
countries,  and  the  provisions  of  an  existing  commercial  treaty  be- 
tween them." 


903 

**  AetQated  by  this  Tiew  of  the  subject,  and  convinced,  that  it 
in  accordance  with  the  real  intentions  of  Congress,  I  felt  it  my  duty 
to  give  effect  to  the  arrangement,  by  issuing  the  required  proclama- 
tion, of  which  a  copy  is  likewise,  herewith  communicated/* 

By  this  arrangement,  American  vessels  arc  allowed  to  go  directly 
to  the  British  West  Indies,  with  domestic  produce  only,  on  an  equal- 
ity, as  to  duties  and  charges,  with  British  vessels ;  and  can  take  colo- 
nial produce,  and  carry  it  to  the  United  States,  or  any  other  country, 
except  the  dominions  of  Great  Britain — while  British  vessels  are  al- 
lowed to  curry  foreign,  as  well  as  domestic  produce,  direct  from  this 
country  to  the  West  Indies. 

The  United  States,  by  thiai  arrangement,  as  explained  by  both  par- 
ties, have  left  it  in  the  power  of  the  British  government  to  impoM 
such  discriminating  duties  as  it  may  think  proper,  on  the  same  arti- 
cles, imported  into  the  West  Indies  from  the  United  States  directlf^ 
and  through  Nova  Scotia,  or  other  North  American  colonies.  A  high 
duty  may,  therefore,  be  laid,  on  articles,  coming  direct,  from  the 
United  States  ;  and  the  same  articles,  from  the  British  North  Ameri- 
can colonies,  may  go  duty  free ;  thus  forcing,  as  the  case  may  be,  the 
whole  West  India  trade  with  the  United  States,  through  these  colonies. 

The  British  minister  discovered  no  little  solicitude,  to  have  thi&part 
of  the  arrangement,  perfectly  understood,  by  both  governments. 

The  American  Minister,  having,  in  one  of  his  notes,  informed  Lord 
Aberdeen,  that  the  government  of  the  United  States  had  lately  di- 
minished the  duties  on  certain  articles  of  colonial  produce,  his  Lord- 
ship, in  replying  to  this  part  of  the  note,  took  occasion  to  observe, 
that  *'  those  changes  were  a  part  of  the  general  scheme  of  taxation, 
which  the  government  of  Anicrira  may,  at  all  times,  impose  or  modi- 
fy, with  the  same  freedom,  as  that  which  Great  Britain  may  exercise, 
in  the  regulation  of  its  system  of  duties  ;  and  it  is  the  more  essential, 
that  his  Majesty *s  government  should  not  contract,  by  implication, 
any  engagement  towards  that  of  the  United  States,  with  respect  to 
such  alterations  ;  berauFC  his  ]\Iajcsty*s  government  had  already  had, 
under  their  consideration,  the  expediency  of  introducing  some  modi- 
ficaiion,  into  the  schedule  of  duties,  attached  to  the  act  of  Parliament 
of  1825,  with  a  view,  more  effectually,  to  support  the  interest  of  the 
North  American  colonics.  To  these  interests,  fostisred,  as  they 
have  incidentally  been,  by  the  suspension  of  the  intercourse,  between 
llie  United  States  niid  the  West  Indies,  his  Majesty's  government  will 
jcontinue  to  look,  with  an  earnest  desire,  to  aflbrd  them  such  protee- 
UioD,  by  discriminating  duties,  as  may  appear  to  be  eonsitteot 


i 


ao4 

the  interettt  of  other  parts  of  his  Majesty's  dominions,  and  with  a  . 
•onnd  policy,  in  the  relations  of  this  country,  with  all  other  Statet.** ' 

^  The  undersigned,''  his  Lordship  adds,  '^  has  thought  it  desirable, 
that  this  point  should  be  distinctly  understood,  on  both  sides,  in  order 
that  no  doubt  should  exist  of  the  right  of  Great  Britain,  to  vary 
those  duties,  from  time  to  time,  according  to  her  own  views  of  expe- 
diency, unfettered  by  any  obligations,  expressed,  or  implied,  towards 
the  United  States,  or  any  other  country." 

The  British  government  thus  candidly  declared  their  views,  in  regard  . 
to  the  right  of  imposing  duties,  to  foster  the  Northern  colonies,  and  the 
mode  in  which  the  trade  with  the  West  Indies  was  to  be  carried  on  in 
fviiire.  The  proclamation  of  the  President,  therefore,  carrying  this 
arrangement  into  effect,  had  no  sooner  reached  Great  Britain,  than  a 
fldiedole  of  duties,  in  accordance  with  the  above  suggestions  of  the 
British  Minister,  was  introduced  into  Parliament ;  and  Mr.  Herriesy 
the  President  of  the  Board  of  trade,  declared  in  debate,  that  its  object 
was,  ^  to  give  encouragement  to  jbl  supply  of  the  West  India  Isl-  ^ 
andi,  by  the  North  American  colonies  of  Great  Britain,  instead  of, 
by  the  United  States,  or  by  any  other  country."  He  also  added,  that 
'*  America  had  entirely  ^nd  unconditionally,  withdrawn  her  preten- 
dons.^' 

To  accomplish  the  object  thus  openly  and  unequivocally  avowed,  an 
act  of  Parliament,  (passed  in  the  winter  of  1831,)  permitted  the  arti- 
cles of  wl^at  ^our,  coni  or  grain,  rice,  live  stock,  beef,  pork,  hams,    I 
or  bacon,  wood  and  lumber,  to  be  imported,  from  the  United  States,  U 
into  the  Canadas,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick,  free  of  duty  ;  f 
and  the  duties  on  some  articles  carried,  from  the  British  North  Amer-' 
ican  possessions  to  the  Went  Indies,  were  repealed.    And  the  import- 
ant articles  of  flour,  beef,  pork,  hams  and  bacon,  red  and  white  oak 
staves,  white,  )^ow  and  pitch  pine  lumber,  are  now  allowed  to  be  car- 
ried, from  the  Northern  provinces,  to  the  West  Indies,  in  British  vessels, 
only,  duty  free ;  while  the  same  articles,  carried,  from  the  United 
States,  dir^tly  to  the  British  West  Indies,  are  there  subject  to  the* 
following  duties — flour,  bs,  equal  to  $1  16  per  barrel — ^beef  and  pork,  I 
about  $6  per  barrel — red  oak  staves,  21 «.  3J.  per  thousand — white 
oak  stares,  199. 6d.  per  thousand — white  pine  lumber,  $6  60  per  thou- 
sand, and  yellow  pitch  pine  lumber,  $5  50  per  thousand. 

Fjour,  beef  and  pork,  when  carried  from  the  United  States,  to  the  .^ 
Northern  provinces,  are,  by  law,  to  be  put  into  warehouses,  in  certain  '^'^ 
ports,  and  from  thence  taken,  into  British  vessels,  and  carried  to  the 
West  Indies.    The  duty  on  beef  and  pork,  in  the  direct  trade,  as  will 
be  seen  heresAer,  amounts  to  a  prohibition. 


205 

The  beneficial  effects  of  this  arrangemeDt  upon  the  interests  of 
British  navigation,  are  thus  noticed,  in  the  New  Bninswigh-^fleraldy 
in  the  fall  of  1831 — ''The  most  important  point  secured,  by  the  new 
arrangement,  is  the  carrying  trade.  British  vessels  may  now  pro- 
ceed, from  any  part  of  His  Majesty's  dominions,  direct  to  tbe  .United 
States,  there  load  a  full  cargo,  either  for  the  West  Indies  direct^  or 
Tia  the  provinces,  ak  the  nature  of  the  cargo  may  invite ;  thus  com- 
pleting the  whole  voyage ;  a  portion  of  which  only^  Americans  would 
be  eligible  to  perform.  This,  also,  embraces  the  privilege  of  import- 
ing debenture  goods,  which  could  not  take  place,  in  American  vessels, 
they  being  confined  to  the  produce  of  their  States  alone.  The  object 
of  our  government  has  been,  plainly  and  avowedly,  io  force  the  trade* 
from  American  hands,  into  those  of  British  ship  owners — to  continue 
and  impose  such  additional  duties,  on  the  direct  carriage  to  the  West 
Indies,  as  will  be  prohibitory ;  and  moreover,  to  obtain  a  market 
for  their  surplus  West  India  produce,  which  they  did  not  before 
possess  P* 

The  editor  of  the  London  Morning  Herald,  alluding  to  this  arrange- 
ment, boasted,  ''  that  brother  Jonathan  had  been, /or  once,  overreach- 
ei  by  (ather  Bull.**  He  might,  with  more  truth,  have  said,  that  brother 
Jonathan,  had,  for  once,  overreached  himself. 

It  is  not  a  little  singular,  that,  while  the  supporters  of  the  British 
government  were  thus  boasting  of  the  great  advantages  secured,  to 
Brituh  navigation  in  this  bargain ;  the  friends  of  the  American  gov- 
ernment were,  at  the  same  time,  assuming  great  credit,  for  the  diplo- 
matic sagacity  of  the  latter,  in  obtaining  advantages,  in  the  American 
West  India  trade,  not  before  attained  by  any  preceding  administration. 

The  American,  as  well  a^  the  British  custom  house  books,  will 
shew,  so  far  as  the  navigating  interest  of  both  countries  is  concerned, 
(and  this  was  the  great  interest  in  quetion,)  on  which  side  the  advan- 
tage lies.  In  1S30,  the  whole  amount  of  British  tonnage,  employed  in 
the  whole  American  trade,  was  only  one  hundred  thousand  two  hundred 
and  ninety  eight;  and  in  1833,  it  was  four  hundred  and  two  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  thirty  ton!»,  making  an  increase,  in  the  short  pe- 
riod of  three  years,  of  three  hundred  and  two  thousand  four  hundred 
and  thirty  two.  This  has  been  occasioned,  in  no  small  degree,  by 
forcing  the  American  trade  with  the  Britii^h  Went  Indies,  through  the 
British  North  American  provinces,  thereby  giving  the  whole  carry iof 
trade,  from  these  provinces,  to  the  W'cst  Indies,  to  British  ships,  leav- 
ing that,  between  the  United  States  and  these  provinces  open,  oo 
equal  terms,  to  British  and  Amdricaii  vessels.    In  addition  to  this,  the 


/ 


ao6 

British  have  gained  what,  as  before  stated,  has  been  their  great  object, 
since  the  peace  of  1783,  the  circuitous  trade,  from  Great  Britain  to 
the  West  Indies,  by  tlie  way  of  the  United  States ;  the  effect  of  which, 
on  the  direct  commercial  intercourse,  between  this  country  and  the 
British  European  dominions,  is  greatly  in  favor  of  the  latter. 

The  attention  of  the  reader  is,  in  the  first  place,  invited  to  the  ef- 
fect this  arrangement  has  had,  on  the  intercourse  with  the  West  In-  | 
dies,  and  with  the  North  American  colonies.     In  1830,  the  trade,  be- 
tween the  United  States  and  the  latter,  was  principally,,  in  American     ^ 
vessels,  their  tonnage  being  one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  five  hun- 
dred and  twenty  seven,  while  that  of  the  British,  was  only  four  thou- 
sand and  two.     In  1833,  the  amount  of  British  and  American  ton- 
nage, which  entered  the  United  States  in  the  same  trade,  was  about  ^ 
equal,  the  former  being  two  hundred  and  eight  thousand  and  fifty  four, 
and  the  latter,  two  hundred  and  nine  thousand  nine  hundred  and  fifty 
eighL  -  The  amount  of  tonnage,  however,  departing  from  the  United 
States,  to  these  provinces,  was  in  favor  of  the  British,  being  two  hun- 
dred and  forty  five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  seventy  nine,  while 
that  of  the  American,  was  only  two  hundred  and  nineteen  thousand 
four  hundred  and  three,  a  difierence  of  more  than  twenty  six  thousand. 

This  difiercncc,  as  will  be  shewn  hereafter,  was  occasioned,  princi- 
pally, by  the  advantages  of  the  British,  in  the  circuitous  trade. 

In  1830,  thera  was  little  direct  trade  with  the  British  West  India 
Islands.  In  1833,  the  American  tonnage,  entering  from  these  Islands, 
was  fifty  three  thousand  ^sc  hundred  and  thirty  seven,  and  the  Brit- 
ish, twenty  six  thousand  four  hundred  and  thirty  eight;  and  the 
American  tonnage  departing,  was  sixty  four  thousand  six  hundred  and 
fifty  nine,  the  British,  twenty  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eight. 
It  will  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  tonnage  above  mentioned,  includes, 
in  both  cases,  the  repeated  voyages  uf  the  same  vessels ;  and  of 
course,  greatly  exceeds,  the  real  tonnage. 

The  value  of  the  dirxct  trade  with  the  British  West  Indies,  is  now  ; 
far  less,  than  with  the  North  American  colonies. 

In  1833,  the  value  of  the  exports  direct  to  the  former,  was 
91,814,006,  and  to  the  latter,  was  84,471,084,  consisting,  principally, 
of  flgur,  pork,  hams  and  bacon,  lard,  live  hogs,  beef  and  lumber; 
which  find  their  way,  to  the  British  West  Indies,  through  the  North 
American  provinces.  During  the  same  year,  the  quantity  of  flour, 
ahippcd  to  these  provinces,  was  one  hundred  and  sixty  eight  thousam 
one  hundred  and  twenty  seven  barrels,  while  that,  shipped  direct  U 
ibe  West  Indies,  was  only  one  hundred  thousand  and  fifty  seven  ;| 


207 

and  no  less  than  sixty  eight  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty  fonr  bar- 
rels of  pork  went  to  the  former,  and  only  three  thousand  four  hundred 
and  seven,  direct  to  the  latter ;  and  in  the  same  year,  the  whole  value 
of  pork,  hams  and  bacon,  lard  and  live  hogs,  sent  to  these  provinces* 
was  9906,016,  and  the  value  of  the  same  articles,  carried  direct  to 
the  West  Indies,  was  only  960,533 — the  value  of  beef,  tallow,  hides, 
and  homed  cattle,  sent  to  the  former,  was  93^1,192,  and  that  of  the 
same  articles  to  the  latter,  was  no  more  than  913,658. 

This  shews,  that  the  British  have  secured  to  their  shipping,  either 
directly  or  indirectly,  the  carriage  of  about  three  quarters  of  the 
American  exports,  to  their  West  India  Islands. 

To  show  the  share  British  shipping  have,  in  the  American  trade 
with  the  British  northern  provinces,  we  invite  the  attention  of  the 
reader,  to  the  following  statement  of  the  amount  of  tonnage,  both 
American  and  British,  employed  between  the  great  commercial  port9 
of  New  York  and  Boston,  and  these  provinces,  in  certain  years,  from 
1830  to  1S33;  and  the  quaptities  of  Hour,  and  pork,  carried  from  the 
former  port,  to  these  provinces,  in  American  and  British  vessels,  in 
each  year,  during  the  same  period. 

Toniioge  entering  the  port  of  New  York,         Tonnage  rli^orcd  from  New  York,  for 
from  ttie  Britinh  provinces.  British  North  American  Cokmiea. 

Teara.  American.  British.  American.  British. 

1830  .  19,352  .  1,983  .  15,170  .  1,072 

1831  .  7,851  15,773  .  6,503  .  18,013 

1832  .  6,553  16,096  .  .  4,500  .  35,044 

1833  .  8,464  24,515  7,272  .  43,088 

Eiportrd  tu  British  North  American  Exported  to  British  North  American 

Colon  if  ft,  in  American  vrasels.  Colonies,  in  British  ^xssels. 

Yearp.  Flour— Bnrrfln.  Pork— Barrels.  Flour— Barrels.        Pork— Bomela, 

1830  .  20,410  .  907 

1831  .  4,998  .  23 

1832  .  4,301  .  362 
lb33  .  6,536  .  1,550 

Tonnage  of  American  and  foreign  vessels,  cleared  for  the  British 
North  American  colonies,  from  the  port  of  Boston,  in  1832  and  1633. 

Years.  .\mrricAn.  British. 

1832      .        .        .        0,771         .         .        .      20,583 
IKW     .         .        .        K259        .         .        .      24,813 

The  American  reader  will  perceive,  from  these  statements,  that  the 
Briti^>h  government  lias  attained  one  of  its  avowed  objects,  in  making 
this  arrangement — that  it  has,  in  fact,  forced  the  American  West  India 
trade,  through  the  norlliern  provinces;  and  thereby  secured  to  British 


2,196 

335 

30,555 

0,866 

31,766 

13,396 

30,307 

10,120 

i 


SOS 

shipping,  much  the  greatest  part  of  this  carrying  trade,  even  from  the 
great  commercial  ports  of  New  York  and  Boston — and  that  John 
Bull  did  not  boast,  without  reason,  that  he  had,  for  once,  overreached 
brother  Jonathan. 

Although  flour,  beef  and  pork,  when  brought  from  the  United  States* 
are,  by  law,  to  be  warehoused,  in  the  provinces,  before  shipped  for  the 
West  Indies — yet,  it  is  said,  that,  with  respect  to  British  vessels,  this 
ceremony,  in  some  of  the  warehousing  ports,  is  dispensed  with,  and 
a  change  of  papers  is,  in  fact,  only  required. 

Such,  indeed,  are  the  advantages,  which  British  vessels,  *now  have, 
in  the  West  India  trade,  that  Americans  cannot  well  compete  with 
them ;  and  the  American  merchants  concerned  in  it,  have  been  obli- 
ged, as  we  are  informed,  in  several  instances,  to  give  up  American 
ships,  and  to  employ  British.  To  what  extent,  this  is  done,  we  know 
"not,  but,  from  the  number  of  the  latter  employed,  from  the  ports  of 
Mew  York  and  Boston,  as  above  stated,  we  have  no  doubt,  to  a 
great  extent 

This  is  a  subject,  certainly,  worthy  of  the  serious  enquiry  of  the 
American  merchants  and  ship  owners ;  and  should  lead  them  to  con- 
sider, whether  this  is  that  fret  trade,  for  which  some  of  them  have 
been  contending. 

This,  however,  is  not  the  only  advantage,  which  the  British  navi- 
gation has  over  the  American,  in  consequence  of  this  arrangement 

The  benefit  secured  by  the  circuitous  trade,  is,  we  apprehend, 
much  greater,  and  has  proved  much  more  injurious  to  the  shipping  of 
this  country.  The  American  tonnage  employed  in  the  trade  between 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  and  Ireland,  in  1833,  was  less 
by  seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty  eight,  than  in  1830 ;  while 
the  British  tonnage,  in  the  same  trade,  and  during  the  same  period* 
had  increased  sixty  two  thousand  four  hundred  and  eighteen.  In 
1830,  the  whole  amount  of  British  tonnage,  in  this  trade,  was  only 
eighty  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  four ;  and  in  1833,  was  one 
hundred  and  forty  three  thousand  two  hundred  and  eighty  two, — the 
American  tonnage  in  the  former  year,  was  two  hundred  and  eleven 
thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty,  and  in  the  latter,  two  hundred  and 
three  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty  two ;  the  amount  in  both 
cases,  being  that,  entering  the  ports  of  the  United  States. 

In  1830,  as  before  stated,  the  whole  amount  of  British  tonnage,  en- 
tering the  United  States,  was  only  one  hundred  thousand  two  hundred 
and  ninety  eight ;  and  in  1833,  was  four  hundred  and  two  thousand  sev- 
en hundred  and  thirty ;  a  difierence  of  three  hundred  and  two  thon- 


809 

und  four  hundred  and  thirty  two.  This  great  increase  of  British  ship- 
ping, in  so  short  a  period,  has  been  occasioned,  principally,  by  the  cir« 
cnitous  trade,  so  long  the  favorite  object  of  British  Statesmen ;  and 
which  the  American  government,  at  last,  voluntarily  yielded.  •  Thi# 
has  thrown,  into  the  hands  of  the  British,  a  much  greater  proportioo 
of  the  carrying  trade  of  the  United  States,  both  in  domestic  and  foreign 
articles,  than  they  have  ever  before  enjoyed,  except  at  the  commenct- 
ment  of  the  general  government. 

The  following  table  presents  to  the  view  of  the  reader,  the  value 
of  domestic  and  foreign  articles,  exported  from  the  United  States,  id 
American  and  foreign  vessls,  in  each  year,  from  1830  to  1833  in- 
clusive. 

, Donifntic  prodac4>.  Foreign  prodacA. 

Vean.        In  American  TesiM*l8.      In  foreiini  rciuiets.    In  American  vessela.    In  foreign  stmtia* 

1830  951,106,189        98,356,840       812,776,529        81,610,960 

1831  49,671,239        11,605,818  15,874,942         4,158,604 

1832  46,925,890        164^1 1,5S0  19,214,870  4,824,008 

1833  62,985,440        17,332,252  15,072,786  4,749,960 

T^ose  who  have  not  watched  the  late  increase  of  foreign  tonnagCf 
in  the  American  carrying  trade,  must  be  surprised  to  learn,  that,  in 
1833,  foreigners,  principally  British,  enjoyed  about  one  fourth  of  the 
whole  carrying  trade  of  the  United  States ;  while,  in  1830,  they  had 
only  a  little  more  than  one  eighth.  In  1830,  the  whole  amomit  of 
foreign  tonnage,  engaged  in  the  Anicrtcan  trade,  was  only  one  hun- 
dred and  thirty  six  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty  six ;  and  in  1833 
was  five  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy 
four. 

It  should  be  noticed,  however,  that  this  great  increase  is  owing,  in 
a  considerable  degree,  to  the  often  repeated  voyages  of  the  same  Tea- 
sel, in  the  intercourse  between  the  United  States,  and  the  northern 
British  provinces ;  and  particularly,  between  the  port  of  Pamame- 
quoddy  and  the  adjoining  British  province;  the  amount  of  foreign 
tonnage  entering  that  port  during  that  year,  being  nominally,  ninety 
seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty  nine. 

Few  foreign  vessels  enter  any  other  port  in  New  England,  except 
that  of  Boston ;  and  the  reader  is  here  presented  with  the  amount  of 
foreign  tonnage,  entering  that  port  and  some  other  of  the  principal 
ports  of  the  United  Sutes,  in  1H30  and  in  1833. 

1830.  RSX 

Passamaquoddy,                           4,231  .                97,669 

Boston,      ....        4,633  .                29,013 

New  York,                               31,391  106,099 

27 


i 


310 


183a 

1833. 

2,836 

10,043 

1,826 

3,688 

•        •                  •                • 

31,214 

6,007 

24,336 

6,316 

24,136 

2,406 

13,314 

1,770 

6,070 

21,760 

32,012 

7,347 

20,780 

4,826 

9,918 

36,303 

62,346 

49 

4,066 

Oswego,    • 
Genesee,    • 
Niagara,     . 
Philadelphia, 
Baltimore, 
Norfolk,     . 
Wilmington, 
Charleston,  S.  C. 
Savannah, 
Mobile, 
Mississippi, 
Cuyahoga,  (Ohio,) 

The  circuitous  trade,  thus  yielded  to  the  British,  has  given  them 
the  carria^  of  no  small  proportion  of  the  bulky  articles  of  the 
South,  particularly  cotton.  In  1830,  the  exports  of  the  domestic 
produce  of  South  Carolina,  was  $7,680,000 ;  of  which  foreign  vesieU 
carried  but  $2,000,000 ;  of  the  $6,000,000  exported  from  Georgia 
the  same  year,  only  $769,706  was  carried  in  foreign  vessels ;  and  of 
the  $13,000,000  from  Louisiana,  $2,983,100  only,  was  carried  in  the 
same  way.  In  1833,  of  $8,000,000  of  domestic  produce  shipped 
from  South  Carolina,  foreign  vessels  had  the  carnage  of  about 
$3,000,000;  from  Georgia  more  than  $2,000,000*  out  of  $6,000,000; 
from  Louisiana,  $6,393,681,  out  of  $16,000,000.  Indeed,  in  1830, 
the  amount  of  domestic  produce,  exported  from  the  States  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  Alabama  and  Louisiana,  was  $28,249,000 ;  and  of 
this,  the  amount  carried,  in  foreign  vessels,  was  $6,284,000;  whereas 
Id  1833,  the  amount  exported,  from  the  same  states,  was  $36,262,000, 
of  which  $11,990,000  went  in  foreign  vessels;  being  in  the  former 
year,  a  little  more  than  a  fifth  ;  and  in  the  latter,  a  little  more  than  a 
third  of  the  whole  domestic  exports  of  those  States. 

The  British  custom  house  books  also  shew,  a  great  diminution,  in 
the  number  and  tonnage  of  American  vessels,  in  the  trade  with  the 
great  commercial  port  of  Liverpool. 

In  1830,  the  number  of  American  vessels,  entering  that  port,  was 
five  hundred  and  three,  with  a  tonnage  of  one  hundred  and  eighty 
one  thousand,  four  hundred  and  eighty  five ;  while  the  number  of 
British  vessels  from  the  United  States,  was  only  one  hundred  and 
forty  seven,  with  a  tonnage  of  forty  eight  thousand  eight  hundred 
and  seventy  three — but  in  1832,  the  number  of  British  vessels,  had 
increased  to  two  hundred  and  ten,  with  a  tonnage  of  seventy  thou* 


811 


MBd  three  hiradred  and  ninety  two ;  and  the  American  Teasels  liad 
diminished  to  three  hundred  and  sixty  five,  with  a  tonnage  of  only  one 
hundred  and  forty  two  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty  five ;  being  a 
decrease  in  American  tonnage,  of  thirty  nine  thousand  three  hundred 
and  twenty,  in  two  years.* 

The  benefits  of  the  circuitous  trade  were  somewhat  increased,  by 
that  part  of  the  arrangement  now  under  consideration,  which  allow- 
ed British  vessels,  the  privilege  of  carrying  foreign  goods  of  any 
kind,  from  the  United  States  direct  to  the  British  West  Indies ;  while 
American  vessels,  were  only  allowed  to  carry  to  these  islands,  the 
produce  of  the  United  States.  We  cannot  but  consider  this  part  of 
the  arrangement  as  wholly  unauthorized.  The  act  under  which  it 
was  made,  directed  the  President  to  admit  British  ^vessels  from  the 
West  Indies,  on  an  equal  footing  with  American,  on  the  conditioo, 
that  the  latter  should  be  placed  on  terms  of  equality  with  the  former» 
**  as  to  duties,  charges,  and  articles  of  import.''*  And  yet  the  arrange- 
ment  was  made,  although  the  Britisli  government  refused  to  admit 
the  import  of  foreign  articles,  in  American  vessels. 

Having  thus  given  a  brief  sketch  of  the  history  of  the  British  West 
India  trade,  we  shall  now  present  the  reader  with  some  account  of  the 
extent  and  value  of  this  trade  at  different  periods.  From  1705  to 
1807,  it  will  be  remembered,  the  ports,  of  the  British  West  Indies  were 
generally  open  to  American  vessels.  From  1796  to  1801,  the  exporta 
and  imports  were  as  follows  : — 


Yem. 

1706 
1796 
1797 
17^8 
1799 
1800 
1801 


Exports. 

92,034,664 
5,446,559 
2,147,025 
4,283,940 
6,285,251 
0,404,785 


Imports. 

$6,426,091 
6,301,634 
3,046,045 
2,926,739 
6,083,372 
6,774,411 
6,968,032 


9,699,r22 

During  the  years  1802,  1803  and   1804,  the  value  of  the  exporta 

and  imports,  according  to  an  estimate  made  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  was — 

VeanL                                       Exports.  Imports. 

1802  .      $6,228,464  $4,486,890 

1803  .   .5,624,647  .    .    4.492,86! 

1804  ,6,315,667  .    .    4,739,186 


•  See  Report  of  the  Board  of  trade,  to  Parliament,  in  1833. 


j 


212 


In  the  yean  1905,  1806  and  1807,  the  value  of  the  intercoune  waa 
nearly  the  same,  as  in  the  three  preceding  years.  The  value  of  the 
exports,  while  the  ports  of  these  Islands  were  open  to  American  vea- 
celSf  generally  exceeded  that  of  the  imports ;  and  as  the  value  of  the 
former,  was  then  estimated,  at  the  place  of  exportation,  and  of  the 
latter,  at  the  place  of  importation,  the  real  difference  greatly  exceed- 
ed that  shewn  by  the  custom  house  books. 

Most'  of  the  exports  consisted  of  bulky  articles,  and  the  amount  of 
fireight  and  insurance,  on  some  of  them,  particularly  lumber  and  live 
stock,  was  about  equal  to  the  first  cost ;  and  the  amount  of  freight 
and  charges  of  the  imports,  formed  no  inconsiderable  part  of  their 
value,  at  the  place  of  importation.  As  American  vessels  were  at  that 
time,  principally  employed,  in  this  trade,  the  profits  arising  from 
these  sources,  were  chtefiy  confined  to  the  American  merchant  and 
ship  owner.  Prior  to  1808,  a  great  proportion  of  American  lumber 
went  to  these  Islands.  The  average  quantity  of  boards  and  plank, 
in  the  years  1805,  1^06  and  1807,  was  about  forty  millions.  In  1802, 
1803,  and  1804,  the  value  of  flour,  bread,  and  biscuit,  was  about 
#2,000,000— of  lumber,  about  $1,000,000— of  beef,  pork,  bacon,  and 
lard,  about  $800,000 — and  of  Indian  corn,  rye,  and  Indian  meal, 
about  $600,000.  The  quantity  of  rum  received  in  return,  during  the 
same  period,  was  about  four  millions  of  gallons  annually,  valued  at 
about  $2,500,000. 

During  the  continuance  of  the  commercial  restrictions,  many  of  the 
American  products  found  their  way,  to  these  Islands,  through  the 
Canadas.  In  1806,  the  value  of  exports  from  Quebec,  was  £551,570; 
and  in  1810,  was  £1,079,474,  making  a  difierence  of  more  than  half 
a  million  sterling,  or  more  than  $2,000,000. 

We  here  present  the  value  of  the  direct  trade,  with  ^thc  British 
West  Indies  and  North  American  Colonies,  from  1821  to  1833,  so  far 
as  appears,  from  official  documents. 


Britisb  West  ladies. 

Biitish  North  American  Culoniet. 

Tean. 

Imports. 

Export!. 

• 

Imports. 

Exports. 

1821    . 

.     $92 

f,346 

$264,632    . 

.  $490,704 

$2,009,336 

1822    . 

.       33 

1,537 

452,141     . 

.    526,817 

1,897,550 

1823    . 

.     1,84 

f031 

1,627,967    . 

.    463,374 

1,821,400 

1824    . 

.    2,75 

4,067 

1,771,008    . 

.    705,931 

1,775,724 

1825    . 

.    2,43 

ll22 

1,647,046    . 

.    610,78^ 

2,539,964 

1826    . 

.    2,20 

f412 

2,110,802    . 

.     650,315 

2,588,549 

1827    . 

.       12 

1291 

690,575    . 

.    447,669 

2,830,674 

1828    . 

89 

4^07 

28,855    . 

.    445,118 

1,674,674 

S13 


BrHisb  West  Indiei. 
Imports.  Exports. 

824ft,^4  80,521 

16i579  1,910 

;Ml,t»3 

4401287  ""1,686,5:06 


British  North  American  Cok»ie& 


^r.  .*-  -•* 


Imports. 

.  8,577,4x12 
.  650,303 
f»l,909 
1,229,526 
1,793,397 


Exports. 

82,764,909 
3,786,373 
4,061,838  * 
3,614,385 
4,390,081 


1,^i,23ff       imVSOb    . 

It  will  be  borne  in  mind,  that  during*  this  period,  (he  British  West 
India  port;*,  were  nometimes  open,  and  sometimes  shut;  and  of 
course,  this  account  gives  but  an  imperfect  view  of  the  real  amount 
of  American  trade  witli  these  islands,  as  it  was,  for  a  great  part  of 
the  time,  carried  on  through  neutral  ports,  in  the  West  IndieSf  in 
which,  the  Americans  were  the  principal  carriers.  ^ 

TRADE  WITH  FRANCE  AND  DEPENDENCIES. 

I.  France. 

The  amount  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States,  with  France 
and  her  dependencies,  in  1787,  is  stated  by  Monsieur  Peuchet,  in  his 
Statistics  of  France,  to  have  been  as  follows : — 

Elxports  to  the  United  States,  from  France  and  dependencies,  in 

Livres. 

Coflee,  sugar,  mm,  syrup,  salt,  olive  oil,  fruits,  brandy, 

wine,  and  liqueurs,  amounted  to         ...         .     10,675,000 

Cotton,  drugs,  Slc.  to 694,000 

Stuffs,  laces,  silk,  hosiery,  linen,  cambric,  snap,  gloves 
gunpowder,  glass  ware,  and  hardware,  to  .  1,23S,000 


12,607,000 


or  about  82,500,000. 

Imports  into  France  and  dependencies,  in 

Grain,  fish,  and  bread  stuffs,  amounted  to 

Boards,  timber,  staves,  live  stock,  fish  oil,   peltry 

and  tar,  potash,  linseed,  and  tobacco,  to 
Manufactures,  introduced  into  the  colonies,  to, 
Negroes, 


pitch 


LiTros. 

4,483,000 

19,283,000 
547,000 
226,000 


24,539,000 
or  about  85,000,000. 

For  about  three  years,  preceding  the  French  revolution,  the  aver- 
age amount  of  imports,  from  the  United  States,  into  France  alone, 
was  estimate  at  9,000,000  livres,  or  about  81,520,000;  and  the  ex- 


814 


porU  from  France  to  the  United  States,  at  1,800,000  litres,  or  about 
•380,00a« 

The  small  aqonnt  of  this  commercial  intercourse,  particolarlj  in 
exports,  disappointed  the  expectation  of  the  French  nation,  and  Mon- 
sieur  Arnoald,t  referring  to  this  balance  against  France,  says — 

**  Voila  done  pour  France  le  ne  plus  ultra  d'un  commerce,  dont 
Tespoir  a  pa  contribuer,  k  faire  sacrifier  quelques  centaines  de  miD- 
ions,  et  plusieurs  generations  d*hommes." 

In  1792,  according  to  the  statement  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  men- 
tioned in  a  preceding  chapter,  the  exports  to  France  and.  dependen- 
cies, amounted  to  $4,696,736,  and  the  imports,  to  f%068,34a 
^llie  articles  of  domestic  produce,  usually  shipped  to  France,  are 
cotton,  tobacco,  hops,  some  fish,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  whale  oil  and 
whale  bone ;  and  those  of  foreign  produce,  principally  sugar  and  cof- 
fee, with,  some  teas,  cocoa,  pepper,  and  other  spices.  The  principal 
imports  are  wines,  brandy,  silks,  olive  oil,  and  jewelry  of  all  kinds ; 
and  latterly,  cotton  goods. 

The  Talue  of  exports  and  imports,  from  1795  to  1801,  was  as  (oU 
lows : — 


Taus. 

Ezpoftt. 

Importa. 

1796 

$7,698,683 

.      $3,671,331 

1796 

3,171,769 

1,836,066 

1797 

3,826,231 

3,045,796 

1796 

1,476,688 

1,371,727 

'  1799 

.            •        •          • 

901,018 

1800 

40,400 

74,228 

1801 

3,966,292 

1,013,690 

And  the  ralue  of  < 

lomestic  and  foreign  proc 

tuce,  exported  to  France* 

from  1804  to  1820, 

was — 

Yem. 

DomMlic  produce. 

Foreifn  produce. 

1804 

.      $3,219,118 

.      •6,604,942 

1806 

3,079,862 

,9,886,602 

1806 

3,220,698 

8,197,604 

1807 

2,716,141 

.      10,316,678 

1806 

708,670 

2,126,396 

1809 

•                      •               •                  • 

.                       •               • 

1810 

16,782 

1,672 

1811 

673,706 

1,119,302 

1812 

402,803 

2,435,218 

«  ArAar  Yoimf's  Traveli  in  France.        t  Dt  la  Balance  da  Commerce,  1791. 


S16 


Taus. 

DoDCttie  produce. 

Foreign  produce. 

1H13 

$]  ,'780,291 

#2,206,463 

1814 

286,^29     .   . 

30,018 

1815 

5,033,084 

1,863,869 

1816 

7,352,076 

2,222,660 

1817 

7,114,535 

1,096,232 

1818 

8,719,445       . 

3,346,577 

1819 

• 

6,612,499 

2,729,549 

1830 

5,461,889 

a 

2,134,864 

From  1821 

,  to  1H33,  the  following  was  the  value  of  imports  and  ei 

ports,  io  eacl 

I  jear. 

■ 

•    Tam. 

Impc 

>>«• 

Sxpoiti. 

•  ^SKVa 

Domcttlc  prodoM 

Foieico  prodoee. 

1821 

$4.98j 

f,940        .      $5,168,698 

•369,861 

1822 

6,0d 

L940        .        4,744,490 

1,280,870 

1823 

• 

6,69 

;790                6,001,776 

3,699,664 

1824     A 

1826    (  . 

"     7.»l 

,667               7,861,630 

1,846,043 

10,8« 

,786        .        7,626,985 

3,353,467 

\(f»       . 

8^1 

^620                9,348,929 

I,709,d66 

iaw  ; 

8^ 

.23SI        .        9,187,6Se 

3,336,945 

1828       . 

93* 

,864        .    .    7,096,337 

3,376,233 

1829 

i978       81894,046 

2,854,360 

1830 

7,« 

,196               9,601,146 

1,092,813 

1831 

14,0(i 

,74S               6,636,^4 

3,629,376 

1832 

1«J.7 

t766                ^942,576 

2,677,147 

1833 

13,43 

,678              10,806,683 

2,965,638 

The  quantity  and  raloe  of  cotton  shipped  to  France,  will  be  found 
in  a  preceding  chapter. 

The  commerce  of  the  United  States  with  France,  is  next  in  mag- 
nitude, though  much  inferior,  to  that  with  Great  Britain.  In  1833, 
the  difference  in  favor  of  the  latter,  in  regard  to  exports,  was  about 
•18,600,000,  and  with  respect  to  imports,  exceeded  $24,000,000. 

The  article  of  cotton,  now  constitutes  in  value,  three  •quarters  of  all 
the  domestic  exports  to  France.  The  average  annual  value  of  these 
exports,  to  that  country,  from  1830  to  1833,  was  $9,000,000,  and  that 
of  cotton,  during  that  period,  was  $7,000,000 ;  of  tobacco,  about 
$627,000,  and  of  rice,  about  $307,000. 

Silks,  cotton  goods,  wine  and  brandy,  are  the  principal  articles  of 
import;  and  the  value  of  each  of  these,  from  1830  to  1833,  was  as 
follows : — 


216 


SHks.  1830. 

Piece  goodfi,        $2,236,5-^9 

Other  manufac- >    ,  osi  74q 
tures  of  silk,  J    *»^^»' '**y 

Sewing  silk,  "       " 

Hosiery,  twist,  ^c.    "      ** 


1831. 

84,863,507 

1,862,175 

236,923 
125,344 


1832. 

$3,232,758 

1,536,144 

164,021 
114,894 


1833. 

$5,282,060 

986,030 

66,244 
93,353 


$3,538,278' 

Wines,      .        .      $635,021 
Brandies,  .         200,899 

CottoD  goods.  1830. 

Printed  or  colored,  $355,227 
White,    .  .  178,784 

Hosiery,  gloves,  6lc.  4,001 
Twist,  yam,  &c.  .  693 
Nankeens,  .         326 

All  others,        .        .    79,284 


$7,087,M9 

$5,047,817 

$6,427,687 

$653,030 

$891,088 

$499,053 

256,529 

616,358 

850,583 

1831. 

1832. 

1833. 

$991,689 

$654,844 

$539,941 

427,509 

409,257 

126,384 

21,5^10 

20,172 

8,273 

169 

1,919 

1,301 

3,257 

1,154 

273 

9(5,508 

142,685 

119,609 

$618,316     $1,540,732     $1,230,031      $795,781 

TRADE    WITH    THE    FRENCH    WEST    INDIA    ISLANDS. 

Fmnce  formerly  possessed  some  of  the  most  valuable  Islands,  in 
the  West  Indies.  The  French  part  of  Bt.  Domingo  was  extremely 
fertile,  highly  cultivated,  and  produced  vast  quantities  of  sugar  and 
coffee. 

In  1786,  the  imports  into  France,  from  her  West  India  possessions, 
were  valued  at  174,831,000  liv res,  or  about  $35,000,000;  of  this  sum, 
the  imports  from  St,  Domingo,  alone,  amounted  to  131,481,000  livres, 
or  about  $26,000,000. 

No  less  than  one  hundred  and  seventy  four  millions  of  pounds  of 
sugar,  and  sixty  millions  of  coffee,  in  the  same  year,  went  to  France, 
from  these  colonies ;  and  this  trade  employed  not  less  than  ^ye  hun- 
dred and  sixty  nine  vessels,  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  two  thousand 
three  hundred*and  ten  tons. 

The  intercourse  between  the  United  States,  and  these  Islands,  was 
regulated,  by  an  arret  of  the  French  government,  bearing  date  the 
30th  of  August,  1784. 

American  vessels  of  at  least  sixty  tons,  were  admitted  into  certain 
ports  in  these  islands,  laden  with  timber  of  all  kinds,  dye  woods,  live 
stock,  salt  beef,  salt  fish,  rice,  liquors,  raw  or  untanned  hides,  peltry, 
resin,  pitch  and  tar ;  and  for  cargoes  of  this  description,  were  allowed 
to  carry  away,  rum  and  molasses,  and  goods  brought  from  France;  on 


217 

payment  of  the  local  duties,  and  one  per  cent  ad  Talorenif  on  all  im- 
ports and  exports.  A  further  duty,  of  three  liirrest  was  imposed  npon 
every  quintal  (of  one  hundred  weight)  of  salt  beef,  cod  or  other  dried 
fish  ;  to  form  a  fund,  for  premiums,  to  be  given  on  cod  and  other  fishy 
from  the  French  fisheries ;  but  salt  meat  from  France  was  not  subject 
to  this  duty.  The  colonial  legislatures,  however,  were  authorized,  in 
times  of  scarcity,  to  suspend  the  operation  of  this  law. 

Prior  to  the  French  revolution,  the  national  policy  of  France  and 
Great  Britain,  was  indicated,  by  their  different  regulations,  respecting 
the  trade  between  the  United  States,  and  their  West  India  possessions. 
With  respect  to  exports  from  the  United  States,  both  nations  ad- 
mitted lumber  of  all  kinds,  live  provisions,  vegetables,  rice,  pitch  and 
tar,  because  neither  could  easily  supply  its  islands  with  these  arti- 
cles.  Great  Britain  excluded  American  beef,  pork  and  dried  fish; 
while  France  admitted  beef  and  dried  cod  fish,  subject  to  the  addi- 
tional duty  above  mentioned.  Great  Biitain  admitted  flour,  bread, 
biscuit,  and  all  kinds  of  grain — France,  on  the  other  hand,  by  a  gen- 
eral law,  excluded  flour,  and  all  kinds  of  grain,  except  Indian  corn. 
With  respect  to  exports,  from  the  islands,  France  allowed  rum  and 
molasses  only,  to  be  carried  to  the  United  States ;  while  Great  Britain 
allowed  not  only  these  articles,  but  sugar,  coflee,  cocoa-nuts,  ginger 
and  pimento — the  latter,  however,  as  we  have  before  stated,  confined 
the  carriage  both  of  the  exports  and  imports  to  her  own  vessels ;  and 
the  former  permitted  the  exports  and  imports,  in  American  vessels. 
The  policy  of  Britain  was,  to  monopolize  the  carriage  of  the  arti- 
cles ;  that  of  France,  to  monopolize  the  articles  themselves,  particu- 
larly the  colonial  productions  of  much  value.  Great  Britain  was 
wiHin£^  the  people  of  the  United  States,  should  have  the  articles  of 
sugar  and  cofl'ee,  on  condition,  that  Briiish  ships  might  carry  them. 
France,  on  the  other  hand,  was  willing  the  Americans  should  supply 
her  Hiigar  and  cofl'ee  plantations,  with  certain  articles,  which  she  was 
unable  to  furnish  herself;  but  would  not  allow  them  to  receive  in  re- 
turn, the  most  valuable  productions  of  these  plantations;  these  wer« 
reserved,  for  her  own  consumption  at  home,  and  to  augment  her  own 
national  wealth.  Under  these  colonial  regulations,  the  United  Stateiit 
furnished  the  French  Islands,  with  the  greatest  part  of  their  supplieti 
obtained  from  foreii^n  countries. 

About  the  year  1780,  the  whole  imports  into  these  islands  from  for- 
eign countries,  were  valued  at  20,878,000  livres,  and  the  exports  to 
the  same  places,  at  14,132,000.  Of  the  imporU,  13,263^)00,  wtro 
from  the  United  States,  which  received  in  return,  74^63,000  of  tbo 


818 

exports ;  and  the  American  tonnage  in  this  intercourse,  waa  one  hnn- 
dred  and  fire  thousand  and  ninety  five. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  wars  in  Europe,  however,  and  partic-  * 
uhrlf  that  declared  by  her,  against  Great  Britain,  in  the  winter  of 
1793,  France  foresaw,  that  she  should  be  unable  to  maintain  her  colo- 
nial system,  during  their  continuance ;  and  opened  a  free  trade  with 
all  her  colonial  ports.  This  trade  she  offered,  to  secure  to  the  United 
States  by  a  national  compact ;  but  this  was  to  be  accompanied  with 
e  new  treaty  of  alliance,  by  which  these  islands,  were  again  to  be 
guaranteed  to  France.  The  American  government  did  not  choose  to 
accept  the  ofler  on  these  conditions. 

In  the  course  of  the  war,  however,  France  was  obliged  to  keep 
open  her  colonial  ports,  to  all  the  world  ;  and  the  Americans,  as  we 
have  before  stated,  had  a  principal  share,  in  the  trade  with  these  isl- 
ands. The  extent  and  value  of  this,  will  appear,  from  the  following 
aeeountof  exports  and  imports,  in  each  year,  from  1796  to  1801. 

Tean.  Exports.  Imports. 

1796  $4,964,962      .  $16,761,768 


16,743,774 
14,030,337 
16,380,091 
2,022,920 
9,386,111 
13,693,266 


1796  ,  .  8,408,946  . 

1797  .  .  8,666,063 

1798  .  .  6,344,690  . 

1799  .  2,776,604  . 

1800  .  .  6,123,433 

1801  7,147.972  . 

During  the  years  1804,  1806,  1806  and  1807,  the  average  amount 
of  domestic  produce,  carried  to  these  islands,  was  about  $2,800,000^ 
and  of  foreign  produce,  between  $3,000,000  and  $4,000,000.  The 
Imports,  from  the  same,  during  this  period,  were  to  a  much  larger 
amount,  the  greatest  part  of  which  was  destined  for  France  and  other 
parts  of  Europe. 

About  the  year  1807,  most  of  the  French  West  India  Islands  were 
in  the  possession  of  the  English,  (except  St.  Domingo,  in  the  posses- 
don  of  the  blacks,)  and  so  continued,  until  restored  to  France,  at  the 
fenerml  peace  in  Europe.  St.  Domingo,  however,  has  never  been  re- 
covered from  the  blacks,  and  an  account  of  the  American  trade  with 
dmt  Island,  since  1821,  will  be  hereafter  given. 

On  the  restoration  of  peace  in  Europe  in  1814,  France  again  re- 
turned to  her  old  system  of  colonial  policy ;  but  the  value  of  the  com- 
mercial intercourse  of  the  United  States,  with  the  islands  remaining, 
mfter  the  loss  of  St.  Domingo,  has  been  comparatively  of  little  im- 
jKurtiQee,  is  the  following  account  of  exports  and  imports,  since,  18S1, 
will  shew. 


219 


Ymn. 

Importi. 

Biports. 

1821 

$901,619 

§896,435 

1822 

96i509 

961,002 

1823 

931613 

867,595 

1824 

881,084 

811,732 

1825 

84  ,968 

1,011,966 

1826 

97;  ,270 

956,174 

1827 

92  ,330 

1,040,853 

1828 

89  ^651 

1,024,771 

1829 

77|,992 

1,072,407 

1830 

5li687 

805,769 

1831 

671,84»      '; 

,        .            717,877 

1832 

■    67y,yB7 

624,975 

1833        . 

511,242 

HAYTI. 

613.719 

The  American  trade  to  the  Island  of  Hayti,  since  it  came  under 
the  government  of  the  hiacks,  has  been  continued  ;  and  since  1821, 
has  far  exceeded  that  with  the  islands  still  remaining  in  the  possession 
of  France.  The  principal  articles  exported  to  Hayti,  are  flour,  rice, 
beef,  pork,  butter,  lard,  hams,  cheese,  and  fish ;  and  coffee  and  cocoa, 
are  the  chief  articles  received  in  return.  The  value  of  the  American 
commerce  with  this  Island,  since  1821,  will  appear,  from  the  follow- 
ing statement  of  the  Imports  and  Exports. 


Yrara. 

Imports. 

Ezpoila. 

1821 

.      $2  246,257 

.      82,270,601 

1822 

2,341,817 

2,119,811 

1823 

2,352,733 

2,378,782 

18^ 

2,217,235 

2,365,155 

1825 

2,065,329 

2,054,615 

1820 

1,511,836 

1,414,494 

1827 

1,781,309 

1,331,909 

1828 

2,163,585 

1,332,711 

1829 

1,799,809 

975,158 

1830 

1,597,140 

823,178 

1831 

1,580,578 

1,318,375 

1832 

2,053,386 

1,669,003 

1833 

1,740,058 

1,147,809 

SPAIN, 


PORTUGAL    AND   DEPENDENCIES. 

I.  Spain. 

The  exports  of  domestic  produce  to  Spain,  have  consisted,  prinei- 
p«l]y,  of  fish,  floor,  whale  oil,  rice,  tobacco ;  and  that  of  foreign 


/ 


290 


produce,  daring  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  consisted  of  cocoa,  coffee, 
engar,  pepper,  and  other  spices ;  for  which  the  returns  have  been 
chiefly  in  wines,  brandies,  and  fruits  of  various  kinds. 

The  exports  and  imports,  from  1795  to  1801,  were  as  follows,  viz : — 

Exports.  Imports. 

82,252,754   .    .   $1,232,844 
1,324,060  1,621,081 


1705 
1796 
1797 
1796 
1799 
1900 
1801 


1,812,558 
2,274,223 
4,237,954 
4,743,678 
2,865,101 


From  1804  to  1820,  the  exports  were — 

Tasrs.  Of  domestic  produce. 

1804  $2,304,193 

1806  2,327,155 

1806  1,363,273 

18Cr7  .   1,181,231 

1806  541,378 

1809  1,289,220 

1610  .  3,488,951 

1611  .        3,963,262 

1812  4,567,754 

1813  6,532,101 

1814  .  57,750 

1815  .  1,109,674 

1816  1,892,156 

1817  608,285 
1618  .  599,398 
1819-  .  .  571,832 
1820 


1,333,056 
984,057 
2,576,988 
3,360,682 
2,876,974 

Foreign  prodnee. 

$597,143 

1,656,312 

1,758,951 

3,547,907 

901,003 

1,290,003 

1,218,601 

297,454 

140,711 

40,905 

1,882 

160,890 

313,092 

136,777 

94,625 

236,054 

118,326 


280,253' 
The  ralue  of  exports  and  impuru  since  1821,  has  been  as  follows  : — 

Tasn.  Imports.  Exports. 

1821    .       $542,393  $539,746 


1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1888 


826,191 
982,026 
568,217 
577,663 
665,117 
614,735 
632.160 


210,566 
237,265 
516,710 
181,396 
194,550 
191,404 
251,146 


Yean. 

1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


221 

Imports. 

$801,529 
1,004,538 
1,275,094 
1,418,184 


Rji  ports. 

•917,137 
745,839 
381,331 
535,183 
362,117 


1,144,508 

The  great  increase  of  domestic  exports  to  Spain,  from  1809  to 
1813,  arose,  as  we  have  before  stated,  from  the  invasion  of  that 
country  by  Bonaparte,  and  the  consequent  demand  for  grain  and  pro- 
Tisions,  to  support  the  allied  armies. 

U.  Spanish  West  Indies  and  American  Colonies. 

During  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  the  Americans  were  the  principal 
carriers  of  the  rich  products  of  the  Spanish  Islands,  and  to  a  great 
extent,  supplied  thot«e  Islands  also,  with  the  manufactures  of  Europe. 
The  amount  of  exports  and  imports,  from  1795  to  1801,  was  as 
follows : — 

Years.  Exports.  Imports. 


1796 

1,821,347 

^Ji,  fo<7, sen:' 

1,718,026 

1797 

3,595,519 

4,123,362 

1798 

5,082,127 

8,139,167 

1799 

8,993,401 

10,974,295 

1800 

8,270,400 

10,587,566 

1801 

8,437,659 

12,799,878 

The  exports 

of  domestic  and  foreign  ] 

)roduce  to  the  same  coun- 

tries,  from  1804  to  1820,  were  estimated  a 

j  follows  : — • 

Yuan. 

DomoKtic  produce. 

Foreign  produce. 

1804 

$1,725,662 

81,176,996 

1805 

2,806,112 

4,884,776 

1806 

2,391,172 

8,476,061 

1807 

2,470,472 

9,870,753 

1808 

631,086 

3,545,967 

1809 

3,352,271 

3,333,346 

iKio 

3,182,318 

3,604,791 

1811 

3,606,510 

3,973,099 

•  We  would  here  remark,  that  the  accounts  of  the  American  trade  with  the 
West  India  Islands  belonging  to  Spain,  as  well  as  to  other  European  nations,  are 
taken  from  the  custom  house  books,  which  shew  iheir  destination  from  the  clear- 
ance of  the  vessels ;  as,  however,  vessels  oAen  go  to  other  ports,  or  islands,  than 
those  indicated  by  their  clearances,  and  some  vessels  clear  for  the  West  Indies 
generally,  the  accounts  cannot  be  considered  perfectly  accurate. 


/ 


222 


Yetn. 

1S12 
1813 
1814 
1815 
1S16 
1817 
1818 
1810 
1820 


DometUc  prodoca. 

82,640,502 
2,809.705 
1,971,886 
2,832,888 
2,732,226 
3,606,588 
3,531,769 
3,519,366 


Foreif  n  prodaoe. 

$1,331,638 

183,549 

48,408 

866,048 

3,048,386 

•3,477,511 

2,380,464 

2,980,717 

2,545,717 


3,439,365 

We  would  here  observe,  thai  sabsequent  to  1820,  a  separate  ac- 
count of  the  commerce  with  the  island  of  Cuba,  has  been  kept  at  the 
Treasury ;  and  we  here  present  a  statement  of  the  trade  with  that 
valuable  Island,  together  with  the  quantity  of  sugar,  cofleef  and  mo- 
lasses, imported  in  each  year,  since  that  period. 


Tesn. 

1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 

i^ai 

1832 
1833 


Impoi 

•6,58i849 


7,651 ,759 


7,24 


,849 


6,121  ;135 
4,B6  ,524 
5,57T,230 

7,068»857 
9»754»787 


Exports. 

$4,540,680 
4,270,618 
5,405,365 
5,807,533 
5,120,'702 
6,132,432 
6,816,088 
6,403,991 
5,578,889 
4,916,735 

A  QftO  Q40 

5,312,151 
5,672,TO0 


The  following  quantities  of  sugar,  coffee,  and  molasses,  have  been 
imported  from  Cuba,  in  each  year,  since  1821 : — 


Bofar, 
Brown— Ite.  White  or  clajed— Ibt. 


1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1888 
1829 


29,651,810 
41,361,231 
30,181,496 
38,560,056 
31,387,099 
35,693,622 
31,709,307 
19,241,344 
17,699,948 


6,165,645 
10,601,672 
6,610,425 
lo,ttwll,Wftf 
6,914,813 
8,698,569 
6,192,776 
5,183,^ 
4,660,351 


coflnse—nM. 
9,113,866 
8,570,937 
15,926,158 
12,802,834 
19,167,025 
18,232,887 
22,325,043 
15,198,771 
18,409,606 


4,738,156 
6,190,894 
6,455,741 
6,410,269 
6,214,367 
7,383,957 
8,576,810 
8,602,669 
6,145,974 


323 


Socir, 


Yeui. 

Brown— Ibt. 

ivao 

31,799,416 

1831 

30,363,080 

1832 

24,744,876 

1833 

36,909,185 

White  or  clajed— Ite. 

7,833,196 

10,326,218 

6,273,781 


Coflbe— Ite. 

15,926,774 
38,097,122 
24,128,542 
38,939,564 


10.449,437 
10,288,526 
10.486,378 


11,870,312 

The  principal  articles  of  domestic  produce,  usually  shipped  to  thb 
island,  are  flour,  fish,  beef,  pork,  hams,  lard,  butter,  rice,  lumber, 
whale  oil.  and  various  domestic  manufactures,  as  household  furniture, 
coaches,  and  other  carriages,  hats,  saddlery,  glass,  gunpowder,  combs 
ftod  buttons,  leather,  boots  and  shoes,  spermaceti  and  tallow  candles, 
and  soap;  and  of  foreign  produce,  cotton,  silk,  flax  and  hempen 
goods,  some  wines,  teas,  spices,  &c. 

The  quantity  of  flour,  beef,  pork,  dried  fish,  and  lard,  exported  to 
Cuba,  since  1821,  has  been  as  follows : — 


Ymn, 

Floor— bbls.          Beef— bbls. 

Pork— bbli 

1.    Dried  flih— qninUlt.     Lard— Ibt. 

1821 

156,071          12,364 

8.509 

41,614          2,398,259 

1822 

144,980         15,981 

7,282 

31,199         2,133,910 

1823 

117,111         13,230 

7,934 

38,288          2,817,349 

1824 

114,228         16.900 

8,659 

53,098    .     3,220,584 

1825 

• 

109,698         13,170 

7,410 

51,280          3,274,101 

1826 

129,233         12,899 

12,330 

53,985         5,028,159 

1827 

118,981         35,190 

20,587 

83,046         5,058,470 

1828 

110,610         20,938 

9,044 

72,144          5,615,240 

1829 

65,149         17,511 

10,636 

95,708         5,118,703 

1830 

77,598           9,794 

9,706 

73,018         4,609,493 

1831 

97,999         15,771 

8,681 

67,514        '5,441,644 

1832 

98,5M8         15,126 

10,539 

87,736  •      5,351,668 

1833 

119,197         22,765 

6,104 

79,433         5,495,897 

The  value  of  the  following  domestic  manufactures,  sent  to  Cuba, 

in  the 

year  1830,  was  estimated  at  more  than  8800,000,  viz. — in 

Household  furniture. 

• 

$58,673 

Coaches,  and  other  carriages, 

16,945 

Hats, 

182,216 

Saddlery, 

21,961 

Glass, 

20,688 

Gunpowder, 

62,722 

Combs  and  buttons. 

33,738 

Leather,  boots,  and  shoes, 

► 

157,738 

Soap,  and  tallow  candles. 

217,990 

Spermaceti  candles, 

•            1 

62.413 

•886,064 


224 


The  American  tonnage,  employed  in  the  commerce  with  this  island, 
since  1821,  has  varied  from  about  one  hundred  thousand,  to  one  hun^ 
dred  and  thirty  thousand  tons,  in  each  year,  (including  the  repeated 
voyages,)  and  with  the  port  of  Havana,  has,  in  some  years,  far  ex- 
ceeded that  of  all  other  nations. 

In  1827,  the  number  of  vessels,  entering  and  clearing,  from  this 
port,  with  their  tonnage^  was  as  follows  :* 

Entered. 
Na  of  vesBeli.     Tonnaite. 


From  the  United  States, 
Spain, 
England, 
France, 
Denmark, 
Bremen, 
Netherlands, 
Hamburgh, 
Sardinia, 
Tuscany, 
Sweden, 
Russia, 
Sicily, 
Prussia, 


786 

57 

71 

48 

21 

14 

24 

12 

8 

6 

3 

2 

1 

1 


125,0«7 

5,412 

12,337 

9,813 

3,458 

2,769 

4,284 

2,021 

1,386 

1,322 

442 

476 

247 

224 


Cleared. 
Na  of  venels.     Tonnafe. 

667        103,395 


80 

53 

38 

17 

13 

19 

13 

7 

5 

2 

2 


7,098 
8,119 
7,477 
3,114 
2,589 
3,471 
2,251 
1,313 
1,165 
360 
476 


1,053        169,281  916        147,731 

The  quantity  of  sugar  and  cofi*(Re,  imported  into  the  United  States, 
since  1821,  from  this  island,  has  been,  of  the  former,  nearly  one  half^ 
and  of  the  latter,  from  one  third  to  one  hulf  of  all  those  articles  im- 
ported, from  all  parts  of  the  worKl,  during  this  period ;  and  indeed, 
for  two  or  three  years  past,  the  American  commerce  with  Cuba,  has 
exceeded  that  with  any  other  country  or  nation,  except  Great  Britain 
and  France. 

The  duties  on  American  vessels,  entering  the  ports  of  Cuba,  have 
lately  exceeded  those  on  Spanish  vessels  from  that  island,  entering 
the  American  ports,  to  the  injury  of  American  navigation.  To  meet 
this,  Congress,  at  its  session  in  1834,  authorized  the  President,  to  in- 
crease the  duties  on  Spanish  vessels,  from  Cuba,  so  as  to  make  them 
equal  to  those  which  were,  or  might  be  imposed,  on  American  ves- 
sels, in  the  ports  of  that  island. 


•  See  statistical  accoont  of  the  ever  faithful  Island  of  Cuba,  for  the  year  1827, 
prepared  by  order  of  the  Spanish  governor.  Taken  from  the  American  duarter- 
ly  Review,  for  Jane,  1830. 


2S» 


From  1821  to  1825,  the  Treasqiy  department  (bmished  ■e]>tr»te 
accounts  of  the  trade,  with  the  Spanish  West  Indies,  (except  Cuba,) 
and  with  the  Spanish  South  American  colonies  grenerallj.  Separata 
governments,  however,  having  been  established,  in  different  parts  of 
the  Spanish  possessions,  in  America,  independent  of  Spain ;  and  the 
United  States,  having  acknowledged  their  independence,  and  formed 
commercial  arrangements  with  them,  the  accounts  of  American  trade* 
since  182S,  have  been  kept  separate,  with  Mexico,  the  confederated 
states  of  central  America,  Colombia,  Buenos  Ayres,  Chili,  and  Pern. 
Since  that  time,  therefore,  we  shall  give  separate  statementi'of  the 
American  commerce  with  each  of  these  countries. 

Spanish  West  Indies^  (exclusive  of  Cuba.) 


Tetn. 

Imi 

portt. 

Ezpoftk 

1821 

•624,616 

.    nodjssti 

1822 

031,667 

166,041 

1823 

8i: 

,or6 

261,628 

1824 

85 

,606 

640,614 

1826 

70C 

,027 

236,868 

1826 

rr 

,770 

223,686 

1827 

06! 

,612    . 

828,610 

1828 

1,12( 

,130 

237,868 

1829 

80l832 
l,3at,148 

84a680 

1830 

273,160 

1831       . 

.      iiW(U«U^ 

316^046 

1832 

1,880,182 

396,111 

1833        . 

1,870,304 

481,390 

Spanish  Sou 

th  American  Colon 

ies  and  Mexico. 

Tetn. 

Imports. 

Bzporti* 

1821 

$1,114,117 

•1,087,736 

1822 

2,526,140 

3,421.063 

1823 

4,842,503 

4,601,873 

1824 

6,786,760 
Mexico. 

7,868,487 

Tetn. 

liDportt. 

Bxfortb 

1825 

•4,044,647 

.      •6,470,144 

1826 

3,916,196 

6,'S61,060 

1827 

6,231,867 

4,173,267 

1828 

4,814,2S6 

2,866,466 

1829 

5,026,761 

2,331.151 

1830 

6,236,841 

.       .       4.837,459 

SO 

i 


996 


T«m. 
1831 

• 

• 

IflipOftB. 

t6, 166,745 

Kzpoffki 

•6,178,218 

1833                .        4,203,964 

.  3,467,541 

1833                       6,452,818 

6,408,091 

Central  Republic. 

Ymn.                                   Impoiti. 

1886                           166.780 

Exports. 

•99,522 

18S6 

204,270 

119,774 

1887 

251,342 

224,772 

1828 

204,770 

159,272 

1820 

311,931 

239,854 

1830 

302,833 

250,118 

1831 

196,504 

306,497 

1832 

288,316 

335,307 

1833 

267,740 

676,016 

Columbia. 

• 

ttmn,                                 Imparti. 

1826                .      •1,837,050 

Export*. 

•1,120,976 

1828 

2,079,724 

1,952,672 

1827 

1,660,249 

944,534 

1828 

1,484.856 

884,524 

1820 

1,255,310 

767,348 

1830 

1.120,095 

496,990 

1831 

1,207,154 

658,149 

1832 

1,439.182 

1,117,024 

1833 

1,624.622 

957,543 

Buenos  Ayres  or  Argentine  Rep 

uhlic. 

Tcm.                                      Impcfti. 

1826                        9749,771 

Export!. 

•573,520 

1836 

522,760 

379,340 

1827 

80,066 

151,204 

1828 

317.466 

154,288 

1829 

912,114 

626,052 

1830 

1,431.883 

629,887 

1831 

928.103 

659,779 

1832 

1,560,171 

923,040 

1833    *  . 

1,377,117 

699,728 

Chili. 

Taus.                                     Import!. 

1886                          t220,609 

Exports. 

•921,438 

1896 

• 

629,940 

1,447,^6 

987 


1827 
1828 
1829 
J830 
1831 
1832 
1833 

Tetia. 

1826 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


Imports. 

$184,693 
781,863 
416,118 
182,585 
413,758 
504,623 
334,130 

Peru. 

Importa. 

•346,883 

795,194 

1,035,462 

1,004,458 
972,884 
917,788 
720,098 


$1,702,601 
2,629,402 
1,421,134 
1,536,114 
1,368,155 
1,221,119 
1,463,940 


$734,798 

273,021 

259,944 

211,157 

71,802 

16,176 

17,960 


654,630 

Most  of  the  domestic  manufactures  of  cotton,  are  sent  to  Mez!co« 
and  South  America.  Of  the  $2,532,567  of  domestic  cotton  manofae- 
tures,  exported,  in  1833,  about  $36,000  went  to  the  East  Indies,  about 
$213,000  to  China,  more  than  $900,000  to  Mexico,  and  the  rest,  prin- 
cipally, to  the  Central  Republic,  Columbia,  Brazil,  Bu«sno8  A3rreaf 
and  Chili. 

PORTUGAL   AND   DBPBNDXNCIXS. 

To  Portugal  and  the  Island  of  Madeira,  the  Americans  hare  usuallj 
sent  wheat,  flour,  corn,  rice,  dried  fish,  whale  oil,  staves  and  headiof ; 
aind  brought  from  thence,  wines,  fruit  and  salt.  IVhile  Portugal  wai 
the  seat  of  war,  in  consequence  .of  its  invasion  by  the  armies  of 
France,  vast  quantities  of  American  flour,  as  we  have  before  tittrit 
went  to  that  country. 

The  value  of  both  the  exports  and  imports,  from  1795  to  ISOl,  m 
as  follows : — 

Teara.  Exports.  ImpwliL 

1795  $594,801  $1,032,3» 


1796 

142,667 

1.206,at 

1797 

220,750 

i^sasjm 

1798 

286,781 

OlMtf 

1799 

638,662 

Mum 

1800 

448,648 

•mm 

1801 

1,130^377 

MUH 

9S8 


And  the  following  is  the  ralue  of  the  eigports  and  imports^  in  the 
American  trade,  with  the  Island  of  Madeira,  during  the  same  period. 

Twvi.  Exports.  Imports. 

IIM  9133,476  $017,960 


1706 

213,786 

562,689 

1797 

191,627 

662,248 

1796 

333,426 

334,122 

1709 

208,186 

163,870 

1800 

622,728 

375.219 

iSOl 

628.344 

514,791 

The  ezporta  to  Portugal,  from  1904  to  1820,  were, 

•    TMn. 

Domettie  prodace. 

Foreign  prodnoe. 

1804 

$1,282,169 

9190,716 

1806 

506,284 

861,647 

1806 

920,841 

867,050 

1807 

829,313 

159,173 

1808 

342.277 

•               •                          •            • 

1809 

1,629,709 

151,426 

1810 

2.664,121. 

121,578 

1811 

8,445,827 

130,726 

1812 

7,729,997 

45,043 

1813 

9,992,012 

7,276 

1814 

396,548 

540 

1815 

1,176,079 

2,996 

1816 

1,237,587 

15,158 

1817 

542,822 

6,364 

1818 

.       1,323,837 

7,642 

1819 

655,798 

8,559 

1830 

83,031 

•        •              •      • 

The  extent  and  vtli 

lie  of  the  commercial  intercourse  with  Portugal 

and  Madeira,  since  18 

21,  may  be  seen 

from  the  following  estimate  of 

imports  and  exports. 

PortvgaL 

mports.                     Dc 

KxportB. 

TMim.                        Ii 

imeftic  produco.             ForelfB  pradoocb 

1821                93 

56,116 

•147,726                      966 

1882        .         4 

42,666 

102,936                   18,666 

1823        .         11 

SI  fiH 

48,077                        300 

1824        .         2 

42,304 

77,266                     6,168 

1826                   2 

21,072 

110,015          .           2,824 

1886                   3 

49,989 

99,945                        638 

1827         .          2 

68,091 

116,103                        220 

S29 


Tcan. 

Imports. 

Domestic  prodoea. 

Fora^n  prodiicttt 

1828 

8112,659 

•77,010 

•1,164 

1829 

237,351 

42.088 

628 

1830 

165,321 

42,406 

1,803 

1831* 

124,446 

39,140 

2,386 

1832 

123,616 

28,202 

300 

1833 

170,180 

73,313 

6,330 

Madeird. 

Import!. 

Export!. 

Yfn. 

DomctUc  produce. 

Foreign  prodooe. 

1821 

8190,280 

8193,414 

•26,667 

1822 

188,767 

-  186,952 

4,662 

1883 

244,263 

117,685 

3,978 

1824 

247,610 

315,896 

26,347 

1886 

361,016 

122,840 

66,328 

1826 

224,833 

119,058 

26,649 

1827 

229,282 

100,153 

18,881 

1828 

168,610 

101,948 

9,066 

1889 

403,056 

175,074 

16,069 

1830 

239,652 

155,719 

12,368 

1831 

177,369 

171,563 

6,728 

1832 

228,310 

145,667 

920 

1833 

319,349 

119,341 

15,642 

After  the  removal  of  the  Portaguese  gOTeroment  to  the  Brazik,  the 
American  trade  with  the  latter  grreatly  increased.  In  1807,  the  amount 
of  exports  to  Brazil,  and  other  Portuguese  American  Colonies,  was 
about  85,000. 

From  1809  to  1820,  the  exports  were — 


Teer*. 

1809 

1810 

1811 

1812 

1813 

1814 

1815 

1816 

1817 

1818 

1810 

1890 


Domeetie  prodtiee. 

8540,653 
721,899 
621,417 
426,982 
137,821 
74,109 
202360 
262,489 
415,796 
757,142 

1,032.377 
667,501 


Foreifn  produce. 

•343,062 

oc0,o39 

1,027,931 

319,641 

20,528 

11,897 

98,487 

160,920 

229,899 

198,196 

229340 

224,996 


830 


And  from  1821  to  1833,  the 

following  was  the  raliie  of  imports  ti 

exports.' 

• 

T«tn. 

Import!. 

Domeftic  produee. 

Foreifn  prodoee. 

1821 

t605,126 

$885,348 

.      $496,412 

1822 

1,486,567 

1,217,411 

246,518 

1823 

1,214,810 

1,062,209 

279,181 

1824 

2,074,119 

1,699,754 

602,150 

1825 

2,156,707 

1,641,296 

752,468 

1826 

2,156,678 

1,597,344 

603,005 

1827 

2,060,971 

1,486,433 

377,373 

1828 

3,097,752 

1,505,770 

482,985 

1829 

2,535,467 

1,510,260 

419,767 

1830 

2,491,460 

1  ,fHlu,if<7if 

242,239 

1831 

2,375,829 

1,652,193  . 

423,902 

1832 

3,890,845 

1,232,077 

822,717 

1833 

5,089,603 

2,474,565 

797,546 

The  principal  exports  of  domestic  produce,  are  flour,  fish,  soma 
beef,  pork,  hams,  and  butter,  spermaceti  and  tallow  candles,  whmie 
oil,  household  furniture,  hats,  shoes  and  boots,  soap,  cotton  goods, 
aind  ginpowder.  Of  foreign  articles,  the  exports  are  some  woollen, 
cotton,  and  hemoen  goods,  sail  duck,  cordage,  teas,  and  spices. 

The  principal  imports,  are  sugar,  coflee,  gold  and  silver  coin,  cop- 
per, and  raw  hides. 

Russia,  Sweden,  Denmark,  Hamburg,  other  Hanse  Towns  and  the 
Northern  German  ports. 

RUSSIA. 

Few  articles  of  domestic  produce  go  to  Russia,  while  the  value  of 
the  imports  from  that  extensive  empire,  has  amounted  to  $2,000,000 
or  $3,000,000 ;  principally,  in  hemp  and  duck. 

From  1795  to  1801,  the  value  of  exports  and  imports,  was  estimai- 
led  as  follows : — 


Taui. 

ELipoili* 

Imports. 

1796 

909,221 

$1,168,715 

1706 

47,381  •     . 

1,382,978 

1797 

3,460 

1,418,418 

1796 

60,090 

1,067,152 

1799 

46,080 

1,274,913 

1600 

1               .                         •        •                  •               < 

1,524,995 

1801 

9,136 

1,672,050 

S3l 

The  Ttlne  of  domestic  and  foreign  exports,  from  1806  to  1820. 


Ymn. 

DcNnettlc. 

Foreign. 

1805 

$12,044 

$59,328 

1806 

»                « 

3,580 

8,827 

1807 

78,850 

366,367 

1808 

•     •          •        « 

•    • 

1809 

146,462 

737,799 

1810 

1,048,760 

2,926,936 

1811 

1,630,499 

4,607,158 

1812 

156,980 

1,586,617 

1813 

• 

50,400 

TOO 

1814 

460 

•        • 

1815 

248,047 

326,502 

1816 

181,101 

525,783 

1817 

■ 

134,557 

505,636 

1818 

87,138 

353,881 

1819 

143,752 

485,869 

1820 

159,851 

1,222,470 

Value  of  imports  aD 

d  exports,  from  1821  to  1 

1833. 

• 

Imports 

Ex 

porta. 

Tean. 

DcNnettic  produce.       Forei 

gn  produce. 

Total  of  both. 

1821 

•1,852,199 

$127,939           $1 

)00,955 

«628,8»4 

1822 

3,307,328 

77,261              5 

^1,820 

629,081 

1823 

2,258,777 

51,635             I 

>97,099 

648,734 

1824 

2,209,663 

92,766              1 

139,215 

231,981 

1825 

2,067,110 

55,191              i 

»2,210 

.287,401 

1826 

2,617,169 

11,044              1 

163,604 

174,648 

1827 

2,086,077 

45,510              S 

»6,734 

382,244 

1828 

2,788,362 

108,922              i 

Wl,573 

460,496 

1829 

2,218,995 

51,684             i 

{34,542 

386,226 

183D 

1,621,899 

35,461              'i 

r81,114 

416,676 

1831 

1,608,328 

1             114,852             : 

M7,914 

462,766 

1832 

3,251(852 

121,114             4 

161,568 

682,682 

1833 

2,77 

2,550 

)             223,734 

180,071 

703,806 

During  the  European  wars,  and  particularly,  in  the  jears  1810  and 
1811,  considerahle  cotton  was  cleared  for  Russia,  but  probably,  des- 
tined for  England ;  and  large  quantities  of  sugar  and  coflee,  were  also 
exported  to  that  country. 

Since  the  termination  of  these  wars,  the  domestic  produce  sent  there 
has  been  trifling ;  consisting  of  a  little  cotton,  tobacco,  rice,  and  some 
oak  bark,  ^c.  Coflee,  sugar,  dye  woods  and  spices,  hare  consUtuted 
the  priodpal  articles  of  foreign  produce. 


f 


93a 

The  imports  consist  of  iron,  hemp,  cordage,  dack«  and  various 
kinds  of  cloth,  made  of  hemp  and  flax:  as  drillings,  diapers,  broad 
and  narrow  tickings,  shirtings,  6lc, 

The  average  amount  of  goods  paying  the  ad  valorem  duties,  and 
which  included  iron,  as  well  as  goods  made  of  hemp  and  flax,  in  the 
years  1802,  1803,  and  1804,  was  81,302,217.  The  value  of  goods 
paying  the  same  duties,  in  1807, 1810,  and  1811,  was  as  follows : — 

Tean.  Value. 

1807 81,804,860 

1810 1,587,784 

toil 3,049,033 

The  average  quantity  of  hemp  received,  in  the  years  1802,  1803, 
and  1804,  was  88,830  cwt,  valued  at  8779,473 ;  and  the  quantity  of 
hemp,  cordage  tarred  and  untarred,  and  cables,  imported,  in  the  years 
1807, 1810,  and  1811,  was— 

Vetra.  Hemp— cwt    Cordafe— tarred— Ibi.    Cordafe— untarred— Iba.    Cablea— Iba. 

1807  135,775  1,007,780  6,843  67,579 

1810  53,148  137,304  .    .  30,469 

1811  205,853  589,946  34,806  108,685 

Quantity  of  iron  and  hemp,  from  1821  to  1833,  and  the  value 
of  each. 

Inm  hamroered^-in 
Tean.  bolta  and  bara— cwt  Value.  Hemp— cwt  Value. 

1821  84,461    8274,593      75,629    8441,114 

1822  120,890     383,915     162,165     930,405 

1823  114,013     354,614     111,348     646,270 

1824  111,957     317,843      44,929     234,042 

1825  79,309     241,442      76,378     429,412 

1826  120,848     414,948      87,588     547,562 

1827  86,325     268,216      82,638     504,552 

1828  117,581     366,059     108,556     707,591 

1829  23,663,505  lbs.  709,827  75,546  511,605 

1830  21,912,702  '«  541,445  30,373  198,185 

1831  12,720,534  ««  314,484  35,991  189,933 

1832  29,252,007  ««•  660,459  129,835  722,791 

1833  21,943,500  ««  573,280  88,373  441,087 

SWBDBN,  AND  SWEDEN  AND  NORWAY,  SINCE  1823. 

The  ordinary  trade  with  Sweden,  has  been  inconsiderable,  except 
in  the  article  of  iron.  The  average  amount  of  exports,  from  1795  to 
ISOI9  was  about  860,000,  while  that  of  the  imports,  during  the  same 
period,  did  not  exceed  880,000. 


A  tfnmll  qininlit3r  of  tobaeco,  rice,  wlmle  oil,  and  some  other 
of  domestic  and  foreign  produce,  are  sent  to  Sweden,  for  which  iron 
it  the  principal  article  received  in  return.  During  the  continuance  of 
the  American  commercial  restrictions,  great  quantities  of  tobacco,  cot- 
ton, sugar,  and  coffee,  were  cleared  for  Sweden,  but  reallj  destined 
lor  other  places. 

Valoe  of  imports  and  exports,  from  1821  to  1833,  including  Nor- 
way, since  1823. 


1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 

Quantity  and 

Tew. 

1821 
1822 
1^23 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


Importa. 

8759,753 
1,151,788 
1,317,242 

^98,915 
1,335,896 
1,128,236 
1,015,507 
1,570,788 
1,020,910 
1,168,110 

904,812 
1,097,394 
1,168,697 

value  of  iron  imported,  from 

Quantity. 

220,260  cwt 

339,885  " 

419,958  " 

333,723  " 

399,775  " 

319,385  «« 

327,540  " 

480,046  «' 

36,709,556  lbs. 

45,206,082  '« 

36,804,646  «« 

46,848,263  '' 

45,041,900  '« 


Bzpoitik 

$217,181 
260,621 
298,228 
324,766 
334,542 
214,523 
409,041 
471,764 
249,634 
371,302 
277,090 
366,418 
314,849 

1821  to  1833. 

Value 

$710,392 
1,051,055 
1,233,826 

909,587 
1,274,645 
1,078,705 

979,921 
1,556,495 
1,008,363 
1,148,604 

880,907 
1,042,033 
1,133,677 


SWEDISH   WIST   INDIBS. 


The  value  of  the  exports  to  these  islands,  from  1795  to  1801,  iMo^ 
annually,  about  $685,000,  and  that  of  the  imports,  during  the 

30 


i 


384 


period,  about  $600,000.  Some  part  of  the  exports  was,  probably, 
destined  to  other  West  India  islands. 

In  1807,  domestic  produce  shipped  to  the  Swedish  West  Indies, 
amounted  to  $416,609,  and  foreign  produce  to  $911,166.  During  the 
eidstence  of  commercial  restrictions,  the  trade  with  other  islands,  was 
carried  on,  through  the  ports  of  the  Swedish  islands ;  and  British  rum 
and  molasses  found  their  way  into  the  United  States,  through  these 
and  other  neutral  ports. 

Since  the  year  1821,  to  1833,  the  imports  and  exports  have  been  as 
follows : — 


Tern. 

Imi 

ortt. 

.  Exports. 

1821 

$6(1,116 

$660,226 

1822 

391,119' 

660,813 

1823 

id 

,808 

260,063 

1824 

101836 

244,670 

1826 

8 

,702 

236,008 

1826 

161,946 

143,867 

1827 

201,636 

441,836 

1828 

371,996 

636,200 

1829 

281,049 

708,314 

1830 

231,630 

690,427 

1831        . 

218,918        .    —    ; 

•  "-^sfiaLDi^ 

1832 

63,410 

148,727 

1833 

32,302 

.  ..      106,220 

DENMARK,    INCLUDING    NORWAY,    UNTIL    1823. 

The  arerage  value  of  exports  to  those  countries,  from  1796  to  1801, 
was  about  $600,000,  and  that  of  imports,  during  the  same  period, 
about  $400,000. 

In  the  years  1806, 1806,  and  1807,  the  exports  were. 


Ymn. 

Domestic  produce. 

Foreign  produce 

1806 

$436,926 

$1,481,767 

1806 

366,696 

1,052,964 

1807 

672,160 

836,468 

In  the  years  1809  and  1810,  in  consequence  of  the  American  non- 
intercourse  with  Great  Britain  and  France,  and  the  occupation  of 
Hamburgh  by  the  French,  great  quantities  of  cotton,  tobacco,  sugar, 
and  coffee,  were  shipped  or  cleared  for  the  ports  of  Denmark  and 
Norwajt  but  really  destined  to  other  countries. 


S85 


Froffl  1815  to  1820,  the  exports  were, 


fcftn. 

Domestic  produce. 

Foreifn  produce. 

1816 

•            1 

$127,920 

$10,683 

1816 

• 

364,768 

119,434 

1817 

•            1 

202,989 

243,138 

1818 

• 

94,034 

94,168 

] 

1810 

•                            a 

77,376 

26,074 

] 

1820 

•                             1 

83,560 

164,694 

Thci 

mporU  and  expo 

rto,  from  1821  to  1833,  were, 

Taara. 

Importi. 

Exports. 

M  WAV* 

DomeMiG  produce.     Foreign  produce 

ToUlof  boch. 

1921 

\ 

$16,156 

$165,568 

$360,536 

$626,103 

1822 

21,232 

32,023 

160,757 

192,780 

1823 

21,028 

39,783 

53,134 

92,917 

1824 

•      • 

35,487 

299,822 

335,309 

1826 

46.827 

214,517 

637,146 

851,663 

1826 

49,264 

100,582 

245,288 

346,870 

1827 

40,922 

149,959 

263,983 

402,941 

1828 

117,946 

150,979 

386,689 

637,666 

1829 

32,911 

73,597 

13,166 

86,763 

1890 

5,384 

76,292 

29,048 

106,340 

1831 

575 

178,333 

176,883 

366,216 

1832 

63,342 

191,605 

350,116 

631,720 

1833 

28,172 

180,611 

112,463 

292,964 

DANISH    WEST    INDIES. 

Exports  and  imports,  from  1795  to  1801. 


Years. 

Ezporte 

Inporte 

1795 

$1,659,306 

.      $2,329,273 

1796 

2,553,810 

2,818,746 

1797 

2,453,606 

2,416,088 

1798 

1,513,104 

M  17,381 

1799 

3,397,262 

2,139,870 

1800 

1,757,689 

999,770 

1801 

irU  from  180 

1,049,361 
4  to  1807,  and  from  16 

3,035,611 
116 10  1820. 

Years. 

Pomefitic  produce. 

Foreign  produce. 

1804 

.      $1,081,618 

•642.388 

1805 

1,523,106 

675,149 

1806 

1,410,029 

1,380.380 

1807 

1,614,711 

1,606.088 

836 


Twn. 

DometUc  produce. 

Ponl^  pcodiNSs 

1816 

$496,249 

$47,720 

1816 

681,948 

174,502 

1817 

1,063,370 

590,727 

1818 

983,583 

557,673 

1810 

1,120,867 

816,426 

1890 

1,589,519 

641,865 

Imports  and  exports,  from  1881  to  1833. 

Vauto. 

Import!. 

Exports. 

M  WCV« 

Domestic  produce.    1 

F'oreign  produc4 

i.     TdUI  of  both. 

1881          1 

Il,98i574 

$1,316,296 

$485,483 

$1,801,779 

I8S» 

%5lil74 

1,603,494 

628,256 

2,231,750 

1823 

l,m604 

1,231,152 

631,002 

1,862,154 

1824 

2,11(1666 

1,149,641 

698,302 

1,847,943 

1825 

1,4»  ;765 

1,281,248 

568,177 

1,849,425 

1820 

2,06  ,900 

1,391,004 

676,001 

2,067,005 

1827 

2,29  ,349 

1,463,691 

538,190 

2,001,881 

1828 

2,25  ^23 

2,202,465 

608,034 

2,810,499 

1820 

2,06  ,266 

1,942,010 

282,401 

2,224,411 

1830 

1,66^834 

1,688,022 

220,723 

1,908,745 

1881 

1^651,641 

^  1,421,075 

224,902 

1,6«,577 

1832 

1,119,366 

*  1,393,490 

282,341 

1, #75,831 

• 

1833 

1,138,700 

1,«?9,670 

267,200 

1,546,870 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  since  the  peace  in  Europe,  the  British 
West  India  ports,  have  been  at  times  entirely  closed ;  and  at  others, 
partially  open ;  and  that,  when  closed,  American  trade  with  those  isl- 
ands, has  been  carried  on,  through  the  Danish  West  India  ports,  as 
well  as  through  the  British  Norlh  American  provinces.  This  will  ac- 
count, for  the  difference  in  the  imports,  from,  as  well  as  exports,  to 
these  islands,  in  different  years,  during  the  last  period. 

HAMBURGH,  BREMEN,  AND  NORTHERN  PORTS  OF  GERMANY. 

The  commerce  of  the  United  States,  with  Hamburgh,  and  Bremen, 
during  the  wars  in  Europe,  and  until  these  cities  were  occupied  by  the 
French  armies,  and  became  a  prey  to  French  rapacity,  was  extensive, 
particularly  with  the  former,  in  colonial  produce.  The  imperial  city 
of  Hamburgh  has  long  been  the  great  depot  of  the  extensive  com- 
merce of  Germany  and  the  north  of  Europe.  By  means  of  the  rivers 
Elbe  and  Weser,  and  the  canals,  connected  with  them,  the  manufac- 
tures of  Germany,  are  brought  to  Hamburgh ;  and  from  thence  ex- 
ported to  the  United  States,  and  other  parts  of  the  world.    Through 


S3T 


this  city,  also,  the  rich  products  of  the  East  and  West  Indies,  are  in- 
troduced into  Germany,  and  the  interior  of  the  continent  of  Europe. 
The  principal  articles  of  domestic  produce,  shipped  to  these  citiest 
are  tobacco,  rice,  cotton,  spirits,  whale  oil,  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  some 
skins  and  furs,  and  latterly  hops ;  thosl^  of  foreign  produce,  are  sugar* 
coffee,  teas,  cocoa,  pepper,  and  other  spices. 

The  extent  and  value  of  the  American  commerce  with  those  places, 
in  domestic  and  foreign  articles,  from  1796  to  1801,  may  be  seen  from 
the  following  estimate  of  exports  and  imports,  during  that  period. 


Vetn. 

Exports. 

Importi. 

1196 

$0,218,540 

.      tl  ,684,624 

iTge           , 

0,471,498 

» 

2,167,390 

1797 

11.963,017 

2,766,677 

1798 

14,634,339 

3,738.763 

1799 

17,144,400 

> 

6.919,426 

1800 

8,012,846 

• 

4,996,886 

1801 

10,463,738 

> 

4.686,266 

The  export*  to  thes 

»e  places,  principally  tc 

>  Hamburgh,  iirom  1802 

to  1610,  and  from  1811 

9  to  1820,  were  as  follows : — 

Twn. 

DomesUe  prodnce. 

Foreign  prodoe*. 

.       1802 

$1,157,272 

.      •6,072,220 

1808 

1,368,296 

1,911,437 

1804 

949,464 

3,626,663 

1806 

893,691 

2.338,917 

1806 

1,672,465 

4.761.769 

1807 

912,226 

2,248.067 

1808 

24,963 

204.862 

1800      '. 

709,981 

1.682.602 

1810 

834,664 

201,818 

1816 

1.768,131 

478,642 

1816 

2,368,287 

1.166.213 

1817 

2,021,213 

1.324.418 

1818 

2,260,027 

1.073,401 

1819 

1,986,412 

1,643,760 

isao 

1,714,196 

8n,079 

The  following  ia  th 

e  value  of  the  exports 

and  imports,  from  1821 

to  183a 

Twn. 

Exports. 

tmpofK. 

1821 

$2,132,644 

•990.166 

1822 

2,606,016 

1,678,767 

1823 

3,169,439 

1.981,096 

288 


Teart. 

Ezportg. 

ImpdHs. 

1824 

•1,863,273 

•2,527,830 

1825 

ai21,033 

2,739,526 

1826 

2,116,697 

2,816,545 

1827 

a013,185 

1,638,558 

1828 

2,995,251 

2,644,392 

1829 

3,277,160 

2,274,376 

1830 

2,274,880 

1,873,273 

1831 

2,592,172 

3,493,301 

1832 

4,088,212 

2,865,096 

1833 

2,903,296 

2,227,726 

HOLLAND    AND    DEPENDENCIES.  • 

During  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  and  until  the  commencement  of 
commercial  restrictions,  the  American  trade  with  Holland  or  the  Neth- 
erlands, especially  in  foreign  produce,  was  extensive  and  valuable. 
Although  Bonaparte  had  placed  his  brother  Louis,  at  the  head  of  the 
government  of  this  country,  in  order  more  completely  to  enforce  his 
continental  system,  yet,  so  strong  were  the  commercial  habits  of  the 
Hollanders,  that  they  found  means  to  evade  the  imperial  mandates ; 
and  this  favorite  system  of  the  French  Emperor,  even  during  the 
reign  of  his  brother  Louis,  was  never  fully  carried  into  effect  in  that 
country. 

The  extent  and  value  of  the  American  trade  with  Holland,  at  dif- 
ferent periods,  will  appear  from  the  following  amount  of  exports  and 
imports. 

From  1795  to  1801,  the  exports  and  imports  were  as  follows,  viz : — 

Years.  Exports.  Imports. 

1795  $1,917,336  $1,329,952 


1796 
1797 
1798 
1799 
1800 
1801 


6,083,491 
7,713,976 
4,713,976 
696,968 
4,372,964 


943,227 

2,404,828 

1,757,371 

662,590 

775.541 

2,529,128 


6,234,450 

From  1804  to  1820,  the  following  was  the  estimated  value  of  the 
exports  of  domestic  and  foreign  produce. 

Years.                              Domratic  produce.  Foreign  produce. 

1804  $2,064,158  .    $11,757,002 

1805  .  1,783,503  14,959,380 
18p6  3,609,964  15,051,665 
1807                        3,098,234  13,086,160 


389 


Yean. 

Domestic  produce. 

Foivign  produce. 

1808 

$382,121 

$2,227,722 

1800 

421,294 

697,070 

1810 

74,194 

28,992 

1811 

•      • 

•      • 

1812 

30,747 

•              •      • 

1813 

29,160 

•               •      • 

1814 

12,159 

15,422 

1815 

3,687,437 

795,390 

1816 

3,325,429 

1,940,358 

1817 

2,588,566 

1,905,905 

1818 

3,501,920 

2,764,943 

1819 

.    .    2,174,310 

1,961,634 

1820 

3,950,102 

2,949,929 

And  the  imports  anc 

1  exports  from  1821  to 

1833,  were  estimated  as 

follows : — 

Teuv. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

1821 

$1,938,953 

$3,694,205 

1822 

863,995 

3,602,051 

1823 

754,950 

5,052,146 

1824 

1,210,267 

2,215,345 

1826 

1,253,369 

3,793,307 

1826 

1,106,408 

1,970,199 

1827 

965,917 

3,228,331 

1828 

1,398,572 

2,229,413 

1829 

1,057,854 

3,985,187 

1830 

•             ooo,*«vo         • 

4,030,078 

1831 

989,837 

1,920,152 

1832 

1,360,668 

5,103,282 

1833 

1,166,856 

2,356,762 

Id  1833,  the  imports  from  Belgium  were  $139,628,  and  the  exports 
$1,005,611 ;  the  trade  with  that  country,  being  kept  separate  in  that 
year  only. 

The  articles  of  domestic  produce,  usually  sent  to  Holland,  are  to- 
bacco, rice,  cotton,  whale  oil,  and  pot  and  pearl  ashes;  those  of 
tobacco,  rice  and  cotton,  hare  been  of  the  greatest  value;  as  the 
following  account  of  the  quantity  and  estimated  value  of  these  arti- 
cles will  shew,  in  different  years,  fronf  1806  to  1833. 


940 


Yean. 

Tobaeoo— hhdi.      Value. 

Rice-4i6ro6i. 

Value. 

Cotton— lbs. 

Valae. 

1806 

99,851 

69,358,929 

17,137 

9457,993 

3,199,146 

S688,413 

1807 

90,444 

1,799,072 

21,163 

629,075 

3,146,909 

660,703 

1815 

99,199 

2,131,104 

21,918 

438,360 

5,169,489 

1,036,748 

1816 

15,974 

2,955,190 

13,055 

336,557 

1,943,270 

594,688 

1821 

13,916 

968,760 

7,192 

121,175 

4,186,096 

639,913 

1839 

23,584 

1,339,618 

5,339 

95,215 

4,970,250 

279,903 

1893 

30,390 

1,384,683 

11,113 

196,268 

4,650,548 

540,365 

1894 

93,159 

1,159,883 

4,518 

75,876 

432,976 

63,588 

1895 

91,998 

1,653,087 

5,299 

296,964 

1,420,225 

331,694 

1896 

15,465 

948,979 

19,934 

936,917 

4,592,439 

556,973 

1837 

95,553 

1,192,288 

16,101 

315,888 

5,862,336 

610,490 

1898 

31,916 

818,815 

90,993 

395,175 

3,780,996 

344,769 

1899 

31,599 

1,053,059 

97,334 

548,709 

9,598,095 

949,886 

1830 

38,576 

1,537,744 

36,816 

587,004 

8,567,486 

840,549 

1831 

33,917 

1,104,198 

8,759 

143,859 

792,659 

89,380 

1839 

34,006 

1,115,962 

9,294 

148,450 

3,990,016 

392,430 

lass 

19,033 

883,625 

19,897 

Belgium 

943^ 

• 

1,363,697 

148,146 

1833 

3,394 

•      181,980 

1,007 

81^ 

1,309,626 

179,779 

The  foreign  produce  has  been  principally  sugar,  coffee,  tea  and 
pepper. 

The  following  quantities  of  sugar  and  coffee,  were  shipped  to  Hol- 
land, from  1800  to  1816,  excluMve  of  1811,  1812,  1813,  and  1814; 
and  the  quantities  and  value  of  the  same  articles,  from  1821  to 
1833:— 

Sugar, 


Yean. 

Brown— lbs. 

White  and  clajed— lbs. 

CoOlM— Iba. 

1800 

7,542,160 

»               •       •                • 

11,618,970 

1801 

14,560,993 

>               •        • 

13,126,837 

1802 

15.436,179 

>               •        •               < 

9,320,937 

1803 

8,894,432 

1,067,806 

2,323,902 

1904 

27,294,509 

7,663,862 

26,082,432 

1806 

.      47,544,197 

8,465,436 

23,694,991 

1806 

66,008.790 

10,106,161 

21.833,438 

1807 

48,012,198 

8,719,629 

19,900,966 

1808 

8,215,969 

1,824,479 

3,487,872 

1809 

3,167,202 

836,459 

967,122 

1810 

88,590 

76,674 

44.618 

1815 

290,047 

•                       •            • 

1,606,170 

1816 

4,443,842 

336,396 

2,067,684 

841 


flofar, 


YauB. 

Brown— Ibc    White  or  clayod—lbc     Value. 

Coflto— Iba. 

Value. 

1821 

731, &53 

1.075,001 

•612,215 

4,009,010 

9c$4T,4IV 

1922 

4«33&,465 

1,58D^02 

400,713 

1,292,640 

287,463 

1833 

6,010,661 

735,471 

383,628 

4,304,257 

8W,a08 

1834 

2,441,145 

198,706 

168,190 

1,765,294 

223,074 

1825 

4,726,036 

286,862 

327,800 

3,414,919 

421,833 

1826 

8,041,308 

506,770 

674,474 

2,698,643 

330,848 

1827 

2,372,032 

131,053 

176,694 

2,422,173 

239,847 

1828 

1,308,479 

2,290 

95,639 

643,452 

66.tt76 

1829. 

4,026,047 

•     • 

210,768 

3,797,768 

307,360 

1830 

1,242,893 

88,015 

82,497 

1,69^642 

132,133 

1831 

2,275,412 

72,283 

.    104,509 

211,505 

20,201 

1832 

4,696,575 

146,156 

232,792 

13,907,618 

1,640,608 

1833 

370,863 

63,684 

22,881 

1,333,491 

163,600 

The  imports  have  consisted  of  woollen,  linen,  and  other  goodtv 
subject  to  ad  valorem  duties,  spirits  from  grain,  some  manufactures  of 
iron,  steel,  and  lead,  paints,  cheese,  glass,  anchors,  sheet,  slit  and  hoop 
iron.  The  average  amount  of  goods  paying  ad  valorem  duties,  in 
the  years  1802,  1803,  and  1804,  was  $1,110,354;  in  1807,  wtfl 
$1,881,741;  and  in  1831,  the  whole  amount  of  imports  was  only 
$989,837,  of  which  $25,502  were  free  of  duty,~$612,088  paid  duties 
on  their  value,  and  $352,247,  specific  duties.  The  average  quantity 
of  spirits  imported,  during  the  three  years  above  mentioned,  was  one 
million  fifty  nine  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  gallons;  and  in  the 
year  1807,  one  million  four  hundred  and  sixty  six  thousand.  In  1831, 
the  quantity  of  spirits  imported,  was  four  hundred  and  fifty  three 
thousand  six  hundred  and  forty  eight  gallons  only.  The  exports  to 
this  country  have  usually  greatly  exceeded  the  imports,  and  the 
balance  has  been  paid,  in  bills  on  Great  Britain,  and  other  parts  of 
Europe. 


DUTCH    WEST    INDUS   AND    AMERICAN    COLONIES. 

The  extent  and  value  of  the  commercial  intercourse  of  the  United 
States,  with  these  dependencies  of  Holland,  may  be  seen,  from  lb* 
following  account  of  exports,  at  difi*erent  periods. 

Yean.  Exports.  Importa. 

1795  $962,705  $2,342,967 

1796  1,768,548  3,703,7W 

1797  1,903,638  2,178,496 

1798  2,720,969  2,476,404 

SI 


24S 


Yean. 

Exp<nls. 

ImporU. 

1799        .        .      $5,154,535 

$3,929,101 

1800                          1,296,052 

2,800,766 

1801         .                   625,791 

1,987,612 

ExporU  from  1804  to  1820,  exclusive  of  the  years  from  1806  te 

1814. 

Yea™.                              Domeitic  produce. 

Foreifn  prodace. 

1804         .               $1,600,667 

$848,365 

1805 

454,645 

138,785 

1806 

570,545 

466,485 

1807 

406,010 

307,366 

1815 

97,334 

697 

1816 

193,786 

72,550 

1817 

747,159 

310,274 

1818 

637,283 

208,643 

1819 

400,568 

130,473 

1820 

431,600 

120,638 

Imports  and  exports,  from'  1821  to  1833. 

Tean.                                      Impoitt. 

Exports. 

1821        .                 •860.050 

$683,043 

1822 

1,491,023 

1,078,776 

1823 

950,957 

812,828 

1824 

997,800 

701,759 

1826 

821,607 

»              •      • 

1826 

554,217 

491,551 

1827 

519,707 

431,735 

1828 

478,397 

456,959 

1829 

438,132 

398,541 

1830 

286,599 

361,793 

1831 

343,799 

416,131 

1832 

328,832 

404,164 

1833i 

• 

380,871 

342,243 

DUTCH    EAST    INDIES. 

During  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  in  which  Holland  was  compel- 
led to  engage,  the  Americans  became  the  principal  carriers  of  the 
rich  products  of  her  East  India  possessions.  The  progressive  in- 
crease of  the  imports  from  these  possessions,  from  1795  to  1801,  was 
as  follows : — 

Yeari.  Importa. 

1795 $26,706 

1796 211,626 

1797      ....      1,029,995 


243 

Tnn.  Imports. 

1798  .     .     .     ^  $2,306,344 

1799  ....  1,446,335 

1800  ....  3,556,320 

1801  ....  4,430,733 

In  1803,  the  quantity  of  coffee  imported  from  the  Dutch  East  In- 
diet  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  was  six  million  eight  hundred  and 
twenty  five  thousand  two  hundred  and  three  pounds,  valued  at 
$1,706300;  in  1804,  was  eight  million  three  hundred  and  ninety 
five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eighty  three  pounds  valued  at 
$2,096,946;  and  in  1807,  was  eight  million  eight  hundred  and  forty 
two  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty  eight  pounds.  Pepper  imported 
from  the  same  places  in  1802,  was  ^^e  million  two  hundred  and  nev- 
enty  five  thousand,  nine  hundred  and  thirty  seven  pounds ;  in  1804« 
was  four  million  nine  hundred  and  forty  six  thousand  two  hundred 
and  eighty  four  pounds ;  and  in  1807,  was  two  million  five  hundred 
and  eight  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy  nine  pounds. 

From  1821  to  1833,  the  following  is  the  estimated  value  of  the  im- 
ports and  exports. 


Veui. 

Imp<Mrts. 

Exports. 

1821 

$134,369 

$1,714,813 

1822    . 

353,144 

1,121,012 

1823 

419,680 

1,902,101 

1824 

147,468   ..   , 

700,286 

1826 

188,402 

1,527,906 

1826 

513,556 

432,463 

1827 

236,247 

166,608 

1828 

1 13,462 

396,987 

1829 

121,348 

238,392 

1830 

181,818 

170,666 

1831 

319,396 

760,326 

1832 

608,974 

£28,020 

1833 

730,290 

ITALY. 

774,841 

The  exports  to  Italy  have  consisted  principally,  of  dried  fish,  sugar* 
coflee,  pepper,  and  cocoa ;  and  the  imports  from  thence,  have  been 
silks,  wines,  brandies,  fruit,  hats  and  bonnets,  lead,  cheese,  olive  oil, 
paper  and  rags. 

The  state  and  value  of  tliis  trade,  may  be  seen,  from  the  following 
estimate  of  the  imports  and  exports,  at  dififerent  periods. 


/ 


344 


Importf  and  exports  from  1795  to  1801. 

Tern.                                      Exports. 

Imports. 

1796                        61,223,150 

$319,653 

1796 

1,100,522 

288.237 

1797 

767,064 

852,408 

1796 

1,334,036 

724,209 

1799 

1,157,212 

753,484 

1800 

2,689,968 

1,104,833 

1801 

2,090,439 

902,406 

Exports  from  1804  to  1820,  (including  Malta 

i  since  1815.) 

Tmti.                             Domettle  produce. 

Forelfn  produce. 

1804                       $178,441 

$1,552,708 

1806 

142,475 

2,320,009 

1806 

185,346 

4,587,727 

1807 

260r2($7 

5,499,72SS. 

180S 

58,085 

1,312,173 

1800 

t               « 

49,206 

1,106,539 

1810 

71,803 

656,691 

1811 

151,555 

437,381 

1812 

139,928 

134J91 

1818 

• 

1,947 

t              •      • 

1814 

•             •      •          .        1 

.      • 

1816 

110,706 

333,330 

1816 

324,929 

1,233,349 

1817 

124,223 

1,309,491 

1818 

101,173 

1,037,304 

1810       / 

108.373 

1,007,338 

isao 

* 

77,117 

1,134,073 

Imports  and  exports  from  1821  to  1833. 

Tmib.                                     Imports. 

Exports. 

isei 

$973,463 

$1,099,667 

18» 

1,562,033 

1,450,184 

1883 

1,369,450 

1,067,905 

1834 

1,029,439 

664,348 

18S8 

1,454,022 

645,039 

1806 

• 

1,120,749 

530,221 

1887 

1,013,126 

610,221 

1828 

1,607,417 

920,750 

1890 

1,409,588 

901,018 

1830 

940,864 

740,360 

345 


Ymti. 

ImporU. 

ExporU. 

1831 

.      91,701,264 

•694,525 

1832 

1,619.795 

687,663 

1833 

999,134 

372.186 

In  1831,  the  value  of  Leghorn  hato  imported,  was  $208,366.  of  pa- 
per rags,  which  are  free  of  duty,  8162,633,  and  of  sewing  silk,  8321.213. 

In  1833,  the  value  of  Leghorn  hats  imported,  was  $78,412,  of  pt* 
per  rags,  $181,601,  and  of  sewing  silk,  $108,552. 

CHINA   AND   THE    NORTH    WEST   COAST    OF   AMERICA. 

The  American  commercial  intercourse  with  China,  commenced 
soon  after  the  close  of  the  peace  of  1783.  The  first  vessel,  from  the 
United  States  to  that  country,  sailed  from  the  port  of  New  York*  on 
the  22d  day  of  February,  1784,  John  Greey,  master,  and  Samuel 
Shaw,  supercago ;  and  returned  on  the  11th  of  May,  1785. 

The  success,  as  well  as  novelty,  of  Capt.  Greenes  voyage,  attracted 
no  little  attention  in  this  country ;  and  the  second  voyage  to  this 
distant  part  of  the  world,  was.  of  a  more  bold  and  adventurous 
character.  ' 

Capt.  Stewart  Deane,  a  citizen  of  Albany,  who  had  successfully 
commanded  a  Letter  of  Marque,  in  the  early  part  of  the  war  of  the 
revolution,  having  had  a  personal  interview  with  Capt.  Green,  on  the 
subject  of  his  voyage,  resolved  to  fit  out  the  sloop  Experiment,  of 
only  eighty  four  tons,  which  he  had  just  built  at  Albany  as  a  coastert 
for  this  distant  voyage;  and  on  the  19th  of  December,  1785,  this  bold 
navigator,  with  a  crew  of  only  seven  men  and  two  boys,  sailed  in  this 
little  bark  for  Canton.  Such  a  distant  voyage,  in  so  small  a  vesseU 
was,  at  that  time,  considered  so  extremely  hazardous,  that  no  insur- 
ance could  be  procured,  at  any  of  the  offices,  either  in  America,  or 
England.  She  arrived  safe,  however,  at  Canton,  in  May,  1 786;  where 
she  was,  at  first,  mistaken  for  a  tender  to  some  large  ship,  which  had 
been  left  below,  in  Canton  river:  and  the  inhabitants  were  not  a  lit- 
tle astonished,  to  learn  that  this  small  vessel,  with  her  scanty  creWt 
had  crossed  the  ocean,  from  the  opposite  hemisphere. 

This  daring,  and  then  unexampled  enterprise  of  Capt  Deane,  en- 
sured him  a  hospitable  reception,  at  Canton,  and  particularly  at  the 
British  factory  at  that  place. 

Capt.  Deane  returned  to  America,  in  1787;  and  was,  afterwards, 
for  some  years,  engaged,  in  the  same  trade,  as  commander  of  much 
larger  vessels ;  and,  as  we  are  informed,  is  still  living,  in  the  city  of 
New  York. 


/ 


846 

These  two  successful  voyages,  induced  others  to  engage  in  them ; 
and  as  early  as  1789,  fifteen  American  flags  were  seen,  at  the  port  of 
Canton,  a  greater  number  than  from  any  other  nation,  except  Great 
Britain.* 

The  principal  articles  imported  from  this  country,  are  teas,  silks, 
nankeens,  and  china  ware.  During  the  wars,  which  desolated  Europe, 
the  Americans,  not  only  supplied  their  own  country,  with  the  neces- 
sary article  of  tea,  but  shipped  large  quantities  of  it,  to  diflferent  parts 
of  that  continent,  to  supply  the  wants  of  those  belligerent  nations, 
who  were  dependent  on  neutrals,  for  this,  as  well  as  other  necessary 
foreign  articles  of  consumption. 

With  respect  to  teas,  which  are  procured  from  China  only,  we  shall 
here  present  the  quantities  imported  and  exported,  at  diflferent  periods, 
since  the  commencement  of  the  present  national  government,  thereby 
shewing  the  extent  and  value  of  the  American  trade,  in  this  article, 
and  also,  the  quantity  consumed  in  the  United  States,  and  the  pro- 
gressive increase  of  that  consumption. 

The  following  is  a  statement  of  the  quantities  of  the  several  kinds 
of  teas,  paying  duties,  the  exports  being  deducted  from  the  imports, 
for  each  year,  from  1790  to  1800. 


Ymtb. 

Bobea— lbs. 

Souchong— Ibfl. 

Hyson— lbs. 

Other  green— lbs. 

ToUL 

1790 

2,069,684 

368,075 

530,613 

88,870 

3,047,242 

1791 

774,008 

91,123 

107,934 

12,932 

985,997 

1792 

2,332,892 

132,355 

115,263 

33,498 

2,614,008 

1793 

1,548,993 

369,687 

82,882 

• 

8,007 

2,009,509 

1794 

2,095,416 

298,503 

29,754 

37,241 

2,460,914 

1795 

2.079,687 

146,467 

99,727 

48,247 

2,374,118 

1796 

1,778,007 

73,578 

239,102 

219,572 

2,310,259 

17W 

1,392,271 

185,359 

206,177 

224,592 

2,008,399 

1796 

1,079,139 

333,349 

194,616 

283,861 

1,890,965 

1799 

3,412,674 

309,598 

240,861 

538,370 

4,501,503 

1800 

1,891,434 

694,802 

533,613 

677,786 

3,797,634 

l\>taU    20,444,145     3,002,806     2,380,542  2,172,975      28,000,548 

Making  the  annual  consumption,  for  these  eleven  years,  about  two 
millions  and  a  half  of  pounds. 

The  following  quantity  of  teas,  of  all  kinds,  was  imported  and  ex- 
ported, in  each  year,  from  1801  to  1812. 


«  Macpherson's  Ansals  of  Commerce. 


S47 


Yean. 

Imported— 4ba. 

Exported—lbs. 

Cootumed— llM. 

1801 

4,086,060 

1,409,253 

3,677,707 

1802 

4,269,828 

1,894,538 

2,375,290 

1803 

6,053,529 

3,146,492 

2,907,037 

1804 

3,622,828 

1,219,233 

2,403,595 

1805 

5,119,441 

1,788,888 

*     3,330,553 

1806 

6,870,806 

2,002,207 

4,868,599 

1807 

8,108.774 

2,663,061 

5,445,713 

1806 

4,812,638 

237,883 

4,574,755 

1809 

1,482,990 

1,770,616 

•        • 

1810 

7,839,457 

1,337,732 

6,501,785 

1811 

3,018,118 

1,025,962 

1,092,156 

1812 

3,056,089 

519,262 

2,636,827 

Making  an  average  annual  consumption  of  about  three  millions,  three 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds. 

From  1821  to  1833,  we  include  the  value^  as  well  as  gvantity  of 
teas,  imported  and  exported,  in  each  year,  during  this  period ;  and  it 
will  be  remenibered,  that  the  value  is  estimated  at  Canton. 


Imported. 


Tear*. 

1821 

1822 

1823 

1824 

1825 

1826 

1827 

1828 

1829 

1830 

1831 

1832 

1833 


Poanda.  Value. 

4,975,646  81,320,927 
6,639,4ai     1,858,962 


1 


Exported. 


8,210,010 

8,934,487 

10,209,548 

10,098,900 

5,875,638 

7,707,427 

6,636,790 

a609,415 

5,182,867 

9,906,606 

14,639,822 


2,360,350 
2,785,683 
3,725,676 
3,740,415 
1,711,185 
2,443,002 
2,045,615 
2,421,711 
1,416,045 
2,783,488 
5,483,088 


Pounda. 

531,691 

1,333,846 

735,076 

^,148,868 


b: 


Value. 

9242,372 
700,198 
813,550 
562,109 


(i)035,808    1,482,141 
<r998,672;  1,308,694 


1,626,417 
1,417,846 
1,018,343 
1,736,324 
526,186 
1,279,262 
1,712,779 


772,442 
679,924 
528,997 
892,807 
360,509 
702,014 
709,522 


Conaumed. 
IVmiida. 

4,443,965 
5,305,568 
6,474,934 
7,785,619  /A-Hh 

'8,099.228^,  lb,. 

4,249,22! 

6,289,561 

5,618,447 

6,873,001 

4,656,661 

6,627344 
12,927,043 


Making  an  annual  consumption,  during  this  period,  of  about  seren 
millions  of  pounds. 

Next  to  teas,  silks  constitute  much  the  greatest  part  of  the  importf , 
from  China. 

The  American  .trade  with  this  distant  country,  may  be  divided  into 
that  which  is  direct  from  the  United  States,  and  that  which  is  carried 
on  generally,  on  American  account,  and  embracing  not  only  that  be- 
tween the  United  States  and  China,  but  that  also  carried  on,  by  the 
Americant,  between  China  and  other  ptrte  of  the  world. 


J 


348 


Tables  No.  XIII,  XIY,  XY,  and  XVI,  exhibit  a  view  of  this  direct 
trade,  from  1821  to  1833,  embracing  a  general  view  of  the  ralue  of 
the  domestic  and  foreign  exports  to  Canton,  and  of  the  imports  from 
the  same  place;  with  the  amount  of  tonnage  employed — also,  the 
value  of  particular  articles  of  domestic  and  foreign  origin,  exported, 
and  the  value  of  the  principal  articles,  imported  from  thence,  into  the 
United  States.  And  Tables  No.  XVII,  XVIU,  XIX,  XX,  and  XXI, 
shew  the  general  trade,  on  American  account  with  Canton,  from 
1806  to  1833,  containing  a  general  statement  of  imports  and  exports, 
in  each  year,  with  the  number  of  vessels  employed,  their  tonnage, 
and  number  of  men — also,  an  account  of  specie,  bills,  and  merchan- 
dize, exported — together  with  an  account  of  particular  articles  of  im- 
port and  export,  from  1818  to  1827;  and  the  value  of  the  exports 
from  Canton,  on  Americim  account,  to  different  parts  of  the  world, 
for  the  last  period.* 

The  total  value  of  imports  and  exports,  in  the  direct  trade,  was  as 
follows : — 

Yean.  Exports. 

1821  $4,290,560 

1822  .       5,935,368 

1823  4,636,061 

1824  .  5,301,171 

1825  .  5,570,515 

1826  .  2,566,644 

1827  .  3,848,135 

1828  .  1,482,802 

1829  1,354,862 

1830  .        742,193 

1831  1,290,835 

1832  .       1,260,522 

1833  .       1,433,759 

The  domestic  articles  exported,  during  this  period,  consisted  of 
(Vm,  ginseng,  domestic  cottons,  cotton  unmanufactured,  and  some 
other  articles,  averaging  between  $300  and  $400  a  year.  In  1833, 
domestic  cottons,  to  the  value  of  $215,495,  were  exported  to  Canton. 


Imports. 

$3,111,951 
5,242,536 
6,511,425 
5,618,502 
7,533,113 
7,422,186 
3,617,183 
5,339,108 
4,680347 
3,878,141 
3,083,205 
5344,907 
7,541,570 


•  With  these  valuable  tables,  as  well  as  others,  we  have  been  obligingly  fumi.sh- 
td,  from  the  office  of  the  Register  of  the  Treasury,  at  Washington ;  the  same  having 
been  compiled  and  made  out,  with  great  care  and  industry,  by  James  McCIery, 
Esq.  one  of  the  principal  clerks  in  that  office,  and  wbo6e  incessant  labors  are  de- 
voted to  obtaining  and  arranging  statistical  information,  in  relation  to  the  com- 
meree  of  the  United  States. 


249 

The  foreign  articles,  consisted  of  specie,  quicksilver,  opium,  and 
woollen  and  cotton  cloths — specie,  however,  constituted  much  the 
greatest  share,  until  1828;  and  was  to  the  following  amount,  in  each 
year,  from  1821  to  1833. 


Yetra. 

Specie. 

1821 

93,391,487 

1822 

6,075,012 

1823 

3,584,162 

1824 

4,463,852 

1825 

4,523,075 

1826 

1,651,595 

1827 

2,513,318 

Ynn. 

specie. 

1828 

.      $454,500 

1829 

601,593 

1830 

78,984 

1831 

367,024 

1832 

452,119 

1833 

290,450 

iod,  cons 

isted  of  nanki 

The  articles  of  import,  during  this  period,  consi 
silk,  china  ware,  teas,  sugar,  cassia,  and  some  other  articles.  The 
quantity  and  value  of  teas,  we  have  already  given ;  and  the  followiog 
was  the  value  of  silk,  during  this  period. 


Yean. 

Value. 

Yean. 

Value. 

1821 

.      81,317,846 

1828 

92,234,190 

1822 

2,389,210 

1829 

1,718,489 

1823 

3,122,186 

1830 

1,061,375 

1824 

2,430,856 

1831 

1,382,463 

1825 

3,065,643 

1832 

2,o7i;or3 

1826 

2,932,830 

1833 

1,387,064 

1827 

1,434,740 

The  foregoing  account  of  the  direct  trade  with  China,  is  taken  from 
the  American  custom  house  books.  With  respect  to  exports,  however^ 
it  presents  but  an  imperfect  view  of  the  extent  and  value  of  the  Ameri- 
can trade,  with  that  country,  the  whole  of  which  is  carried  on  with  the 
port  of  Canton. 

To  attain  a  knowledge  of  the  extent  of  the  whole  American  trade 
with  this  country,  it  becomes  necessary  to  ascertain  the  amount  of 
that  carried  on,  by  the  Americans,  from  Canton,  with  other  parta  of 
the  world,  as  well  as  the  United  States — and  to  this,  we  shall  now  in- 
vite the  attention  of  the  reader. 

It  is  well  known,  that  formerly  large  quantities  of  valuable  fiursy 
procured  on  the  north  west  coast  of  America,  and  of  seal  skiniy  ob- 
tained from  the  numerous  islands,  in  the  high  latitudes  of  the  aoutbern 
ocean,  were  carried  to  China ;  and  furnished  no  inconsiderable  part  of 
the  American  funds,  in  the  China  market ;  and  which  never  apptaitd 
in  the  American  custom  house  documents,  or  constituted  any  perl  of 
the  official  exports  of  the  United  States. 

S2 


/ 


sso 

The  great  prices  obtained  at  Canton  for  furs,  particularly,  sea-otter 
skins,  from  the  north  west  coast  of  America,  carried  there  by  Captain 
Cook,  induced  others  to  engage  in  this  trade.  The  enterprise  of  the 
Americans  led  them,  very  early,  to  engage  in  these  1r>ng  and  hazard- 
ous trading  voyages.  The  first  of  the  kind  undertaken,  from  the 
United  States,  was  in  a  ship  belonging  to  Botfton,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  Kendrick ;  and  the  discoveries  made  by  this  ship,  along 
the  north  west  coast  of  this  country,  were  afterwards  urged,  by  the 
United  States,  in  support  of  their  claims,  in  that  quarter.  These 
▼oyages,  at  first,  afforded  large  profits,  from  the  number  of  the  skins 
procured,  and  which  found  a  ready  market  at  Canton.  The  quantity  of 
these  furs,  for  many  years  past,  has  greatly  diminished,  atid  this  trade 
has  become  of  comparatively  small  importance. 

The  Americans,  not  only  explored  the  north  west  part  of  this  con- 
tinent for  furs,  but  also  visited  the  numerous  ii^lands  in  the  southern 
ocean,  in  search  of  seal  skins,  for  the  Chinese  market.  These  latter 
▼oyages,  being  at  first,  also  profitable,  induced  such  competition,  that 
the  seal  soon  became  scarce,  at  the  places  usually  visited.  The 
Americans,  however,  in  search  of  them,  with  a  spirit  of  enter- 
prise and  hardihood,  only  equalled  by  those  who  pursue  the  whale, 
pushed*  their  way  through  floating  mountains  of  ice,  to  still  higher 
southern  latitudes ;  and  found  the  objects  of  their  pursuit,  in  islands 
and  regions  before  unknown.  This  was  done,  principally,  by  the 
hardy  and  adventnrous  inhabitants  cf  Skj^ington  in  Connecticut,  in 
their  little  barks,  of  from  fiAy  to  eighty  tons ;  and  by  whom  the  seal- 
ing business  is  now  chiefly  pursued,  and  who  find  a  ready  market,  for 
the  produce  of  their  hardy  toils,  in  their  own  country.  In  June, 
1833,  the  number  of  schooners  employed  in  sealing,  from  Stonington 
and  its  vicinity,  was  twelve,  whose  aggregate  tonnage  was  only  eight 
hundred  and  fifty  five ;  averaging  about  seventy  for  each  vessel,  and 
manned  by  two  hundred  and  two  men. 

We  have  no  official  documents  shewing  the  value  of  the  funds  thas 
procured  by  the  Americans,  for  the  Chinese  market.  An  American 
gentleman,*  however,  who  was  for  some  time  Consnl  at  Canton,  has 
been  good  enough  to  furnish  us  with  a  statement  of  the  number  and 
Talue  of  sea  otter  and  seal  skins,  imported  into  Canton,  in  American 
Taaaels,  from  June,  1800,  to  January,  1803,  with  the  number  of  Amer- 
ean  vetsels,  entering  the  port  of  Canton,  during  the  same  period,  and 
die  Taloe  of  exports,  for  each  year,  from  June  lllh,  1800,  to  June, 
1808. 


•  Sullivan  Daw,  Esq.  of  Providence. 


S51 

Agreeable  to  this  statement,  the  Dumber  of  aea  otter  and  seal  akini, 
brought  to  Canton  by  the  Americans,  was  as  follows : — 

Sea  Otter— Na       Value       Seal  akiii^-Na      Valot. 

From  the  llih  of  June,  1800,)    ^^^    $123,060    325.000  1276.288 
to  April  27th,  1801.        S 

m 

From  May   15th,   1801,   to  )  ,4  j^      ^^^^^    4jjq^5q     SK^SM 

June,  1802.  ) 

From  June,  18;i2,  to  January  >,3^y^      ^^^^     29^qqq     gg^QQO 

9th,  1803.  ) 

'     34,357    $695,313  1,048,750  $907,878 

Making  the  value  of  both,  during  this  period,  a  little  more  than 
$1,600,000 

The  number  of  American  vesselii,  entering  the  port  of  Canton,  du- 
ring the  first  period,  was  thirty  three ;  of  which  seven  were  from 
Boiiton,  seven  from  Philadelphia,  and  all  the  otter  skins  were  brought 
in  the  vessels  from  the  former  place.  The  number  of  vessels  in  the 
second  period  was  thirty  four, — fourteen  from  Boston,  and  nine  from 
Philadelphia ;  and  in  the  third,  the  number  was  thirty  three ;  eleven 
from  the  former  place,  and  six  from  the  latter ;  and  in  the  two  last 
periods,  most  of  the  otters  were  also  brought  by  the  Boston  vessels. 

According  to  the  same  statement,  the  exports  to  the  United  Statei. 
were — 

For  the  first  period, $2,522,000 

the  second  do 3,742,194 

Averaging  those  tu'o  years,  about  $3,200,000 ;  and  the  value  of  skins, 
\    imported  during  the  same  periods,  was  about  $1,080,000;  equal  to 
about  one  sixth  of  the  export/*. 

We  have  no  means  of  information,  as  to  the  value  of  furs  and  skins 
carried  to  Canton,  from  1803  to  1818.  Table  No.  XIX,  shews  the  val- 
ue of  furs  carried  to  that  place  on  American  account,  from  1818  to 
1827,  being,  on  an  average  about  $300,000  a  year. 

About  the  year  181 0,  the  American  merchants  began  to  carry  Eng- 
lish woollen  and  cotton  goods,  from  the  ports  of  Great  Britain,  directly 
to  China.  The  value  of  these  kind  of  goods,  imported  into  Canton 
by  the  American  merchants,  in  1824 — 5,  was  $794,514;  and  in 
1826—7,  was  $S9.3,836.* 

It  will  be  noticed  by  the  reader,  that  the  merchandize  thus  exported, 
from  Great  Britain,  does  not  appear  in  the  American  custom  house 
books ;  and  makes  no  part  of  the  official  accountji  of  American  es> 
ports  to  China. 


•  Me  ralloeh'i  DictioDary  of  Commeres,  dee.  fSfe  CM— 7. 


I 

J 


252 

We  present  the  reader  with  a  sUtement,  (from  Table  No.  XVII,). 
of  the  general  trade  with  Canton,  on  American  account ;  contain- 
ing the  imports  and  exports,  according  to  a  valuation  made  at 
Canton,  with  the  number  of  American  vessels  employed,  with  their 
tonnage,  and  number  of  seamen  in  each  year,  ending  on  the  20\h  of 
Jane,  1804,  to  1833. 


Tatra  Midinf 
30th  June. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Number  of 
vessels.          Tonnai^. 

Namb«r 
of  men. 

1806 

$3,558,815 

93,842,000 

34 

10,169 

70» 

1806 

5,326,358 

5.127,000 

42 

12,480 

868 

1807 

3,877,362 

4,294,000 

37 

11,268 

767 

1808 

3,940,090 

$476,000 

33 

8,803 

683 

1800 

479,850 

808,000 

8 

2,215 

166 

1810 

5,744,600 

5,715,000 

37 

12,512 

765 

1811 

2,898,800 

2,973,000 

16 

4,748 

331 

1812 

3,132,810  . 

2,771,000 

25 

7,406 

513 

1813 

1,453,000 

620,000 

8 

1,816 

171 

1814  > 
1816^ 

451,000 

572,000 

9 

1 

2,a54 

195 

1816 

2,527,500 

4,220,000 

30 

10,208 

615 

1817 

5,609,600 

5,703,000 

38 

13,096 

780 

1818 

7,076,828 

6,777,342 

39 

14,325 

800 

1819 

10,717,151 

9,057,033 

46 

16,022 

951 

1820 

8,185,000 

8,173,107 

43 

16,139 

837 

1821 

5,392,795 

4,715,696 

29 

9,378 

662 

1822 

8,192,768 

7,563,644 

45 

16,630 

912 

1823 

8,339,389 

7,623,492 

40 

14,677 

804 

1824 

6,460,339 

5,677,149 

34 

13,069 

683 

1825 

8,962,045 

8,501,119 

.43 

16,202 

864 

1826 

7,781,301 

8,762,562 

42 

16,431 

885 

1827 

4,273,617 

4,429,381 

26 

9,666 

521 

1828 

5,394,917 

6,745,696 

29 

11,(>41» 

592 

1829 

4,065,670 

3,873,857 

27 

10,279» 

552 

1830 

4,341,282 

4,209,810 

35 

13,326* 

716 

1831 

4,223,476 

4,344,648 

34 

12,944* 

695 

1832 

5,531,807 

5,999,731 

34 

12,944* 

695 

1833 

8,362.971 

8.225.375 

59 

22,462 

1,207 

As  this  statement  includes  the  whole  trade  of  the  citizens  of  the 

United  Sutes  with  Canton, 

it  will  be  perceived. 

that  it  excecc 

Is,  both 

in  import! 

1  and  exports,  the  amount  shewn,  by  the  American 

custom 

•  1898,  *9,  '90,  "31  and  ^33,  taken  Oom  a  Canton  paper,  tons  and  men  estimated. 


233 

hoiue  books.  The  bills  of  exchange  or  credits,  lately  fornished  the 
American  merchants  trading  to  China,  by  the  bank  of  the  United 
States,  and  by  individual  capitalists,  instead  of  specie,  do  not  appear, 
in  the  American  official  accounts  of  exports  to  that  country — the 
amount  of  exports,  therefore,  in  the  direct  trade  with  Canton,  since 
1828,  is  comparatively  small.  Table  No.  XXI,  exhibits  the  destination 
of  the  exports  from  Canton,  on  American  account,  in  each  year,  from 
1|18  to  1827,  shewing  the  amount  sent  to  the  United  States,  to  En- 
rope,  and  to  other  places,  viz.  to  Batavia,  New  Holland,  ManilUt 
Sandwich  Islands,  South  America  and  Mexico.  The  amount  variest 
considerably  in  different  years — in  1819,  the  amount  sent  to  the  Uni- 
ted States,  was  $7,527,804 ;  to  Europe,  $1,496,442,  and  to  other 
places,  $32,787,  and  in  1822,  to  the  United  States,  $3,462,682;  to 
Europe,  $1,109,114, and  toother  places,  $144,000. 

The  following  statement  exhibits  the  whole  amount  of  the  Ameri- 
can trade  with  Canton,  for  the  year,  ending  June  30th,  1833. 

Imports  into  Canton. 
Bills  on  England,  £1,013,988,  .  .  .  $4,772,516 

Dollars  and  bullion,    .....  682,519 

Other  articles,  ....  -  2,907,936 


$8,363,971 

Exports,  from  Canton,  to  the  United  States,  viz  : — 

Teas,    .....  $5,043,631  t 

Silks 1,157,260 

Other  articles,  ....  490,522 


Exported  to  Europe,  viz : — 
leas,  .  •  •  •  •         9^^  I  fvl  t 

Other  articles,  ....  41,063 


$6,691,413 


$922,974 

Exported  to  South  America  and  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,         346,175 
Exported  to  Manilla,  .  .        $346,173 

The  following  received,  part  of  a  cargo,  at 

Manilla,  .....  66,000 


Port  charges,  on  19  vessels,  at  Wampoa,  $114,000 

28      "        with  rice,        .  28,000 

12      ««        atLintin,        .  4,800 


$264,816 


$146,800 


Value  of  exporto,     .....  )S8,372,I78    ' 

imports,    .....  8,362,971     ' 

•0.907 


/ 


354 

The  exportof  from  Canton,  during  this  year,  to  other  places  than 
the  United  States,  were  more  than  91,500,000,  and  the  imports,  from 
other  places,  about  $2,000,000. 

In  estimating  the  gain  of  the  American  merchant,  in  the  general 
commerce  with  China,  it  should  be  considered,  that,  as  the  imports 
are  principally  in  specie  or  bills  of  exchange,  his  profits  must  chiefly 
arise,  from  carrying  the  articles  procured  at  Canton,  to  different  parts 
of  the  world — and  the  table  will  shew,  that,  in  1833,  this  trade  em- 
ployed fifty  nine  American  vessels,  with  a  tonnage  of  twenty  two 
thousand  four  hundred  and  sixty  two,  and  one  thousand  two  hundred 
add  seven  men.  Estimating  the  advance,  on  the  value  of  the  exports, 
this  year,  at  20  per  cent,  the  profits  would  be  about  $1,600,000,  if  at 
25  per  cent,  about  $2,000,000. 

The  quantity  of  teas,  brought  to  the  United  Stiites,  from  1882  to 
1827,  inclusive,  being  six  years,  was  about  fifty  millions  of  pounds, 
and  the  quantity  carried  directly  from  Canton,  to  Europe,  during  the 
same  period,  in  American  vessels,  was  about  sixteen  millions  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds. 

The  amount  of  the  commerce  of  the  United  States  with  China,  is 
next  to  that  of  Great  Britain.  The  imports  of  the  latter,  into  that 
country,  consist  principally  of  the  articles  of  cotton  and  opium,  car- 
ried from  the  British  East  India  possessions,  by  the  East  India  com- 
pany and  by  individuals. 

From  the  year  1830  to  1833,  inclusive,  the  average  annual  value  of 
cotton,  carried  from  these  possessions,  on  private  account,  was  about 
$3,700,000,  and  on  the  company  account,  about  $1,400,000,  making 
about  $5,100,000;  and  the  average  value  of  opium,  during  the  same 
period,  was  about  $12,000,000,  being  for  both  those  articles  about 
$17,000,000. 

The  whole  average  annual  amount  of  British  imports,  during  this 
period,  was  $21,500,000 ;  which  would  leave  about  $4,500,000  for  the 
imports  from  all  other  parts  of  the  British  dominions. 

Tea  is  the  principal  article  of  British  exports  from  China.  The 
quantity  exported  on  an  average  of  the  period  above  mentioned,  was 
about  thirty  three  millions  of  pounds,  the  prime  cost  of  which,  was 
between  nine  and  ten  millions  of  dollars.  The  greatest  part  of  the 
tea,  is  carried  to  Great  Britain,  by  the  East  India  company.  No  in- 
considerable portion  of  the  balance  of  the  imports,  is  paid  in  bullion. 


i 


Value  of  Brititk  produce  and  manufactures,  exported,  to  all  parts 
of  tke  ttorM,  from  1798  to  1832. 


D«U^d  ..!«-, 

1798 

£111,672,603 

£33.148.692 

1799 

»I.0&4,213 

38,942.498 

1800 

24,304,284 

39,471.203 

1901 

26,719.980        . 

41.770.354 

1802 

27.912.108 

48.500.683 

1803        . 

^262,102 

40.100.870 

1804 

23,934,292 

40.349.642 

1805 

25,003.308 

41.068,  W2 

1806 

27,403.663 

43.M2.176 

1807 

25.190,762        . 

40.479.865 

1806 

26.602.288        . 

40.881,671 

1609 

35.107,439        . 

60.242.781 

1810 

34,»40,660 

49.«75.«34 

1^11 

24,109.931 

34.917.281 

1812 

31,243,362 

43.667.8M 

1813        . 

32.000.000 

43,000,000 

1814        . 

33,200,580        . 

43.447.372 

1815 

41,712.002        . 

49.653,245 

1816 

34.774,620        . 

40.328.940 

1817 

39,235.397        . 

40,337,118 

1818 

41,963.627 

46,188,250 

1919 

32,923.575 

34.ai8,496 

1920 

37.818.036 

35.668.670 

1921 

40.11H,H93 

35.826,082 

1823        . 

43,569.490 

36,176.897 

1823 

43.144.406        . 

34.691.124 

1824 

48,030,037         . 

37.573.919 

I82S 

46.468.282        . 

38,083.773 

1836 

40.332.  IW         . 

30,847.638 

1827 

61.276.448 

38,396,339 

1838 

62.029.151 

36.162.799 

182D 

66.213.043 

36.830.470 

1830 

61.140.866 

38.251,593 

1831 

60,683.933 

37,163.618 

1933        . 

66,026.702 

36,444.524 

857 


s 


o 


I 

:3 


.  .  /. 


s 

•    •    •£ 

8 

pg  ii<  q&qp 


c  « 
S.9 

II 


a* 

•Is 
lit 

CDS 


258 


H 

P 

H 

O 

O 


o 
H 


p  JO  ^^  ^  •^  i-<  Oi  1^  ^ 


Si 


IS 


»; 


li,  ,  .^  CO 

•■  1 1  »  ^ 

''T     -co 


lis' 


—  ^  «^ 

CO 
CO  lO 


o  r^co 


•    ••>•> 


g 


^ 


? 


ii 


CO  CO  .  ^ 

CO  Me 

«^  I      # 

C3        c: 


*i 


r-  a  a  A 


%a  Q^  1^4  imm 


f^^ 


CO  w  »  ^ 
—  C*  «^  lO 

©tCO'-^TT 

—  cf  od'c^ 


_     Kw  f^  lO 


35 
5S. 


T 
3i 


—  5  $1 

o  c:  6i 

»         •         r- 

p  c<  «c 

01 


.^ 


z 


01 


t* 


-X 


C?  —  :X 

^       •■  r      • 


CO 


?f 


1^ 


S  S  S  lo» 


I© 

3 

CO 


O  t^  I& 

of 


Si 


|C0^ 


c 


8 

a5 


I? -:- 


i 

9 

i 

if:l: 

^ 

» 

1^ 

5?§ 

5 

ol 

-^^- 

o» «  e  r^ 


-M 


o 

CO 


X 


i 


CO 


If?  ^ 


■t'4  i  p 

*^' >    •  jc 

c  >»  .  £-  tali  -S  ::5  c  c 

«  E-2  claw  ^1b««s« 


c 
'    E 

*■   5 


•  » 


c   c   ^ 

a   c<   5 
b   ^    c 


339 


u 

H 
'A 

O 

O 


1-3 


I  .i;^' 


nr  X  1  -^  iL  ic  3 
.r  ?  C  51  r-  iO  c:  5  S 

of 


3 

3f 


S  —  F- 1* 


II 


1^  X  •-•  5S  w  i'f  :tf 

5  2  T?  ar  3  51  Ci 
lO  O  r*  9  ud  CO  :? 

5  —  3D  ^  X  O  f* 


X 

o 


X  ** 
r»co 


«'3? 


1«     -TTT  « f*  ^  o 

»  » ^  »  » -  -» 

5»CiX"^2j  X 


lO 


Q  sl^  CO  IT  W  "T 

»         »        Vk      _»         »         » 


I'- 


of  ©• 


5' 


12-. 


Sx 


X  t^ 


« 


lis 

O  »  r- 


S9  ^  9< 

.ssi 

»  •>  » 


eo 


9^ 


i5   " 


S 


^Si^Sf 


01 


^  O)  0) 


Ci —  « 


75" 


^  ss 


;s  f  I'-  -^  Of  to  w 


o 
of 


^5r;= — 


of 


of       05'ofrf 
f-«  lO  Of 

CO 


i 


'#. 


t:  -« 


iS  CO 


■A?   «•?  H 

C  lO  w 
#*  0» 


c*5 


If 

11 


r-  X  r* 


"5 


Si  S7eS 

»    • ^»  _^ ^» 


I- 


i  5  I?  5  w  55 

X  W  C  —  —  CO  cfc 


of 

CO 


2^ 
ofi-' 


0»     CO       —       © 


o  •^  •-« 


X 

0< 

X 


s' 


s 

^ 


^ 

^ 


1. 
,1 


cr. 

-  c-.-::  s  3  - 


N    C 

fc- J£_r 

—  ?   es 
C   S"   ^ 

««  »«s   n    <■«    fQ 
C    "    «    fl    O 


^^  ^     <■•     *•     «1    ■•• 


^ 

.  g  . 

• 

e-^ 

^    0 

o 

c  -^ 

-3 

"O  JC  ■ 

v 

•*    1 

b^ 

2 

•n 

it 

E  1 

'^ 

«  ' 

^ 

^^ 

«  - 

CB 

•        «A 

c 

;2 

<£ 

1^ 

C 

«> 

> 

e 

>..H    = 

« 

It^'Z 

3     O: 

^<u 

^ 

UKl 

r 


960 


o 

< 


I 


i2 


in 


H 


S'2 


"5^ 


p 


s 


^ 


is 


I 


oS  * 
id 


10 


s 


si 

S  P 


h 


h 


3 


8 


t^5 


3 


S 


J2 


2§ 


loet 

si 


^ 

? 


(^f 


S  2  00 


<£ 


■^ 

8 


^- 


1 

CO 

s 


I 


w 

^ 

» 

« 


S2 


J2 


cf 

s 


00 


s 

rfo* 


n 


II 


CD 


si 


^ 


SI 


5< 


5« 

^  lO 


^ 


lO 
5£ 


28 


5 


3 


$ 


^n 


to 
Sd 


•    •    •   • 


•   •   • 


.52 

•S  8  • 

e 

o*o 

c  .s  S 

•    •    •  •. 

^5 

4B 

ra  «« 

feNN  a 

Russia, 

Prussia, 

Sweden, 
Swedish  W< 

Denmark  an 
Danish  Wes 

United  Neth 
Dutch  West 
Dutch  East 

861 


H 
P 
K 

H 

O 


o 


'^^ 


£ 


f*  r-  f*  •—  ifi  go  oD 

s 


sis^i^i 


lO  ^Pm 


SI 


S^^ 
i? 


H 


22S! 

lO       ©f 


w 

^ 


§S  2  ^  CO 

cf  t^^ef^ 

^^         jts         ^Sf 

^       (R       lO 

o 


s 


si 


of 


(^f 


SO 


25 


ss 


CO  CO  I 


5JS 


g 


^    5g"  ^^  j:  a^ 


g^er^- 


—  ®  'X)  *0  — 

#^     ^     M    m    *^ 

_p     ^»       »       ^       » 

*^  X  o  a  ^2 
•r  3S  »5  3;  X 


\0 


*5 


5 


f,  ■ 


^    PS 


^  <- 

:h^ 


^       CO 


©f 

*•  I 

9^ 


s 


in 


I 


2  0)  g  *^ 

SCO  lO  ;c 


s 
i 


"Sir 


2 
w 

8 


©f 


o 

3 


e  9  g  <D  :5 
MOCOAO 


eg 
's 

9 


O.  K   ^   u  O 


1 


is 


•T3    « 


^  -  #i-  3  - 
-  c  -c  ^  -c 


s 

u 

fiQ 

e 

<8 


m 


6 


S^  «•«  s 

r  E   °  B  a 


^ 


26S 


w 

H 
2 


—  -^  o 

—  -j<  c? 


1112^  ei§ 


?i 


o 


»^  •*  o 
o  o  ^ 

—  O  CI 


I—   X)  C«  -<      .  *1* 


I 


7i 


X  o  r^  *i 

r-CQ  ^^ 
»^  »f^  >^  _^ 

-  c*2  2f  —  f 

^^i  ^^j  ^23  ^^^ 

r-  w  ot 


S  S I 

Tf  «^  w 

.        »        •»        ^ 

wo 

ODOf 


o 


5  5B^  8 


o 


kb  ^ 


kO 


SI 


I    I 


l5l 


9  kO  ^ 


g^i 


$ 


*.^ 


liS  V*  ^• 

»  •>  » 


^ 


is' 


3$ 

?2X 


o  ^ 

^  o 


GD  CO 


S*- 


23 

W'rf 

»0  ^ 


o  r: 

tO  CO 
iOt}< 

kO  O 

CO  ^ 


.-*  kO 


OiCO 


;0  •-  f*  ^ 


X 


s'^ 


X 


xS"^  w 

t*  ^  !*•  Ci 

•■    ^    ^    • 

«S2S 


^ 

S 


2 


f^ 


35  —  lO  f* 

82    ^ 


X 


CO 


"^S 


w    V^    f^    _ 

kfi  r*  kO  kO 

$^2SS 


3 


—  «  CO  o 


^  CO  t* 
kO^ 


§ 

kO 
X 

X 

3? 


T       ^  X  0*  CO  "^ 


ggf  g^  g  jc  CO 

O       W  CO  CO  C^  CO 

of 

^  ^  ^^  JQ  vi  QD  ^r 

»  CO  o  #*  kS  ^  t: 


s 

i 


52 


(?<  5?  «  35  it  X  •- 

C<  C  kOC*  c  X  » 


kO 


n 


w  X  CO  kO  —  X  kO 

.coxxg(Ng>-: 

O  —  X  **  —  X  kO 

55  "^  CO  CC  5*  r»  t* 

CO       p-  C«  <N 


kC 


^"^    •>    ^    *    »    »    •* 
j^ kO^  r^ gt  g kO 


X 


§ 


kfl   -co 


©lift 


I  s^ii^ 


»*co 


^ 


7i 


St*  S^  X  r-  £7 


6i 


o 


CO 


si" 


0) 


ao 

c 

CO 


CJ     OB 

«  C     •«  s   o 

C_*>M     CD     S  •-• 

E  dsr  .2  o 

C^  •=  i£  o  e 


E       Ml 


£ 


c>^ 


£  «  -  • 

5*S  CT  » 


•     •   O   S   2 


-^  2  i  a 

ct     .     •  •  X  .^ 

5-  o  o  c 

^  S  S 


s.« 


^  g    flfl    •   w    a.^ 


S63 


TABLE  No.  IV. 

Amount  of  goods  imported  into  the  United  States  for  the  year  ending 

30/A  September,  1807. 


Ibf. 


Value  of  goods  paying  an  ad  va-  )  \ 

lorem  duly  of  15  per  cent.     >  i 

■Do.     do.     do.   m     do. 

Do.     do.     do.  22i     do. 
Malmsey  and  Madeira  wines,  gals.' 
Burgundy, 
Sherry, 

411  ulher  wines. 
Foreign  spirits  from  grain. 
Prom  other  materials, 
Molasses, 

Beer,  ale,  and  porter. 
Teas,  bohea. 

Do.  souchong, 

Do.  hyson, 

Do.  other  green. 
Coffee,    .  • 

x^OvOof      ... 

Chocolate, 
Sugars,  brown,  6lc. 

Do.  clayed,  Slc.    . 

Do.  candy  and  refined. 
Almonds, 
Currants, 

Prunes  and  plums, 
Figs, 

Raisins,  in  jars  and  boxes, 
All  others, 
Candles,  tallow, 
Wax  and  spermaceti. 
Cheese, 
8oap. 
Tallow, 
Spices,  mace. 

Do.  nutmegs. 

Do.  cinnamon, 

Do.  cloves. 

Do.  pepper. 

Do.  pimento. 

Do.  cadsia,    . 
Tobacco,  manufactured,  other 
than  snuff  and  cigars. 

Snuff, 

Indigo, 

Cotton, 


305,103  a  $2  59 


13,948      4 
315,779      1 
4,843,489 
1,477,679      1 
9,915,243 
8,511,1>34 
22«,55a 
1,511,051 
2,016,177 
1,251,367      1 
2,823,017 
59,824;ml 
9,191,344 
3,640 
175,110,619 
45,398,494 
159,986 
685,400 
436,049 
10:i,766 
283,353 
^!^  1,4 1 9 
2,91H,073 
547,540 
4,412 
1,029.642 
2,090,125    . 
1,750,279 
2,105      7 
3,1H2      3 
9,076       1 
48,526 
3,499,43:) 
1,19(^239 
141,348 

10,261 

57,002 
l,010,6r^      1 
3,377,870 


93 
36 
55 
33 


46,861,538 

11,097,676 

696,703 

1,023,321  95 

25;       59,279 

12j     353,672  48^ 

63  3,051,397    7 

1,477,679 

9,221,175  99 

3,064,044  24 

1{M,607  45 

496,946  83| 

621  1,250,029  74 

I  1,251,367 

75  2,117,362  76 

2816,470,^7    6 

^  2,297,961 

40  1,456 

1017,511,061  90 

5,001,804  22 

28,797  48 

143,934 

56,686  37 

14,527  24 

42.502  95 

138,307    4 

291,807  30 

1;«,558  28, 

2,647  20 

288,299  70 

376,222  50 

262,541  85 

16,462  50 

10,341  60 

17,425  02 

40,761  84 

804,869  69< 

203,172  68 

48,058  32 


13 
18 
21 
13 
14 
15 
16 
10 
18 
IX) 
28 
18 
15 
50 
25 
92 
84 
23 

22; 

34 


20,  2,052  20 

25  14,250  50 

83  l,f^9,629  76 

31  1,047,139  70 


r 


T4BLE  No.  IV.— GoKTiKuiD. 


Powder,  hair,  .         .        lbs 

8,099  fl 

900  16 

815  8^ 

Do.     gun.    .         .         . 

211.748 

40 

97.404    » 

Starch 

26,aOB 

IS 

3.931  35 

Glue,       .... 

114,732 

23 

26.388  36 

Pewter  plates  ond  diahes, 

69,879 

25 

14.969  76 

Iron,  anchorg  nnd  sheel. 

781,875 

9 

70.368  75 

Do.  slit  and  hoop,    . 

773,017 

10 

77.301  70 

Do.  mils  and  snibcs, 

4,948,443 

11 

544.328  7* 

Quicksilver,    . 

17.211 

69 

11,875  69 

Painls,  yellow  in  oil, 

32.590 

15 

4.888  50 

Do.           do.        dry, 

122.460 

8 

9.796  80 

Do.  Spanish  brown. 

828,368 

6 

49.702    8 

Do.  while  and  red  lead, 

2,8W,092 

IS 

420.613  fO 

Lend,  6l  Dianufaclures  oflead 

2,456,884 

11 

270,147  34 

Seines,    .... 

10,081 

50 

5,042 

Cordage,  tarred. 

1,068,329 

11 

117.516  IS 

Do.    untarred.. 

67.210 

10 

5.721 

Cables,    . 

67.720 

12 

8.126  40 

Steel,       . 

cwt. 

15.315 

13 

206.695 

Hemp,     . 

141,107 

15 

2,116.606 

Twine,    . 

4.253 

30 

137,690 

Glauber  bbIw, 

167 

6 

786 

Salt,  weighing  more  ihan 
66  Iba.  per  bushels,     lbs. 

138.173.064 

li^ 

1,387.903  60 

Do.  weighing  Seiba.orleds 
per  bushel,           bushels 

418.638 

69 

288.79122 

Coal,       .         .         .         . 

456.936 
233.902 

29 
450 

132,511  44 
1.052,569 

Fish,  foreign  caught, ) 
Bo.  aalmon,     . 

7.231 

14 

101.234 

Do.  mackerel. 

16,008 

7 

112.686 

Do.  nil  other. 

17,057 

6 

102,312 

Glass,  black  ql.  bottles,  gross 

a4,5M 

760 

184,456 

Do.  window  not  above  6  ) 

bylOinchesforeachIOO> 

22.719 

1160 

261.268  60 

sqnare  feet  boxes.             } 

Do.  not  above  10  by  12, 

3,089 

IB 

46,335 

Do.  nil  above  10  by  12, 

4.183 

I7&0 

73,302  50 

Segan.,    .         .         -         M 

25,624 

10 

266,240 

Lime,      .                  .     casks 

386 

8 

3,080 

Boots,      .        .        .    pairs 

3,554 

650 

23,101 

Shoes  and  Mippers,  silk. 

31,880 

1  76 

55.700 

Do.  morocco,  Ac.  for  men  ) 
■Dt!  women.       .                \ 

72,875 

1  75 

01,093  75 

Do.  children's. 

24.761 

76 

18.870  76 

Corda,  wool  or  cotton,    (Joz. 

4 

6 

24 

Do.  playinK.    •         .    packs 

6,426 

36 

3.348  78 

|-                                 Jhtal, 

;»l38.674.tf»t8il 

5    *  = 
H    .-I 


1  lilJSSIJIili.lPJ.ISPisPJl 

i|||||rFsp|ap|i||||||| 

mm 

■        "82 

iieiiy.=>ipH.is»M|| 

..-si 

!  ISrPjiSI  -S|liS.P.i||l 

i'.'.. 

•■•iililiillll-- 

..|P|5^||.P||||||.  . 

1 

1.... 

1,,,, 

.  .l4-4l^|^-3444i«y  ■  5 

1 

1  r 
t  =  =  = 

as 

1  II  iiy 

366 


1^ 


O 

fiQ 

< 


8  V  a" 


u 


V 

a 


-;      «  ^  6«  ^ 


S  rf 


CO 


w^  ^  — r    "  —i"  ^^  _j  ^r  .— r  ^^  .-r  ^^r  _^  J*    ►  "  ^  ^•.  ■*>  ^^    » 

©f»o 


OliJ^ibS 


P-« 


,-         -    ^^    ___--'  ^^       m      jf 

^^  ^?  W4  CO  w»  ^^  ^J* 

—  OD  ^        i-i  .^        CI 


^C2X^gppox$cO'-"F*o^3ifiM*^io 
^i0rf©F-aDi0»OOO^-^Tf^05o©9D 


W^  h»  »-*  B  •—  tO 


CO  t*  (1) 
—  r*  ;o 

C4  O  lO 


DC0©O®QDt**^C9 
»    ^    »    •> <»    »    #i    •«    •> 


•^  is  »-*  COO  »  ^*  CO ^  ao  ci  Of  o 

»-*  "^  «  ^  Cf       p->  o 


S  S  rS  ^  =o^  C 

3i  Oi  lO  •-•  lO  r*  u 


•^  CO  t*  '^  —  »o 

&     to  —  ^  8  w  8  w  8  S  S  55 


g 


'S 


8 

£ 

e 

.51 

0)    10 


0) 

e 
c 

s 


so 


^'^cS^'-s^ 


u    ^    ^    «    *    C 


S    9 

QQ 


«S  -2 

"bi)  c 
c   o 

UX 


5  « 

CB     ft. 


5 

»- 
o 
a 

8 


•c  • 

fiQ 


•    0    ^    b 

lis 

o  ©   © 
9i  JB  je 


s 

a 
o 


S  0 


«  o 


««  CO  a>  c 


•>"0 

.2  c 
o  ^ 
«  o 


If 

O  • 

ascDcQaoh 


cqJ 

4) 


t2  "^  "?i  ^   •> 

•  »•   •>■   •■«  aS     i 


2  o 

e  a 
S  t 

— r 


267 


•   • 


•5  •  -8  •§ 

Id  CO 


•   • 


CO 


•   •   •   •  ^4   •••••••••• 

CO 


<5  <^^  w  »  o  ac     ^ «r 


•       •       •       •       • 


^  JO  3D^C0       O 


^^  ^^  "^  Oc  ^"  ^< 


"^'  ^*  ^?  ^i"  •■•  ^*  «4  ^i4       • 

OD  WiO       p-O(O0 

of 


SS£S£ 
SSSSS 


10 


II 


g  X  O  QD 

'      ■»       •       »      »» 


s 


i 

lO 

35 


3 
I 


9 

s 


iT 
o 


o 
a 

8 

•c 

« 

B 


(?r 


p- -<  «iO« -^CO  •^•^       CCiJiCO  — -^ 
«        »-*  CO 


a 

(9 


0) 

c 


S.t: 

*•  -3 


V 


10 


s 


o  5;35 


o 

*■  d  « 


c 


8  Jf*= 
5jS 


3     •  O  C  j5   = 


0)  ;= 


S  s  s 

JZJS   o 


•  «  «  *r  -^  ^ 

k'    Ml    «■    ai  ••«  •*« 
ifc^  *•    ■■    jS    e    ►• 


S 

« 


^§1 


£  8 
OcDa.S 


E 


» 

o 

N 

< 

u 
V 

■c 


0) 
CO 

*  be   •  •* 

^    s 

r*       o 


o 
•On 


<o 


r 

w'S      'It 

"DO         9 

^^        ^ 

P^  colli 

cs  o  n  u  m*  jn  wk^  S5^ 


be 


s 


8"S   "S 


I 

St 


X*  o  o  d 


•3 


o  8 


o8 


gee 


i 


960 


o 

< 


I 

t2 


i 


i 
I 


S 


a* 


^ 


w 


n 


^ 


is 


US 


e<co 


its 


iis 


s 


ll 


10 


s 


S3 


J2 


t 


8 


1 


« 


IS 


^ 

•> 

f* 

^ 


^ 


SI 


loSt 


ei 


■^ 

s 


is 


s 


S2 


J2 


1^ 


S8S 


If 


o 
K 


H 


si 

efo* 


d  kO 

rf  lO 

I      Of 


ss 

PS 


« 


lO 


iff" 


s 


9^ 


•» 

s; 


\^^ 


Sd 


« 


S 

•» 

^ 


0)S 


4) 


4B 


•s-S  S-s 


c  • 

iJ 

c  o 


^    4)    • 

«)*^  »s 

4)  S  2 

111 

ess 


861 


Q 
M 

H 

o 


o 


^  •>  ^ 
CO      ci 


8?' 


s 


3 


""5 


Hi 


1^ 


CD 
O  f* 

eo©f 


?1E 

^8 


e 


s 


m 


*^ 


t-  t"  *•  »-  ifi  qp  uD 


o 

5' 


of 


^ 

i? 


f 


lO       ©f 


w 

^ 


CD  S  S  CD  CO 
lO  CiGf  lOCD 


S 


3§ 
If 


CDOi 


ef 


3i 


li 


25 


r- 
O 


9S 


t 


SB®  S' 

^  c^  ;p  I 


S 


*dl 


i 


kO 


3    ^? 


MM 

wo  «p« 

-J       CO 


9d 


s 


III 

CO  X 


8 

5 
©f 


O  ^  kO 

•k 

kO 


3 


So 
iff  — 


ff>  »^»  Qs 

r*o  ^ 

cf  X 


2 

9 


lO 


•(?f 


o 

3 

of 


c   X 

-^  «» ^ 

C    «    -  -" 


c       •* 


c  9  g  vrS  0'C'C 


'S 

o 

Si; 


i 


Is- 


i 

» 


s 

u 

e 

is 
cSsc 


to  .? 

CO*; 


370 


•>  •«  »         »         Vk 


oefeo 


od"     cf     ^co     of 


lO       QD  *-«  iD  t«  00  0^ 

IIP 


»         •>         V^      .*k         •>        ^         V'         •>        f> 

S  £Z  ^Sf  S  S  {^  8  &^ 

O      QD      iS  o  oSX 


^     ^     I^Tf 


w  w  ^  CO 


$5 


^'iS'iS 


^lO 


u2  ^  ^ 

IPBft<<P 


qD(S(SsBO 


flS  «B  n  •  CS 

5  -c  -c  -c  « 


if 

=  -r 

-I 

82 

.2  & 
COO 


c 
c       S  'S 

4)    S  .^    O 


S  w  u  w 

S  a  a  a 

Sstfi 


ari 


"^ 


§  'i  '8  '  'i 


S8  *  '  '!BS£  '^S  '  'si  '2 


fi-f    ef    Kg*ar5-'if'-'' 


HIH 


P^lilS^i 


of 


M 

9i 


e 


£  8 

^  e 


CO 


^  f* 


O  *-«  A  O 

S  S  o)  S 


10  cs 

Mi  ••■ 

o  -< 

w  -5 


s 
a 


o 


«0 

u 

O     • 
N 

V   c 


a  J 

"  be 
•r  3 

«  a,  5 


s 
o 


c 

C 


o 


c 


w  ^  w        ^ 


& 


^  •      *      ••      •k      •>    _f* 

2C  CO  « 1^  lO  ^ 


«t  O  Oi  •-* 


gs  32S  ^Sl 

S?3       S^ 


"    *"    Gi 


•^  o 

•J© 


s 

g 

s 


:$; 


^ 


if 


o 


«*    tXOt^    MA'S    C^'C 


life's 


STo 


if 

a 


E 


o 


Q 

^ 


^ 


2LS.2 


-o  5  •  c 


r  s. 


o  « 


S    I.    U 

I  o  e 


i 


372 


*&« 


Sill 


"2¥ 


CD 


fo  ^  ^  kfi  lO  ^M  lO 

i-<  r*  ^  W  r*  ^  « 

lO  O  CO  ^*  ^*  i6  W 

•>         »        »»     _•>        0>        0>         •^    _  w 


2 


§S8SpSSSJ2SSS 

^V  •>       •«  •>  •   m-       ^       0>       0,       0.   •>       »       • 


s 

ei 


CO 


t^^ 


ip  ^  ^  ^  lO  jp 

9^  O  CD  Tf  QD 


S 


^    S?5^«^« 


I 


8    i 


as 


n 


lO 

5 


i 


CO        CD  CO 


l|l^id«s 


8;i 

■*  9 

t>  9 
ti  ft 

>  ^ 


15" 


of 


K 

P 


00 


^%  flj 
o  ^ 

g    «    <8 
4)    0)    C 


3: 


§i 


£58So2 


»  — 


5  ° 

is 


—  r-  gag  ^2*^ 

•>  »  •>         ■>        Vk 


55S2 

^  ^  ^  » 


01 

2 


_  "4  **C0     -CDCO* 

88^ 


Of  —  f 


Tf  lo  g  ^  oiOf  51 


COI^ 

S2 


lO  lO       0*  ^  Ci  05       t»       r»       OD 

S  S  ?  2t  $  52  S -^  2     P  «  S  2!  3  » 


to 

C 

a 
B 

S 

a 


^     « 


u 

i 

fiQ 

c 

C 

s 


9 


«9    ID    es  xC  >C 


6    o 


ID     0) 

(2^ 


c5a 


so 
© 

'%m       • 

fl-o 

-a  « 

c  E 
=a  6 

a 


i*      =  a- 

e  -  S  o 

E  c  5  o 
®^^  e 

«  2  «  S 
3  --5  S 
0  c^ 


0"=  s 


o  o 


jr-o 


ft.  o  • 
cu     S 

c       ^ 


2  s 

Is 

S| 
|S«    ^ 

fc.  S   U   V   o 

o  ^  c  d  a 

««  <S    ft.    ki    M 


273 


•  •$  •  SS  'Sd^ $ 


OD  ^  id  ^ 


£§i 


p-^  ^ 


nr 


■  s 


^    »    •> 
Tf  i-i  -^ 


1"^ 


1^ 

S 


s«  - 


10  ^10  g  w  (xT     ^'gg'^Sef  5""  a  of  g  ^*(?f  rf 


$; 


_^      »      •>      » 


ODOOOGISPsr 


^ 


s 


of 


oTgf 

CD 


«r 


•>     •«  ^  » 

lO       f^  Of  lO 

^  Q  QD  ^ODf^W^ft^Q**  t^'oTifi  00  SP  ®  5P  <2  ifi" 


®^     ^SaSS     S     ^     » »*  ot 


^ 


Iff 

^  X  X) 

•      •>      ^      p> 


8|lS 


82 


OQQC9¥"*&OOC90^^XS*^' 
35o®CJDibO«CDrfO«^aDiO*-*< 

^  ©  CO  X       CO  ® 

CO        01  ^ 


cf  of  Ko 
of 


2  = 

—  01 


**WtO  —  X"-*^XOf 

F-oi«         o  ©  Of  Tf 
of- 


$8^2  .S 


/ 


S74 


>  ^  1^-  c:  •  CQ  5  5  0*  2 


@ 


Saw 

•>  »  •> 

»  w  »-< 

CO 


OD       •-      ^  r» 


O 


e  9        O 


fa  CO 


9        >^ 


•Is? 


"8s 


•—  S   •  o   •   • 


CO 


1^  £?  ^ 

Q  1^  f- 

Oi    »^    »^ 


^  p-»  1^ 

r»  Q  t* 

CO  r- 


a-S  ."O 


?^l 


CO 


w  ;p  CO 
lO  O  |0 
%0  ^  01 

•»      •»      ^       » 

—     1^ 


s 

^ 

» 

a 


go  ^  ^  >iC> 


s2s 


2§*- 


CO  Q  r«X  9 
wwco-^  S 

»       *>       »       » 

'9 


#*  r»  OS 


S 


^  1^  ,-  ^  * )  1^  ,- 

CO  »^  3d  OS  •^  S  o 


OS  X  3S 

2  lag 


o    8 


X  CC  GC  tO 
^       CO 


^  ^    •»    ^    •» 


CO  »Q  t^ 
50  ^9*  CO 

isi 

*^  CO 


S'9 
■A 


art  lO    («■  «l 


»       »       •>        » 

»—  ^  -^  -, 

CO 


^  £  C  ^^ 


»       •>       w 

^       01 


IT  CO  —  »-N  « 
lO  —  ^  CO  -^ 

—  ©oso 

CO  »        •-- 


Of*© 

2  J^CO 


O  1^ 


^  S  "  ** 


CO 
—  0< 


05  ;C  0*  01  rf    •  t^ 


OS  -x  A 
lO  ^  Q 


SS5 

»  •>  •> 

01  O  i» 

OS  o 


?: 


ss  ^ 


4^  XX 

o 

5S^ 


—  © 

S;3 


<5{ 


^OIOI^rj«^©«0» 
*    ^  »    »    » 


0» 


8l¥8 

r*  ^  »-<  r- 

•>   •> »■    •> 

-7500  t* 

**^  ^^  vat 
^a'   ^?   ^^ 

xo< 


—  01 


«  m 


of     ^ 


X  t^C? 
«Qf  CO 


??-- 


IS 


Sg2S 

»    »■     »  _» 
X  —  0*  <x 


0» 

Si 

01 

o 


y- 


'-^        0« 

HI 

»    tfk    ^ 
CO        -^ 

of 


01  TT  cow  X 
»-<  t*  05  ^  3 

«  ^©  c*co 

S5cj66 


—  4>» 


I 


l^  sp   ^  ^M  1^  mm 

8 »»  SoJS9 

t-  -r  X  -Jb 


a 
'o 

a 
es 


-a 
c 


Of 


s    ••o 


•-3     **  00     OB 


•   to 

•-    £ 

e       c 


2  S  S  «  c  cS 
a  S.  ^  ^  a»  «  a; 

teflUflOqDQOas 


3  3  a  <5 


-o  3 


to 
o 

•  z  « 

•3  c    ^ 

<^  Si  o 

»  *"»    'T*   »mm 

s^  ^.- 

^  3      CQ 


^  5;  -s  3  -s 


%m 


£  r:  fe  2 

h.    r;  3    -« 

Co** 

r  ^-=-< 

®  5  c    • 

Si.®   o» 

S    fc-  "S*    C 
es    O    a    (9 

c  e  c  •- 
S  «e  S  c 

^  2  £  « 

es   «.  «   « 


M4  U  C  O  .P  ^ 

^  c  c  c  ^  a 

z:  4)  a>  a>  S  ® 

^  k.  ».  ».  P  M 


S75 


f 


^        C<  aO  CO  lO  C 
^     •  —  €*©♦«« 


•   •   •   •   •  ^5 


•  •   •   • 


s 


5f  Cr  —  —  f  "J  CC  <^       — 


CO  ^ 


c«      ^ 


P-.  —       0* 


S*ogDf«Gfco~ 

oof-^eo  — -- 

«)«©  — g- 


^ »■        »        ^        ^ 

lO  CO  lO  I-"  w 


'-SS'^S 


^  00  ^ 

^Tf"o"-^  CO  SJ 

.^  ^»         Wk         »         ■»         » 


c^^fcooico     o»^^ 


»  f>  •«  »  » 

CO  Of  ^  »^  00 

^     wot 


1^  -•  —  Q  «  «  CO       lOO       ®^ 


s 


^  ©I  »^  -N 

CO 


?co5_ 


»        »        »        »  ^^         »»        ».        ^        m    _m 


-J  « 

o  a  »-, 

^  0 

a.  *  e 


c 

o 

c 


0     m*    »^ 


S    a.   C 


0^ 

c 


•  -c  = 


e  c  0)  -^  0  4,  2 


n 


0 

•  010 

c 
a 
D. 

X 

4) 


10 

S  ^CO 


'  .^^    _*^  ^^  ^^  ^^ 

lO      o  cf 


^  iB  lO  r* 


^  lO  ip 


^N  ^  — 


||ii§eSgi| . 


I 


COtO 

r  c^ 


8 


^1  di 


lO  Zl5  3  oS 


I 


•r  —  ao 


-sg 


S9) 


0 


O 


0 

•  V0 

rs 
< 


<  = 


0      Q) 


c  •     •     • 

o 

^       •     0 

fc.  ^  i» 

•<  ^0 


3    «« 


?ttg 


::  0 


"0    8 
0    0 


§  2  -  =  « 

—  5"  "^   ft*  c 

JT  0  ^ 

^    0   S    ^W    ^ 

•  -^  o 

-  ^  •>  I-  *•  E 

-"i'C  3  ©IS 


0 

a 
0 

« 

0 

9    ^ 
C    M 


0 

t. 
O 

E 


3 
o 

o 


E  S 


0 

< 


--S 


S  o  o  o  o 


sf 


i 

< 


0) 

E 


0 


agdcS 


s 

^ 


# 


S74 


r  I* 


3         «  t'— «  t- 


■ST 


i^ 


lO 


qD  p«  ^  «^ 


CO 


o 


;C  9)        O 


W        S  SS 


3C        IT  t^  W 

p    •  o    •    •  Q  r* 

CO  o 


;ii  \^  ^m  t^ 


**•  ^^  ■ — ■ 


5  rs 


€»■;  t^  lO 


682 


•  ^f  ^»"  b5 

5 15  o  u5 

)%Orf  W 


'Q*  3D  »-<  —  »  O 

••    ^    •»    ••         » 


5     £ 


o:  £  Op 

CO  ^  lO 

9 


iS 


0» 


51 


f*  —  •—  X)  t^  — 


©I  ^  r*  lO 

»   »>   •>   *k 


i5  55  «  05  CO  ^  r« 

^       m^      0^  9* 


ii 

QD 


Ct  ^  O  *<« 

«M  1^  M   2) 


^ 


t*  SJ  »0  •^  O 


S 
•>  •  »  •> 

^  t"  <^  f* 

f*  W  0*  o 
lO  lO  ^  f* 


^  TT*  wi  «^  V(  ^  X 

X  CO  -^  —  C5  t^  o 


•-^co 


o  OD  t^  e  f*  © 


^  ^  -^ 

CO 


S  ''*  22 


co-^ 


$ 


CO 


-•  25 

COO 


«  X  <M  Q  K  N 

»  CS  ;C  ©I  Ci  ^    • 
»    »■    •>    »    »>    •> 


05 


O  If 

US 

•>       •>       » 

C5 


C5 

X  A 
ar  ^ 

to 


s: 


--  X  s  rr  *^  ^  ^'' 

05  ••  ^  ©  -^  ^  O 

05  »-<  1^  lO  5^  ^ 

»    »    »    ■»    »    ^ 


—  ©  W  lO 

»  V'  »  » 

III! 


§C0  O  kO  iQ  *7* 
CO  O  ©«  W  «^ 
1^^  —  <^  lO 

t^  —  O  O  t*  ift  o 

w  ^?  ^9*        CO  *"* 


^  _ 

©»  X 


"^  ©*  -n* 
X  w^ 

CO  M^ 

lO  mm 


SW  X 

CO  »*  05 


«  tt 


o  o  ©I  r«  (O  05 

•^  »  ••  ^^  » _  j> 

oieo XTf  o  iS 


.-go 

^  lO 


*       a^     _•*      ^       *       •>       » 

of 


Sis 


lO  — 

'^X 


9 

^ 


8 


y^ 


W 


a 

w    •    • 

a 
es 


QQ 


u 

VM 
> 


•• 

V 


n  =  « 

rn  "^  "^ 
w  ^   c> 

•  t«       *^ 

c  «  ^ 


S      2iT:  ^ 


c 

Si 

mm 

E 


•    •    • 


» 


m 


2    3    fT    IT    **    ^   •• 

a  S.  ^  ^  a»  «  o; 


^  •—  «C  •*  jC    ""    a 
c  0  «  X  «)   y>  <2 


c 

u 

E 

< 


•  c 


,Si  5 


c 
2  S 


=  -< 


0^    g 

Si  ® 


3 

2:: 


^  c 

c  ^ 

«  o 

CQ  g 


X 

c 

a 


3  3  w  «i: 

JS  Oj3 

c  ^  a 

V  S  9» 


•2  Si 


c  c 


caOf-^EbCfa 


875 


f 


•      •      •      •      •  m(      •      •      •      •      •    ^p 

s 


is 


"2^ 


•   •   •  c*  ?  S   •    •   • 


Sec  t-  —  51 

M.f«  -^  •     •     •      •      •      •     "^ 

^  W  O  CO  ^ 

^  —  0* 


•      • 


S^Q  CD  ^S'  sS  ^^  ^f  CC  kO  QD 


,*^C0—       OD^O^COgjaDt^Ot  lOiOgJ       -*o»       • 


<c^9coib^ifi^c60k0 

Sco^et»-ioc*^eo©fco 


r*  o  lO  CO  X  -«*TeP'Xr<*^'-*Q«P9SC0      3~S      H" 
©•-N^     coof^ -^co  «^aD  ^^  ^-^ -^    .®«!:!    .®' 


I 


X  A  QQ  «~ 


iOi2  0»  — CO 

582S?: 


kO 


01  ©I  **  ^^ 

CO 


aS8£p2gK288 

moSt^eo^iiooot^io 


i 


"ig'g^ 


lO   e  ©f   01 


^  i5  kO 


i 


38  '^  S  &  ^  2  *^  ^  9}  S  7Z^  fR  18  S  £ 
oSS»0'^^3or»f*PS!B$coio 


i 


ci^' 


o3otc5s:2;sa«»®5* 

^  -*   Of 


$3^* 


sr 


S76 


■V 


•8 


•  '^  •  .^^s  •  Q S S 5?  •  •  •  55 

lO  O  >-^  CD       oD  r*  CO  O^  *-* 

•   •       •    •  •  ^ 


2  '8 


•     •     • 


^  .. 


^        W        CO  0* 

•k  *>  •>  » 


or*    •    •  e*5    •  ^   •  t^  -^  - 

©I  oi  ^      w     CO  cico 


^  •    •  -gg 


GO 


^  t^       lO 


H' 


g 


COCO©^©iOwf*0«'^QD^  —  OCO^r»CO 

•^     Of  Tf  wgjg  o*co  i^w^  jjw         g 


o     co« 
4>.      ^  r* 


s 


oco 


=f 


•S5 


!!i'5s^Q0CB^OO 


•>•        m        ^        •»  •« 


r*       CO^       r^^CO^OfkOCOOiO  <^ 


cS  lO  CO  to 

CO  ^^  lO  ^ 


1-^  lO 


«4r 

^op^eoioi^Q-r 


§ 


O'Ot) 
S  QD 


♦*'^S'^S!Sv2£2S^£S2^oi-«     ®«--<g 

-^        G«  4-^  CO  O  GO  ^  ^  CO  kO  1^  <^  ^  i^       lO        p- W 

ofco         S         '^  w 


^ 


c<     o«o 


;^  S  «^  ^i.r  nrf^  •z' .«^  .«r  ^^  ^^  .f  ^^  ^r  .^  .^ 


00  00 


3?S}§ 


CD 


if  ^aeCd'ioatrjfcD'^ 


CO 


CO 


s 


t^CD 
CO  — 

P-CO 


ss 


of 


•^  »-«  ^*  W  O  ^        O  &0  t*  CD 


^6  • 


^  COCO  55cD^     -^fll 


SSS^So<SS8 

§'^  mJ^  m^  ^  ^t  .^^  ^  ^  ^ 
00  9  OD  9  lO 


•     • 


•n     0)  «     •    ■- 


-T  • 


«    «B 


V       »       Q 

c  5 


CD 
O 


«0 

c 


9SCU 


k  i  I  °'f  i  S^o 
TO  nn_Q  Q  Se  ft  Q  bS  /j^ 


.2 

a 


O    ft, 


•c 

fiQ 


V   o 
So 


c 

§    eT    S       • 
&.    C    V 

«  e8 .:: 
t^  ^  »^ 

O      Q)^ 

O    f^    m 

c  i;  "2 

*  So  «- 

^  SJ  «  6 


3 


c 
2 


•c-5 

CQO 


^  2  o  5 


s. 

a 

6 
S 


tM  %J  ti  V 

<u  B  e 

^  o  «»  |) 

^  b  k  C 


e  h 


lit 


.3  .  . 


ISiSiil 


5llf 


iiii§Siigiiii«r 


fplfiii5i§§i 


glUETiiiiTff 
IlieililliSgr 


iMifisSirpsf 


gififisifiiiiT 


fpiiMffpp'iPMiiifiiiiiiri  -m 


"gSS    ■-  =  Fa 


I       S  .S:^^lf     oil 

&■    >,      s  s  2  =  ^  «  B-a  s. 


878 


•s.a 


Si 


s  c> 

a5 


f: — ©■ 


t^ 
^ 


2^3 


^la — 


^ 

lo 


82-" 


t*(£ 


lO  o 


Q  ^  Gp  QD  O        ^  vii«  ^  p« 


I 


ef 


•  lO  o  »  ^ 


^ 


O  MO  vX/ 
o  s  51  "*  ^  ^^ 


!g 


^ 
> 


gpg 


^  QD  CO 


fi  O  kO  O  O 


O       O 


W 


CO  ^ 


CO 


^  r-  lO 

1  »  »  •> 


•i 


ig 


w 


s-  - 


r  P  3  $R  <=>  5i  ig  » 

05  r*  ~  vJD  ^  ^ 


ZSi 


CO 


;^  lu  ^  rr 
lO  I*  f*  rr 

ii  i 

»-^  Of 


ESS 
2S^    CO 


^9 


CI 


is?? 


W  S  IP 

-"ef 


SeSs 


^*  o*  ^* 


-^  t^ 


279 


S 

CO 


•     •     •  •Jjf     'wOD 

©I 


5     W 

CO 


CO 


m 
It 


lOiS       ^S 


25 


c6 


^i09icieo     QDCjiocot^     G^eteogo^ 


CO 


I 


#•5 


SB 


t*Tf  ^ 


si 

CO  ^ 


f^iOf?     of  ifD^-ctof  »-^©'^^Tf     oSae^coeljf     f-^Vcf^-T     — ©f^ 


I 


off 


^  CO  CO  TT  »~ 


<0  CO  Tf 


lO  ©  ©^ 


**  Of  50  CO  ^*  ^^ 


•r»a  iQ  © 


0  ^^  3D  ^P  ^5*  ^J*  w 

»  ^   ^  ^       9»       9*       m^ 


M 


^ 


^ 

g 

^ 


©f 


COCO 


r 


lO 


»-« o 


=  $  9 


EllTflllllflllii 


^ 


t 


©  lO  CO 


^^$©TfS?©5SSwSj5 

—  ©  ^  "^  ©  Of         —        ^  fm  ^ 


I 


o  m  A  o  Z)  ©  © 


CO  ir:  ©  © 
©  01  c*2 

©  »^ 


^  u! 


Ifllllii 

C0^r*»^»^©©©^*iO^»^''T 
CO  lO       •—  c«  »-*       -^ 


4^ 

© 


HI 

ef-*rt 

lO  lO  *** 


9 


8 

•c 

6 


9 

o^  e  o 


i 


it 
H 

ll 

II 
ft 


is, 

ill 
E«5  . 

i 
III 

III 

ifi 


life 


i-gig;5-8iigs-..i.ig.sis 


i  JliiigssgiSii' 


It 


3  M  5* -»i  w      Sew* 


*"£:«"-"  Jf  of  «5^S"*^ 


mvi 


;iiiiipii|s.iissiSi.i.|iiS3 


K-^'-^Jfrftrfrf 


se,§i|?.iis«s23gs 


i-  85  I'll  ^';  Sii  i'^  ^ 


iiliiOEilSHIgi 


sj.scs 


fifiiil 


!|S|||f 

lliiiii 


„E| 


aa.aia;aazoaci3^.^aagiZMOgft.^h.«igW 


981 


SSS  ?! 


eo 


CO  o 


^  r2  ^  ©I  -^  f-»  t* 


s  •  •  • 


lO 


lllflil 


©f  CO     ^     oT 

S  £     9     S 


1 


j{f^  .^^•"****'^"'"S;^'   '^^E;  . 


i 


~     ~    ~    »    »    'g'    »    p  _^  _»    •    «►  __»    .y 

S  §  S  S  ^.o  S  lo  tO  06  cb 


f-c* 


OJ  ™^  ^C  v«  ^*  CO  ^J*  ^J*        t"* 


^^^'^*f**^"5l   'S   •^•?f  cots  c5aC-•»fixc?^305^  w95oi  w 

CO  CO  ^        1—  »^        ©I  CO 


^  2  •^ 


3S    S 


of 


01  O  "-  O  O  i5  kS 


iS  Of 


O  P  S  J  {^CO  O  CO  S  ^  P  S  iS  S  —  S 


lO  '-^ 


I©  Pi*  ^  p-      ^      »i« 


CO 


Si  1 1  ill" 

5-'""" 


Ss^§ii 


i??    I    ?? 


X^  Q  ?fc  ©I  «  CO 

lO  r*  e  ic  ip  o 


S"l 


^ •       •       •  .   •       ^       »  _^       »      »       •>      » 

•»• -f  ^  3  1^  f^  —  CO^fCO -•  ^       c 

X  ©I     •-ccof^di     —CO         © 
if         p-:c*f  ©I 


0) 


4 

s 
m 


s 


c 
o 


o 
a. 

s 

C9 


'S 


3  0*  Ji  ^      • 


0) 

s 


^  ""  £  3  c  — 


C  f  c  ^ 


-   z  C  s  jz  ^  ^  ^  — 


«9 

a 


•a 


I.  T"     S     b 

o 
2 


i 

t 


8 

a 


36 


/ 


S74 


CO 


8^  • 


FT^ff 


S    6 


^c5 


M4      U      C      O   jO     O 

^  c  c  c  ^  a 
z  i>  o  V  2  9> 


IFF 


p" 


flMfiisisi  ■sisrialflllilllpll 


_-rf_-_-_-     rflJ     ot 


||8s|a'|^g"S? 


IllPliiiSi 


liPIfgfPi 


^II1  -l- 


IlilfilMllWillfllf 


lO      (o'ef     ei 


iiiglisiiflHililHI 


iigilllMIMpfllpf 


Ifflfffi 


3S|S! 


3     J  -a: 


§="3  S;=  i-S  .-S  o  S'Sf  1 


ii 


m 


S76 


gS     e  QD  I—   *—  Of  A  *->«       o  ;(p  (JD   r*  o   (k) 
kO     © »-«  <0   ®  r»  CO  C6       P-.  CO  T-*   05  01   •^ 

a5  o 


^  ^  ^ 


kC  *^  o 
CO  0*« 

■^   ^   ^ 

?0  ^ 


5! 

kO   ^ 


^  f* 


o 


COCO©^©iOwl>0«'^QD'9"^^OCO^r*CO 
•^        Of  Tf  ©iCOJg  WCO  1^01^  J5©*  g 


»-<  O  kO  ^ 

O   CO  « 
1^   -N  1^ 


s 


OCO 


=$ 


•S5 


eS  S  S  S  So  S  o  lO  CO  S  S  S  S  S  o<  oS  Si  $ 

t*       CO^   r^OCO^^tOCOOiO 
•N   ^N     CO  01  ^^   r"   *^ 


S  kO  CO  to 
eo*^  kO'Q* 


s 


I 


kOioaDaooo^^OfabaDOdOfabud^c^d 

-^       01 -*  00  O  OD  ^  ^  ?0  kO  t»  t»  ^  1^       lO 

Of  CO  O  ^  01       0« 
„                    0* 


IIS 


15!  •*  ®  !a!  ®  —  r-"o"*^'C0~0f  !*  kff 


iiiii 

=«^  c^cd'gjf CO kO 5D ©if  ^'oo^^^S «r of  o-^     ^ 

'*»r«-^<  OtCDQD        C0u3  wTf 


01      oto 


J 


CO  — 


^^SH^Sss^^^B^ 


n 


^6 


•^  ^- p^  w  ©  ^      o  kO  r»  ®  o      k?& 

•^  -»  ©  01       0< 


3«  cS\iSc^, 


Soft 


f 


o  • 


& 


©  kO 
—  S 


1^-9  CO  01 


kO  ^ 


S2 


kg  ^  kA  g  o» 

CO  X  S  %  *"  I 
coQco  « jcrof  I 

0«  t^ 


HI 

»  s 


(SI 


CD 
O 


«0 

o 

c 

c 

CB 

o 

E 


c 

u    C    V 


C    6, 

5  £ 


s   « 


<ik      (0     OS 


9SCU 


o 


xr3  5 
o  c  ^ 
'?  es  o 

o«  ^ 
«  o  S 

^    K    3 


S  jfl 


CQO 


2   ej   C 

fib 


e 

Q  •  •  •  • 

I-  2 

i  *    S 

c  e  »;  e  |L 

£  8  J  85 


•s  .  •  ■  -s  •  ■  • 


Tg-Tl- 


■ITT 


f iiilsiiriiii*§  ■iiiiiiiiiiifl" 
lT|||i|i|gii|igi 

tf  ' « —     e*     — 

"Oifiiffiiiiiiii 

S  JiiiiigfiiiSfi 


rfiiiiiiwiw 


_____  J 

pjMP.P.P.PJ.P.P.P.p.PJ.PCP;  ■^. 


il 


MisSlE'ssPiisr'P'liiiiii'g  "is .  s 


<l  .     .  . 
°|S5  .i 

III i  -^ 


<  5     i  "  -e 


f-||s^||||||||||=£|..-s|j|||| 


878 


lF~TTT 


Si-s§i--*-g-l* 


SIS  •i5«giSgill§i?ili£gigggpiii 


III  .iiSisisiiiijgKiiiigiiiiiisi 


^"s: 


gli3|iSsigiii5gil*iSsiiliif 


iU4 


«-■■■=  ;i-'^j=.-i,.>-.-s...s--  Jsj  ii 

.--  --■£■=  .-  S-S-e*  E-Sl 


880 


Spi 


SScoS 

to  QD  cf 


SS  -682 


^       CO 


SP  QD  <g  CO        5" 

C^  ©  QD  •     •  ^<     •  GD 
V  Of  (JD  CD        ^" 

oTef  K  ©f 

f^  ^i<  •    •       • 


KoT     lo 


^= 


kO 

s 


^    *»'8'^'S8^=gf^®'S"' 


«  —  ^  lO  1-^ 


lO 


1: 


i 


8^ 

Q  lO  «  I 


I^Ssl^iiil  -i 


ODCli 

01  ef 


i 


i« 


ko  •^S 


^  CO 


^ 


©f 


OD 


S' 


IIP! 

SiD  O)  lO  9  •^  OD 
S  &  ^ 

^  CO 


^i 


UD  1^  O  CO  •-• 


CO  lO 


$ 


rj<  —  ^ 


SIS    s 


05 


nil 

of     -* 


M  lO^  CO 


CO  2r  2t 


S2 


OO  ^^  ^O*  CD  V  ^^  »• 


K 

9 


*©f  x" 


IB 

'S 

o 


o 


OSdHoDCDOQiCQQ 


•igsssg 


-£S 


iliiiiiSiii  -iii 

iliiiiifi 

siiriigri 

B|gS=PS|'g 


IWIlTliflllillli 


—  o  i3  —  aJo«T  —  lo" 


lifliifis 


fS^-j,-        — vf. 


II 


SllsiiiSJ.IIissill 


ilBilsSiiiigiliSi 


rfif      -rf 


■  3  ■  -I 


£     t  s  *-  c  i"a  ^ 


382 


•    •  •      f^  • 


15       ^»       —  •-  3D  iQ 


o 


g 


O  «*  O        ?5^ 


7?r 


SSSo 
5522^8 


=EWI¥ 


IT 


CDC* 


SfTS 


S*^**^ 


C«  CO  CO 


2     r!s:SB2r2<3D*2*rS5«oo 


I  a    g 


^8fS2^$'S^^S'2*    g 


-^        <^  f-^ 


9  U9  O  S  S  C  (ID 

••         »        ^        »         »         •>        a> 


*—  I'*  rr  "T 
^  **  «> 

ooo 


^,.im 


8  c?  2  2  ^  §  S2§J  '8  £  ZI  ?1 


s 


09  O 

kOCd 

CO  f 


CI  o 


C  hN 


5 


'c 

o 


I 


*    *    *  ^  ^ 
CO  w  »^  »^ 


in 


PCS 

o»  — r- 


«?8 


III 


g 


SI 


M^x7    ^- 


»a  M  «*  « 

coo  o  o 

t*  '^  o  r* 

ciOD 


^       MS        •% 


« 


M    C» 


c 


*  e 
es 


c 

«9    V 


0) 


CJ     «^     ^  ••« 

S  3  52^3 


s 


CO  tt'^ 


J  .2  4,  .s 

^    2    4>    V 


-^  > 


«  CO 


«  0^  .c  js 


c    S    X     «    A    or.  <^    «B 

*"  ^  '^  '^  '^  '^  >  s 

#1\    ^^"     •^    •■*    c^v    •*4       A«       «■ 


c  c  —  "5  •* 


Ml 

if? 


e  e 

o  o 

V  9) 

c  e 

t9  n 


«D 

JS   o 


4» 

e 

fi  a 
o  o 


C   s  IL  •—  •— 

_  _  2  o • It 


988 


SS8  .  •§  •    =* 


mis"^ 


3£ 

coo 


CO 


5" 


"'Sf— ^"^    ""Sf    '''^    ^'^ 


wir 


^ 

s 


2?f 


o 


lO  Of       ^  O 


flss 


s 


of 


^^S88 


_-  ,^  »o    -^ 

lO'iCCOC 


•       •  ^ft       •       • 


•       ••••••• 


•f  o  c*  ^  ""  CO  w  r*  o*  CO  CO 
KoT     01     «©c«f     of^ 


©Sis  'SP^«3do 


rSS3     S2S2SS2 


Kco  —  ^  —  r-Sf loS^   • 


9$ 


^     S  S  o(  3  (s>  S  ^ 

f*  ^  f*  COOD  O  Oi 


o  ^  ^  5  -•  d  ig 


kO 


^'of 


©  ^  © 


§'^^^ef 


Si 


F 


^ 


s 


j^ 


»       •>       •>  »      •> 


1^ 


« 

^ 


Is 


•5 

c 


m 


N    ^ 

<  J 

U     « 


a 
o 


2 
15 


^  s:s 


> 


w  2  U 

w  ^  « 

C  J  « 

«  •  O      . 

ft)  xg  c 

*  **  ft  <^ 

•C  3  C    ft» 


C    0 

u  a. 

li 

<^    •   • 

tf  Si 
—  ^^-^ 

E^  £:= 
:2  =4  S 


^    ft; 

s  c 


o 
ft) 


ft) 


ft)  ^    3 
0  =  U 


.=  .§  <^     ^ 

5"  U).-    fe    3    Q--    ft) 

.S  >-  ifi  ft«  c  0  •£  >> 


=:  ft)  s 

»  c  a>  -. 

^  ^  c  s 

"  5:1?  2 


• 


O  B 


r 


284 


O 

r* 

o 

> 


es 


i4 

o 
< 

§ 

s 

& 

i 

< 


S 

•< 


t|! 


e  e 


Oi 


s 


s 


^5  f*      •      •      •      •  *p 


(?f 


CO 


o 

3 

^  » 


3  •  •♦- 


«  — 


si**  : 


23  S  §  S  S  ?: 

9  >o  ^  o  n  IS  — 

^      »      ^      ♦      »      •      •« 

O^  CO^  01  ^  t^ 


»       »       »       » 

o  «  ^  ^ 


•       •      •      • 


•       •       •       • 


m 

OS 
s  « 

as 


s 


2lg 


-•        ^  ^       C0  1< 


s 


01  «^ 

lO  OJ 

^  ^  lb 

Its  lO  CO  ^  0{       o 

0*       CO 


^  CO 


ZfSn  — *^     ofetf 


o 


o 

M 

i 

> 


fill 


-^CO 


O^  gp  A  ^ 

«  oecx 
f^  —  coo 


5     ^ 


^  t 


e  «• 


CO 


M 

O)  CO 


gig 


0* 


CO 


15" 

01 


ceo 
cots 


-<        01 

r-    'CO 

CO 


5  c 


O  Q 

J?2 


to 


&.&• 


^5 


^^23 


W    ft^     ^^ 
^^    !»•    aV 


-'rf 


CO  O  CO 

X  ^  f* 

CO  t^ 

^^  <p**  ^^  «iM 
"ir  3fc  i5  o 

3P  ""  w  ii» 


S«2S 

^  0*  lO 


s 

o 

CO 


^      •«      •» 

0»Ci  -* 


7)  iS 


—  pco      — • 


i6  —  t^  r-      a  — 


—  Ci 


CO  CO       CO  — « 


01  ^  CO  —  *—  X        •- 


'A 

I 


• 

.2  •  '  •  ^  g  •  •  •  S  8 

SB.S  S.22  2^  t-  -  .  c  5^  —  -c-c  S-  ^•"  ,,  5>  «-c^  ^  ®5 
?2":3"oS.l£2-r'?J?-2c:a««vSTS'»fc-SwwooeH5; 

»  S««  s5-5ii^^tJJS  fc-'S  &-5*5  ^  -  =  c  c  c.5.2  g 


is  -te  i 


III  '=g 


TW 


liniiiiii  ■liiiiinwfsfffiii 


FilMIIfllfllfFIIIllMffTrTil 


I 


^£S=iiSi  .=81112 

w  f!  •"  ^  -5  S  m'  ffl      s  —  oJ  N  lO  f^ 


pSiH 


as 


r|f||T 


1   I 


-33     7 


■J 


988 


1' 


n 


55 — g 

•>  •«  #1       »       »       ■>       •> 


iwfur 


<S  w     (fococo     woo  «*-r-3      ^^^t* 


a 


a 


•-^  O  O  CO        F-«  ep  CO  OQ  iQ  ^ 


Illllf 


w/)<or»«^SR»S52C0 


J'S 


CO  1^  -«       •- 


!| 


ei 


QD  O  O 


11 


2 


25-" 


O       00 


SSSiooS^^SdSSS 

a>      •>       f  »»       »»       »    _•>       •»       •       •>    _» 

0^«(Z>        i^ACp0^r*'-4Q 


o    8  ?S5  «^ 

OD       rr  QD  —  O 

*  co©f  ^ 


s 

CO 


^$ 


8 

X 
«  o 

.2       .   .  8   •      g  w 

•sl-il  iJI-s^l^l  c:i:sl|l  6 1  i  11  «£  „ 

B{o«(aqDOQgaQWaD-OflBcoaBgCBOa&t.hft.aDaDt« 


967 


'Sit  *28 


•      •      •      • 


O 


W 


•  •  •  • 


-as r- 


11* 


St 


•3 


•     •     • 


•  •  •  5 


•  •  • 


cf 


8  ei  ^^  ^  e<  ^  eoHN  9  X  S  CO  1^  9  £  ^  S  S  ^  o  S  o  ^  S  «  2  5  ^ 


£ 


^idef        ©ef 


Scfe^coaD«-^aD35«iOf*i 


^P  •883SI28S 


ilifii 

00       ^« 


CO    •«  tr 


s     ^  It)  *^' 
•  ©  8  P  •  ©  •-  •  ^_     op 


©Mr? 


Scg^iSfoeici     sf  gpr  SBiSrf  ^rf2     ^^a5'lO     ©^ 
S    SSS2>SS    55fS       lo       ©s< 


s*s 


«yD^^iO'9«uD«io»5©^«-coef  — 


m? 


is 


t^ 

$ 


fl^IIIlIIflfll s i I s  .III  .iTTsTPl^ 

0Oco0««M         t*  I— I— lb  »o  »-•  — "  w     CO  Oft     Oi^ 
aD*i«  •-«  ^to     1-^     Cf  CO 


h.       ^       ^  kO©f-i 


i 


•>• •      • •••-• 

S     .-        «-  .§  '^  *£ 

t   -e    •      S       8 g 5   • 

1  J     |s  «       II     ^1  ^  I 

S5      K  "5  •s  *»  JO  -o  ^^  Jj        •   •    •    •    •       3 

•a    'i      ^s       0         g-    ^   K«       S§    S-s       rf?  . 


289 


a4  ^ 


35  2  2J  25  2?  S  Q  »^  ^ 

©  »  f^OD  CO       ®  »  ^ 


-J     c:  ^  SJi 

•    'CO    •  uO  -•  c» 


CO 


rf  Tf  »-N  OD 


C^fr*C0'T'C0G^O3D 

•>       »       »       »  •>      •>      » 

•  ©I  "^ 


5a,   ^  t^ 


f-4  iQ 


g  Wrj<  CO 

»  »  •> 

C  05  «- 


*Q  •-* 


»    »    •> 


5;-'S«r 


CO     -•^^  »  x  o:  t^  r-co^     rj<  lo  o      lO 
CO  CO  OD  •  •  ^       o       w 


(M    ^ 


2 00 go 2 S 3! * S S>  . $ ® 
§oPSS^o?dSS  'SSI 

0*  N  -■     t"  •         ce 


^8 


•>  ••  ^  •» 


ocor-o-^w^QioeigDci^co^      3" 

^  .-^  iO  O -«  «3<  U9  kO  «-4 -^       «0  lO  9        O 

p^  lO         S  '^  -^     CO 


"2^ 
5 


1^  lO 


^'^§§ 


^  o  w 


11 


=  3 


©I 


OD 


o 


II 


•  o«^  co- 


ld 


CO 

•5<  — 


y      •> 


CO  jnodis  o 
—  —  ^  X  55 


¥2 


-ef 


S 


i$288 

o  X  05  t>-ar5 


51 

C5I2 
X  If 


^  —       r}«  — 


^ 


^  Tf  o  w  o 

»-<  21  ® 

^  CO  CO 


^8? 

^  X  C5 
Off       *    ^    ^  -If  _^     •  _^     •>     » 


§- 

S  X  X  o  i 

#*      ^      ^ 

X 


05 

S 

CO 


CO       — 


s- 


•  lO 

C5 

SI 


f"2" 
lO 

^8 


^  o  o  S 

©f  Oi 

lO 


CfiQ- 


e9 


09 


5^2 

c  ^ 

at  ^^ 


CO 

c 


S  g 


^^^ 


9) 

c 
a 

V  e  e  w 


(A 
0^ 


o 

• 

c 
«s 

®    • 

s 

< 

c 
cs 

•  j: 

;=.! 

-I 


CC 


•       •       •       • 


•       •       •       • 


K 


S2 


SSooqdS 


llii 


iig§ 


©f 


•OC^M 


«  o  u  o 
c 


o 

c 
o 


C  'S 


2   i--^-.s^.- 


•C  ^    CO    ^ 

XOa^QQU(j< 


^    ."  -  c  ^ 
•  "2  ^  ^  s  ^ 

^  5  fc  -  -  sp  -s 


fifEpf 


F^SiSS 


pWfllff 


siliUMIHm 


ilMIf 


i*!^* 


PPl 


-      rf      -      cf 


Ifllfli 


liirEiSlllIIII 


g  iisi 


lifpllplllliiiFTil  .fg"i 


8 


•s 

gVCa.Sb.uo.3aoHhgoOBg-<uuft'igCu-*'<MgM^a5«gp 


E  »  £  = 


990 


2 
C 


< 

SB 


KrS'lJI 


i^ 


!^ 


o 
w 


s 


of 


Od 


••    •«    •■ 
•-COW 


?o  o  — 


5  s  «* 

*>  V  •> 


fSSF 

<o  ^  ^  ^ 


id  tfi  {?0  ?0  00  '^f  ^^  ^?  ^'  ^5 
O^t09IQD90wt&CDa6 

«^     —  w         ofxcoio 

•—  F^  ©I    '^  «^ 


s 


CO 


ss 


QC  —  QD  lO  C« 
iO«  Of  •-'9« 


f 


N 


•^' 


3 


tO 


I 

Kf 
S 

I 


9t 


fi 


I 


xS 


^ $    •ODr^abw  lO  O^  iOrj<  «QD    'OOFO 

r^     co^c^     iftwt^co     oo©f  — c*         cox     ^ 


^  w 


e  V 

I*  c. 


== — S"5"5     ST 

^».  ».      ^      •»  •> 


CO 


_  _*i0**Xt^*O 

S    SSg!    S       xto    s 

CO  ^  — ■  .  •— 


^  f 


X  Id  •-«  kO     *  CD 


SB 


J£ 


■*  5 


?      S  H        •  §  X 


Id 

©t 

X  00  Cd  CO  ©t 


^i^s 


Q  X  CO       ^"5" 


Id  X  CO 


I 

o 


•      •    k_^    CO 

^\  aj 

(9  .2 
*-^ 

CO  "^ 
1  9  £  S 


00 


(1) 


m 


Btt    ■» 

CSC 
Q«    0    CO 


u 

«  je 

«  s 
2Q 


•*  5 

a"! 

9    3 

QQ 


^-2 


E 

s 


•a 
c 


00 


s  9  3  u  e 


5  cS  £j2«  o-C'C 


CB 

c 

•0 

'3 

C 

•c 


.2? 

*5 

_o 

"o 
c 

CB 

u 
« 

a 


•3 


•|  'lis  -iJli  -I  -SSpil 


•$     X 1^  lO 


MIHIplFTlp 


nifimii 


film 


flip 


^ 


plfHIliili 


HIHI 


l¥ 


ffniMllIIIf 


A      9)0 


tii 


'W. 


^11 


''i''8^s'-|i'i^i-* 


gggi 


■lis 


I  llli  I 


111 


892 


i4 
< 


7 


O 


o 
H 


u 

u 


8 


»^$ 


y 


2§ 


1^ 

a": 


.  ^  »  •>  »  •> 


9 


<M  CO  ^  C5  CP  ?P 
^^      lOCO  W 


-  cS  %0  O  <M  t^ 


Q<  ©f  r- 


wc5^  ®  —  la 


SsSR    8 


CO 


s 


CO 


Si 


?r 


CO 

•35 


s 


'« 

n 


I 


2^    gg«*2*J??ef*:8|5if^    5g*R*^ 


«^  S  H  S  S  So  8  S  8  w  OD ! 


?J 


s 

^ 


m 

O 
lii 

z 

:;> 

u 

s 
f- 

X 
c 


I- 


§ 


•  Iflllllllll 


•  •••■••lllt-lllttlll 


••••■••■•lll»lllt 


•  I 


.  £  .  .  8  .  .  .  8 


I  •  .tl*  I  I  I 


•  ••• Ilt^llll 


I  I 


■  •••■•Iflllllllllll 


•  ••• ••Illlllt 


I. 

E 


:! 
g 


^  <JD  ^*  QD  O 


A^^  ^M^   %#S    ^^^   X^^   ^^^   /wN   A^M  ^^C    ^ — ^. 


a'Sl    SSf-'-g?   «^!?j*-'-'    Jfg's^ 


i^  an  «  ft 


8 

» 
Q 


i'§^)2^f*'«*2?-*Sf«f|^^'tfs^|^Sf 


i 


8 

I 

a 
m 

a 
8 

I 


«» 

s 


s 


o 
C 

S 

•c 


o 

a 
•*« 

S 

8 

I 


S 

^1 


si 

if 

liilillilili 

liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii{ 

ll 


ill 


l|l 


III 
in 


sISHIIlPIIlI 


ilSIfPIIIIKP 


a 


u 


•"8! 


=  .-t  --■■S's-.-lfl 


3'SS"*22S''SgSSlsN 


sSHIIElIlHISli 

Sg52aS<°S8SSSgBP 

"• '_''3'  - 

...ilfslHIfSIplfl 


896 


o 


^  t 
•<'S 

IS    V 

•••      IS        m 

^    *M   A 

It    C3  95 


^2 


i 


I 


e( 


i 

n 


i 


X«  r«  %  10  ^  ^  SI  et  <^  CD  M     9  kO  <^  a»  01  ol  ^  OD  ^ 


il¥|gif 

»       »>  _>  ^^  ^j>  •>  ^  •  •*  *  ^-f" 

Q    28S  — '^    Ss2 


9  ^^  lid  CO 


3 


J 


C*  A  kO  C9  <^|p  ^-*O»(»fija0i 


C^ 


i 


i 


2*   SS^S^l^'^s:^^ 


IS  n  6  n  ct 

^  O  9  ^  T!«       kO  ^  O  O  ^  ( 


"?gf 


s' 


^ 

2 


II 


Q  S  ^  i5  I 


co 


s 


ef 


^ 


S 


3* 


='    2fS^^^«^ 


CO 


fPf  O  f 

^2 


iA 


©f     «f 


»  V  v> 


W  i-«CQ 


3 

9 

9 

or 


W 


^^-j-cfg- 


Q  IQ  Q  QC  CD 
09  ^  ^  OD  C0 


cf 


^  CO  ^  o 
co-«oX' 


^  ^*  ©  ''S* 


z 

Of 


^£t' 


^— ^    2 


2  3 

O  ^  -    -    " 


5"   g" 


CQ 


n   w   SB   n   n   H> 

la 

3 


i 


ft-- 

o 


•     •     .        ^ 

s  g>  c  =  * 


r 


896 


Q 
M 
P 
» 

H 

O 

I 

• 

e 
pa 

<! 
H 


g 


s 


c9eoiot«i&f«tooo^oa5o9ofF 


CO    o^ 

^     CO 
CD 


fJ 


« 
M 


a 


CI 


I 


8 

<4 


"WWW 


^S 


CO      i9^ 


lO     ^ 

w) 

5  § 

s 

ffi  <i^ 

» 

i  s; 

i 

5$ 

s 

9 

or 


8 


«       I-* 


^  ^  CO  oS 

O  kO  00  *^  1-4 


•k 

o 

s 


CD 

of 


CD 


h3 


s 


of 

St 


s 


^DCDCP^f^QCS*^ 
M       OScDOiO"-^ 


as*- 


r^cD 


O     CO 


K 

M 


^s 


i 


«t3    C    O    V 

5  s^  o  ii  .•  « 


St 


2f 


OD 


I 

s 


S 


is 


k 
tt 


bo 

9 

.O 


e 


a» 


o      .3    5 

a       C3    ^ 

fe   »-  g     N 


5.5  5       c  o^   ^2        •* 


o^  o    o 


s  e  S: 
fSS.: 

H 


C 

9 
O 

V 

§ 

9 

ft 

! 

^^ 

».a 

u 

s  s 

s* 

K 

-a  C 
»S 

:f  o 


8- 
Ss 


•mm 

a  o 

§8. 

Si 
^1 


897 


s 

I 


o 

pa 
< 


Si 

".2 


l4         «: 


••• 

a  ^ 


^i 


'  ^    ^  S!  S  K  ® 


O  9 

II 

6 


CDCP^S 


!S  ^S  St  S^S^S  ^St  Sr  X  ^2(  2( 


i 

o 


X 


SSISi$5SS 

^M  lO  lO  F-  f»  f-< 
©  Tj*  ^  ^  CO  00 


o2 

c  »  » 
**  v^  CO 
EM 


^eoi^i 


c(e(ere(^*^*c('2 


J 


ii  R|||f  lliliissjsl 


e 
3 


iiii 


S5 


If 


9S 


g 


9 


V 


xX'axxxxxxxSilDSSSSSSB 


V 


» 


r 


TABLE  No.  XII. 

Declared  value  of  the  principal  articles  of  British  produce  and  man' 
ufactures^  exported  from  Great  Britain^  in  1832. 


cwts. 

barrels 

tons 

cwls- 
it 

tons 

cwts. 

yds. 

lbs 
piece** 
barrels 
cwta. 


cwts. 
dozen 


Apparel,  slops,  and  haberdashery, 

Arms  and  ammunition,    . 

Bacon  and  bams,     . 

Beef  and  pork, 

Beer  and  ale, 

Books  printed, 

Brass  and  copper  manufactures, 

Butter  and  cheese. 

Coal,  culm,  and  cinders. 

Cordage,         .... 

Cotton  manufactures  by  the  yard. 

Do.  Hosiery,  lace,  and  small  wares. 

Do.  Twist  and  yarn,    . 
Earthen  ware  of  all  sorts. 
Fish,  herrings, 
Glass,  entered  by  weight. 

Do.  at  value. 
Hardware  and  cutlery,     . 
Hats,  beaver  and  felt. 
Iron  and  steel  wrought  and  unwrought,   tons 
Lead  and  shot,         ....'* 
Leather  wrought  and  unwrought,     .        lbs. 

Do.     Saddlery  and  harness, 
Linen  manufactures  entered  by  the  yard,  yds. 

Do.  Thread,  tapes  and  small  wares. 
Machinery  and  mill  work,     .  . 
Painters  colors. 

Plated  ware,  jewelry  and  watches, 
Salt, 

Silk  manufactures. 
Soap  and  candles, .. 
Stationary  of  all  sorts. 
Sugar  refined, 
Tin  unwrought. 

Tin  and  pewter  wares  and  tin  plates 
Wool,  sheep  and  lambs. 
Woollen  and  worsted  yarn,     . 
Woollen  Manufactures  entered  by 

the  piece. 
Woollen  manufactures  entered  by 

the  yard. 
Woollen  hosiery  and  small  wares. 
All  other  articles,    . 


5,972 

26,191 

11,290 

4.114 

213,483 

72,350 

5^8,520 

49,652 

461,046,503 

76!667,i50 

43,265,283 

121,399 

189,761 


bushels 

. 
cwts. 

cwts. 

lbs. 

it 

pieces 
yards 


Total, 


306,143 
55,458 

147,636 

12,181 

1,407,729 

49,531,046 


10,561,861 
121,754 

455,847 
31,838 

4,199,825 
2,204,461 

2,296,686 
6,010,7S1 


£712,3451 

274,95^ 

18,70e 

88,65( 

204,001 

93,03e 

916,56S 

264,721 

228,647 

100,70t 

11,500.63c 

1,174,99S 

4,722,769 

490,787 

146,854 

1,434,431 

7,899 

1,434,431 

144,597 

1,190,748 

144,653 

244,39S 

54,583 

1,716,084 

67,.346 

92,715 

116,081 

173,670 

149,670 

529,991 

315,645 

177,7181 

1,038,790 

111,797 

5M3,259 

219,650 

235,307 

4,633,286 

474,518 

136,644 
1,457,793 


£36,444,525 


899 

TABLE  No.  Xllf, 

Direct  Trade. — A  Statement  exhibiting  the  value  of  the  ExparU 
to,  and  Imports  from  Canton,  and  also  the  Tonnage  employed  in 
this  branch  of  foreign  trade,  during  the  years  ending  on  toe  2^ik 
of  September,  1821  to  1833,  inclusive. 


Yran 

radinf 
30lhi3ept. 


BXFOBTS. 


1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1886 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1830 
1831 
1832 
1833 


Domestic 
produce 


$388,535 
429,230 
288,375 
330.4CM5 
160,069 
242,451 
290,8es2 
230,385 
260,759 
156,290 
244,790 
336,162 
537,7741 


Forelipi 
merchandise. 


•3,902,0-^ 

5,506,138 

4,347,686 

4,970,705 

5,410,456 

2,324,193 

3,573,543 

1,252,417 

1,094,103 

585,903 

1,016,045 

924,360 

o9i>,98o 
» 


Total 


•4,290,560 
5,935,368 
4,636,061 
5,301,171 
5,570,515 
2,566,644 
3,818,135 
1,482,802 
134,862 
742,193 
1,290,835 
l,26a522 
1,433,759 


<M,  11 1,951 
5,242,536 
6,511,425 
5,618,502 
7,533,113 
7,422,186 
3,617,183 
5,339,1061 
4,680,847 
3,878,141 
3,083,205 
5,344,907 
7,541,570 


TOWWACB. 

Cleared 

for 
Caotoo. 


6,040| 
8,185 


9,478113,067 


9,563 
8,667 
4,956 
8,950 
3,664 
6,351 
3,501 
5,061 


fiora 
Cantoo. 


5,622 
9,622 


10,518 
1^468 
10,432 

o,cJOll 

9,981 
8,052 
8.598 
4,316 


7,232 11, 14« 
9,538115,334 


•\ 


^. 


J 


V 


'•      \ 


V 


v< 


.V 


>. 

.^•A 


TABLE  No   XIV. 

Direct  Trade. — A  Statement  exhibiting  the  value  of  domestic  pro- 
duce  and  manufacture,  exported  to  Canton,  during  the  years  enaing 
20th  September,  1821  to  1833,  inclusive. 


Yearn 

endinf 
3Ulhi<r|iL 


1N21 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 

irth 

18»^ 
lS*-i9 
UOO 
1831 
1832 
)i833 


DOMBariC  PBODDCB,  4tc. 


Fun. 


Ginaenf. 


8142;399; 

78,15N 

lOO/Jlo' 

89,h31^, 

33,130 

45,110 

100,986 

101,7^ 

80,180 

10,306 

42,396 

129,570 

lOQiim 


^171,780 
304,181 
139,582 
222,780 

94,421 
134,799 

79,566 

90,900 
110,396 

64,070; 
115,928] 

99,303 
182,437! 


Doroeatic 
coctona. 


$14,931 
9,388 
14,981 
26,998 
56,173 
49,256 

215,495 


Cotton  UQ- 

manofactur* 

ed. 

$53,593! 

14,192j 

112 

296 

28,850 
10,740 


1,998 


$300,536 
429,290 
288,375 
330,466 
160,069 
242,451 
290,862 
230,386 
260,7 
125, 
244, 
336,1 
537,774 


300 


9 

n 


I 

i 

9 


S 


W   Oi  ^ 


00  00  f*  w 

fiN  lO  ^  ^« 

5C00  w^ 

&3 


s 

00 


lO^^tocfoo^^     ^ 


poeioo(8^3^»^otoo^ 


i 


cc5  lO  dS  cS  Tt;  ^ 


4» 


9 


'S  ' 


g| 


6 


00 


•^ 


^ 


ODo  e^oo 


•       •       • 


^51  Of  ®  o  3d  r^o  o> 
•    •    •    •SSSSSSSSC 


^  O  v^  QD  O  1^00  ud  UD  O  O  *^  ' 


J! 


<I)(I)<I>99<c;aDQDa0aDaDa0 


301 


> 

o 
55 


I 

IS 

!: 

Si. 


IS 

o 

a,    %> 
2    R 


fe" 


•^8 


S3 


M 
A 
M 

m 

H 
u 

M 


J 


»      »      y      »>      »     .»■     ^      •i  ^»i  __. 

Sx  c6  S  S  S  %o  M -4  S  S 


o  r«  t^ 


^ 

3 


0^©«^r«^*r«0%OO^uOCDiQ 


ifixxco^oaoodQiMocieQ 


I 


_•*  _•>  ^_y»      »    ^      »      »  ^v      •>      •»  ^v 


i3 


2E:^^8§SJ^§2'«'I;; 


>.r  ^  ^f  jmt    ^  mt  ^S  S^  ,Jt      •'3'*» 

—  xe#«!5gco«  —  ep&^jD 
cocc  — ^ec5^olr*oWodo 

Or 


e  ^ 


CO 


X 


b  s:  fc '^  fi  5S  ♦^  ^  8  8 

•^  W  W  ^*  CO  Tf*  »^ 


s 


s 


> 


802 

TABLE  No.  XVn. 

Gknkbal  Tkade. — Statement  exhibiting  a  view  of  the  general  trada 
bettDcen  the  United  Statet  and  Canton  according  to  valwation*  made 
in  Canton,  annually,  during  tke  years  ending  on  the  30tA  June, 
18M(olS33. 


Junis. 

''"KS'ol,""' 

'^Pi11i,n'*° 

Hiunlrr  uf 

T™..r. 

Nomberof 

181)5 

«3,66B.815 

»3,»42,W)0 

_»^,^ 

10,169 

Toa 

1806 

5.326,368 

6.127,000 

43 

12,480 

868 

1807 

3.877.362 

4,294,000 

37 

11,268 

765 

180H 

3,ftlO,090 

3.476.000 

33 

8.803 

683 

I8U0 

47«,860 

808,000 

8 

2,215 

166 

1810 

6.741.W)0 

5.716,000 

37 

12.512 

765 

IHil 

2,898.800 

2.97:1.000 

16 

4.748 

331 

]8I2 

3,132,810 

2,771.000 

25 

7,406 

513 

1613 

1,453,000 

620,000 

8 

1,816 

171 

1814  J 
1B16( 

451,000 

572.000 

9 

2,851 

196 

mie 

2,627.600 

4,220.000 

30 

10.208 

615 

1817 

6,60W,«00 

6,703.000 

38 

13,096 

780 

1818 

7,076,828 

6.777.342 

39 

14,326 

800 

IHIO 

10,217,161 

9,057.0.13 

40 

16,022 

951 

1820 

8.185,000 

8,173,107 

43 

15,139 

837 

1821 

5.392.7fl6 

4.715.696 

28 

9,378 

562 

1822 

8,192,768 

7.563.644 

45 

15.630 

913 

1823 

8,339.389 

7,523,492 

40 

14,677 

801 

1824 

6,460.339 

5,677,149 

34 

13.069 

683 

1825 

8,962.046 

8,501,119 

43 

16,282 

864 

1826 

7.781.301 

8.752.562 

42 

16,431 

885 

1827 

4,2rj.6l7 

4.429,381 

28 

9.666 

521 

1828- 

6.394.917 

6,745.696 

29 

11,041 

593 

1820- 

4,065,670 

3.873.867 

27 

10,279 

558 

1830' 

4,341,282 

4,208,810 

35 

13,325 

716 

1831' 

4,223,476 

4,314i»48 

34 

12.W4 

695 

1832* 

8,631.807 

5,999,731 

34 

12,944 

695 

1833 

a3fl2,971 

^228,375 

59 

22.463 

1.207 

*  1896,  %  '30,  "31  aod  '39,  lakeii  rrom  a  Canioo  ptper— tons  lod  neo  estimated. 


803 
TABLE  No.  XVIII. 

General  Trade. — Statement  exhibiting'  the  amount  of  Specie^ 
Bills,  and  Merchandize,  exported  to  Canton^  on  American  account^ 
annually,  from  1805 to  1833.  c     li     ^       ^4iCJ  1^^ 


Fc— oo  end- 
in(  June  30th. 

1805 

IMVOBTa  E 

NTI^ANTOill. 

— ^ 

i«p«cie.             Bill 

■  on  Eofiand. 

^Merchandise. 

Tfittl  value. 

$2,902,000 

$2,653,8U^ 

"«1555,^8 

1806 

4,176,000 

• 

1,150,358 

^,326,358 

1807 

2,895,000 

982,36% 

3,877,362 

1808 

3,032,000 

908,090 

3,940,090 

1809 

70,000 

409,850 

479,850 

1810 

4,r23,000 

3,414,600 

5,744,600 

1811 

2,330,000 

568,800 

2,898,800 

1812 

1,875,000 

1,257,810 

3,132,810 

1813 

616,000 

887,000 

1,453,000 

1814  > 
1815^ 

.          . 

451,000 

451,600 

1816 

1,922,000 

605,000 

2,527,000 

1817 

4,545,000 

1,055,600 

5,600,000 

1818 

5,601,000 

1,475,828 

7,076,828 

1819 

7,414,000       ( 

1200,000 

2,603,151 

10,217.151 

1820 

6,297?000 

i,88aooo 

8,185,000 

1821 

2,995,000 

2,397,795 

532,795 

1822 

5,125,000 

3,067,768 

8,192,766 

1823 

6,292,940 

2,046,549 

8,339,389 

1824 

4,096,000 

2,364,000 

6,460,339 

18-:^ 

6,52'1,500 

2,437,525 

8,962,025 

1826 

5,725,200 

2,056,101 

7,781,301 

1827 

1,^1,168 

400,000 

2,032,449 

4,273,617 

182S* 

2,640,300 

300,000 

2,454,617 

5,394,917 

1829* 

740,900 

657,000 

2,667,770 

4,065,670 

1830* 

1,123,644 

423,656 

2,793,982 

4,341,282 

1831* 

183,655       1 

,168,500 

2,871,321 

4,223,476 

1832* 

2,483,871 

667,262 

2,383,684 

5,531,807 

1833 

682,519       4 

,772,516 

2,907,936 

8,362,971 

«  1828,  "9,  '30,  'SI  and  '33,  taken  froiD  a  Canton  paper. 


/ 


804 


!■ 


^    X 


o 

pa 


IS 


o 
o 


H 

Q 
< 

•J 
< 

96 
M 

H 


^13 


O  CO  CD 


OD  1-4  O  10  Qp  (£ 

t^  lO  O  05  O  Cg 

«^  ©  (xT  »rf  ad  off  «tf  ad  K  ^ 


f^  <^  — 


s 


^p 


2 
P 


¥ 


iO  O 

CO  CO 


o    N»o     •^00. ^et. 


u 


SPowS?C£)-*P« 

5PcoPo585d8S 


80 


1 


3 


X  qdS  3d 


Si 


«i 

.9 

It 

B 
t 

t 

a 

i 

.9 

u 

p 

"8 


> 
O 

u 


e 

s 

JO 

tm 
tt 

.a 


n3 

P 

.9 

o 
a 

a 
-n 

a 

13 


1^ 

o 

CQ 

< 


s 

CI 


O 

o 


H 

a 


•J 
< 

M 
SB 

H 

o 


ao6 


s 


^  oT  aeT  ^  r^  r^  lO  QtlT  otf  ^ 


»0  O  G)^ 


ii 


1 

-co 
in 


1^ 


«M  O  QD  |fi  iQ  ifl  tff  "^ 


goSr^oM 


;^ 


I 


9  S  o  S  Sd-o  S  od  ^ 


^ 
^ 


e 


5t  ^  ^ 


2^1 

•t  —•  Q  O  <5 

«-«  X  w  w  "^ 


^  la  ^ 


I' 


s^ 


II 


X  O 


—  ^ 


iBx  x%  S 


«5 

S 


306 

TABLE  No.  XXI. 

A  Statement  exhibiting'  the  destination  of  Exports  on  American  ac- 
count,  from  Canton,  during  the  seasons  ending  on  the  20th  of 
June,  1818  to  1827. 


Beanon  ending 

DESTINATION   UP  BXPORTH   PROM  CANTON 

. 

30th  June. 

linileU  &taii«. 

burop*". 

Other  plact**.' 

Total. 

1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 

$5,927,519 
7,527,801 
6,793,078 
3,462,582 
6,016,218 
6,760,582 
5,006,243 
7,016,444 
7,()5(),938 
3,922,194 

$849,^23 

1,496,442 

1,348,563 

1,109,114 

772,763 

383,910 

453,906 

584,675 

684,856 

154,408 

$32,787 
31,466 
144,000 
774,6(53 
379,000 
217,000 
200,000 
'416,7()8 
352,715 

$6,777,^2 
9,057,033 
ai73,107 
4,715,696 
7,563,644 
7,523,492 
5,677,149 
8,501,119 
a752,562 
4,429,377 

*  Batavia,  New  Holland,  Manilla,  Sandwich  Islands,  South  America,  Mexico. 


3V7 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Revennes — Derived  chiefly,  fr-m  duties  un  imports  and  tonnage,  and  on  sales  of 
public  Innds — Internal  taxes  laid  at  different  pcri(»ds,  but  soon  repealed — 
Amount  received  from  the  customs,  from  1791  to  1833 — Direct  ta;Fes  laid,  at 
four  different  periods — Amount  of  the  valuation  of  lands  in  1799,  and  a  com- 
parative view  oC  their  value  in  1791^  and  in  1814  and  ldl.>— Lands,  ceded  by  the 
individual  Slates,  for  the  benefit  of  the  United  Stales— Whole  amount  of  the 
public  lands  in  183'J — Cluantity  to  which  the  Indian  title  has  been  extinguish- 
ed— Cluantity  granted,  for  the  support  of  schools,  colle;;es,  and  bencTolent  in- 
stitutions— for  internal  improvements  and  other  special  objects — Brief  view  of 
the  questions  in  relation  to  the  future  disposition  of  the  public  domain — Post 
Office  establishment — Increase  of  post  offices,  and  amount  of  postage  received — 
General  account  of  the  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  general  government, 
from  1791  to  1833. 

• 

Thb  revenues  of  the  United  States  have  been  derived,  principally, 
from  duties  on  imports  and  tonnage,  and  from  the  sales  of  public  landfl. 
Internal  taxes  have  occasionally  been  imposed,  but  were  continued 
only  for  short  periods.  Prior  to  1H02,  internal  duties  were  laid  on 
manufactured  snuiT,  refined  sugar,  sales  at  auction,  licenses  to  retail 
wines  and  distilled  spirits,  stamped  paper,  and  on  carriages  for  the 
conveyance  of  persons ;  but  these  were  all  repealed  in  that  year.  Du- 
ring the  late  war  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  duties 
on  most  of  tliese  articles  were  renewed ;  and  duties  were,  also, 
imposed  on  various  domestic  manufactures.  Hut,  soon  after  the  re- 
turn of  peace,  all  these  internal  taxes  were  repealed. 

Some  additions  have  been  made  to  the  revenue,  from  the  Post  Of- 
fice, from  money  paid  for  patents,  and  from  dividends  on  bank  stock. 
Direct  taxes,  have  been  laid^  at  four  different  times  only,  from  tlie 
commencement  of  the  government.  The  duties  on  imports  and  ton- 
nage, called  the  customfi*,  have  varied  at  difTi  rent  periods,  and  have 
been  laid,  generally,  either  upon  the  value  of  the  articles,  called 
ad  valorem  duties,  or  a  certain  sum  has  been  imposed  upon  the  arti- 
cles themselves,  called  specific  duties.  We  shall  notice  these  duties, 
more  particularly,  in  a  subsequent  chapter  on  domestic  manufactures. 
We  would  here  observe,  however,  that,  on  the  first  of  July  1812,  im- 
mediately after  the  declaration  of  war  against  Great  Britain,  one  hun- 
dred per  cent,  was  added  to  all  the  permanent  duties  on  imports,  to 
continue  during  the  war,  and  which  wei-e,  afterwards  continued  untO 
Che  30th  of  June,  18ia 


r 


306 


The  actual  annual  receipts  from  the  custonw,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  government,  to  1833,  omitting  cents,  have  been  at  fol* 
lows : — 


^p  to  Dec.  31tt 

Dolli. 

Years. 

DoTto. 

1791 

4,399,472 

1813 

13,224,623 

1792 

3,443,070 

1814 

5.998,772 

1793 

4,225,306 

1815 

7,282,942 

1794 

4,801,065 

•   1816 

36,306,674 

1795 

5,588,461 

1817 

'26,263,346 

1796 

6,567,987 

1818 

17,176,385 

1797 

7,549,649 

1819 

20,283,606 

1796 

7,106,061 

1820 

15,005,612 

1799 

6,610,449 

1821 

13,004,447 

.  1800 

9,080,982 

1822 

17,569,761 

1601 

10,750,778 

1823 

19,086,433 

1802 

12,438,235 

1824 

17,878,325 

1803 

10,479,417 

1825 

•20,098,713 

1604 

11,098,563 

1826 

23,341,331 

1805 

12,936,487 

1827 

19,712,263 

1806 

14,667,698 

1828 

23,205,523 

1607 

15,845,521 

1829 

22,681,965 

1806 

16,363,550 

1830 

21,922,391 

1609 

7,296,020 

1831 

24,224,441 

1610 

8,583,309 

1832 

28,465,237 

1611 

13,313,222 

1833 

29,032,506 

1612 

8,958,777 

$623,941,575 
More  than  one  half  of  the  import  duties  are  now  collected,  in  the 

port  of  New  York.  v 

The  following,  was  the  amount  of  imports  in  the  States  of  New 

York,  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  Louisiana,  Maryland  and  South 

Carolina,  in  the  years  1821  and  183d. 

1821.  1833. 

$23,629,246         $55,916,449 


New  York, 

Massachusetts, 

Pennsylvania, 

Louisiana, 

Maryland, 

South  Carolina, 


14,626,732 
8,158,922 
3,379,717 
4,070,842 
3,007,113 


19,940,91 1 

10,451,260 

9,590,505 

5,437,057 

1,517,705 


$57,072,572  $102,855,677 

The  whole  value  of  imports  in  1833,  was  $108,116,311,  and  the 
ntt  Afflount  of  duties  the  same  year,  was,  $14,790,493  36.     The 


309 

amount  of  duties  collected  in  each  of  these  States,  in  that  year,  was 

about  in  the  samo  proportion,  as  the  amount  of  imports  into  each,  at 

abore  stated. 
The   duties,   in    the   years    1806,  1806  and    1807,  amounted  to 

$47,055,029;  and  the  amount  which  accrued  and  was  secured  in  the 

States  hereafter. named,  was  as  follows : — 

New  York,  ....         $14,584,573 

Massachusetts,  .  10,400,047 

Pennsylvania,        ....  8,480,609 

Maryland,  •  .  .  •  4,211,331 

South  Carolina,     ....  %440,056 


$40,125,706 
Tables,  No.  I.  and  II.  show  the  gross  and  net  amount  of  duties  on 
imports,  with  the  amount  of  draw  backs,  bounties,  expenses  of  col- 
lection, &c.,  from  1791  to  1832. 

DIRECT    TAXES. 

By  the  constitution,  direct  taxes,  when  laid,  are  to  be  apportioned 
among  the  States,  in  the  same  manner,  as  representatives,  including 
three  6fVhs  of  the  slave  population.  This  part  of  the  constitution  waa 
a  compromise  between  the  slave  holding  and  non  slave  holding  states; 
the  former,  agreeing  to  pay  direct  taxes,  according  to  the  ratio  of 
Uieir  representation.  Notwithstanding  this,  four  direct  taxes  only, 
have  been  laid,  from  the  commencement  of  the  government — the 
slave  holding  states,  therefore,  have  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  this 
compromise  without  feeling  much  of  its  burdens. 

The  first  direct  tax  was  imposed  July  14th,  1798, being  $2,000,000, 
and  was  apportioned  agreeable  to  the  constitution.  It  was  laid  upon 
all  dwelling  houses,  and  lands,  and  on  slices  between  the  ages  of 
twelve  and  fifty,  in  the  following  manner,  viz  : — 

'*  Upon  every  dwelling  house,  which,  with  the  out  houses,  appur- 
tenant thereto,  and  the  land,  whereon  the  same  were  erected,  not  ex- 
ceeding two  acres,  shall  not  be  valued  at  more  than  one  hundred  and 
not  more  than  five  hundred  dollars,  a  sum,  equal  to  one  tenth  of  one 
per  cent,  on  the  amount  of  valuation. 

At  more  than  $500,  and  not  more  than  $1,000,  three  tenths  of  one  per  ct 

3,000,  four  tenths  of     do. 
6,000,  five  tenths  of      do. 

10,000,  six  tenths  of      do. 

15,000,  seven  tenths  of  do. 

20,000,  eight  tenths  of    do. 

30,000^  nine  tenths  of     do. 


do. 

1,000, 

do. 

do. 

3,000, 

do. 

do. 

6,000, 

do. 

do. 

10,000, 

do. 

do. 

15,000, 

do. 

do. 

20,000, 

do. 

/ 


310 


And  on  all  dwelling  housed,  valued  at  more 

than        .  $30,000,  one  per  cent,  on  the  Talomtion. 

Upon  every  slave  enumerated,  (and  such  as  ^*  from  fixed  infirnBitj 
or  bodily  disability  were  incapable  of  labor,'*  were  not  to  be  enu- 
meratcd,)  there  was  assessed  fifty  cents. 

After  deducting  the  sums  thus  assessed  upon  dwelling  houses  and 
slaves,  within  each  state,  from  the  sum  apportioned  to  such  state,  the 
remainder  was  asifessed,  upon  the  lands  in  such  state,  according  to 
the  valuation  made,  in  pursuance  of  law,  and  at  such  ratio  per  cen- 
tum, as  should  be  sufficient  to  produce  the  said  remainder. 
The  number  of  acres  of  land  in  the 

United  States,  then  valued,  was 
The  number  of  'dwelling  houses, 

over  one  hundred  dollars,  was 

Making  .for  both, 

The  number  of  slaves  enumerated,  was  303,219. 
The  proportion  of  the  two  millions  assessed  upon 

houses,  was 

Upon  lands, 

Upon  slaves,         •     *  .        .   -     . 


163,746,688, 


278,695, 


Vahi*.     . 

$479,293,263 

140,683,984 
$619,977,247 


$471,968 

1,327,713 

196,600 

Table  No.  III.  presents  a  view  of  the  number  of  acres  of  land,  and 

dwelling  houses,  with  their  respective  valuations,  and  the  number  of 

slaves,  in  each  state,  with  the  proportion  of  the  tax  assessed  upon  each. 

The  following  quantity  of  land  was  valued  in  each  state,  with  its 

▼aluation,  viz : 


New  Hampshire, 

Massachusetts, 

Rhode  Island, 

Connecticut, 

Vermont, 

New  York, 

New  Jersey, 

Pennsylvania, 

Delaware, 

Maryland, 

Virginia, 

North  Carolina, 

South  Carolina, 

Georgia, 

Kentucky, 

Tennessee« 


No.  of  acres. 

3,749,061 

7,831,628 

565,SI4 

2,649,149 

4,918,722 

16,414,510 

2,788,282 

11,969,835 

1,074,106 

5,444,272 

40,458,644 

20,956,467 

9,772,587 

13,534,159 

17,674,634 

8,961,367 

ie3,74«|686 


ValuaUon. 

$19,028,106 
59,445,042 

8,082,355 
40,163,955 
15,165,484 
74,885,075 
27,287,981 
72,824,852 

4,063,248 
21,634,004 
59,976,860 
27,909,479 
12,456,720 
10,263,506 
20,268,325 

5,847,602 
$479,293,968 


811 

The  second  direct  tax  wts  laid  the  second  of  August,  I8I89  being 
t3v000,'000,  and  was  apportioned  among  the  Btatesy  on  the  eeo- 
808  of  1810 ;  and  the  sums  thus  apportioned,  were  divided  to  each 
county  in  the  State.  The  division  among  the  counties  might  be  made 
according  to  one  of  two  rules,  prescribed  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury.  In  those  states,  where  there  was  a  state  tax,  each  coun- 
ty's quota  was  made  to  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  whole  quota 
of  the  Htate,  as  the  amount  of  the  state  tax,  paid  by  such  county, 
bore  to  the  whole  sum  paid  in  the  state,  to  the  state  tax. 

The  second  rule,  as  stated  by  the  Secretary,  was,  "  That  in  those 
states,  where  there  is  no  state  tax,  or  if  there  be  one,  the  proportion, 
in  which  it  is  apportioned  among  the  -counties,  is  not  known,  the 
principle  assumed  for  a  basis,  is,  that  the  comparative  advancement 
of  wealth,  (or  rather  the  increase  in  the  value  of  property,  subject  to 
the  direct  ux  now  to  be  imposed,)  and  of  population,  in  the«difler- 
ent  districU  of  the  same  states,  have  been  equal,  since  the  year  1790; 
80  that  if  a  given  portion  of  a  state  containing,  for  example,  one 
fourth  of  the  population  of  the  state,  and  which  paid  in  1799,  one 
fourth  of  the  direct  tax  of  that  state,  now  contains,  one  third  of  the 
whole  population  of  the  state,  it  ought  now  to  pay  one  third  of  the 
whole  tax  to  be  imposed  upon  the  state.  And  in  respect  to  popula* 
lion  for  both  epochs,  although  the  federal  numbers,  or  numbers  rep- 
resented in  Congress,  haye  been  taken  as  the  constitution  directs,  for 
ascertaining  the  quota  of  each  state,  of  the  whole  sum  to  be  raised  in 
the  United  States,  yet,  for  apportioning  the  sum  thus  found  as  the 
qoota  of  anj^  state,  among  the  several  counties  of  that  stata,  the 
whole  numbers  of  the  several  counties,  including  slayes,  have  been 
taken  ;  because  it  is  considered  that  the  slaves  increase  the  wealth,  or 
the  ability  to  pay,  in  a  ratio,  at  least,  equal  to  the  augmented  quota, 
which  this  mode  will  give,  to  those  parta  of  a  state,  in  which  slaves 
are  possessed,  over  those  in  which  there  are  none,  or  a  smaller  num< 
ber..  Maryland  is  the  only  state  where  there  is  a  considerable  pro- 
portion of  slaves,  to  which  this  mode  of  apportioning  the  tax  among 
the  counties  has  been  applied.  The  process  there  is,  to  make  the  quota 
of  each  county  in  a  given  state,  compared  with  ita  population  in  1810), 
bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  present  quota  of  the  state,*compared 
with  ita  whole  population  in  1810,  as  the  quota  of  the  same  county, 
of  the  direct  tax  of  1790,  compared  with  ita  population  by  the  census 
of  1800,  bore  to  the  quota  of  the  whole  state,  of  the  direct  tax  of 
1799,  compared  with  ita  whole  population  in  1800.*' 


804 


I 

X 

S 


X 


ho 
.5 

o 


E     ^ 


O 


o 


M 

CD 


f 


§|B 


3 


OW  — CO  — W"^OF-0« 


a  l>  X  S  Ob  &3  lO  O  CD 


^1 


¥ 


Ok  «fc  ^    _  JK  JC  »■  y       J^  • 


1 


^ 

a 

A 


s 


k 


e 

£ 


^, 


I 


^1 
I' 


^ 


^  ^  fJs    A  A  ^^M 

^  CO  W  CO  ^  ^  'T 


s 
s 


•k 


Sx 


cS  CD  S  csSd 


m 


s 
s 


f 


^        »        <^        »        •>        » 

1^  k0  2>  o  e  a 


SI' 


iilff 

^       ^       m       9*       m^ 

c  o  2  ^  o 


§Q  Q  lO  O  1^  Q  ^ 
Q  «  ir  «  —  Q  ^ 


t*co 


O)  X  o  ^  eg  9 
^^  ^N  '^  CO  01  »^ 


Pool  S^x  — P  S 

5CSPSw8x©S 


— -^  e- 


^«-'  >^  ^^  »— 

X  X  X  X 


i 


T3 

•S 
8 

S 

I 

o 

.9 
o 

0 

•8 

M 


> 
o 
o 


e 

9 
« 

.9 

ja 


•o 
0 

o 

.9 

o 

a 


.s 


(2' 


X 

o 


I 

£ 


« 

9K 


If 


IS 

<3 


i 

It 

••* 

K 

I 

I 

M 
A 


M 


I   r 


J— 


i 


^  3 

hi 


I 


©  •^JD©  ©  yfi  1^ 


F 

327  fig  jg 

0>  ©  *"  W  lO  w 


e 

br. 


•  -:*.: 


'^kihlUtl 


I* 

I 


11 


I 


314 

erease  was  mach  greater.  In  fifteen  years,  the  increase  in  the  State 
of  New  York  was,  from  one  hundred,  to  two  hundred  and  AeTeniy 
miUions ;  and  in  Pennsylvania,  from  a  little  more  than  one  hundred 
to  three  hundred  and  forty  six  millions. 

The  average  value  of  lands  per  acrcj  (including  buildings)  accord- 
ing to  the  valuations,  in  1814  and  1815,  may  be  stated  nearly  as  fol- 
lows, in  each  state  : — 


Per  aero. 

• 

Peraere. 

New  Hampshire 

,       .        $9 

Delaware, 

.    $13 

Massachusetts,  . 

.       .        18 

Maryland, 

20 

Rhode  Island, 

.       ^ 

Virginia, 

4  15 

Connecticut, 

34 

North  Carolina, 

2  50 

Vermont, 

6  40 

South  Carolina, 

8 

New  York, 

16  50 

Georgia, 

2  50 

New  Jersey, 

35 

Kentucky, 

4 

Pennsylvania,    . 

29 

• 

Tennessee, 

6 

The  average  value,  throughout  the  United  States,  was  about  910 
per  acre 

In  this  calculation,  the  number  of  acres  is  taken  from  the  returns 
of  the  lands  valued  in  each  state,  in  1799 ;  the  returns  of  the  quantity 
of  lands  valued,  in  1814  and  1815,  being,  in  some  of  the  states,  in- 
complete. 

The  states  of  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  South  Caroli- 
na, iSeorgia,  Kentucky,  and  Ohio,  assumed  their  proportion  of  the 
three  million  dollar  tax ;  and  the  states  of  New  York,  South  Caroli- 
na, Georgia  aiid  Ohio,  assumed  their  proportion  of  the  six  million. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  peace  having  taken  place,  the  act 
lajring  the  annual  six  million  tax,  was  repealed  on  the  5th  of  March, 
1610,  and  a  tax  of  three  millions  only,  was  laid  for  that  year. 

SALES   OF   PUBLIC    LANDS. 

In  noticing  the  internal  revenues  and  resources  of  the  United  States, 
the  public  lands  cannot  be  omitted.  No  country  in  the  world  can 
boast  of  such  vast  resources,  as  the  United  States  possess,  in  national 
domains. 

Before  calling  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  manner  in  which 
this  great  and  growing  interest  has  hitherto  been  managed,  we  beg 
leave  to  observe,  that  serious  questions  have  lately  arisen,  not  mere- 
ly, as  to  the  mode  of  disposing  of  these  land^,  but  whether  Congress 
hat  a  right  to  dispose  of  them  at  all.  Opinion^  have  been  advanced, 
with  apparent  aehousDesa,  that  the  United  States  have  no  right  what- 


315 

ever,  to  the  lands,  lying  within  the  limits  of  the  new  states  that  have 
been  formed,  at  the  West  and  South  west ;  but  that  the  acts,  creatinf 
them,  are  a  virtual  relinquishment  of  all  right  to  the  soil,  as  well  m 
jurisdiction  of  the  public  lands,  lying  within  the  limito  of  the  states 
thus  crated.  A  slight  attention  to  this  subject,  however,  will  shew* 
that  such  opinions  are  wholly  unfounded.  It  is  well  known,  that  da- 
ring the  war  of  the  revolution,  serious  disputes  arose,  between  the 
'states,  respecting  the  western  territory ;  and  which,  for  a  long  tiJno 
prevented  the  final  ratification  of  the  articles  of  confederation. 

A  majority  of  the  states  had  claims  to  all  this  territory,  which  tlia 
others  were  unwilling  to  acknowledge ;  and  some  of  the  states  reAn 
sed  to  accede  to  the  confederacy,  without  some  security  that  this 
extensive  and  valuable  territory,  if  ultimately  acquired  by  the  joint 
exertions  and  at  the  joint  expense  of  all,  should  enure  to  the  benefit 
of  all — and  insisted  on  a  relinquishment  of  such  claims,  as  a  condition 
of  their  joining  the  federal  alliance. 

In  this  situation.  Congress  earnestly  called  upon  the  states,  claim- 
ing  these  lands,  to  make  liberal  cessions  of  them,  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Union ;  and  to  induce  them  to  do  this,  declared,  that  the  lands  whieh 
might  be  thus  ceded,  '*  should  be  disposed  of /or  the  common  benejiiof 
the  United  States^  and  be  settled  and  formed  into  distinct  republican 
states,  which  should  become  members  of  the  federal  union,  and  have 
the  same  rights  of  sovereignty,  freedom  and  independence,  as  the 
other  states.'*  In  consequence  of  this  recommendation,  and  a  desire 
to  perfect  the  union,  cessions  were  made  of  all  the  lands  north  west 
of  the  river  Ohio.  The  terms  and  conditions,  as  stated  in  all  the 
def  ds  of  cession,  were,  that  the  lands  ceded,  should  be  for  the  sole 
benefit  of  the  United  States.  New  York,  in  her  deed  of  cessionf 
which  was  the  first  madeJ>y  any  of  the  states,  declared,  that  the  ter- 
ritory ceded,  ''  ^kg^gff  and  enure  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  such  of 
the  United  States,  as  shall  become  members  of  the  federal  alliance  of 
the  said  states,  and  for  no  other  use  and  purpose  whatsoever." 

Virginia,  declared  that  the  lands  ceded  by  her,  *'  shall  be  consider- 
ed as  a  common  fund,  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  such  of  the  United 
States,  as  have  become,  or  shall  become  members  of  the  confedera- 
tion or  federal  alliance  of  the  said  states,  Virginia  inclusive,  according 
to  their  usual  respective  proportions,  in  the  general  charges  and  ei- 
penditures,  and  tthall  be  faithfully  and  bona  fide  disposed  o(  for  AtU 
purpose^  and  for  no  other  use  or  purpose  whatsoever,^* 

The  same  was  substantially  declared,  in  the  deeds  of  cession  of  die 
other  states. 


i 


316 

The  countiy  north  west  of  the  riyer  Ohio,  and  lying  within  the 
Hniita  designated  in  the  Treaty  of  1783,  being  tlius  secured,  for  the 
benefit  of  all  the  states,  some  regulations  for  the  settlement  and  gOT- 
emment  of  this  extensive  territory,  as  well  as  its  future  political  rela- 
tion and  connection  with  the  old  states,  became  necessary.  « 
.  With  this  view,  the  celebrated  ordinance  of  July  13th,  1787,  was 
accepted  by  Congress.  The  fundaofiental  articles  of  this  ordinance  and 
which  were  to  *'  be  considered  as  articles  of  compact,  between  the  orig-  * 
inal  states  and  the  people  and  states  in  the  said  territory,  and  forever  to 
remain  unalterable,  unless  by  common  consent,*'  were  drawn  up  with 
great  care  and  wisdom. '  Among  these  articles,  one  of  the  first  was,  that 
^  religion,  morality,  and  knowledge,  being  necessary  to  good  goTem-> 
neot,  and  the  happiness  of  mankind,  schools  and  the  means  of  educa^ 
taoiiy  shall  forever  be  encouraged.'^'*  With  respect  to  the  point  now  in 
qoeation,  the  future  disposition  of  the  lands,  it  was  specially  provided 
and  declared,  in  the  fourth  article  of  the  compact,  that,  *•*•  the  Legisla- 
tares  of  those  districts,  or  new  states,  shall  never  interfere  with  the 
primary  disposal  of  the  soil,  by  the  United  States  in  Congress  assem- 
bled ;  nor  with  any  regvlations  Congress  may  find  necessary,  for  se- 
curing the  title  in  such  soil,  to  the  bona  fide  purchasers.*' 

By  the  same  articles,  the  territory  was  uHimately  to  be  formed  into 
not  less  than  three,  nor  more  than  five  states.  The  people  who  set- 
tled upon  this  territory  were  therefore  perfectly  apprised  of  the  terms 
on  which  such  settlements  were  to  be  made  ;  and  particularly,  that  the 
lands  were  forever  to  be,  at  the  disposal,  and  under  the  regulation  of 
Congress. 

Nor  were  the  framers  of  the  present  constitution  inattentive  to  this 
great  interest ;  that  instrument  declaring,  that  **  the  Congres  shall 
have  power  to  dispose  of  and  make  all  needful  rules  and  regulations, 
respecting  the  territory  or  other  property  belonging  to  the  United 
States."  The  advocates  of  the  opinion  we  are  opposing,  admit,  that 
the  United  States  do  own  the  land,  and  that  the  same  may  be  disposed 
of,  and  regulated  by  Congress,  so  long  as  it  is  under  a  territorial  gov- 
ernment ;  but,  that  at  the  moment  the  whole  or  any  part  of  it  is  form- 
ed into  a  state,  the  right  of  the  United  States  to  the  lands,  lying 
within  the  limits  of  the  new  state,  ceases  ;  that,  as  they  cannot,  by 
the  constitution,  'own  lands  in  any  state,  without  the  assent  of  that 
slate,  the  very  act,  by  which  the  territory  is  made  a  state,  is  a  virtual 
relinqfaishment  of  all  right  to  the  land,  embraced  within  its  limits. 


^^.^ 


^  <» 


The  tdTOcaies  for  this  cziraordiniry  do<;trine,  leem  to  forget,  tb^t^^^  \  ^^ 

bf  the  oTi^inal  compact,  before  recited,  the  United  States  were  to  « 
hare  the  power  to  dispose  of  the  western  IiiidK,  iiot  only,  while  thejr 
remained  "  districts,"  but  after  those  districts  irere  made  into  *'  new  S^j^\  "i 
«fate«."  The  Legislatures,  both  of  the  "Districts  and  of  the  new  -i  V-.  ^-_* 
ataUs,"  were  prohibited  from  interfering  wiib  the  United  States,  in'  t*  ^  V^  »> 
the  disposal  of  these  lands.  But  neither  the  great  statesmen  who  •-  v^  '^%s,^ 
framed  the  ordinance  and  the  constitution,  nor  those,  who,  for  so 
many  years,  administered  the  general  government,  nor,  until  rery 
lately,  has  a  single  settler  on  the  territory,  erer  made  any  such  dis-  A  ^  "^ 
linction,  as  that  above  mentioned.  It  is  an  after  thought,  calculated,  '  V  ■< 
perhaps,  to  serve  the  purposes  orarobition  ;  and  if  attempted  to  be  J;^ 
carried  into  cQect,  certainly  calculated  to  interrupt,  if  not  destroy  that  J 
harmony  of  the  union,  for  the  security  of  which, 'the  lands  were  orig'  -f 
inally  ceded.  > 

All  the  stales  yet  formed  out  of  the  territory  north  west  of  the 
river  Ohio,  have  considered  themselres  bound  by  the  terms  of  this 
original  compact ;  and  hare,  without  hesitation,  agreed,  that  nothing 
■hould  be  done  by  them,  "  repugnant  to  the  ordinance  of  the  I3lb  of 
Jvly,  1787,  between  the  original  stales,  and  the  people  and  states  of 
the  territory  norib  west  of  the  river  Ohio." 

The  Stale  of  Ohio  was  formed,  as  early  as  1S03,  and  since  that  pe- 
riod, it  i*  well  known.  Congress  have  continued  to  dispose  of  the 
public  lands  in  that  state,  and  in  other  new  stales  formed  subsequently. 

Louisiana  and  the  Floridas,  were  purchaeed  with  the  money  of  the 
people'of  the  United  Stales  to  the  amount  of  •20,000,000,  taken  from 
the  general  treasury.  And  it  would  be  strange,  indeed,  if  the  inhab- 
itants, living  on  the  territory  so  purchased,,  when  admilled  into  the 
union,  should  be  entitled  to  all  the  lands,  ihoa  paid  for  out  of  the  jotnl 
fvnd  of  the  peo]ile  of  the  United  States.  To  prevent  all  difficulty  or 
dispute,  on  the  subject  of  the  right  to  this  portion  of  public  landa, 
when  Louisiana  was  admitted  into  the  union,  it  was,  on  the  ezpreas 
condition,  that  the  people  of  that  territory  met  in  convention,  shoald 
pass  an  ordinance  irrevocahU,  without  the  consent  of  the  United 
States,  by  whirh  they  should  agree  and  declare,  that  they  forever 
disclaimed,  all  right  and  title  to  the  waste  and  unappropriated  lands, 
lyitig  within  the  said  territory  ;  and  that  the  name  should  be  and  re- 
main, at  the  sole  and  entire  disposal  of  the  United  States. 

There  can  be  no  doubt,  thai  the  lands,  in  Louisiana  and  the  Flori- 
das, should  be  disposed  of  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  union,  aa  well 
oa  thoae  north  of  the  <Nilo  river.    A  diflerence  of  opinion,  howtrer, 


318 

has  sometimes  arisen  in  apd  out  of  Congress,  whether  the  objects,  for 
which  specific  grants  of  portions  of  these  lands,  have  been  occasion* 
mlly  made  by  Congress,  were  fur  the  general  benefit  or  not. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  small  portions  of  them  have  been 
granted  in  the  new  states,  for  schools,  for  colleges,  for  canals,  for 
roads,  for  the  cultivation  of  the  vine,  and  many  other  objects  ;  and 
in  two  instances,  to  institutions  established  in  the  old  states,  fot  the 
education  of  the  deaf  and  dumb.* 

In  pursuance  of  the  original  compact,  in  relation  "  to  schools  and 
the  means  of  education,'^  before  alluded  to,  in  aH  the  new  states* 
formed  north  of  the  Ohio,  Congress  have  granted  one  thirty  sixth 
part  of  all  the  public  lands,  lying* within  the  limits  of  each  state,  for 
schools,  being  one  lot  in  every  township ;  and  Save,  also,  given  one 
4wentieth  part  of  the  proceeds  of  the  lands  in  each  respective  state, 
thus  formed,  to  be  applied  to  the  laying  out  and  making  public  roads, 
leading  from  the  navigable  waters,  emptying  into  the  Atlantic,  to  the 
river  Ohio,  and  also,  through  the  new  states.  The  latter  grant  was 
made,  on  the  condition,  that  the  public  lands,  sold  in  each  state, 
should  be  exempt  from  taxes,  for  five  years  after  such  sale.  In  addi- 
tion to  these  general  grants,  special  grants  have  been  made,  at  variotis 
times,  for  colleges,  canals,  and  other  improvements,  necessary  in  a 
new  country. 

That  these  grants  of  certain  portions  of  the  public  domain,  *in  the 
new  states,  were  for  the  interest  of  the  union,  as  well  as  that  of  those 
particular  states,  cannot  be  doubted  ;  when  it  is  considered,  that  the 
^mainder,  is  thereby  rendered  much  more  valuable.  Congress,  in- 
deed, acting  as  an  agent  and  trustee,  for  the  people  of  the  union, 
has  managed,  in  this  respect,  as  every  wise  individual  would,  in  sim- 
ilar circumstances ;  without  good  roads,  the  lands  themselves  could 
not  be  possessed,  and  without  schools,  or  the  means  of  education, 
they  would  be  hardly  worth  possessing. 

The  quantity  of  land  thus  granted,  constitutes  but  a  small  portion 
of  the  whole  of  the  public  domain. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  year  1832,  the  quantity  of  lands  un- 
sold, and  to  which  the  Indian  title  had  been  extinguished,  in  the  states 
of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Missouri, 'Mississippi,  Alabama  and  Louis- 
iana, and  in  the  territories  of  Michigan,  Arkansas  and  Floridas,  was 
estimated,  at  two  hundred  and  twenty  seven  million  two  hundred  and 
ninety  three  thousand  eight  hundred  and  eighty  four  acres ;  and  the 
quantity  in  the  same  states  and  territories,  to  which  the  Indian  title 
had  not  been  extinguished,  at  one  hundred  and  thirteen  million  fire 


319 

hundred  and  seventy  seven  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  nine 
acres;  making,  in  the  whole,  three  hundred  and  forty  million  eight 
hundred  and  seventy  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty  three* 
'ttte  quantity  beyond  the  limits  of  these  states  and  territoiles,  has 
been  estimated,  at  seven  hundred  and  fifty  million  acres  ;  making  the 
wlioie  of  the  public  lands,  at  the  commencement  of  1832,  one  thou- 
sand and  ninety  million  eight  hundred  and  seventy  one  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  fifty  three  acres. 

Up  to  the  same  period,  there  had  been  granted  and  appro priated* 
for  internal  improvement,  in  the  states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois  and 
Alabama,  two  million  one  hundred  and  eighty  seven  thousand  six 
hundred  and  sixty  &\e  acres, — ^for  colleges,  academies  and  universi- 
ties, in  the  new  states  and  territories,  five  hundred  thousand, — ^for 
common  schools,  seven  million  nine  hundred  and  fifty  two  thousand 
five  hundred  and  thirty  eight, — for  religious  and  charitable  institu- 
tions, eighty  nine  {housand  six  hundred  and  five, — for  seats  of  gov- 
ernment, twenty  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty  nine, — and,  as 
saline  reservations,  two  hundred  and  ninety  eight  thousand  two  hun- 
dred and  eighty  eight;  making  the  whole  of  the  grants  and  ap- 
propriations for  these  objects,  eleven  million  fifty  seven  thousand  six 
hundred  and  eighty  five  acres.     (See  Table  No.  IV.) 

It  is  well  known,  that  ^^^  lands  offered  for  sale,  have  been  accurate- 
ly surveyed,  and  laid  out  into  townships ;  and  these  townships  again 
into  lots,  varying  from  six  hundred  and  forty  to  eighty,  and  even  forty 
acres  in  extent ;  so  that  every  person  in  the  United  States,  for  a  very 
small  sum,  could  procure  a  farm :  and  to  prevent  partiality  and  fa- 
voritism, all  the  lands  must  be  first  ofiTered  for  sale  at  public  auction. 

The  minimum  price  of  the  lands  was,  at  first,  two  dollars  per  acre ; 
and  until  1800,  one  half  of  the  purchase  money  was  to  be  paid  in 
thirty  days,  and  the  residue,  in  one  year  after  the  sale.  In  1800,  the 
term  of  credit  was  extended — one  twentieth  was  to  be  paid  down,  to 
be  forfeited,  in  case  one  quarter,  including  this  twentieth,  was  not 
paid  in  forty  days  ;  .and  one  quarter  of  the  remainder,  was  to  be  paid 
in  two  years,  and  the  other  two  fourths,  in  each  succeeding  year,  with 
six  per  cent,  interest,  on  the  three  last  payments. 

In  consequence  of  this  extension  of  credit,  the  sales  were  more 
rapid,  many  forfeitures  took  place,  and  a  very  large  debt  was  accu- 
mulated. On  the  30th  of  September  1817,  thiti  debt  was  about 
98,000,000,  and  on  the  30th  of  June  1820,  it  had  increased  to  about 
921,500,000. 


/ 


320 

The  inconvenieoces  experienced,  and  the  dangers  apprehended, 
from  this  vast  accumulation  of  debt  for  the  public  lands,  induced  Con* 
gress,  on  the  24th  of  April  1820,  to  abolish  aH  credit  for  lands ;  and 
to  direct,  that,  after  the  first  of  July  1820,  all  sales  should  be  paid  for, 
hi  cash,  on  the  day  of  sale,  and  the  minimum  price,  was,  at  the  same 
time,  reduced  to  one  dollar  twenty  five  cents  per  acre.  This  great 
reduction  of  price,  rendered  some  equitable  arrangement,  between 
the  government  and  prior  purchasers,  proper  and  necessary.  Thia 
arrangement  was  made  under  an  att  of  March  2d,  1821,  to. the  gene- 
ral satisfaction  of  those,  who  had  previously  purchased,  at  a  higher 
price.  .        . 

We  would  here  inform  the  reader,  that  up  to  the  25th  of  January 
183%  the  payments  ma^e  by  the  United  States,  for,  and  on  accomit 
of  the  public  lands,  were  as  follows,  viz. — 

Payment  on  account  of  the  purchase  of 

Louisiana.  Principal,  .         $14,084,872  28 

Interest,  on  811,250,000,  8,529,353  43 

$23,514,225  71 

Payment  on  account  of  the  purchase  of 

Florida.  Principal,  $4,085,599  82 

Interest,  to  30th  Sept.  1831,  1,265,416  67 

• $6,251,016  49 

Payment  of  compact  with  Georgia,  .  .  1,065,484  06 

Payment  of  the  settlement  with  Yazoo  ' 

claimants,  .....  1,830,806  44 

Payment  of  contracts  with  the  several 

Indian  tribes,   (all  expenses  on  ac- 
«  count  of  Indians,)  ....        11,852,182  66 

Payment  of  commissioners,  clerks,  and 

other  officers,  employed  by  the  United 

States,  for  the  management  and  sale 

of  the  western  domain,  .  .  3,563,834  54 


$48,077,551  40 


The  amount  actually  received,  into  the  public  Treasury,  from 
aales  of  the  public  lands,  up  to  1833,  omitting  cents,  has  been  as  fol- 
lows, in  each  year. 


321 


Taan. 

DoUt. 

Yean. 

Dolh. 

IT96 

4,836 

1816 

1,717,985 

1797 

83,540 

1817 

1,991,226 

1798 

11,963 

1818 

2,606,564 

1799 

((  »t 

1819 

3,274,422 

1800 

443 

1820 

1,635,871 

1801 

167,726 

1821 

1,212,966 

1802 

188,628 

1822 

1,803,581 

1803 

165,675 

1823 

916,523 

1804 

487,526 

1824 

984,418 

1805 

540,193 

1825 

1,216,090 

1806 

765,245 

1826 

1,393,785 

1807 

466,163 

1827 

1,495,845 

1808 

647,939 

1828 

1,018,308 

1800 

442,252 

1829 

1,517,176 

1810 

696,548 

1830 

2,329,356 

1811 

1,040,237 

1831 

3,210,815 

1812 

710,427 

1832 

2,623,381 

1813 

835,655 

1833 

3,967,682 

1814 

1,135,971 
1,287,959 

1815 

v44,0ll4,iXj46 

The  United  States,  therefore,  on  the  30th  of  September,  1833, 
had  not  received,  from  the  avails  of  the  public  lands,  the  amount  of 
their  actual  cost,  independent  of  interest  on  large  sums  expended,  as 
above  stated. 

The  national  debt  being  extinguished,  the  public  lands  are  nov 
exonerated  from  the  pledge,  to  which,  they  have  heretofore  been  sub- 
ject on  tliat  account ;  and  in  what  way,  or  manner,  or  for  what  objects, 
they  shall  hereaAer  be  disposed  of,  has  already  become  somethiag 
more,  than  a  mere  subject  of  speculation. 

They  now  produce,  to  the  public  treasury,  more  than  three  mill- 
ions a  year ;  and  if  managed  with  prudence  and  economy,  will  consti- 
tute a  future  fund  of  incalculable  value — and  it  should  be  the  prayer 
of  every  American  patriot,  that  this  rich  inheritance,  OMiy  never  be 
sacri6ced,  at  the  altar,  either  of  avarice  or  ambition.  The  prayen 
of  the  patriot,  however,  are  not  always  heard  ;  and  we  may  be  per- 
mitted to  ask,  whether  there  is  not  some  reason  to  fear,  that,  in  the 
political  conflicts,  which  may  arise,  that  amidst  party,  and  perhape, 
•ectional  strife,  the  true  interest  of  the  union,  in  regard  to  this  prop- 
erly, may  not  be  overlooked,  and  that  of  the  old  sUtea,  entirely  diart- 

garded. 

41 


r 


322 

The  old  states,  have,  indeed,  an  interest  in  the  lands,  north  of  the 
Ohio,  and  east  of  the  Mississippi,  which,  con  only  he  duly  known, 
hut  hy  considering  the  blood  and  treasure  they  have  expended,  in 
securing  them,  first,  in  the  war  of  1756,  and  again,  in  the  war  of  1776. 

The  reader  need  not  be  informed,  that  this  subject,  has  lately  enga- 
ged the  attention  of  the  National  Legislature.  In  the  winter  of  1832» 
a  Committee  of  the  Senate,  wat«  directed  to  inquire  into  the  expediency 
of  reducing  the  price  of  the  public  lands,  and  of  ceding  tkem^  to  the 
several  states,  within  which,  they  were  situated,  on  reasonable  terms. 
On  a  report  of  this  committee,  drawn  up  with  no  ordinary  ability, 
the  senate  passed  an  act,  dividing  the  avails  of  the  lands,  among  the 
states,  to  be  applied  to  certain  objects,  for  a  limited  term  of  five  years — 
this  bill,  was  not  finally  acted  upon  during  that  session,  by  the 
other  branch  of  the  legislature.  The  President,  however,  called  the 
attention  of  Congress,  to  the  same  subject,  in  his  message,  at  the 
opening  of  the  next  session  of  that  body. 

"  Among  the  interests,"  says  the  President,  "which  merit  the  con- 
sideration of  Congress,  after  the  payment  of  the  public  debt,  one  of 
the  most  important,  in  my  view,  is  that  of  the  public  lands.  Previous 
to  the  formation  of  the  present  constitution,  it  was  recommended  by- 
Congress,  that  a  portion  of  the  western  lands,  owned  by  the  states, 
should  be  ceded  to  the  United  States,  for  the  purpose  o(  general  kar» 
moTUf9  and  as  a  fund  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  war.  The  recommen- 
dation was  adopted,  and,  at  difierent  periods  of  time,  the  states  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, New  York,  Virginia,  North  and  South  Carolina  and  Geor- 
gia, granted  the  vacant  soil, /or  the  uses  for  which  they  had  been  asked. 
As  the  lands  may  now  be  considered  as  relieved  from  this  pledge,  the 
object  for  which  they  were  ceded,  having  been  accomplished,  it  is  in 
the  discretion  of  Congress,  to  dispose  of  them,  in  such  way,  as  best 
to  conduce  to  the  quiet,  harmony  and  general  interest  of  the  Ameri- 
can people." 

After  observing,  that  the  speedy  settlement  of  these  lands,  was  the 
true  interest  of  the  republic,  and  adverting  to  the  questions,  which  had 
arisen,  involving  ''  the  rights  of  the  new  states,  and  the  powers  of  the 
general  government,"  questions,  which,  he  added,  might  "  speedily 
assume  an  importance,  not  now  generally  contemplated,*^  the  Presi- 
dent submits  to  Congress,  his  own  plan,  as  to  the  future  management 
and  disposition  of  this  immense  public  property. 

**  It  seems  to  me,"  he  proceeds  to  say,  "  to  be  our  true  policy,  that 
the  public  lands  shall  cease,  as  soon  as  practicable,  to  be  a  source  of 
revenue,  and  that  they  should  be  sold  to  settlers,  in  limited  parcels,  at 


823 

%  price,  barely  sufficient  to  reimbqrse  to  the  United  States,  the  ex- 
pense of  the  present  system,  and  the  cost,  arising  under  our  Indian 
compacts.  The  advantages  of  accurate  murreys,  and  undoubted  titlett 
now  secured  to  purchasers,  seem  to  forbid  the  abolition  of  the  pre** 
ent  system,  because  none  can  be  substituted,  which  will  more  perfect- 
ly accomplish  these  important  ends.  It  is  desirable,  however,  that,  tii 
convenient  time,  this  machinery  be  withdrawn  from  the  United 
States,  and  that  the  right  of  soil  and  the  future  disposition  of  it,  be 
aurrendered,  to  the  states  respectively,  in  which  it  lies.*' 

It  will  be  observed  by  the  reader,  that  the  President  here  assertty 
that  the  objects  of  the  original  cession  of  the  public  lands,  by  the  in- 
dividual states,  was  general  harmoivy  ;  and  that  they  might  constitute 
*'a  fund  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  war,''  and  that  these  object! 
*'  having  been  accomplished,**  Congress  had  a  perfect  discretion  to 
dispose  of  them  so  as  best  to  conduce  to  the  '*  quiet,  harmony  and 
general  interest  of  the  American  people  ;'*  and  that  in  his  view* 
the  quiet,  harmony  and  general  interest  of  the  American  people, 
would  be  best  promoted,  by  giving  them  to  settlers,  merely  for  the 
expense  of  surveys,  and  cost  of  Indian  titles,  and  by  giving  them 
after  a  convenient  time,  to  the  new  states. 

Congress  were  not  able  to  see,  how  it  would  conduce  to  the  quiet 
and  harmony,  much  less  to  the  general  interest  of  the  American 
people,  to  take  this  immense  domain,  belonging  to  twenty  four  statea, 
and  to  give  it  to  seven  states,  lately  formed  out  of  it, — a  domain, 
which  the  other  seventeen  states,  had,  at  their  own  expense,  and  at  a 
great  sacrifice,  acquired.  They,  could  not  see,  the  justice  of  depriv- 
ing more  than  ten  millions  of  people,  living  in  those  seventeen  states, 
of  all  their  share  in  these  lands,  and  of  transferring  it  to  two  miUiona 
and  a  quarter  of  people,  in  the  new  states. 

Differing,  therefore,  with  the  executive  on  this  subject.  Congress, 
at  the  same  session,  at  the  opening  of  which,  this  message  was  deliv- 
ered, passed  an  act,  **  for  the  temporary  appropriation  of  the  pro* 
ceeds  of  the  sales  of  the  public  lands,''  directing,  that,  aAer  the  31ft 
day  of  December  1832,  for  the  term  of  five  years,  there  should  **  be 
allowed  and  paid  to  each  of  the  States  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Ala- 
bama, Missouri,  Mississippi  and  Louisiana,  over  and  above  what  each 
of  the  said  states  is  entitled  to,  by  the  terms  of  the  compacts  entered 
into,  between  them  respectively,  upon  their  admission  into  the  onion, 
and  the  United  States,  twelve  and  a  half  per  cent,  upon  the  net 
mrooont  of  the  sales  of  the  public  lands  in  their  respective  limits  ;** 
tke  twelve  and  a  half  per  cent  to  be  applied,  to  some  objset  or  ob^ 


884 

j^ts  of  internal  improvement  or  education^  within  faid  stmies,  w 
the  legiflatares  thereof  should  direet.  The  remaining  seren  eighla» 
wai  to  be  divided,  among  all  the  states,  and  to  be  applied,  *'  to  auch 
purposes,  as  the  legislatures  might  deem  proper."  The  reader  need 
not  be  informed,  that  this  act,  not  being  sent  to  the  President,  until  a 
day  a  two  before  Congress  had  completed  its  constitutional  term,  U 
was  retained  by  him,  until  the  commencement  of  the  next  session  of 
Congress,  when  it  was  returned,  with  his  negative.  The  Congress,  to 
which  it  was  returned  being  new,  the  act  could  not  constitutionally  hm 
reconsidered,  and  was,  of  course,  lost 

We  cannot  but  consider  it  very  unfortunate,  that,  on  a  question  so 
Titally  important,  to  the  whole  AjPoerican  people,  as  that,  of  tlie  fu- 
ture disposition  of  this  immensely  valuable  domain,  such  a  differ- 
ence  of  opinion  should  exist,  between  the  Executive  and  Legislative 
branches  of  the  government.  The  reader  must  be  too  familiar,  with 
this  recent  transaction,  to  render  a  particular  reference  to  it  necea- 
aary,  to  enable  him  to  understand  the  grounds  of  this  difference.  Wc 
beg  leave,  however,  to  call  his  attention,  to  the  objections  of  the  Exec- 
utive, to  that  part  of  the  bill,  which  gave  to  the  new  states,  12^  per 
cent  more,  than  to  the  old  states.  '*  Waiving*^  says  the  veto  message* 
**  all  considerations  of  equity  or  policy,  in  regard  to  this  provimon, 
what  more  need  be  said,  to  demonstrate  its  objectionable  character^ 
than,  that  it  is,  in  direct  violation  of  the  pledge^  given  by  Congress 
to  the  states,  before  a  single  cession  was  made ;  that  it  abrogates  the 
condition^  upon  which  some  of  the  states  came  into  the  union  ;  and 
that,  it  sets  at  nought  the  terms  of  cession,  spread  upon  the  face  of 
every  gprant,  under  which  the  title,  to  that  portion  of  the  public  lands 
is  held,  by  the  federal  government" 

Again,  referring  to  the  compacts  contained  in  these  acts  of  cesnion, 
he  adds,  **  The  states,  whoso  relative  strength  at  the  tim^,  gave  them 
a  preponderating  power,  unanimously  sacrificed  domains^  which 
would  have  made  them  the  rivals  of  empires ;  only  stipulating^,  thai 
they  should  he  disposed  of  for  the  common  benefit  of  themselves^  and 
the  other  confederative  states.** 

It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  reconcile  this  part  of  the  veto  message 
with  that  of  the  preceding  session,  before  alluded  to,  recommending 
the  giving  the  whole  of  the  public  lands,  to  the  new  states. 

For,  if  to  give  one  seventh  part  of  these  lands,  or  their  avails,  to 
the  new  states,  is  a  violation  of  the  pledge  given  by  Congress  to  the 
states,  an  abrogation  of  the  condition^  on  which  some  of  the  statee 
euflie  into  the  union,  and  a  nuUificaHon  of  the  termsi  on  whteh  a  pot^ 


ff. 


325 

tloii  of  those  lands  were  originally  granted  by  the  states ;  surely,  |l 
most  be  contrary  to  all  these,  to  give^  to  the  new  states,  the  whole  of 
these  same  lands. 

Nor  is  it  less  difficult,  to  reconcile  the  discordant  views  of  the  two 
messages,  in  relation  to  the  purposes  and  pledges^  for  which,  and  on 
which,  the  grants  of  these  lands  were  made  and  receiyed.  In  the  finitt 
il  is  alleged,  that  they  were  granted,  for  the  purposes  of  **  general 
harmony,  and  as  a  fund  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  war*' ;  and  in  the 
same  message,  it  is  also  said,  that  they  are  relieved  from  this  pledge, 
the  object,  for  which  they  were  ceded  being  accomplished — but,  in 
the  second,  it  is  affirmed,  that  they  were  ceded  on  an  express  stipule* 
tion,  that  they  were  to  be  disposed  of,  for  the  common  benefit  of  the 
union ;  and  that  they  were  not  relieved  from  this  stipulation  or  eon* 
dition ;  and  that  the  objects  of  the  cession,  had  not  been  accomplished. 
8ach,  indeed,  is  the  difference,  between  the  two  messages,  on  this 
point,  as  to  lead  one  to  imagine,  that  they  must  have  been  written  by 
difiTerent  hands,  and  for  very  different  purposes. 

With  respect  to  that  portion  of  the  public  lands,  lying  east  of  the 
Mississippi,  and  embraced  within  the  treaty  of  1783,  it  is  unquestioa- 
mbly  true,  as  we  have  before  stated,  and  we  trust,  proved,  that  the 
pledge,  given  by  Congress,  was,  that  they  should  be  '*  disposed  of, 
for  the  common  benefit  of  the  United  States,'*  and  that  the  terms  and 
conditions  of  the  various  cessions  were  substantially  the  same. 

This  was  a  compact,  which  is  still  obligatory,  and  no  disposition  of 
these  lands,  can  now  be  made,  contrary  tu  it,  any  more  than  it  could, 
the  moment,  after  it  was  made ;  and  the  object,  for  which  they  were 
ceded,  can  never  be  accomplished,  so  long  as  the  United  Htates,  or  the 
union  remain.  They  were  originally  granted,  for  the  common  benefit« 
•a  a  bond  of  union,  and  must  continue  so ;  and  whenever  they  shall 
be  diverted,  to  any  other  object,  that  bond  will  be  broken. 

They  have,  indeed,  been  since  pledged,  for  the  psyment  of  the 
debt  of  the  revolutionary  war,  and  have  been  again  pledged,  for  Ihe 
debt  of  another  war;  and  these  pledges  have  been  redeemed,  and  the 
kods  relieved  from  them:  and  now  they  may  be  pledged,  for  the 
debt  of  another  war,  or  for  such  other  objects,  as  may  be  deeiMcd 
beneficial,  to  the  whole  people  of  the  United  Btates. 

The  people,  by  the  constitution,  have  delegated  to  Congreic,  tbe 
power  of  disposing  of,  and  managing  this  great  property,  for  tbcir 
benefit :  Coagreis  most,  therefore,  judge,  what  are  the  comraon  bene- 
fits,  for  which,  these  lands  may  be  granted ;  and,  In  ptrticalar  CMCi, 
diflerent  opinions  have  existed,  and  may  hereafter  exist,  both  is  asd 


826 

out  of  Congress — and  yet,  we  cannot  suppose  it  possible,  thai  anjr 
difference  can  exist,  as  to  the  general  disposition  of  this  great  com- 
mon interest 

Prior  to  the  treaty  of  Greenville,  in  1796,  these  lands  were  a  wilder- 
ness ;  and  various  grants  of  small  portions  of  them,  as  before  shewn* 
have  been  made,  since  that  period,  for  roads,  and  for  schools,  in  this 
territory,  or  in  the  new  states.  This  has  been  done,  in  order  to  in- 
duce settlements  and  thereby  render  the  residue  more  valuable,  and  was 
certainly  for  the  common  benefit;  and  it  is  not  within  our  knowledge, 
that  these  special  grants,  have  ever,  or,  at  least,  until  very  lately,  been 
deemed  a  violation  of  any  pledge  given  by  Congress,  or  of  the  con- 
ditions of  the  cessions  of  the  states  themselves. 

As  early  as  May,  1796,  three  separate  tracts  of  this  land,  were 
granted  to  Ebenezer  Zane,  for  surveying  and  opening  a  road,  from 
li¥heeling  to  Limestone ;  and  the  flourishing  town  of  Zanesville,  was 
built,  on  a  part  of  one  of  the  tracts,  selected  by  him,  on  the  Musk- 
ingum. If  these  various  grants,  for  the  purposes  of  internal  im- 
provement, and  for  the  means  of  education,  were  not  considered  a  vi- 
olation of  the  original  compact,  we  must  confess  our  inability  to  see, 
why  the  extra  grant  of  12j^  per  cent,  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  of 
these  lands,  to  the  new  states,  for  the  same  objects^  should  be  so  con- 
«idered. 

In  making  this  grant  of  12|  per  cent.  Congress,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Executive,  has  not  only  violated  the  original  compact,  but  ex- 
ceeded its  constitutional  powers,  in  appropriating  the  monies  of  the 
United  States,  for  special  local  objects,  in  particular  states. 

The  principles,  upon  which  this  grant,  as  well  as  others  of  a  sim- 
ilar character  before  mentioned,  was  made  to  the  states,  formed  out 
of  territory,  which  was  the  common  property  of  the  union,  in  our  ap- 
prehension, steer  clear  of  this  objection,  whether  well  or  ill  founded. 

The  United  States,  being  the  owners  of  these  lands,  it  would  seem 
clear,  that,  like  other  owners  of  similar  property,  they  necessarily 
have  the  right  of  managing  them,  so,  as  to  advance  their  interest  in 
Ihem ;  and  of  course,  to  grant  a  certain  portion  of  them,  in  such  a 
way,  as  to  render  the  remainder  more  valuable. 

This  exercise  of  power,  in  relation  to  their  own  lands,  situated  in 
the  new  states,  has,  in  our  view,  no  connection  with  the  question, 
whether  Congress,  under  the  constitution,  has  the  general  power,  of 
taxing  the  people,  and  appl3ring  the  avails  of  such  taxes,  merely,  for 
local  objects  in  a  particular  state. 


837 

When  it  is  coosidered,  that  these  lands  amount  to  more  than  one 
Ihoasand  million  of  acres,  that  they  are  capable  of  sustaining,  and 
will  probably,  ere  long,  actually  sustain,  a  population  of  more  than 
a  hundred  millions ;  their  value  outruns  all  sober  calculation — and  we 
may  be  permitted  to  hope,  that  the  people  of  the  United  States  will 
never  consent,  that  they  shall  be  transferred  to  any  state,  or  clasi 
of  states,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest,  if,  indeed,  the  object^  for 
which  those,  lying  east  of  the  Mississippi,  were  originally  granted, 
has  been  accomplished,  and  on  that  account,  they  may  be  transfer- 
red for  the  exclusive  benefit  of  some  particular  states,  we  would  en- 
quire, whether  it  would  not  be  more  just  and  equitable,  to  return  them 
to  the  states,  from  which  they  were  derived.  But,  while  the  anion 
remains,  there  are  common  objects  enough,  to  which  they  can,  and 
must  be  applied.  And  we  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  the  national  debt, 
being  now  extinguished,  the  United  States  have  it  in  their  power*  to 
apply  their  great  and  growing  resources,  to  promote  the  individual, 
the  social,  the  moral  and  religious  happiness  of  the  people  of  this 
country,  to  an  extent,  beyond  what  any  nation  has  hitherto  accom- 
plished. 

To  poiiit  out  the  various  ways,  by  which  this  can  be  effected,  does 
not  come  within  the  design  of  our  work.  Two  objects,  however,  are 
of  such  paramount  national  importance,  as  readily  to  occur  to  the 
reader,  and  to  the  accomplishment  of  which,  we  hope  to  see  the  ap- 
plication of  a  part,  at  least,  of  the  public  domains,  either  by  the  gen- 
eral government  itself,  or  through  the  medium  of  the  states.  We  re- 
fer to  the  subjects  of  internal  improvement,  and  the  colonization  of 
the  free  people  of  color.  • 

Since  I  SI  7,  about  eighty  or  ninety  millions  of  dollars,  as  will  ap- 
pear, in  a  subsequent  chapter,  have  been  expended,  in  canals  and  rail 
roads,  in  this  country,  either  by  states  or  by  individuals. 

Should  the  general  government,  apply  a  portion  of  the  proceeds  of 
the  public  lands,  in  aid  of  the  states  and  individuals,  towards  these 
and  other  objects  of  internal  improvement,  the  United  States  would 
soon  present  facilities  of  intercoursse,  unequalled,  in  any  country 
whatever. 

This  fund,  we  would  have  applied,  to  facilitate  the  vast  and  increas- 
ing intercourse,  between  the  east  and  the  west — in  improving  the  nav- 
igation of  the  great  rivers  of  the  Mississippi  valley,  and  in  connect- 
ing them,  either,  by  canals  or  rail  roads,  with  the  great  northern 
lakes.  We  would  render  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  the  Mis- 
souri, the  Ohio,  and  their  tributary  streams,  safe,  by  night,  as  well  as 


y^ 


328 


by  day,  by  removing  every  obstruction  from  their  beds.    Ev^ry  dol- 
lar, thus  expended,  in  improving  the  great  national  western  fam, 
^  would  soon  yield  fourfold,  in  return. 

By  appropriating  another  portion  of  these  lands,  to  aid  the  cause  of 
colonization,  we  might  hope  to  see  our  country,  ultimately,  liberated, 
from  an  evil,  which  all  feel  and  all  deplore. 

POSTAGE. 

By  the  constitution,  Congress  have  power  to  establish  post  offices, 
and  post  roads ;  and  soon  after  the  commencement  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment, laws  were  passed  carrying  this  power  into  effect. 

The  rapid  increase  of  settlements  over  such  an  extent  of  country, 
as  that  of  the  United  States,  necessarily  required,  a  great  increase  in 
the  extent  as  well  as  number  of  post  roadn,  and  a  proportionable  in- 
crease in  the  number  of  post  offices.  Table  No.  V,  exhibits  an  ac- 
count of  this  establishment,  from  1789  to  1830,  inclusive,  containing 
the  number  of  post  offices,  amount  of  postage,  compensation  to  post 
masters,  transportation  of  the  mail,  incidental  expenses,  with  the  bal- 
ance for  or  against  the  office,  and  extent  of  post  roads,  for  each  year, 
daring  that  period.  * 

From  this  will  be  seen  the  increase  of  the  post  offices  and  extent 
of  the  post  roads,  in  the  following  periods. 

Number  of  pott  offices.  Extent  of  poet  roada,  in  mike 

1,905 
22,309 
37,035 
48,976 
72,492 
94,052 
115,176 

In  July  1834,  the  number  of  post  offices  was  ten  thousand  six  hun- 
dred and  ninety  three.  On  the  3d  of  March,  1793,  the  weekly  trans- 
portation of  the  mail,  was  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety 
three  miles  in  stages,  eight  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty  seven  in 
sulkies,  and  on  horseback,  seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty  two ; 
and  yearly  transportation  was,  eight  hundred  and  forty  six  thousand 
four  hundred  and  sixty  eight  miles, — on  the  3d  of  March,  181 1,  the 
weekly  transportation  in  stages  was,  forty  six  thousand  three  hundred 
and  eighty  miles,  and  in  sulkies  and  on  horseback,  sixty  one  thousand 
one  hundred  and  seventy  one,  and  yearly  transportation  was,  five 
million  five  hundred  and  ninety  two  thousand  six  hundred  fifty  two ; 


1791 

89 

1801 

.   1,025 

1811 

.   2,403 

1816 

,   4,260 

1820 

.   4,500 

1825 

.   5,677 

1830 

.   8,450 

3S9 


tnd  on  the  Ist  of  July,  1833,  the  anoaal  transportation  was,  in  stagei» 
■erenteen  million  six  handred  and  ninety  three  thousand  eight  hun* 
dred  hnd  thirty  nine  miles,  in  steam  boats,  six  handred  twenty  eight 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  thirty  seven,  and  on  horseback  and  ia 
sulkies,  eight  million  Ave  hundred  and  thirty  one  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  nine ;  total,  twenty  six  million  eight  hundred  and  fifty  four 
thousand,  four  hundred  and  eighty  Are. 

The  following  is  the  amount  of  postage  received  in  each  state  and 
territory,  for  the  year  ending  March  31  st,  1832,  serving  to  shew  the 
relative  amount  of  business  in  each  state  : — . 


Maine, 

New  Hampshire, 

Vermont,    . 

Massachusetts, 

Rhode  Island, 

Connecticut, 

New  York, 

New  Jersey, 

Pennsylvania, 

Delaware, 

Maryland, 


$31,223  63 

18,845  29 

20,295  16 

129,712  20 

15,772  51 

39,380  07 

344,266  73 

25,652  18 

206,408  24 

6,005  20 

76,766  00 


District  of  Columbia,  15,118  30 
Virginia,    .  93,797  36 

North  Carolina,  31,820  91 

South  Carolina,  52,755  87 


Georgia, 

Ohio, 

Indiana,  . 

Missouri, 

Kentucky, 

Tennessee, 

Alabama, 

Mississippi, 

Louisiana, 

Michigan, 

Arkansas, 

Florida,  . 


$91,786  06 

63,400  42 

9,765  17 

15,756  67 

42,979  30 

35,544  19 

32,546  96 

17,528  81 

48,128  96 

7,137  28 

2,726  12 

6,722  21 

$1,471,371  04 


The  post  office  establishment  has  usually  more  than  supported  itself, 
and  small  balances  have  been  paid  into  the  public  treasury.  The  whole 
amount  received  at  the  treasury  from  this  source,  from  1793  to  1832, 
was,  $1,091,232  61.  The  net  revenue  in  Great  Britain,  from  the  post 
office,  in  1831,  was  £1,530,074,  and  in  1832,  £1,457,132,  or  between 
six  and  seven  millions  of  dollars  in  each  year. 

RBOEIPTS   AND   EXPENDITURES. 

A  general  view  of  the  annual  receipts  from  the  various  sources  of 
revenue,  and  of  the  annual  expenditures  of  the  general  government, 
from  its  commencement,  to  1832;  together  with  the  objects  of  ex- 
penditure, may  be  seen  in  Table  No.  VI,  omitting  cents,  which,  how- 
ever, are  included  in  the  general  footing ;  containing  the  amount  re- 
ceived from  the  customs,  internal  revenue,  direct  taxes,  postage,  pub- 
lic lands,  loans  and  treaaury  notes,  dtc.  dividend,  sales  of  bank  stock 

42 


330 


and  bonus,  and  miscellaneous — and  the  annual  expenditures  for  ihm 
civil  list,  foreign  intercourse,  miscellaneous,  military  service,  including 
fortifications  and  internal  improvements,  revolutionary  pensions,  other 
pensions,  Indian  department,  naval  establishment,  and  public  debt* 
together  with  the  balances  in  the  Treasury,  at  the  end  of  each  year. 

And  the  reader  is  here  presented  with  the  aggregate  amount  of  the  re- 
ceipts from  these  various  sources,  together  with  the  aggregate  amount 
of  the  expenditures  for  the  objects  above  specified,  for  each  year,  du- 
ring this  period. 


Expenditures. 

$7,207,539  02 

9,141,500  67 

7,529,675  55 

9,302,124  77 

10,435,669  65 

a367,776  84 

8,626,012  78 

8,613,517  08 

11,077,043  50 

11,989,739  92 

12,273,376  94 

13,276,081  67 

11,268,983  67 

12,624,646  36 

13,727,114  49 

15,070,993  97 

11,292,292  99 

16,761,584  29 

13,867,226  30 

13,319,986  74 

13,601,808  91 

22,279,121  ,15 

'39,190,520  36 

38,028,230  32 

39,582,4a3  35 

48.5M4,495  51 

40,877,646  04 

35,101,875  40 

24,004,199  73 

21,763,024  85 


From  4th  cf  March, 

« 

1789.  to  Dec.  3l8t 

Receipts. 

1791 

$10,210,025  25 

1792 

8,740,766  77 

1793 

5,720,624  28 

1794 

10,041,101  65 

1796 

9,419,81)2  79 

1796 

8,740,329  65 

1797 

a758,916  40 

1798 

8,209,070  07 

1799 

12,621,459  84 

1800 

12,451,184  14 

1801 

12,945,455  95 

1802 

15,001,391  31 

1803 

11,064,097  63 

1804 

11,835,810  02 

1805 

13,689,508  14 

1806 

15,608,828  78 

1807 

16,398,019  26 

1808 

17,062,544  09 

1809 

7,773,473  12 

1810 

12,144,206  53 

1811 

14,431,838  14 

1812 

22,639,032  76 

1813 

40,524,844  95 

1814 

34,559,536  95 

1815 

50,961,237  60 

1816 

57,171,421  82 

1817 

33,833,592  33 

1818 

21,593,936  66 

1819 

24,605,065  37 

1820 

20,881,493  68 

1829 
1830 
1831 


?19,5W,?03  72 
20,532,427  W 
20^40,606  30 
24.381,243  79 
S6,&10,KiS  02 
a6,2«0,434  21 
22,966,303  96 
24,763,629  23 
24,827,627  38 
24,»14,116  54 


31,866,561  46 


Erprndinin*. 

•19,000,672  00 
17,676,692  67 
16,314.171  00 
31,806,638  47 
23,686,804  72 
24,103,308  40 
22,660,764  04 
25,469,479  52 
25,044,368  40 
24.68&,28l  56 
30,038,440  12 
34,360,608  06 


9844,202,068  43 

•842,260,890  88 

Hie  receipts  were  rrom  the  following  sources,  viz : — 

From  the  Customs, 

•594,900,067  29 

"      Internal  ReTcnue, 

22,236.200  81 

"      Direct  Taxes, 

12.736,886  60 

*'      Poslagp, 

1,091,223  61 

"      Public  Lands. 

40,U27,3S0  02 

"      Loann,  Treasury  Noles,  &c., 

166,181,678  67 

"      Sales  of  Bank  Slock  atid  Bonus, 

11,052,606  30 

"      Miscellaneous, 

5,428,892  33 

>#'^11.2(.2,lifiS  43 

Civil  List,             .... 

•37,138,047  31 

Foreign  Intercourse, 

21.143.592  33 

Miscellaneous,      .... 

32,191,703  11 

Military  servicM,  including  f.irtili cations. 

arsenals,  armuries,  ordinnncr.  Internal 

1  m  prove  men  tB,  inc.,     .             .            . 

100,630,643  21 

Revolutionary  Pcnsioni, 

17,298.282  22 

Other  Pensions, 

0,710,307  23 

Indian  Department, 

13,413,186  16 

Naval  CMablishmctil,      . 

1 12,703.933  23 

Public  l)cl^ 

408,090,20*  08 

•M2.260.800  88 


839 


The  receipts  into  the  Trearary,  in  1833,  were 
and  from  the  following  sources,  viz : — 
Customi,  f2e,03%508  91 


$33,048,496  » 


3,967,682  56 
474,986  00 
136,300  00 
337,949  79 


Lands, 

Dividends  on  bank  stock. 
Sales  of  bank  stock. 
Incidental  items. 

And  the  expenses  were,  $24,267,298  49 

As  the  national  debt  is  extinguished,  the  duties  on  imports  have 
been  reduced — many  articles,  heretofore  paying  heavy  duties,  such  as 
teas,  coffee  and 'spices,  now  come  in  duty  free  ;  and  the  duties  on  all 
others  have  been  gradually  lessened,  as  we  shall  hereafter  more  par- 
ticularly notice,  when  on  the  subject  of  manufactures.  The  revenues, 
therefore,  in  future,  arising  from  the  customs,  will  not,  probably,  ex- 
ceed fourteen  or  fifteen  millions. 


833 


o 


m 


i 


It  It 

3^ 


i 


^ 


H 

I 


i 

8 

s 


M         M         •«         ^         «k         «k •»         •»•••»         Jfc  _  J^         to         •»        •»         M         •»        fk         •»         ••       ^»         M         •»         » 

'«  ^  o  <o  t«  t«  GO  to  oi  o»  CO  00 -it  <<•  ^  to  to  r*  r*  01  r*  m  (O  <iii 


a 


^1 
11 


1' 


iSS°'8SSS9SS;seSS<;S;i5t:>:8S%SS3 


III 


aSPSSg8S2"8fg"a'8S8*8¥8'S" 


3  S 


I 

e 


•      •     > 

9  g  a 


I 


D*AQ«Ncor?^QDe>vaDonAOkaDMaDM od o a ^  t^f 


s 


1" 


/ 


334 


••> 


O 

< 


9 

c  c 


3'» 


IR        O  O  lO 


& 

e 


—  o 
':*  Q 

Sot 

70^ 


^^ 

^        ^        r 

la  'Ot)  c 

-*  Tf  O 

o  —  ci 
<^  o  o 

#^        •>        •> 


—  ^ 


» • 


'^^^-  SSSwt^S 


t*^  r» 


la  CO  -N  CO  59  o  _ 

iS  t*  CO  5^  fcO  5  W  'sf 

•«       r       •»       »       » 

X  X  ^  2  ig 

£  6  CO  1^  ?< 


o  —  —  «^ 

Si 

•     ^    •     • 

—  of  t  iS 


:52t:2i:^SI£?J?f55S 


uO  CO 
lO  ^ 

"^  X 
of  uO 


O  X 

lO  o 
r*  #>• 
1^  lO 

C  X 


^  X  CO  ©  »-< 


1*  50  *0 

1^  ct  lO  i5 

»  *  •  __^ 
S»  «» lO  X 
fe  »  ?♦  »^ 
—  «i»  — 


^t;lfr:!f^£*s^'S>^S?f5'?l?f^*?f 


Si 

£3 


\6  ^ 

O  CO 
•?  X 


tij 


>V    il*>    Vw'  W'« 


C3  ^^  ^2? 


2g5S 

X  1*  Ci 
"^  ^  £t 

•J*'^*  X 

1^  r*  t^ 


01  t^ 

01  « 


1.0  o 

Of  CO 
0*  lO 

^  oi 


l"*    w    IC 

^  ^  —  o  o 

01  cocoxco 
CO  =;  QCO  O 

<w«^    W«    Si    ^fl*    ^^ 
»        ^        •»        ««.        •i 

—  CO  »0  t»  Oi 

iO  •*  —  SP  S5 
<-x  t^x35 


X  xo-r 


9 
g 

I 


X"^  01 

**    -N    ;C 


X  CO  lO  CO  X 

wi^x  bo* 

P  o  S  r* 


2g 

oJS 


—  lO  —  r- 


iO 


'sf  ^  01  X 

r-  -<  a 

0*  «o 

05 1?5  ^ 

'   -^    •*    •"  ^ » 


«  i  I S. «     f^  S  ?  3b  o 

•a  P  fi  ?5  « 


CO  c^ 

55S 


ml  3 


-ssss 


C  3 


rs  ^  s"is 


o 

8 

P 


2« 


f  O  I^CO  — 

t±  cocor*  o 

4>»  X  C5  cc  « 

^        ^        "^ 

^M    «M    '^    ^ 

^"    ^r    «  »     «  

O  Ot  01^  X 


c?5 

hs  X 

-mm     «• 

—  ^  CO  —  T« 

5  f  3f  lO  »0 

c5  0*  -»  X  lO 


CO 

w  t-  — 

•>       »       » 

fil"SS«g2$2g 

-N  cot 

t-  -J*  X 


I'  f^  01  »a 

MMt        *^        ^^        ^^        ^^        ^^        ^^ 

W^      ^^      ^"^      w^      "^      ^«      ^^ 


X  CO  e 
lO  o  — 
—  -*  0* 


IP         »•         »■ 

—  o»  t* 

1^  »5  1^ 

£  li  01 


I" 

lO 

ii 

of  X 

lO 

52 

t*  CO 

—  o 
Si  -" 

coo 


ss 

oJoJ 

o  o 

£Ji5 


OOI 
r*  — 

lO  •-< 


1^ 

X 


^y    •  •    •  •    •  •    •  •    ■• '    ■*___  ^^  _  —  ■*  ■■ 


0^  »0 
uO  / 

o  o 


^a    1^    ^ 
^^    «••    ^« 

#k       ^        flh 

OOI  o 


of- 


CO  01 

0»  3  —  — 
CO  — 

o!  fco 

_^ 

5  CO 

W^  ^  9»  ^ 

COGi  —  — 


CO  01  oJ  S 


1^  X 


S  S  o!  fco  ^ 


X  ^ 


=  s 


4 

e 
e 
c 


5S 


ilSS^SS^iS^S 


a 


-5  -,  ^*5  •-,  — 
kO  k6  t  X  tS 

»o  01  ic  X  r^ 

0*  O  Q  f  ■*  — 

b  w  3  X  01 

23?Jico 

■^    w«    1^    ^    .^ 

£  ''^  ^  ^  /i  ii  •;  ifti  iS  'S  2  i 

tco  —  ^■^*^XwO*l.oco^• 


o?  c^ 

O  Ci 


^<  ;C  w 
<»•  '^^  "T* 
X  r  fcO 

9^  9-  4^ 


XO 

»  •> 

•r  © 

CO  iO 


— 1>- 

I*  CO 


S  ?  oJ  s 

X  -J*  f*  o 

»         »        •>         » 
^V^   ^^    %^     'W^ 

??c^5*;? 


©  01 

c^  o* 


I 


^  w*  ^        _■- .-^ 

r-co»ox  T 

1^  o  f-  0» 

r-  5^  —  lO  — 
CO  y?  o>  y  o^ 

lO  ©  r*  X  2 

X  55  x  X  X 


T 

X 


5  o? 

JDX 


©  o#  r 

—  \Q  Of 

C5  1^  © 

»     ••     » 

x©*r 
r*  r»  cfe 

©cot 

»       •       •• 

••  Of  lO 
0>  j_>.  Of. 

ff  o?  0> 

X  X  r 


t  01 

r*cO 


1^  fr 

•  •  •*  »^ 


Vf>Of 

XX 


c^  © 
ic  X 


^^      p^"      »^^       ■'  ** 

coc5c55 

CO  »0  01  X 

Of  «^  C^  kO 

./^  ;Q^  ^  ^ 

o?5S  5 


iiii 


335 


o 

e2 


•9 

a 


It 
St 


«> 
Co 

.V 


•^  O      O  I*  •-* -^  c«  o 


•    *    •    •»    » 

O  W  •^  W  X 


t*  CO  N  "^  »P  ® 


•'35!3'*ifi§llS®gSS*' 


CO 


X 

H 


"el 


> 


836 


• 

A 
H 
P 
SB 


O 

i 


r 


I 


a 
9 


C«       ^^       ^*       Of       Fi<  00  ^^  — < 


S2 


i 


lSf:jS2SS2!S?SSi§^t:2 


g 


CD 


CO 


s 


s 


s 


CO 


.SI 


.o 


o 


381 


i 


if 


•§si  •§ 


J*) 


.ef  efef 'J'J 


3 

a 


cS    •     '     '     •  3 

tO  o 

^  •  •     -SI 


s 


e* 


sf 


•^« 


$' 


(o  u3  a> 


•5*1  . 


^J^$§'^^^^^# 


St 


•      •      •      • 


s 


to 


•«  •>  •>  •>  *  ^  •  _^  _^  _^  _* 


i 


o' 2  2 


£-  •  o  S  «  * 


—    <"    "*  'm    m^ 


43 


9  a<M 


II 


^2  2-a-2« 
1^1 


^ 
^ 


•=S  o  V  «»  B 
—  -♦  -  4, 


^  a-5^ 


«ll 


££h 


♦  ♦« 


330 


and  bonus,  and  miscellaneous — and  the  annual  expenditures  for  Um 
civil  Hst,  foreign  intercourse,  miscellaneous,  military  service,  including 
fortifications  and  internal  improvements,  revolutionary  pensions,  other 
pensions,  Indian  department,  naval  establishment,  and  public  debt, 
together  with  the  balances  in  the  Treasury,  at  the  end  of  each  year. 

And  the  reader  is  here  presented  with  the  aggregate  amount  of  the  re- 
celpts  from  these  various  sources,  together  with  the  aggregate  amount 
of  the  expenditures  for  the  objects  above  specified,  for  each  year,  du- 
ring this  period. 


From  4lh  cf  March, 

• 

1789,  to  Dec.  3l8t 

Recfiplfl. 

Expenditures. 

1791 

$10,210,025  25 

$7,207,539  02 

1792 

8,740,766  77 

9,141,569  67 

1793 

5,720,624  28 

7,529,575  56 

1794 

10,041,101  65 

9,302,124  77 

1795 

9,419,802  79 

10,4.35,669  65 

1796 

8,740,329  65 

a367,776  84 

1797 

8,758,916  40 

8,626,012  78 

1798 

8,209,070  07 

8,613,517  68 

1799 

12,621,459  84 

11,077,043  50 

1800 

12,451,184  14 

11,989,739  92 

1801 

12.945,455  95 

12,273,376  94 

1802 

15,001,391  31 

13.276,081  67 

1803 

11,064,097  63 

11,258,983  67 

1804 

11.835,810  02 

12,624,&I6  36 

1805 

13,689,508  14 

13,727,114  49 

1806 

15,608,828  78 

15,070,993  97 

1807 

16,398,019  26 

11,292,292  99 

1808 

17,062,544  09 

16,764,584  29 

1809 

7,773,473  12 

13,867,226  30 

1810 

12,144,206  53 

13,319,986  74 

1811 

14,431,838  14 

13,601,808  91 

1812 

22,639,032  76 

22,279,121  15 

1813 

40,5^,814  95 

'39,190,520  36 

1814 

34,559,536  95 

'■      38,028,230  32 

1815 

50,061,237  60 

.'J^   39,582,4a3  35 

1816 

57,171,421  82    .   \ 

.  48.244,495  51 

1817 

33,833,592  33 

40,877,616  04 

1818 

21.593,936  66 

35,104,875  40 

1819 

21,605,(565  37 

24,004,199  73 

1820 

20,881,493  68 

21,763,024  86 

VtanMofHmb, 

ire«,li.D«-31«.                            BeerlpU, 

E.p*nditBr« 

18SI 

« 19.573,703  72 

«19,090.572  69 

■  laa 

20.233.437  W 

17,676.699  67 

1823 

20340,000  28 

15,314.171  00 

1834 

24,381,243  70 

31,898,538  47 

1836 

86,&10,SiS  03 

23,686,804  72 

1826 

26.a60,'134  21 

34,103,398  46 

1827 

23,966,303  96 

22,066,764  04 

1839 

24,703,029  33         . 

25,459,479  52 

1839 

24,827,627  38        . 

26.014,358  40 

1830 

21,844,116  64 

24,585.2S1  55 

1831 

28,526,820  82 

30.038,446  12 

1833 

31,866,501  46 

34,366,693  06 

«814,3e2,668  43 

$842,360,890  88 

Therece 

)ta  were  from  the  following  sources 

,  viz  :— 

From  th«  CuetoniB, 

9594,909,067  20 

"     I 

nlernsl  Revenue, 

22,235.260  81 

"      Direct  Taxes, 

13,736,888  60 

"      Postage, 

1,001.223  61 

"      Public  Landi, 

40,627,250  92 

"      Loans,  Trcaaury  Notes,  &c.. 

156,181,673  57 

"      SaW  of  Bank  Stock  and  Bonus, 

11.052.606  30 

"      Miscellaneous. 

5,428.893  33 

H-W.'H'ZX.f.-,  43 

The 

r  f^ifci^  ■■— 

Civil  L 

si,             ...             . 

$37,158,047  31 

ForcijT 

1  Intercourse, 

21.143,693  33 

MiMellsneous,     .... 

33,191,703  11 

Mililar 

arse 

als,  armories,  ordinnnce,  InWimal 

Imp 

I90.5.39,&13  21 

Revolutionary  Pensions, 

17,298,282  22 

Other  Pensions, 

6,710,307  23 

Indian 

department. 

ia413,188  16 

Na»al  E.-labli»hmcnl,      . 

1 13,703,933  23 

Public 

Ucbl, 

408,090.201  06 

e842,3GO30O  86 

333 

The  reoeipto  into  the  Treasury,  in  1833,  were         •33,M8,426  96 
wad  from  the  following  sources,  viz : — 
Customs,  $29,032,508  91 

Lands,  .  3,967,682  56 

Dividends  on  bank  stock,  474,985  00 

Sales  of  bank  stock,  .  135,300  00 

Incidental  items,  .  337,949  79 


And  the  expenses  were,         •  $24,257,298  49 

As  the  national  debt  is  extinguished,  the  duties  on  imports  have 
been  reduced — many  articles,  heretofore  paying  heavy  duties,  such  as 
teas,  coffee  and 'spices,  now  come  in  duty  free  ;  and  the  duties  on  all 
others  have  been  gradually  lessened,  as  we  shall  hereafter  more  par- 
ticularly notice,  when  on  the  subject  of  manufactures.  The  revenues, 
therefore,  in  future,  arising  from  the  customs,  will  not,  probably,  ex- 
ceed fourteen  or  fifteen  millions. 


333 


o 


m 
S 


i 

8 

s 

X 


T 


"Si 


SS«*SSSS9SS;iSSSSS;i5t:i:8SSSS3 


^1 

Hi 


^ 

ii 

e 


ft* 

^8  9 


•>  5  ■ 

s±is 


•*  =  •  ►» 

i 


S 


a 


I 


s 


334 


o 

< 


d  e  V 

^  ^  ** 

^&';§* 

^  "'^ 
S  *>  a 

o  •*•  5 

S  «  « 

•  ~    00    => 

J*  **•  a 
*>  a 
H  •&  «) 

*•%>•« 


9 

5 
£  C 

Is 

£ 


CO 


»•       »       «l 
«T    ^^    «X 


♦^  p^*  o 

C  O  fcS 


-f    -N    O 

•5<  r*  ^ 

"^  If?  t* 

III 


I-.  51  3  S  «  r^  SI 


gSf:SS2i:2i:s 


o 
a 


—  o 

iC  CO 

si 


lO  j6  e 
-'•^  Ci 

f*  kC  o 

^       ^        » 

»  »  » 
t^  —  1^ 

p-  ^  — 


IS  ^  — 

^  ^  C5 

«  -f  iC 
iC  W  1^ 

ift  'T  r* 


Q  ^  iQ 


/^f  »*c  ^^ 

—  —  ?f 


O  Q  (M 

O  "^  *^ 

»     »■     » 

X  I'i  o 

•«      ^      *• 

r*  Q  1* 

—  ?5  'M 


51§ 

CO  (?«  If* 

»        »        » 

CO  t*  25 

?I  =  SI 

s  s  s 

i6  ?o  -• 

O  O  X 


»       ^       »       »> 

»-4    ^  ««    l^ 

v^   «*•   Gx  ^7* 

f      ^      _»       •" 

if*   5.5f_§ 


Ci  a  g  «* 


£3 


lO  lO  ^  »^  ^      ^  irs  C5 


2S2 

15  2 

^  X 


2SS 

Xrf  c: 

•        •«       ^ 

T  «  S» 
•J«*f  X 

«*  t^  t* 


CO    '-i 

irs 

01  «^  Cf 


w«  ^   ^* 


1} 


nO  O)  o 

c*  »  t* 


CO  01  CO 

•-  CO  o 

in  a  a 

5?  S 1* 

1^  <-  OD 


—  oo 

CO  xco 

Q  CO  O 

C^  ^  — 

^     »     » 

lo  t;^  oa 
J^xx 


X  X  iS'? 

t^  «4i  ^  r<* 


a 

s 
i 


oxooScoi^SiSt^x 


j2 


I-- 


coxx  :r 
•^  o5  f  Q 

^  »  «  -• 

01  1.0  X  01  »o 


x-r  o| 
o  Sco 

O*  I*  — 


5$ 


-N  !>. 


"-•"TU  01  X 

**  o  r-  cc 


is 


I 


k.0 


« I S  S.i!     ii  '36  "^f  X  o  CO  <*  »-<  X  «  lO  X  w  it  -<  x  —  « 


P'36 


"o  g  S  -  - 
ii  "•  c  e  » 


C  8  C  c  o 
Si  Oc-3 

OB  .2  ^2 


Z  a 

C  3 


p.'XCO 


t-  f  X 

»    »    » 

X  CO  e 
lO  Ci  — 
—  —  0* 

I*  I* 


OJ  X  oj»o 
ol  ?i  ol  § 

lO      o  o 


33  c  o  X 

ffrt    ^H^     «■■     ^^V     M 

^S^c?c5 

w  cS  X  ci  X  —  -c  ci  c*  CO  o<  25 
•■   "^   »■  -^  _^ 

I*  CO  -•  9  CO 

cor*  3  j^  X 

>»•  CO  CO  >•  *  *"* 
^  r*^  '^^  ?^  ^ 


.j- 


o 


a 


S 


5S( 
o  ot 


0*^X0  0 


^  w  ^ 

—  Of  c* 
»0  »5  <* 
jf  li  0* 

■#  C 

_M  i^  '^^ 
^~  I^    «^ 

o  of  o 


C5  —  CO  O 

CO  o  »o  o 

«•        »        »       » 

•c  I*  —  c: 

<?f  —  fO  Ci 


*^  •-"  r* 

—  iO  X 

lO  ^  r 
w  5«  S 

si:?:? 

•     1^     ^     ^ 

CO  —  <r  tJ 

—  —  X  x 

01  fcO  w  i£ 

5^o> 

»  »  »> 

«-•  ■-■  ^i 

^^  ^~  ^< 


c 

tc 

e 

e 

e 

c 

H 


SSrfxissSS  — 


b>  CO 


X 


r*  !>•  #*  0?  :c  o 

"-  S?  »*  ^-  ^  *:: 
o»  i:  —  X  X  lO 


2 1  §  |g|?.S£ggig|ggg5 


XO  I* 


•n  S  S  o5  S 

O  X  f  I*  i2 


«) 

•3 

a 
a 


'^  J  J  01  ^ 

f  CO  —  r- 

»o  ;i  r-  S 

I*  lO  c  1* 

r*co  lO  X 

OD  I*  ^  r- 

»■    ••    1^    » 

I*  0*  —  »0 

cof:  01  o» 


/   7»  I'"  0?  lO  lO  -*  /  7?  i#  Ci  CC  lO  «. 

OiCiXCole5w^-«iicoc*c*5 


CO  o  0?  c:  0*  X 
a!  5  o*  —  »o  o> 

O  CO  O  C5  I*  w 

»   »    ^    ■■   »   * 
0*  fcS  X  ©  CO  ^ 

^       •>      »       ^       »■       • 

—  ©  X  —  OMO 

'^>  —  —  o>  *>o> 


lO  ©  f*  X 

xxxx 


—  §  oJ  -ff  ?}  0> 
X  iD  X  X  X  X 


r*  o*c. 

^        ^        » 

«  S  01 


,»-.  -~ 


S  fi  § 
X  X  ic 


g-^.  CO  »0  01  x 
t  H  ci  r;  ^ 
>j  0*  r*  CO  ift 

•    »    »    •■ • 

foj^T^o 
loSwo* 

?>  o?  S  ^  ?» 
ol  o*  «cofe 

X  X  X  X  x 


836 


o 

e2 


I 

a 


St 

T: 


Co 


2 


•-0 


»         »         »         »         4^         »         » 

»  W^CO  X  COO 

^  id  lO 


S^SoSSSSSSSS* 


ssss 


.n 


» 

•i 


^ 


lO  'T  f  -^  1^ 


§SSj« 


I  =  *  *-  ^  •»  S2'3 '»' £'&  =  **"« - 


9 


w 


SwS"§$i^Js*ga;s 


CO 


^"^  •  •  *••  ^^  ^  ^r*   JL/  5x  ^^   Jt»'  ^r  ff^  U3  Cj  !S 

x»j??icoi5iCr»*rco'?;£w5oeoGr5r«r 


/; 


S 


"?    ^^    w    ^    "^    "^ 

r-  X  3  «  05^ 


i 


^#*    ^f    TJ* 


5^  S?!? 

S  S  kO  CD  CD 


e 
S 


t; 

e 

< 

g 


•    •    • 


V 


5  r  c  -•* 


.5  c 


3     ■» 


3 


S  jC  -*    —    i- 


12 


C    it 


Urn 

o 


^ 

^ 


c 

• 


s     » 


p   08  •—  ^^  w  .2   <j    « 

js  :^3Dt  S  c  c  c 


i 


836 


p 

SB 


I 


f 


I 


SS;3!:  =  9SS1SSSS&S$)2 


s 


$§s 


S9 


9SS 


C«       ^^       »^       Of       w^QO  ^^  ^* 


s 


« 


8 

9 


i 


S        s   s   s  s  s 


£2 


s 


{ 


n 


g 


o 
< 


• 


^ 


387 


•^  ^V       mm  m  . 


mm 

H 


S 


•  t 


4  -^ 


.efefef-J 


§ 


O 


a 


^9 


8  m 
s 


til 

1 


t  — 3 


cS   •    '   •   • 


•       •       • 


s 


e* 


^ 


t 


Ij  O  I.  - 


O  u5  O^  O  ' 


i§ 


coop 
2  cS  So 


IzS     B 


is^j?*§^^^^ 


^^ 


*  ^s     •     •     •     • 

•  Tf       •       •       •       • 


iils|i  .lis 


c^ 


a 


-^'ISs 


I 

I 


o 


g.?1lil.§»i-5 


e 


S  ^  2  S  'S  JS  -a  -a  S  'C 


V. 


43 


O 
O 


2S5  8  82 


■§1.2-9 -5 


££h 


« ^  ♦♦  «ii 


338 


CO 

I- 


O 


I 


I 


i 


31 


DaS 


8'^ 


a 


i 


^  o 


2 

a 


a 


II 


^^ 


"I 


I 


Is 

o  = 


t0  5gcjc«3; 


«-•  —  —  »' 


CO 


CO 


—  w  ka  ka  ©  <N  t  w  e  ^  e  c-J  —  iJ  'rtf  fff  ^<c 


aD2ao29^o©iftGrwar)fc.o«(Mift 


CO  la  *-*  f»  ic  r* 

£§£  =  * 


I: 


I 


]pacii5JCiCiCiCio:cic:^o©oo<r'o 


339 


-.--.-.J.I 

3f  3  ^  ^  ^  ^  »o 


1^ 


^e<2G«   •   •   •   .otooS 


•        •        •        • 


s  .*saBss{»as$s$ 


C^  QD  O  <^ 

r«  TP  o  lO 


•    •    • 


•    •     • 


6  90C<  3^ 


00(300^0  —  O  —  —  TfiOX.  OD&OlioSOOt^ 
i^  ^s»  rw\  »^  ^^  — *■     •     • ^     •   _»    _!^     »  _^     ^     ••    ^    _^  _»    _• 


« 

? 


0« 


ss^§ 


lO  ^  •*  g  «  g  S 


s 


52  ^  —  x^co 

—  t'"!f   X  •-  Tf 

.^^^  -~  ^^^  —  ^~        ..      *~  "~  ''  *~  ^  V  V  V«  *^  ^  0^  ^  Mi  ^  ^  W»  ^  ^  ^k 

SZ53I^*r2^'xS»2  2!Wi'5«^i^^csiogDiscoc5a>©o 
r*i.':ccc^c^--wcr*otWf^C5©*f--i*-of*«f*5e5 

>— f  <«c  .^ r  >-r  >*r  m?  .^iT  .-.i*    *  ^r  ,«r  _^    •>  ^^    *-  ,^*-  ^  ►  __r    ••    •"       ^»    •» 

^^i0i0k0or-r*d^©o>-49iMO— •  —  ^9S^lb©f*o^ 

•  ^         ^  wm  w^  fm»  ^  wm  mm  wm  ^  fJi  mm  0m  mm  mm* 

3  2r  s  ^  T         ©  w  is '— ©  ©  i5  ©  5  OD  r- lOO  lO  iB  3S 

0DX0DXaDXXXXXXXXXXX95XXaD9D9D9DaD 


o 
H 


I 


$ 
(§ 

> 


is 


I 


■a 

St 

« 


840 


ill 

1" 


1 


IlllPlflllllllfll 


^S9 


o  (xT  lO  o  o?  at?  QD  OD  ef  d<r  of  lO  1-^  1-^  CO  lo  cd"  1^  r^  oC '^ 


I 

n 


il 


5" 


•   •   • 


p 


«»-$ 


=8?^ 


14 

^f  litis 


CO     wo®  ^  F 


0^ 


4 

I 


»    *  ^  r^^  o  lO  M  c«  "^ 


!§ 


I 


w 


=  ^^?fSg'5^g'{?2^sf5'* 


0 


t^^ 

zs 


CO 


•      • 


i 

I 


1^ 


I 


9 


^  o  ^S  5  ^  o^  ^  o  ^  Ss  H  M  ^  2  $  S  S  g  S 

.^  jmT  i^  .^  .*f  m^Z  >^  ^  tfS"  ^mt  .mT  Zt  .-T       ••  ^       ••       •       •»       •>  ^  ^ 

"^CO"^^»0®t^<*OOSO©fO^«(ff"^iOCD<*CJDCO 


ir^i?  ?  ?  ?  c  ?  c  §  ?  ¥  ?  ®  ¥  Sd  S  8  8  3d  8  5  5 


341 


H 
M 

m 

M 
H 

I 

• 

O 
M 

P 

H 

O 


o 

e2 


I 


*-•  lO  CO  Cf 

—  «  a»  Q  ^^ 


11  SISl  iFi  il'PP' 

^^M^^        CO        fm 


CO 

s 


ef  id 


lOiO 


00 

i 


2 


ssg 


HM^ 


^cD9a9e<io^QDO^ioio^or«aDA^cdaD09 

2  8  S  So  G  S  SSS  2- 8  £  S  2  a  S  22.2  8  2  8i 
7^  Sd -•  S  ?  S  S  K  S  o<  S  S  S  Gt  S  9  o  Z  S  Si  S 


—  ^  — ^ctco^  — ^ 


^,-,^^,-cfcocC 


» 

9 


I 


$ 


ifillillls § 5 s $ s ? 

X  5  S  8  2  '^       ^^    3  2  ^^  Is 


coot 


of 


S 

c 
.Sai 


? 


ifiiimiiliiiiii 


O  CO  *^  CD 


.y       y*      r  ^^  _^  __^  _  ji      »      jf      »     T»      V       ■»      **      ff    V*      **  ^t       »  ^» 


sr 


2ie22£2C£2SS 

ODaDODGoaDxaDaDSS 


II 

^•5 


It 

1^" 


"" M 


SSsSsiSEi 


ggg 


'Tt     ilUlHIIIIIi 

||         g|SSSgg"|gSBS! 


Mi 


if 


mumrnm 


snissiissiis 

=S3f  JS  JS  Sg  1 1£| 


Ifs 


(Ml 


ninsiffirffipKiiUMir 


PHlsIililplMElllPillii 

=SSSEgSS*S3"Sa32E!!s8"SSi!SsaSg 


SSSSiSSsiiisJ.iiiHimiMIil 

liianiffssffJirsisiiiwiL 

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii  I 

SS ESS S S SSS 1 1 J; > I s g  5 S SSgSS 


Ill  Jl§|2s3l3i2 

iSS  SiSiiESSS'SS 


iiiilsiiiiiiiiiE||i|||iii| 

fiirjsiWiiisisiiifsiisfiFi 

£s5Ssl;IEi3HjJS;r:iSt!||§s|gi= 


Silsi 


E2^SZS?:9!gSK3S 


844 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Amount  of  colonial  tonnage— by  whom  and  in  what  proportions  owned,  in  the 
different  colonies — Ship  building  carried  on  by  the  colonists — Duties  on  Ameri- 
can and  foreign  vessels,  imposed  by  the  Slates,  under  the  confederation — Dis- 
criminating tonnage  duties  adopted  by  the  general  government,  in  V789,  and 
ever  since  continued^Modes  of  keeping  accounts  of  American  tonnage — 
Occasional  uncertainty  as  to  the  actual  amoimt  of  such  tonnage—Amount  of  er- 
gistered  tonnage  employed  in/oreign  trade — Of  enrolled  and  licensed,  engaged 
in  the  coasting  trade,  steam  navigation,  and  in  the  fisheries — Number  of  vessels, 
amount, of  tonnage,  and  number  of  seamen^  in  each  State  and  Territory,  in 
183&— Amount  of  foreign  tonnage  employed  in  American  trade,  in  each  year, 
ih>m  1789  to  1833 — ^Amount  of  British  tonnage  difficult  to  be  ascertained — 
Attempt  to  compare  it  with  that  of  the  United  States — ^Amount  of  tonnage  in 
several  ports  of  Great  Britain  and  in  the  United  States— American  navy— NoC 
systematically  encouraged,  before  the  late  war  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain. 

TONNAGE. 

The  shipping  interest  of  the  United  States  has  justly  claimed  and 
received,  the  patronage  and  protection  of  the  general  government, 
from  its  first  formation,  under  the  present  constitution.  The  inhab- 
itants of  the  northern  sections  of  this  country,  situated  many  bun- 
dred  miles  along  a  rocky,  and  comparatively  sterile  coast,  very  early 
turned  their  attention  to  commerce  and  navigation.  This  soon  at- 
tracted the  notice,  .and  excited  the  jealousy  of  the  Parent  Country. 
Sir  Josiah  Child,  as  early  as  about  1670,  declared,  that  *'  Of  all  the 
American  plantation^,  his  Majesty  has  none  so  apt  for  the  building  of 
shipping  as  New  England,  nor  none  comparably  so  qualified  for  the 
breeding  of  seamen,  not  only,  by  reason  of  the  natural*  industry  of 
that  people,  but,  principc^lly,  by  reason  of  their  cod  and  mackerel 
fisheries ;  and  in  my  opinion,  there  is  nothing  more  prejudicial,  and 
in  prospect,  more  dangeroys  to  any  mother  kingdom,  than  the  in- 
crease of  shipping  in  her  colonies,  plantations,  or  provinces." 

Thin  jealousy,  although  continued  and  manifested  in  a  variety  of 
ways,  did  not  prevent  the  increase  of  colonial  navigation.  The 
amount  of  shipping  employed  in  the  commerce  of  this  country,  while 
in  a  colonial  state,  and  particularly  the  portion  owned  by  the  colonists 
themselves,  it  is  difficult  to  Ascertain. 


846 

By  the  colonial  Castom  House  books,  kept  at  Boston  bj  **  the  In* 
spector  General  of  the  imports  and  exports  of  North  America,  and 
Register  of  shipping,**  it  appears,  that  the  amount  of  tonnage  which 
entered  in  the  provinces,  now  the  United  States,  from  January  6th« 
1770,  to  January  5th,  1771,  was  three  hundred  and  thirty  one  thou- 
sand six  hundred  and  forty  four ;  and  the  amount  cleared  the  same 
period,  was  three  hundred  and  fifty  one  thousand  six  hundred  and 
eighty  six.* 

It  is  well  known,  that  the  tonnage  at  that  time,  giren  in  to  the  Re- 
gister, was  about  one  third  less  than  the  actual  tonnage,  in  order  to 
evade  the  duties,  light  money  and  expenses.  But  this  was  more  than 
counterbalanced,  by  the  tonnage  of  the  same  vessel,  being,  in  many 
instances,  repeated,  in  consequence  of  different  voyages  in  the  same 
year.  The  actual  amount  of  tonnage,  employed  in  the  colonial  trade* 
may,  therefore,  be  estimated  at  about  three  hundred  thousand. 

This  tonnage  was  owned,  1st,  by  persons  residing  in  the  European 
British  dominions — 2d,  by  British  merchants,  occasionally  residing  in 
the  colonies — and  3d,  by  native  colonial  merchants  ;  and,  according  to 
an  estimate  of  British  statesmen,  in  the  following  proportions,  in  the 
several  colonies : — 


Fronortion  belonffng    ProportioD  belonfiag     PraportkM  to> 
to  British  merchanli,     to  British  merchants,     loactoff  to  nal^ 
resident  in  occssiooallf  residents     OMootsl  lahab- 


Europe.                   io  the  cokmies. 

HanM. 

New  England, 

l^th 

l-8th 

64)thi 

■ 

New  York, 

3-8ths      . 

3-8ths 

3^th« 

Pennsylvania, 

2-6th8      . 

3-8ths 

3-8tht 

Maryland  and  Virginia, 

6-8ths 

l-8th 

1-Stfa 

North  Carolina,     . 

5-8ths      . 

2-8ths 

l-8(h 

South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 

^Sths      . 

2'8Uis 

l-8tht 

The  amount  entered  and  cleared,  in  the  several  coloniest  during  the 

year  above  mentioned,  was  as 

follows : — 

Bntered— 400S. 

ClMnd-«M. 

New  Hampshire, 

15,302 

.        • 

20,198 

Massachusetts, 

06,271 

.        • 

70,384 

Rhode  Island, 

18,667 

•        • 

90,001 

Connecticut 

19,223 

•        • 

90.963 

11^523 

131,400 

•  Lord  Sheffield  od  Americaa  commerce. 

t  See  Report  of  the  Lords  of  the  Committee  of  the  Privy  cooodl,  Jaautry, 
1791,  in  Acheson's  collection,  Ac.  page  74. 

44 


r 


Entered^  tonft. 

New  York, 

.        25,539 

Pennsylvania, 

50,901 

Maryland, 

30,477 

Virginia, 

44,803 

North  Carolina, 

20,963 

South  Carolina, 

29,504 

Georgia, 

9,914 

^ 


S46 


26,653 
49,654 
33,474 
45,179 
21,490 
32,081 
10,604 

It  will  be  observed,  that  the  outward  exceeds  the  inward  tonnage, 
about  twenty  thousand.  This  difference  was  occasioned,  in  no  small 
degree,  by  the  sale  of  colonial  ships  in  Great  Britain.  Ship  building 
was  a  profitable  business  in  the  colonies,  and  was  carried  on  to  the 
greatest  extent,  in  New  England ;  and  it  has  been  calculated,  that 
about  fifty  colony  built  vessels,  were  annually  sold  in  the  parent 
country.  These  were  generally  first  sent  to  the  West  Indies,  laden 
with  lumber  and  provisions;  and  from  thence,  were  freighted  with  l 
West  India  produce  to  Great  Britain,  and  there  sold  ;  and  in  this  way 
became  a  profitable  remittance,  in  payment  for  British  manufactures. 

The  number  of  vessels  built  in  the  colonies,  in  1772,  was  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty  two,  with  an  aggregate  tonnage  of  twenty  six  thou- 
sand five  hundred  and  forty  four ;  and  of  this  number,  one  hundred 
and  twenty  three,  containing  eighteen  thousand  one  hundred  and 
forty  nine  tons,  were  built  in  New  England  :  fifteen  in  New  York, 
one  in  New  Jersey,  eight  in  Pensylvania,  eight  in  Maryland,  seven 
in  Virginia,  three  in  North  Carolina,  two  in  South  Carolina,  and  five 
in  Georgia.* 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  amount  of  American  ton- 
nage,  from  the  peace  of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  the  new  gor- 
ernment.  During  this  period,  some  states,  in  order  to  encourage 
American  shipping,  laid  discriminating  duties,  in  favor  of  vessels  be- 
longing to  citizens  of  the  United  States ;  and,  in  some  instances, 
made  a  difference,  also,  in  favor  of  vessels  belonging  to  nations  hav- 
ing treaties  with  this  country.  In  Pennsylvania,  the  tonnage  duty 
on  American  vessels,  was  about  four  pence  sterling, — on  foreign 
ships,  belonging  to  nations  having  treaties,  eight  pence, — and  on  the 
ships  of  nations  having  no  treaties,  about  two  shillings.  In  Mary- 
land, the  duty  on  domestic  vessels,  was  eight  pence, — on  foreign 
ships  in  treaty,  one  shilling,7— and  on  foreign  ships  not  in  treaty, 
one  shilling  and  seven  pence, — and  on  British  ships,  three  shill- 
ings and  sixpence.     In  Virginia,  while  the  duty  on  American,  was 

•  AchesoQ,  page  87. 


847 

one  shilling  and  three  pence,  it  was  fonr  shillings  and  six  pence  on 
British  ships.  In  New  York,  however,  the  trreat  importing  state* 
the  duty  on  foreign  vessels  was  only  four  or  Bre  pence  sterling. 
This  want  of  uniformity  and  universality  in  this  countervailing  and 
protective  system,  rendered  the  whole  unavailing.  Foreign  shipa 
would  naturally  seek  the  port  where  the  duties  were  lowest,  especial- 
ly under  equal  advantages  for  a  market,  for  their  import  cargoei ; 
and  the  low  duty  in  New  York,  offered  a  premium  on  foreign  trade. 
Under  these  partial  and  inefficient  regulations,  American  shipping  re- 
ceived little  benefit ;  and  foreign  vessels  filled  the  American  porta. 
This  important  subject  was  not  forgotten  by  the  first  Congress,  that 
met  under  the  new  form  of  government ;  and  discriminating  tonnage* 
and  other  duties,  were  first  laid,  in  the  summer  of  1789,  and  haTC 
ever  since  been  continued.  This  encouragement  to  American  ship- 
ping, was  not  confined  to  these  discriminating  duties ;  but  foreign 
ships  were  entirely  excluded  from  the  coasting  trade,  and  from  all 
participation  in  the  American  trade  with  China.  The  latter  was 
done,  i}y  imposing  an  additional  duty  on  all  teas,  imported  in  for- 
eign vessels,  varying  from  four  to  ten  cents  per  pound ;  thereby,  in 
fact,  giving  a  complete  monopoly  of  the  China  trade  to  the  American 
merchant. 

Under  this  protective  system,  and  in  consequence  of  the  new  and 
extraordinary  situation  in  which  t^is  country  was  placed  by  the  long 
wars  in  Europe,  the  increase  of  American  tonnage,  has  been  withoat 
a  parallel,  in  the  commercial  world. 

Under  the  new  government,  American  ships  assumed  a  national 
character,  and  a  national  flag-tBll  vessels,  employed  in  foreign  trade, 
were  to  be  registered  by  the  -collector  of  the  district  to  which  they 
belonged  ;  and  no  vessel  was  entitled  to  be  registered,  unless  bnlU  in 
the  United  States,  or  hacUbeen  taken  and  condemned  as  lawful  prize 
and  owned  by  an  Amencan  citizen.  The  vessels  engaged  in  the 
coasting  trade  or  fisheries,  were  to  be  enrolled  or  licensed  by  the  same 
collector.  The  register  enrollment  or  license  specifies  the  tonnage  of 
the  vessel ;  and  an  account  of  every  vessel,  thus  registered,  enrolled 
or  licensed,  is  annually  transmitted  from  each  disirict,  to  the  Treasury 
Department. 

We  would  here  observe,  that,  in  the  course  of  the  wars  in  Europe, 
Americans  became  owners  of  vesi^els,  which  were  employed  in  foreign 
trade,  but  which,  because  foreign  built,  or  for  some  other  cause,  were 
not  entitled  to  a  register,  or  to  be  considered  as  having  a  national 
character ;  these,  howerer  were  furnished  with  certain  ptpera  called 


840 


o 
H 


i 


U 
V 


2  *• 


is 

!i 

Is 

•a- 


^ ^r ^t  —T ^^ .^ ,jr 4^ ^^   "  ^   "_? 


x  S  a?  ^  ^  S9 
_  _  O  00  w  f*  ^  ^ 
*   ••   * ^fc  »   ••   »  »k 


I 


(x>  ^  9  ^  9  Oi  ^  t^  Qi  a  \Q  (x>  \o  a  ^ 


<I)<P 


2'*'2*Sf'^^82fj^?|g£^2*2'S'«"aSS 


3|| 
III 

Sll 


p 


•   •'  • 


•   •    •   • 


\i 


P 


Hif 


si  SKS 


§io  ^  ;0  IQ  tO  <^       Of  ^  rr       Cl       M  A 
#v^   A^^  ^^^  /M^  j^S  ^9^  aE2        .  2^^  2.1  3^K  SE 

2  P  QD  ^  01  O  lO       Oft  OD  OD       v-^       0»  <Z) 


w 


tO^ 


I 


--f  *  ^    ^    f  »  m     ••  ••  »  •i    ^  IN  ••     _» 


s 


=  8*^?fS^*?lf??'«'SS*55«* 


Tj»  lO  op  ^*  O 


00 


•       • 


Of  00  u5aD-*®f*r»*^io^© 
*■ ?  __»   *  _^   »   •   ^  »   »   »   «. 


9 

a 


^JWlIliSs 


'    ^      ^    ,^  »       »      »      »     _» 

(D  —  iOQmQOOOD' 


K<rf 


p 

^ 


9k  2K  ««^  ^ws  ^S  ««K  ^S  £S  £i  !5  ^^ 
00O^O^O'q*C5c^&f^ 

^  ^  _w  »  •>  ^  *>  •>  *>  ■>  *> 
^co^'*kO«r*i*ooio  ©f  o 


c6 


8$S  wSiooo 


341 


as 
a 

H 

H 

< 


H 

P 

as 

as 
o 


o 

< 


I 


ii|iS|ii|i8i|l|  , 


i 


i 


I? 


COO 


^«^v-««-«  v-«^^f-«^        CO        »- 


CD 


1 


4 


1 


lO 


id 


*    »    •  _»  _»    »    ^    »■  ^  _•>    »    »»    »     ^ 

IoSSSoqSSSSSS  io 


if  Slgiir '"I .. 


|f 


lO  kO 


i 

S 


I 

£ 


^ea3S9elZ^aDoSiOk0^e»^ab9S^^aDm 


5 


2 


>©OOF-C0©       ^%0^^    '^W*^  •©  Of 


iS 


s 


Ct  ^  Of  OD  CI 


©f 


O  CD  ^^  CD  9  09  *^ 


"^ ^ c^ ^ dS e^ t^ e^  fsmit^'^'^f^    ^ f^  rf    *fij"«<r  #? 

,Je**-r.*j^j^Kg^gefK2*J:8*i2*§fgf55fgJ 


sT 


I 


IS  is  S2  2  S  £  M  ^  ^  S  S 

II 


l§ 


s 


■ii 


•I* 


-sn 


■SJIIIisSs.llsJl 


gsSKRIsglSSilgl 


,;;;a5llil 


ISS»SSSSS"8S8S 
rSSSSSsSS    "SS2 


"is    mmiiiimiii 


n  I- 


gSsJgsssgilglg^'l 


WiiHimiiiiii 


inisiKifSfSHiiisiiiiiiir 
lllllilglllllilllllllgli; 


"•■2"=  ""■"-'i'-'s  sfas -■•' 


IP  JlliilSSS^s 


ilEMIMipfpHliHIiir 

H  i  ?  s = I  s  E  s  sisismssiiiiii 
ipiIIPIIIiSlliaiFiHIIf 


usiipiisiiiiiiiiiiHiiESS 


isil 


lalliEilisilSi 


36S 

The  actual  increase  of  the  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  at  diftr- 
ent  periods,  from  the  commencement  of  the  general  goyemment,  has, 
therefore,  been  less  than  appears,  from  the  official  Treasury  accounts. 

In  1793,  the  whole  American  tonnage,  was  put  down  at  5209764» 
and  might  then  be  deemed  the  actual  tonnage,  and  in  183%  the  actual 
tonnage,  was  1,439,450,  making  an  increase,  during  that  period,  of 
918,686  tons. 

The  amount  of  domestic  and  foreign  tonnage,  which  has  actuaUj 
entered  the  ports  of  the  United  States,  from  abroad,  and  on  which, 
duties  have  been  paid,  in  each  year,  will  serve  more  distinctly  to 
shew  the  state  of  the  American  tonnage,  employed  in  trade  with  for* 
eign  nations ;  and  its  increase  at  different  periods.  As  this  amonnt, 
includes  the  repeated  voyages,  it  shews  the  activity  and  extent  of  the 
American  foreign  trade,  in  each  year.  We  accordingly,  here  present 
the  reader,  with  the  American  and  foreign  tonnage  employed  in  the 
foreign  trade  of  this  country,  from  1789  to  1832. 


Tetn. 

American. 

Foreign. 

TMaL 

1789 

127,329 

106,654 

233,983 

1790 

355,079 

250,746 

605,825 

1791 

363,854 

240,548 

604,402 

1792 

414,679 

244,298 

658,957 

1793 

447,754 

163,566 

611,320 

1794 

525,649 

82,974 

608,623 

1796 

580,277 

56,832 

637,109 

1796 

675,046 

46,846 

721,892 

1797 

608,078 

72,757 

680,835 

1796 

522,245 

87,760 

610,005 

1799 

626,495 

107,583 

734,078 

1800 

682,871 

123,882 

806,753 

1801 

849,302 

158,365  . 

1,007,667 

1802 

787,301 

143,366 

930,667 

1803 

787,424 

163,889 

951,313 

1804 

821,962 

122,140 

944,102 

1805 

922,098 

87,S43 

1,010,141 

1806 

1,044,008 

90,985 

1,1«54,<I<IU 

1807 

1,089,876 

86,322 

1,178,198 

1806 

525,130 

47,672 

872.802 

1809 

603,931 

80,500 

684,431 

1810 

906,434 

80,316 

086,760 

1811 

948,247 

33,203 

081,460 

1812 

667,999 

47,099 

716,098 

1813 

237,348 

H3,827 

361,175 

853 


T«an. 

TbCaL 

1814 

69,626 

48,302 

107,928 

1816 

700,500 

216,707 

917,227 

1816 

877,462 

259,142 

1,136,604 

1817 

780,136 

212,420 

992,656 

1818 

755,101 

161,413 

916,514 

1819 

783,579 

85,554 

869,133 

1830 

801,252 

79,204 

880,467 

1831 

769,081 

83,181 

852,265 

1823 

747,887 

113,278 

861,165 

1833 

806,331 

117,297 

923,628 

1834 

815,758 

90,666 

936,424 

1836 

886,511 

94,836 

981,347 

1836 

91035 

120,716 

1,031,351 

1837 

900,199 

136,734 

1,036,933 

1828 

821,781 

149,435 

974,216 

1839 

^4,616 

130,098 

984,714 

1830 

870,299 

134,419 

1,004,718 

1831 

914,704 

317,658 

1,232,362 

1833 

972,282 

412,104 

1,384,386* 

The  revenues  under  the  general  government,  did  not  commence 
until  the  middle  of  August,  1789,  the  tonnage  for  that  year,  therefore, 
only  includes  that  which  entered  after  that  time. 

The  great  increase  in  the  foreign  tonnage,  in  the  years  1831, 1832 
and  1833,  arose  principally, as  we  have  before  shewn,  from  the  arrange- 
ment made  with  the  British  government,  in  relation  to  the  West  India 
trade.  The  amount  of  American  tonnage  employed  in  foreign  com- 
merce, was  greater,  during  the  years  1806  and  1807,  than  at  any  peri- 
od since.  The  imports  and  exports,  in  those  two  years,  exceeded  in 
bulk  and  value,  those  of  any  subsequent  years. 

The  tonnage  of  the  coasting  trade,  has  nearly  doubled  since  1807, 
and  is  pow  nearly  equal,  to  that  in  foreign  trade ;  and  will,  no  doubt, 
soon  exceed  it 

Table  No.  lY  contains  a  statement  of  the  amount  of  foreign  tonnage 
which  entered  the  ports  of  the  United  States,  from  each  nation,  from 
1789  to  1833;  and  we  here  give  the  amount  of  the  whole  foreign  ton- 
nage and  that  of  Greai  Britain^  for  certain  years. 


«  See  Table  No.  111. 
46 


354 


BriUflh 

210,618 

19,660 

71,689 
104,336 

64,7W 
212,426 

47,365 

63,034 
100,298 
402,730 

e  No.  IV,  from  which  Ibe 


Yean.  Whole  foreign  tonnage. 

1791  .  .  240,248 

1796  .  46,849 

1800  .  121,403 

1803  .  .  163,714 

1807  .  .  86,780 

1816  .  269,142 

1820  .  .  78,859 

1825  .  .  94,836 

1830  .  .  136,446 

1833  .  .  520,874 

Some  differences  will  be  found  in  Tabi 
above  is  taken,  and  the  annual  official  report,  relating  to  the  com- 
merce, and  navigation  of  the  United  States,  and  from  which,  some  of 
our  preceding  tables  were  taken.  Table  No.  IV,  however,  in  the 
most  correct,  as  it  was  taken  from  the  Treasury  books,  after  they  were 
finally  balanced  and  closed,  in  each  respective  year. 

The  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  far  exceeds  that  of  any  other 
nation,  except  Great  Britain ;  and  how  near  it  approximates  to  the 
actual  tonnage  of  that  nation,  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  ;  and  this  dif- 
ficulty arises,  principally,  from  the  mode  of  making  out,  and  of  keep- 
ing the  tonnage  accounts  of  that  country. 

Most  of  the  official  tables  of  British  tonnage,  either  in  the  foreign 
or  coasting  trade,  contain  the  tonnage  of  the  same  vessels,  in  their  re- 
peated voyages  the  same  year;  and  this  swells  the  nominal,  far  be- 
yond the  real  amount.  While  that  employed  in  the  foreign  trade  is 
thereby  made  to  amount  nominally,  to  between  two  and  three  mil- 
lions, the  coasting  tonnage  rises  to  eight  or  nine  millions ;  and  this  has 
■ometimes  been  mistaken  for  the  actual  amount.  In  addition  to  this, 
it  should  be  remembered,  that  until  1825-6,  the  trade  between  En- 
gland and  Ireland  was  called  foreign,  and  the  tonnage  employed  in 
it,  was  put  into  the  official  tables,  as  engaged  in  foreign  trade.  'Since 
that  period,  however,  it  has  been  included  in  the  coasting  trade. 

It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  also,  that,  in  Great  Britain,  all  vessels, 
over  a  certain  tonnage,  wh'ether  employed  in  the  foreign  or  coasting 
trade,  must  receive  a  Register,  in  the  various  ports  to  which  they  be- 
long. In  1829,  the  whole  number  of  vessels,  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
was  estimated  at  nineteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  ten,  whose  reg' 
istered  tonnage  was  two  million  one  hundred  and  ninety  nine  thou- 
sand nine  hundred  and  fifty  nine ;  and  of  this  number,  thirteen  thou- 
sand nine  hundred  and  seventy  seven,  with  a  registered  tonnage  of 


855 

one  mUKon  seven  hundred  and  fifty  eight  thousand  and  sixty  fivCf 
were  in  England  and  Wales — three  th'ousand  two  hundred  and  twenty 
eight,  with  a  tonnage  of  three  hundred  and  eight  thousand  two  hun- 
dred and  ninety  seven  in  Scotland,  and  the  remainder,  in  Ireland,  and 
in  the  Isles  of  Jersey,  Guernsey  and  Man.^ 

What  proportion  of  this  tonnage  is  employed  in  foreign^  and  what 
in  the  coasting  trade,  it  is  difficult,  for  some  of  the  most  distinguished 
statistical  writers  in  Great  Britain,  to  ascertain,  with  much  precision. 
Marshall,  in  his  late  very  valuable  Digest  of  the  Commerce,  Popula- 
tion, Revenues,  6lc.  of  the  British  empire,  prepared  from  a  vast  mass 
of  parliamentary  documents,  referring  to  some  of  his  official  tables, 
relating  to  British  tonnage  says,  ''Interesting  as  the  details  exhibited, 
in  this,  the  preceding  and  the  following  pages,  may  justly  be  deemedy 
they  give,  but  a  very  imperfect  view  of  the  actual  number  and  ton- 
fiag'6  of  shipping,  employed  between  Great^ritain  and  the  respective 
countries  of  the  world  more  particularly  so,  with  the  contiguous 
countries  of  continental  Europe.  To  Germany,  the  voyages  are, 
probably,  repeated  six  times  within  the  year — to  the  Netherlands 
eight  times — to  France  twelve  times — to  Prussia,  Sweden,  Norway 
And  Denmark,  many  repeated  vo3rages  are  made,  as  well  as  to  the 
United  States  of  North  America,  and  to  British  America — to  the  Brit- 
ish Isles,  the  voyages  are,  probably,  repeated,  on  an  average,  ten  timeSf 
within  the  year,  so  that,  instead  of  thirteep  thousand  ^ve  hundred 
Teasels,  of  two  million  two  hundred  thousand  tons  of  aggregate 
burthen,  being  employed,  in  foreign  commerce  of  the  kingdom,  about 
one  half  that  number  and  tonnage  only,  is  so  employed ;  and,  of  that 
amount  of  tonnage,  full  half  is  employed,  between  the  United  King- 
dom, and  the  British  West  Indies  and  British  North  America.^' 

**  The  like  fallacy^'  he  adds,  '*also  pervades  the  amount  of  the 
nymber  of  vessels  and  their  tonnage,  employed  between  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland ;  and  still  more  so,  in  regard  to  the  number  and  tonnage 
employed  in  the  coasting  trade^  which,  in  a  return  presented  to  Par- 
liament, in  1832,  the  tonnage  so  employed,  was  represented  as 
amounting  to  nine  million  four  hundred  thousand  tons  annually,  in- 
cluding the  amount  employed  between  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
(which  since  1825-6,  has  been  officially  considered  as  a  coasting 
trade) ;  independent,  also,  of  the  fallacy,  which  the  accounts  involve, 
consequent  on  the  repeated  voyage — the  principle  of  measurement 
adhered  to,  in  itself,  involves  not  merely  a  fallacy ^  but  an  obicurity^ 


*  See  Table  No.  V. 


/ 


356 

in  regard  to  the  actual  burthen  of  the  shipping  owned  and  regUterad 
— the  prevailing  practice  being;  to  deduce  the  content^,  from  the 
length  and  breadth,  without  any  regard  to  the  depth  or  cnnre;  to 
that,  in  some  cases,  the  actual  cubical  contents  of  a  vessel,  will  con- 
siderably exceed  the  official  result,  while,  in  others,  it  will  not  be  half 
the  quantity — such  a  practice,  is  as  discreditable  to  official  sen^ice, 
as  it  is,  to  practical  science,  which  seems  more  directed  to  noveltj 
and  experiment,  than  to  correct  existing  error.'' 

Table  No.  VI,  is  an  official  statement  of  British  and  foreign  ship- 
ping employed  in  the  trade  with  the  principal  countries  of  the  world* 
in  1830 ;  and  proves  the  correctness  of  Marshall's  opinion,  in  regard 
to  the  great  diffi^'rence  between  the  actual  and  nominal  amount  of  the 
number  and  tonnage  of  vessels,  employed  in  the  trade  of  that  kingdom. 

The  number  of  foreign  vessels,  that  entered  the  British  ports,  ac- 
cording to  this  official  account,  was  five  thousand  three  hundred  and 
fifty  nine,  with  a  nominal  tonnage  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  eight 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty — of  these  vessels,  six  hundred  and 
nine  were  from  the  United  States,  with  a  tonnage  of  two  hundred  and 
fourteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  sixty  six,  being  between  a  quarter 
and  a  third  of  the  whole  foreign  tonnage,  shewing  clearly,  that  the 
vessels,  entering  from  other  countries,  were  much  smaller,  and  re- 
peated their  voyages  much  oftener,  than  those  of  the  United  States* 

The  whole  registered  tonnage  of  England  and  Wales,  in  1829,  was, 
as  before  stated,  one  million  seven  hundred  and  fifty  eight  thousand 
and  sixty  five ;  and  the  whule  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  in.  1832, 
was  one  million  four  hundred  and  thirty  nine  thousand  four  hundred  * 
and  fifty,  making  a  difierence  of  only  three  hupdred  ai^d  twenty  eight 
thousand  six  hundred  and  fifteen. 

The  British  board  of  trade,  in  its  second  annual  report,  containing 
a  digest  of  the  revenues,  commerce,  navigation,  &,€.  of  the  United 
Kingdom,  for  1832,  declares,  that  the  actual  number  of  vessels,  em- 
ployed in  the  Baltic  trade  jlhrough  the  sound,  in  1832,  was  one  thon* 
sand  one  hundred  and  fifteen,  with  a  real  tonnage  of  one  hundred  and 
ninety  seven  thousand  six  hundred  and  eleven ;  while  their  number, 
according  to  their  repeated  voyages,  was  three  thousand  three  hun- 
dred and  thirty,  and  their  tonnage  five  hundred  and  ninety  two  thou- 
sand eight  hundred  and  thirty  three,  being  about  three  to  one. 

Taking  this,  as  a  general  rule,  it  will  be  found,  that  the  actual  num- 
ber of  British  vessels,  entering  from  the  countries  mentioned  in  Ta- 
ble No.  VI  will  be  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixteen,  instead 
of  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  eight,  and  their  actual 


357 

tonnage  about  seven  hundred  and  twenty  six  thousand  six  hundred 
and  seventy,  instead  of  two  million  one  hundred  and  eighty  thousand 
and  twelve. 

It  is  not  less  difficult  to  form  an  accurate  comparison,  between  Brit- 
ish and  American  tonnage,  employed  in  the  eoasting  trade.  The 
transportation  of  coal,  coastways,  requires  no  small  proportion  of  the 
British  coasting  tonnage.  Marshall  says,  **  The  vessels  employed  in 
the  carrying  of  coal,  will  repeat  their  voyages  eight  times,  within  the 
year — the  number  of  ships  entered,  at  the  coal  market  in  London,  in 
183%  was  seven  thousand  five  hundred  and  twenty  eight ;  this  num- 
ber divided  by  eight  for  repeated  voyages,  gives  nine  hundred  and 
forty  one  ships ;  estimated  at  an  average  of  two  hundred  tons,  gives 
one  hundred  and  eighty  eight  thousand  and  two  hundred  tons  of  ship- 
ping, as  engaged,  in  supplying  the  metropolis  with  coal,  which,  being 
equal  to  about  one  half  of  the  quantity  shipped  coastways,  it  makes 
about  three  hundred  and  seventy  ^we  thousand  tons  of  shipping  re- 
quisite for  the  conveyance  of  sea-borne  coal,  from  one  part  to  another 
of  England  and  Wales  alone.** 

The  tonnage  of  the  seven  thousand  five  hundred  and  twenty  eight 
Teasels  which  entered  the  port  of  London,  in  1832,  as  above  stated, 
including  the  repeated  voyages,  was  two  roi]lion  one  hundred  and  for- 
ty nine  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty ;  and  this,  according  to 
Marshall,  would  make  the  whole  official  coasting  tonnage,  for  carry- 
ing coal,  about  four  million  and  three  hundred  thousand. 

The  whole  official  tonnage,  employed  in  the  coasting  trade,  in  the 
year  1832,  was,  as  before  stated  by  Marshall,  nine  million  and  four 
hundred  thousand,  leaving,  for  other  than  the  coal  trade,  five  mil- 
lion and  one  hundred  thousand  tonn.  Supposing  the  vessels,  thus 
employed,  repeat  their  voyages,  as  oficn,  as  those  in  the  coal  trade, 
the  actual  tonnage  in  the  British  coasting  trade,  in  1832,  would  be 
about  eight  hundred  and  twenty  eight  thoiisand  tons.  We  give  this 
from  the  foregoing  data,  as  only  approximating  the  truth. 

It  has  been  supposed  by  some,  that  since  the  year  1814,  the  ton- 
nage of  Great  Britain,  has  greatly  increased,  while  that  of  the  United 
States  has,  at  least,  been  nearly  stationary. 

The  committe  of  commerce  and  navigation  of  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, in  a  report  of  the  8th  of  February,  1830,  say,  **  that,  ta- 
king the  average  of  the  two  first,  and  two  last  years,  from  1814  to 
1888,  the  tonnage  of  all  foreign  nations  trading  with  Great  Britain, 
bad  increased  about  twenty  thousand  tons  or  3  per  cent :  while  Brit- 
ish navigation  had  augmented  six  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  tons, 
or  about  60  per  cent. 


i 


868 

With  respect  to  foreign  tonnage  entering  British  ports,  we  hiTe 
before  tn  a  Table,  shewing  the  entries  o^  foreign  vessels,  into  those 
ports,  from  1819  to  1S32 ;  and  by  this  it  appears,  that  on  an  average 
of  the  yeairs  1820  and  1821,  the  tonnage  of  foreign  entries,  was  six 
hundred  and  ninety  three  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty  two; 
and  on  an  average  of  1827  and  1828,  it  was  one  million  thirty  four 
thousand  three  hundred  and  ninety  two ;  'making  an  increase  of  for- 
eign tonnage,  to  the  amount  of  three  hundred  and  forty  thousand  five 
hundred  and  seventy.  And  with  respect  to  British  tonnage,  Mar- 
shall, after  a  full  investigation  of  the  subject,  difiers,  very  mlite- 
rially,  from  the  committee,  as  to  its  augmentation,  since  1814.  In 
his  Digest,  before  alluded  to,  he  says  :  *'  Although  the  following  pft- 
ges  exhibit  a  great  increase  in  the  movement  of  British  shipping ;  ac- 
cording to  the  statement  below,  the  decay  since  the  termination  of 
the  war  in  1814,  appears  greatly  to  have  exceeded  the  5ut7J,  partico- 
larly  in  England,  which  shews  a  diminution  of  three  hundred  and 
seventy  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixteen  tons,  in  1831,  at 
compared  with  1816;  other  parts  of  the  empire,  however,  shew  an 
increase,  so  that  the  total  decrease  of  the  empire,  is  only  two  hun- 
dred and  one  thousand  nine  hundred  and  sixty  nine."^ 

Marshal],  no  doubt,  here  refers  to  a  Table  of  the  tonnage  owned 
and  registered  in  the  several  ports  of  the  British  empire,  from  1814 
to  1831 ;  and  which  will  be  found  among  the  Tables  annexed  to  this 
chapter,  and  numbered  V.     The  diminution  of  the  tonnage  in  Eng* 
land  and  Wales,  in  1831,  compared  with  1816,  referred  to  by  Mar-        \ 
shall,  may  be,  and  probably  was,  in  some  degree,  occasioned,  by  a      . 
correction  of  the  registered  tonnage,  made,  in  that  country,  as  Mar-^      /) 
shall  elsewhere  says,  in  1827;  and  probably,  in  the  same  manner  ns      .^ 
that  made  in  the  United  States,  two  years  after.    For,  in  1827,  thw  *^^ 
registered  tonnage  in  England  and  Wales,  was,  as  appears  by  dM^  Xl| 
tame  Table,  about  two  hundred  and  forty  eight  thousand  tons  \tm^ 
than  in  1826 ;  a  decrease  too  large  to  take  place  in  a  single  yenr.- 
We  here  subjoin  the  tonnage  of  several  ports  in  the  United  States,  in 
1832,  and  in  England  in  1829 — having  no  official  account  of  the  ton- 
nage of  the  particular  ports  in  the  latter,  subsequent  to  that  year. 

Porta.  Toanage.  Ports.  Tonnsfs. 

New  York,   .  298,832  I^oildon,    y.        572,835 

Boston,  171,045  Newcastle,    .  y.   202,379 

Philadelphia,  77,103  Liverpool,     .        161,780 


•  MarriiaU's  Digest  of  the  Commerce,  &c.  of  the  British  empire,  1833,  page 


359 


Ports.. 

VoftM. 

TooiMffe. 

New  Bedford, 

70,560 

Sunderland,  . 

107,628 

New  Orleans, 

61,171 

White  Haven, 

72,967 

Portland, 

47.942 

Hull,     . 

72,248 

Baltimore,    . 

47,129 

Bristol, 

49,035 

Bath, 

33,480 

Yarmouth, 

44,134 

Salem, 

.    •'  -^,293 

Whitby, 

41,576 

Nantucket,    . 

28,580 

Scarborough, 

28,070 

Barnstable,  . 

28,153  . 

Plymouth,     . 

24,114 

Waldoboro, 

24,948 

Dartmouth,    . 

24,114 

New  London, 

24,225 

Beaumaris,     . 

22,076 

Penobscot,   . 

22,155 

Poole,   . 

17,860 

Newboryport, 

20,131 

Exeter, 

17,168 

Providence,       .  , 

19,136 

Belfast, 

18,576 

Portsmouth,  N.  H 

17,126 

Plymouth,     . 

17,669 

Norfolk, 

15,790 

- 

Passamaquoddy,   , 

13,370 

• 

Charleston,  S.  C. 

13,244 

It  will  be  perceived,  that  the  tonnage  of  the  leu  largest  ports  in  the 
United  States,  exceeds  that  of  the  ten  largest  ports  in  England,  (with 
the  exception  of  the  port  of  London,)  about  sixty  four  thonsaod  tons ; 
and  it  should  be  borne  in  mind,  that  among  the  English  ports,  thosa 
•f  Newcastle,  Sunderland,  and  White  Haven  are  included,  whose 
tonnage  is  almost  entirely  employed  in  the  coal  trade. 

If,  indeed,  the  tonnage  in  the  English  coal  trade  is  deducted,  the 
actual  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  in  1832,  exceeded  the  remaiDing 
^u^ual  tonnage  of  England  and  Wales  in  1829.  And  we  do  not  hes- 
itate to  say,  that  the  whole  commercial  tonnage  of  the  United  States, 
fai  proportion  to  their  population,  is  considerably  larger  than  that  of 
the  united  kingdom  of  Gteat  Britain. 

The  American  navy,  intimately  connected  as  it  is,  with  the  com- 
mercial prosperity  of  this  country,  should  not  pass  unnoticed.  la 
1833,  the  number  of  vessels  of  war,  of  the  United  States,  amounted 
to  fifty  three  ;  and  consisted  of  twelve  seventy  fours,  fourteen  frigates 
of  iht  first  class,  carrying  forty  four  guns  each,  and  three  of  the  second 
class,  carrying  thirty  six  guns  each,  and  fifteen  sloops  of  war,  from 
twenty  four  to  eighteen  guns,  and  nine  other  vessels  of  smaller  size. 

The  encouragement  of  a  navy,  although  recommended  by  Wash- 
iogton  and  the  elder  Adams,  did  not  become  the  settled  policy  of  the 


/ 


360 

general  government,  until  since  the  late  war  between  the  United 
States  and  Great  Britain.  For  some  years  prior  to  this  war,  few 
members  of  the  national  councils,  comparatively  speaking,  were  in 
favor  of  a  navy ;  and  fewer  still,  were  bold  enough  to  advocate  its  in* 
crease,  particularly  in  frigates  and  seventy  fours.  Gun  boats  were 
tlien  the  favorites  of  the  administration.  I)pring  the  war  to  which 
we  have  alluded,  frigates,  as  the  administration  paper  of  that  period 
justly  declared,*  literally  ^^  fought  themselves  into  favor  ;'*  and  since 
that  period,  seventy  fours  and  frigates,  have  been  the  favorites  of  the 
public,  as  well  as  the  government. 

In  April,  1816,  Congress  appropriated  one  million  of  dollars  annu- 
ally, for  eight  years,  for  the  gradual  increase  of  the  navy ;  and  the 
President  was  authorized  to  cause  to  be  built,  nine  ships,  to  rate  not 
less  than  seventy  four  guns  each,  and  twelve  shifts,  to  rate  not  leas 
than  forty  four  gun^^  each,  as  soon  as  the  timber  and  other  materials 
could  be  procured  and  prepared  for  that  purpose ;  and  was  also  em- 
powered, to  procure  steam  engines,  and  other  imperishable  materials 
necessary  for  building  three  steam  batteries.  And  the  next  year,  in 
order  to  insure  a  sufficient  supply  of  ship  timber,  in  future,  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  navy,  was  directed  to  cause  the  va>cant  lands  of  the 
United  States  to  be  explored,  and  to  select  and  survey  such  tracts  as 
should  be  found  to  produce  live  oak  and  red  cedar ;  and  which  were  to 
be  reserved  from  future  sales,  and  appropriated  for  the  sole  pur- 
pose of  supplying  timber  for  the  navy. 

This  policy  has  been  ever  since  pursued  ;  and  the  reader  need  not 
now  be  informed,  how  much  it  has  contributed,  not  only  to  the  pro- 
tection of  the  commerce,  but  to  the  advancement  of  the  national  char- 
acter of  this  country  abroad. 


National  Intelligencer. 


961 

TABLE  No.  I. 

A  Statement  exhibiting  the  amount  oj  Ttinnaee,  Regittered,  Enrol- 
Ud  and  Licensed  in  the  several  dislricts  of  the  iMited  Statet,  oa- 
nvally,  from  the  year  ^^m  to    832. 


1789 

RafM^iMlnFoT 

-"^ISi'S 

°nT»  .TATU 

n»l 

nr»«,n(...df. 

11.  U,.   PUh»W 

123,993 

69,007 

9,092 

901.662 

1790 

340,254 

103,776 

29,349 

478.377 

1791 

363,110 

106,494 

32,6.12 

602,146 

179S    , 

411,436 

120,957 

32,062 

564,467 

1793 

307,r34 

lll,8:.3 

38,177 

620,764 

1791 

438,863- 

162J^79 

27,176 

628,618  - 

1795 

529,471 

181,398 

34,096 

747,966 

1796 

576,733 

217,810 

37,320 

831,990 

1797 

597,777 

237,403 

41,733 

876,013 

1798 

603.376 

£>1,443 

43,609 

999,328 

1799 

662,107 

316,641 

30,571 

939,409 

1800 

669,921- 

27*492- 

30,079 

972,492  - 

1801 

632,907 

274,552 

40,119 

947,677 

ISOB 

660,380 

289,623 

42,101 

992,104 

1H03 

607,157 

299,000 

52,956 

919,172 

1804 

672,6:)0 

317,537 

62337 

1,042,404 

1806 

749,311 

332,063 

58,364 

1,140,368 

ie06 

t«\2« 

310,640 

69,91] 

1,208,730 

1807 

W8,307 

319.029 

71,213 

1J168,S48  ■ 

1808 

S08,7(i9 

420,820 

52,722 

1,242,506 

1800 

9 1  crew 

405,irf2 

35,060 

1,360,261 

1810 

981,269  - 

405,347  - 

35,168 

1,424,784  - 

1«M 

7(iH,8,=i2 

420,:!02 

43,2* 

1,232,602 

1812 

760,«al 

471,972 

31,401 

1,269,997 

1813 

674,s,-,:i 

471,109 

20,667 

1,666,639 

1814 

074,6.33 

466.169 

19,419 

1,159,210 

1815 

851205 

475,666 

38,188 

1J68,126 

1816 

800,760 

622,165 

49,291 

1,372.210 

'     1817 

600,725 

606,090 

65,157 

1,390.912 

1819 

606,089 

649,374 

69,722 

1.225.186 

1810 

612,930 

671,059 

70,763 

1.260.761 

1920 

619,048 

699.025 

73,091 

1.290.167 

1821 

610,996 

614,844 

M.218 

1.396,966 

1823 

628,160 

621,199 

72,360 

1J31.609 

1923 

639,931 

617,806 

79,810 

1.336.566 

1924 

669,»ra 

611,563 

77,627 

1.389.163 

1825 

700,788 

640,8«2 

91,902 

1.423.113 

1N26 

737,979 

722,331 

73,882 

1.631.191 

1927 

747,170 

789,159 

»1,279 

1.620.608 

1N29 

812,619 

842.906 

86,868 

1.741.393 

1829 

660,143 

608.859 

101,797 

1.9I»,799 

1830 

676,475 

616,978 

98,323 

1,191,776 

1831 

620,452 

0.39,724 

101,671 

1,967,947 

1932 

6»s,9go 

619,627 

102.933 

1,439,460 

e 


I 


CO 


6  " 

"3  5 

4f'B 


s 
^ 

^ 


A    X    ^ 


cf 


^A 


111 


^<  CQ  ^  »-< 


a 

I. 

3c 

D 


. 


©   • 


•5:8SSS5d3B2S;2?§2- 


i^^wgeo 


d 


lO    '^c*n<q*o»M.^ 


S2"S25;^$SS2  '"22  •§?««•' 


S 
a 


II 


CO    •  et  ODCOiOiO^  C«  C«0  OD©     '^t^CO    •  ^  w  c* 


g^  c«  c«2®  ® 


2  *S 


cc 


aa»^  N 


^        d  ?D  ^  »-< 


^  C*^  Si 


e 


^ 


6 


g- 


J3 
CD 


|l 


S2*S 


'Ct 


-s 


OD 


CO 


Oi  CO  '^  ^<  CO  ^^  ©I 


Is 


^  ^  1-M  »-«  o       CD 


^ 


OD 


I 

I 


©I  ^lO  ^ 


©I 


o 


CO 


X 


gOiiOOCO©*0©l'f'-* 


•  lO 


Oi  O  -^    •    • 
CO        ^ 


^    •© 


o 


sTSB  o 


o 


0) 


«  -.  9  !^  J?  >»  5  g  -  -2  ^  ^  .2  i  -^ 


s»    C    •>    O    c 


(fi 


►^    w    »,  •—         - 


c 
—  aJ2  «*s:  o«c  ■_ 


TABLE  No.  nr. 

A  itairmnt  eihibiiing  lAeotmrtintpf  Anxrican aiti  Parsin  U»»agt  rmpluwed  i» 
Ue  fmeign  trade  ,if  lit  UaiI'd  Slnlts,  aHnimOy,  frBmlTX  to  133S  ;  <tn^  aU» 
Ue  propi/r!im  akieh  Uu  fortign  Ivnna^t  bears  In  tkt  wiuU  aMraml  tf  tvMtag* 
fy»pUiyid  in  llu  mid  trail  during  Iht  iitmt  peritid. 


TDHHICI  JIDUYU  IN  KUUOH  Tujlt,                                             i 

PiofnnnjB  d  lonl.a 

AmtriMB  nwcta. 

Foreign  (cvHta. 

T<*a 

nw 

plo^'"'™''"' 

I27.a!a» 

100,654 

233,983 

45.0(0  100 

1790 

353.079 

250,746 

603.826 

41.4     " 

1791 

303,864 

240,548 

601,402 

38.8     " 

1792 

414.fi79 

S44.278 

658.967 

37.0     " 

1793 

447.754 

163,560 

611.320 

26.7     " 

I7»4 

&2»,<Vt9 

82,974 

608.623 

15.9     " 

1795 

BW,2T7 

66,832 

637.109 

8.0     " 

1796 

676,040 

40.8^16 

721,892 

6.S     " 

1797 

008.07S 

72,757 

680,835 

10.7     " 

1708 

622,245 

87.700 

610,005 

14.4     " 

1799 

026,495 

107,5s3 

734,078 

14.6     " 

1800 

082,871 

123,882 

800,753 

1B.4     ■' 

1»)1 

S49.302 

158,365 

1,007,667 

16.7     " 

I80S 

787,301 

143,366 

930,667 

15.4     " 

1803 

787.4ai 

103.889 

951,313 

17.2     " 

ISM 

621.062 

122,140 

944.102 

12.9     " 

la© 

922.29S 

sr.Ms 

1.010,141 

8.7     " 

IMM 

1,044,005 

90,985 

1,134,990 

6.8     " 

1S07 

1,069,876 

86.322 

1,176,198 

7.3     ■• 

I«W 

525,130 

47,672 

672,802 

8.3     " 

1509 

60:i.<)31 

80,500 

«S1.43I 

11.8     •■ 

t^io 

906,431 

80,316 

986,750 

8.1     " 

1811 

91Km7 

33.2113 

081,450 

3.4     ■■ 

1S12 

667.9I« 

47,099 

715,098 

0.6     " 

1SI3 

237.348 

113.827 

351,175 

48.0     •• 

!N|4 

&»,fi2(S 

48.302 

107,928 

44.7     •• 

1815 

700.500 

816,T27 

917,227 

23.6     " 

1810 

877.4«2 

'■!5t).i42 

1,130,604 

22.8     •■ 

1817 

78rt,i:jfl 

212.420 

992,556 

!il.4     ■• 

I81H 

755.101 

161,413 

916,514 

17.6     •• 

1819 

7K3.679 

85.554 

869,133 

9.8      " 

1820 

801.253 

79.201 

880,457 

8.10    •' 

1831 

760.0HI 

83,181 

852,265 

9.7      " 

1822 

747,887 

113,278 

801.165 

13.1     " 

1823 

806.3.*» 

117,297 

933.628 

12.7     " 

i8ai 

Ht5.7.W 

90.666 

936.424 

9.6     '■ 

1825 

886.511 

(M.836 

98i,ai? 

10.6     ■' 

1820 

910.3(15 

1 -20.7 10 

1,031.351 

11.7     •• 

1827 

(«0,11W 

130.731 

1,036,933 

13.2     •■ 

1W28 

8-i),78l 

1 111.4.30 

974.216 

15.3     ■' 

lH2ft 

851,616 

i;»,09S 

BS1.7I4 

13.2     " 

1830 

870,299 

131.419 

1. 001.71 8 

13.4     ■• 

1831 

914,701 

317,656 

1.232,363 

25.7     - 

1832 

97%S8S 

412.104 

1.384.386 

26.7     ■' 

864 


o 


s 


t9 


1 


t9 


< 


Ik 


^ 

^ 


• 


ii 


a 


i 


% 


8  S  5  S  S  S  »  *  P  P  S  9  S  lo  «*  S  *  q^f- • 


•     'CO 


is 


CO 


9g 


lO  ^  C"  <^  ^  ^  ^ 


^Sm 


2  ^  o  CO  50  S  21  ^  ^  !9I  ^k  fA  ^  »fs 
w25cooco3o**»oc*ab»i*950w-- 

Of^^iOO^iOfiO^^COCOOt 


Jl 

a 

2 


iQtU&»oSocow«^-^5»QC5ia®2^S£ 


ii 


^1 


©gDOi^®co^i^  ^co  oip'^Q«cor»'^©^ct 

GDO>o5ojF-eooo5^r^owQDo5  —  »o©e»Oi^ 
^^efco--^'*^'**^2^^^i2jfof2orcrr-*'*ef 


•>  »  » 

Ct  Tf  — 


9 

o 


e« ^  1^ 3 »o Tf  ^ « Tf  fe -^    •   '-^^^Scl   •    ' 

-       -   -  »»  » 


■^ 


3 


Wk        m       *■        W' 

of  ococo ^ 


9« 


•^c*i^co^*or*50^o      CO         ^*co^o^O"^ 
•»»»»•>  _»  »  _»  »  •>   »  » 

i-«C0^0*C0O  •  •  i-«  «o  ^ -^  ^  ot 


4S 

i! 

a 

s. 


^iS 


©■STFF 


^  lO  lO  — •  ^ 


^ 


(Jl  w  rr  «"•  Q  g» 


XI 
u 

a 


s 


COO^QDCOi^OiQiA^C^ 

Sfio®^gDtI0*^w^ 
(SooScoww^oMio 

^cfx)2!i2^<^©*^'* 

^*         d  ^  ^* 


r^"<5 


is^ii^  "i 


r^^^ 


w 


|g 


Q<  0>  0<  -« 


g 


s 


* 


S66 


^  «  «  5  »  » "^  -  :s  ^  85  a  o  9  S  ^  » t- S  8  ©  5  § 


•   •    •    • 


lO     *     *     *     * 


•^    '^    ••-*  ©  Oi^ 


S3 


lO 


. —  'T  ifS  -^ 


¥12 

—  wot 


•   • 


S$2 


w   •   •eoSPSSSSs 


of   . 


eo 


$ra 


•r  ^  ^  CO  W  X  OD  Q  1^  •  r*  f*  t©  QD  O  g5  lO 


CO   &0     p 

©  ef  c*?  eo  ^  CO  «  o  otT  «  o  ©  ;d  a5  a&  K  c»J  jjT  eg 


CO  — 


CO 


S  oS« 


•of- 


c^    •    'c^    •    •  —  —  ©  —  -^5r-z)--cor-Tf5x3Dw©-2,p 

C0_O  O  lO  jO  OICO  —  OIW(N-"        -^  ----•' 

... 


•      •      'p^^      •  fm      *      *      * 


22 
5S 


©  W  ©     ^  •-•  O  W  O  r*  CO  £2 


8  3  S  S2  5c-  S  4  S  S 

^  ol  r^  CO  IS  —  ^  of 

(^f©-^z^e©'•f©-f^'ofof?£•f  «rof-(N«co©'co©ft:ift 
^■■■*^— '^o**^ —  Of  Ot  y5 

—  i^LO©xg9--r^55cowcc©'r--©Hi02?»3-*Q55 


iii?*iil 


=fl?ll¥ 


t^kO-^  '?  r?  «^  — «t  »oxxi6  ox©  ©3d©»  — 


^o)  —  — 


—  ©»co 


xaDxaDxxxxxxx$(SD^xxxxxxxS 


/ 


866 


<^ 


O 

< 


00 


s 

IP 


GO 


CO 

o 


? 


f  vt/  ymj  ^^  >«^  •■•  ■*•»  ^"  •'w  >*^  ^^^  •»•  ^"^    >«    ^"^  ^^  '•'i'   '»* 

el"  f^  g6*  ^  CO  ^  ^  of  ^  lo  oD  id"  «:•  K  lo  Tf  ^  od 


ss 


COiO 


OQr- 


5 


•^  gp  op  ®  t^ 

Of  of  ©f  of  Ci  of  Cf  ©f  Cf  ©I  ©I  Cf  ©I  ©f  of  of  of  of 


oT  o  o> «  oi  w  to  Q  OD  r^ :-: ;;; 
idioiotot6cD<«fiOkO&oiio 


lO  lO  CO  09 


f-«  ^  r^ 


CO  "^  '^^ 


CO  •^  ^ 

S  01 5 


s 


I  SI 


kO 


S8*e* 


CD 


§^f 


g 


—  —  «»♦» 


o 

0» 


sssss 


e 
m 


aDwoit^aDF-io^QDco55^;ooor»oc^ 
aDOoaDaDGDODaDt^t«i^t^;o«;DioiocD 


e 

9 


aoo«r»Ko(r)0<^OfOJo*^aDco;oo» 


o^r^-? 


£SS 


r*ioo^o^oaD^iooi^r*^iOtSo<^i^ 

_^       ^       9^       ^       Ck       1^       ^       IK    #k       IK       ^       •«       «h      jpb       ^       9^       m^       0>. 

«c«t^aDaDOoooi-«F-«coed^c«aDQoa» 


I 


9 

I 


s 


lO 


of  of  of  of  of  of  of 


■^•qf-oi 


©8 


1^ 
S2 


E 


GOODGOGOGOGoSyD 


867 


o 

pa 

< 


•2*3 

BQcg 

6 


I 


^^882 


^      •      *      ^ r  _^      •"  _^ 


•   • 


§ 


§®  I&  Q  ^  9  "^  O  ^  lO  A     *     * 


ss« 


CD 

s 


S«5  • 


ill 


©f-eo 


i 


I 

01 


^ 

t* 


9 


3'^ 

m  ~ 


PS 


5 


9SSS  = 


X 


c6 


5 

8 


rf-     • 


ft-    9 


o 


.2  ^ 


5rQ 


•3         ft-   "        T-   *        «S 

.-^     *•-<    J;?    a 

*^  4?  J5 .?  -P      S.X  -c  «  c 


/■ 


368 


CHAPTER  IX, 

Peculiar  situation  of  the  United  States  at  three  different  periods — 1st,  during  tht 
wars  in  Europe,  from  1793  to  1807— 2d,  during  the  embargo,  Aon  iotercooTK, 
and  war  with  Great  Britain — and  3d,  from  the  close  of  this  and  the  European 
wars — During  the  first  period,  Americans  became  the  carriers  of  the  continen- 
tal belligerents — Great  increase  of  American  shipping — Trade  in  foreign  arti- 
cles greater  than  in  domestic — Great  Britain  jealous  of  the  American  neutral 
trade — Revived  the  rule  of  1756  concerning  colonial  trade — Take  and  con- 
demn American  vessels  under  this  rule — New  negotiations  with  Great  Britain 
— Treaty  made  with  that  nation  by  Munroe  and  Pinckney — Rejected  by  the 
President,  without  consulting  the  Senate — British  refuse  the  terms  insisted  on 
by  the  American  Executive — The  embargo — Causes  which  led  to  it — French 
decrees  and  British  orders  in  council — Bonaparte  determines  there  shall  be  no 
neutrals — American  Executive  informed  of  it  before  the  embargo— Bonaparte 
declares  the  Americans  shall  be  his  allies  or  his  enemies — Embargo  unpopnlar 
— Is  exchanged  for  non  intercourse — Bonaparte  indignant  at  this,  and  leiaBes 
American  vessels  in  the  continental  ports  and  orders  a  sale  of  them-^Refoaes 
compensation — Duke  de  Cadore's  Letter  of  the  5th  of  August,  1810,  concern- 
ing the  revocation  of  the  French  decrees — President's  proclamation  declaring 
them  repealed — Non  intercourse  revived  against  Great  Britain — Disputes  as 
to  the  actual  repeal  of  the  decrees  of  France — Bonaparte's  definitive  decree 
repealing  them — Not  made  public  until  more  than  a  year  after  its  date — War 
declared  against  Great  Britain — Orders  in  council  repealed — Armistice  offered, 
and  refused  by  the  American  government — Treaty  of  peace — State  of  Ameri- 
can commerce  during  the  embargo,  non  intercourse,  and  war — Americans 
pass  navigation  acts  after  the  close  of  the  war — State  of  American  commerce 
during  the  third  period — Amount  of  trade  in  domestic  and  foreign  articles,  and 
with  different  parts  of  the  world. 

In  the  preceding  chapters,  we  have  presented  a  view  of  the  external 
commerce  of  the  United  States,  from  the  commencement  of  the  na- 
tional government  to  the  year  1833,  inclusive ;  a  period  of  more  than 
forty  three  years.  It  cannot  have  escaped  the  attention  ef  the  read- 
er, that  the  time  embraced  in  this  view,  may  very  naturally  be  divided 
into  thrf  e  periods ;  in  each  of  which,  the  peculiar  circumstances  and 
situation,  in  which  the  United  States  were  placed,  had  a  material  in- 
fluence and  bearing,  on  their  internal,  as  well  as  external  commerce 
and  resources,  and  indicated  the  policy  pursued  by  them,  in  relation 
to  both. 

The  first  commenced  in  1793,  when  Europe  generally  became  in- 
▼olred  in  the  wara  arising  out  of  the  French  revolution,  and  ended 


369 

in  1807,  when  the  United  States  entered  upon  a  system  of  conimer: 
cial  restrictions  against  the  principal  European  belligerents. 

The  second  extended  from  1807,  to  the  close  of  the  year  1814, 
when  peace  took  place  between  this  country  and  Great  Britain,  and 
the  wars  in  Europe,  also,,  ceased — and  the  third,  from  1815  to  1833, 
during  which  period,  the  United  States^  as  well  as  Europe,  were  in  a 
state  of  peace. 

It  is  well  known,  that  a  moat  extraordinary  political  revolution 
commenced  in  France,  about  the  time  of  the  establishment  of  a  new 
government  in  the  United  States.  The  abolition  of  royalty,  and  the 
substitution  of  a  republic  in  France,  accompanied  with  the  beheading 
of  the  King  and  Queen,  in  1703,  united  Great  Britain  and  the  other 
principal  European  powers,  in  a  war  with  the  French  nation — a  war 
which  continued,  with  hut  a  short  interval,  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a 
century.  It  was  the  policy  of  the  rulers  of  the  French  Republic,  not 
merely,  to  enlist  the  sympathies  of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  but 
to  induce  them  to  make  common  cause  with  them  in  their  struggles  with 
fhe  European  powers.  President  Washington,  however,  very  wisely 
assumed  the  ground  of  neutrality,  as  alike  consistent  with  the  honor 
and  interest  of  his  country,  and  issued  his  celebrated  proclamation  of 
neutrality,  of  the  22d  of  April,  1793.  This  policy  of  the  father  of 
his  country,  was  continued  by  the  succeeding  administrations,  with 
the  exception  of  partial  hostilities^with  France,  in  1798  and  1799, 
until  1807.  During  this  period,  .n^rly  all  Europe  was  engaged  in 
this  unexampled  contest ;  and  the  old  systems  of  commercial  and 
colonial  monopoly,  were  almost  entirely  abandoned.  This,  as  we 
have  before  stated,  threw  into  the  hands  of  the  Americans,  a  great 
proportion  of  the  commerce  of  the  world. 

The  great  demand  for  American  agricultural  productions,  and  the 
consequent  increase  in  their  price,  as  well  as  the  demand  for  shipping 
for  transporting  these,  as  well  as  colonial  and  other  productionst  to 
various  places  in  Europe  and  elsewhere,  naturally  turned  the  attention 
of  the  Americans  almost  exclusively,  to  agriculture,  commerce  and 
navigation. 

That,  in  consequence  of  this  new  and  extraordinary  state  of  the 
world,  great  and  rapid  additions  were  made  to  the  wealth  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  no  one  can  doubt  This  is  evinced,  particularly  by  the 
unexampled  increase  of  their  shipping,  and  of  their  domestic  and  foreign 
exports.  The  registered  tonnage  of  the  United  States,  as  stated  in  a 
preceding  chapter,  in  1793,  was  three  hundred  and  sixty  seven  thou-  ^  dijp  IMf 
•aDd.seTen  hundred  and  thirty  fonr ;  and  in  1807,  was  eight  hundred  ^  S4t,  ^O^ 

47  •—  . 


870 

and  forty  eight  thousand  three  hundred  and  eix,  as  shewn  by  th* 
custom  house  returns,  making  an  increase  in  fifteen  years,  of  four 
hundred  and  eighty  thousand  fiytf  hundred  and  sewnty  two ;  *and 
after  an  allowance  for  vessels  lost  or  worn  out,  during  that  period, 
the  actual  increase  could  not  have  been  less  than  four  hundred  thoa- 
■and.  From  17d6  (the  time  when  a  discrimination  was  made  between 
exports  of  domestic  and  foreign  origin,)  to  1807,  the  value  of  domes- 
tic and  foreign  exports  was  as  follows,  viz : — 


Yean. 

Domestic  export!. 

Foreign  ezpoils. 

1796 

.       $40,764,097 

.      926,300,000 

17OT 

29,850,206 

27,000,000 

1798 

28,627,097 

33,600,000 

1799 

33,142,622 

46,623,000 

1800 

'.    .         31,840,903 

39,130,877 

1801 

47,473,204 

46,642,721 

1801^ 

36,708,189 

36,744,971 

1803 

^206,961 

13,694,072 

1804 

41,467,477 

36,231,697 

1805 

42,387,002 

63,179,019 

1806 

41,263,727 

60,283,236 

1807 

48,699,692 

69,643,668 

$464,319,977  $476,273,061 

Making  a  difference,  during  t|)is  period,  of  nearly  twelve  millions 
of  dollars,  in  favor  of  foreign  exports. 

The  increase  of  American  tonnage,,  during  the  period  under  review, 
has  no  parallel,  in  the  commercial  annals  of  the  world.  In  1700,  tha 
commercial  tonnage  of  England  was  estimated,  at  two  hundred  and 
seventy  three  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety  three,  and  in  1760,  at 
SIX  hundred  and  nine  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety  eight,  an  in- 
crease, in  half  a  century,  of  about  three  hundred  and  thirty  six  thou- 
sand ;  and  the  increase,  in  the  next  half  century,  was  only  about  six 
hundred  and  sixty  thousand  tons.*  This  tonnage  included  the  re- 
peated voyages,  and  is  much  greater  than  the  actual  tonnage. 

The  great  increase  of  American  shipping  during  this  period,  was 
occasioned,  in  no  small  degree,  by  the  neutral  position  of  the  United 
States.  The  wars  in  Europe  opened  the  ports  of  the  colonies  of 
France,  Spain  and  Holland,  both  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  to  a 
neutral  flag;  and  the  sugar  and  the  coffee,  and  the  spices,  and  other 


<  ..  '  I 


•  C ha Imer's  Estimate,  p.  234. 


371 

rich  products  of  both  hemispheres,  found  their  way  to  Europe,  prin- 
cipally,- in  American  bottom's;  and  the  colonies  of  these  nations* 
were,  also,  supplied  with  European  produce,  in  the  same  way.  Eren 
Great  Britain,  during  this  struggle,  in  which  she  was  left,  at  timea,  to 
combat  alone  against  the  rest  of  Europe,  was  compelled  to  relax  her 
colonial  system,  and  to  permit  a  free  trade,  with  her  West  India  pos- 
aessions. 

We  are  aware,  that  a  different  .cause  has  been  assigned  for  the 
great  increase  of  American  shipping,  at  an  early  period  of  the  na- 
tional gOTernment,  in  an  official  document,  communicated  to  the  Housa 
of  Representatives,  in  February,  1830,  by  the  committee  of  com- 
merce  and  navigation ;  and  we  are  induced  to  notice  an  error,  in  this 
document  in  relation  to  American  tonnage,  because  it  was  the  foun- 
dation of  the  different  views  taken  by  the  committee,  on  this,  as 
well  as  other  subjects;  and  because  the  document  it8elf,.has  been  re- 
ferred to  by  some  English  writers,  as  containing  authentic  statements* 
*'It  is  a  common  impression,"  say  the  committee,  in  the  document  or 
report  alluded  to,  "  that  our  early  maritime  prosperity ^  was  owing  to 
th^  wars  growing  out  of  the  French  revolution,  which  enabled  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain,  to  monopolize  the  carrying  trade. 
Those,  who  think  so,  take  but  a  superficial  viejuo  of  the  causes,  which 
gave  a  strong  impulse  to  our  navigation,  at  that  early  period.  These 
were,  the  rich  and  increasing  agricultural  resources,  the  removal  of 
all  the  countervailing  laws  of  the  states,  our  commercial  enterprise« 
and  a  foreign  commerce  without  restrictions.  Our  navigation  grew 
more  rapidly,  before  the  continenul  war,  when  we  had  nothing  to 
carry,  but  our  own  productions,  than  it  did,  at  any  period  afterwards. 
For  three  years,  from  1789  to  1792  (see  Table  No.  Ill,)  the  increase 
was  near  three  hundred  thousand  tons  ;  from  1793  to  1796,  it  ought 
to  have  been  increased  to  a  greater  amount,  but  it  was  not  over  two 
hundred  thousand,  shewing  clearly,  a  mure  rapid  increase,  both  in 
ratio  and  amount^  before  than  after  the  war  broke  out*^ 

By  referring  to  (No.  Ill,)  a  Table  annexed  to  this  document,  headed 
**  a  comparative  statement  of  American  tonnage,  employed  in  the  for- 
eign trade,  from  1789  to  1807,  and  from  1815  to  18S9,'*  we  find,  iiH 
deed,  the  tonnage  for  1789,  put  down  at  one  hundred  and  twenty  sev- 
co  thousand  three  hundred  and  twenty  nine,  and  for  17^2,  at  four 
hundred  and  fourteen  thousand  six  hundred  and  seventy  nine,  making 
an  exact  difference  of  two  hundred  and  eighty  seven  thousand  three 
hundred  and  fifiy ;  and  hence  the  committee  infer,  as  we  suppose, 
that  the  actual  increase  of  American  tonnage,  in  foreign  tradoy  dor- 


378 

ing  that  short  period,  was  nearly  three  hundred  thousand.  It  is  iMt 
a  little  singular,  that  a  committee,  to  w6om  was  entrusted  the-impor^ 
ant  subject  of  commerce  and  navigation,  should liave  forgotten,  etpe- 
cialiy  in  so  elaborate  a  report,  that  the  revenue  system,  under  the  gen- 
eral government,  did  not  go  into  operation,  until  the  middle  of  Au- 
gust, 1789 ;  and  that  the  tonnage,  for  that  year,  pat  down  in  the  Table 
referred  to,  only  included  that  part  which  entered  the  ports  of  the 
United  States  aAer  that  time,  embracing  about  three  months  and  a 
half;  and  of  course,  could  only  include  a  little  more  than  one  third 
of  the  whole  tonnage  then  employed  in  foreign  trade.  Had  tbe«oiii« 
mittee  observed  the  tonnage  for. the  next  year  (1790)  in  the  sanae  Ta- 
ble,  they  would  have  found  it  to  be  three  hundred  and  fifly.four  thoo- 
aand  seven  hundred  and  sixty  seven  ;  and  that  the  increase  from  1790 
lo  179S,  was,  in  fact,  less  than  sixty  thousand ;  and  they  would,  aUo» 
see/  from  the  same  Table, 'that  the  tonnage  had  increased  from  1793 
to  1796,  about  two  hundred  and  twenty  seven  thousand,  making  a  diA* 
ference  in  favor  of  the  latter  period  of  about  one  hundred  and  aixty 
seven  thousand.  In  adverting  to  the  causes  of  this  increase,  it  should 
be  borne  in  mind,  that  Great  Britain  was  not  engaged  in' the  war  vn- 
til  1793;  and  that  in  the  preceding  year,  the  foreign  tonnage  employed 
in  the  American  trade  was  a  little  more  than  two  hundred  and  forty 
four  thousand,  of  which,  two  hundred  and  six  thousand  belonged  to 
that' nation;  and  that,  in  1796,  in  consequence  of  the  war,  only  forty 
nine  thousand  foreign  tonnage  entered  the  ports  of  the  United  Statea. 

Domestic  tonnage,  therefore,  was  substituted  for  foreign  ;  and  the 
increase  of  the  former  during  this  period,  was  not  wholly  owing  to 
the  increase,  either  of  domestic  or  foreign  productions,  which  enter- 
ed into  the  American  commerce.  Had  the  committee,  who  drew  the 
document  alluded  to,  adverted  to  the  export  Tables,  at  that  early  period 
of  the  government,  the  difference  in  the  value  of  '*  agricultural  re- 
sources,'' exported  between  1790  and  1792,  would  have  been  found 
short  of  919750,000;  and  this  amount  would  hardly  have  required  en 
addition  of  three  hundred  thousand  tons  of  shipping.  From  1793  to 
1796,  however,  the  difference  in  the  value  of  exports  was  nearly 
841,000,000,  and  oif  this  sum,  $26,000,000  arose  from  productions  of 
foreign  origin.  The  committee  seem,  also,  to  have  forgotten  the 
impulse  given  to  American  navigation,  by  the  discriminating  ton- 
nage and  other  duties,  established,  at  the  commencement  of  the  gov- 
ernment. 

The  increased  demand  for  the  agricultural  productions  of  this  coun- 
try, daring  the  period  under  review,  raised  their  price  to  a  height  be- 


878 

fore  unknown.    This,  as  well  as  the  trade  in  foreign  productions,  ne« 
cessarily  created  a  demand  for  shipping ;  and  agriculture,  commerce 
and  navigation,  became  the  mopt  lucrative  employments,  and  almost 
exclusive  objects  of  pursuit  in  thb  United  States.     We  have  before 
OS,  a  (able  giving  the  price  of  flour  at  Philadelphia,  from  1785  to  I8289 
a  period  of  forty  four  years,  the  accuracy  of  which,  we  believe,  may 
be  relied  on.    The  average  price  of  flour,  from  1785  to  1793,  accord- 
ing to  this  table,  was  $5  41  per  barrel,  while  the  price,  from  1793  to 
1807,  (excluding  the  years  18Q2  and  1803,  when  Europe  was  at  peace 
under  the  treaty  of  Amiens,)  being  twelve  years  of  the  war,  was  90  12; 
making  a  difference  of  84  71  per  barrel.   This  diflerence,  during  these 
two  periods,  may  be  attributed  by  some,  to  the  depressed  state  of 
commerce,  and  a  want  of  an  efficient  government,  during  a  part  of  the 
first  period.     By  adverting,  however,  to  the  price,  from  1820  to  1828, 
after  Europe  had  settled  down  in  peace,  and  again  returned  to  her  old 
systems  of.  policy,  it  was  reduced,  to  $5  46,  being  only  five  cents 
more  than  in  the  firtit  mentioned  period.     The  advanced  price  of  ag- 
licujttural  productions,  during  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  was  accom- 
panied by  A  great  advance  in  the  price  of  lands  in  the  United  States. 
The  diflference  in  the  valuations  of  lands,  made,  under  the  authority 
of  the  general  government,  between  1799,  and  1814  and  1815,  was, 
as  we  have  before  stated,  $950,293,806.    Taking  into  view,  all  otheir 
causes,  which  contributed  to  produce  this — such  as  the  increase  of  pop- 
ulation, clearing  of  new  lands,  improvement  of  the  old,  depreciation  of 
money,  &c.,  yet  no  small  part  of  it  must  be  attributed  to  the  increase  of 
the  profits  of  the  lands  themselves ;  as  it  is  well  known,  that,  except 
in  the  new  stares,  the  price  of  lands  has  diminished,  since  1815. 

The  American  commerce,  during  this  period,  was  often  interrupted, 
by  depredations,  committed  under  illegal  orders,  decrees  and  block- 
ades of  the  two  great  belligerents,  France  and  Great  Britain.  Theie 
depredations  commenced,  under  the  French  decree  of  May  9th,  1798, 
and  others  which  followed,  and  under  the  British  order  of  the  8th  of 
June,  1793,  prohibiting  flour  and  meal  from  being  carried  to  France, 
or  to  any  port  occupied  by  French  armies.  This  was  followed,  by 
other  British  ordersf  in  relation  to  neutral  trade  with  the  French  West 
Indies.  The  proceedings  of  the  British  government,  under  these  ille- 
gal orders,  as  well  as  other  acts  strongly  indicating  hostile  intentiona, 
would,  probably,  have  brought  the  United  States,  into  open  war  with 
Great  Britain,  as  early  as  1791,  had  not  President  Washington  inter- 
posed a  peaceful  mission  to  that  country^  and  which  ended  in  a  treaty, 
condnded  by  Mr.  Jay,  on  the  19th  of  November  of  that  year;  and 


874 

under  which,  the  merchants  of  the  United  States,  received  more 
ten  millions  of  dollars,  as  a  compensation  for  property  illegally  takeo* 
under  the  British  orders  referred  to. 

France  considered  this  treaty  as'a  violation  of  prior  engagements 
made  with  her,  on  the  part  of  the  Americans ;  and  its  final  ratifi^tioa 
in  .179Gs  was  immediately  fallowed,  by  a  general  seizure  and  ponden- 
nation  of  American  vessels,  under  several  illegal  decrees  of  the  Ez« 
ecutive  Directory.- 

This  brought  the  United  States  into  partial  hostilities  with  Franeet 
and  which  ended  by  a  treaty  made  with  the  first  consul  in  1800.  The 
treaty  of  Amiens,  in  1801,  gave  a  short  respite  to  Europe.  The  wart 
however,  was  renewed  in  1803,  with  more  determined  animositj,  ihaa 
before ;  and  the  law  of  nations  was  disregarded,  n6t  only  between  the 
belligerents  themselves,  but  between  them  and  neutrals.  In  this  re- 
newed contest,  such  was  the  maritime  superiority  of  Great  Britain, 
that  the  copimercial  vessels  of  France,  Holland  and  Spajn,  were  al- 
most driven  from  the  ocean ;  and  these  nations  were  dependant  upon 
a  neutral  flag,  for  their,  colonial,  as  well  as  other  supplies;  and 
the  United  States  beci^me  their  sole  carriers.  This  interference 
of  neutrals,  in  the  commerce  of  her  enemies,  Great  Britain  consid- 
ered, as  unjustly  depriving  her  of  the  only  means  she  had,  of  an* 
noying  them  and  as  preventing  her  from  bringing  them,  to  joat 
terms  of  peace  ;  and  was  at  last  carried  to  such  an  extent,  that  in 
1805,  she  considered  it  as  a  cover  of  enemy's  property ;  and  denom- 
inated it  '*  war  in  disguise."  A  pamphlet,  under  this  imposing 
name,  was  published  in  Great  Britain,  in  that  year,  well  calculated  to 
excite,  not  merely  the  jealousy,  but  the  hostility  of  that  couutry, 
against  neutrals.  In  this  celebrated  pamphlet,  the  American  people* 
were  referred  to,  as  *'  a  new  power  that  had  arisen  on  the  western  shore 
of  the  Atlantic,  whose  position,  and  maritime  spirit,  were  calculated 
to  give  new  and  vast  importance,  to  every  question  of  neutral  righU^ 
especially  in  the  American  seas."  And  the  author,  also,  declares, 
**  that  not  a  single  merchant  ship,  under  a  flag  inipical  to  Great  Brit^ 
ain,  now  crosses  the  equator,  or  traverses  the  Atlantic  Ocean." 

Under  impressions,  which  such  language  as  this,  would  naturally 
produce,  the  British  government  and  the  admiralty  courtis,  were  con- 
firmed and  supported,  in  the  revival  of  the  rule  of  1750,  by  which,  it 
was  claimed,  that  neutrals,  in  time  of  war,  could  carry  on  no  trade, 
which  they  had  not  been  accustomed  to  carry  on,  in  time  of  peace. 

Great  Britain  had  not  before  objected  to  the  Americans  bringing 
colonial  and  other  produee  into  the  ports  of  the  United  States,  there 


375 

•eeurio^  the  dutien,  and  then  again  reshipping  it,  with  a  drawback 
of  moat  of  the  duties,  to  any  foreign  country.  She  now,  claimed 
that  the  allowance  of  this,  was  only  a  relaxation  of  the  rule  of  1^66 ; 
and,  on  the  22d  of  May,  1806,  an  American  vessel,  called* the  Essex, 
Ornle  master,  was  condemned,  together  with  her  cargo,  under  the 
rule  before  mentioned,  now,  for  the  first  time  applied  during  this  war. 
In  consequence  of  this  admiralty  decision,  many  American  Tesaeli^ 
in  the  same  situation  as  the  Elssex,  were  seized  and  brought  into  Brit- 
ish ports.  This  immediately  became  a  subject  of  complaint,  on  the 
part  of-  the  American  merchants.  It  will  be  remembered,  that,  at  this 
time,  the  United  States  had  no  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  in  relation 
to  commerce ;  the  commercial  pyrt  of  that  concluded  by  Mr.  Jay, 
hmring  expired  in  1804.  The  British  goTemment,  however,  propos- 
ed in  that  year,  a  renewal  of  this  treaty,  to  continue,  until  two  yean 
after  the  close  of  the  new*  war — but  this  was  declined,  by  the  Ameri- 
can Executive. 

In  this  peculiar  state  of  things,  a  new  negotiation  was  set  on  foot ; 
end  Mr.  William  Pinckney,  who  had  been  one  of  the  commissionera 
under  Mr.  Jay's  treaty,  to  adjust  the  claims  of  the  American  mer- 
chants, was  associated  wilh  Mr.  Munroe,  in  conducting  it.  The  im- 
portant subject  of  impressment,  as  well  as  the  colonial  trade  was, 
also,  to  claim  the  attention  of  the  American  negotiators. 

On  the  31st  of  December,  1806,  Messrs.  Munroe  and  Pinckney, 
during  the  short  period  of  the  Fox  administration,  with  much  diffi- 
culty concluded  a  treaty  with  Great  Britain.  With  respect  to  the 
colonial  anid  other  trade,  the  elewnth  article  provided,  in  substance, 
that,  during  the  then  existing  war,  European  products,  might  be  car- 
ried to  the  port  of  any  colony,  belonging  to  the  enemy  of  Great  Brit- 
ain, provided  they  had  been  entered  and  landed  in  the  United  States, 
and  paid  the  ordinary  duties ;  and  on  re-exportation,  should,  after  the 
drawback,  have  been  subject  to  a  duty,  equivalent  to  not  less  than 
one  per  cent  ad  valorem,  and  were  bona  (ide  the  property  of  Amer- 
ican citizens.  And  the  produce  of  the  colonies  of  the  enemies,  might, 
also,  be  brought  to  the  United  States,  there  entered,  landed,  and  hav- 
ing paid  the  duties,  might  be  re-exported,  to  any  part  of  Europe,  sub- 
ject to  a  duty,  after  the  drawback,  of  not  less  than  two  per  cent  ad 
valorem.  This  treaty,  it  is  well  known,  was  rejected  by  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son, without  even  consulting  his  constitutional  advisers;  principally, 
for  the  want  of  an  express  stipulation,  against  future  impressments — 
a  stipulation  which,  after  immense  sacrifices,  from  commercial  re- 
atrietiona,  for  four  years,  and  a  war  of  two  and  a  half  yeara  nore. 


i 


376 

the  successor  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  was  unable  to  obtain.  And  we  bef 
leare  here  to  remark,  that,  although  the  American  comroifwionen 
eoufd  not  procure  a  treaty  stipulation,  on  this  important  subject,  ia 
strict  accordance  with  their  instructions ;  yet  the  British  conunis- 
stoners,  in  a  written  communication,  gave  such  assurances  of  iecQ- 
rity,  against  the  future  abuse  of  the  practice  of  impressment,  as  satis- 
fled  the  American  commissioners,  on  this  point. 

Mr.  Muuroe,  in  his  letter  to  the  President,  of  the  28th  of  Febnm- 
ry,  1808,  giving  his  reasons,  for  assenting  to  the  treaty,  on  this  point, 
says — "  We  were,  therefore,  decidedly  of  opinion,  that  the  paper  of 
the  British  commissioners,  placed  the  interest  of  impressment^  on 
ground,  which  it  was  both  safe  and  honorable  for  the  United  States,  to 
admit ;  that,  in  short,  it  gave  their  government  the  command  of  the 
subject,  for  every  necessary  and  useful  purpose.  Attached  to  the 
treaty,  it  was  the  basis  or  condition,  on  which  the  treaty  rested.** 
The  consequences  of  the  failure  of  the  negotiation,  are,  by  Mr.  Munroe, 
described  in  the  follov^angua^e — '*  War,  therefore,  seemed  to  be  the 
inevitable  consequence  of  such  a  state  of  things ;  I  was  far  from  con- 
sidering it  an  alternative,  which  ought  to  be  preferred,  to  the  arrange- 
ment, which  was  offered  to  us.  When  I  took  into  view  the  prosper- 
ous and  happy  condition  of  the  United  States,  compared  with  that  of 
other  nations ;  that,  as  a  neutral  power  they  were  almost  the  ezcln- 
sive  carriers  of  the  whole  world ;  and  that,  in  commerce,  they  flourished 
beyond  example,  notwithstanding  the  losses,  which  they,  occasionally 
suffered,  I  was  strong  in  the  opinion,  that  these  blessings  ought  not 
to  be  hazarded,  in  such  a  question.*** 

The  hasty  rejection  of  this  treaty,  (the  best,  no  doubt,  that  could 
have  been  made,  at  that  time,  as  Mr.  Jay*s  was,  in  1794,)  ultimately 
led,  as  Mr.  Munroe  had  predicted,  to  a  war  with  Great  Britain. 

In  entering  upon  the  consideration  of  the  situation  of  the  United 
States,  during  the  second  period,  commencing  at  the  close  of  1807, 
when  their  whole  external  commerce  was,  at  once,  withdrawn  from 
the  ocean — a  commerce,  which  in  the  three  years  immediately  pre- 
ceding, in  imports  and  exports,  exceeded  three  hundred  millions  of 
dollars  for  each ;  we  deem  it  not  improper  to  advert  to  some  of  the 
immediate  causes,  which  led  to  this  proceeding  on  the  part  of  the 
American  government 

NThe  battle  of  Jena,  in  October,  1806,  placed  the  capital  of  the 
kingdom  of  Prussia,  in  the  hands  of  Bonaparte ;  and  elevated  with  his 
victory,  from  this  capital,  he,  on  the  21st  of  November  following^ 
iifiied  his  iamoos  decree,  usually  bearing  the  name  of  the  place,  from 
whence  it  issued.    This  decree  was  the  commencement  of  a  commer- 


877 

dal  waWkre  against  Great  Britain,  called  the  continental  Sfftem.  It 
declared  the  British  islands  in  a  state  of  blockade,  and  prohibited  all 
commerce  and  intercourse  with  them — not  only  to,  but  all  letters  or 
packets  written  in  England,  or  to  an  Englishman,  in  the  English  Ian" 
guagCy  were  to  be  seized  in  the  post  offices — every  British  subject  of 
•whaterer  rank  or  condition,  found  in  countries  occepied  by  French 
troops,  or  those  of  the  allies  of  France,  were  to  be  made  prisonere 
of  war — every  ware  house,  all  merchandize  or  property  whatever, 
belonging  to  an  Englishman,  was  declared  good  priae — ^no  vessel 
eoming  directly  from  England  or  her  colonies,  or  having  been  there, 
after  thb  publication  of  the  decree,  was  to  be  admitted  into  any  port; 
and  every  vessel,  by  a  false  declaration,  contravening  the  foregoing 
disposition,  was  to  be  seized,  and  the  ship  and  cargo  confiscated,  aa 
English  property. 

This  decree  was  declared  to  be  the  fundamental  law  of  the  empire, 
until  England  should  acknowledge,  that  the  rights  of  war,  should  be 
the  same  on  land  as  at  sea ;  that  it  should  not  be  extended  to  any  pii* 
▼ate  property  whatever,  nor  to  persons  who  were  not  military ;  and 
until  the  right  of  blockade  be  restrained  to  fortified  places  actually 
invested  by  competent  forces.  The  execution  of  this  unprecedented 
decree,  was  severely  felt,  tj  some  of  the  commercial  cities  of  the 
empire ;  and  Hamburg,  Bordeaux,  and  others,  solicited  some  relaza* 
lion  of  it,  in  their  favor  t  but  the  French  Emperor  declared  to  them, 
**  Britain  must  be  humbled,  were  it  at  the  expense  of  throwing  civiH* 
zation  back  for  centuries,  and  returning  to  the  original  mode  of  tra- 
ding by  barter.*' 

Bonaparte  was  unable,  however,  at  once,  to  induce  by  argument,  or 
compel  by  force,  all  the  continental  powers,  to  cooperate  with  him.  In 
hb  favorite  scheme  of  destroying  England. 

Although  Holland  and  Spain  had  long  been  subservient  to  his  wiD, 
and  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  and  the  treaty  of  Presborg,  had  placed 
Austria  under  his  control,  yet  the  voluntary  or  involuntary  coopera- 
tion*of  Russia  and  Prussia,  and  some  of  the  minor  powers  of  Europe 
was  still  wanting. 

The  hard  terms  offered  th#Prussian  monarch,  prevented  an  imme* 
diate  settlement  of  the  terms  of  peace ;  and  relying  on  the  aid  of 
England,  and  of  the  Russian  armies,  the  war  was  continued  in  the 
north,  with  alternate  success,  until  the  famous  battle  of  Friedland,  and 
the  equally  famous  treaty  of  Tilsit,  riveted  the  chains  of  Prussia,  and 
added  Russia  to  Bonaparte's  list  of  vassal  nations.  One  of  the  aecrei 
articlea  of  this  treaty  was,  aa  has  often  been  asserted,  and  no  douM 

4.S 


J 


378 

with  truth,  an  engagement,  on  the  part  of  the  conquered,  to  aid  ia 
earrying  into  effect  the  continental  system.  This  engagement  waa 
complied  with ;  and  these  powers,  in  the  months  of  September  and 
November  following,  became  the  allies  of  France  against  Grest 
Britain. 

Knowing,  that  the  minor  powers  of  Europe,  particularly,  PortogiA 
and  Denmark,  could  easily  be  made  to  yield  to  his  commands,  Bona- 
parte immediately  after  the  peace  of  Tilsit,  determined,  that  all  neu' 
tral  and  commercial  nations,  should  be  compelled  to  join,  in  his 
commercial  warfare  against  Great  Britain.  With  this  view,  and  with 
this  fixed  determination,  he  returned  to  Paris,  on  the  27th  'of  July 
1807,  where  his  plans  soon  got  into  circulation,  at  first,  indeed,  only 
in  whispers.  Among  other  things,  it  was  said,  that  an  army  was  rais- 
ing in  the  south,  to  take  possession  of  Portugal,  and  another  in  the 
north,  to  seize  upon  Denmark,  and  generally,  that  ha ving* settled  ^the 
affairs  of  the  belligerents  (except  England)  to  his  liking,  he  was  de- 
termined those  of  neutrals  should  be  settled  in  the  same  way.  The 
conduct  of  the  Emperor  towards  the  Danish  and  Portuguese  ministers, 
at  a  general  audience  held  with  all  the  foreign  ministers,  on  the  se- 
cond day  of  August,  confirmed  the  whispers  in  circulation.* 

The  affairs  of  neutrals  were  to  be  settled,  by  uniting  with  France, 
against  Great  Britain. 

Subsequent  events  fully  proved  the  truth  of  the  information,  at  first 
communicated  in  whispers.     Portugal  was  soon  called  upon  **  to  ac- 


*  The  following,  is,  in  substance,  the  letter  of  General  Armstrong,  to  his  gov- 
ernment,  bearing  date  the  3d  of  August,  1807,  giving  an  account  of  this  audience, 
and  of  the  stories  then  in  circulatir.n. 

"  Have  had  an  audience  with  the  Emperor,"  says  Grcncral  Armstrong,  "  since 
Ids  return.  I  stood  near  Baron  Dyer,  the  Danish  minister.  The  Empeh>r  spoke 
to  him  and  said,  '  so  Baron  the  Baltic  has  been  violated ;'  did  not  hear  the  Baron*s 
toswer,  and  the  Emperor  said  to  him,  in  a  voice  more  raised  and  peremptory,  '  so 
Baron  the  Baltic  has  been  violated.'  From  the  Danish  minister  he  proceeded  to 
myself  and  others,  and  went  to  the  minister  of  Portugal,  and  it  is  said,  read  to 
him  a  severe  lecture,  on  the  conduct  of  his  court.  These  circumstances,**  the 
American  minister  adds,  "  go  far,  to  justify  %r  wAtV/ierj  in  circulation,  that  an 
army  is  raising  in  the  south,  to  take  possession  of  Portugal,  and  another  in  the 
north  to  go  against  Denmark ;  and  generally,  that  having  sealed  the  affairs  of  the 
*  kiUigerenU  (exce)^  England)  to  his  likings  be  intends  to  settle  those  of  neutrals^ 
in  the  same  way.  On  this  account  probably,  Baron  Dyer  toqk  me  aside  and  asked 
me,  whether  an  application  had  been  made  to  me,  to  ^oin  in  the  projected  union  of 
all  commercial  states,  against  Great  Britain.  On  my  answering  in  the  negative, 
ht  said, '  you  are  a  favored  nation ,  but  your  turn  must  cowu^  at  last.* 


in 


879 

eede  to  thef3rstem  of  the  continent ;"  but  delaying  a  compliance  with 
the  demand  against  her  ancient  ally,  or  doing  it  in  a  manner  unsatia* 
factory,  war  wan  declared  against  her,  by  the  Emperor,  on  the  2l8tof 
October,  1807,  and  in  six  days  after  thitji,  France  and  Spain,  or  rather 
Bonaparte  and  the  Prince  of  Peace,  by  a  secret  treaty,  in  a  formal 
manner,  divided  Portugal  between  them,  and  in  this  division  the  For* 
tuguese  American  possessions  were  included,  and  were  to  be  divided 
between  the  parties.  A  French  army  was  soon  in  motion,  to  take 
possession  of  the  part  allotted  to  the  Emperor ;  and  on  the  4th  of 
December,  Junot,  with  this  army,  was  at  Lisbon ;  and  in  a  proclama- 
tion, soon  after  issued,  declared,  that  the  interests  of  the  Portagueae» 
engaged  the  Emperor  and  King  his  master,  and  **  that  the  destinies  of 
Portugal  were  brightening,  and  her  future  happiness  secured,  becauaa 
Napoleon  the  great,  had  taken  her  under  his  omnipotent  protection.^ 
In  the  mean  time,  the  Prince  Regent  of  Portugal,  took  his  departure 
for  the  Brazils,  under  the  protection  of  a  British  squadron.  Bona- 
parte, no  doubt,  would  have  proceeded  in  the  same  way  against  Den- 
mark, had  not  Great  Britain  anticipated  his  plans,  by  forcibly  taking 
possession  of  the  whole  Danish  fleet,  and  carrying  it  to  England.  In 
justification  of  this  extraordinary  measure,  the  British. alleged,  and 
probably  with  truth,  that  it  was  one  of  the  secret  articles  of  the 
Treaty  of  Tilsit,  that  the  Danes  were  to  be  compelled  to  join  the  co- 
alition against  England ;  and  their  fleet  was  to  be  employed  against 
that  country ;  and  that  self  preservation,  imperiously  demanded  the 
seizure  of  this  fleet,  on  the  same  principle,  that  an  individual  in  con- 
test with  one  who  had  threatened  his  life,  would  be  justified  in  wrest- 
ing a  dagger  by  force,  from  the  hands  of  a  bystander,  which  his  ap- 
tagonist  was  on  the  point  of  seizing,  to  plunge  into  his  bosom. 

And  yet,  after  tlie  battles  of  the  Nile  and  Trafalgar,  few,  it  is  be- 
lieved, would  say,  that  even  the  Danish  fleet,  added  to  the  fleet  of 
France  and  her  allies,  would  necessarily  have  been  sufliciently  pow- 
erful to  destroy  that  qf  Great  Britain. 

To  have  enforced  the  Berlin  decree  against  the  Americans,  while 
the  north  of  Europe  was  open  to  British  commerce  through  the  Bal- 
tic, would  have  been  unavailing.  .While  Bonaparte,  therefore,  in  the 
winter  and  spring  of  IBOv^as  occupi|4  with  his  armies,  in  compel- 
ling the  cooperation  of  the  northern  powers,  General  Armstrong  waa 
informed  by  the  Minister  of  Marine,  that  the  decree  was  not  to  aflfect 
the  American  commerce,  **  which  would  still  be  governed  by  the  mlee 
of  the  treaty  established  between  the  two  countries.^ 


380 

Boty  u  Baron  Dyer  had  predicted,  th^  turn  of  ike  AmerteoMM 
ai  last.  On  the  18th  of  September,  1807,  Regnier,  the  grand  judge* 
referring  to  American  vessels,  informed  the  procureur  general  of  the 
council  of  prizes,  that,  as  the  Emperor  had  not  thought  proper  to 
express  any  exception  in  his  decree,  there  was  no  ground  to  make 
any,  in  the  execution^  in  any  thing  whatever.  To  a  remonstnuica 
presented  by  General  Armstrong,  on  this  subject,  the  Secretary  .of 
foreign  relations,  replied,  on  the  7th  of  October,  **  that  his  Majesty 
has  considered  every  neutral  vessel  going  from  English  ports,  with 
cargoes  of  English  merchannize,  or  of  English  origin,  as  lawfully 
seizable,  by  French  armed  yessels."  '*  The  decree  of  blockade,''  ho 
adds,  "  has  now  been  issued  eleven  months.  The  principal  powers  of 
Europe,  far  from  protesting  against  its  provisions,  have  adopted  then. 
They  have  perceived,  that  its  execution  mvst  be  complete^  to  render  it 
more  effectual ;  and  it  has  seemed  easy,  to  reconcile  these  measuros 
with  the  observance  of  treaties^  especially  at  a  time  when  the  infrmo- 
lion  by  England,  of  the  rights  of  maritime  powers,  render  their  inter* 
ests  common^  and  tends  to  unite  them^  in  support  of  the  same  cause*** 

In  consequence  of  these  intentions  and  views  of  the  Emperor,  the 
merchandize  of  an  American  vessel,  the  Horizon,  (a  vessel  shipwreck* 
ed  on  the  coast  of  France  in  May  preceding)  which  was  of  Elnglish 
origin,  was,  soon  after,  confiscated,  under  the  5th  article  of  the  Berlin 
decree.  To  this  decision,  the  American  minister  stron^gly.  remonstr^* 
ted,  and  the  answer  of  the  French  government  clearly  shews,  that 
Bonaparte  had  in  reality,  and  that  not  merely  by  whispers,  determin* 
ed  to  settle  the  affairs  of  neutrals  to  his  liking,  as  he  had  done  those 
oC  the  belligerents ;  and  that,  in  his  commercial  warfare  against  Greet 
Britain,  there  should  be  no  neutrals.  After  stating,  that  England  **in 
violating  the  rights  of  all  nations,  had  united  them  all,  by  a  common 
interest,  and  that  it  was  for  them  to  have  recourse  toforce^  against 
her,  the  French  minister  declares  the  conditions^  on  which  alone 
the  Americans  could  expect  redress,  for  the  injuries  of  which  they 
complained.  **  All  the  difficulties,'*  he  says,  **  which  have  given  rise 
to  your  reclamations,  sir,  would  he  removed  with  ease,  if  the  govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  after  complai^g  of  the  injustice  and  vio- 
lation of^  England,  took,  withithe  whole  continent,  the  part  of  guar* 
enteeing  itself  therefrom." 

We  would  here  state,  that  on  the  20th  of  October,  the  King  of 
Holland,  the  brother  of  the  French  Emperor,  issued  a  new  decree, 
more  rigidly  enforcing  that  of  Berlin ;  and  it  can  now  scarcely  be 
credited,  that  a  decree,  issued  by  the  sovereign  of  a  civilized  nation. 


381 

•hovld  eontain  an  order,  that  all  correspondence,  journals,  d&c.  which 
•hould  come,  in  a  neutral  flag,  should  he  seized  and  buTnt. 

On  the  II  th  of  November,  1807,  the  celebrated  British  orders  in 
coancil,  were  issued  in  opposition  to  the  Berlin  decree,  which  waa 
now  to  be  universally  enforced.  By  these,  all  the  ports  and  places  of 
France  and  her  allies,  or  of  any  other  country,  at  war  with  his  Ma« 
jesty,  and  all  other  ports  or  places  in  Europe,  from  which,  although 
not  at  war,  the  British  flag  was  excluded,  and  all  other  ports  or  placeit 
in  the  colonies  belonging  to  his  Majesty's  enemies,  were  to  be  subject 
to  the  saoie  restrictions,  in  point  of  trade  and  navigation  (with  certain 
exceptions)  as  if  the  same  were  actually  blockaded  by  his  Majesty** 
naval  forces,  in  the  most  strict  and  rigorous  manner ;  and  all  trade  in 
articles,  which  are  of  the  produce  or  manufacture  of  the  said  conn* 
tries  or  colonies,  should  be  deemed  and  considered  unlawful ;  and  anj 
vessel  trading  from  or  to  said  countries  or  colonies,  with  all  the  goods 
and  merchandize  on  board,  and  all  the  articles  of  the  produce  or  roan* 
nfiictnre  of  such  countries  or  colonies,  might  be  captured  and  con* 
demiled  as  prizes  to  the  captors. 

To  these  orders  others  were  afterwards  issued,  either  explanatory, 
or  more  particularly  carrying  them  into  effect,  by  which  certain  prop- 
erty passing  through  England  to  a  foreign  country,  was  made  subject 
to  a  transit  duty. 

To  the  British  orders  of  November  11th,  succeeded  another  decreet 
issoed  by  the  French  emperor,  from  his  imperial  palace  at  Milan,  dated 
December  17th,  declaring,  that  every  ship,  to  whatever  nation  belongs 
ing,  that  shall  have  submitted  to  be  searc)ied  by  an  English  ship,  or  to 
a  voyage  to  England ;  or  that  shalf  have  paid  any  tax  whatever  to  tha 
English  government,  shall  thereby,  and  fur  that  alone,  be  denation* 
aKied,  to  have  forfeited  the  protection  of  its  king,  and  to  have  become 
English  property — and  the  ships  so  denationalized,  on  entering  the 
ports  of  France,  or  those  of  her  allies,  or  on  falling  into  the  hands  of 
French  ships  of  war,  or  privateers,  were  declared  lawful  prizes.  And 
by  the  same  decree,  the  British  Islands  were  again  declared  in  a  state 
of  blockade,  both  by  sea  and  land. 

On  his  return  from  Italy  i^bnuary,  1808,  Bonaparte  instructed  his 
minister,  to  inform  Gen.  Armstrong,  tMit,  in  consequence  of  the 
British  orders  of  November  11th,  he  could  not  doubt,  but,  that  the 
United  States  had  declared  war  against  Great  Britain.  "  War  then 
exists,*'  says  Champagny,  '*in  fact,  between  England  and  the  United 
States ;  and  his  Majesty  considers  it,  as  declared  from  the  day,  on 
which  England  published  her  decrees.    In  that  persuasion,  his  Ma* 


/ 


382 

jestj,  ready  to  consider  the  United  States,  as  assocfated  with  the  ea 
of  all  the  powers,  who  have  to  defend  themselves  against  England,  hat 
not  taken  any  definitive  measure,  towards  the  American  vessels,  which 
may  have  he«n  brought  into  our  ports;  he  has  ordered,  that  ihej 
should  remain  sequestered,  until  a  decision  may  be  had  thereon,  ae- 
cording  to  the  dispositions,  which  shall  have  been  expressed,  by  the 
government  of  the  United  States." 

Not  long 'after  the  date  of  this  extraordinary  letter,  learning, 
haps,  that  the  Unted  States  had  not  in  fact  declared  war  against 
gland,  as  he  had  predicted,  Bonaparte  declared  in  full  council,  that 
the  Americans  should  be  compelled  to  be  his  allies  or  his  enemies; 
and  proceeded,  to  order  the  condemnation  of  some  American  Tessaky 
then  in  a  state  of  sequestration.  This  important  information  waa 
communicated  to  the  American  Executive,  by  Gen.  Armstrong,  in  a  let- 
ter bearing  date  the  22d  of  February,  1808,  and  which,  as  it  derel- 
opes,  in  a  most  unequivocal  manner,  the  views  and  policy  of  tha 
French  Emperor,  in  relation  to  this  country,  we  here  present  an  ex- 
tract, to  the  reader. 

**  Nothing  has  occured  here,**  says  Mr,  Armstrong,  ''  since  the  date 
of  my  public  dispatches  (the  17lh)  to  give  to  our  business  an  aspect 
more  favorable  than  it  then  had ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  two  facts,  which  I  think,  sufficiently  shew  the 
decided  character  of  the  Emperor's  policy  with  regard  to  us.  These 
are,  first,  that,  in  a  council  of  administration,  held  a  few  tiays  past, 
when  it  was  proposed  to  modify  the  operation  of  the  decrees  of  Not. 
1806,  and  Dec.  1807,  (though  the  proposition  was  supported  by  the 
whole  weight  of  the  council,)  he* became  highly  indignant,  and  de- 
clared that  these  decrees  should  suffer  no  change — and  that  the  Amer- 
icans should  be  compelled  to  take  the  positive  character  of  either 
oltiA  or  enemies — secondly,  that  on  the  27th  of  January  last,  twelTe 
days  after  Mr.  Champagny*s  written  assurances,  that  these  decrees 
should  work  no  change  in  the  property  sequestered  until  the  discus- 
sions with  England  were  brought  to  a  close,  and  seven  days  before 
he  reported  to  me  verbally  these  very  assurances,  the  Emperor,  by  a 
special  decision,  confiscated  two  of  o^  ships  and  their  cargoes  (the 
Julius  Henry  and  Juniata)  Yor  want  merely  of  a  document,  not  re- 
quired by  any  law  or  usage  of  the  commerce,  in  which  they  were  en- 
gaged. This  act  was  taken,  as  I  was  informed,  on  a  general  report  of 
sequestered  cases,  amounting  to  one  hundred  and  sixty ;  and  which, 
at  present  prices,  will  yield  upwards  of  100,000,000  of  francs,  a  som, 
whose  magnitude  alone,  renders  hopeless  all  attempts  at  saving  it. 
Danes,  Portugese  and  Americans,  will  be  the  principal  sufferers. 


388 

*<  If  I  am  right  ia  supposing  the  Emperor  has  detiDitively  taken 
his  ground,  I  cannot  be  wrong  in  concluding  that  you  will  immediately 
take  yours.*' 

The  American  government  had,  indeed,  taken  its  ground, 'but  not 
such,  it  is  apprehended,  as  that  contemplated  by  Gen.  Armstrong,  in 
the  above  letter.  It  had  withdrawn  the  whole  American  commerce 
from  the  oceans  and  to  this  proceeding,  we  now  invite  the  attention 
q£  the  reader. 

\pn  the  I4th  of  December,  1807,  despatches  reached  Washingtoui 
from  the  American  minister  at  Paris,  giving  the  first  official  informa- 
tion of  the  application  of  the  Berlin  decree,  to  American  vessels. 
Among  these  was  the  letter  of  Regnier,  the  note  of  Gen.  Armstrongs, 
and  the  answer  of  Champagny,  before  mentioned.  These,  on  the 
18th  of  the  same  month,  were  laid  before  Congress,  together  with  a 
newspaper,  containing  a  proclamation  of  the  British  king  of  the  16lh 
of  October,  recalling  his  subjects  from  abroad,  in  foreign  service,  and 
giving  directions,  as  to  the  mode  of  searching  for  and  taking  them, 
when  found  on  board  commercial  neutral  vessels.  And  we  cannot 
but  here  observe,  that  these  were  the  only  papers  then  submitted  to 
Congress,  although  the  letter  of  Gen.  Armstrong,  dated  August  3d, 
1807,  before  noticed,  disclosing  the  views  and  policy  of  Bonaparte  in 
relation  to  neutrals,  in  a  manner  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood,  must 
have  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Executive.  Nor  has  any  expla- 
nation ever  been  given,  why  a  document  so  important,  should  have 
been  concealed  from  Congress,  at  that  time,  and  not  have  been  com- 
municated to  that  body,  until  long  after  the  embargo  was  laid. 

}n  communicating  the  above  papers  to  the  national  legislature,  the 
President  said  they  would  shew  '*  the  great  and  increasing  dangem 
with  which  our  vessels*  our  seamen  and  merchandize  are  threatened 
on  the  high  seas  and  elsewhere,  from  the  belligerent  powers  of  Eu- 
rope*'— and  he  recommended,  on  this  account,  an  embargo. 

In  consequence  of  this  recommendation,  an  embargo  was  laid,  t>n 
the  22d  of  December,  and  without  any  limitation  as  to  time. 

The  secretary  of  state,  in  communicating  to  the  American  minister 
at  London,  the  embargo  act^e  day  after  it^  passage,  says,  *'  the  policy 
and  causes  of  the  measure  are  explained,  in  the  message  itself;'*  and 
in  a  second  letter,  to  the  same  minister,  not  long  after,  he  says,  **  my 
last,  which  was  committed  to  the  British  packet,  enclosed  a  copy  of 
the  act  of  embargo,  and  explained  the  policy  of  the  measure.  Among 
the  considerations**  he  added,  **  which  enforced  it,  was  the  probability 
of  such  decrees,  as  were  issued  by  the  British  government  on  the  11th 


r 


884 

of  NovemW,  the  language  of  the  British  Gazettes,  with  other  iadi- 
cations,  having  left  little  doubt,  ^hat  such  were  meditated.'^  On  ike 
day  the  vessel  arrived  at  New  York,  from  France,  bringing  the  d^ 
•patches  above  mentioned  from  Gen.  Armstrong,  a  vessel,  elao*  ar- 
rived, at  the  same  port,  from  England,  bringing  British  newapepent 
containing  information,  that  retaliatory  orders  against  the  French  Bei^ 
lin  decree,  would  probably  soon  issue.  Indeed,  wh^n  it  is  conaid* 
ered,  that  the  British  government,  as  well  as  the  American  ExecutiTeb 
had,  for  some  time  before,  had  full  information  of  the  fixed  detenqpil- 
aiion  of  Bonaparte,  that  there  should  be  no  neutrals,  and  that  all  ne- 
lions  were  to  be  compelled  to  join  in  enforcing  the  Berlin  decree,  no 
one  could  doubt,  that  Great  Britain,  would  take  some  measures  of  re- 
sistance or  retaliation. 

The  public  at  large,  however,  and,  we  may  add,,  even  the  membeis 
of  the  national  legislature,  not  having  official  information,  on  this  snl^ 
ject,  a  diversity  of  sentiment  prevailed,  in  this  country,  as  to  the  causes, 
as  well  as  the  policy  of  the  embargo.  As  a  measure  of  coercion, 
to  obtain  redress  for  injuries  received  from  foreign  powers,  as  it  was 
afterwards,  avowed  to  be  ;  and  for  this  purpose,  was  to  be  continued, 
until  such  redress  was  obtained,  it  certainly  was  a  severe,  and  we  ntaj 
add,  bold  experiment  on  the  interests,  as  well  as  on  the  patience  and 
forbearance  of  an  active  and  enterprising  people. 

The  correspondence  of  Mr.  Jefferson  with  his  particular  friendst 
now  before  the  public,  61early  shews  his  views  of  the  French  de- 
crees, and  how  far  he  wished  them  to  be  enforced.  To  one  of  his  po- 
litical friends,  under  date  of  January  Ist,  1814,  he  says,  ''  The  tme 
line  of  policy  for  us^  is,  that  Bonaparte  should  be  able  to  effect  the 
complete  exclusion  of  England,  from  the  whole  continent  of  Ewrope^ 
in  order,  by  this  peaceable  engine  of  restraint^  to  make  her  renounce 
her  views  of  dominion  on  the  ocean,  of  permitting  no  other  nation 
to  navigate  it,  but  with  her  license,  and  on  tribute  to  her ;  and  her 
aggressions  on  the  persons  of  our  citizens^  who  may  choose  to  exer- 
cise their  right  of  passing  on  that  element — and  this  would  be  ejfed^ 
ed  by  Bonaparte's. succeeding  so  far  as  to  close  the  BaZ<ic  against 
her.'*  And,  in  the  same  letter  he  adds,  J*  I  wished  such  limits  only, 
to  the  successes  of  Bonaparte,  as  should  not  prevent  his  completely 
closing  Europe  against  British  manufactures  and  commerce,  and 
thereby  reducing  her,  to  just  terms  of  peace  with  us.''* 

*  Jeflerson's  Memoirs,  Vol.  IV,  p.  2S2. 


885 

■ 

It  if  difficult  to  reconcile  these  derlarationSf  with  the  idee,  that  the 
embargo  was  recommended,  for  the  purpose  of  compelling  Bonaparte 
to  revoke  a' decree*  the  full  execution  of  which  on  the  continent  of 
Europe,  was  to  be  so  beneficial  to  the  United  States,  as  to  compel 
Great  Britain,  by  this  **  peaces  ble  engine  of  restraint,"  lb  renounce, 
among  other  things,  *' her  aggressions  on  the  persons  of  our  citiiena*' 
on  the  ocean,  that  is,  renounce  the  right  of  impressment ;  and  wouki« 
also,  **  reduce  her,  to  just  terms  of  peace  with  us."  And  it  is  difficult 
to  see,  how  Bonaparte's  plan  could  be  completely  executed,  if  the 
trade  of  neutrals,  and  particularly  that  of  the  United  Btates,  should  be 
carried  on  as  usual.  It  should  seem,  therefore,  that  Mr.  JefferaoDt 
deemed  it  best  for  the  Americans,  to  keep  their  thousand  shipa  at 
home,  and  wait  with  patience,  for  the  beneficial  effects  of  Bonaparte's 
**  peaceable  engine  of  restraint."  In  the  debates  on  the  embargo« 
in  the  House,  one  of  the  members,  supposed  to  be  in  the  aecreta 
of  the  administration,  did  declare,  **  that  Bonaparte  was  fighting  our 
battles." 

The  French  Emperor  did  not  consider  the  embargo  aa  directed 
against  his  decree ;  but  viewed  it  as  aiding  his  continental  syatem ; 
and  that  in  this  way,  the  Americans  had  become  allies^  in  his  com- 
mercial warfare  against  Great  Briuin. 

The  object  of  bis  Bayonne  decree,  issued  in  April,  I806»  was  to 
aid  in  enforcing  it.  This  decree  ordered  the  custom  house  officers 
**  to  seize  all  American  vessels,  then  in  French  ports,  or  which  migbt 
come  into  ibem  hereafter" — and  the  American  minister  wasinformed» 
that  these  seizures  were  made  ^*  because  no  vessel  of  the  United 
Btates  can  now  navigate  the  seas,  without  infracting  a  law  of  the 
said  states,  and  thus  furnishing  a  presumption,  that  they  do  so,  oa 
British  account,  or  in  British  connection."  The  French  minister  of 
foreign  afl^irs,  who  wrote  nothing,  but  what  was  in  accordance  with 
the  will  of  his  master,  in  his  report  to  the  Emperor,  of  the  8th  of 
September,  180B,  says — **The  Americans,  a  people  who  involve  their 
fortunes,  their  prosperity,  and  almost  their  existence  in  commerce^  •/ 
hare  given  the  example  of  a  great  and  courageous  sacrifice.  Thej 
have  prohibited,  by  a  gener^  embargo,  all  commerce  and  navigation, 
rather  than  submit  to  that  tribute,  which  th^  English  impose."  And 
on  the  5th  of  August,  1810,  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  informs  the  Amer> 
ican  minister,  that  the  Emperor,  *'  had  applauded  the  embargo  laid 
by  the  United  States."  Indeed,  these  views  of  Bonaparte  respee^ 
ting  the  embargo,  were  directly  commnntcated  to  the  American 

49 


886 

utive*  by  Robert  L.  Livingston,  who  had  learnt  them,  from  a  convw* 
sation  with  Bona|>arte  hiroselC 

In  answer  to  Mr.  Livingston's  letter,  informing  him  that  the  rQltr 
of  France,  considered  the  embargo  **  a  wise  measure,**  Mr.  Jefferaoii» 
on  the  15th  of  Oct.  1806  says, ''  The  explanation  of  his  principl€a» 
given  you  by  the  French  emperor,  in  conversation^  is  correct,  as  fiff 
as  it  goes.  He  does  not  wish  us  to  go  to  war  with  England,  knowing 
we  have  no  ships  to  carry  on  that  war.  To  submit  to  pay  England 
the  tribute  on  our  commerce,  which  she  demands,  by  her  orders  in 
council,  would  be  to  aid  her  in  the  war  against  him,  and  wonld  give 
him  just  ground  to  declare  war  with  us.  He  concludes,  therefore,  as 
every  rational  man  must,  that  the  embargo,  the  only  remaining  alter- 
native, was  a  wise  measure,*^ 

Mr.  Jefferson,  however,  in  the  same  answer,  advises  Mr.  Living)^ 
ton,  to  consider  this  explanation  given  by  Bonaparte,  as  *'  confiden- 
tial, leaving  to  the  government  to  retain  or  make  it  public^  as  the 
public  good  may  require.*'* 

The  embargo,  however,  was  as  unpopular  among  the  merchants  of 
America,  as  the  French  decrees  were,  among  the  merchants  of  Hol- 
land ;  especially  after  it  was  avowed  to  be  a  measure  of  coercion,  and 
to  be  continued  for  an  indefinite  period.  AYith  all  Europe  on  his 
side,  the  American  merchants  perceived  that  Bonaparte  would  not 
relax,  much  less  abandon  his  decrees,  aided,  as  they  were,  by  the 
embargo — nor  could  they  believe,  that  Great  Britain,  however  much 
she  might  sufier  by  it,  would  yield  to  the  claims  of  the  Americans 
nnder  such  a  menace. 

While  the  war,  therefore,  continued  in  Europe,  they  saw  little 
prospect  of  saving  their  ships,  from  rotting  at  their  wharves.  The 
people  in  general,  deprived  of  a  market  for  their  accumulated  pro- 
duce, at  last,  became  impatient;  and  it  required  more  than  the  great 
popularity  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  to  persevere  in  his  favorite  scheme ;  and 
his  own  political  friends,  some  of  whom  he  denominated  pseudo-re- 
publicans, compelled  him  to  exchange  the  embargo,  for  a  non-in- 
tercourse with  both  the  great  belligerents. 

On  the  first  of  March,  1809,  a  non-intercourse  with  France  and 
Great  Britain  was  substituted  for  the  embargo,  to  take  effect  after  the 
20th  of  May,  following.  The  President,  at  the  same  time,  was  au- 
thorized, in  case  either  of  the  belligerents  should  so  revoke  or  modify 
its  edicts,  as  that  they  should  cease  to  violate  the  neutral  commerce 


•  See  VoL  IV  Jefferson's  Works,  p.  113. 


of  the  United  States,  to  declare  the  same,  bj  proclamation ;  after 
which  the  trade  with  the  nation  so  doing,  was  to  be  renewed. 

Under  this  law,  in  April  following  its  passage,  an  arrangement 
was  made  with  the  British  minister,  (Mr.  Erskine,)  in  which,  he  gave 
assurances,  that  the  orders  in  council  should  be  withdrawn  on  the  10th 
of  June  following — in  consequence  of  which,  the  President  issued  hif 
proclamation ;  and,  on  the  10th  of  that  month,  the  American  trade 
with  Great  Britain  was  opened.  This  arrangement,  however,  being 
disarowed  by  the  British  guvernment,  on  the  ground  that  Mr.  Erskine 
had  exceeded  his  powers ;  the  act  was  revived  against  Great  Britaint 
by  a  second  proclamation  of  the  0th  of  August  of  the  same  year. 

Knowing,  that,  if  the  American  commerce  were  let  loose  upon  the 
ocean,  his  **  peaceable  engine  of  restraint,*'  would  be  injured,  if  not 
destroyed,  Bonaparte  was  extremely  indignant,  at  the  removal  of  the 
embargo,  and  the  substitution  of  a  non-intercourse  with  FraneOf 
against  whom  he  declared  the  United  States  had  no  ground  of  com^ 
plaint  His  indignant  feelings,  however,  were  concealed  until  the 
continental  ports  under  his  control,  were  filled  with  American  veaaela, 
laden  with  valuable  cargoes — these  he  then  ordered  to  be  seiiedt  be- 
icavse,  as  he  alleged,  French  vessels  had  been  seised  by  the  Ameri* 
cans.  Against  these  seizures  the  American  minister  strongly  remon* 
strated ;  and  if  the  seizure  of  these  vessels,  was  a  most  flagrant  ool- 
rage  upon  the  known  principles  of  national  law,  as  well  as  of  common 
justice,  the  answer  to  this  remonstrance  was  a  still  greater  oat- 
rage,  upon  the  honor,  integrity  and  general  character  of  the  Ameri- 
can government  and  people;  and  evinced  Bonaparte's  feelings,  at 
the  removal  of  the  embargo.  On  the  17th  of  February,  ISIO,  G^- 
cral  Armstrong  was  informed,  by  the  French  minister,  ^*that  his 
majesty  could  place  no  reliance  on  the  proceedings  of  the  United 
States,  who,  having  no  ground  of  complaint  against  France^  com- 
prised her  in  their  acts  of  exclusion ;  and  since  the  month  of  May* 
have  forbidden  the  entrance  of  their  ports,  to  French  vessels,  under 
the  penalty  of  confiscation.  As  soon  as  his  majesty  was  informed  of 
this  measure,  he  considered  himself  bound,  to  order  reprisals  on 
American  vessels,  not  only  in  his  territory,  but  likewise,  in  the  coun- 
tries, which  are  under  his  influence.  In  the  ports  of  Holland,  of 
Spain,  of  Italy  and  Naples,  American  vessels  were  seized,  becavsc 
the  Americans  have  seized  French  vessels." 

'*The  Americans  cannot  hesitate,  as  to  the  part,  which  they  are  to 
take :  they  ought  to  tear  in  pieces  the  act  of  their  indepcndencct  and 
to  become  again,  as  before  the  revolution,  the  subjects  of  Eng land. 


388 

or  to  take  such  meaiurest  m  that,  their  commerce  and  indoitrj  ahoiild 
not  be  tarifedi  (tarifi^s)  by  the  English,  which  renders  them  more  de- 
pendant than  Jumaica,  which,  at  least,  has  its  assembly  of  represen- 
tatives and  its  privileges."  *'  Men  without  just  political  yiewt,  (smns 
politique,")  the  French  minister  adds,  **  without  honor  without  eii^r- 
gfft  may  allege,  that  payment  of  tribute  imposed  by  England^  may  be 
submitted  to,  because  it  is  light ;  but  why  will  they  not  perceive,  that 
the  English  will  no  sooner  have  obtained  the  admission  of  the  prin- 
ciple, than  they  will  raise  the  tariff,  in  such  way,  that  the  burden  at 
first  light,  blooming  insupportable,  it  then  will  be  necessary  to  fight 
for  inUresti  after  having  refused  to  fight  for  honor." 

Those  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  this  period,  can  hardly  be- 
Veve,  that  an  answer,  so  much  in  violation,  not  only  of  the  ordinarj 
nilea  of  diplomacy,  but  those  of  decency  itself,  and  which  could  noi 
be  tolerated  in  private  life,  should  have  been  given,  even  by  Bona- 
parte, much  less  that  it  should  have  been  so  tamely  received  by  the 
American  i^overnmcnt. 

The  future  historian  will  be  obliged  to  record,  that  the  American 
Executive  did  not  even  order  the  minister  at  Paris,  to  repel  such  falae 
charges  against  the  conduct  and  character  of  the  people  of  this  conn-* 
try.  That  minister,  however,  without  waiting  for  directions  from  his 
government,  with  the  spirit  and  feelings  of  an  American,  did  immedi* 
ately  repel  these  false  and  unjust  charge  against  his  country.  To 
the  charge  or  declaration,  <*  that  the  United  States  had  nothing  to 
complain  of  against  France,"  General  Armstrong  emphatically  asked, 
*^  was  the  capture  and  condemnation  of  a  ship  driven  on  the  shores  of 
France  by  stress  of  weather,  and  the  perils  of  the  sea — nothing ! 
Was  the  seixure  and  sequestration  of  many  cargoes,  brought  to  France 
In  ships  violating  no  law,  and  admitted  to  regular  entry  at  the  imperial 
custom  houses — nothing  ?  Was  the  violation  of  our  maritime  righta, 
consecrated,  as  they  have  been,  by  the  solemn  forms  of  a  public  treaty — 
nothing!  In  a  word,  was  it  nothings  that  our  ships  were  bumt^  on  the 
high  seas,  without  other  offense,  than  that  of  belonging  to  the  C7jit- 
ted  l^aUs ;  or  other  apology,  than  was  to  be  found  in  the  enhanced 
aafety  of  the  perpetrator!  Surely,''  he  adds,  "if  it  be  the  duty  of 
the  United  States,  to  resent  the  theoretical  usurpations  of  the  British 
orders  of  November,  1807,  it  cannot  be  less  their  duty,  to  complain  of 
the  daily  and  practical  outrages^  on  the  part  of  France.''  Such  was 
Ihe  language  of  the  American  Representative  at  Paris,  against  the 
oetrages  of  France  upon  the  commerce  of  his  country. 


389 

The  conduct  of  Bonaparte  was  not  less  unjust  and  arbitraiy  towards 
Holland  and  his  brother  Louis,  than  towards  the  Americans,  and  all 
others  who  would  not,  at  every  sacrifice,  aid  and  assist,  in  carr3ring 

•  

into  complete  execution,  his  decrees  against  the  commerce  of  England. 

The  Hollanders,  not  having  fully  complied  with  his  commands,  in 
this  respect,  he,  on  the  24th  of  January,  1810,  threatened  to  '*  recal 
home  the  Prince  of  the  bloody  whom  he  had  placed  on  the  throne  of 
Holland — to  occupy  all  the  mouths  of  the  rivers  in  that  country,  and  all 
its  ports,  by  French  troops  ;*'  and  to  **  employ  every  means,  without 
being  stopped  by  any  considerations,  to  make  Holland  enter  into  tb« 
continental  system.^* 

This  threat  would  have  been  carried  into  execution,  had  not  Louii»' 
who  was  sent  for  to  Paris,  submitted  entirely  to  the  dictation  of  Na- 
poleon. 

On  the  16ih  of  March,  1810,  the  King  of  Holland  signed  a  treaty, 
by  which  he  not  only  bound  himself  to  enforce  the  continental  systemt 
with  the  utmost  rigor,  but  to  make  over  to  Bonaparte,  all  the  AmerU 
can  merchandize,  that  had  arrived  in  the  ports  of  Holland,  in  Ameri* 
can  vessels,  since  February  Ist,  1809,  as  the  following  extraordinary 
article  to  be  found  in  this  treaty  will  shew :  "  all  the  merchandize  im* 
ported  by  American  vessels  that  have  arrived  in  the  ports  of  Holland, 
since  the  Ist  of  February,  1800,  shall  be  put  under  seqtusiratifmf 
and  made  over  to  Frdnce^  in  order  to  her  disposing  thereof,  according 
to  circumstances,  and  the  state  of  her  political  relations  with  the 
United  Sutes.** 

And  seven  days  after  the  date  of  this  treaty,  the  famous  Rambouillet 
decree  bore  date,  though  not  published  until  the  14th  of  May  follow- 
ing. By  this  decree,  Bonaparte  ordered,  that  all  Teasels  under  th« 
flag  of  the  United  States,  which,  counting  from  the  20th  of  May» 
1800,  had  entered  or  should  enter,  into  the  ports  of  his  empire,  of  hb 
colonies,  or  of  the  countries  occupied  by  his  arms,  should  be  seizod« 
and  the  products  of  the  sale  deposited  in  the  surplus  fund  (caissd  d* 
amortissment.) 

This  decree  was  soon  after  executed,  and  the  property  of  Americaa 
merchants,  to  the  amount  of  many  millions  of  dollars,  in  the  TarioM 
continental  ports,  was  sold,  and  the  avails  placed  in  (to  them  at  least) 
literally  ''  the  chest  of  death.'' 

And  we  would  here  observe,  that  the  vessels,  carrying  this  proper- 
ty  had  been  permitted  quietly  to  enter  the  continental  porta,  without 
any  warning  of  what  was  to  be  their  future  fate,  and  that  those  which 
entered  the  port  of  Naples,  with  rich  cargoes  of  colonial  prodocet 
went  there  at  the  express  inviutioo  of  th«  agent  of  Bonapartet  who 


i 


390 

then  ruled  that  country.  Thin,  however,  was  disregarded,  and  tlie 
whole  was  seized  by  the  hand  of  lawless  power,  under  the  form  of  a 
retrospective  decree. 

In  this  extraordinary  state  of  things,  the  governinent  of  the  Uoi- 
t€d  States,  was  indeed,  extremely  perplexed  and  embarrassed,  aa  to 
its  future  course,  in  relation  to  the  two  belligerents. 

It  was,  at  last,  determined  to  change  the  commercial  position  of  the 
country,  with  respect  to  both.  Tiie  commercial  vessels  of  both  na* 
tions  were,  therefore,  by  a  law  of  the  first  of  May  1910,  admitted 
into  American  ports,  while  their  armed  ships  were  excluded.  Thb 
was  accompanied  with  a  new  proposition,  that  in  case  either  France 
or  Great  Britain  should,  before  the  3d  day  of  March  then  Dezt«  so 
revoke  her  edicts,  as  that  they  should  cease  to  violate  the  neutral 
commerce  of  the  United  States,  the  President  was  to  declare  the 
same,  by  proclamation ;  and  if  the  other  nation  did  not,  within  three 
months  thereafter,  revoke  or  modify  her  edicts  in  like  manner,  then 
the  non  intercourse  law  was  to  revive  against  the  latter  nation,  and  the 
restriction  relative  to  the  public  armed  vessels  of  the  former,  was  to 
be  discontinued. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  French  government  was  informed 
in  the  most  explicit  manner,  by  the  American  Executive,  that  a  aatis- 
fitctory  provision  for  the  restoration  of  the  property  of  the  Ameri- 
cans,  then  lately  seized  in  the  ports  of  the  continent,  **ma9t  be 
combined,  with  a  repeal  of  the  French  edicts,  with  a  view  to  a  non 
intercourse  with  Great  Britain;  such  a  provision  being  indispensahU 
evidence^  of  the  just  purpose  of  France  towards  the  United  States. *• 
^  This  act  was  communicated  to  both  governments,  and  drew  from 
that  of  France,  the  celebrated  letter  of  the  Duke  de  Cadore,  of  the 
5th  of  August,  1810,  to  General  Armstrong,  in  which,  after  statinf 
that  Congress  by  the  act  of  May  1st,  1810,  had  retraced  its  steps, 
and  engaged  to  oppose  the  belligerent,  refusing  to  acknowledge  the 
rights  of  neutrals,  the  Duke  says  :  '*  In  this  new  state  of  things,  I  am 
authorized  to  declare  to  you,  sir,  that  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan, 
are  revoked,  and  that  after  the  1st  of  November,  they  will  cease  to 
have  effect,  it  being  understood^  (bien  entendu  que)  that,  in  conse- 
quence of  this  declaration,  the  English  shall  revoke  their  orders  in 
council,  and  renounce  the  new  principles  of  blockade  which  they  have 
wished  to  establish,  or  that  the  United  States  shall  cause  their  rights  to 
be  respected  by  the  English.*' 

This  letter  concludes  with  another  declaration,  of  the  sincerity  of 
which,  some  may  be  disposed  to  doubt,  when  they  recollect  the  lan- 
guage of  that  of  die  17th  of  the  preceding  February,  which  was,  that 


391 

**  his  Majesty  loves  the  Americans — their  prosperity  and  their  eom- 
merce  are  withia  the  scope  of  his  policy.*' 

In  readingr  this  letter,  and  adverting  to  the  questions  that  arose,  re- 
specting its  real  meaning,  one  cannot  but  imagine,  that  Bonaparte  musi 
have  given  the  same  directions  about  it,  as  he  did  about  the  descrip- 
tions of  the  limits  and  extent  of  Louisiana,  inserted  in  the  treaty 
ceding  that  country  to  the  United  Sutes,  *^  that  if  it  was  not  obscure 
to  make  it  so.'* 

The  words  in  this  letter,  translated  **  it  is  understood,'*  are,  in  the 
original,  as  before  quoted,  **  bien  entendu  qve^*^  and  created  no  little 
difficulty,  in  ascertaining  the  real  meaning  of  the  declaration.  The 
usual  meaning  of  the  expression,  is  **  upon  condition,  or  provided 
that,'*  and  hence  arose  another  question,  whether  this  condition^  in 
technical  or  law  language,  was  precedent  or  subsequent.  The  Amer- 
ican Executive  considered  it  subsequent^  and  issued  his  proclamatioi 
of  the  2d  of  November  1810,  declaring,  that  the  French  edicts  weret 
in  fact,  revoked  on  the  first  of  November;  and  that,  unless  the  British 
orders  in  council  should  be  revoked,  on  or  before  the  2d  of  Febmaryt 
1811,  the  non  intercourse  law  should  be  revived  against  Great  Britain* 
And  we  cannot  but  here  remark,  that  by  this  proclamation,  the  non 
intercourse  law  was  to  be  put  in  force  against  Great  Britain,  althoogh 
no  provision  had  been  made  by  the  French  government,  for  the  resto- 
^ration  of  the  millions  of  American  property,  so  arbitrarily  seized  in 
the  continental  ports;  and  the  American  merchants  were  not  a  little 
surprised  at  this,  after  the  declaration  of  the  Executive,  that  such  a 
restoration  must  accompany  the  repeal  of  the  decrees. 

The  events  which  followed  the  issuing  of  this  proclamation,  gave 
rise  to  disputes,  whether  the  decrees  did,  in  (act,  cease  to  take  eflfeet, 
even  as  respects  the  United  States,  subsequent  to  the  1st  of  November. 

That  Bonaparte  did  not  intend  they  should  cease  to  have  effect,  on* 
til  the  British  orders  were  revoked,  or  the  United  States  had  become 
a  party  in  th»  war,  in  order  to  procure  their  revocation,  subsequent 
events,  we  apprehend,  prove  beyond  a  doubt  To  present  a  detail- 
ed view  of  the  numerous  facts,  going  to  shew  tliis,  does  not  fall 
within  the  design  of  this  work — it  belongs  to  the  page  of  history.  It 
is  not  improper,  however,  here  to  state,  that  notwithstanding  their 
pretended  revocation,  American  vessels,  with  their  cargoes,  after  the 
1st  of  November,  were  seized  and  held,  as  the  French  term  it,  in  se* 
questration^  viz.  as  pledges  for  the  future  good  behavior  of  the  Amer- 
icans ;  or  until  Bonaparte  could  ascertain,  (as  he  says  in  his  treaty 
with  his  brother  Louin)  what  would  be  **  the  state  of  his 
relations  with  the  United  States." 


892 

The  official  declantions  of  the  French  gorernment  ahewt  Aat 
afler  the  Ist  of  Norember,  these  decrees  were  in  force*  wilbovt 
any  exception.  The  Duke  of  Cadore,  in  a  report  made  to  the 
peror,  referring  to  them,  says  :  ^*  As  long  as  England  shall 
io  her  orders  in  council,  your  majesty  will  persist  in  your  decr< 
And,  on  the  31st  of  March,  1811,  Bonaparte  himself,  in  an  address 
to  his  council  of  commerce,  declares,  that  **  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and 
Milan,  are  the  fundamental  laws  of  my  empire.  For  the  neutral  iia¥- 
igation,  I  consider  the  flag,  as  an  extension  of  territory.  The  power 
which  suffers  its  flag  to  be  violated,  cannot  be  considered  as  neatraL 
The  (ate  of  the  American  commerce  will  soon  be  decided.  I  will 
fiiTor  itv  if  the  United  States  conform  themselves  to  these  decrees-^ 
in  a  contrary  case,  their  vessels  will  be  driven  from  my  empire.*' 

After  the  5th  of  August,  and  subsequent  to  the  Ist  of  NoTember* 
1810,  the  American  Executive  pressed  the  British  government,  for  a 
reTOcation  of  its  orders,  on  the  ground  of  the  actual  repeal  of  the 
French  decrees.  The  British  government,  however,  insisted  that  the 
decrees  were  still  in  force,  and  asked  for  some  official  repealing  act 
of  the  French  government,  of  as  high  a  nature  as  that  which  created 
them ;  declaring,  that  the  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Cadore  was  not  a 
doeament  of  that  character — that  it  was  a  mere  declaration  that  they 
would  thereafter  be  repealed,  on  certain  conditions, — that  thiii  decla* 
tatlon  had  never  been  carried  into  effect,  by  any  act  under  the  signa- 
ture of  Ihe  Emperor. 

The  American  government,  on  the  other  hand,  urged,  that  the  for- 
mal declaration  of  the  French  minister,  which  he  was  fully  authorized 
to  make,  the  proclamation  of  the  President,  and  the  non  application 
of  the  decrees  to  American  commerce,  was  sufficient  evidence  of  sudi 
repeal.  In  this  situation,  the  business  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain  rested. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  American  merchants  did  not  give  np  all 
hope  of  some  remuneration  for  the  vast  amount  of  the  property  of 
which  they  had  been  robbed,  until  the  arrival  of  a  new  French  minis- 
ter  (Senrurier)  in  the  winter  of  1811.  He  soon  gave  official  infor- 
mation of  the  settled  determination  of  Bonaparte,  not  to  restore  or 
make  any  remuneration  for  the  property  so  seized  and  sold. 

It  was  confidently  expected,  that,  on  the  arrival  of  a  new  French 
minister,  all  doubts  would  be  removed,  as  to  the  actual  repeal  of  the 
French  decrees — doubts,  which  had  caused  some  division  in  the 
eahlnet,  as  well  as  in  Congress,  among  the  political  friends  of  the  ad* 
ministration.    To  remove  these  doubts,  on  the  20th  of  February,  tho 


398 

-mm 

secretary  of  state,  Mr.  Robert  Smith,  prepared  a  diafi  af  a 
the  French  minister,  in  which,  among  others,  was  the  folk' 
lions,  **  were  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  revoked,  in 
part,  on  the  first  day  of  last  November  ?  or  have  they,  as 
posterior  to  that  day,  been  so  revoked  ?  or  have  yog 
from  your  government  to  give  to  this  government,  any 
explanation,  in  relation  to  the  revocation  or  modiiicatm  4ff 
decrees  ?" 

Before  preparing  this  note,  the  secretary  had  conferred  vdfc  ikc 
French  minister,  on  the  subject  of  these  questions,  and  olhcn  W  ^ 
culiar  interest,  at  that  period  ;  and  the  result  of  this  eoofmace 
no  doubt,  been  communicated  to  the  President — and  the  objeci  W 
note  was,  to  obtain,  from  the  French  minister,  in  a  written  ItinM.  ^ 
substance  of  what  had  passed  between  them  at  this  conference. 

The  President,  however,  did  not  approve  of  sending  this  note,  m 
proposed  by  Mr.  Smith.  On  submitting  it  to  him,  the  secretary,  m 
an  address  afterwards  presented  by  him  to  the  public,  says,  tkmi  t^ 
President,  '^  to  his  astonishment  told  him,  that  it  would  not  bt 
dient  to  send  Mr.  Serrurier  any  such  note — His  deportment'* 
Smith  adds,  **  throughout  this  interview,  evinced  a  high  degree  •! 
quietude,  which  occasionally  betrayed  him  into  fretful  espr^ 
Mr.  Smith,  also,  says,  *'  he  entreated  him,  but  in  a  manner 
cate,  not  to  withhold  from  Congress,  any  information  that 
useful  to  them,  at  so  momentous  a  juncture.^'  The  note  wm^  $m*i 
and  no  official  enquiry  was  made  of  Mr.  Serrurier  on  this 
subject.  The  reasons  for  this  have  never  been  made  pubMi 
can  be  little  doubt,  we  apprehend,  that  the  answer,  wL«ii^ 
most  have  drawn  from  the  French  minister,  would  have 
the  French  and  American  governments  did  not  agree,  aa 
ing  of  the  declaration  of  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  of  the 
preceding ;  and  that  the  proclamation  relative  to  ike 
decrees,  on  the  first  of  November,  had  issued  prei 

Thus  kept  in  ignorance  of  the  real  views  of  Boi 
ject.  Congress,  on  the  2d  of  March,  IHll,  confii 
tion,  by  passing  a  non-iutcrcourse  act  against  Grant; 

The  secretary  of  sute,  who  certainly  had  the 
was  satisfied,  that,  at  the  time  of  passing  this  l^  -iviw  ^*,^ 
not  revoked.     In  his  address  before  alluded  to«kei 
information,  which  had  been  received  by  Mr.  Jlii^iy^^  ^  l^ 
date  of  the  non-intercourse  law  (that  of  MaaoibftwM  t$  #.««   ^ 
the  lime  of  psssing  it,  evident  to  my  mind, 

60 


/ 


394 

decrees  had  not  been  revoked,  as  had  been  declared  by  the  proda* 
nation.*^ 

Although  Congress  and  the  people  of  the  United  States  were  ibiM 
deprived  of  official  information,  in  relation  to  the  actual  revocation  of 
the  French  decrees ;  yet  they  could  not  be  kept  in  ignorance  of  other 
facts,  evincing  beyond  all  doubt,  the  hostility  of  Bonaparte  towards 
the  American  commerce.  While  he  was  amusing  the  government 
and  people  of  the  United  States,  with  the  honeyed  expressions  of  his 
hve  for  them  and  for  their  *•  prosperity  and  commerce,'*  he  was  pur- 
suing measures,  destructive  of  that  very  prosperity  and  commerce. 
On  the  same  5th  of  August,  when  this  fluttering  declaration  was  made* 
he  imposed  a  duty  of  eighty  cents  on  sea  island,  and  about  sixty  cents 
on  all  other  American  cotton  imported  into  France — nor  would  he  per* 
roit  the  trade  between  the  two  countries,  to  be  carried  on,  except  by 
imperial  licenses ;  and  particular  articles  only,  such  as  cotton,  fish  oil, 
hides  and  peltry,  dye  woods  and  salt  fish,  were  allowed  to  be  import- 
ed, and  oiily  from  the  ports  of  New  York  and  Charleston  ;  and  the  car- 
goes composed  of  these  articles,  were  to  be  accompanied  by  a  cer- 
tificate of  origin  from  a  French  consul.  And  the  Americans  were 
prohibited  from  carrying  sugar  and  cofiee  to  France.  "With  respect 
to  return  cargoes  the  Americans  were  obliged  to  take  wines,  brandy, 
silks,  linens,  cloth,  jewelry,  household  furniture,  and  other  manufac- 
tured articles. 

Such,  indeed,  was  the  scanty  commerce  allowed  wiih  France,  after 
the  pretended  repeal  of  the  imperial  decrees,  that  the  Secretary  of 
State,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1810,  says  to  the  French  minister, 
**  If  France,  by  her  own  acts,  has  blocked  up  her  ports  against  the 
iQirodaction  of  products  of  the  United  States,  what  moiive  has  the 
government  in  a  discussion  with  a  third  power,  to  insist  on  the  privi- 
lege of  going  to  France  I  Whence  the  inducement  to  urge  the  a»- 
nvlment  of  a  blockade  of  France,  when,  if  annulled,  no  Americaa 
cargoes  could  obtain  a  market  in  any  of  her  ports  ?  In  such  a  state 
of  things,  a  blockade  of  the  coasts  of  France  would  be,  to  the  United 
States,  as  unimportant  as  would  be  a  blockade  of  the  Caspian  Sea.'* 

In  this  extraordinary  state  of  commercial  relations  with  France,  a 
new  American  minister,  (Mr.  Barlow,)  was  sent  to  that  country,  with 
special  instructions,  to  make  a  commercial  treaty,  with  the  French 
emperor,  hopeless,  as  such  an  event  might  seem. 

Mr.  Barlow  was  amused  with  fair  promises  of  soon  concluding  a 
commercial  treaty,  upon  terms  of  reciprocity,  and  even  including' 
indemnitiea  for  spoliationa. 


396 

Without  adverting  to  the  details  of  this  singular  oegociatioDt  if, 
indeed,  it  mny  be  called  by  that  name,  we  cannot  but  observe,  that 
while  Bonaparte  apparently  agreed  to  the  principles  of  the  proposi- 
tions made  by  Mr.  Barlow,  in  relation  to  a  commercial  intercourse; 
the  continental  system  was  constantly  interposed  as  an  insurmounta- 
ble obstacle,  to  any  arrangement.  One  of  the  propositions  of  Mr. 
Barlow,  was,  that,  as  a  compensation  for  the  loss  of  their  trade  to 
British  ports,  in  consequence  of  the  non-intercourse  act,  the  Ameri- 
cans should  he  allowed  '*  free  access  to  those  of  the  continent  of 
Europe" — and  that  *'  they  might  carry  thither,  such  means  of  purchas- 
ing those  productions,  as  their  own  soil  and  industry,  those  of  other 
neutral  nations,  and  those  of  the  French  colonies,  might  filrnish.'* 
The  note  containing  this  proposition,  was  a  long  time  befure  the  em- 
peror; and,  on  the  19th  of  December,  1811,  the  Duke  of  BassanOy 
informed  Mr  Barlow,  "  that  the  Empcror*s  taking  so  long  a  time  to 
consider  it,  and  make  up  his  decision,  was  not  without  reason,  for  it 
opens  a  wide  field  for  meditation^  on  very  interesting  matters.  That 
the  Emperor  had  read  the  note  repeatedly, and  with  great  attention; 
that  he  told  him,  the  reasoning  in  it  was  every  where  just,  and  the 
conclusions  undeniable ;  but  to  reconcile  its  principles,  with  his  con- 
tinental  system^  presented  difficulties,  not  easy  to  remove.**  And  the 
Duke  himself,  on  the  27th  of  the  same  December,  declared  to  Mr. 
Barlow,  that,  '*  tlie  United  States  would  be  entirely  satisfied  on  the 
pending  questions ;  and  that  there  would  be  no  obstacle  to  their  at- 
taining the  advantages  they  had  in  view,  if  they  succeed^  in  making 
their  flag  safe.'*'' 

In  this  situation,  the  negociation  remained,  during  the  winter  of 
1812;  and,  on  the  10th  of  March,  the  Duke,  in  a  report  made  to  the 
Emperor,  declared,  that,  *'  as  long  as  the  orders  in  council  shall  not 
be  repealed,  and  the  principles  of  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  with  respect 
to  neutralii,  put  in  vigor,  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan,  iisiMt^  re- 
main  inforce^  as  to  all  those  powers,  who  shall  safier  thfip'ikg  to  be 
denationalized.  The  ports  of  the  continent  must  sot  be  opened, 
either  to  denationalized  fiags^  or  to  English  merchandise.'* 

It  will  be  remembered,  that,  by  the  Milan  decree,  every  ship,  that 
should  have  submitted  to  be  searched  by  an  English  ship,  or  to  a  voy- 
age to  England,  or  that  should  have  paid  any  tax  to  the  British  gov- 
ernment, was  denationalized^  and  liable  to  condemnation. 

The  declaration  in  this  report,  was  a  definitive  answer  to  the  prop- 
osition of  Mr.  Barlow  which  the  Emperor  had  so  long  considered  ; 
and,  for  a  time,  seemed  to  stagger,  even  the  faith  of  Mr.  Barlow  hia- 
telf,  as  to  the  actual  repeal  of  the  Freaeh  decreea. 


396 

Referring  to  this  report,  in  a  letter  to  the  American  Secretarjr  of 
State,  of  the  16lh  of  March,  he  says,  **  you  will  notice,  that  the  miii- 
isler,  in  his  report,  says  nothing  particular  of  the  United  States,  wad 
nothing  more  precise,  than  heretofore,  of  the  revocation  of  the 
decrees.** 

**  This  furnishes,'*  he  subjoins,  ^'  an  additional  motive,  for  usiog  all 
my  efforts,  to  get  the  treaty  through ;  carrying  with  it,  an  uneqwho^ 
col  stipulation^  tkdt  shall  lay  that  question  at  rest.  Its  importaoee 
is  surely  sufficient  to  warrant  my  detaining  th'e  Hornet.** 

It  will  never  be  forgotten,  with  what  intense  interest  and  anxiety, 
the  arrival  of  the  Hornet  was  looked  for,  in  this  country ;  and  partie- 
i]lar)y,*at  Washington,  in  the  spring  of  1812.  On  the  22d  of  April, 
bowcTer,  the  Hornet  was  '*  dismissed  without  the  expected  treaty  ;** 
and  the  Wasp  was  detained,  for  the  purpose  of  being  the  bearer  of  it. 

Despatches  by  the  Hornet  reached  Washington,  on  the  22d  of  May — 
referring  to  the  expected  treaty,  and  particularly  to  the  subject  of 
spoliations,  Mr.  Barlow  tells  the  American  Executive,  **  This  is  dull 
Work,  hard  to  begin  and  difficult  to  pursue.  I  urged  it  a  long  time, 
without  the  effect,  even  of  an  oral  answer.  But  lately,  they  hare 
consented  to  give  it  a  discussion,  and  the  minister  assures  me,  that 
something  shall  be  done,  to  silence  the  complaints^  and  on  principles, 
that,  he  says,  ought  to  be  satisfactory.*^ 

While  Mr.  Barlow  was  thus  negotiating  in  France,  Great  Britain 
was  again  urged,  to  revoke  her  orders,  on  the  ground  of  the  actual 
repeal  of  the  French  decrees.  She,  however,  still  required  some  au- 
thentic act  of  the  French  government,  shewing  such  a  repeal ;  and, 
on  the  21st  of  April,  the  Prince  Regent,  by  a  public  act,  declared, 
that,  *'  whenever  the  French  decrees,  by  some  authentic  act  of  the 
French  government,  publicly  promulgated^  should  be  absolutely  and 
unconditionally  repealed,  the  orders  in  council,  should  be  revoked.^ 

On  the  appearance  of  this  declaration  of  the  Prince  Regent,  Mr. 
Barlow  strongly  urged  the  French  government,  to  furnish  the  evi* 
dence  required  by  the  ruler  of  Great  Britain. 

**  It  is  much  to  be  desired,**  says  Mr.  Barlow,  in  a  note  to  the 
French  minister,  of  May  Ist,  '*  that  the  French  government  would 
BOW  make  and  publish  an  authentic  act^  declaring  the  Berlin  and 
Milan  decrees,  as  relative  to  the  the  United  States,  to  have  ceased, 
in  November,  1810,  declaring  that  they  have  not  been  applied,  in  any 
instance  since  that  time ;  and  that  they  shall  not  be  so  applied  in 
future.  The  case  is  so  simple,  the  demand  is  so  just,  and  the  nec^s^ 
gity  so  urgent,  that  I  cannot  withhold  my  confidence,  in  the  prompt 
and  complete  success  of  my  proposition.*' 


397 

This  application  drew  from  the  French  government,  on  the  10th  of 
May,  a  copy  of  a  decree,  purporting  to  have  passed,  on  the  28lh  of 
April  of  the  preceding  year ;  in  which,  after  a  preamble,  Bonaparte 
declares,  that  «*  The  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  are  definitively^  and 
to  date,  from  the  first  day  of  November  last,  considered  as  not  having 
existed^  (non  avenus,)  in  regard  to  Americen  vessels.*** 

The  French  government  gave  a  copy  of  this  decree,  with  great  re- 
luctance ;  and  it  will,  probably,  always  remain  doubtful,  whether  it 
was  made,  at  that  time;  or  had  been  formally  passed,  at  the  time  it 
bears  date,  to  be  produced  thereafter,  as  occasion  or  necessity  might 
require.  On  the  latter  supposition,  its  long  concealment,  shews  con* 
dusively,  that  Bonaparte  expected  and  required  some  further  act  of 
resistance,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government,  against  Great 
Britain,  than  the  law  of  March,  1811. 

For,  if  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  were,  "  in  good  faith,  and  mi* 
conditionally"  repealed,  or  intended  to  be  repealed,  on  the  1st  of  No-* 
rember,  1810 ;  whence  the  propriety  or  necessity  of  concealing  a  de- 
cree, made,  as  was  pretended,  in  confirmation  of  such  repeal  ?  And 
particularly,  if  no  further  resistance,  to  the  "  pretensions"  of  Great 
Britain  was  expected  or  required,  on  the  part  of  the  Americans,  than 
the  act  of  March,  181 1 ;  what  plausible  reasons  can  be  given,  why  this 
definitive  decree,  pretended  to  be  passed,  in  consequence  of  that 
very  act,  was  not  immediately  made  public,  and  ofiicially  communi- 
cated to  the  American  government  ? 

The  manner,  in  which  it  was  drawn,  from  the  French  govemmenty 
and  the  extraordinary  circumstances  attending  it,  as  given  by  the 
American  minister,  at  Paris,  will  throw  light  on  this  subject.  In  hia 
letter  of  the  12th  of  May,  Mr.  Barlow  gives  his  government,  the  fol- 
lowing account  of  this  transaction. 

•  Palace  of  St.  Clond,  April  98tb,  1811. 
SapoUon^  Emperor  of  the  Prenek,  4^.  4r<^ 

Od  the  report  of  our  minister  of  foreign  relations,  seeing,  by  a  law  passed,  oa 
the  2d  of  March  1811,  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  has  ordered  the  ezeen- 
tion  of  the  provisions  of  the  act  of  non-intercourse,  which  prohibits  the  vessels 
and  merchandize  of  Great  Britain,  her  colonies  and  dependencies,  iVom  entering 
into  the  ports  of  the  United  States :  considering,  that  the  said  law  is  an  act  of 
resistance  to  the  arbitrary  pretensions,  consecrated  by  the  British  orders,  ia  oooa* 
cil,  and  a  formal  rtfusal^  to  adhere  to  a  system  in  fading  the  independence  of 
neairal  powers,  and  of  their  flag,  we  have  decreed,  and  do  decree,  as  follows  .*— 

*'  The  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  are  defiitively  and  to  date,  from  the  first  daj 
of  November,  considered,  as  not  having  existed,  (non  avenas,)in  regard  to  Amer- 
ican vesseb."  Napolbov. 


396 

**  After  the  date  of  my  letter,  of  which  I  have  the  honor  to  enclote 
you  a  copy,  I  found,  from  a  pretty  sharp  conversation  with  the  Duke 
of  Basisano,  that  there  was  a  singular  reluctance  to  answering  my 
note  of  the  Ist  of  May.  Some  traces  of  that  reluctance  you  will  per- 
ceive, in  the  answer  which  finally  came,  of  which  a  copy  is  here  eo« 
closed.  This,  though  dated  the  10th,  did  not  come  to  me  until  latt 
evening.  I  consider  the  communication  so  important  in  the  present 
crisis  of  our  affairs  with  England,  that  I  despatched  the  Wasp  imme- 
diately, to  carry  it  to  Mr.  Russel,  with  orders  to  return  with  his  an- 
swer, as  soon  as  possible.'^ 

**  I  am  confident  that  the  President  will  approve  the  motive  of  my 
solicitude  in  this  afifair,  and  the  earnest  manner  in  which  I  pressed  the 
minister  with  it,  as  soon  as  my  knowledge  of  the  declaration  of  the 
Prince  Regent  enabled  me,  to  use  the  argument  that  belonged  to  the 
subject.  When,  in  the  conversation  above  alluded  to,  the  Duke  first 
produced  to  me  the  decree  of  the  28th  of  April,  ISll,  I  made  no 
comment  on  the  strange  manner  in  which  it  had  been  so  long  conceal- 
ed from  me,  and  probably  from  you.  I  only  asked  him,  if  that  decree 
had  been  published.  He  said  no,  but  declared  it  had  been  communi- 
cated to  my  predecessor  here,  and  likewise  sent  to  Mr.  Serrurier,  with 
orders  to  communicate  it  to  you.  I  assured  him  it  was  not  among 
the  archives  of  the  legation,  that  I  had  never  before  heard  of  it ; 
and  since  he  had  consented  to  answer  my  note,  I  desired  him  to  send 
me,  in  that  official  manner,  a  copy  of  that  decree,  and  of  any  other 
document  that  might  prove  to  the  incredulous  of  my  country,  (not  to 
me)  that  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  were  in  good  faith  and  «<n- 
conditionally  repealed,  with  regard  to  the  United  States.  He  then 
promised  me  he  would  do  it,  and  he  has  performed  his  promise.** 

If  the  concealment  of  this  decree  for  so  long  a  period,  was  extra- 
ordinary, the  declaration  of  the  French  minister  was  not  less  so,  that 
the  same,  though  not  published,  had  been  communicated  to  the  prede- 
cessor of  Mr.  Barlow,  (Mr.  Russel)  and  also  sent  to  Mr.  Serrurier,  to 
be  communicated  to  the  American  government. 

The  spirit  of  concealment,  in  relation  to  this  transaction,  seems  to 
have  reached  .the  American  Executive ;  as  neither  the  decree  itself, 
nor  Mr.  Barlow^s  letter  of  the  12th  of  May  concerning  it,  although 
they  both  arrived  at  the  office  of  the  department  of  State,  by  the 
Wasp,  on  the  13th  of  Julj)  1812,  were  laid  before  Congress  until 
the  3d  day  of  March,  18f3 ;  and  then  only,  in  consequence  of  a  spe- 
cial call  of  the  House  of  Aepresentatives. 


399 

In  his  message  to  Congress,  at  the  opening  of  its  session,  on  the 
4th  of  Noyember,  1812,  the  President,  alluding  to  the  promulgation 
of  this  decree,  merely  says  :  **  This  proceeding,  although  made  the 
ground  of  the  repeal  of  the  British  orders  in  council,  is  rendered,  by 
the  time  and  manner  of  it,  liable  to  many  objeetionsy 

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  any  other  reason,  for  withholding  these  pa^ 
pers  from  Congress,  than  a  desire  to  conceal  from  that  body  as  well 
as  the  nation,  the  perfidy  of  a  government,  on  whose  conduct  the 
American  Executire  had  before  placed  so  much  confidence.  And  itia 
still  more  difficult  to  imagine  a  reason,  why  the  President  did  not,  in 
sending  these  papers,  inform  Congress,  whether  the  declaration,  made 
by  the  French  minister  to  Mr.  Barlow,  relative  to  its  being  communi- 
cated  to  Mr.  Russel,  and  to  Mr.  Serrurier,  were  true  or  not ;  as  the 
consequences  of  its  concealment,  had,  in  our  view,  been  nothing  leas 
than  involving  the  United  States  in  a  war :  and  the  blame  must  restf 
either  with  the  French  or  American  government. 

As  these  papers  were  sent  to  Congress  on  the  last  day  of  its  sessioot 
no  further  explanation  of  this  mysterious  transaction  could  then  be 
asked  for. 

The  people  of  the  United  States  as  well  as  their  Representatives, 
were  not  a  little  astonished,  at  the  facts  disclosed  in  Mr.  Barlow*s 
letter ;  and  in  June  following,  at  an  extra  session,  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives called  upon  the  Elxecutive  for  a  full  explanation  of  them ; 
end  particularly,  as  to  what  time^  hy  whom^  and  in  what  manner  this 
decree  was  first  communicated  to  the  American  government,  or  any  of 
its  representatives. 

In  answer  to  this  call,  the  national  legislature  was,  for  the  first  time 
informed,  that  Mr.  Russel  had  no  knowledge  of  the  decree,  onlil 
sent  to  him  by  Mr.  Barlow;  and* that'  the  same  had  never  been  com- 
municated to  the  American  government  by  the  French  minister,  or  any 
other  person,  previous  to  the  date  of  Mr.  Barlow*s  letter — and  that 
the  French  minister,  when  inquired  of  declared,  that  the  first  intelli- 
gence he  received  of  its  existence,  was,  by  a  letter  from  the  Duke  of 
Bassano,  of  the  10th  of  May,  1812;  and  that,  in  this  letter,  the  Duke 
expressed  his  surprise,  that  a  prior  letter  of  May,  1811,  in  which  he 
had  transmitted  a  copy  of  it,  for  the  information  of  the  American 
government,  had  not  been  received. 

And  no  further  explanation  was  ever  given^  or  attempted  to  be  gir- 
en,  of  this  transaction ;  a  transaction,  which,  among  many  others, 
served  to  prove,  that  the  diplomatic  history  of.  NapoIeon^s  reign,  was 
but  a  history  of  consummate  artifice  and  perfidy. 


400 

Bonaparte  indeed  was  one  of  thoae  military  conquerors*  whom  CSod, 
in  his  providence,  for  reasons  inscratable  by  mortals,  has,  at  times, 
permitted  to  disturb  and  destroy  the  repose  of  the  world ;  and  who,  in 
their  ambitious  and  mad  career,  regard  neither  truth,  nor  justice*  nor 
any  law,  human  or  divine,  when  opposed  to  their  own  individual 
wUl. 

Resolved  to  destroy  Great  Britain  by  the  dentruction  of  her  com- 
merce and  manufactures,  he  determined  that  every  nation  should  uiite 
with  him,  and  become  his  allies  for  this  purpose — and  no  means  were 
leA  untried,  to  induce  or  compel  them  to  do  this.  With  his  armies* 
he  took  possession  of  the  countries  in  Europe,  whose  rulers  refused 
to  obey  his  will,  and  compelled  them  to  join  him  in  his  warfare  against 
Great  Britain.  The  United  States  he  was  unable  to  reach  with  his 
armies ;  but  every  act  of  the  Americans,  not  in  accordance  with  his 
plans,  or  in  obedience  to  his  high  commands,  was  followed  by  a  seiz- 
ure of  their  vessels  and  other  property,  whenever  and  wherever  they 
came  within  his  grasp ;  regardless  of  treaties,  the  law  of  nations  or 
of  his  own  declarations — and  when  General  Armstrong  was  instruct- 
ed to  demand  redress  for  these  outrages^  as  a  violation  of  treaties* 
and  the  well  known  law  of  nations,  he  informed  his  own  government, 
that,  to  appeal  to  the  stipulation  of  treaties,  or  to  the  law  of  nations 
for  redress,  at  the  court  of  Napoleon,  *'  would  be  literally  appealing 
to  the  dead.*' 

And  it  can  now  hardly  be  credited,  that  when  the  American  Congress* 
on  the  ground,  that  the  French  decrees  were  repealed,  and  the  free- 
dom of  the  seas',  thereby  secured  to  the  Americans,  so  far  as  France 
was  concerned,  was  preparing  for  war  against  Britain,  in  order  to  se- 
enre  the  same  object ;  that  Bonaparte  was,  by  his  fast  sailing  squad* 
rons,  seizing  and  destroying,  as  fart^in  his  power,  American  vessels 
and  property,  on  the  ocean.  One  of  these  squadrons,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Mons.  Feretier,  (a  member  of  the  legion  of  honor)  from  the 
4th  day  of  February,  to  the  6th  of  May,  181%  captured  on  the  high 
seas,  twenty  seven  American  vessels,  many  of  which  he  ordered  to 
be  burnt.  Among  those  thus  captured  and  burnt,  was  the  ship  Asia 
of  Philadelphia,  and  the  brig  Gershom  of  Boston,  both  bound  to  Lis- 
bon, laden  with  corn  and  flour.  In  putting  the  crews  of  these  vessels, 
on  board  of  an  American  ship  bound  to  the  United  States,  he  gave 
tliem  a  certificate,  in  which  he  declared,  that  they  had  been  captured* 
**  d'apres  les  instructions  de  son  excellence  Monseigneur  Le  Minister 


401 

de  la  Marine  et  lea  colonies.*'*  The  papers  relating  to  tbe  captm 
and  barning  uf  the  Asia  and  tlie  Gershom,  were  laid  before  the  tecre^ 
Ury  of  state,  on  the  13th  day  of  April,  1812. 

Other  acts,  also,  of 'the  French  government,  senre  to  shew  its  views 
of  the  declaration,  contained  in  the  duke  of  Cadore*s  letter  of  the 
5th  of  August,  1810;  and  also  to  prove,  that  the  decrees  did  not 
cease  to  have  leffect,  subsequent  to  the  28th  of  April,  181 1. 

AAer  the  President's  proclamation  of  the  2d  of  November  arrived 
in  France,  American  vessels,  were  still  captured ;  but  the  duke  of 
Massa,  on  the  26th  of  December,  1810,  informed  the  President  of  the 
council  of  prizes,  that  the  vessels  so  captured  or  siezed,  should  **  re- 
main only,  in  a  state  of  sequestration ^  and  the  rights  of  the  proprie- 
tors being  reserved  for  them,  until  the  2d  of  February  next,  tlie  pe- 
riod, at  which,  the  United  States  haying  fulfilled  their  engagementf  to 
cause  their  rights  to  be  respected,  the  said  captures  shall  be  declared 
null  by  the  council,  and  the  American  vessels  i-estored,  together  with 
their  cargoes,  to  the  proprietors." 

Notwithstanding  this  declaration,  it  is  well  known,  that  these  vessels 
were  not  restored,  on  the  arrival  of  the  act  of  2d  of  March,  181 !»  be- 
fore mentioned.  On  the  8th  day  of  May,  1811,  ten  days  after  the 
date  of  the  definitive  repealing  decree  before  noticed,  Mr.  Russel* 
in  a  letter  to  the  secretary  of  state,  says,  **  It  may  not  be  improper 
to  remark,  that  no  American  vessel,  captured^  since  the  1st  of  No- 
vember, 1810,  has  yet  been  released.*^ 

And  it  may  not  be  improper  here  to  state,  that  on  the  4th  of  Juljt 
181 1,  the  American  ship  Julian  was  captured,  and  on  the  10th  of  Sep- 
tember following  was  with  her  cargo,  condemned  by  the  council  of 
prizes  at  Paris;  and,  among  other  reasons,  **  because  she  was  visited 
by  several  English  vessels" — and,  on  the  same  day,  another  American 


•  The  following  is  a  copy  of  this  certificate,  now  in  our  poisessioD,  (except  the 
names  of  tbe  crew.) 

"  Etat  nominstif  des  hommes  composant  les  eqaipsget  da  navire  L'Asia  ve- 
nant  de  Pbiladelpbia,  et  da  brick  Le  Gershom  veaant  de  Boston,  destio6  pour 
Lisbon,  avec  des  cargautons  de  grain  et  de  farine,  eaptnii  par  la  diviuon  sar  le 
eommandement  de  Monsieor  Fereder,  membrede  la  legion  d'hoDoeor;  et  tPmpns 
Us  instruaions  de  urn  BxctlUnc*  M&nuigntur  Lt  Ministtr  de  la  JUdrint  H  Us  C§^ 
9%U9~Ats  dite  Eqnipagesembarqoez,  cejoor,  sar  le  Brick  Americaio,  La  ThaaMS^ 
Captaine  Aliha  Hitcbeock,  Tenant  de  Saint  Ubes,  et  allant  a  New  Harea. 

Certifi^  de  la  present  etat  veritable,  et  conform^  ao  r^le  d'Eqoipag^ 
mains,  SdFev.iSia.  Le  commandant  dels  division, 

61 


v. 


40B 

•hip  ihe  Herealett  was  also  condemned,  because,  as  alledgcd  hf 
the  imperial  council  of  prizes,  "  it  was  impossible^  that  she  was  mti 
visitedy  by  the  enemy's  ships  of  war.'' 

Id  this  singular  state  of  things,  in  relation  to  France,  the  Premdenl» 
on  the  1st  of  June,  1612,  recommended  a  declaration  of  war  at^nat 
Great  Britain.  This  declaration  was  made,  by  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, on  the  4th,  but  was  not  finally  concurred  in  by  the  Senate, 
until  the  Hth  of  the  same  month. 

And  we  would  here  observe,  that,  in  our  apprehension,  there  can 

be  little  doubt,  that  the  decree  of  Bonaparte  definitively  repealiof 

y  his  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  was  kept  back,  until  such  time,  as,  that 

its  publication  wotild  not  prevent  that  issue  of  the  contest  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain,  to  which  all  his  measures  tended. 
\^  l¥hen  it  was  sent  to  Mr.  Barlow,  on  the  10th  of  May,  1812,  Bona- 

parte, no  doubt,  was  satisfied  that  the  American  government  had  de- 
termined on  a  war  with  Great  Britain ;  and  that  a  declaration  to  that 
effect,  would  be  made,  in  all  probability,  before  the  news  of  the  re- 
peal of  the  orders  in  council  (should  such  repeal  be  the  consequence 
of  the  publication  of  the  decree)  would  reach  the  United  Statea; 
though,  from  the  former  conduct  of  Great  Britain,  he  did  not,  proba- 
bly, expect,  that  such  would  be  the  consequence. 

It  needed  not  all  the  sagacity  of  a  French  diplomatist,  to  ascertain, 
with  certainty,  at  Washington,  in  the  winter  of  181%  that  unleas 
Great  Britain  changed  her  measures,  before  the  rising  of  Congreaa 
then  in  session,  war  would  be  declared  against  her.  Many  things 
erinced  this,  which  could  not  be  concealed  from  any  one,  then  at 
Waahington,  much  less,  from  one,  whose  special  duty  it  was,  to  watch 
the  movements  of  the  government  at  that  place.  In  January,  a  large 
addition  was  made  to  the  army,  and  in  March  a  loan  of  eleven  mil- 
lions was  authorized ;  and  we  know  that  many  of  the  members,  in 
private  conversation,  openly  avowed  their  opinions,  in  favor  of  a  de- 
ehiration  of  war,  before  the  close  of  the  session.  In  addition  to  these 
open  manifestations,  we  would  here  state,  that  on  the  12th  day  of 
March,  the  committee  of  foreign  relations  in  the  House,  requested  a 
private  conference,  with  the  secretary  of  state,  on  this  subject,  and 
that,  at  this  conference,  held  on  that  day  or  soon  a^er,  the  secretary 
distinctly  stated,  as  the  opinion  of  the  President,  that  war  should  be 
declared  against  Great  Britain,  before  the  adjournment  of  Congress ; 
and  that  as  a  preliminary  measure,  an  embargo  should  be  laid  for  sixty 
days — that  the  President  would  reccommend  this  preliminary  meas- 
ure, if  he  were  satisfied,  it  would  be  adopted  by  the  committee  and 


40S 

the  house ;  and  the  committee,  by  a  direct  Tote»  decided  io  (a?or  of 
such  a  measure. 

It  is  well  known,  to  all  acquainted  with  the  management  of  afiiiirs 
at  Washington,  that  a  transaction  of  this  importance  and  characteri 
though  intended  to  be  kept  secret,  would,  in  some  way^  reach  the  ears 
of  foreign  ministers,  at  that  place,  as  soon  as  the  winds  could  carry  ilf 
from  the  capitol,  along  the  Pennsylvania  avenue* 

An  embargo  for  siity  days,  was  recommended,  by  the  President  oi 
the  first  of  April,  and  almost  immediately  adopted  by  both  hooset* 
The  news  of  this  sure  precursor  of  war,  could  have  reached  Fraiie6| 
by  a  fast  sailing  vessel  (and  rumor  at  the  time,  said  that  such  a  Tee- 
■el  was  dispatched  by  the  French  minister,)  prior  to  the  lOth*  and 
even  the  1st  of  May. 

Events  proved  the  truth  of  the  information,  or  verified  the  predie- 
,  tions  of  Bonaparte,  respecting  the  course  of  the  American  govern- 
ment. 

War  was  declared  against  Great  Britain,  five  days  before  her  oi^ 
ders  in  council  were  revoked.  Had  the  news  of  this  revocation  reach* 
ed  Washington,  before  that  declaration  had  been  made,  we  do  not  has* 
itate  io  say,  that  war  would  not  have  taken  place.  Withont  advert* 
ing  to  the  well  known  circumstances,  that  Congress  had  agreed  io  ?•• 
peal  the  non-intercourse  act,  in  case  Great  Britain  would  rescind  her 
orders,  without  insisting  on  her  relinquishment  of  the  right  of  im- 
pressment ;  and  that  the  Erskine  arrangement  was  made  and  carried 
into  effect,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government,  on  the  same 
terms,  we  would* observe,  that  a  majority  of  the  Senate  was,  at  firstt 
opposed  to  the  declaration  passed  by  the  house.  That  body  had  thit 
important  subject  under  consideration,  from  the  6th  to  the  17th  of 
June,  before  a  final  decision  was  had  upon  it.  The  committee  of 
the  Senate,  to  whom  the  bill  from  the  House  had  been  referred,  was 
specially  instructed  to  go  no  farther  than  to  order  reprisals,  by  public 
and  private  armed  vessels,  against  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain;  and 
when  the  committee,  in  pursuance  of  such  instructions,  reported  an 
amendment,  substituting  reprisals  for  war,  the  Senate  was  equally  di- 
vided upon  it;  and  the  substitute  was  lost.  While  this  was  under 
consideration,  it  was  proposed  to  order  reprisals  against  France,  alto ; 
and  thi:<  proposition  was  lost,  by  a  majority  of  two  only.  And  before 
a  final  decision  on  the  bill,  Mr.  Giles  proposed  another  substitute,  ae- 
thorizing  the  Presidont,  to  instruct  the  commanders  of  all  American 
armed  ships  of  war,  to  recapture  any  American  vessel,  bound  to  may 
place  prohibited  to  such  vessel  by  the  British  orders  in  coundlf  wUek 


■) 


404 

had  been  prenotraly  captured,  by  anj  British  armed  resael ;  and  to 
capture  any  British  armed  vessel,  which  should  resist  such  recaptare» 
or  be  found  hovering  on  the  coasts  of  the  United  States,  for  the  pur- 
poee  of  interrupting  their  lawful  commerce — and  that  he,  alaot  be 
empowered,  to  instruct  all  ships  of  war  to  recapture  any  American 
Teasel  navigating  the  ocean,  conformably  to  the  law  of  nations,  pre- 
viously captured  by  any  French  armed  vessel;  and  to  capture  such 
French  armed  capturing  vessel — with  power,  likewise,  to  grant  letters 
of  marque  and  general  reprisals,  against  the  commerce,  both  of 
France  and  Great  Britain. 

The  war  party,  however,  at  last,  prevailed  in  the  Senate,  as  it 
had  in  the  other  branches  of  the  government ;  and  the  substitute  of 
Mr.  Giles  was  negatived,  by  a  majority  of  four,  and  on  the  final  paaa- 
age  of  the  bill,  the  majority  was  six.* 

From  these  proceedings  of  the  Senate,  we  trust,  that  it  may  be 
justly  inferred,  that  bad  the  news  of  the  repeal  of  the  ordem  reached 
Washington,  before  the  final  question  had  been  taken  in  that  body, 
war  would  not  have  been  declared.  And  we  have  always  deemed  it 
a  matter  of  regret,  that  after  that  repeal,  the  armistice  offered  on  the 
part  of  the  British  government  was  not  accepted,  leaving  the  qoea- 
tion  of  impressment,  in  the  situation,  it  had  been  previously  left, 
under 'the  law  of  Congress  before  alluded  to,  and  under  the  Erskine 
arrangement.  The  American  Executive,  however,  did  not  think 
proper,  to  accept  it,  but  upon  terms  relating  to  impressment,  which 
the  British  considered,  as  giving  up  the  question  on  their  part ;  and 
the  war  was,  therefore,  continued,  principally,  if  not  solely,  on  the 
subject  of  impressment. 

If  neither  Washington  nor  Adams,  aided  by  such  able  negociatora, 
aa  Jay  and  King,  at  a  much  more  aunpicious  period,  could  not  obtain 
from  Great  Britain,  a  relinquishment  of  the  right  of  impressment — 
If  the  Fox  administration,  whose  views  were  supposed  rather  favor- 
able towards  this  country,  would  not  yield  it,  in  the  treaty  made  with 
Messrs.  Munroe  and  Finckney ;  what  probable  ground  was  there. 


•  We  have  good  reasons  for  believiog,  that  some  of  the  cabinet,  as  well  as 
some  of  the  members  of  Congress,  assented  to  the  war,  with  reluctance.  And 
we  would  here  observe,  that  this  reluctance  might  have  been  produced,  by  a  pri- 
vate letter,said  to  have  been  whuen,  and  we  believe  was  written,  by  Mr.  Barlow, 
to  some  individual  at  Washington,  (a  copy  of  which  is  now  in  our  possession,) 
stroDf ly  advising  against  involving  the  United  States,  in  a  war,  wiih  either  of  the 
btlligerenti. 


c- 


'      ^  406 

fer  be1ievin|r,  that  fhe  would  yield  it,  at  a  time,  when,  fhe  waa  eon* 
leMing,  as  she  alleged,  for  her  very  existenee  as  a  nation,  against  the 
most  powerful  and  unprincipled  conqueror  and  tyrant,  the  world  had 

^ever  seen — against  one,  whom  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Adams, 
called  «'  the  Attila  of  his  age,*'  **  the  destroyer  of  ten  millions  of  the 
human  race,  whose  thirst  for  blood  appeared  unquenchable,  the 
great  oppressor  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  world'^ — '*  a  lion  in 
the  fiel  1 — in  civil  life,  a  cold  blooded,  calculating,  unprincipled  nrar^ 
per,  without  a  virtue*'— one,  of  whose  conduct  and  character,  Mr. 
Jefferson,  in  a  letter  to  Madame  de  Stael,  (who  had  personally  felt 
his  power,)  gives  the  following  more  extended,  and  more  graphie  de- 
scription. 

**  It  is  by  millions  that  Bonaparte  destroys  the  poor,  and  he  is  eulo- 
gized and  deified  by  the  sycophants,  even  of  science.  These  merit 
more  than  the  mere  oblivion,  to  which,  they  will  be  consigned ;  and 
the  day  will  come,  when  a  just  posterity  will  give  to  their  Aero,  the 
only  preeminence  he  has  earned,  that  of  being  the  greatest  of  the  ie^ 
stroyers  of  the  human  race."  *^  What  year  of  his  military  life,"  Mr. 
Jefferson  adds,  '*  has  not  consigned  a  million  of  human  beingi,  to 
death,  to  poverty  and  wretchedness !  What  field  in  Europe  may  not 
raise  a  monument  of  the  murders,  the  burnings,  the  desolations,  the 
fiimines  and  miseries  it  has  witnessed  from  him  !  and  all  this,  to  ac- 
quire a  reputation,  which  Cartouche  attained,  with  less  injury  to 
mankind,  of  being  fearless  of  God  and  man." 

It  cannot  but  occur  to  the  reader,  that  a  day  may  also  come,  when 
^  a  just  posterity^'  may  be  disposed  to  inquire,  what  possible  chance 
the  United  States  could  have,  of  obtaining  the  object,  for  which,  after 
the  repeal  of  the  orders  in  council,  war  was  continued,  unless,  indeed* 
through  the  instrumentality  and  power  of  one,  whom,  Mr.  Jeflerson 
has  thus  called  **  the  greatest  of  the  destroyers  of  the  human  race." 

And  an  answer  to  this  inquiry,  may  be  found  in  the  conduct  and 
proceedings  of  the  American  government  itself.  In  January,  1813y 
the  committee  of  foreign  relations,  declared,  and  the  declaration  was 
sanctioned  by  the  House,  that,  **  Had  the  Executive  consented  to  an 
armistice,  on  the  repeal  of  the  orders  in  council,  without  a  satisfactorr 
provision  against  impressment,  or  a  clear  and  distinct  underatandlnr 
with  the  British  government  to  that  effect,  your  committee  would  not 
have  hesitated  todisapprove  it  The  impressment  of  our  seamen* 
being  deservedly  considered  a  frincipol  cause  of  the  war,  the  war 
ought  to  be  prosecuted,  until  that  cause  was  removed."    **  War,**  the 

\  committee  add,  **  having  been  dedareii)  and  the  case  of  impresament 
being  neceai%ri]y  included,  aa  onettf  the  most  important  caneeti  it  to 


406 

evident  that  it  must  be  provided  for^  in  the  pacification :  the  omit* 
MOD  of  it,  in  a  treaty  of  peace  would  not  leave  it  on  its  former  grouod, 
it  would,  in  effect,  be  an  absolute  relinquishment.*^ 

Id  conformity  with  this  declaration,  the  Executive,  on  the  15th 
of  April,  1813,  instructed  the  American  envoys  sent  to  Europe,  to 
negociate,  under  an  expected  mediation  of  Russia,  not  to  conclude 
a  peace  with  Great  Britain,  unless  they  '^  obtain  a  satisfactory  stipm* 
Zd^ton  against  impressments,  one,  which  would  secure,  under  our  flag, 
protection  to  the  crew."  If  this  could  not  be  accomplished,  all 
further  negociation  was  to  cease ;  and  they  were  directed  to  rettnm 
home,  without  delay.  The  mediation  of  Russia,  not  having  beeo 
accepted  by  Great  Britain,  the  same  instructions  were  renewed,  in 
consequence  of  a  proposition,  to  open  negociations  at  Gottenburg. 

But  when  Bonaparte  was  driven  from  Russia,  and  was  on  his  way 
to  Elba,  tlie  tone  of  the  Executive  was  entirely  changed,  on  this 
subject  The  instructions  given,  on  the  25th  of  June,  1814,  coo* 
tained  the  following  passages — *^It  is  impossible,  with  the  lights 
\  which  have  reached  us,  to  ascertain  the  present  disposition  of  the 
British  government,  towards  an  accommodation  with  the  United. 
States.  We  think  it  probable,  that  the  late  events  in  France,  may 
have  had  a  tendency  to  increase  its  pretentions." 

*'  At  war  with  Great  Britain,  and  injured  by  France,  the  United 
States  have  sustained  the  attitude,  founded  on  those  relations.  No 
reliance  was  placed,  on  the  good  ojices  of  France,  in  bringing  the  war 
with  Great  Britain,  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion.  Looking  steadily  to 
an  honorable  peace,  and  the  ultimate  attainment  of  justice  from  both 
powersytne  President  has  endeavored,  by  a  coni^istent  and  honorable 
policy,  to  take  advantage  of  every  circumstance,  that  might  promote 
that  result.  He  nevertheless  knew,  that  France  held  a  place,  in  the 
political  system  of  Europe  and  of  the  world,  which,  as  a  check  on  Eng* 
land^  could  not  fail  to  be  useful  to  i/s." 

And  in  two  days  after  this,  the  American  negociators  were  instme- 
led,  in  the  following  words — ^^On  mature  consideration,  it  has  been 
decided,  that  all  circumstances  above  dlluded  to,  incident  to  a  prose- 
cution of  the  war,  you  may  omit  any  stipulation  on  the  subject  of 
impressment,  if  found  nesessary  to  terminate  it."  Here,  if  we  right* 
ly  understand  it,  is  an  acknowledgment,  that  the  Executive  relied 
on  Bonaparte,  for  attaining  the  object  for  which  the  war  had  been 
continued ;  not,  indeed,  on  his  *'  good  offices,^'  but  on  the  successful 
efforts  of  that  mighty  power,  which  he  had  acquired — a  power,  which, 

the  Executive  supposed,  '*  could  not  fail  to  be  useful"  to  the  United 


407 

Butes.  Bonaparte  had  conquered  continental  Europe,  that  he  might 
thereby  conquer  England — he  had  made  war  on  the  different  Europe* 
an  nations,  to  compel  them  to  assist  him  in  the  conquest  of  that 
country — he  had  made  war  upon  the  commerce  of  the  United  Statett 
to  compel  them,  to  make  war  upon  the  commerce  of  Great  Britain, 

We  cannot  suppose,  however,  it  could  have  been  the  wish  of  the 
Executive,  that  the  success  of  this  destroyer  of  nations,  should  ha?e 
extended  to  the  destruction  of  Great  Britain,  as  a  nation  ;  but  so  hr 
only,  as  to  compel  her  to  do  justice  to  the  United  States.  But,  it 
may  be  asked,  who  could  have  put  a  stop  to  his  career,  at  this  point  T 
Who  could  say  to  this  conqueror,  thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no 
farther  T 

Viewed,  therefore,  in  the  light  in  which  the  American  Executive 
has  placed  its  own  conduct,  it  was  one  of  the  boldest  and  most  hazard- 
ous political  experiments  ever  made — one  of  the  deepest  political 
games  ever  played.  It  staked  the  rights,  the  happiness  of  millionst 
upon  the  fortunes  of  a  madman — a  madman,  indeed,  powerful  and 
successful,  beyond  example,  and  to  whom  some  of  his  mad  and  blas- 
phemous followers  had  applied  the  epithet  of  omnipotent ;  and  who 
was  then  invading  Russia  with  a  military  force  greater  and  more 
powerful,  than  the  world  had  ever  seen.  But  the  chances  in  this  deep 
political  game,  at  last  turned  against  him,  and  against  the  United 
States  ;  or  as  we  ought  rather  to  say,  the  days  of  his  political  power 
were  already  numbered,  by  that  being  who  alone  is  omniscient^  as  well 
as  omnipotent — long  oppressed  Europe,  at  last  rose  and  hurled  him 
from  the  high  station  to  which  he  had  attained.  With  the  loss  of  hit 
power,  the  American  Executive  lost  all  hope  of  attaining  the  object 
for  which  the  war  had  been  continued ;  and  was  obliged  to  conclude  • 
treaty  of  peace,  without  any  stipulation  whatever,  on  the  part  of 
Great  Britain,  in  relation  to  impressment ;  and  thus  left  this  important 
subject,  if  the  inference  of  the  committee  on  foreign  relations,  before 
alluded  to,  is  just,  in  a  worse  situation  than  before. 

riaving  thus  briefly  adverted  to  the  causes  which  led  to  the  inter- 
ruption of  the  external  commerce  of  the  country,  during  the  period 
now  under  review,  by  embargo,  non  intercourse  and  war,  it  b  tiiBO  to 
call  the  attention  of  the  reader,  to  the  extent  of  that  commerce^  when 
it  was  suflered  to  leave  the  American  ports. 

During  the  embargo,  the  coasting  trade  was  subjected  to  very  rigor- 
ous exactions,  lest  it  should  find  its  way  to  foreign  nations.  Notwith- 
standing this,  many  vessels,  either  by  real  or  pretended  streat  of 
weather,  or  from  other  causes,  were  driven  into  foreign  porta ;  and 


»:• 


408 

the  courts  of  the  United  States  were  filled  with  suiU  for  breaches  of 
the  original  embargo  act«  and  the  various  subsequent  acts,  made  to 
enforce  it.  On  the  removal  of  the  embargo,  trade  in  some  degree 
revived,  though  still  embarrassed  by  the  non  intercourse  acts  before 
noticed.  The  value  of  the  exports  of  domestic  and  foreign  origin* 
from  September  30th,  1807,  to  September  SOth,  ][812,  was  in  each 
year  as  follows : —  j  U  '" '  "^  -^  -^ 

Yean.  DomesUc  export!.  Fcmifii  ezports.      ^  , 

1806  .        $9,433,546  .  .  $18,997,414    'r% 

1809  .  31,405,702  .                20,797,531 

1810  .  .        42,366,675  .  .        24,391,295  \ 

1811  .  .  45,294,043  .        16,022,790 

1812  .  30,032,075  .  .          8,495,127 


$158,532,075  $82,704,157 

From  September  30th,  1812,  to  September  30th,  1814,  when  the 
United  States  were  at  war  with  Great  Britain,  the  value  of  the  exports 
greatly  diminished — 

Tears.  DcmeeUc  exports.  Foreign  exports. 

1813  .      $25,008,153       .   $2,847,845 

1814  .   .    6,782,272   .         145,169 


$31,790,424  $2,993,014 

Much  the  greatest  part  of  the  domestic  exports  in  1813,  consisted 
of  flour,  wheat,  com,  rye  and  rice  shipped  to  Spain  and  Portugal,  not 
only  for  the  supply  of  the  inhabitants  of  those  countries,  then  desola- 
ted by  the  invading  armies  of  Bonaparte,  but  for  the  support  of  the 
British  troops,  then  assisting  in  the  defence  of  those  countries  against 
their  invaders.  This  commerce  was  carried  on,  with  the  connivance 
of  the  British  government ;  and  the  most  of  it,  no  doubt,  in  a  man* 
ner  unjustifiable,  by  special  licences  from  that  government.  The 
value  of  the  above  articles  carried  to  Spain  and  Portugal  in  1813,  ex* 
ceeded  nineteen  millions.  Taking  this  sum  from  the  whole  value  of 
exports  for  these  two  years,  will  leave  only  about  sixteen  millions 
with  the  rest  of  the  world. 

The  long  embargo,  the  non  intercourse  acts,  and  the  war  which 
followed,  against  a  nation  on  which  the  United  States  had  been  so 
long  dependent,  for  no  small  propdrtion  of  their  principal  articles  of 
consumption,  proved  the  great  want  of  their  own  internal  resources. 
Notwithstanding  the  short  period  of  the  war,  the  American  armiea 
suflered  severely  for  the  want  of  blankets,  and  other  necessary  cloth- 
ing.   And  the  great  want  of  fiidlities  for  the  transportation  of  pro- 


\ 


409 

▼ifions  and  baggai|;e  necessary  for  their  armies,  as  well  as  of  their 
military  ptored,  through  such  an  extensive  country,  greatly  enhanced 
the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  increased  the  national  debt  This,  in 
addition  to  the  new  st^te  of  things  in  Europe,  in  consequence  of  the 
general  peace,  necessarily  directed  the  attention  of  the  Americans,  at 
the  close  of  their  war  with  Great  Britain,  to  the  subject  of  their  own 
internal  resources — a  subject  for  a  long  time,  for  reasons  already  / 

Y stated,  almost  entirely  neglected* 
This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  third  period  under  re- 
view, viz.  from  1816  to  1833;  and  we  shall  present,  not  only  a  concise 
comparative  view  of  the  external  commerce,  but  also  a  brief  sketdi 
of  the  internal  commerce  and  resources  of  the  United  States,  dorinf 
this  interesting  peiiod. 

The  new  state  of  Europe,  after  an  unexampled  war  of  a  quarter  of 
a  century,  made  it  necessary  for  the  United  States  to  adopt  some  per^ 
manent  regulations,  in  order  to  secure  and  preserve,  as  far  as  posaibley 
their  external  commerce,  and  particularly  their  navigation,  so  greatly 
increased  in  consequence  of  that  war,  as  well  as  to  encourage  domesiie 
industry,  and  increase  their  own  internal  resources. 

With  a  view  to  the  first  object,  the  National  Legislature,  on  the  8d 
day  of  March,  1816,  repealed  the  acts  imposing  the  discriminating 
tonnage  and  other  duties,  between  American  and  foreign  vessels,  so  fiur 
as  respected  the  produce  or  manufactures  of  the  nation,  to  which  such 
foreign  vessels  might  belong ;  such  repeal  to  take  effect  in  favor  of  any 
foreign  nation,  whenever  the  President  should  be  satisfied,  that  the 
discriminating,  or  countervailing  duties  of  such  foreign  nation,  so  far 
as  they  operated  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  United  States,  had  been 
abolished.  And  we  would  here  state,  that  under  this  act,  the  dntiet 
have  been  equalized  between  the  United  States  and  many  of  the 
countries  in  Europe  and  South  America,  either  by  treaties,  or  mutual 
legislative  acts. 

Prior  to  the  year  1817,  no  act  had  been  passed  by  Congresa,  which 
could  be  denominated  a  navigation  act  Before  that  period,  the  cap* 
tain  or  commander  only  of  a  commercial  vessel,  was  required  to  be 
an  American  citizen,  to  give  a  national  character  to  such  vessel ;  and 
foreign  articles  might  also,  before  that  time,  be  imported  in  foreign 
vessels,  from  any  country  whatever.  On  the  1st  of  March,  1817t  en 
act  was  passed  *'  concerning  the  navigation  of  the  United  Statest'* 
having  two  objects  in  view,  one  to  increase  the  number  of  Americea 
seamen,  and  the  other  to  find  employment  for  them.  To  attain  the 
ftrat,  the  act  declared,  that,  afUr  the  aOch  of  September,  1817,  m 


/  • 


410 

Teasel  or  boat  eogaged  in  the  fisheries,  should  be  entitled  to  the  boM* 
ties  allowed  by  law,  unless  the  qfficerSf  and  at  least  three  fourtk$  of 
the  crew,  should  be  citizens  of  the  United  States,  or  persons  not  the 
subjects  of  any  foreign  prince  or  state ;  and  that  every  vessel  eoiploy* 
ed  in  the  coasting  trade,  (except  those  going  from  one  state  to  ma 
adjoining  state  on  the  sea  coast,  or  on  a  navigable  river  or  lake,  or 
going  from  Long  Island  in  the  State  of  New  York,  to  the  State  of 
Rhode  Island,  or  from  the  Sute  of  Rhode  Island  to  Long  Island) 
should  be  subject  to  a  duty  of  fifty  cents  per  ton,  unlesR  three  fourths 
at  least  of  the  crew  were  American  citizens,  or  persons  not  the  subjects 
of  any  foreign  prince  or  state.  The  same  act  also  declares,  that*  after 
the  same  time,  a  duty  of  fifty  cents  should  be  paid,  on  every  American 
vessel,  entering  from  a  foreign  port,  unless  the  officers,  and  at  least 
two  thirds  of  the  crew,  should  be  of  the  same  national  character  du- 
ring the  voyage,  with  the  exception  of  sickness,  desertion,  &c.  io  a 
foreign  conntry.  These  regulations  were  in  accordance  with  those 
long  since  adopted  by  most  of  the  commercial  nations  in  Europe. 
Great  Britain  in  time  of  peace  requires  three  fourths^  and  in  time  of 
war,  one  fourth,  of  the  crews  employed  in  foreign  voyages,  to  be 
British  subjects.  The  proportions  in  the  same  voyages,  have  varied 
in  France,  from  two  thirds  to  three  fourths.  By  the  regulations  of 
the  nations  around  the  Baltic,  a  major  part,  at  least,  of  the  crew,  most 
be  subjects  of  the  nation  to  which  the  vessel  belongs.  By  the  same  act, 
no  goods  could  be  imported  from  any  foreign  port  or  place,  except 
in  vessels  of  the  United  States,  or  in  vessels  truly  and  wholly  belong* 
ing  to  the  people  of  that  nation,  of  which  such  goods  were  the  growth, 
production  or  manufacture,  or  from  which  the  same  would  only  be,  or 
most  usually  were,  first  shipped  for  transportation  ;  with  a  proviso, 
however,  that  the  act  was  not  to  extend  to  the  vessels  of  any  foreign 
nation,  which  had  not,  or  should  not  adopt  a  similar  regulation. 

By  this  proviso,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  the  act  was  merely  retali- 
atory, as  it  included  those  nations  only,  which  had,  or  should  have,  sim- 
ilar regulations,  in  regard  to  American  vessels.  The  policy  of  extend- 
ing it  no  farther  is  obvious,  when  it  is  considered,  that  the  United  Slates, 
ftem  their  local  situation  and  other  causes,  can  carry  colonial  and  other 
foreign  articles,  especially,  in  time  of  war  in  Europe,  as  cheap,  if  not 
cheaper  than  any  other  nation.  And  experience  has  proved,  that  during* 
the  period  now  under  review,  a  time  of  peace,  the  Americans  have 
reteiaed  no  ineonsiderable  sliare  of  the  carrying  trade  of  the  worid. 

By  referriag  to  a  preceeding  chapter,  on  the  subject  of  exports. 
Urn  reader  will  find,  that,  (hnn  1890  to  1831  inclnsive,  a  period  of 


411 

twelre  jrears,  the  ralae  of  domestic  exports  was  about  MGOyOOO^OOOy 
and  that  of  forei|^n  exporto  about  8260,000,000»  making  a  difference 
of  about  $390,000,000. 

By  comparing  the  value  of  the  exports,  during  these  twelve ^ears  of 
peace,  with  that  of  the  exports  of  twelve  years  of  wari  vix.  from 
1796  to  1807,  it  will  be  found,  that  the  value  of  domestic  exports,  dn* 
ring  the  years  of  peace  exceeded  that  of  the  same  exports,  in  the 
twelve  previous  years  of  war,  about  $186,000,000,  while  the  valoe  of 
foreign  exports,  during  the  period  of  war,  exceeded  that  of  the  saoae 
exports,  in  the  latter  period  of  peace,  about  $216,000,000. 

And  on  comparing  the  value  of  the  whole  exports,  during  theta 
two  periods,  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  extent  of  the  external  commerce 
of  the  United  Suteti,  from  1796  to  1807,  exceeded  that  from  1820  to 
1831,  about  $90,000,000. 

The  amount  and  value  of  American  commerce  with  difTerent  na* 
tions  and  places,  has  more  or  less  varied,  in  different  years,  since  181& 

The  following  table  presents  a  view  of  the  imports  from,  and  the 
exports  to,  the  principal  nations  and  countries,  with  which  the  United 
States  have  any  considerable  intercourse,  for  the  year  1830. 

Exports. 

DomMt 
From  Importi. 

Russia,  $1,021,^^ 

Sweden  and  depend.  1,398,640 
Denmark  and  do.  1,671,218 
Netherlands  and  do.  1,366,766 
O.  Britain  and    do.    26,804,984   29,767,068    1,898,813    31,667,861 


DomesUe 
produce. 

•36,461 

Poreifn 
prodoea. 

$381,114 

Total  .r 
Mb. 

•410,676 

734.063 

227,678 

961.790 

1,764,314 

240,771 

2,014,086 

3,737,319 

826,118 

4,662,437 

Htnie  Towns,  &.e. 

1,973,278 

1,649,732 

726.148 

2,274,860 

France  and  depend. 

8,240,882 

10,699,318 

1.106.920 

11,806.238 

Hayti, 

1,607,140 

714,791 

106.387 

813,178 

Spain  and  depend-  ) 
encies.except  Cuba, ) 

2,986,461 

988,307 

143,099 

1,432,306 

Cuba, 

6,677,230 

3,439,060 

1,477,696 

4.916,766 

Portugal  and  depend. 

471,643 

266,336 

23463 

279.79^ 

Italy  and  Malta, 

940,264 

326.260 

414,121 

740.360 

Mexico, 

6,022,12p 

986.764 

3,861,694 

4,837,468 

Columbia,     . 

1,120,096 

316,732 

180,266 

497,960 

Brazil, 

2,491,460 

1,600.099 

243,230 

1,844,238 

Argentine  Republic, 

1,431,883 

«6,220 

204,667 

029,867 

Chili,  . 

183,686 

016,718 

020,396 

1,636,114 

Pern, 

072,884 

32.400 

39,402 

71 3n 

China, 

3,878,141 

160,290 

666,908 

049^198 

41S 


With  respect  to  imports  and  exports*  to  the  amount  of  half  a  ofl- 
lion  or  more,  the  nations  and  countries,  take  precedence  as  follows : — 

Import!. 

1.  6re|it  Britain. 
8.  France. 


Exports. 

1.  Great  Britain. 
%  France. 

3.  Cuba. 

4.  Mexico. 

5.  Netherlands  and  dependencies. 

6.  Hanse  Towns. 

7.  Denmark  and  dependencies. 

8.  Brazil. 
0.  Chili. 

10.  Spain  and  dependences. 

1 1.  Sweden  and     do. 

12.  Hayti. 

13.  Italy  and  Malta. 

14.  China. 
16.  Argentine  Republic. 


&  Cuba. 

4.  Mexico. 

5.  China. 

6.  Spain  and  dependencies. 

7.  Brazil. 

8.  Hanse  Towns, 
9«  Denmark  and  dependencies. 

10.  Russia. 

11.  Hayti. 

1%  Argentine  Republic. 
13.'  Sweden  and  dependencies. 

14.  Netherlands  and    do. 

15.  Columbia. 

16.  Peru. 

17.  Italy  and  Malta. 

We  would  here  state,  that  the  value  of  the  trade  between  the  above 
countries  and  places,  with  the  United  States,  is  taken  from  the  returns 
of  the  custom-house  books,  which  do  not  always  shew  the  real  ex- 
tent of  the  commerce  with  particular  countries.  Thi?,  it  will  be  re- 
marked^ is  the  case  with  China,  with  which  the  annual  value  of  the 
American  trade,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  is  now  about  $8,000,000, 
giving  her  a  place,  in  the  commercial  scale,  next  to  France. 


413 


CHAPTER  X. 

Bills  of  credit,  constituted  the  priocipal  currency  of  the  North  American  Colo* 
nies — First  issued  by  Massachusetts  in  1690 — These  bills  depreciate  in^alue-* 
State  of  this  depreciation  in  1748 — Congress  resort  to  a  paper  medium  in  the  war 
of  the  revolution — depreciates  and  dies  in  the  bands  of  the  possessors — Estab* 
lishment  of  the  Bank  of  North  America — a  National  Bank  established  by 
Congress,  in  1791— Numerous  State  Banks  created — Proceedings  of  Congress 
in  relation  to  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  National  Bank  in  1811,  and  in 
relation  to  a  new  National  Bank  in  181&— New  National  Bank  established  in 
1816 — Situation  of  the  State  Banks  during  the  war— Many  of  them  slop  pay- 
ing specie — Their  bills  depreciate — National  Bank  assists  in  the  restoration  of 
specie  payments — Difference  of  opinion  between  the  Legislative  and  Executive 
branches  of  the  government,  as  to  the  constitutionality  and  expediency  of  a 
National  Bank — Bill  passed  by  Congress  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the 
present  National  Bank  in  1832 — Negatived  by  the  Pre5ideDt — His  views  tm 
this  subject  different  from  those  of  his  predecessor— Number  and  condition  of 
the  State  Banks  at  different  periods — Proportion  of  their  circulation  to  their 
capitals,  in  different  States,  in  1833  and  January,  1834 — Evils  arising  from 
banks  of  circulation — Should  be  carefully  guarded  against. 

Some  brief  sketches  of  the  internal  coinmerce,  wealth  and  resoar- 
ces  of  the  United  States,  especially,  during  the  period  under  immedi- 
ate review,  will  now  be  presented  to  the  reader.  Our  riews,  how- 
ever,  on  this  important  part  of  political  economy,  will  be  confined  to 
the  subjects  of  Ist,  Banks,  2d,  Manufactures,  and  3d,  Internal  im- 
proveroent^,  of  different  kinds,  such  as  canals,  rail  roads,  steam  nari- 
gation,  dec. 

Banking  institutions,  which  will  be  the  subject  of  the  present 
chapter,  have  too  great  an  influence  and  bearing,  on  the  interna^  ai 
well  as  the  external  prosperity  of  this  country ;  and  particularly,  haa 
too  intimate  a  connexion  with  its  currency,  to  pass  unnoticed. 

Before  calling  the  attention  of  the  reader,  however,  to  the  origin* 
progress  and  eflfects  of  these  institutions,  especially  since  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  present  national  government,  we  beg  leave  to  remind 
him,  that  paper  money  of  some  description,  has  constituted,  in  this 
country,  a  great  proportion  of  its  currency  or  circulating  mediom, 
from  the  year  1690  to  the  present  time.  >VhiIe  under  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  parent  state,  this  paper  consisted  of  bills  of  credit*  as 
they  were  called,  issued  by  the  several  colonies ;  and  for  the  pajrment 
of  which,  the  faith  of  the  colonies  themselves,  was  pledged. 


i 


414 

These  bills  were  called  ia  by  taxes,  payable  at  different  periodiy 
and  were  not  only  made  receivable,  in  the  payment  of  those  taxes, 
and  of  all  debts  due  to  the  government  issuing  them  ;  but  were,  also, 
made  a  tender  in  payment  of  private  debts,  until  this  was  prohibited* 
by  act  of  Parliament. 

Massachusetts  led  the  way,  in  making  and  issuing  this  species  of 
paper  money. 

That  colony  incurred  expenses,  in  an  unfortunate  maritime  expe- 
dition against  Quebec  in  1690,  much  beyond  its  ordinary  means  of 
payment ;  and  to  meet  these  expenses,  resorted  to  the  expedient  of 
issuing  bills,  on  the  credit  of  the  colony.  This  was,  afterwards  foU 
lowed,  as  cases  of  emergency  arose,  by  most,  if  not  all  the  other  Brit- 
ish North  American  colonies. 

These  bills,  however,  became  less  valuable,  than  gold  and  silrer, 
in  each  colony,  where  they  were  issued.  In  New  England,  ibey 
were  valued  at  six  shillings  for  a  silver  dollar ;  and  at  this  rate,  were 
denominated  the  lawful  money  of  that  part  of  the  country — ^in  New 
York,  they  were  valued,  at  eight  shillings,  and  in  Pennsylvania,  seven 
shillings  and  six  pence,  for  a  dollar ;  and  hence  arose  the  different 
currencies,  in  these  several  colonies,  and  which  remain  to  the  present 
day ;  and  with  which,  many  of  the  people  are  now  more  famillart 
than  with  any  other. 

These  bills,  however,  still  continued  to  depreciate,  particularly 
in  New  England,  and  the  Carolinas,  in  consequence  of  excessive 
issues.  In  1745,  Massachusetts  alone,  to  pay  the  expenses  of  her 
fortunate  expedition  against  Louisburg,  and  in  other  preparations,  in 
the  war  then  exitfting  between  England  and  France,  issued  bills  to 
the  amount  of  between  two  and  three  millions  of  pounds  lawful 
money.  This  large  amount,  naturally  occasioned,  an  increased  de- 
preciation, so  that,  in  1748,  eleven  hundred  pounds  of  these  bills,  was 
only  equal,  to  one  hundred  pounds  sterling. 

In  consequence  of  their  wars  with  the  Indians,  large  issues  werSt 
also,  made  in  the  two  Carolinas,  at  various  times. 

The  extent  of  the  depreciation  of  these  bills,  in  the  several  colo- 
nies, in  1748,  may  be  estimated,  from  the  state  of  the  exchange,  in 
each,  with  London,  or  from  the  amount  of  those  bills,  which,  at  that 
lime,  was  required,  to  procure  a  bill  of  exchange  of  £100  sterling,  on 
London. 

The  following  has  been  estimated,  as  the  difference,  in  the  difltav 
ent  colonies,  at  that  period. 


415 

New  En^iftod,  for       £100  sterUng,  paid  in  bilk— £1 100 
New  York,  for  "  "  190 

East  Jersey,  for  **  **  190 

West  Jersey,  for  "  "  180 

PennsylFania,  for  **  "  180 

Maryland,  for  '*  «'  200 

YirginU,  for  ««  ''         £190  to  195 

North  Carolina,  for  *'  ''  1000 

South  Carolina,  for  '«  '•  700* 

Great  Britain  paid  to  Massachusetts,  the  sum  of  £180,000  starliof  i 
for  expenses  in  the  expedition  against  Louisburg ;  and  with  this  sum, 
that  colony  redeemed  her  bills,  at  the  rate  of  fifty  shillings  per  ounee 
of  silrer. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  war  of  the  revolution,  the  United 
Colonies  were  obliged  again  to  have  recourse  to  the  old  system  of 
paper  money — and,  in  1775^  bills  of  credit  were  issued  by  Congrefft, 
to  the  amount  of  93,000,000;  and  to  this,  large  sums  were  afler* 
wards  added;  and  a  depreciation  in  value  was  the  natural  consa* 
quence,  although  Congress  made  them  a  tender,  in  payment  of  all  pri- 
vate  debts,  and  declared  a  refusal  to  receive  them,  to  be  an  extingnisli* 
ment  of  the  debt  itself.  This  depreciation  began  to  be  serioosly  ielt« 
early  in  the  year  1777 ;  and  increased  with  the  increase  of  issnee. 
In  September,  1779,  these  issues  amounted  to  $160,000,000 ;  when 
Congress  declared,  that,  on  no  account*  should  they  ever  exceed 
(200,000,000 :  and  bills  to  this  amouot  were  issued,  before  the  close 
of  tliat  year ;  a  sum  too  large  to  admit  of  a  redemption  at  par»  and  in 
the  course  of  the  years  1780  and  1781,  the  bills  entirely  stopped  eir* 
culaiion. — Nor  has  any  part  of  them  ever  been  redeemed,  except  at 
one  hundred  for  one,  under  the  funding  system,  first  established,  bjr 
the  present  national  government 

Soon  after  the  death  of  continental  money,  at  the  suggestion  of 
Robert  Morris,  superintendent  of  Finance,  Congress  established  a 
national  bank,  by  the  name  of,  **  The  President  and  Directors  of  tha 
Bank  of  North  America.**  This  institution  went  into  fuccessfnl  opa> 
ration  in  December,  1781,  with  a  capita]  of  only  f400X)00,  and  un* 
der  the  management  of  its  projector,  and  others  associated  with  hioit 
contributed,  as  far  as  its  limted  means  would  allow,  to  relieve  tha 
financial  distress  of  the  coontry,  at  that  period.    This  bank  is  still  in 


•  Holmes'  Annals. 


416 

operation  in  Philadelphia,  with  an  enlarged  capital,  and  under  •  new 
charter  from  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania ;  and  has  always  sus- 
tained the  eame  character  and  credit,  with  which  it  commenced 
business. 

Such  was  the  scarcity  of  money,  soon  after  the  peace  of  1783,  in 
consequence  of  the  depressed  state  of  American  commerce,  and  the 
want  of  an  efficient  national  government,  that  some  of  the  States  again 
resorted  to  paper  money,  and  tender  laws. — And  some  of  them,  in- 
deed, went  so  far,  as  to  make  personal  property  a  tender  in  payment 
of  private  debts, *at  the  apprisal  of  men,  to  be  selected  for  thai  pur- 
pose. These  extraordinary  remedies,  instead  of  relieving,  increased 
the  evils  complained  of;  and  contributed  not  a  little,  to  the  adoption 
of  the  present  constitution,  by  which,  the  States  themselves  were 
prohibited,  from  issuing  bills  of  credit,  or  making  any  thing  but  gold 
and  silver,  a  tender  in  payment  of  debts. 

The  only  banks  in  existence,  when  the  national  government  went 
into  operation,  were  the  bank  of  North  America  before  mentioned,  the 
bank  of  New  York,  situated  in  the  city  of  New  York,  and  the  bank  of 
Massachusetts,  in  Boston,  with  an  aggregate  capital  of  only,  about 
•%000,000. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  (Mr.  Hamilton,)  very  early  per- 
ceived, that  a  bank  established  by  national  authority,  was  necessary, 
in  the  management  of  the  finances  of  the  general  government.  He, 
therefore,  in  December,  1790,  recommended  to  Congress  the  estab- 
lishment of  such  an  institution.  Banks  had  existed  in  Europe,  for 
about  six  hundred  years.  The  first  was  established  at  Venice,  in 
1200,  when  that  famous  city  was  the  commercial  emporium  of  Europe. 
As  commerce  travelled  west,  banks  followed,  and  were  successively 
established,  at  Genoa,  Amsterdam  and  Hamburg,  long  the  centre  of 
the  commercial  transactions  of  the  Hanseatic  League — from  thence 
they  followed  commerce  to  England ;  and  have  since  been  established, 
with  more  or  less  success  in  France,  and  in  different  parts  of  conti- 
nental Europe. 

The  benefits,  which  the  commercial  countries  of  that  quarter  of  the 
world,  had  experienced  from  institutions  of  this  kind,  as  well  as  the 
advantages  derived  from  the  bank  of  North  America,  induced  Con- 
gress, no  doubt,  to  comply  with  the  recommendation  of  Hamilton, 
and  to  establish  an  institution  of  a  similar  character,  by  the  name  of 
the  bank  of  the  United  States.  The  act  for  this  purpose,  was  passed, 
on  the  25th  day  of  February,  1791. 


417 

The  power  of  the  general  goTemment  to  establish  such  an  insti- 
lotioD  was  then  questioned  ;  and,  on  this  account,  the  measure  was 
op[>osed,  |>articularly  in  the  House  of  RepreaentatiFes.  President 
Washington,  requested  the  opinion  of  the  Attorney  General,  the  Sec- 
retary of  Slate,  and  the  SecreUry  of  the  Treasury,  in  writing,  as  to 
the  constitutionality  of  the  measure.  The  opinions  of  the  two  former, 
were,  in  the  negative,  and  that  of  the  latter,  in  the  affirmative,  on  this 
Dew  and  important  question  ;  and  the  opinion  of  the  Secretary  of  war, 
although  not  given  in  writing,  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury.  On  this  equal  division  of  his  Cabinet,  the  Presideol, 
after  mature  deliberation,  put  his  signature  of  approbation  to  the  biU. 

The  reasons  then  and  since  urged  for  and  against  this  constitutional 
power,  would  fill  volumes.  And  we  can  here  only  say,  in  general, 
that  the  advocates  for  a  national  bank,  urged,  that  it  was  the  **  necet- 
■ary  and  proper**  meanSt  of  carrying  into  execution,  other  substantive 
powers,  expressly  vested  in  Congress — giving  to  the  word  **  necessa- 
ry,*' as  used  in  the  constitution,  in  connection  with  the  word  **  proper,** 
the  meaning  of  requisite,  needful,  useful,  or  conducive  to.  The  oppo- 
nents however,  gave  a  mvck  more  limited  meaning  to  this  word, 
restricting  it  to  those  means  which  were  absolutely  necessary  in  order 
to  carry  into  effect  other  powers  granted  and  **  without  which  th€ 
grant  of  power  would  be  nugatory.^*  And  we  would  here  obserTe, 
that  the  bill  creating  this  institution,  passed  the  Senate,  with  great 
unanimity ;  and  that  the  votes  in  the  House,  were  thirty  nine  to  twen- 
ty ;  and  that  this  decision  was  not  strictly  according  to  the  parties 
then  known  by  the  name  of  federal  and  anti-federal,  as  some  of  the 
former  voted  against  the  bill,  and  some  of  the  latter  in  favor  of  it. 
Bot  Mr.  Jefferson  and  Mr.  Madison,  then  and  afterwards  leaders  of  the 
anti-federal  party,  were  strongly  opposed,  ou  constitutional  groirods. 

The  capital  of  the  bank  thus  established,  was  $10,000,000;  two 
millions  to  be  subscribed  by  the  United  States,  and  the  residue  by  in- 
dividuals. Two  millions  of  the  sum  subscribed  by  individuals,  was 
to  be  paid  in  specie,  and  six  millions  in  six  per  cent  stock  of  the 
United  States.  This  charter  was  to  continue  until  the  4th  of  March, 
1811,  and  in  the  mean  time,  no  other  bank  was  to  be  establislicd  bjr 
national  authority. 

Experience  soon  proved  the  utility  of  such  an  institution,  not  only 
to  the  government,  but  to  the  community  at  large.  The  benefit  waa 
felt  by  the  United  States,  not  merely  in  their  financial  operations,  (ml 
in  the  sale  of  their  shares  in  the  institution.  In  1706  and  171^,  two 
lliOQiand  four  hundred  and  ninety  governmental  shares  were  aoki,  at 

63 


I 


416 

S5  per  cent  advance ;  two  hundred  and  eighty  seven  in  1797»  «C 
advance  of  20  per  cent. ;  and  in  18^  the  residue,  being  two  thu 
two  hundred  and  twenty,  were  sohl  to  fureiguers,  at  45  per  cent*  ad- 
vance, making  together  a  profit  of  $671,000. 

This  bank  was,  also,  profitable  to  the  stockholders  as  well  as  bene- 
ficial to  the  government — its  dividends,  on  an  average,  being  about  8| 
per  cent,  a  year. 

As  the  charter  would  expire,  in  March  1811,  the  stockholders,  in 
the  spring  of  1808,  presented  a  memorial  to  Congress,  praying  for  a 
renewal  of  it.  The  Senate  referred  the  memorial  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury,  (Mr.  Gallatin)  **  to  consider  and  report  thereon,  at  tbe 
next  session  of  Congress." 

At  the  next  session,  on  the  3d  day  of  March,  1809,  Mr.  GallatiD 
made  a  report  in  favor  of  a  renewal  and  continuance  of  the  charter* 
with  an  addition  to  the  capital  and  such  other  modificatioos  as  he 
thought  proper  to  suggest 

The  general  state  and  condition  of  the  bank,  taken  at  a  medianit  as 
stated  in  this  report,  was  as  follows  : — 

Or.  I.  Debts  due  the  bank — 

1.  Six  per  cent  stock,  remaining  part 

of  the  original  subscription,         .  $2,230,000 

2.  Loans  to  individuals,  consisting 
chiefly  of   discounted   notes,  at 

sixty  days,  ....  16,000,000 

3.  Due  by  banks  incorporated  by  the 

States, 800,000 


•18,030,600 

II.  Specie  in  the  vaults, 5,000,000 

III.  Cost  of  lots  of  ground  and  buildings  erected,  480,000 


Total,  Cr.  $23,510,000 

Dr.  I.  CapiUl  stock  of  the  bank,     .        .  $10,000,000 
II.  Monies  deposited  by  government 

and  by  individuals,       .        .        .      8,500,000 
III.  Bank  notes  in  circulation,    .        .      4,500,000 

Total,  Dr.    $23,000,000 

Leaving  a  balance  for  contingencies,  of  $510,000. 
From  this  state  of  the  bank,  the  Secretary  declared,  that  its  affiiirs 
as  a  monied  institution,  '*  had  been  wisely  and  skilfully  managed.'* 

Mr.  Gallatin  proposed  that  the  capital  should  ultimately  be  increased 
to  $30,000,000— that,  of  the  additional  (twenty  millions,)  $15,000^000 


419 

to  be  Bubforibed  by  the  staten,  in  ten  annual  instalments,  and  $6,000,000 
hj  individuals — the  hank  to  pay  a  bonus  of  $1,250,000,  to  pay  inter* 
esijon  the  public  deposits,  when  above  a  certain  amount,  and  to  be 
bound  to  loan  to  the  United  States,  when  required,  three  6fths  of  ita 
capital.  Congress  rose,  the  day  this  report  was  presented  to  the 
Senate.  During  the  next  session,  this  subject  did  not  come  before  the 
Senate ;  but  the  following  is  a  sketch  of  the  proceedings  upon  It  in 
the  House. 

In  January  1810,  the  memorial  previously  presented  to  the  Houaey 
by  the  stockholders,  for  a  continuance  of  their  charter,  was  referred 
to  a  select  committee.  This  committee  having  heard  the  petitioneri« 
in  relation  to  the  terms,  upon  which  they  were  willing  to  receive  a 
renewal  of  their  charter,  reported  generally  to  the  House,  that  they 
did  not  feel  themselves  authorized  to  agree  upon  any  termti ;  that 
these  would  more  properly  be  considered  in  the  details  of  a  bill,  after 
the  principles  had  been  settled  in  the  House.  Without,  therefore,  gir- 
ing  any  opinion  as  to  the  terms,  or  as  to  the  plan  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  above  mentioned,  and  to  which  the  Secretary  when  call- 
ed upon,  had  referred  them,  they  recommended  a  resolution  declaring, 
**  that  it  is  proper  to  make  provision  for  continuing  the  establishmenl 
of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  with  offices  of  discount  and  depoaity 
under  the  regulations  necessary  for  the  beneficial  administration  of  the 
national  finances,  during  such  time  and  on  such  conditions  as  may  be 
defined  by  law.*' 

Soon  after  this  report  was  made,  a  member  introduced  another  res- 
olution, declaring  **•  it  expedient  to  inquire  into  the  expediency  of 
establishing  a  National  Bank,^* 

These  resolutions  were,  at  length,  referred  to  dififerent  committees ; 
and  the  committee  to  whom  the  second  resolution  was  referred,  on 
the  22d  of  March,  reported  **  a  Bill  to  establish  a  national  bank.'* 
By  this  bill,  a  bank  was  to  be  established  at  the  city  of  Washington, 
with  a  capital  not  exceeding  $16,000,C00,  with  branches  in  the  terri- 
tories of  the  United  States,  and  in  the  states  respectively,  on  the 
application  of  the  Legislatures  thereof.  In  reporting  this  bill,  the 
committee  said,  that  a  majority  of  them  were  not  satisfied  it  contained 
the  best  mode  of  establishing  a  national  bank  ;  and  that  it  was  report- 
ed, without  any  pledge  on  their  part,  of  supporting  it,  in  preference  to 
any  other  system  which  might  be  devised. 

The  other  committee  reported  a  Bill,  somewhat  in  accordance  with 
the  plan  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  The  charter  of  the  ez« 
btinf  bank,  by  this  bill,  was  to  be  continued  for  twenty  years    iht 


490 

•iockholdeni  to  pty  a  bonus  of  $1,260,000,  and  to  add  to  the  capital» 
$1,000,000 — the  United  States  to  have  liberty  to  subscribe,  as  an  ad- 
dition to  the  capital,  $9,000,000,  not  exceeding  one  million  a  yemw; 
and  the  bank  was  bound  to  make  loans  to  the  United  States,  io  anj 
sum  or  sums  not  exceeding  at  any  one  time,  $6,000,000 ;  and  to  pay 
an  interest  of  three  per  cent,  on  public  deposits,  over  three  milliona. 

The  plan  of  establishing  a  national  bank  at  Washington  had  lew 
advocates.  The  bill  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter  was  under  debete« 
for  several  days ;  and  a  motion  to  postpone  it  indefinitely,  being  vir- 
toally  a  rejection,  was  negatived  sixty  seven  to  forty  six ;  and  on  a 
question  to  strike  out  the  first  section  of  the  bill,  the  vote  stood,  yeas 
thirty  four,  and  nays  seventy  three.  The  bill  however,  was  aAer- 
wards  suffered  to  lie  upon  the  table,  and  was  not  further  acted  upon* 
during  that  session.  These  proceedings,  and  other  circumstances» 
shew,  that  a  majority  of  the  House,  was  not  then  prepared,  either  to 
adopt  or  reject  the  plan  proposed  by  Mr.  Gallatin,  or  by  the  Commit* 
tee ;  and  evince,  we  apprehend,  that  there  was  not  a  majority  in  the 
House,  against  a  national  bank,  upon  constitutional  grounds.  And 
we  would  observe,  that  in  addition  to  the  expressed  opinions  of  Mr* 
Gallatin,  on  this  point,  as  well  as  upon  the  expediency  of  a  national 
bank,  it  was  well  understood,  that  the  then  President,  (Mr.  Madison) 
although  originally  opposed  to  the  establishment  of  a  bank,  as  un* 
warranted  by  the  constitution,  considered  the  question  so  fully  settled, 
that  he  would  not  on  that  account  have  put  his  veto  to  a  bill  for  the 
renewal  of  the  charter,  had  such  been  presented  to  him. 

Early  in  the  next  session,  the  stockholders  preferred  a  new  peti- 
tion for  a  continuance  of  their  charter ;  and  which,  in  the  House,  was 
referred  to  a  large  committee,  consisting  of  one  from  a  state.  This 
committee,  on  the  4th  of  January,  1811,  reported  a  bill  in  favor  of  e 
renewal  of  the  charter,  not  materially  dififering  from  the  one,  on  the 
same  subject,  reported  the  previous  session,  and  to  which  we  hare 
before  alluded.  This  bill  was  debated  until  the  24th  of  January, 
when  the  same  was  disposed  of  by  an  indefinite  postponement,  by  e 
majority  of  one  only — sixty  five  in  the  affirmative  and  sixty  four  in 
negative.  As  the  charter  expired  on  the  4th  of  March  following,  this 
vote  was  decisive  in  the  House  against  its  renewal. 

Id  the  Senate,  the  petition  of  the  stockholders,  at  an  early  day  of 
the  session,  had  also  been  referred  to  a  committee ;  but  this  com- 
mittee did  not  act  upon  the  subject,  until  after  the  final  vote  of  the 
House  before  noticed.  On  the  6th  of  February,  this  committee  re- 
ported a  bill,  for  the  eontintiance  of  the  charter,  and  which  was  under 


-A 


4S1 

dcbttte,  until  the  90th  of  the  same  month,  when,  on  taking  the  queatioii 
upon  it,  the  rotes  were  equally  divided,  seventeen  in  the  affirmative 
and  seventeen  in  the  negative.  This  necessarily  threw  the  casting 
vote  upon  the  President  of  that  body,  (George  Clinton,)  who  gave 
his  vote,  in  the  negative,  upon  the  ground  of  the  unconstitutionality 
of  the  bill,  and  it  was,  of  course,  lost  The  bank,  therefore,  was 
obliged  to  wind  up  its  afiairs,  and  the  result  evinced,  that  they  had 
been  wisely  and  safely  managed,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  interest  of  the 
stockholders  were  concerned ;  as  they  were  finally  paid  $10S(,  on 
each  $100  of  the  stock. 

To  those  acquainted  with  the  Congressional  history  of  that  period, 
it  is  perfectly  well  known,  that,  in  the  Senate,  there  was  not  a  ma* 
jority  against  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  on  constitutional  scni« 
pies.  In  the  House,  those  who  voted  against  its  renewal,  may  be 
divided  into  three  classes,  1st  Those,  who  denied  the  constitu- 
tional power  of  Congress ;  2d.  Those,  who  admitted  the  power,  and 
were  in  a  favor  of  a  national  bank,  but  were  indisposed  to  continue 
an  institution  under  the  control  of  their  political  opponents,  and  of 
which  foreigners  owned  much  the  greatest  part,  and  3d.  Those  who, 
without  questioning  the  power  of  Congress  on  this  subject,  gave  a 
preference  to  state  banks.  We  do  not  think,  that  those  of  the  first 
class,  constituted  a  majority  of  the  House,  who  voted  against  the  con* 
tinuance  of  the  charter. 

In  order  to  ascertain  the  various  reasons,  which  governed  those, 
who  constituted  this  small  majority,  it  is  necessary  to  consider,  that 
the  applicants  for  an  extension  of  the  important  privileges  of  banking, 
were  the  political  opponents  of  those,  who  were  cjilled  upon  to  grant 
them ;  and  it  cannot  be  strange,  that  this  should  have  influence  with 
some,  in  the  decii*ion  of  this  question,  even  among  those,  who  deem* 
ed  a  national  bank,  both  constitutional  and  expedient ;  and  that  they 
should  be  disposed  to  grant  these  privileges,  to  their  political  friends, 
rather  than  continue  them,  to  their  political  opponents.  Indeed,  in 
the  debates,  on  this  subject,  it  was  avowed,  that  the  same  party,  which 
opposed  the  original  grant,  must  oppose  the  renewal  of  that  grant. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  also,  that,  before  tlie  final  decision  of  thia 
question  in  Congress,  the  legislatures  of  the  states  of  Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania,  Virginia  and  Kentucky,  had  expressed  opinions  against 
the  renewal  of  the  charter ;  and  had  instructed  their  representatives 
in  Congress  to  vote  against  it  The  public  mind  generally,  was,  also, 
by  newspaper  publicstions,  not  a  little  excited  against  the  bank  and  its 
supporters.    Those,  who  belonged  to  the  party  then  in  power,  who 


^ 


4SSt 

were  in  favor  of  renewing  the  charter,  were  accused,  not  onl^  of 
lacy,  but  of  being  bribed  and  corrupted  by  the  bank  or  its  agents. 
Mr.  Crawford  of  the  Senate,  who,  as  chairman  of  the  commilteet 
reported,  to  that  body,  the  bill  before  alluded  to,  and  who  sap- 
ported  it  with  all  the  energies  of  his  powerful  mind,  thus  notices 
these  accusations.  *'  The  democratic  presses  in  these  great  states 
(referring  to  states  opposed  to  the  bank)  have,  for  more  than  twelve 
months  past,  teemed  with  the  most  scurrilous  abuse,  against  every 
member  of  Congress,  who  has  dared  to  utter  a  syllable,  in  favor  of  a 
renewal  of  the  bank  charter.  The  member  who  dares  to  give  his 
opinion,  in  fa?or  of  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  is  instantly  charged 
with  being  bribed,  by  the  agents  of  the  bank — with  being  corropl 
with  ha?ing  trampled  upon  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  peoph 
with  having  sold  the  sovereignty  of  the  United  States,  to  foreign  cap* 
italists — with  being  guilty  of  perjury,  by  having  violated  the  constitu- 
tion.** The  reader,  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  that  period,  os 
perusing  this,  by  itself,  wonld  suppose,  that  Mr.  Crawford  must  have 
referred  to  charges,  of  a  much  more  recent  date. 

The  influence  of  state  banks,  was  also,  brought  to  bear  on  the 
great  question,  then  before  Congress ;  and,  when  it  is  considered, 
that  the  number  of  these  banks,  had  at  that  time  increased  to  nearly 
niniety,  located  in  most  of  the  states,  with  a  capital  of  more  than  forty 
millions,  their  influence  could  have  had  no  inconsiderable  weight. 
With  this  union  of  views  and  interest  against  the  bank,  it  is  not  strange* 
that  the  charter  granting  it,  should  be  suffered  to  expire. 

In  the  war,  which  soon  followed,  the  United  States  were  obliged 
to  rely  on  the  state  banks,  not  only,  for  the  collection  and  distribution 
of  their  revenues,  but  for  a  gir^at  proportion  of  their  loans,  to  carry 
on  the  war.  This  required  increased  issues  of  paper,  and  this  cir-* 
cnmstance,  with  the  pressure  of  the  war  upon  the  American  com- 
merce, induced,  or  obliged  the  banks,  south  of  New  England,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1814,  to  stop  paying  specie  for  their  bills.  A  great  deprecia- 
tion of  these  bills,  was  the  necessary  consequence,  as  will  be  more 
particularly  noticed  hereafter.  This  rendered  it  impossible,  for  the 
general  government  to  procure  loans,  for  the  prosecution  of  the  war, 
except  upon  terms  utterly  ruinous. 

A  national  bank,  seemed  to  present  the  only  remedy  for  the  finan- 
cial embarrassments  of  the  country.  The  secretary  of  the  treasury, 
therefore,  (Mr.  Dallas,)  very  early  in  the  session  of  Congress,  which 
met,  on  the  last  of  September,  1814,  presented  a  plan  for  a  national 
bank,  to  consist  of  a  capital  of  $60,000,000,  divided  into  one  hundred 


483 

thoostad  shares  of  9600  each— three  fifths  of  the  capital,  •30,000,000, 
to  be  subscribed  by  corporations  or  individuals,  and  two  fifths, 
$20,000,000,  by  the  United  States.  Of  the  subscriptions  by  corpora- 
tions or  individuals,  one  fifth  or  $6,000,000  to  be  paid  in  specie,  and 
four  fifths  or  $24,000,000,  either  in  specie  or  six  per  cent  stock,  issued 
since  the  declaration  of  war,  and  in  treasury  notes,  in  the  proportion 
of  one  fifth  of  the  latter,  and  three  fiftlis  of  the  former. — The  subscrip- 
tion of  the  United  Sutes,  to  be  paid  in  six  per  cent  stock.  The  treas- 
ury notes  subscribed  might  be  paid,  in  public  six  per  cent  stock ;  and 
no  part  of  the  public  stock,  which  constituted  a  portion  of  the  capital, 
was  to  be  sold,  during  the  then  existing  war,  nor,  at  any  subsequent 
time,  for  less  than  par ;  nor,  at  any  time,  to  an  amount,  exceeding  one 
moiety,  without  the  consent  of  Congress.  The  bank  was  to  be  bound, 
to  loan  to  the  United  Sutes,  $30,000,000,  at  six  per  cent  interest. 

In  submitting  this  general  plan  of  a  bank,  to  be  established  by  na- 
tional authority,  Mr.  Dallas  asked,  whether  it  could  be  deemed  a  vio- 
lation of  the  right  of  private  opinion,  *'  to  consider  the  constitution- 
ality of  a  national  bank,  as  a  question,  forever  settled^  and  at  rest  T' 
The  secretary,  however,  did  not  suppress  his  own  opinion,  on  this 
question,  but  declared,  **  that,  in  these  times,  the  establishment  of  a 
national  bank,  will  not  only  be  useful,  in  promoting  the  general  wel- 
fare, but,  that  it  is  necessary  and  proper^  for  carrying  into  execu- 
tion some  of  the  most  important  powers,  constitutionally  vested  in 
Congress.'* 

A  bill  was  afterwards  submitted  to  the  House,  substantially,  in  ac- 
eordance  with  the  above  plan.  All  parties  in  Congress  seemed  then 
in  fsvor  of  a  national  bank,  with  the  exception  of  a  few,  who  still  en- 
tertained constitutional  objections. 

Serious  difierences  of  opinions,  however,  existed,  as  to  some  of  the 
principles,  on  which  such  a  bank,  should  be  established.  The  great 
points  of  difi*erence  were,  as  to  the  amount  of  capital,  and  whether  it 
should  chiefly  consist  of  six  per  cent  public  stock  already  usued^  or 
of  treasury  notes  thereafter  to  be  issued — whether  the  United  States 
should  hold  stock  in  it,  and  have  an  agency  in  its  management— 
whether  the  bank  should  be  bound  to  loan  tlie  government,  $30,000,000v 
when  required,  and  be  prohibited  from  selling  public  stock,  during  the 
continuance  of  the  war ;  and  whether,  it  should  have  power,  to  sus- 
pend specie  payments.  These  subjects  were,  for  many  days,  debated, 
with  great  zeal  and  warmth,  and  many  plans  were  suggested,  through 
the  aid  of  a  national  bank,  to  relieve  the  country  irom  the  evils  it  ex- 
perienced from  a  depreciated  currency,  and  from  its  difficulties  in  pro- 
curing loans. 


434       ^-"    ,..^'-     ••■ 


Mr.  Calhoun  proposed,  that  the  capital  shoal^  consist  of  90,000^000^ 
in  specie,  and  $44,000,000,  in  treasury  nutes,  to.  be  thereafter  issued, 
and  which  might  be  paid,  in  six  per  cent  stociSuind  sold  at  the  picaih 
Qre  of  the  bank — that  the  United  States  shoula  not  be  a  stockholdert 
or  have  any  agency  in  the  management  of  the -institution — thai  il 
should  not  be  bound  to  make  loans  to  the  goyernment,  nor  have  power 
to  suspend  specie  payments.  Afler  much  debate  and  dirision,  the 
bill  was  amended  so  as  to  embrace  substantially,  the  above  proposi- 
tions of  Mr.  Calhoun;  and  finally,  the  capital  was  redoced,  to 
$30,000,000.  The  bill  thus  amended,  did  not  meet  the  approbatioo 
of  the  treasury  department,  nor  that  of  a  majority  of  the  House,  and 
was  negatived. 

Soon  after  this,  a  bill,  for  a  national  bank,  in  accordance  with  the 
plan,  proposed  by  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  was  passed  by  the 
Senate,  and  sent  to  the  House.  This  bill  contained  a  clause,  empew- 
ering  the  bank,  to  suspend  specie  payments,  in  case,  during  the  war, 
or  one  year  after,  there  should  be  such  a  demand  for  gold  and  silver, 
as  to  "  induce  a  reasonable  and  probable  belief,"  that  it  was  intended 
to  be  exported,  so  as  to  endanger  the  specie  capital  of  the  bank,  and 
of  the  country ;  or  to  be  wilfully  withdrawn  from  circulation,  so  as 
to  embarrass,  obstruct  and  discredit,  the  pecuniary  transactions  of  the 
people  and  the  government,  as  well  as  the  bank  itself;  or  should  be 
demanded  in  consequence  of  a  wilful  accumulation  of  bills  of  the 
bank,  with  the  intention  of  destroying  the  credit  of  the  institulioD* 
The  President  of  the  United  States  was  to  have  power  to  direct  the 
bank  to  resume,  or  continue  to  suspend  specie  payments,  as  he  might 
deem  expedient. 

The  details  of  this  bill  again  became  subjects  of  serious  debate,  in 
the  House.  Its  opponents  urged,  that,  as  the  bank  was  to  commence 
operations,  with  a  small  amount  of  specie,  and  without  the  power  of 
selling  any  part  of  its  capital,  consisting  of  public  stock ;  and  was 
under  obligation,  to  loan  the  government  $30,000,000,  it  roust  neces- 
sarily be,  a  mere  paper  bank.  That  the  loans  to  government  must 
be,  in  bills  to  a  large  amount,  and  which,  would  immediately  retnni 
to  the  bank — and  the  bank,  having  no  means  of  paying  them,  most, 
of  course,  suspend  payment,  almost  as  soon  as  it  had  commenced  op- 
erations— that  these  bills  would  therefore  depreciate,  and  the  country 
would  then  have  a  depreciated  national  currency,  as  well  as  a  depre- 
ciated state  currency. 

Every  attempt,  however,  to  amend  the  bill,  so  as  to  make  it  a  spe- 
cie paying  bank,  was  unsuccessful,  the  House,  being,  on  some  of 
these  amendments,  about  equally  divided. 


485 

Oa  the  third  reading  of  the  bill,  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Web* 
ateft  to  recommit  it  to  a  select  committee,  with  special  instructions, 
to  amend  it  by  reducing  the  capital  to  $25,000,000,  by  striking  out 
4he  provisions  allowing  the  bank  to  suspend  specie  payments,  ma- 
king it  obligatory  on  the  bank  to  lend  money  to  the  government, 
and  prohibiting  it  from  selling  its  stock,  during  the  war.  In  support 
of  this  motion,  Mr.  Webster,  pointed  out  the  defects  of  the  bill,  aa  it 
eame  from  the  Senate,  and  the  ill  effects  it  must  necessarily  haye,  on 
the  credit  and  currency  of  the  country,  with  great  force  of  argument, 
and  with  not  a  little  sarcastic  severity.  **  The  loan  of  thirty  millions,** 
said  Mr.  Webster,  **  can  only  be  made  by  an  immediate  issue  of  bills 
to  that  amount.  If  tliese  bills  should  return,  the  bank  will  not  be 
able  to  pay  them.  This  is  certain  ;  and  to  remedy  this  inconveni- 
ence, power  is  given  to  the  directors,  by  the  act,  to  suspend,  at  their 
own  discretion,  the  payment  of  their  notes,  until  the  President  of  the 
United  States  shall  otherwise  order.  The  President  will  give  no 
snch  order,  because  the  necessities  of  government  will  compel  it,  to 
draw  on  the  bank,  till  the  bank  becomes  as  necessitous  as  itself.  In- 
deed, whatever  orders  may  be  given,  or  withheld,  it  will  be  utterly 
impossible  for  the  bank  to  pay  its  notes.  No  such  thing  is  expected 
from  it  The  first  note  it  issues,  will  be  dishonored  on  its  return* 
and  yet,  it  will  continue  to  poor  out  its  paper,  so  long,  aa  the  govern- 
ment can  apply  it,  in  any  degree,  to  its  purposes.** 

««  What  sort  of  an  institution  is  this  ?"    Mr.  Webster  asked,  «•  II 
looks  less  like  a  bank,  than  a  department  of  government.     It  will  be 
properly  the  paper  money  department     Its  capital  is  government 
debts  ;  the  amount  of  its  issues  will  depend  on  government  necessi- 
ties; government,  in  effect,  absolves  itself  from  its  own  debts  to  the 
bank,  and,  by  way  of  compensation,  absolves  the  bank  from  its  own 
contracts  with  others.   This,  indeed,  is  a  wonderful  scheme  of  finance. 
The  government  is  to  grow  rich,  because  it  is  to  borrow  without  obli- 
gation of  repaying  ;  and  i^o  borrow  of  a  bank,  which  issues  paper, 
without  liability  to  redeeflnt    If  this  bank,  like  other  institutions, 
which  dull  and  plodding  common  sense  has  created,  were  to  pay  its 
debts,  it  must  have  some  limits  to  its  issues  of  paper ;  therefore, 
there  would  be  a  point,  beyond  which,  it  could  not  make  loans  to 
government    This  would  fall  short  of  the  wishes  of  the  eontrirera 
of  this  system.    They  provide  for  an  unlimited  issue  of  paper  in  en- 
tire exemption  from  payment    They  found  the  bank,  in  the  first 
place,  on  the  discredit  of  government,  and  then  hope,  to  enrich  for* 
emment  out  of  the  insolvency  of  their  bank.     With  them,  poverty 

64 


/ 


4S6 

itvelf  is  the  main  source  of  supply,  and  bankruptcy  a.  mine  of  iaez- 
haostible  treasure.  They  rely,  not  in  the  ability  of*  the  bank,  but  ai 
its  beggary  ;  nut  in  gold  and  silver  collected  in  its  vaults,  to  psty  ita 
debts,  and  fulfil  its  promises,  but  in  its  locks  and  barsf  provided  by 
statute,  to  fasten  its  doors,  against  the  solicitations  and  clamors  of 
importunste  creditors.  Such  an  institution,  they  flatter  themselvesy 
will  not  only  be  able  to  sustain  itself,  but  buoy  up,  the  sinking  credit 
of  the  government.  A  bank,  which  does  not  pay,  is  to  guaranty  the 
engagements  of  a  government,  which  does  not  pay !  John  Doe  is  to 
become  security,  for  Richard  Roe.  Thus  the  empty  vaults  of  tkm 
Treasury,  are  to  be  filled,  from  the  equally  empty  vaults  of  the  bank; 
and  the  ingenious  invention  of  a  partnership  of  insolventSf  is  to  re- 
store and  reestablish  the  credit  of  both." 

The  moHon  of  Mr.  Webster  did  not  prevail ;  and  on  the  passage  of 
the  bill,  the  votes  stood  81,  in  the  affirmative,  and  80,  in  the  negative ; 
and  the  speaker,  (Mr.  Cheeves,)  being  opposed  to  tlie  bilU  gave  his 
vote  in  the  negative,  in  consequence  of  which,  the  votes  being  equal, 
die  bill  was  lost. 

The  speaker  was,  indeed,  placed  in  a  most  trying  situation.  Al- 
though a  supporter  of  the  administration,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  de- 
clare his  own  convictions,  that  it  was  a  measure,  **  dangerous,  anez« 
ampled,  and  of  almost  desparate  resort.''  In  briefly  examining  the 
views  of  those,  who  advocated  the  passage  of  the  bill,  as  calculated 
to  resuscitate  public  credit^  to  establish  a  circulating  medium,  and  to 
afford  the  ways  and  means,  for  the  support  of  government,  the  speak- 
er expressed  his  solemn  belief,  that  neither  of  these  purposes,  could 
be  answered  by  it.  He,  at  the  same  time,  expressed  an  opinion, 
that  a  national  bank  bill  might  be  framed,  which  would  unite  a 
jority  in  its  favor.  The  bill  was  reconsidered  the  next  day,  and 
ferred  to  a  select  committee,  who,  soon  after,  reported  the  same,*  with 
Mnendments,  reducing  the  capital  to  $30,000,000,  to  consist  of 
5,000,000  in  specie,  16,000,000  in  Treasury  notes,  and  10,000,000 
in  stock  of  the  United  States,  issued  since  the  dealaration  of  war, 
with  a  reservation  of  a  right  in  the  United  States,  to  subcribe  an  ad- 
ditional 5,000,000,  payable  in  4  per  cent  stock.  Other  important 
amendments  were,  also,  proposed  by  the  committee,  partieularly,  by 
striking  out  the  Clauses,  relating  to  a  compulsory  loan,  and  the  power 
of  suspending  specie  payments.  These  amendments  were  substantially 
agreed  to,  in  ihe  House,  and  the  bill  thus  amended,  was  passed  by  a 
large  majority,  190  to  37 ;  and  was  finally  concurred  in  by  the  Senato. 


4S1 

This!  bill,  it  is  well  known,  was  returned  by  the  President,  with  hit 
objections.  These  objcctioif^  however,  were  not  founded  upon  the 
question  of  constitutional  power, — a  question,  which  the  President  ex* 
pressly  waived,  as  being  fully  settled  ;  but,  because,  in  his  opinioOt 
it  was  not  calculated  '*  to  answer  the  purposes  of  reviving  pnbHe 
credit,  of  providing  a  national  medium  of  circulation,  and  of  aiding 
.the  treasury,  by  facilitating  the  indispensable  anticipations  of  the 
revenue,  and  by  affording  to  the  public  more  durable  loans.*'  The 
bill,  not  being  repassed  by  two  thirds  of  the  Senate,  to  which  it  waa 
returned,  did  not  become  a  law.  A  national  bank,  however,  seemed 
the  only  resource  left,  to  restore  public  credit,  and  enable  govern- 
ment  to  prosecute  the  war ;  the  Senate  therefore  immediately  paa« 
'ted  another  bill,  substantially  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  the  Hee* 
retary  of  the  Treasury ;  and  which  was  sent  to  the  H6use,  on  the 
13th  of  February,  1815,  and  would,  no  doubt,  have  then  passed,  bnt 
for  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  peace.  At  the  very  moment,  when  the 
question  was  to  be  taken,  on  the  passage  of  the  bill,  the  mail  arrived 
from  New  York,  bringing  a  letter  to  one  of  the  members  put  in  at 
the  mail  was  closing,  informing  him,  that  a  rumor  had  just  reached 
the  city  of  a  vessePs  being  at  the  Hook,  bringing  news  of  peace. 
The  House,  apprized  of  this,  immediately  adjourned  without  taking 
the  question  ;  and  the*  next  day,  the  news  being  confirmed,  the  hill 
itself,  on  motion  of  Mr.  Lowndes,  was  postponed  indefinitely ;  and 
the  subject  of  a  bank,  was  no  farther  agitated,  during  the  remaining 
short  period  of  the  session. 

This  imporUnt  subject  was,  however,  brought  to  the  notice  of  the 
National  Legislature,  early  in  its  next  session,  both  by  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  and  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treatnry.  The 
former,  in  his  opening  message,  referring  to. a  modification  of  the 
taxes,  on  the  return  ^of  peace,  says — **  It  is,  however,  essential  to 
every  modification  of  the  finances,  that  the  benefits  of  an  nnifom 
national  currency,  shoold  be  restored  to  the  community.  The  ah* 
sence  of  the  precious  metals,  will,  it  is  believed  6e  a  temporary  evil ; 
but,  until  they  can  again  be  rendered  the  general  medium  of  ex- 
change, it  devolves  on  the  wisdom  of  Congress,  to  provide  a  snbtli- 
tute,  which  shall  equally  engage  the  confidence,  and  .accommodate 
the  wants  of  the  citizens  throughout  the  Union.  If  the  operation  of 
the  state  banks,  cannot  produce  this  result,  the  probable  operation  of 
a  national  bank,  will  merit  consideration  ;^*  dec. 

In  recommending  a  national  bank,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treatory 
orged  its  great  importance,  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  and  eonCiao- 


,*y 


498 


ing  a  nnifurm  nadoilal  currency ;  declaringr  that  this  important  object 
coald  pot  be  eflected  by  the  state  bank%.  "  The  truth  is,'*  aaya  Mr. 
Dallas  in  his  annual  reportt  '^  that  the  trharter  restrictions  of  some  of 
the  banks,  the  mutual  relation  and  dependence  of  the  banks  of  the 
sane  state,  and  even  of  the  banks  of  the  different  states,  and  the  duty 
which  the  Directors  of  each  bank  conceive  they  owe  to  their  imine* 
diate  constituents,  upon  points  of  security  or  emolument,  interpoee. 
an  insuperable  obstacle,  to  any  voluntary  arrangement,  upon  natiantd 
considerations  alone^  for  the  establishment  of  a  national  medium^ 
through  the  agency  of  state  banks.^^ 

Congress  had  too  severely  experienced  the  evils  and  mischiefe  of  a 
disordered  currency,  during  the  war  which  had  then  just  closed  ;  and 
from  which  the  country  was  not,  at  that  time,  relieved,  not  to  fed' 
the  necessity  of  a  national  bank,  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  similar 
evils,  as  well  as  to  afford  present  relief.  During  the  session  of  €k>n- 
gress,  therefore,  in  the  winter  of  1616,  the  bank  now  in  operation 
was  established,  without  much  opposition  on  constitutional  grounds ; 
though  a  difference  of  opinion  existed,  in  relation  to  the  amount  of 
capital,  the  agency  of  the  government  in  the  management  of  the  in- 
stitution, and  other  details  of  the  bill,  in  consequence  of  which,  many 
finally  gave  their  votes  against  it. 

The  capital  of  the  new  bank  was  $35,000,000,  divided  into  three 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  shares  of  9100  each.  Seventy  thousand 
•hares,  or  $7,000,000,  to  be  subscribed  by  the  United  States,  payable 
in  five  per  cent,  stock,  redeemable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  government; 
and  the  remainder,  by  individuals,  companies,  or  corporations,  of 
which,  $7,000,000  was  to  be  paid  in  gold  and  silver,  and  $21,000,000 
In  the  funded  debt  of  the  United  States ;  and  it  was  made  lawful  for 
the  United  States  to  redeem  the  funded  debt  thus  subscribed  at  their 
pleasure.  The  bank  was  to  continue  until  the  3d  day  of  March,  1836^ 
and  in  the  mean  time,  no  other  bank  was  to  be  established  by  Con- 
gress. Twenty  ^ve  Directors  were  to  be  annually  appointed  ;  five  by 
the  President  of  the  United  States  and  the  Senate,  and  twenty  by  the 
individual  stockholders*  The  following  are  some  of  the  fundamental 
articles  of  the  institution — not  less  than  seven  directors  were  to  con- 
stitute a  board  for  the  transaction  of  business — the  debts  of  the  cor- 
poration were  not  to  exceed  $35,000,000,  over  and  above  the  deposiia 
— no  loan  to  be  made  to  the  government,  to  an  amount  exceeding 
$500,000,  or  to  any  state,  exceeding  $50,000,  nor  to  any  foreign 
prince  or  state,  unless  authorized  by  law — no  foreigner  to  be  a  direc- 
ler— *the  Directors  were  to  establish  an  office  of  discount  and  depodt; 


4S9 

in  theDtitrict  of  Colnmbiat  tnd  in  other  placest  m  fhej  might  think 
proper — were  to  furnish  the  head  of  the  Treasury  Department  with 
weekly  statements,  if  required,  of  the  amount  of  capital,  and  of  the 
dehts  due,  of  the  money  deposited,  of  the  notes  in  eirculation,  and  of 
the  specie  on  hand ;  and  the  head  of  said  department  had  the  right  of 
inspecting  such  general  accounts,  in  the  books  of  the  hank,  as  might 
relate  to  said  statements,  but  not  to  inspect  the  accounts  of  any  priTate 
indiridoal  or  indiTiduals  with  the  bank — foreigners  to  have  no  TOt* 
in  the  choice  of  directors,  and  the  corporation  was  to  issue  no  not6y 
of  less  amount  than  ^lie  dollars. 

The  notes  of  the  bank,  payable  on  demand,  were  made  receiTaUe* 
in  all  payments  to  the  United  States,  unless  otherwise  directed  by  aet 
of  Congress ;  and  the  deposits  of  the  money  of  the  United  StateSt 
were  to  be  made  in  the  bank  or  its  branches,  unless  the  Secretary  of 
the  TreaHury  should,  at  any  time,  order  and  direct  otherwise ;  in  which 
case,  he  is  immediately  to  lay  before  Congress,  if  in  session,  and  if 
not,  immediately  aAer  the  commencement  of  the  next  session,  the 
reasons  for  such  order. 

The  bank  was  to  pay  a  bonus  of  $1,600,000  to  the  goTcmment*  and 
was  to  distribute  the  funds  of  the  government,  in  payment  of  the  pub- 
lic creditors,  when  required  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  withool 
any  expense ;  and  was,  also,  to  perform  the  duties  of  .commissioners 
of  loans  for  the  several  states,  when  required  by  law ;  and  waa  to  bo 
subjected  to  pay  twelve  per  cent,  interest  on  notes  or  deposits,  from 
the  time  of  a  refusal  or  neglect  to  pay  the  same,  according  to  contract 
— it  was  made  lawful  by  the  charter,  for  either  House  of  Congress,  tp 
appoint  a  committee  to  inspect  the  books  and  examine  into  the  pvo* 
ceedings  of  the  bank,*  and  to  report  whether  the  provisions  of  the 
charter  had  been  violated ;  and  on  the  report  of  such  committee,  or 
whenever  the  President  of  the  United  Siates  should  hkve  reason  to 
believe,  that  the  charter  had  been  violated,  it  was  lawful  for  Congreas 
to  direct,  or  the  President  to  order  a  Sire  Facias  to  be  issued  out  of 
the  circuit  court  of  the  District  of  Pennsylvania,  to  try  the  question, 
whether  the  charter  had  been  forfeited. 

Before  noticing  the  operations  of  this  bank  and  its  beneficial  infln* 
encc,  in  restoring  public  credit,  reestablishing  an  nniform  currency, 
and  in  promoting  the  prosperity  of  the  country,  ^e  beg  leave  to  invito 
the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  subject  of  state  banks. 

Three  state  banks  only,  as  before  stated,  were  in  operation  at  tho 
commencement  of  the  government,  with  a  capital  of  about  92,000,000. 
On  the  first  of  January,  1811,  however,  their  number  had  increased 


/ 


b  '    * 


480 

to  eighty  eight,  with  a  capiUtl  of  $42,610,000 ;  making  the '  wbolt 
banicing  capital  of  the  country  at  that  period,  including  that  of  the 
national  hank,  more  than  $52,000,000.  As  the  charter  of  the  mtioB- 
al  hank  expired  on  the  4ih  of  March  of  that  year,  the  vacauin  waa 
more  than  supplied,  by  the  immediate  creation  of  new  state  bmnka; 
and  as  each  state  exercised  the  right  of  supplying  the  supposed  defi* 
eiency,  without  much  regard  to  what  other  states  were  doing,  with 
the  same  view,  banking  capital  was  increased,  in  a  short  period,  much 
beyond  any  reasonable  or  legitimate  demand  for  it  From  January 
1811,  to  January  Ist^  1815,  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  twenty  new 
atate  banks  were  established  and  went  into  operation,  with  a  capital 
of  about  $40,000,000 ;  thereby  actually  increasing  the  bank  capital, 
during  that  short  period,  $30,000,000. 

The  State  of  PennsylFania  alone,  by  a  single  act  of  the  Slat  of 
March,  1814,  created  forty  one  banks,  with  a  capital  of  about 
$17,000,000 — thirty  seten  of  which  went  into  operation.  The  cTib 
of  this  unexampled  multiplication  of  banks,  was  soon  felt  by  the  dU 
izens  of  that  state,  as  the  greatest  part  of  them  failed ;  and  a  cooh 
mitlee  of  the  Senate  in  1820,  in  a  report*  referring  to  this  act,  declared, 
that  it  **  inflicted  opon  the  commonwealth  an  evil  greater  than  had 
erer  been  experienced  by  its  citizens." 

Many  additional  .state  banks  were  created  in  the  year  1815,  and  the 
following  was  the  number  of  these  banks,  with  an  estimate  of  the 
amount  of  their  capital,  of  their  bills  in  circulation,  and  of  specie  in 
their  raul til,  on  the  Ist  of  January,  in  each -of  the  years,  1811,  1815^ 
and  1816 ;  for  which,  we  acknowledge  ourselves  indebted  to  Mr.  Gal* 
latin's  valuable  treatise,  entitled  **  Considerations,  on  the  currency  and 
banking  system  of  the  United  States,-'  published  in  1831. 

CapitaL  Notes.  I^Melt. 

1st  Jan.  1811— Bank  of  U.  S.  $10,000,000  S5,400,000  86,800,000 

State  banks,  No.  8a     43,610,601  23,700,000  9,600,000 

■  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  

Total,         863,610,601  $38,100,000        $15,400,000 

1816— 308  Sute  banks,        $83,359,690         $46,600,000        $17,000,000 

1816— 346  State  banks,  89,833,433  68,000,00Q  19,000,000 

Various  estimates  have  been  made  of  the  amount  of  the  bills  of  the 

several  state  banks,  during  the  late  war  between  the  United  States  and 

Great  Britain,  and  up  to  January  1816.    In  November  1813,  Mr.  Jef* 

ferson  estimated  th  Amount  as  high  as  two  hundred  millions.    Thia 

estimate  was  made  on  data  merely  conjectural,  and  was,  no  doubt,  fiir 

beyond  the  actual  amount.* 

*  See  4th  vol.  Jeflfersoa's  works,  pages  317  and  818. 


431 

Mr.  Crawford  while  Secretarj  of  the  TreMOiy,  etttouilctl  the  peper 
circolalioo,  in  laiS,  at  about  $62,000,000,  and  the  specie  circalation 
al  abovt  (8,000,000 ;  making  the  whole  circulation,  •'^,000,000— but 
in  1810,  he  estimated  the  former  at  abuut  $99,000,000,  and  the  latter, 
at  about  $11,000,000,  making  the  whole  about  $1 10,000,000.«  Thk 
eatimate'  is  larger,  than  that  given  by  Mr.  Gallatin,  at  before  stated. 
We  incline  to  the.opinion,  that  the  estimate  giren  by  Mr.  Gallatin, 
was  rather  too  low,  and  that  by  Mr.  Crawford,  in  1816,  rather  too 
high. 

Few  banks,  at  that  period,  were  obliged  to  make  returns  of  their  sit^ 
nation ;  and  it  was  then,  and  inde^  is  now,  difficult,  and  almost  Irh 
possible,  to  obtain  in  this  extensive  country,  an  accurate  account  of 
the  amount  of  bank  notes  in  circulation,  at  any  given  period.  Many 
of  the  state  banks,  particularly,  in  the  middle  states,  made  large  loana 
to  government,  during  the  war ;  and  as  this  must  have  been  done, 
principally  in  bills,  the  issues  of  these  banks,  must  have  greatly  in* 
creased  from  this  caose.  The  pressure  of  the  war  was  such,  that 
these  banks,  and  others  south  of  New  England,  were  obliged,  as  bn* 
fore  stated,  to  stop  paying  specie  for  their  bills,  in  September,  1814. 

.This  suspension  of  specie  payments,  naturally  produced  a  distrust, 
as  to  the  solvency  of  these  institutions ;  and  their  bills  depreciated  in 
value.  This  depreciation  was  different  in  different  states.  In  8ep* 
tember,  1814,  the  bills  of  the  Baltimore  banks,  were  at  a  discount  of 

• 

90  per  cent,  while  the  discount  of  those  of  the  city  of  New  York, 
did  not  exceed  10  per  cent ;  and  on  the  first  of  January,  1816,  thn 
discounl,  at  the  former  place,  was  at  20  per  cent,  and  at  the  latter,  !& 
This  state  of  the  currency,  as  we  have  before  seen,  greatly  embarraaa- 
ed  the  financial  concerns,  both  of  the  government  and  of  individuals-* 
loans  could  not  be  obtained  by  the  United  Statea,  without  sacrificea 
too  great  to  be  made.  Almost  every  state  had  a  currency  of  ita  own  | 
and  the  revenue  of  the  government,  was  paid  in  bills  of  oneqpal 
ralue.  The  news  of  peace,  however,  wtiich  reached  the  tJnited 
States  in  February,  181&,  for  a  short  time,  nearly  restored  confi* 
deuce,  in  the  state  banks.  It  was  expected,  that  immediately,  on  the 
return  of  peace,  the  banks  would  return  to  specie  paymenta.  In  conne* 
quence  of  this,  in  the  same  month  of  February,  the  discount  at  Balti* 
more  was  reduced  to  6  per  cent,  and  at  New  Yorl^to  2  per  cent,  Tbn 
public  however,  was  disappointed ;  the  banks,  either  from  want  of  abil* 

•  See  Mr.  CrawfordV  Report  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  January 
ltth,l8Qa 


f 


438 

iiyf  or  dispotitioD,  still  declined  paying  specie ;  and  a  depreciatioii,  to  a 
greater  extent  than  before,  followed.  The  bank?,  indeed,  had  an  la- 
*  terest  in  keeping  out  their  bills,  as  long  as  possible,  as  their  dirideodi 
were  thereby  increased.  In  the  spring  and  summer  of  1B10»  aboat 
fifteen  or  sixteen  manths  after  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  peaeet  the 
discount  at  Baltimore  was  20  per  cent,  at  Philadelphia  from  15  lo  IT* 
at  New  York,  12^,  and  at  some  other  places,  it  reached  25  per  cent 
The  debts  due  to  the  United  States,  as  well  as  the  vast  amount  of  rev- 
enue>  arising  from  the  immense  importations  subsequent  to  the  peace, 
could  only  be  paid  in  this  depreciated  paper.  The  government  wm 
under  the  necessity  of  taking  this,  or  nothing;  although,  by  law,  since 
the  dissolution  of  the  national  bank,  gold  and  silver  were  alone  receiva- 
ble in  payment.  Indeed,  the  general  government,  was,  in  this  ra> 
•pect,  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  state  banks,  as  it  had  no  legal  con- 
trol over  them ;  and,  without  their  aid,'  gold  and  silver,  could  not  be 
brought  into  general  circulation. 

In  ihis  unequal  and  disordered  state  of  the  currency,  the  secretary 
of  the  treasury,  in  making  payments,  in  different  parts  of  the  United 
States,  so  as  to  do  justice  to  all  the  public  officers  and  creditors,  bad 
to  encounter  difficulties,  almost  insurmountable.  During  the  years 
1815  and  1816,  he  made  attempts  to  unite  the  state  banks,  in  resum- 
ing specie  payments,  but  without  success. 

This  inequality  in  the  value  of  bills  received  in  the  different  states, 
in  payment  of  the  revenues,  produced,  in  reality,  an  inequality  in  the 
burden  of  taxes ;  and  was,  su  far,  a  violation  of  that  part  of  the  con- 
stitution, which  requires,  that  '*  all  duties,  imposts  and  excises,  shall 
be  uniform  throughout  the  United  States."  Of  this,  the  states,  whose 
currency  was  sound,  had  great  reason  to  complain. 

To  remedy  these  evils  Congress,  as  before  noticed,  in  April,  1810, 
established  a  national  bank.  Time,  however,  was  requisite,  for  the 
organization  of  this  institution,  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  effect  the  ob- 
ject, fift  which  it  had  beeif  created.  As  a  preliminary  step  towards  a 
return  to  specie  payments.  Congress,  soon  afler  the  establishment  of 
the  bank,  directed  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  to  adopt  such  meaa- 
nres,  as  he  might  deem  necessary,  to  cause  the  revenues  to  be  collected 
in 'the  leg^l  currency  of  the  United  States;  and  gave  him  positiTe 
directions,' after  the^Mhh  of  January,  1817,  to  receive  nothing  in  pay- 
ment, but  the  legal  currency  of  the  United  States,  or  treasury  notes, 
or  notes  of  the  national  bank,  or  notes  of  banks,  which  were  paid  in 
specie,  on  demand.  The  new  bank  of  the  United  States,  did  not 
commence  operationis  until  January,  1817 ;  and  soon  afler,  in  pur- 


488 

•oaDta  of  a  matoal  arnmgeiDent  between  this  bank,  anu  the  stale 
banks  of  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Baltimore  and  Virginia,  specie  pay- 
ments were  resumed. 

The  erils  experienced,  from  depreciated  bank  paper,  daring  the 
late  war,  and  for  so  long  a  period  after  its  conclusion ;  and  the  proba- 
bility of  a  recurrence  of  the  same  evils,  in  future,  in  consequence  of 
the  multiplication  of  banks,  and  of  their  frequent  failures ;  have  led 
some  to  question  the  policy,  of  depending  upon  banks,  to  supply  the 
country  with  a  circuiting  medium ;  and  to  suggest,  whether  the  Uni- 
led  States,  like  Frsnce,  ought  not  to  depend  on  the  precious  metab 
alone,  for  their  currency.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  evils  arisiiig 
from  a  depreciated  hank  paper,  and  from  the  failure  of  state  banks* 
have  been  great.  From  January  1st,  1811,  to  July  1st,  1830,  no  less 
than  one  hundred  snd  sixty  five  state  banks,  either  failed,  or  discon- 
tinued their  business,  having  an  aggregate  capital  of  about  thir^ 
millions  of  dollars.  These  failures  took  place  in  almost  every  state 
and  territory ;  in  Maine  eight,  Massachusetts  six*  Rhode  Island  two» 
New  Hampshire  two,  Connecticut  two.  New  York  ten.  New  Jersey 
seven,  Pennsylvania  nineteen,  Delaware  one,  Maryland  nine,  Distrkt 
of  Columbia  four,  Virginia  ten,  North  Carolina  two.  South  Carolioa 
two,  Georgia  one,  Louisiana  two,  Alabama  three,  Tennessee  four,  and 
five  branches,  Kentucky  forty  three,  Ohio  twenty,  Indiana  two,  Illi- 
nois two,  Missouri  two,  and  Michigan  one.* 

In  the  vaults  of  the  banks,  which  failed,  the  government  had  aboni 
$1,390,707;  the  greatest  part  of  which  it  will  lose;  but  the  loss  to 
individuals,  amounted  to  many  millions ;  and  unfortunately,  a  great 
share  of  it  fell  upon  the  widow  and  the  orphan,  whose  property  had 
been  vested,  or  deposited,  in  these  institutions. 

These  failures  originated  from  various  causes,  principally,  how- 
ever, from  too  great  a  multiplication  of  banks,  in  placea  not  adapt- 
ed to  the  proper  and  regular  banking  business — from  improvidani 
discounts,  and  from  overissues;  and  this  took  place,  in  many  in- 
stances, from  ignorance  of  the  nature  and  operation  of  banks,  and 
the  principles  of  banking ;  and  in  others,  no  doubt,  with  the  fraud- 
ulent design  of  gain,  at  the  expense  of  the  public  and  of  individoab. 

To  follow  the  example  of  France,  might,  perhapa  be  more  safe  for 
the  community,  especially  in  times  of  great  commercial  or  poUtieal 
embarrassment ;  but  we  spprehend,  that,  in  a  new  country,  like  thai 

•  q>ll>rtn  00  ih»  Ounacf. 
66 


434 

of  the  United  States,  where  capital  is  so  much  wanted,  and  for  to 
many  yeai^  will  be  wanted,  the  benefits  arising  from  institutions  of  this 
kind,  will  over  balance  the  evils;  and  that  banks,  when  properly  used, 
will  continue  to  be  highly  advantageous.  We  say,  when  properly 
used,  for  the  disadvantages  of  institutions  of  this  kind,  arise  from  tke 
ftbase  of  them. 

We  consider  it,  as  long  since  settled,  that  paper  of  some  kind,  most, 
to  a  great  degree,  constitute  the  medium  of  exchange,  in  all  commer- 
cial countries,  like  the  United  States.  •  And  it  is  difficult  to  see,  how 
the  great  revenues  of  the  government,  can  be  well  collected  and  dia- 
iributed,  throughout  this  extensive  country ;  or  how  the  money  con- 
eems,  arising  out  of  its  vast  agricultural,  commercial  and  manufactnr- 
iag  interests,  can  be  well  managed,  without  the  aid  of  some  kind  of  pa- 
per, to  be  used  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  That,  bills  issued  by  bankit 
under  proper  management,  constitute  a  general  medium  of  exchange, 
more  convenient  and  advantagous,  than  any  other  kind  of  paper,  seems 
now  to  be  generally  admitted. 

The  people  of  the  United  States,  therefore,  must  take  banks,  for 
better  or  for  worse — and  the  exertions  of  all  those,  who  are,  or  may 
be,  entrusted  with  the  creation  or  management  of  them,  should  be 
directed  to  secure  the  good  they  are  calculated  to  produce,  and  to 
prevent  the  evils  to  which  they  are  liable. 

The  great  and  prominent  evil  of  banks  of  circulation,  has  been, 
that  of  over  issues,  or  issues  of  notes  beyond  their  legitimate  and 
proper  demand,  as  a  medium  of  exchange.  To  prevent  this,  varions 
regulations  have  been  made,  by  some  of  the  states.  In  New  England, 
New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Georgia,  and  probably  some  oth- 
ers, the  banks  or  the  most  of  them,  are  obliged  to  present  annual 
statements  of  their  situation.  These  statements  are  to  contain  the 
amount  of  the  capital  of  each  bank,  its  bills  in  circulation,  its 
depositSt  and  the  specie  in  its  vaults,  at  the  time  of  such  statement 
— and  to  prevent  any  deception,  by  a  previous  preparation,  for  such 
an  exhibit  of  their  jiffairs,  in  Massachusetts,  the  time  for  making 
such  statement  is  not  precisely  known,  but  it  roust  be  made  at  any 
time,  when  called  for,  by  the  governor  and  council ;  and  in  New 
York,  an  examination  of  the  banks  themselves  is  to  be  made  by  spe- 
eial  commissioners,  appointed  for  that  purpose,  who  make  their  an- 
nual report  to  the  legislature. 

Such  statements,  from  all  the  banks  in  the  United  States,  woald 
be  highly  useful,  not  merely  to  the  state  or  place,  where  such  banks 
are  located,  but  to  the  country  generally.    They  would  afford  greater 


435 

security  to  all  men  iii  business,  against  impoaition,  from  bills  of  dis> 
tant  bank«,  of  whose  solidity,  they  can  now  have  no  knowledge. 

They  would,  also,  enable  the  economist  and  statesman,  to  ascertain, 
with  an  accuracy,  not  now  attainable,  the  amount  of  the  circulation 
and  currency  of  this  extensive  country ;  and  to  see,  what  proportion  of 
this  currency  consisted  in  bills,  and  what  in  specie.  In  addition  to 
this,  it  would  furnish  data,  by  which  the  legislatures  of  every  state, 
would  be  able  to  form  a  better  judgment,  ai  to  the  wisdom  or  policy 
of  extending  banking  institutions. 

Indeed,  since  every  bank  of  circulation,  may  be  considered  a  iiitii^« 
having  a  right  to  coin  money,  for  a  general  currency,  does  not  the  se» 
curity  of  the  public,  seem  to  require,  that  each  bank,  should  lei  the 
others  know,  the  amount  of  its  coinage;  so  that  all  may  judge,  whether 
the  aggregate  coinage  of  about  five  hundred  mint  establishmentSf 
scattered  throughout  the  United  States,  may  be  more  or  less,  than  is 
necessary,  to  serve  as  a  medium  of  exchange  ?  As  a  further  security 
against  extensive  issues,  some  of  the  states  have  subjected  the*  banks 
to  a  high  rate  of  interest,  in  case  of  a  refusal  or  neglect  to  pay  their 
notes  and  deposits,  in  specie,  on  demand.  In  MassachusettSt  this  in- 
terest is  twenty  four  per  cent,  in  Louisiana  twelve,  and  it  will  be 
remembered,  that  the  present  national  bank,  is,  by  its  charter,  made 
liable,  also,  in  such  a  case,  to  pay  12  per  cent,  interest 

To  secure  the  public  against  hisses,  by  the  failure  of  banks,  a  fund 
has  been  provided  in  the  State  of  New  York,  called  "  s  safety  fund*** 
This  fund  is  created,  by  a  tax  of  one  half  per  cent,  of  the  capital 
of  the  banks  subject  to  the  fund,  payable  annually,  for  six  years ; 
and  is  to  be  applied  to  the  payment  of  the  notes,  of  those  bankst 
which  may  fail.  When  the  fund  amounts  to  half  a  million  of  dollars* 
it  is  to  be  on  interest  and  to  accumulate,  until  wanted,  for  the  object, 
on  account  of  which  it  was  created ;  and  when  the  fond  shall  be  re- 
duced below  the  sum  of  half  a  million,  by  calls  upon  it,  from  the 
failures  of  unsound  banks,  the  sound  banks,  are  to  make  up  the  de- 
ficiency by  a  similar  annual  tax.  Connected  with  this  system,  is  the 
appointment  of  commissioners,  whose  duty  it  is,  to  examine  into  the 
state  and  condition  of  all  the  banks  subject  to  this  fund,  as  odeo,  as 
they  may  think  proper,  and  to  report  annually  to  the  legislature ;  and 
who,  we  believe,  have  power,  also,  to  institute  proceedings  for  the 
purpose  of  arresting  the  further  operations  of  those  banks,  whose 
situation  they  may  consider  unsound. 

This  part  of  the  system,  if  the  commissioners  do  their  duty,  we 
deem,  a  much  greater  security  against  the  over  issues  of  banks,  thtn 


# 


436 

die  fond  itself;  as  It  proTides  the  means  of  preTenting  stieh  ow 
issoesi  on  the  part  of  these  institutions. 

Indeed,  the  jostice,  of  requiring  one  bank,  to  become  saretj  for 
another,  with  which,  it  has  no  connexion,  and  over  which  it  has  no 
legitimate  control,  has  been  questioned  by  many ;  and  its  fbjustice 
teems  more  apparent,  when  it  is  considered,  that  the  banks  are  to 
contribute  to  this  fund,  not,  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  bills  they 
pat  in  circulation,  but  to  the  amount  of  their  capitals.  The  banks  of 
the  city  of  New  York,  therefore,  having  a  capital  of  from  sixteen  lo 
eighteen  millions,  with  a  circulation  of  only,  about  five  millions,  fur- 
nish nearly  two  thirds  of  a  fund,  to  secure  the  circulation  of  the 
country  banks,  amounting  to  about  ten  millions,  issued  on  a  capital 
of  about  the  same  amount.  Time  alone,  can  determine,  whether  the 
policy  of  this  fund,  may  not  be  as  questionable,  as  its  justice.  It  is 
to  be  feared,  that  the  security  to  the  public,  may  be  more  apparent, 
than  real ;  and  that  its  tendency  may  be,  not  only  to  multiply  banks, 
bat  to  encourage  greater  issues,  from  small  banks,  than  would  be  sos- 
tained,  on  their  own  credit  alone  :  The  latter  can,  only,  be  counter- 
aeted,  by  the  vigilance  of  the  commissioners. 

Most,  if  not  all  of  the  state  banks  have,  heretofore,  issued  notes  of 
a  denomination,  as  low  as  one  dollar;  to  the  almost  entire  exclosion 
of  specie.  We  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that,  in  our  view,  good  policy 
\  requires,  that  no  bank  should  be  permitted  to  issue  bills  of  a  less  de* 
I  nomination  than  five  dollars.  The  place,  which  the  small  bills  now 
occupy,  would  in  no  inconsiderable  degree  be  then  filled  with  specie. 
This  would  lessen  the  proportion,  between  the  paper  and  specie  cir- 
culation of  the  country :  and  thereby,  give  additional  security  against 
the  evils  and  dangers,  always  attending  an  exclusive  paper  circula- 
tion. The  States  of  Pennsylvania,  Maryland  and  Virginia,  have  late- 
ly excluded  all  bills  below  &ve  dollars ;  and  a  committee  of  the  legie- 
kture  of  the  former  state,  in  a  report,  made  in  January,  1833,  de- 
clared, that,  in  consequence  of  this  prohibition,  the  precious  metals, 
were  **  widely  diffused  and  abundant  in  all  parts  of  the  State.**  And 
the  reader,  will  recollect,  that  the  present  national  bank,  can  issue  no 
bills  ander  five  dollars.  In  England,  in  order  to  secure  a  greater 
amoont  of  specie  circulation,  bank  notes  of  a  less  denomination,  than 
£6  sterling,  are  prohibited ;  and  in  Scotland,  none  are  permitted  to 
circulate,  less  than  twenty  shillings.  The  bank  of  France,  the  only 
bank  in  that  country,  authorized  to  issue  notes,  has  none  less  than 
five  hundred  francs,  about  equal  to  one  hundred  dollars. 

The  circulation  of  specie,  in  England,  is  now  about  equal,  to  that 
of  bank  paper. 


437 

Thr  Vtnk  circulation  of  Scotland  hat  been,  and  is  still  small,  in 
proportion  to  the  banking  business  done,  in  that  country.  In  1825, 
it  amounted  to  only  £3,310,000,  sterling,  or  about  •15,600,000;  al- 
though the  deposites  in  those  banl&s  were  Tery  great. 

To 'this  circumstance,  as  well  as,  their  mode  of  doing  business,  and 
to  the  skill  and  prudence  of  their  managers,  may  be  attributed  the 
solidity  and  security  of  the  Scotch  banks.  The  whole  loss  sustained 
by  the  public,  from  the  failure  of  these  banks,  for  more  than  a  ceoto- 
ry  past,  has  not  exceeded,  it  is  said,  £36344,  or  about  $181,000. 

The  banking  system  of  Scotland,  the  operations  of  which,  haTO 
been  so  profitable  to  the  stockholders,  and  so  safe  for  the  public,  oughts 
we  think,  to  be  more  generally  known  in  the  United  States.     Three 
incorporated  banks,  only,  exist  in  Scotland,  viz.  **  the  bank  of  Scot- 
land,** esUblished  by  Parliament,  in  1695,  the  Royal  bank,  by  a  royal 
charter,  in  1727,  and  the  British  Linen  Company.    These  hare  a  cap- 
ital paid  in,  of  £3,000,000,  being  less  than  $15,000,000.     In  addition 
to  these,  there  were,  in  1826,  twenty  nine  private  establishments,  con- 
•btiog  of  partners,  more  or  less  numerous.    Among  these,  the  na- 
tional bank  of  Scotland,  has  twelve  hundred  thirty  eight  partners, 
the  Commercial  bank  of  Scotland,  five  hundred  twenty  one,  and  the 
Aberdeen  Town  and  Country  bank  four  hundred  forty  six,  and,  of    ^ 
the  remainder  three,  had  more  than  one  hundred  partners,  six,  between 
twenty  and  thirty,  and  seventeen,  less  than  twenty.  These  banks  had 
at  that  time,  one  hundred  and  thirty  three  branches,  located,  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  that  country.    A  great  part  of  the  business  of  these  banks* 
is,  to  receive  the  money  of  individuals,  on  deposit,  at  a  low  rate  of 
interest,  and  to  loan  it,  at  a  higher  rate ;  and  such  was  the  credit  of 
these  institutions,  that,  in  1826,  no  less  than  £18,000;000  was  depos- 
ited in  their  vaults ;  of  which,  about  one  half  was  said  to  be  deposit- 
ed in  small  sums,  by  mechanics,  laborers  and  fishermen.    At  that 
time,  the  usual  interest  given  bjr  the  banks,  on  deposits,  was  3  and  4 
per  cent ;  but  since  that  period,  it  has  been  reduced  to  2^  per  cent.* 
A  considerable  part  of  the  money  thus  deposited,  is  loaned  to  individ- 
uals, on  what  are  called  cash  eredits.    To  obtain  this  kind  of  credit* 
the  borrower  gives  a  bond,  with  two  sureties,  to  the  bank,  to  repay 
the  amount,  for  which  he  has  a  credit,  with  interest,  generally  at 
five  per  cent    The  borrower,  is  then  authorized  to  draw,  for  the 
amount  agreed  to  be  advanced,  from  time  to  time,  as  he  may  want  it; 
and  is  to  pay  interest,  on  the  sums  thus  drawn,  only,  from  the  time  of 


•  Blc  CuUoch. 


438 

receiving  them  ;  and  he  is,  also,  at  liberty,  to  repay  in  such  smnt*  and 
at  such  times,  as  may  be  convenient  for  him. 

These  arcoants  are  settled  half  yearly  or  yearly,  and  the  balance 
struck  ;  and  this  balance  carried  to  a  new  account;  and  the  origiiiAl 
bond  still  stands  security,  for  this  balance,  and  other  advances* 

By  this,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  a  great  proportion  of  the  actual 
capital  of  that  country,  which  would  otherwise  lie  idle  and  unproduc- 
tive, is  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  skilful  and  prudent  trustees,  no* 
der  whose  management,  it  becomes  active,  and  contributes  to  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  manufacturing  and  agricultural,  as  well  as  the  com- 
mercial interests  of  Scotland. 

By  thuti  doing  "business,  on  the  actual  capital  of  the  country,  fewer 
bank  notes  are  required ;  and  the  amount  of  these,  as  before  stated*  in 
1825,  did  not  exceed  about  $15,000,000.  The  banks  exchange  notes 
twice  a  week,  and  for  this  purpose,  have  agents  at  Edinburgh, 
where  these  exchanges  are  made,  and  the  balances  paid. 

The  Scotch  banks  have  been  as  profitable  to  the  share-holders,  as 
they  have  been  beneficial  to  the  public.  The  shares,  in  the  bank  of 
Scotland,  originally  £83  68.  Sd.  steriing,  sold  for  £200,  in  1826— the 
Royal  bank,  with  a  capiuil  of  £1,500,000,  divided  annually  £150,000 
and  the  British  Linen  Company,  having  paid  back  their  capital,  being 
£50D,000,  divide  9  per  cent — And  some  of  the  private  banks,  partic- 
ularly, that  of  Aberdeen,  has  been,  it  is  said,  still  more  profitable  to 
the  partners. 

We  would  here  ask,  whether  some  of  the  banks  of  the  United 
States,  could  not,  also,  pay  interest  on  deposits,  and  give  catih  creditSf 
in  the  manner  of  the  Scotch  banks.  The  trust  companies,  lately  es- 
tablished in  the  United  States,  by  paying  low  interest  on  deposits, 
and  loaning  them,  at  a  higher  rate,  have  been  profitable  to  the  stock- 
holders. We  perceive,  indeed,  by  the  returns,  that  the  banks  in 
Massachusetts,  pay  interest  on  $7,949|940,  of  their  deposits. 

The  national  bank,  at  the  beginning,  had  not  only  to  encounter,  the 
difficulties,  arising  from  a  disordered  currency ;  but,  had  also,  as  &r  as 
possible,  to  provide  against  similar  difficulties  in  future. 

With  this  view,  the  Directors  deemed  it  necessary  to  procure  from 
abroad,  a  large  amount  of  specie ;  and  for  this  purpose,  sent  a  special 
agent  to  Europe ;  and  from  July  30th,  1817,  to  December,  1818,  thera 
was  imported,  for  the  use  of  this  institution,  $7,311,750,  in  specie,  at 
an  expense,  including  loss  of  interest  and  premium,  of  $525,277.  In 
addition  to  this,  during  the  year  1817  and  1818,  a  scheme  of  stock 
jobbing  was  devised  and  carried  on,  in  the  shares  of  the  bank,  highly 


489 

injarioQs  to  the  bank  itself,  a9  well  as  the  public,  in  wbich  some  of  the 
Directors,  and  even  some  of  those  appointed  by  the  goTernment,  were 
concerned. 

In  this  scheme,  a  large  amount  of  the  money  of  the  bank  was  used^ 
being  loaned  to  those  concerned  in  it,  on  pledges  of  the  very  stock 
purchased  with  the  loan,  at  $125  per  share.  In  consequence  of  these 
profligate  speculations,  the  price  of  shares,  about  the  1st  of  Septcm* 
ber,  1817,  rose  to  $15di.  The  bubble,  however,  at  last  burst,  and 
in  December,  1818,  the  price  fell,  to  $110  per  sliare. 

In  consequence  of  this  mismanagement,  the  bank  lost  between  two 
and  three  millions  of  dollars ;  the  loss  at  the  6ffice  at  Baltimore  alone» 
amounted  to  $1,071,221 ;  and  the  bank  was  unable  for  a  long  time  to 
make  dividends. 

On  a  change  in  its  direction  and  presidency,  the  bank  gradually 
recovered  from  its  losses,  and  has  since  been  managed,  in  a  manner 
not  only  highly  beneficial  to  the  government,  but  greatly  conducive 
lo  the  interest  of  the  community  at  large.  In  the  course  of  sixteen 
years,  this  institution  has  collected  and  received  in  its  vaults,  public 
money,  to  the  amount  of  from  three  to  four  hundred  millions  of  dol* 
lars ;  and  this  vast  amount  it  has  disbursed  and  distributed  through 
the  United  States,  in  the  payment,  not  only  of  the  various  ordinary 
expenses  of  the  government,  but  the  interest  and  principal  of  the 
public  debt,  and  the  numerous  government  pensions,  dtc.  Ac. ;  and 
this  has  been  done,  without  the  loss  or  expense  of  a  single  dollar  to 
the  government  It  has  also  aided  the  government,  by  temporary 
loans  ;  and  in  this  way,  in  one  instance,  saved  the  public  credit  A 
large  instalment,  being  the  balance  of  the  Louisiana  debt,  became  due 
on  the  21st  of  October,  1820,  and  was  previously  advertised  to  be 
paid  on  that  day ;  but,  in  consequence  of  an  unexpected  defalcation 
in  the  receipts  of  the  revenue,  the  funds  of  the  government  were  in- 
sufficient to  meet  so  large  a  payment  In  this  situation,  the  Treasury 
Department  made  application  to  the  bank,  stating  that  it  **  had  not 
the  means  of  paying  the  balance,"  at  the  time  specified,  and  request- 
ing it  to  **  advance  the  amount,  to  the  holders  of  the  stock,  or  their 
agents,  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  9ave  the  public  credit^  and  to  satisfy 
the  holders.**  The  bank  immediately  complied  with  this  request,  and 
made  Kuch  arrangements  as  saved  the  credit  of  the  public  treasury. 

That  this  institution,  wilh  its  twenty  Ave  branches  located  in  dififer- 
ent  parts  of  the  union,  has,  in  a  variety  uf  ways,  essentially  contrib- 
uted to  advance  the  United  States  to  their  present  prosperous  condi- 
tion, no  one,  acquainted  with  its  operations  and  effect,  can  entertain  a 


\ 


9  440 

doubt.  It  has  afforded  aid,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the 
chant,  the  manufacturer,  and  the  agriculturalist ;  and  thereby  contrib- 
uted to  the  advancement  of  the  internal  as  well  as  external  resonrca 
of  the  country.  One  of  the  great  objects  for  which  it  was  establitflied, 
and  which  is  of  common  benefit,  has  been  accomplished — it  has  m- 
dered  and  continued  the  currency  as  uniform,  as  any  currency  coBr 
sisting  of  paper  can  be.  The  aids  it  has  afforded  the  loerchaot  ud 
the  manufacturer,  by  loans,  and  by  furnishing  facilities  for  ibreiga 
and  domestic  remittances,  are  too  common  and  too  well  knowo  to  be 
I  here  noticed.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten,  that  this  institution  haii 
I  also,  furnished  the  East  India  and  China  merchant,  with  a  crecBt 
j  in  Europe,  and  thereby  saved  him  the  necessity  of  carrjring  so  mocii 
specie  to  those  distant  markets ;  and  the  public  has  been  tfaerefaj 
relieved  from  embarrassments,  sometimes  occasioned,  by  a  auddoi 
demand  of  millions  of  dollars,  for  exportation  to  those  countries. 

The  charter  of  the  present  national  bank,  expires  on  the  3d  day  of 
March,  1836 ;  and  we  cannot  but  consider  it,  as  one  of  the  most  un- 
fortunate occurrences  in  the  financial  history  of, this  country^  that 
such  a  difference  of  opinion  should  exist,  between  the  different 
branches  of  the  general  government,  not  merely,  whether  this  par- 
ticular bank  shall  be  continued ;  but  whether,  after  the  expiration  of 
its  charter,  any  national  bank  whatever,  shall  exist  in  this  country. 
Whether  the  present  bank  shall  be  reestablished,  is  a  question,  com- 
paratively, of  little  moment ;  but  whether,  after  the  3d  of  March, 
1836,  any  other  bank  of  a  national  character  shall  be  established,  is  a 
question  of  great  and  vital  importance  to  the  union. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  this  question,  was  brought.*^  to  the 
deliberate  consideration  of  the  legislature  and  people,"  in  the  message 
of  the  President  to  Congress,  in  December,  1829.  Referring  to  the 
national  bank,  the  message  declared,  that  "  both  the  constitutionaUig 
and  expediency  of  the  law  creating  this  bank,  are  well  questioned^  by 
a  large  portion  of  our  fellow  citizens ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  by 
all,''  the  message  added,  "  that  it  had  failed  in  the  great  end  of  estab- 
lishing a  uniform  and  sound  currency,*^  This  declaration  created 
no  little  surprise,  in  the  minds  of  all  who  had  made  themselves  ac- 
quainted with  the  nature  and  benefit  of  banking  operations ;  and  par- 
ticularly, with  the  effects  produced  by  the  bank  in  question,  on  the 
currency  of  the  United  States.  The  regulation  of  the  currency  of  a 
nation,  is  one  of  the  highest  and  most  important  acts  of  sovereignty; 
and  at  the  same  time,  is  one  of  the  greatest  delicacy  and  difficulty, 
especially  when  it  consists  wholly  or  chiefly,  of  paper.  In  this 
country,  this  high  and  delicate  power  is  vested  in  Congress. 


m 

Thif  declaration  of  the  Execativet  therefore^  did  not  escapo  tbt 
notice  and  attention  of  that  body ;  and  the  reporti  of  the  committees 
of  the  Hoase  and  Senate,  on  this  subject,  in  the  winter  of  1890,  ex* 
pressed  opinions  totally  different  from  those  contained  in  the  mes* 
sage.*  These  reports  were  drawn  up  with  no  ordinary  ability,  andf 
we  belicTe,  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  a  great  majority  of  those,  who 
look  the  trouble  to  examine  a  subject  somewhat  complicated,  that  nn« 
der  the  influence  and  operations  of  the  national  bank,  the  United  States 
possessed  a  currency  as  uniform  and  as  sound,  and  even  more  so, 
than  any  other  country,  where  paper  constituted  the  greatest  part  of 
its  circulating  medium.  That  its  bills  being  receivable  in  payment  of 
the  revenues,  and  of  all  debts  due  to  the  government,  were  generally 
received  as  cash,  in  all  private  money  transactions  in  every  part  of 
the  union ;  and  in  places  most  remote,  never  at  a  discount  greater 
than  a  quarter  of  one  per  cent.  And  the  public  were  also  informed, 
by  these  reports,  (what  indeed  men  of  extensive  business  knew  bo* 
fore)  that  by  means  of  these  bills,  and  of  inland  drafts  furnished  by 
the  bank  and  its  branches,  money  could  be  transmitted  by  individuals, 
to  any  part  of  the  United  States,  at  an  expense  of  not  half,  and  oAen, 
not  one  fourth  of  the  actual  cost  of  transmitting  silver ;  the  rates  of 
exchange  being  at  par,  between  places  not  very  remote ;  and  rarely 
exceeding  one  quarter,  one  half,  and  three  quarters  of  one  per  cent, 
between  places  as  distant  from  each  other,  as  many  of  the  great  com* 
mercial  cities  in  Europe. 

Nor  was  the  difference  less  between  the  various  branches  of  the 
government,  on  the  constitutionality  than  on  the  expediency  of  a 
national  bank.  The  Secretar}'  of  the  Treasury,  convinced,  as  all  bb 
predecessors  had  been,  both  of  the  constitutionality  and  expediency  of 
such  a  national  institution,  recommended  to  Congress  the  renewal  of 
the  present  charter,  with  certain  modifications ;  and  in  the  winter  of 
1832,  a  bill  for  that  purpose,  received  the  sanction  of  Congress.  This 
bill,  however,  was  returned  by  the  President,  with  his  veto,  and  not 
being  repassed  by  two  thirds,  was  lost. 

We  shall  only  ask  the  attention  of  the  reader,  to  that  part  of  this 
message  which  contains  some  historical  statements  and  views  in  rels* 
tion  to  the  proceedings  of  Congress,  on  the  subject  of  a  national 
bank,  in  1811,  181&,  and  1810;  and  principally  for  the  purpose  of 
contrasting  them  with  the  statements  and  views  of  one  of  his  prsds* 


•  Mr.  Mc  Duffie  was  cbairmao  of  the  committee  of  the  House,  and  Gkneial 
Samuel  Smith,  chairiDaa  of  the  Senate's  committae. 

66 


eessora,  (Mr.  Madison,)  on  the  sam/subject  The  part  of  the  Teto 
•age  alluded  to,  says :  **  It  is  maintained  by  the  advocates  of  the  Imak, 
that  its  constitutionality,  in  all  its  features,  ought  to  be  considered  ae 
Mettled  by  precedent^  and  by  the  decision  of  the  supreme  court.  To 
this  conclusion  I  cannot  assent  Mere  precedent  is  a  dangerow 
source  of  authority,  and  should  not  be  regarded  as  deciding  qaeetions 
of  constitutional  power,  except  when  the  CLcquieacence  of  the  people 
and  the  states  can  be  considered  as  well  settled.  So  far  from  this 
being  the  case,  on  this  subject,  an  argument  against  the  bank  might 
be  based  on  precedent.  One  Congress  in  1791,  decided  in  favor  of  a 
bank;  another  in  1811  decided  against  it.  One  Congress  in  181&» 
decided  against  a  bank;  another,  in  1816,  decided  in  favor.  Prior  to 
the  present  Congress,  therefore,  the  precedents  drawn  from  th&t  source 
were  equal.  If  we  resort  to  the  states,  the  expressions  of  legislative* 
judicial  and  executive  opinions  against  the  bank,  have  been,  probably^ 
to  those  in  its  favor,  as  four  to  one.  There  is  nothing,  in  precedent, 
therefore,  which,  if  its  authority  were  admitted,  ought  to  weigh  in 
favor  of  the  act  before  roe.'' 

To  those  acquainted  with  the  Congressional  history  of  the  peri- 
ods, above  referred  to,  these  declarations,  in  a  public  document,  from 
the  chief  magistrate,  must  appear  strange,  indeed. 

The  message  declares,  that,  in  the  years  1811  and  1815,  Congress 
decided  against  a  bank,  on  the  ground  of  its  unconstitutionality,  (and 
if  this  is  not  the  meaning,  it  has  no  meaning,  applicable  to  the  point 
there  controverted,)  and,  therefore,  as  to  precedents,  they  were  equaL 
Had  the  President  consulted  the  executive  papers,  then  in  his  pos- 
session, he  would  have  found,  that  Congress,  so  far  from  deciding 
against  a  bank,  in  1815,  actually  sent  to  the  President,  a  bill  establish- 
ing a  bank,  as  we  have  before  stated,  and  that  the  then  President,  (Mr. 
Madison,)  in  returning  it,  expressly  waived  all  constitutional  objec- 
tions ;  declaring  that  question  completely  settled.  On  this  point,  the 
language  of  his  message  is,  **  Waiving  the  question  ef  the  constiiu' 
tional  authority  of  the  Legislature  to  establish  an  incorporated  bajsk* 
as  being  precluded,  in  my  judgment,  by  repeated  recognitions,  under 
varied  circumstances,  of  the  validity  of  such  an  institution,  in  acts  of 
legislative,  executive  and  judicial  branches  of  the  government,  accom- 
panied, by  indications,  in  different  modes,  of  a  concurrence  of  the 
general  will  of  the  nation  ;  the  proposed  bank  does  not  appear  to  be 
calculated  to  answer  the  purposes  of  reviving  the  public  credit,  of  pro- 
viding a  national  medium  of  circulation,  and  of  aiding  the  treasury, 
by  facilitating  the  indispensable  anticipations  of  the  revenues  and  by 
affording  to  the  public  more  durable  loans.** 


448 

After  Mr.  Madison  had  retired^rom  public  life,  and  had  an  oppor* 
lonity  of  calmly  reviewing  his  former  opinions,  he  fully  confirmed 
those  he  had  given,  in  his  message,  above  referred  to.  This  was  donet 
in  a  letter  to  an  individual*  now  before  the  public,  dated  Jan.  25th« 
1831 ;  in  which,  after  stating,  that  precedents,  expounding  the  con* 
•titution,  should  guide,  and  overrule  individual  opinions ;  and  after 
referring  to  the  Various  precedents,  in  relation  to  the  present  ques- 
tion, he  says,  **  It  was  in  conformity  with  the  Tiews  here  taken  of  the 
respect  due  to  deliberate  and  reiterated  precedents^  that  the  bank  of 
the  United  States,  though,  on  the  original  question  held  to  be  uncon« 
stitutional,  received  the  Executive  signature  in  1817,*'  (meaning  1610.) 

**  The  act  originally  establishing  a  bank,  had  undergone  ample  dia- 
cossions,  in  its  passage  through  the  several  branches  of  the  govern* 
inent.  It  had  been  carried  into  execution,  throughout  a  period  of 
twenty  years,  with  annual  legitdative  recognitions ;  in  one  instancet 
Indeed,  with  a  positve  ramification  of  it  into  a  new  state,  and  with 
the  entire  acquiescence  of  all  the  local  authorities,  as  well  as  the 
nation  at  large ;  to  all  of  which  may  be  added,  a  decreasing  pros- 
pect of  any  change  in  the  public  opinion  adverse  to  the  constitution- 
ality of  such  an  institution.  A  veto  from  the  Executive,  under  these 
circumstances,  with  an  admission  of  the  expediency  and  almost  ns- 
eessity  of  the  measure,  would  have  been  a  defiance  of  all  the  obliga- 
tions derived  from  a  course  of  precedents^  amounting  to  the  requisite 
evidence  of  the  national  judgment  and  intention^" 

Mr.  Madison  was  President  of  the  United  States,  in  1811,  and  1815 
and  1816;  and  had  the  best  means  of  information,  in  relation,  not 
only,  to  the  views  and  opinions  of  Congress,  on  this  great  questioDv 
but,  also,  as  to  those  of  the  local  authorities,  and  of  the  nation  at 
large ;  and  indeed,  called  upon  officislly  to  act,  on  this  question,  it 
became  his  duty,  to  examine  into  precedents,  and  to  ascertain  the 
sense  of  the  nation  in  regard  to  them.  If  then,  a  question  of  consti- 
tutional law,  is  ever  to  be  settled,  by  precedent  and  acquiescence,  the 
declaration  and  decision  of  the  chief  magirtrate,  under  these  circum- 
stances, must  be  entitled  to  peculiar  weight.  Can  it  fail,  thereforst 
to  excite  surprise,  that  after  another  precedent  had  been  added  and 
acquiesced  in,  for  nearly  twenty  years  more,  a  successor  of  Mr.  Mad- 
ison, should  declare,  that,  so  far  as  the  acts  of  the  general  govern- 
ment were  concerned,  the  precedents  were  equal ;  and  that,  as  to  ths 


•  Charles  J.  iDgersoU,  Esq. 


444 


local  aothorities,  thej  were,  m  ft^lirto  one,  against  the  eonetitoiioftal- 
ity  of  a  national  bank. 

And,  above  all,  must  it  not  appear  strange,  that  his  saccessor  ahoiiM 
declare,  that,  in  1815,  Congreiis  not  only  decided  against  a  bank,  bat 
that  this  decision  was  grounded  on  a  want  of  constitutional  aathor- 
itj ;  when  the  whole  proceedings  of  Congress,  in  relation  to  a  baokt 
in  that  year,  shew  a  large  majority  in  both  Houses,  in  favor  of  a  bill, 
creating  such  an  institution;  and  when  Mr.  Madison's  objectioof 
to  it,  were  expressly  founded,  on  the  details,  and  not,  on  the  catuH^ 
tuHonaliiy  of  the  bill. 

Nor  has  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Madison,  been  less  explicit,  as  to  tlia 
grounds,  upon  which  Congress,  in  1811,  refused  to  continue  the  char- 
ter of  the  first  bank.  In  the  letter,  before  alluded  to,  Mr.  Madiaon 
thus  refers  to  the  supposed  precedent  against  the  constitutionality  of 
a  bank,  by  the  refusal  of  Congress  to  continue  the  first  charter.  **  It 
has  been  contended,  that  authority  of  the  precedents,  was,  in  that 
ease,  invalidated,  by  the  consideration,  that  they  proved  only,  a  re> 
spect  for  the  stipulated  duration  of  the  bank,  with  a  toleration  of  it, 
until  the  law  should  expire ;  and  by  the  casting  vote,  given  in  the 
Senate,  by  the  Vice  President,  in  the  year  1811,  against  a  bill,  for  es» 
tablishing  a  national  bank,  being  expressly  given,  on  the  ground  of 
unconstitutionality.  But,  if  the  law  itself  was  unconstitutional,  the 
stipulation  was  void,  and  could  not  be  constitutionally  fulfilled  or  tol- 
erated. 

*'  As  to  the  negative  of  the  Senate,  by  the  casting  vote  of  the  pre- 
■iding  officer,  it  is  a  fact,  well  understood  at  the  time,  that  it  reaoH- 
ed,  not  from  an  equality  of  opinions,  in  that  assembly,  of  the  power 
of  Congress  to  establish  a  bank,  but,  from  a  junction  of  those,  who 
admitted  the  power,  but  disapproved  the  plan,  with  those  who  denied 
the  power.  On  a  simple  question  of  constitutionality,  there  was  a 
decided  majority  in  favor  of  it" 

If  any  thing  farther  were  wanting,  to  confirm  the  testimony  of  Mr. 
Madison,  on  this  last  point,  we  might  refer  the  reader,  to  a  declaratioD 
made,  in  the  Senate,  in  the  winter  of  183%  when  the  veto  message 
was  under  debate,  by  a  member  of  that  body,*  that,  in  1811,  he  was 
in  the  Senate  and  voted  against  the  bank,  '*  but  not  on  constitutional 
grounds,  and  had  no  doubt,  that  such  was  the  case  with  other  mem* 
bers.** 


•  General  Samael  Smith. 


445 

• 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  EieeatiTe,  has  called  in  qaestion, 
not  only  the  constitutionality  and  expediency,  but,  also,  the  solvency 
of  this  institution.  This  was  intimated  too  plainly,  to  be  misunder- 
stood in  his  annaal  message  to  Congress,  of  December,  1832.  To 
pat  the  National  Legislature  on  its  guard,  with  respect  to  the  public 
deposits,  was  the  proper  object  of  such  an  intimation«^-an  intimation, 
indeed,  coming  from  such  a  quarter,  directly  calculated  to  impair,  if 
not  destroy,  the  credit  of  the  institution.  And  it  seems  somewhat 
difficult  to  imagine  why  it  did  not  produce  this  effect,  but  on  the  sap- 
position,  that  the  public  was  better  acquainted,  with  the  affairs  of  the 
bank,  than  the  President,  seemed  to  be ;  or  was  satisfied,  that  the  in- 
timation, was  intended,  for  political,  rather  than  for  financial  effect 

On  this  subject,  also,  the  Legislature  differed  from  the  Ezecative. 
The  committee  of  ways  and  means,  after  a  full  examination  of  the 
subject,  reported  to  the  Houee,  its  full  conviction  of  the  soundness 
and  solvency  of  the  institution. 

^  It  appears,"  say  the  committee,  ^  from  official  documents  of  un- 
questionable authority,  that  the  specie  actually  in  the  vaults  of  the 
bank  of  the  United  States,  is  within  one  tenth  oi  the  amount,  held  by 
all  the  other  banks  in  the  Union ;  whilst  its  circulation  of  paper,  ia 
but  one  fourth  of  the  aggregate  of  theirs.  In  other  words,  the  bank 
of  the  United  States  has  about  nine  millions  of  specie,  with  a  circu- 
lation of  notes,  to  the  amount  of  seventeen  millions  and  a  half;  while 
the  aggregate  of  all  the  other  banks,  with  specie  in  their  vaults  but  a 
little  above  ten  millions,  have  a  circulation  of  sixty  eight  millions  of 
bank  paper.  The  committee,  therefore  recommend,  that  the  House 
should  adopt  a  resolution,  declaring  that  the  government  deposits 
may,  in  the  opinion  of  the  House,  be  safely  continued  in  the  bank 
of  the  United  States.*'  And  this  resolution  was  adopted  by  a  large 
Hiajority,  1 10  to  46.  To  enable  the  committee  as  well  as  Congress  to 
judge  of  the  solvency  of  the  institution,  its  directors  gave  a  conden* 
sed  view  of  the  actual  state  of  the  bank,  on  the  1st  day  of  Jan.  1838 ; 
and  which,  we  here  subjoin — 

The  claims  against  the  bank  are. 
Its  notes  in  circulation,  •        •        •        •  $17,4594^71  79 

The  deposits,  public  and  private,    .  13,647,617  96 

The  debt,  to  the  holders  of  the  ftinded  debt  of  the 

United  States,  for  principal  and  interest,    .  6,733,703  16 

The  unclaimed  dividends, 76,639  74 


•37,807,88  74 


446 

Its  refources  are, 

Specie, $8,951,847  M 

Notes  of  State  Banks,  .         $2,291,666  04 

Balances  due  by  Stote  Banks,  1,696,262  08 

3,887,907  12 

Funds  in  Europe,  and  Foreign  bills  of  exchange,  3,190,225  43 

Real  esUte, 3,036,241  62 

Debts  due  hy  individuals,  on  notes  dis- 
counted, .        .        •        $43,626,870  32 

On  domestic  bills  of  exchange,  18,069,043  26 

61,695,913  67 

Mortgages  d&c, 103,330  % 

$80,865,465  99 
From  which  deduct  the  claims  as  above,      •        •  37,807,322  74 


And  there  remains  an  excess  of  .        •        •        $43,058,143  25 

The  foregoing  statement  of  the  situation  of  this  great  inatitutioBv 
shewing  a  surplus  of  more  than  $43,000,000,  proved  its  solvency  be- 
yond all  doubt.  Individuals,  as  well  as  the  government  continued  to 
trust  their  money  in  its  vaults ;  and  the  price  of  the  stock,  shewed,  thet 
stockholders  entertained  no  fears  for  their  capital. 

Notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  Congress,  that  the  public  money 
was  perfectly  safe,  in  the  vaults  of  the  bank,  -the  President  thought 
proper,  before  the  next  meeting  of  that  body,  to  take  measures,  for 
its  removal  from  thence,  to  the  vaults  of  certain  state  banks. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  by  the  charter,  the  public  money  was 
to  be  deposited  in  this  bank,  **  unless  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasary 
should  otherwise  direct,"  in  which  case,  he  was  to  lay  before  Con- 
gpress,  the  reasons  of  such  order.  One  Secretary  of* the  Treasury, 
was  removed  from  office,  by  the  President,  merely  because  he  would 
not  comply  with  his  wishes,  and  remove  the  deposits ;  and  another 
was  appointed  who  immediately,  gave  the  order  for  the  removal,  «• 
required  by  the  President ;  snd  submitted  his  reasons  for  the  same,  to 
Ck>ngress,  at  the  commencement  of  its  next  session. 

Without  adverting  to  the  reasons  actually  given  by  the  Secretary, 
we  would  only  observe,  that  he  admitted,  that  the  bank  was  solvent, 
and  that  it  was  a  safe  place  of  deposit.  The  Senate,  declared,  that 
the  reasons  offered  by  the  Secretary  were  insufficient;  and  also, 
declared,  that*  the  interference  of  the  Executive,  in  relation  to  saeh 
removal,  was  an  unwarrantable  assumption  of  power  over  the  public 
money. 


447 

The  Hoote,  without  deciding  directly,  whether  the  reMona  offered  i .  ^ 
by  the  secretary  were  sufficient  to  justify  the  removal,  passed  a 
gif  ing  some  directions  relati? e  to  the  public  deposits,  in  the  state 
banks ;  and  thus  virtually  confirmed  and  sanctioned  the  order  of  re- 
moval. To  this  bill  the  Senate  refused  its  assent ;  but  the  public 
money  has  remained  in  the  vaults  of  such  state  banks,  as  the  Presi* 
dent  and  secretary  think  proper  to  select 

The  declaration  of  the  senate,  in  relation  to  the  unwarrantable  in- 
terference of  the  President,  in  this  transaction,  drew  from  him,  a  pro- 
test against  it,  as  an  unwarrantable  intCLrference  of  the  Senate,  in  the 
affiiirs  of  the  Executive ;  and  justifying  his  conduct,  on  one  groundf 
never  before  assumed,  we  believe,  by  any  of  his  predecessors— that 
is,  that  he  was  the  keeper  of  all  the  property,  even  the  money  of  the 
United  States,  and  that  he  was  repsonsible  for  its  safe  keeping. 

And,  in  a  still  later  communication  to  Congress,  requesting  thai 
body,  to  give  directions  and  to  make  some  regulations,  in  relation  to 
depositing  the  public  money,  in  the  state  banks,  the  President  says 
**  the  powers  of  Congress  to  direct  in  what  places,  the  treasurer  shall 
keep  the  money  in  the  treasury,  and  to  impose  restrictions  on  the 
Executive  authority^  in  relation  to  their  custody  and  removal^  is  nn- 
limited^  and  its  exercise  will  rather  be  courted^  than  discouraged,  by 
those  public  officers  and  agents,  on  whom  rests  the  responsibility,  for 
their  safety." 

This  communication,  if  we  rightly  understand  it,  shews,  that  the 
President  still  claims  an  unlimited  authority,  in  relation  to  the  **  cus- 
tody and  removaP'  of  the  public  money ;  and  that  he  is  the  officer 
and  agent,  or,  at  least,  one  of  the  **  the  public  officers  and  agents,''  on 
whom  rests  the  responsibility  of  its  safety.  That  this  is  his  meaningt 
we  Uiink,  is  evident,  when,  in  the  same  communication,  he  adds,  ^*  It 
is  desirable,  that  as  little  power  as  possible,  should  be  left,  to  the 
President  or  secretary  of  the  treasury,  over  these  institutions,  (the 
state  banks)  which,  being  thus  freed  from  Executive  influence^  4^.** 

We  may  be  permitted  to  enquire,  from  whence,  the  President  de* 
rives  the  authority,  thus  claimed.  He  must  have  it,  either  from  the 
constitution,  or  from  some  law — \U  from  the  constitution,  it  may  be 
asked,  why  he  invites  Congress  to  'Mmpose  restrictions"  upon  this 
authority  ?  Congress  can  no  more  restrict  his  constitutional  power, 
in  relation  to  the  public  treasure,  than  it  can  his  power  in  relation  to 
the  army  and  the  navy.  If  the  people  of  the  United  States,  in  tbdr 
charter  of  union,  have  made  their  chief  magistrate  keeper  of  their 
money,  and  have  made  him  responsible  for  its  safe  keeping,  Congrese 


r 


448 

eannot  deprive  him  of  this  high  trust ;  nor,  indeed,  can  he  relinquish 
it  to  Congress.  If  the  constitution  has  given  him  the  power  of  re- 
moving the  pablic  treasure,  from  one  place  to  another,  at  his  owa 
will  and  pleasure,  the  national  legislature,  can  no  more  divest  him  of 
it*  than  it  can,  of  his  constitutional  power  of  removing  public  officers, 
from  their  places. 

If,  indeed,  he  possesses  this  power,  by  virtue  of  a  law,  Congress, 
may,  at  its  pleasure,  alter  this  law ;  and  may  impose  restrictions  on 
his  authority,  or,  by  a  repeal  of  the  law  itself,  entirely  divest  him  of  it 

But  we  may  ask,  in  what  part  of  the  constitution,  this  grant  of 
power  is  to  be  found ;  or,  to  what  page  of  the  statute  book,  we  most 
lorn,  to  find  a  law  of  the  national  legislature,  conferring  upon  the  Ex- 
ecutive, this  important  trust? 

The  framers  of  the  act,  establishing  the  Treasury  department,  in 
September,  1789,  certainly  did  not  consid^  the  President,  as  the  con- 
stitutional keeper  of  the  public  money,  when,  by  this  act,  they  created 
an  officer  by  the  name  of  treasurer,  whose  duty  it  was  *'  to  receive 
and  keep  the  monies  of  the  United  States,^'  and  who  was  to  give  a 
bond,  with  sureties,  in  the  sum  of  $150,000,  for  *'  the  faithful  per- 
formance of  the  duties  of  his  ofiice,  and  for  the  fidelity  of  the  per- 
sons  by  him  employed^* — and  this  bond  wsa  to  be  approved,  not  by 
the  President,  as  might  be  supposed  would  have  been  the  case,  had 
he  been  ultimately  responsible  for  it,  but,  by  the  secretary  of  the 
treasury  and  the  comptroller.  When  Congress  has  designsted  a 
place,  where  the  treasurer  is  to  keep  the  public  money,  he  is  bound 
to  keep  it  in  the  place  designated ;  but,  if  no  place  is  fixed  by  law,  the 
trfSisurer  will  keep  it,  in  such  place,  as  he  deems  safe,  both  for  him- 
self, and  the  public.  In  fixing  upon  this  place,  the  treasurer,  would, 
no  doubt,  consult  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  perhaps  the  Presi- 
dent ;  and  probably,  follow  their  advice ;  he  alone,  however,  would 
be  legally  responsible. 

But,  when  the  place  is  designated  by  law,  the  treasurer  is  tu  be 
governed  by  that  alone — there  the  money  must  remain,  until  Con- 
gress shall  direct  otherwise.  Before  the  grant  of  the  present  bank 
charter.  Congress  had  never  designated  a  place,  where  the  public 
money  should  be  kept  By  this  charter,  the  treasurer  was  bound  to 
keep  it  in  the  vaults  of  this  bank,  or  its  branches — but  in  those  states, 
where  there  were  no  branches,  the  treasurer  was  not  prohibited  from 
placing  it,  with  such  state  bsnks,  or  with  such  persons,  as  he  might 
think  proper.  Prior  to  the  present  bank  charter,  therefore,  the  treas- 
urer was  permitted  by  Congress,  to  deposit,  for  safe  keeping,  the  pub- 


449 

Ke  money,  entrosted  to  bis  care,  in  such  places,  and  with  such  per- 
sons, as  he  himsoir  thoaght  proper  to  designate ;  under  the  advice,  no 
donbt,  of  the  secretary  of  the  treasury,  and  so,  as  best  to  subserve  the 
public  interest ;  and  he  alone  was  legally  responsible,  as  his  bond  de- 
dares,  **  for  the  fidelity  of  the  persons  by  him  employed^'  for  this 
purpose. 

Having  given  a  brief  view  of  the  origin  and  operations  of  the  pres- 
ent bank  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  some  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  different  branches  of  the  general  government,  in  relation  to  it ; 
we  proceed  to  state,  that  the  establishment  of  a  national  bank,  in 
1816,  did  not  prevent  the  increase  of  banking  institutions,  in  the  several 
states.  The  number  of  these  in  1816,  was,  as  the  reader  will  remem- 
ber, two  hundred  and  forty  six ;  and  on  the  first  of  January,  1834,  they 
had  increased  to  five  hundred,  at  least,  with  a  proportionable  increase 
of  capital ;  and  we  here  present  a  view  of  the  number,  capita],  issuei» 
specie  and  deposits  of  state  banks,  at  various  periods,  from  1791  to 
January  Ist,  1834 ;  being  made  partly  from  returns,  and  partly  from 
estimates. 


Na  Ctpital.  iHOflB.  Specie.  Depotili. 

1791  3  83,000,000 

^8U^|      *  42,610,601        $22,700,000         $9,600,000 

^YeiS^I     908  82,259,590         45,500,000  17,000,000 

^"eie**!     ^^  89,822,422         68.000,000  19,000,000 

1820  301  98,267,763  39,558,870  16,176,651        $30,286,689 

1829  329  110,434,361  48,535,833  14,919,351  40,639,671 

^^m]    ^^  168,827,803         78,342,528         17,368.430         66,216,087 

The  table  annexed  to  this  chapter,  exhibits  the  number  of  stale 
banking  institutitions  in  operation,  in  1833,  and  on  the  1st  of  Janv* 
ary,  1834 ;  together  with  the  aggregate  amount  of  their  capital,  issoesy 
specie,  deposits  and  discounts,  in  each  state  and  territory.  This  table 
u  made,  from  actual  returns  of  the  banks  themselves,  in  the  statea 
of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecti- 
cut, Vermont,  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  North  CavoHBa* 
Creorgia  and  the  District  of  Columbia ;  and  in  the  other  states,  and 
in  the  territories,  partly,  from  returns  from  some  of  the  banks,  pertly 
from  estimates ;  and  in  part  from  a  compilation,  contsining  abetraeti 
of  returns,  and  of  estimates,  of  the  several  state  banks,  made  by 
the  clerk  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  at  WashinftoUf  from 

67 


450 

mttarialf  furnished  by  a  member  of  thai  House.*  From  data,  how«' 
ever,  in  our  possession,  we  have,  in  several  instances*  varied  the  es- 
timates of  capital,  in  this  compilation,  as  well  as  of  issues  and  spe- 
cie. We  do  not  present  it  as  perfectly  accurate,  especially,  where 
made  from  estimates ;  but,  we  believe,  it  does  not  materially  vary, 
from  the  truth.  We  would  observe,  that  the  estimates,  in  relation 
to  the  banks  in  Ohio,  rest  more  on  conjecture,  tlian  in  the  othet 
states.  By  a  document,  in  our  possession,  furnished  by  a  gentle- 
men of  Ohio,  well  acquainted  with  the  subject,  there  were,  in  the 
year  1831,  eleven  banks  in  that  state,  with  a  capital  paid  in,  of 
$1,000,000,  having  a  circulation,  estimated  at  $1,500,000,  and  with 
$660,000  specie,  in  their  vaults.  Since  thai  period,  up  to  January, 
1834,  nine  banks  had  been  added,  two  of  which,  the  Franklin  and 
Commercial,  located  at  Cincinnati,  had  a  capital  of  $1,000,000  each. 
The  whole  capital  of  the  former  has  been  paid  in,  and  $986,025  of 
the  latter.  We  have  estimated  the  capital  of  the  other  additional 
banks,  and  the  probable  increase  of  some  of  the  old  banks  at 
$2,000,000,  making  the  whole  capital  $5,000,000.  We  have  added 
$500,000  to  the  circulation,  making  it  $2,000,000 ;  and  also,  $50,000, 
to  the  specie,  estimating  the  whole  at  $700,000. 

In  January,  1834,  as  we  have  been  informed,  one  state  bank  only 
was  in  operation,  in  Kentucky,  which  commenced  business  at  Louis- 
ville, August  1st,  1833.  We  have  before  us  a  statement  from  an  au- 
thentic source,  shewing,  that,  on  the  30ih  day  of  August,  1834,  the 
amount  of  capital  of  this  bank  paid  in,  was  $1,079,430,  amount  of  is- 
sues, $450,000,  and  specie  $240,690 ;  and  which,  we  have  inserted 
in  the  Table,  with  an  estimated  amount  of  deposits  and  discounts. 

The  bank  of  the  United  States,  on  the  1st  of  January,  1834,  with  a 
capital  of  $35,000,000,  had  a  circulation  of  $19,208,379,  specie 
$10,031,237,  deposites  $10,965,373,  and  discounts,  (including 
$16,302,392  of  domestic  bills,)  $54,911,461.  This  makes  the  whole 
banking  capital  of  the  United  Stotes,  at  that  time,  $203,827,883,  is- 
sues $97,550,907,  specie  in  vaults  $27,394,667,  deposits  $77,181,46% 
and  discounts  $325,599,843.  The  state  banks  were  situated  in  the 
northern,  middle,  southern,  south  western,  and  western  sections  of 
the  union,  in  the  following  proportions,  as  to  number,  capital,  issues 
and  specie,  together  with  the  proportion  of  circulation,  to  capital,  in 
each  sectioa. 


♦  Mr.  Wilde  of  Georgia. 


451 

Propofftiott  «r 
No.  CapitaL  Notn  iMued.  Specie.  notes  to  ceptt^ 

Mew  EnfUnd,       241  ^7,343,321  9\b,l^,S58  $2,989,206    33  per  cU 

K  Yorti,  N.  Jer  J 

ri'KS3ii;;[l73    58,6T7,238    33,249,632    7,066,613    60"    " 

UM  Marylajid,  } 
Virginia,  8.  A  N.  \ 

our'^F!^i:[  39  21,993,103  1&,381,981  3,429,961  70"  " 

da,  J 


CC        M 


Alabama,   Miaai-  ) 

aippij^and  uo.  {   18    31,639,763      8,948,627    2,852,606    26 

Tenneaiee,  Ken--^ 
tacky,  Ohio,  In-  § 

di™jiiin^>  31      9,072,262      6,036,431     1,136,146    66  "    " 

Michigan,  ' 

The  whole  circalation  of  the  state  banks,  is  aboat  46  per  cent  of 
their  capital ;  and  including^  the  national  bank,  the  whole  bank  drcn* 
lation  of  the  United  States,  is  a  little  less  than  60  per  cent,  of  the 
bank  capital. 

It  will  be  noticed,  that  the  bank  circulation  of  the  state  of  New 
York,  with  a  capital  short  of  twenty  eight  millions,  was,  at  that  time 
nearly  eighteen  and  a  half  millions;  while  that  of  Massachnsetts, 
with  a  capital  of  more  than  twenty  eight  millions,  was  less  than  eight 
millions.  Indeed,  it  appears,  that  the  state  of  New  York,  with  a  cap- 
ital less,  by  nearly  twenty  millions,  than  that  of  all  New  England ; 
had  a  circulation,  of  nearly  three  millions  more,  than  that  section  of 
the  country ;  and  that,  in  fact,  her  circulation  was  nearly  one  quarter 
of  the  whole  state  bank  circulation  of  the  United  States.  This  ariseSf 
from  her  wants  of  circulation^  in  consequence  of  her  great  internal, 
as  well  as  external  commerce. 

In  calculating  the  extent  of  these  wants,  it  should  be  borne  in  mindv 
that  the  city  of  New  York,  is  the  first  commercial  city  in  this  countryt 
and  the  second  in  the  world.  That  in  tonnage,  and  in  commerce 
generally,  it  stands  next  to  the  city  of  London.  More  than  one 
half  of  all  the  importations  into  the  United  States,  come  into  the 
port  of  New  York,  and  more  than  one  quarter  of  all  the  exports  of 
this  country,  pass  through  the  same  port.  Nor,  in  estimating  the 
wants  of  circulation  in  this  state,  should  her  internal  commercet  by 
means  of  her  canals,  be  disregarded.  It  will  be  seen,  in  a  subsequent 
chapter,  (on  the  subject  of  canals  and  rail  roads)  that  the  valoe  of  ar» 
tides  brought  down  the  Erie  and  Champlain  canals,  in  1833,  amomt- 
ed  to  nearly  $13,000,000 — that  among  these  articles,  the  quantity 
of  boards  and  plank  exceeded  one  hundred  millions  of  feet,  while  the 
whole  quantity  of  the  same  articles,  exported  from  the  whole  United 


f 


45S 

Steteit  the  mme  year,  was  only  about  seventy  six  millions ;  leariof , 
in  hror  of  these  canals,  twenty  four  millions — that  the  quantity  of 
flour  brought  down  the  canals  in  the  same  year,  was  nine  hundred 
and  twenty  three  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty  one  barrels ;  and 
the  quantity  of  wheat,  was  nine  hundred  and  twenty  one  thoasaod 
^we  hundred  and  seven  bushels,  which  is  equal  to  one  hundred  and 
eighty  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  hve  barrels  of  flour ;  making 
the  whole  quantity  of  flour,  one  million  one  hundred  and  seven  thou- 
Mnd  seven  hundred  and  sixty  six ;  while  the  quantity  of  flour  export- 
ed from  the  United  States  the  same  year,  was  nine  hundred  and  fifty 
flve  thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty  eight ;  and  of  wheat,  was  only 
thirty  two  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty  one  bushels — equal  to 
•iz  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty  four  barrels ;  making  a  diflfereoce 
between  the  quantity  of  flour  brought  down  these  canals,  and  the 
quantity  exported,  more  than  one  hundred  and  forty  six  thousand 
barrels,  in  favor  of  the  canals.  In  addition  to  this,  the  same  chapter 
will  show,  that  about  one  hundred  thousand  tons  of  merchandize 
during  this  period,  went  up  the  canals ;  and  that  this  internal  com- 
merce gives  employment  to  more  than  two  thousand  three  hundred 
canal  boats,  and  about  eleven  thousand  men.  It  is  this  vast  inland 
commerce  that  sustains  the  great  circulation  of  the  country  banka  in 
that  state,  which  on  the  1st  of  January  1834,  exceeded  ten  millions 
of  dollars ;  and  constitutes  by  far  the  greatest  and  best  safety  fund 
of  the  banks  of  the  State  of  New  York. 

Since  the  1st  of  January  1834,  charters  for  many  new  state  banks^ 
have  been  granted,  authorising  an  aggregate  capital  of  830,200,000. 
Some  of  these  have  gone  into  operation  ;  but  what  proportion  of  this 
capital  has  been  paid  in,  we  have  not  ascertained.  In  Ohio,  the 
amount  added  to  the  bank  capital  in  1834,  was  81,200,000;  in  New 
York,  more  than  three  millions ;  and  it  may  probably  be  safe,  to  esti- 
mate the  actual  amount  of  state  bank  capital,  on  the  1st  of  January, 
1835,  at  $175,000,000. 


•  The  nomber  thus  granted  is  forty  three,  and  in  the  following 

states. 

Na 

Affregata  capttaL 

Na 

Afgregate  capitaL 

Connecticut, 

6 

.      $1,150,000 

New  York,         8 

.     $3,800,000 

Indiana, 

1 

1,600,000 

Ohio,    .              10 

4,500,000 

Keatockj,  . 

1 

5,000,000 

Pennsylvania,     3 

960,000 

Loaisiana,  . 

1 

.      19,000,000 

South  Carolina,   1 

900,000 

Maine, 

3 

900,000 

Tennessee,   .       3 

500,000 

Mississippi, 

3 

350.000 

Vermont,             1 

100,000 

New  Jersey, 

4 

550,000 

V 

453 

Af  this  country  advancet  io  population  and  wealth,  a  gradual  in« 
crease  of  banking  capital  and  bank  circulationt  so  long  as  its  medium 
of  exchange  consists  of  bank  paper,  is  proper.  But  when  the  local 
Legislatures,  in  a  single  year,  authorise  an  additional  capital  of 
$30,000,000,  does  it  not  present  a  subject  worthy  of  serious  inquiry^ 
whether,  in  so  doing,  they  are  not  losing  sight  of  some  of  the  soundest 
principles  of  political  economy  ?  Whether  they  have  not  forgotten 
the  evils  lately  experienced  in  this  country,  from  the  failure  of  one 
hundred  and  sixty  or  seventy  banks  ;  and  from  the  great  depreciation 
of  the  bills  of  others,  which,  though  they  did  not  actually  fail,  for  two 
or  three  years  refused  payment  in  specie  ?  May  it  not  also  be  asked* 
whether  they  have  not  forgotten  the  lessons,  which  the  history  of 
banks  of  circulation  in  Europe,  as  well  as  in  this  country,  must  have 
taught  them  T  The  history  of  no  small  part  of  the  banks  of  circuit* 
tion,  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  from  the  Mississippi  scheme  of  Law 
to  Uie  present  time,  is  but  a  melancholy  history  of  their  failures ;  oc- 
casioned, in  no  small  degree,  by  excessive  issues,  to  supply  the  real 
or  artificial  wants  of  the  governments  creating  them. 

It  will  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  celebrated  banks  of  Venice,  Ge- 
noa, Amsterdam,  and  Hamburgh,  were  banks  of  deposit  merely,  and 
not  of  circulation.  Banks  of  the  latter  description  have  succeeded 
best,  and  have  been  most  useful  in  the  British  European  dominiona* 
And  yet  the  banks  in  Ireland  have  shared  a  fate  somewhat  similar,  to 
those  on  the  continent ;  and  their  history  has  been  shortly  told,  by 
Sir  Henry  Parnell.  **The  loss  that  Ireland  has  sustained,"  sayi 
Pamell,  ''  by  the  failure  of  banks,  may  be  described  in  few  words.  It 
appears  by  the  report  of  the  committee  on  Irish  exchange,  in  1804, 
that  there  were  at  that  time,  in  Ireland,  fiAy  registered  banks — fince 
that  year,  a  great  many  more  have  been  established  ;  but  the  whole 
have  failed,  one  aAer  another,  involving  the  country,  from  time  to 
time,  in  extreme  distress,  with  the  following  exceptions :  first,  a  few 
that  withdrew  from  business, — secondly,  four  banks  at  Dublin,  three 
at  Belfast,  and  one  at  Mallow — these  eight  banks,  with  the  new  pro- 
vincial bank  (established  in  1825)  and  the  bank  of  Ireland,  are  the 
only  banks  now  existing  in  Ireland." 

The  safety  and  security  of  the  Scotch  banks,  consists,  in  a  great 
degree,  in  the  comparative  small  amount  of  their  issues ;  being,  aa 
appears,  by  a  previous  statement,  in  18SM,  about  $15,000,000.  And 
yet,  in  the  evidence  before  the  committee  of  Parliament,  appointed 
to  examine  into  the  subject  of  a  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  bank 
of  England,  it  appears  that  even  these  prudent  banks,  were  aomatimea 
dependent  on  the  bank  of  England  to  sustain  them. 


454 

England  has  been,  and  still  is,  the  great  banking  hoase  of  tlie 
world ;  and  yet  with  all  her  wealth,  and  with  all  her  resources,  the 
has,  at  yarious  times,  experienced  great  commercial  distress,  arisiiig 
in  no  small  degree,  from  excessive  issues  and  from  over  trading. 
England  has  bat  one  incorporated  bank,  the  bank  of  England ;  but 
she  has  many  hundred  banking  companies,  consisting  of  yolantaiy 
associations  of  individuals,  not  exceeding  six  in  any  one  association; 
which  issue  notes  called  country  bank  notes,  without  restriction,  ex- 
cept that  none  are  to  be  under  £5,  and  for  the  payment  of  which,  the 
private  property  of  all  concerned  is  holden  ;  and  which  are  also  sub- 
ject to  the  bankrupt  laws  of  that  country.  Many  of  these  banking 
companies,  it  is  well  known,  have,  at  various  times,  failed.  Such  wis 
the  pressure  and  commercial  distress  at  the  commencement  of  1798, 
that  one  hundred  of  these  Country  banks  failed.  This  distress  came 
unexpectedly,  and  was  preceded  by  a  time  of  peculiar  commercial 
prosperity,  and  as  usual,  was  accompanied  with  great  bank  issues,  and 
over  trading.  In  1797,  from  the  pressure  of  the  war  and  other 
causes,  the  bank  of  England,  at  the  request  of  the  government,  de- 
clined paying  its  notes  in  specie  ;  and  it  did  not  again  resume  specie 
payments,  until  1821.  In  the  mean  time,  the  notes  of  this  bank,  al- 
though the  bank  itself  was  identified  with  the  government  and  nation, 
did  suffer  a  considerable  depreciation.  In  1814,  1815,  and  1816,  two 
hundred  and  forty  English  country  banks  stopped  payment;  and 
commissions  of  bankruptcy  issued  against  ninety  two  of  them. 

The  great  pressure  and  panic  in  England,  at  a  much  later  period,  in 
1825,  is  within  the  recollection  of  our  readers ;  and  it  was  fortunate, 
that  the  bank  of  England,  although  its  specie  funds  were  then  low, 
placed  its  credit  upon  high  ground,  by  offering  **  to  loan  money  to 
every  body  on  good  security,''  and  in  one  day,  discounted  commercial 
paper,  to  the  amount  of  £15,000,000  sterling. 

The  United  States  have  had  their  days  of  pecuniary  pressure  and 
distress,  and  will  have  them  again ;  and  the  evils  of  so  great  a  dis- 
proportion between  paper  and  specie  circulation,  as  before  stated,  will 
then  be  severely  felt ;  and  must  end  in  the  failure  of  many  of  the  state 
banks,  and  of  hundreds  of  individuals  connected  with  them. 

The  amount  of  bank  paper  in  England  has  greatly  diminished  since 
the  close  of  the  long  wars  in  Europe ;  and  the  bank  and  specie  circu- 
lation in  that  country,  is,  at  the  present  time,  about  equal.  The  extent 
of  this  diminution  will  appear,  from  the  subjoined  account  of  the 
notes  of  the  bank  of  England,  and  of  the  country  banks  in  circulatioQ, 
in  each  year,  from  1814  to  1829 — 


455 


1814 

1915 

1816 

1817 

1818 

1810 

1820 

1821 

1822 

1823 

1824 

1825 

1826 

1827 

1828 

1829 


Bank  of  Engkod-HBotes. 

£26,901,000 
26,886,000 
26,574,000 
28,274,000 
27,220,000 
25,657,610 
24,553,160 
20,443,320 
18,326,430 
19,582,348 
20,293,326 
19,290,570 
22,255,222 
21,512,491 
21,078,327 


Country  btnki^noiei» 

£22,709,000 

19,011,000 

15,096,000 

15,894,000 

20,507,000 

15,701,338 

10,576,245 

8,256,180 

8,416,830 

9,920.074 

12,831,832 

14,930,168 

8,656,101 

9,985,300 

10,121,476 

8,130,327 


19,640,000 

In  1830,  1831,  and  1833,  the  notes  of  the  bank  of  England  varied 
from  nineteen  to  eighteen  millions  sterling ;  and  those  of  the  country 
banks  were  about  seven  millions.  In  1833,  the  state  of  the  bank 
of  England,  was  as  follows: — circulation,  £19,054,000;  deposits* 
£12,519,000— toUl  liabilities,  £31,573,000— securities,  £23,569,000— 
bullion,  £10,254,000— total  asseu,  £33,823,000. 

From  1810  to  1818,  the  average  circulating  medium  of  England, 
was  estimated — 

In  bank  paper,        £45,229,000  about    $216,000,000 

Specie,    .        .  6,172,000  about        29,625,000 


£51,401,000 
In  1833,  its  circulating  medium,  was 
in  paper  of  the  bank  of  England,      £19,054,000 
^    of  the  country  banks,  7,000,000 


$245,626,000 


£26,054,000 
25,381,000 


•91,469,000 
33,600,000 

$125,000,000 
Specie,  .        .         25,381,000  121,828,000 

£51,435,000  $246,887,000 

The  bank  paper  circulation  of  England,  in  1833,  did  not  exceed 

that  of  the  United  States,  but  about  twenty  seven  and  a  half  millions 

of  dollars. 

From  the  condition  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,  and  the  State 

banks,  on  the  1st  of  January,  1834,  as  presented  in  the  annexed  table, 

it  appears,  that  the  proportion  of  the  paper  of  the  national  bank  to  its 


i    % 


."V 


•       if 


# 


456 

specie,  was  less  than  two  to  one,  and  including  its  deposites  was  about 
three  to  one — and  that  the  proportion  of  the  paper  of  the  State  banks 
to  their  specie,  about  four  and  a  half  to  one,  and  including  their  de- 
posites, about  eight  and  a  half  to  one. 

If  we  add  to  the  specie  supposed  to  be  in  the  vaults  of  all  the  beoks 
of  the  United  States,  the  amount  of  specie  in  circulation,  on  the  first 
of  January,  1834,  estimating  it  at  $12,000,000,  the  metollic  part  of 
the  circulation  will  be  about  $30,000,000,  making  the  whole  circula- 
tion at  that  time,  $137,944,000.  It  will  be  borne  in  mind,  that  in  this 
calculation  we  have  included  the  whole  bank  issues,  without  deduct- 
ing the  bills,  at  that  time  which  lay  idle  in  the  various  banks,  suppo- 
sed to  be  about  $25,000,000,  and  also,  the  whole  of  the  specie  in  their 
vaults,  estimated  at  $27,000,000 — If  these  are  deducted,  it  will  leave 
what  may  be  called  tha^actual  circulation,  about  $85,000,000. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  imports  of  specie,  from  September 
30th,  1833  to  September  30th,  1834,  were  $17,985,910,  while  the  ex- 
ports, during  the  same  time,  were  only  $1,991,459,  leaving  in  the 
country  about  16,000,900.  About  5,000,000  of  this,  went  into  the 
vaults  of  the  national  bank,  and  the  rest  into  those  of  the  state  banks ; 
and  would  vary  the  proportions  between  the  paper  and  specie  of  these 
institutions.  On  the  first  of  January,  1835,  the  specie  in  the  vaults 
of  the  safety  fund  banks  of  the  State  of  New  York,  was  $5,561,745. 

The  charter  of  the  bank  of  England  was  renewed,  on  the  20th  of 
August,  1833,  for  the  term  of  ten  years.  One  of  the  most  important 
new  features  in  it,  is,  that  the  notes  of  the  bank  are  made  a  legal  ten- 
der every  where,  except  at  the  counter  of  the  bank  and  its  branches. 
The  object  of  this  restriction  is,  probably,  to  prevent  a  drain  of  spe- 
cie from  the  vaults  of  the  bank.  It  is  a  new  measure,  and  its  efiects 
on  the  metallic  part  of  the  currency  of  that  country,  may  be  consid- 
ered doubtful.  Other  provisions  of  the  charter  are  that  the  notes 
issued  by  the  branches  of  this  bank,  of  which  it  has  fourteen,  are  to 
be  paid  at  the  places  where  is^tued — the  interest  on  all  notes  or  bills 
of  exchange  discounted,  not  having  more  than  ninety  days  to  ran, 
is  left  free,  and  weekly  returns  of  the  general  state  of  the  bank,  are 
to  be  made  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and  extracts  from 
them  to  be  published  monthly. 

In  a  country  whose  currency  consists  of  bank  paper,  credit  is 
every  thing.  It  is  the  foundation  of  that  medium  of  exchange, 
on  which  every  individual  in  the  community  depends,  not  only 
for  the  fulfilment  of  all  his  contracts,  but  for  the  daily  support  of 
himself  and  family.    The  least  suspicion,  therefore,  respecting  the 


457 

genenl  credit  of  this  paper,  is  felt  like  an  electric  shock,  throughoat 
the  whole  community;  and  while  this  suspicion  continues,  whether 
well  or  ill  founded,  the  whole  business  of  the  country  is  at  a  stand, 
and  cannot  again  be  set  in  motion,  until  confidence  is  restored,  or 
some  other  medium  is  provided.  Thus,  in  1825,  the  bank  of  Eng^ 
land,  by  boldly  furnishing  fifteen  millions  of  its  paper  or  credit  in  a 
single  day,  soon  restored  public  confidence,  and  enabled  the  great  ba* 
siness  of  that  country,  to  take  its  usual  course. 

The  late  removal  of  the  public  deposites,  from  the  vaults  of  the 
bank  of  the  United  States,  produced  a  general  distrust  and  want  of 
confidence,  not  only  in  the  monied  concerns  of  the  banks,  but  of  in* 
dividuals ;  and  for  a  time,  occasioned  such  a  derangement  of  the  greal 
money  transactions,  in  their  infinite  ramifications,  as  to  cause  great 
pecuniary  distress,  throughout  this  extensive  country.  To  a  super- 
ficial observer,  the  cause  appeared  inadequaA  t6  the  efiect ;  not  so,  to 
those  who  had  observed  similar  effects,  even  from  slighter  causes,  in 
commercial  countries,  where  credit  was  the  basis  of  their  various 
monied  operations. 

Had  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  in  Great  Britain,  by  a  royal 
mandate,  removed  the  public  money,  from  the  vaults  of  the  bank  of 
England,  who  can  doubt,  that  it  would  have  produced,  for  a  time  in 
that  counrty,  such  a  distnist,  panic,  and  pecuniary  distress,  aa  it  bad 
never  before  experienced. 

This  subject  has  been  too  ably  developed  by  the  discussions  in  Con- 
gress, and  in  rarious  periodical  and  other  publications  of  the  day, 
to  need  any  further  elucidation  in  this  place.  Some  of  these  publi- 
cations, were  of  a  party  and  ephemeral  character— others,  however, 
were  of  a  different  stamp,  and  proved  that  in  this  country,  as  well  as 
in  others,  credit  was  not  to  be  trifled  with  ;  and  that  it  would  not  here, 
any  more  than  elsewhere,  bear  the  rude  touch  of  arbitrary  power.* 

It  is  Uie  duty  of  those  entrusted  with  the  high  and  important  pow- 
er of  establishing  and  regulating  the  currency  of  a  country,  to  take 
«are  that  its  soundness  and  credit,  should  never  be  suspected. 

The  people  of  the  United  States,  more  than  forty  years  ago,  took 
this  power  from  the  individual  states,  (some  of  which  had  abused  it,  by 
making,  not  only  their  paper  money,  but  even  personal  property,  a 
tender  in  payment  of  debts,)  and  vested  it  in  a  national  legislature; 

*  Among  the  publicatiuns  on  this  subject,  not  of  an  ephemeral  character,  ws 

would  refer  to  the  report  uf  "  the  Union  Committee,"  in  the  city  of  New  Yofk, 

and  to  a  pamphlet,  entitled  "  an  enquiry  into  the  caoses  of  the  public  distrew." 

68 


k.^ 


J^ 


r' 


458 

aod  this  power*  that  legislature  cannot  surrender  hack  again  to  Ae 
states.  But  it  may  he  asked,  whether  it  does  not,  in  some  degroet  at 
least,  surrender  this  power,  to  the  states,  when  it  leaves  to  them  alone 
the  issuii^^  of  a  paper,  which  is  virtually  to  be  the  currency  of  the  eomii* 
try — a  paper,  which,  although  the  general  goyemment,  may  not  be  la* 
gaily  bound  to  receive  in  payment  of  its  revenues,  yet  it  may  be  obliged 
to  receive,  as  in  the  late  war,  or  nothing.  And  surely  no  friend  of  the 
union  can,  for  a  moment,  deem  it  wise  or  prudent  for  the  national 
government  to  be  dependent  on  state  banks  alone,  not  only  for  a  cur* 
rency,  but  for  the  management  of  its  fiscal  concerns,  when  he  reflects, 
that  these  banks  are  under  the  control  of  the  states  themselves ;  and 
ll|atthe  time  may  come,  when  some  of  the  states  may  be  so  hostile  to 
the  general  government,  as  to  prohibit  their  banks  from  thns  acting 
as  its  fiscal  agents. 

If  the  currency  of  thts  country  is  to  consist  of  bank  paper,  this 
paper  should  be  issued  under  the  authority  of  the  national  government, 
and  under  such  regulations  as  it  may  prescribe ;  and  so  as  to  ensure 
its  soundness  and  credit.  To  do  this,  it  should  take  care  that  the 
issues  never  exceed  the  necessary  circulation  of  the  country,  and  be 
always  convertible  into  he  universal  standard  of  value.  Tooke  veij 
wisely  said,  *'  It  is  the  business  of  a  bank,  that  administers  a  paper 
currency,  to  have  no  other  end  in  view,  than  that  of  preserving  its 
paper,  strictly^  correctly  and  invariably y  upon  a  level  with  the  value 
of  gold ;  and  any  assistance  to  trade^  or  any  assistance  to  gotern' 
mentf  involving  an  increase  of  issues  not  called  for,  by  the  v?ants  of 
circulation,  is  a  departure  from  the  legitimate  objects  of  the  insti- 
tution." 

The  **  wants  of  circulation"  here  given  as  the  invariable  rule  for 
issues  of  bank  paper,  vary  with  the  business  of  a  country,  and  with 
the  activity  of  that  business — and,  therefore,  it  may  be,  and  no  doubt 
is,  at  times,  difficult  even  for  the  wisest  bankers  to  ascertain  these 
wants  so  correctly,  as  not  to  be  in  danger  from  over  issues. 

And  if  it  is  difiicult  for  the  Barings  and  the  Rothschilds  always  to 
ascertain  the  wants  of  circulation  so  as  to  avoid  the  evils  of  over  issues; 
what  can  be  expected,  on  this  difficult  part  of  banking  business,  from 
the  directors  of  five  hundred  different  banks,  and  perhaps  of  five 
hundred  more  to  arise  hereafter— especially  when  it  is  considered, 
that  these  directors  are  appointed,  not  to  regulate  the  currency,  but 
to  regulate  the  amount  of  dividends  ? 

'While  the  general  government  manages  ils  fiscal  concerns  through 
a  bank  of  its  own  creation,  it  has  little  to  do  with  the  bills  of  state 


4S9 

banks,  as  a  currency.  If  the  national  bank  receive  these  bills  in  pay- 
ment of  the  revenues  of  the  government,  it  receives  them  at  its  own 
risk ;  and  of  course  will  keep  a  vigilant  eye  upon  the  operations  of 
the  state  institutions ;  and  see,  that  no  bills,  b^t  those  of  sound  banks, 
find  their  way  into  its  vaults.  This  interested  vigilance,  on  the  part 
of  the  national  bank,  will  do  more  to  prevent  over  issues  by  the  state 
banks,  than  all  the  vigilance  of  the  treasury  department  It  should 
be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  state  banks,  also,  have  an  interest  in 
watching  the  operations  of  the  national  bank,  and  thus  both  become 
salutary  checks  upon  each  other — In  addition  to  this,  Congress  can, 
at  any  time,  refuse  to  take  the  bills  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States, 
and  this  is  an  effective  check  against  excessive  issues  of  that  inatita*. 
tion.  And  it  has  been  owing  to  these  mutual  and  salutary  chedOfi 
that  the  currency  of  this  country,  though  consisting  of  the  notes  of 
so  many  various  banks,  has  been  kept  so  miiform  and  sound  since 
1817 ;  and  is  the  only  probable  way,  by  which  the  same  kind  of  cur- 
rency, can  be  preserved  uniform  and  sound  in  future. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  United  States  established  a  mint, 
in  1702.  From  that  period  to  January  1st,  1829,  the  coinage  of 
gold  amounted  to  9S,395,812  60,  of  silver  to  822,271,499  90,  and  of 
copper  $639,512  98(,  making  in  the  whole  $32,206,825  38^. 

The  annual  coinage  since  that  period  has  been  from  three  to  four 
millions,  until  1834,  when  it  amounted  to  $7,388,432,  being 

Gold, $3,954,270 

Silver 3,415,002 

Copper, 19,161 

$7,388,423 

This  increase  in  the  coinage  in  1834,  was  occasioned,  principally  by 
an  act  of  Congress  passed  in  the  summer  of  that  year,  raising  the  val- 
ue of  gold,  in  consequence  of  which  more  than  one  million  of  the  gold 
in  the  United  States  was  re-coined,  $898,000  from  the  gold  region  of 
this  country,  and  $2,180,000  of  gold  from  Europe. 

The  American  gold  coined  at  the  mint,  from  1824  to  1831  inclusive, 
was  $3,679,000 ;  and  was  procured  in  the  following  states — 

Virginia, $252,500 

North  Carolina,      .  •  2,054,000    . 

South  Carolina, 200,500 

Georgia, 1,169,000 

Tennessee,  12,000 

Alabama, 1,000 

$3,679,000 


li 

||PJjjiJiJ.I58SiPMIi§ig||  IS  1 
Ililllilllllllilllp-IP^PI  l|  1 

s 

1 

Ijipjgip.iijssiijpiiiiiii 

III 

1" 

16  i 

m 

n 
■11 


II 


JiKl3SJJ.slil.?s|ass.|si|ISg.l, 


ssasEssss; 


'Hslii5ll5Sspiiiili||s|i 


ns 


111 


i 
III 


2'     i  ' 

S  SB 


Haft's     -S=  f-sl>,^>,^=°t'°--^-^<2^     «£ 


461 


CHAPTER  XL 

The  British  jealous  of  the  manufactures  of  the  colonists — Prohi|)it  the  exportation 
of  woollens  from  their  American  plantation!»  in  1G90,  and  aAerwards  forbid 
c'ertain  manufactures  benif,'  carried  ou  there — Slate  of  the  colonial  manafactures 
in  1731— State  of  manufactures  during  the  war  of  the  revolntion,  and  to  the 
time  of  the  ailoption  of  the  present  constitution — First  Congren  under  the 
constitution  lay  duties  with  a  view  to  encourage   manufactures — Report  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  on  the  subject — British  government  desirous     • 
of  limiting  these  duties — Wars  in  Europe  prevented  much  attention  to  manv^ 
factures  in  the  United  States  until  1H09 — Marshals  directed  to  take  an  accflii^- 
of  American  manufactures — These  accounts  imperfect— New  manufactintV*^ 
established  during  the  war  of  181:2 — Their  depressed  state  after  the  return  of 
peace,  in  consequence  of  large  importations — Encouraged  by  the  tarifis  of 
1H16,  1H*J4,  and  18*J8 — Constitutionality  of  these  acts  called  in  question — Are 
modified  by  subsequent  act^ — Progress  of  manufactures  since  ltil5^Amount  of 
foreign  goods  consumed  in  the  United  States — Estimate  of  the  amount  of  the 
domestic  manufactures  of  cotton,  wool,  iron,  leather,  d:c.  dec.  in  1833 — Com- 
parative view  of  the  consumption  of  foreij^  and  domestic  goods — First  Con- 
gress in  the  tarilTof  July,  1789,  encourage  domestic  manufactures— The  people 
petition  that  body  in  17S9,  to  afford  such  protection — Principles  of  the  report  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasur}' on  manufactures,  made  to  Congress  in  1791 — 
DifTerent  situation  of  particular  sections  of  the  Union,  as  to  foreign  markets 
for  their  different  productions — Views  of  British  statesmen  and  economists,  in 
rclati'.>n  to  the  American  policy  of  encouraging  manufactures — New  England 
originally  oppascd  to  the  tarid*  acts — Extent  of  the  manufactures  at  Lowell* 

In  presenting  the  fullowing  sketches  of  the  manufactares  of  the 
United  States  at  the  present  time,  and  of  their  increase  during  the 
period  under  review,  wc  cannot  but  call  tho  attention  of  the  reader  to 
the  state  of  manufactures  in  this  coantr}',  prior  to  the  revolution. 
The  North  American  colonists,  it  is  well  known,  were  in  bondage  to 
the  parent  State,  in  regard  to  manufactures  as  well  as  commerce. 

No  soonor  had  they  commenced  some  coarse  woollen  fabrics  for 
themselves,  than  the  jealousy  of  English  manufacturers  of  the  same 
kind  of  fabrics  was  excited,  lest  they  should  not  only  supply  them- 
selves with  woollens,  but  also  foreign  nations;  and  as  early  as  1009, 
Parliament  declared,  **  that  no  wool,  yarn,  or  woollen  manufactures 

m 

of  their  American  plantations,  should  be  shipped  there,  or  even  laden, 
in  order  to  be  trans|)orted  from  thence  to  any  place  whatever.** 

In  1710,  tfie  house  of  commons  also  declared,  *'that  the  erecting 
manufactories  in  the  colonies,  tended  to  lessen  their  dependence  upon 
Great  Britain.** 


i 


462 

While  the  colonies  were  increasing  in  papulation,  and  endeaToring 
to  secure  to  themselves  the  benefits  of  their  own  labor,  complainlfl 
were  constantly  made  to  Parliament,  by  interested  individuals,  that 
the  colonists  were  not  only  carrying  on  trade^  but  were  setting  op 
Tnunufacturesy  detrimental  to  Great  Britain.  These  complaints  pro- 
duced an  order  of  the  house  of  commons,  in  1731,  directing  the 
board  of  trade  to  inquire  and  report,  **  with  respect  to  laws  made, 
manufactures  set  up,  or  trade  carried  on,  detrimental  to  the  trader 
navigation,  or  manufactures  of  Great  Britain.^' 

As  the  report  of  the  board  made,  in  pursuance  of  this  order,  in 
February,  1731-2,  contains  the  best  account  that  has  fallen  within  oar 
notice,  of  the  situation  of  manufactures  in  the  colonies  at  that  period, 
\nd  discloses  the  policy  of  the  parent  country  on  this  subject,  we 
shall  present  to  the  reader  some  extracts.  **The  following  com- 
plaints'' the  board  says,  *'  have  been  lately  made,  against  some  plan- 
tation laws,  viz. — in  Massachusetts  Bay,  an  act  was  made  to  encourage 
the  manufacture  of  paper,  which  law  interferes  with  the  profit  made 
by  the  British  merchant,  on  foreign  paper  sent  thither." 

**  In  New  England,  New  York,  Connecticut,  Rhode  Island,  Penn- 
sylvania, and  in  the  county  of  Somerset  in  Maryland,  they  have  fallen 
into  the  manufacture  of  woollen  cloth  and  linen  cloth,  for  the  use  of 
their  own  families'  only;  for  the  product  of  these  colonies  being 
chiefly  cattle  and  grain,  the  estates  of  the  inhabitants  depended 
wholly  on  farming,  which  could  not  be  managed  without  a  certain 
quantity  of  sheep ;  and  their  wool  would  be  entirely  lost,  were  not 
their  servants  employed  during  the  winter,  in  manufacturing  it  for 
the  use  of  their  families.^' 

**  Flax  and  hemp  being  likewise  easily  raised,  the  inhabitants  manu- 
factured them  into  a  coarse  sort  of  cloth,  bags,  traces  and  halters  for 
their  horses,  which  they  found  did  more  service  than  those  they  had 
from  any  part  of  Europe." 

**  However,  the  high  price  of  labor  in  general  in  America,  rendered 
it  impracticable  for  people  there  to  manufacture  their  linen  cloth  at 
less  than  twenty  per  cent,  more  than  the  rate  in  England,  or  woollen 
cloth  at  less  than  fifty  per  cent,  dearer,  than  that  which  is  exported 
from  home  for  sale.  It  were  to  be  wished,  that  some  expedient  might 
be  fallen  upon,  to  direct  their  thoughts  from  undertakings  of  this  na- 
ture ;  so  much  the  rather,  because  these  manufactures,  in  process  of 
time,  may  be  carried  on  in  greater  degree,  unless  an  early  stop  be 
put  to  their  progress,  by  employing  them  in  naval  stores.  Where- 
fore we  take  leave  to  renew  our  repeated  proposals,  that  reasonable 


463 

encoaragemeni  be  given  to  the  same.  Moreover,  we  find  that  certain 
trades  carried  on,  and  manufactures  set  up  there^  are  detrimental  to 
the  trade,  navigation  and  manufactures  of  Great  Britain.  For  the 
state  of  these  plantations  varying  almost  every  year,  more  or  less  so 
in  their  trade  and  manufactures,  as  well  as  in  other  particulars,  we 
thought  it  necessary  for  his  Majesty's  service,  and  for  the  discharge 
of  our  trust,  from  time  to  time  to  send  general  queries  to  the  several 
(Governors  in  America,  that  we  might  be  the  more  exactly  informed 
of  the  condition  of  the  plantations,  among  which  there  were  several 
that  related  to  their  trade  and  manufactures,  to  which  we  received  the 
following  returns,  viz. — The  Governor  of  New  Hampshire,  in  his  an* 
swer  said,  that  there  were  no  settled  manufactures  in  that  provincet 
and  that  their  trade  principally  consisted  in  lumber  and  fish." 

**  The  Gvovernor  of  Massachusetts  Day  informed  us,  that  in  some 
parts  of  this  province,  the  inhabitants  worked  up  their  wool  and  flax 
into  an  ordinary  coarse  cloth  for  their  own  use,  but  did  not  export  any. 
That  the  greatest  part  of  the  woollen  and  linen  clothing,  worn  in  this 
province,  was  imported  from  Great  Britain,  and  sometimes  from  Ire- 
land; but  considering  the  excessive  price  of  labor  in  New  England, 
the  merchant  could  aflbrd  what  was  imported  cheaper  than  what  was 
made  in  the  country.  There  were,  also,  a  few  hat  makers  in  the  mari- 
time towns,  and  that  the  greater  part  of  the  leather  used  in  that  coun- 
try, was  manufactured  among  themselves.  That  there  had  been  for 
many  years,  some  iron  works  in  that  province,  which  had  afierded 
the  people  iron  for  some  of  their  necessary  occasions ;  but  thailht 
iron  imported  from  Great  Britain  was  esteemed  much  the  best,  and 
wholly  used  by  the  shipping ;  and  that  the  iron  works  of  the  prov- 
ince were  not  able  to  supply  the  twentieth  part  of  what  was  necessary 
for  the  use  of  the  country.'^ 

**  They  had  no  manufactures  in  the  province  of  New  York,  thai 
deserve  mentioning ;  their  trade  consisted  chiefly  in  furs,  whalebone, 
oil,  pitch,  Ur,  and  provisions.  No  manufactures  in  New  Jersey  that 
deserve  mentioning ;  their  trade  being  chiefly  in  provisions  shipped 
from  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.  The  chief  trade  of  Pennsylvaniat 
lay  in  their  exportation  of  provisions  and  lumber ;  no  manofactaref 
being  established,  and  their  clothing  and  utensils  for  their  houses 
being  all  imported  from  Great  Britain.  By  further  advices  from  New 
Hampshire,  the  woollen  manufacture  appears  to  have  decreased ;  the 
common  lands  on  which  the  sheep  used  to  feed,  being  now  appropria- 
ted, and  the  people  almost  wholly  clothed  with  woollen  from  Great 
Britain.    The  manufactures  of  flax  into  linens,  some  coarse  and  aoiiie 


/ 


464 

fine,  daily  increased  by  the  great  resort  of  people  from  Ireland  thitheTf 
who  are  well  skilled  in  that  business.  By  late  accounts  from  Maoa- 
chusetts  Bay,  in  New  England,  the  assembly  have  voted  a  bounty  of 
thirty  shilling^  for  every  piece  of  duck  or  canvass  made  in  the  prov- 
ince.  Some  other  manufactures  are  carried  on  there,  as  brown 
holland,  for  womcns  wear,  which  lessens  the  importation  of  calicoes, 
and  some  other  sorts  of  East  India  goods.  They  also  make  some 
small  quantities  of  cloth,  made  of  linen  and  cotton  for  ordinary  shirt- 
ing. By  a  paper  mill  set  up  three  years  ago,  they  make  to  the  yaloe 
of  £200  sterling,  yearly.  There  are  also,  several  forges  for  making 
bar  iron,  and .  some  furnaces  for  cast  iron  or  hollow  ware,  and  one 
slitting  mill,  and  a  manufacture  for  nails.  The  Governor  writes  con- 
cerning the  woollen  manufacture,  that  the  country  people,  who  used 
to  make  most  of  their  clothing  out  of  their  own  wool,  <do  not  now 
make  a  third  part  of  what  they  wear,  but  are  mostly  clothed  with 
British  manufacture.  The  Surveyor  General  of  his  Majesty^s  woods 
writes,  that  they  have  in  New  England,  six  furnaces  and  nineteen 
forges,  for  making  iron ;  and  that  in  this  province,  many  ships  are 
built  for  the  French  and  Spaniards,  in  return  for  rum,  molasses, 
wines,  and  silks,  which  they  truck  there  by  connivance.  Great  quan- 
tities of  hats  are  made  in  New  England,  of  which  the  company  of  hat- 
ers in  London  have  complained  to  ua,  that  great  quantities  of  these 
hats  are  exported  to  Spain,  Portugal,  and  our  West  India  Islands. 
TKtf  also  make  all  sorts  of  iron  for  shipping.  There  are  several 
Wflt  bouses  and  sugar  bakers  established  in  New  England." 

**  By  the  last  advices  from  New  York,  there  are  no  manufactures 
there  that  can  affect  Great  Britain.  There  is  yearly  imported  into 
New  York,  a  very  large  quantity  of  the  woollen  manufactures  of  this 
kingdom,  for  their  clothing,  which  they  would  be  rendered  incapable 
to  pay  for,  and  would  be  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  making  for 
themselves,  if  they  were  prohibited  from  receiving  from  the  foreign 
sugar  colonies,  tlie  money,  rum,  molasses,  cocoa,  indigo,  cotton,  wool, 
6lc.  which  they  at  present  take  in  return  (or  provisions,  horses,  and 
Inmber,  the  produce  of  that  province  and  of  New  Jersey,  of  which 
he  affirms  the  British  colonies  do  not  take  off  above  one  half.  But 
the  company  of  hatters  of  London  have  since  informed  us  that  hats 
are  manufactured  in  great  quantities  in  this  province.^ 

**  By  the  last  letters  from  the  Deputy  Governor  of  Pennsylvania, 
he  does  not  know  of  any  trade  carried  on  in  that  province,  that  can 
be  considered  injurious  to  this  kingdom.  They  do  not  export  anjr 
woollen  or  linen  manufactures ;  all  that  they  make  which  are  of  n 


406 

eotfie  sort,  being  for  their  own  use.  We  tre  further  informedt  that 
in  this  province,  are  built  many  brigantines,  and  small  sloops,  which 
they  sell  to  the  West  Indies." 

**  The  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  informs  us,  in  answer  to  our 
queries,  that  there  are  iron  mines  there,  but  not  a  fourth  part  enough 
to  serve  their  own  use ;  but  he  takes  no  notice  of  any  manufactures 
there.  No  returns  from  the  Governor  of  Connecticut  But  we  find« 
by  some  accounts,  that  the  produce  of  this  colony  is  timber,  boards, 
all  sorts  of  English  grain,  hemp,  flax,  sheep,  black  cattle,  swinCy 
horses,  goats,  and  tobacco.  That  they  export  horses  and  lumber  to 
the  West  Indies,  and  receive  in  return,  sugar,  salt,  molasses  and  mm* 
We  likewise  find,  that  their  manufactures  are  very  inconsiderable ; 
the  people  there  being  generally  employed  in  tillage,  some  few  in 
tanning,  shoe  making,  and  other  handicrafts ;  others  in  buildingt  and 
in  joiner's,  tailor's,  and  smith's  work,  without  which  they  could  not 
subsist  No  report  b  made  from  Carolina,  the  Bahama,  or  the  Ber* 
muda  Isles." 

In  conclusion  the  board  say :  *'  From  the  foregoing  state  it  is  ob- 
servable, that  there  are  more  trades  carried  on,  and  manufactures  set 
up  in  the  provinces,  on  the  continent  of  America,  to  the  northward  of 
Virginia,  prejudicial  to  the  trade  and  manufactures  of  Great  Britaiot 
particularly  in  New  England,  than  in  any  other  of  the  British  colo* 
nies ;  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  their  soil,  climate  and  pro- 
duce, being  pretty  nearly  the  same  with  ours ;  they  have  no  Mpfk 
commodities  of  their  own  growth  to  exchange  for  our  manu(lMltorils» 
which  puts  them  under  greater  necessity,  as  well  as  under  greater 
temptations,  for  providing  for  themselves  at  home ;  to  which  may  be 
added,  in  the  charter  governments,  the  little  dependence  they  have 
upon  the  mother  country,  and  consequently  the  small  restraint  they 
are  under,  in  any  matters  detrimental  to  her  interests.  And  there- 
fore, wc  humbly  beg  leave  to  repeat  and  submit  to  the  wisdom  of  this 
honorable  House,  the  substance  of  what  we  formerly  proposed  in  our 
report  on  the  silk,  lineoy  and  woollen  manufactures,  herein  bofore 
recited,  namely — whether  it  might  not  be  expedient  to  give  these  col- 
onics proper  encouragement  for  turning  their  industry  to  such  manu- 
factures and  products,  as  might  be  of  service  to  Great  Britain,  and 
more  partiuclarly  to  the  production  of  all  kinds  of  naval  stores.*** 

The  complaints  of  the  London  company  of  hatters,  did  not  pats 
unheeded  by  Parliament     Immediately  after  this  report,  an  act 


•  Macphtrson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  3. 

69 


/ 


466 

pMsed  (5  George  II,  1732,)  «*  to  prevent  the  exportation  of  hato  ovc 
^\  of  any  of  his  Majesty's  colonies  or  plantations  in  America,  and  to  re- 

strain the  number  of  apprentices  taken  by  the  hat  makers,  in  the  nid 
colonies  or  plantations,  and  for  the  better  encouraging  the  making  of 
hate  in  Great  Britain.'*  By  this  extraordinary  act,  not  only  was  the 
exportation  of  colonial  hats  to  a  foreign  port  prohibited,  but  their 
transportation  from  one  British  plantation  to  another  British  planta- 
tion, was  also  prohibited,  under  severe  penalties ;  nor  could  they 
«^  be  laden  upon  any  horse,  cart,  or  other  carriage,  to  the  intent  or 
purpose  to  be  exported,  transported,  shipped  off,  Slc, — and  no  peraon 
was  allowed  to  make  hats,  unless  he  bad  served  an  apprenticeship  for 
seven  years,  nor  could  he  have  more  than  two  apprentices  at  one 
time ;  and  no  black  or  negro  was  permitted  to  work  at  the  business 
of  making  hats." 

The  manufacturers  of  iron  next  claimed  their  share  in  the  bcnefili 
to  be  derived  from  the  colonies.  They  were  willing  the  poor  colo- 
nists should  reduce  the  iron  ore  with  which  their  lands  abounded, 
iilto  pigs  and  even  bar  iron,  provided  they  could  monopolize  the 
manufacture  of  it,  beyond  this  incipient  stage.  In  1750,  therefore. 
Parliament  permitted  pigs  and  bar  iron  to  be  imported  from  the  colo- 
nies into  London,  duty  free  ;  but  prohibited  the  erection  or  continu- 
ance of  any  mill,  or  other  engine  for  slitting  or  rolling  iron,  or  any 
plating  forge,  to  work  with  a  tilt  hammer,  or  any  furnace  for  making 
«(ee£in  the  colonies,  under  the  penalty  of  two  hundred  pounds.  And 
every  such  mill,  engine,  forge  or  furnace,  was  declared  a  common 
nuisance ;  and  the  colonial  Governors,  on  the  information  of  two 
witnesses  on  oath,  were  ordered  to  cause  the  same  to  be  abated  with- 
in thirty  days,  or  to  forfeit  the  sum  of  £500. 

The  various  acts  of  the  parent  country,  restraining  the  manufac- 
tures, as  well  as  the  commerce  of  the  colonists,  were  considercni  by 
the  latter  as  extremely  oppressive  and  injurious,  and  some  of  them, 
as  a  violation  of  their  rights ;  and  were  regarded  no  farther,  than  was 
necessary  to  prevent  an  open  rupture. 

If  the  colonists  were  indeed  English  subjects,  entitled  to  all  the 
privileges  of  their  fellow  subjects  in  Great  Britain,  they  could  not 
see,  why  they  should  be  placed  on  a  footing  so  different — why  they 
should  not  be  permitted  equally  with  those  in  England,  to  seek  the 
best  market  for  their  produce — why  subjects  in  America,  should  not 
be  suffered  to  manufacture  the  iron  found  in  their  own  lands,  to  such 
an  extent,  and  in  such  a  manner,  as  they  might  think  proper. 


467 

Nor  could  the  mannfacturen  of  hats  in  Boston,  New  York  and 
Philadelphia,  be  very  easily  induced  to  believey  they  had  not  an  equal 
right  to  employ  as  many  apprentices,  as  those  of  London,  Bristol  or 
Liverpool. 

During  the  war  of  the  revolution,  the  Americans  eondnued  and  in- 
creased their  household  manufactures ;  and  as  far  as  possible  introdu- 
ced the  manufacture  of  various  articles  necessary  for  their  defence. 

From  the  peace  of  1783,  to  the  commencement  of  the  present  na- 
tional government,  some  attempts  were  made  to  introduce  new  man- 
ufactures, but  generally,  in  consequence  of  the  weakness  and  ineffi- 
ciency of  the  government,  without  success.  The  power  to  coun- 
teract the  restrictions  of  foreign  nations,  unfavorable  to  American 
manufactures,  as  well  as  commerce,  was  withheld  from  Congress  un- 
der the  confederation  ;  and  the  want  of  unanimity  and  co-operationt 
prevented  this  from  being  done,  by  the  states  themselves.  Indeed, 
until  the  adoption  of  the  present  constitution,  the  United  States  were 
a  nation  in  name  only,  being  utterly  powerless,  as  to  the  great  objects, 
for  the  attainment  of  which,  the  revolution  had  been  undertaken  and 
accomplished. 

One  of  the  objects,  which  claimed  the  attention  of  the  first  Con- 
gress, under  the  new  form  of  government,  was  the  encourage- 
ment and  protection  of  the  manufacturing,  as  well  as  the  commercial 
interests  of  the  country.  In  laying  duties  on  imports  in  July,  1789, 
Congress  had  reference,  as  the  preamble  of  the  act  imposing  them 
declares,  to  **  the  encouragement  and  protection  of  manufacture^^'* 
This  was,  also,  openly  avowed,  on  the  floor  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, in  the  debates  on  the  first  tarifif,  established  by  the  general 
government. 

The  first  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  (Hamilton,)  whose  powerful 
mind  seemed  intuitively,  fully  to  comprehend  every  subject,  to  which 
it  bent  its  force,  was  the  great  advocate  of  American  manufactures. 

In  his  celebrated  report  on  this  subject,  presented  to  the  House  of 
Representatives,  in  Jaimary,  1791,  every  argument  was  urged,  and 
we  may  truly  add,  exhausted,  in  favor  of  the  policy  and  expedien- 
cy of  protecting  and  encouraging  this  branch  of  domestic  economy. 

The  constitutional  power  of  Congress,  to  afford  such  encourage- 
ment, was  not  at  that  time,  nor  for  a  long  time  after,  questioned  by 
any  one.  Tu  the  principles  contained  in  this  report,  as  well  as  to  the 
proceedings  of  Congress,  in  relation  to  the  first  tarifif,  we  shall  here- 
alier,  more  particularly  refer,  when  considering  the  constitutional 
question  lately  started  on  this  subject 


468 


Some  braoches  of  domestic  manufacture,  had,  at  that  time*  made 
such  progress,  as,  in  a  great  measure,  to  supply  the  home  market 
Among  these  the  Secretary  mentions  those  of  skins  and  leather,  iron, 
wood,  flax  and  hemp,  bricks,  coarse  tiles  and  potters  ware,  ardent 
spirits  and  malt  liquors,  writing  and  printing  paper,  sheathing  and 
wrapping  paper,  press  paper  and  paper  hangings,  hats,  women's  atoff 
and  silk  shoes,  refined  sugar,  oils  of  animals  and  seeds,  soap,  sperm- 
aceti and  tallow  candles,  copper  and  brass  wares,  particularly  for 
distilleries,  sugar  refiners  and  brewers,  andirons  and  other  utensila 
for  househdd  use,  philosophical  apparatus,  tin  wares  for  most 
purposes  of  ordinary  use,  carriages  of  all  kinds,  snuff,  chewing  and 
smoking  tobacco,  lamp  black,  and  other  painter's  colors  and  gun  pow- 
der. These  articles  were  made  in  manufactories,  by  the  way  of  reg- 
ular trades.  In  addition  to  these,  great  quantities  of  cloths  of  wool, 
cotton  and  fiax,  or  mixtures  of  them,  were  made  in  families,  in  every 
part  of  the  country ;  and  to  such  extent,  as  the  Secretary  says,  in  some 
districts,  as  to  supply  two  thirds,  three  fourths,  and  even  four  fiAka  of 
the  clothing  of  the  inhabitants. 

At  the  date  of  this  report,  establishments  for  the  manufacture  of 
cotton  and  wool  had  commenced  in  Rhode  Island,  Massachusetts  and 
Connecticut ;  and  a  company,  with  half  a  million  capital,  had  been 
formed,  for  a  cotton  establishment  at  Patterson,  in  New  Jersey,  and 
afterwards  commenced  business  at  that  place.  The  first  cotton  Vic- 
tory in  the  United  States,  was  established  at  Providence,  by  Almy 
and  Brown,  and  Mr.  Samuel  Slater,  a  cotton  manufacturer  from 
England.  Mr.  Slater  was,  indeed,  the  father  of  the  cotton  manufac- 
tures in  this  country ;  and  the  United  States  owe  much  to  his  skill 
and  perseverance  in  this  branch  of  domestic  industry.  This  distin- 
gruished  manufacturer,  has  ever  since  continued,  and  still  continues  to 
carry  on  the  same  business ;  and  we  are  happy,  in  being  able  to  say, 
that  his  industrious  and  persevering  efforts  have  proved  advantageous 
to  himself,  as  well  as  to  his  adopted  country. 

A  cotton  manufactory  was,  also,  established  at  Beverly,  in  Massa- 
chusetts, in  1789  or  1790,  by  a  number  of  patriotic  gentlemen  of  that 
town,  aided  by  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts. 

We  had  an  opportunity  of  visiting  both  these  establishments,  in 
the  summer  of  1790,  and  the  articles  then  made  in  them,  were  prin- 
cipally corduroys,  fustians  and  jeans. 

About  the  same  time,  a  woollen  factory  was  established  at  Hart- 
ford, in  Connecticut,  under  the  patronage  of  Ck)l.  Jeremiah  Wads- 
worth,  a  gentleman  whose  patriotic  and  active  efforts  were  alwaya 
directed  to  the  promoti<H>  of  the  best  interests  of  his.  country. 


469 

PrMident  Wuhington  delivered  hi«  speech  to  Congrew,  in  Janua- 
ry, 1790»  dressed  in  a  suit  of  broadcloth  from  this  factory,  presented 
by  its  owners. 

The  protection  and  patronage  thus  given  to  American  roanufae- 
tures,  by  the  government,  and  by  individuals,  would,  no  doubt,  have 
ensured  their  success  and  rapid  increase,  at  that  period,  had  not  a  new 
state  of  things  soon  after  arose  in  Europe,  which  necessarily  turned 
the  attention  of  the  Americans  to  agriculture  and  commerce.  The 
encouragement  afforded  to  American  manufactures,  by  the  national 
legislature,  in  the  tariff  of  July,  1780,  did  not  escape  tlras  notice  of 
British  statesmen ;  and  we  beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  read- 
er, to  the  celebrated  report  of  the  committee  of  the  board  of  trade 
in  1791,  to  which  we  before  alluded,  when  on  the  subject  of  the  Weil 
India  trade ;  and  which,  also,  had  special  reference  to  this  subject* 
Although,  in  this  report,  it  is  acknowledged,  that  the  United  States, 
have  full  right  to  impose  duties,  **  either  for  the  purpose  of  raising  t 
revenue,  or  of  encouraging  the  produce  or  manufactures  of  ikeir 
territories^^*  yet  the  committee  discover  no  little  anxiety,  to  prevent 
the  increase  of  those  duties,  to  such  an  extent,  as  to  interfere  with 
the  introduction  and  consumption  of  British  manfactures  in  the  United 
States. 

To  prevent  this,  the  committee  recommended,  that,  in  the  negocia- 
tions  for  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  United  States,  then  contem- 
plated, two  propositions  should  be  made,  on  the  part  of  the  BriCiah 
government,  in  relation  to  this  subjecL  The  first  was,  **  That  the 
duties  on  British  manufactures,  imported  into  the  United  States,  shaU 
not  be  raised  above  what  they  are  at  present,*'  (1791.) 

'*  It  may  be  of  use,'*  the  committee  say,  *^  to  bind  the  United  States 
not  to  raise  those  duties  above  what  they  are,  at  present^  by  obtain- 
ing an  express  stipulation  for  this  purpose ;  but,  if  this  concession 
cannot  be  obtained,  it  may  be  sufficient,  perhaps,  to  stipulate,  that  the 
duties  on  British  manufactures  should  not,  at  any  time^  be  raised 
above  the  duties  now  pajrable  on  the  like  manufactures  imported  from 
Great  Britain  into  France  and  Holland,  according  to  the  commercial 
treaties  with  those  powers.** 

The  second  proposition  was,  "  that  the  duties  on  all  other  merehan- 
dize,  whether  British  or  foreign,  imported  from  Great  Britain  into 
the  United  States,  shall  not  be  raised  higher,  at  any  lime,  than  on  the 
like    merchandize    imported    from  any  other  European  nation.*** 


•  AchesoD,  p.  114  sad  115. 


These  propositioDs  evince  a  solicitude  on  the  part  of  the  British  gor- 
ernmenty  not  only  to  secure  the  consumption  of  British  manufactures 
in  the  United  States ;  but  also,  to  secure,  for  British  shipping,  the  cai- 
riage  of  foreign  articles^  on  equal  terms,  with  other  nations. 

The  wars  in  Europe  prevented  the  urging  of  these  propositions ; 
and  little  attention  was  paid  to  manufactures  in  the  United  States, 
from  1793,  until  1807,  when,  in  consequence  of  the  embargo  and  the 
restrictive  system,  the  Americans  found  themselves  deprived  of  many 
necessary  articles  previously  obtained  from  foreign  nations.  This 
naturally.,)^  them  to  inquire,  into  the  state  of  manufactures  in  their 
own  country,  and  as  to  the  best  mode  of  encouraging  them. 

In  1809,  the  House  of  Representatives,  at  Washington,  not  only 
ordered  the  re-printing  of  Hamilton's  report  on  manufactures,  before 
mentioned,  but  directed  the  then  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  (Mr. 
Gallatin,)  to  collect  information  with  respect  to  the  various  manuiac- 
tures  of  the  United  States,  and  to  report  the  same,  "  together  with  a 
plan  best  calculated  to  protect  and  promote  them.'' 

The  information  collected  by  the  Secretary,  although,  as  he  says, 
**  in  general  partial  and  defective,"  was  communicated  to  the  House 
in  April,  1810.  In  consequence  of  this  deficiency,  the  Secretary  rec- 
ommended a  provision  for  obtaining  more  detailed  and  correct  inform 
mation  on  the  subject,  by  the  marshals,  who  were  to  take  the  census, 
in  the  course  of  that  year.  In  pursuance  of  this  recommendation, 
the  marshals,  and  their  assistants  were  directed,  at  the  time  of  taking 
the  census,  ''to  take,  under  the  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  tlie 
Treasury,  and  according  to  such  instructions  as  he  shall  give,  an  ac- 
count of  the  several  manufacturing  establishments  and  manu£ictures 
within  their  several  districts,  territories  and  divisions.'* 

Perfect  and  complete  returns  of  the  various  manufactores  of  this 
extensive  country,  could  not  be  expected,  within  the  time  limited  for 
the  return  of  the  census. 

The  returns  from  Pennsylvania,  Connecticut,  Massachusetts,  New 
York,  and  Virginia,  were  the  most  prefect,  though  in  many  respects 
deficient  From  these  returns,  defective  as  they  were,  an  estim- 
ate or  digest  of  the  value  of  the  manufactures  of  the  United  States, 
at  that  period,  was  made  by  a  gentleman,*  selected  for  that  purpose, 
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  was  as  follows,  viz : — 

•  Tench  Coxe,  of  Philadelphia. 


$30,497,067 
2,062,180 


1.  Goods  maDtifmctiiTed  by  the  loom,  from  cotton^  wooI» 
hemp,  flax  and  silk,  including  stockings,   . 

2.  Other  goods  spun  from  the  fine  materials  above 
enumerated,  .  .  .  •  • 

3.  Instruments  and  machinery  manufactured,  estimated 
at  $186,000,  carding,  fulling  and  door  cloth  staining 
by  machinery,  estimated  at  95,967,816, 

4.  Hats  of  wool,  fur,  dtc*  and  from  mixtures  thereof, 

5.  Manufactures  of  iroUf         .  •  .  . 

6.  do.      ofgold,  silver,  set^work,  mixed  metals,  dtc. 

7.  do.      of  lead,  «... 
8i.  Soap,  tallow  candles  and  wax,  spermaceti  and  whale  oil,   1,766,903 

17,085,477 
858,660 


6,144,446 

4,328,744 

14,364,526 

4lM83,018 

385,660 


0.  Manufactures  of  hides  and  skins,  • 

10.  do.        from  seeds,      .... 

11.  do.        from  grain,  fruit  and  case  liquors,  dis* 
tilled  and  fermented,         .  •  •  . 

12   Dry  manufactures  from  grain,  exclusive  of  flour, 
meal,  dtc  ..... 

13.  Manufactures  of  wood,      .... 

14.  do.        of  essences  of  oils, 

15.  Refined  sugar,        .  •  .  •  . 

16.  Manufactures  of  paper,  paste  boards,  cards,  6Le. 

17.  do.        of  glass,  .  .  •  • 

18.  do.        of  marble,  stone  and  slate, 

19.  Earthern  manufactures,      •  •  •  . 

20.  Tobacco        do.  .  •  •  . 

21.  Drugs,  dye  stufis  and  dyeing, 

22.  Cables  and  cordage,  .  •  .  . 

23.  Manufactures  of  hair,         .  •  •  • 

24.  Various  and  miscellaneous  manoftetaret,  • 


16,528,207 

75,766 
5,654,706 

170,160 
1,415,724 
1,930,285 
1,047,004 

462,115 

260,720 
1,260,378 

600382 
4,243,166 

120,731 
4,347,611 

$127,604,602 

We  would  observe,  that  Mr.  Gallatin,  from  the  information  eollecl- 
ed  by  him,  estimated  the  value  of  the  manufactures  of  the  Doited 
States,  at  more  than  $120,000,000;  and  he  thought  it  not  improbable, 
that  the  raw  materials  used,  and  the  provisions  and  other  articles  con- 
sumed by  the  manufacturers,  created  a  home  market  for  agricultural 
products  not  very  inferior  to  that,  which  arose  from  foreign  demand. 
He,  also,  estimated  the  value  of  goods  made  from  cotton  and  wooU  to 
exceed  $40,000,000  annually. 


r 


s 


47S 

The  manufaettire«  of  cotton  and  wool  were  then  principally  confined 
to  families ;  and  Mr.  Gallatin  thought  it  probable,  that  about  two 
thirds  of  the  clothing,  (including  hosiery,)  of  the  house  and  taUe 
linen  worn  and  used,  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States,  not  re- 
siding in  cities,  was  the  product  of  feiniily  manufactures. 

The  number  of  cotton  mills,  returned  to  tlie  secretary,  which  were 
erected,  at  the  close  of  the  year  1809,  was  eighty  seven ;  sixty  two  of 
which  (forty  eight  water  and  fourteen  horse  mills,)  were  in  operation, 
and  worked  at  that  time  thirty  one  thousand  spindles.  The  oth« 
twenty  fii^,  it  was  supposed,  would  be  in  operation,  in  the  course  of 
the  year  1810;  and  with  the  former,  would  probably  work  eighty  thou- 
sand spindles,  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  1811. 

He  estimated  the  amount  (Tf  capital  that  would  be  employed,  in  these 
mills,  at  $4,800,000,  the  cotton  used,  three  million  and  six  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  the  yarn  sp)mi  at  two  million  and  eight  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  pounds,  valued  at  93,240,000,  the  men  employed  five 
hundred,  and  the  women  and  boys  three  thousand  five  hundred. 

By  the  returns  of  the  Marshalls,  the  number  of  cotton  factories 
was  one  hundred  and  sixty  eight,  with  ninety  thousand  spindles ;  bat 
from  most  of  the  states,  no  returns  were  made  of  the  quantity  of  cot- 
ton used,  the  yarn  spun,  or  the  cloth  made  in  these  factories,  r^  Mas- 
sachusetts had  fifty  four,  most  of  them,  no  doubt,  small,  having  in  the 
whole  only  nineteen  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty  eight  spindles, 
iind  consuming  but  eight  hundred  and  thirty  eight  thousand  three  hun- 
dred and  forty  eight  pounds  of  cotton,  and  their  produce  valued  at 
$931,916.  Rhode  Island  had  twenty  six  factories,  with  twenty  one 
thousand  and  thirty  spindles,  and  Connecticut  fourteen,  with  eleven 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  eighty  three  spindles. 

Few  woollen  factories  were  established  in  the  United  States,  in 
1810;  most  of  the  domestic  woollen  fabrics  were  then  made  in  fiamilies. 

We  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  the  original  returns  of  ths 
marshals,  and  are,  therefore,  enabled  from  them  to  present  the  reader 
with  the  following  account  of  the  quantity  of  cloth  made  of  wool, 
cotton  and  flax,  and  their  mixtures,  in  each  state,  with  its  estimated 
value,  and  the  number  of  looms,  also,  in  each  state. 


r 

Na  of  jrardi. 

Valae 

NaofkMfiM. 

Maine,    ... 

.    %646,756 

$1,067,702 

16.067 

Massachusetts,   • 

.    4,048,209 

2,060,576 

22,664 

New  Hampshire, 

.    4,301,085 

1,760,417 

20,960 

Rhode  Island, 

.    2,562,482 

1,055,474 

44166 

Connecticut,    . 

.    4,086,898 

2,139,826 

16,132 

473 


NoboC  ywito. 

VahM. 

.  NaorioQM. 

VermoDtf 

.    3,390,659 

$1,669,096 

14,801 

New  York,      . 

.    9,044,752 

5,005,887 

33,068 

New  Jersey,    . 

.     1,920,327 

1,168,232 

4,745 

Pennsylvania, 

.    0,400,674 

4,134,768 

17,577 

Delaware, 

.       378,757 

245,111 

2,000 

Maryland, 

.     1,801,578 

901,539 

6,388 

Virginia, 

.    9,855,996 

4,465,171 

42.476 

North  Carolina, 

.    732,927 

2,591,817 

42,677 

South  Carolina, 

.    3,267,141 

1,678,887 

14,038 

Georgia, 

.    4,062,879 

2.081,309 

13,190 

Kentucky, 

.    4,685,375 

2,057,081 

24,469 

East  Tennesse, 

.     1,218,000» 

624,194 

6,963 

West  Tennessee,     • 

.    2,062,844 

1,051,115 

10,363 

Ohio, 

.     1,943,433 

999,548 

10,966 

District  of  Columbia, 

71,000 

35,500 

186 

% 

76,130,772 

•36,790,249 

324,9961 

This  quantity,  no  doubt,  was  short  of  the  truth — many  familieiy 
were,  probably,  unable  to  give  very  accurate  accounts;  and  many  morev 
jealous,  that  the  object  was  taxation,  either  refused  to  give  any  ac- 
count whatever,  or  certainly  not  to  the  full  amounL  The  marshal 
of  Rhode  Island  informs  the  secretary,  that  much  patience  and  for- 
bearance was  required  by  his  assistants  **  from  the  prejudices  uf  th« 
people,  who,  in  many  instances,  refused  to  give  any  account  of  their 
manufactured  articles ;  and  perhaps,  not  any  article  to  the  full  amount 
or  value,  from  an  opinion,  that  the  returns  were  demanded  by  govern- 
ment, with  a  view  of  taxing  their  industry .''  In  consequence  of  thii^ 
the  marshal  was  of  opinion,  that  the  articles  maouiactured  might  Im 
justly  estimated,  from  20  to  25  per  cent,  above  the  amounted  returned. 

There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt,  that  the  value  of  manufactures 
of  wool,  cotton  and  flax,  in  1810,  exceeded  640,000,000. 

The  war  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  which  soon 
followed,  compelled  the  Americans  to  manufacture  for  themselveit 
particularly  woollen  and  cotton  goods ;  and  many  millions  of  capital 
were  invested,  by  individuals,  in  the  establishment  of  woollen  and 
cotton  factories. 

The  demand  created  by  the  war  itself,  was  sufficient  encouragt- 
ment ;  and  the  prices  obtained  for  these  domestic  articles,  remunera* 


•  By  estimate,  the  va]ae  being  ooly  retained. 

60 


i 


474 

ted  the  inanufactDrer,  during  iU  contiDuance.  But  the  duration  of  tkt 
war  was  too 'short,  to  enable  the  American  adventurer  in  a  new  bnai- 
ness,  to  compete  with  the  old  and  experienced  manufacturer  in  Eu- 
rope, on  the  return  of  peace.  In  addition  to  this,  at  the  close  of  the 
war,  the  United  States  were  deluged  with  foreign  goods,  prineipallj 
from  Great  Britain.  During  the  three  first  quarters  of  181&,  the 
Talue  of  imports  was  983,080,073,  and  from  October  Ist,  1815  to  Oc- 
tober, 1816,  the  value  of  imports  amounted  to  the  enormous  sQin  of 
$156,30^700,*  as  we  have  shewn  in  a  preceding  chapter,  of  which 
the  value  of  those  paying  ad  valorem  duties  exceeded  9100,000,000^ 
about  $70,000,000  being  woollens  and  cottons.  And  we  would  here 
observe,  that  the  value  of  the  exports,  in  the  years  1815  and  1816^ 
was  only  $134,478,205. 

This  vast  influx  of  foreign  goods  not  only  glutted  the  market,  and 
■objected  the  importer  to  great  losses,  but  destroyed  the  hopes  of  the 
American  woollen  and  cotton  manufacturer.  The  latter  effect  was 
i^ew.ed  by  British  statesmen,  with  no  little  satisfaction,  and  nAs  deem- 
ed an  ample  compensation  for  any  looses,  sustained  by  the  English 
manufacturers.  Mr.  Brougham,  referring  to  the  losses  sustained  by 
the  latter,  declared  in  Parliament  that  **  it  was  well  worth  while  to 
incur  a  loss  upon  the  first  exportation,  in  order  by  the  glut^  to  stijle 
in  the  cradle^  those  rising  manufactures,  in  the  United  States,  which 
the  war  had  forced  into  existence,  contrary  to  the  natural  course  of 
things."  American  statesmen  now  saw  the  necessity,  as  well  as  jus- 
tice, of  affording  some  protection  to  those  manufactures,  which,  in  the 
hour  of  trial,  had  been  called,  if  not  forced,  into  existence.  Thej 
had  felt  for  the  sufferings  of  the  American  army,  from  the  want  of  ne- 
cessary clothing,  during  the  short  period  of  the  war ;  and  they  were 
too  sensible  what  the  country  owed  to  those,  who  had  adventured 
their  capital  and  credit,  in  a  new  and  untried  business,  not  to  listen  to 
their  application,  to  be  saved  from  utter  ruin. 

The  national  legislature  were  now  for  the  first  time,  since  the  com- 
mencement of  the  government  in  the  summer  of  1789,  seriously  call- 
ed upon  to  adjust  the  tariff,  with  a  view  to  support  and  protect  Amer- 
ican manufactures.  The  tarifif  act  of  1816,  was  made  with  special 
reference  to  this  object,  particularly  as  to  woollens  and  cottons ;  and 
the  only  difference  of  opinion  in  Congress,  then  was,  as  to  the  extent 
of  such  protection. 


♦  See  Table  No.  V,  Chapter  VF. 


475 

Tbe  duty  on  woollens  and  coUon8«  was  ultimately  fixed  at  25  per 
cent,  ad  valorem,  from  June  dOth,  1816,  to  June  dOth,  1819,  and  after 
that  period,  at  90  per  cent.  With  respect  to  cottons,  however,  it  waa 
provided,  that  all  cotton  cloths,  the  original  cost  of  which  was  leia 
than  86  cents  per  square  yard,  should  be  deemed  to  have  cost  that 
turn,  and  pay  duties  accordingly.  This  was  the  commencement  of 
what  has  been  called  the  minimum  principle;  and  its  real  object waf» 
wholly  to  exclude,  from  the  American  market,  the  coarse  East  IndU 
totton  fabrics.  This,  it  will  be  perceived,  afforded  encouragement  to 
the  American  cotton  planter,  as  well  as  the  American  cotton  ^man- 
ufacturer. 

We  would  here  observe,  that,  by  the  same  act,  a  permanent  duty 
of  thirty  per  cent  ad  valorem  was  imposed  on  various  other  articlei ; 
and  among  these  were  hats,  cabinet  wares,  and  all  manufactures  of 
wood,  carriages  of  all  descriptions,  leather  and  all  manufactures  of 
leather,  and  paper  of  every  description.  And  to  encourage  the  man- 
ufacture of  domestic  sugar,  a  specific  duty  of  three  cents  per  pound, 
was  laid  on  all  imported  brown  sugar. 

Without  adverting  to  the  details  of  the  various  acts,  afterwarda 
passed,  altering  that  of  1816,  we  would  observe,  that  the  duty  on  bar 
iron  was  raiseil  in  1818,  and  that  in  1824,  the  duties  on  woollens  and 
cottons  was  revised;  and  that  by  the  act  of  that  year,  a  duty  of  525  per 
cent  was  laid  on  all  woollen  goods,  the  value  of  which,  should  not 
exceed  33^  cents  per  square  yard  ;  and  aAer  June  90th,  1825,  a  doty 
of  33^  per  cent  ad  valorem  was  imposed  upon  those  costing  more 
than  33}  cents  per  square  yard,  with  the  exception  of  blankets  and 
atufi*  goods. 

Much  more  time,  skill  and  experience  are  requisite  in  the  rarioua 
branches  of  the  manufacture  of  wool,  than  in  that  of  almost  any  other 
article,  in  order  to  meet,  with  success,  more  experienced  foreign 
manufacturers. 

In  addition  to  the  want  of  skill  and  experience,  the  American  man- 
ufacturer of  wool,  had  to  struggle  with  the  countervailing  lawa  and 
regulations  of  the  British  government,  made  with  the  express  riew  of 
injuring  this  branch  of  American  industry ;  or,  in  the  language  of 
Brougham,  '*  to  stifle  it,  in  its  cradle.**  One  of  the  countervailing 
measures  of  that  government,  was  a  reduction  of  the  duty  on  imported 
wool.  Prior  to  the  American  act  of  1824,  the  duty  on  wool  import- 
ed into  England  was  six  pence  sterling  per  pound  ;  but  soon  after  the 
passage  of  this  act,  this  duty  was  reduced  to  one  penny  per  pound ; 
and  for  the  purpose,  aa  the  debates  in  Parliament  shew,  of  enabUnf 


Vv 


M 


476 

the  British  manifactarer  to  send  his  woollens  to  the  United 
at  a  cheaper  rate.    And,  not  long  after,  with  the  same  view,  the  d«^ 
on  all  wool,  the  price  of  which  was  less  than  one  shilling  sterlingb 
*  was  reduced  to  a  half  penny. 

The  American  manufacturer  of  wool,  finding  it  diffiult,  if  not  im- 
possible, to  struggle  against  all  these  difficulties,  again  applied  to  Con- 
gress for  aid ;  and  the  celebrated  tariff  act  of  18SS,  was  the  result  ef 
this  application — an  act,  which  has  been  declared  not  only  highly 
oppressive  to  the  great  mass  of  the  community,  and  injuiious  to  com- 
merce, but  in  direct  violation  of  the  constitution  itself. 

By  this  act,  the  minimum  system  was  extended  generally  to  wool- 
lens. All  manufactures  of  wool,  with  some  exceptions,  the  valne  of 
which  did  not  exceed  50  cents  the  square  yard,  paid  a  duty  on  thai 
sum,  of  45  per  cent  ad  valorem — those,  the  value  of  which  exceeded 
50  cents,  but  did  not  exceed  $1,00  the  square  yard,  paid  a  duty  of 
45  per  cent  ad  valorem,  on  the  latter  sum — those  between  $1,00  and 
$2,50,  the  same  duty  on  the  latter  sum — those  between  $2,50  and 
$4,00,  the  same  duty  on  the  last  sum,  and  those  exceeding  $4,00»  50 
per  cent  ad  valorem. 

Unmanufactured  wool,  was,  also  subjected  to  a  duty  of  4  cents  p&r 
pound  and  40  per  cent  ad  valorem.  Additional  duties  were,  also,  laid 
upon  iron,  hemp,  flax  and  molasses ;  and  the  minimum  price  of  cot- 
tons was  raised  to  35  cents  the  square  yard.  The  policy  of  this  act 
was  questioned  by  many  of  the  merchants  of  this  country,  and  its  con- 
stitutionality by  most  of  the  people  of  the  southern  states.  Unfortu- 
nately, it  was  a  compound  made  up  by  its  enemies,  as  well  as  ila 
friends,  and  was  not  satisfactory  to  either. 

The  time  was  now  approaching,  when  the  national  debt,  being 
nearly  extinguished,  the  sinking  fund,  amounting  to  ten  millions  an- 
nually, would  be  no  longer  wanted.  A  new  modification  of  the  rer^ 
enue  system,  would  soon  be  necessary,  to  meet  this  new  state  of  the 
financial  affairs  of  this  country.  In  this  modification  of  the  duliesv 
the  advocates  of  the  protecting  system,  contemplated  a  reduction  of 
the  duties  principally  on  those  articles,  which  had  not  been,  or  conld  not 
be  produced  in  this  country ;  while  its  opposers,  on  the  other  hand,  in- 
sisted, on  an  abandonment  of  the  system  itself,  by  making  the  duties 
00  all  imports  about  equal.  With  a  view  of  obtaining  information 
and  enlightening  the  public  mind  on  this  great  and  interesting  subjeclp 
two  Conventions  were  held,  in  the  summer  and  fall  of  1831 ;  one  in^ 
the  city  of  Philadelphia,  called  the  anti-tariff  or  free-trade  conven* 
lion— -the  other  at  the  city  of  New  York,  called  the  tariff  convention. 


477 

Both  were  composed  of  gentlemen  distinguished  for  talents  and  ex- 
perience ;  and  their  addresses  to  the  people  of  the  United  States,  and 
memorials  to  Congress,  or  as  they  may  be  called,  essays  expressive 
of  their  different  views  of  the  questions  of  political  economy  then 
agitated,  were  drawn  up  with  no  ordinary  care  and  ability,  and  must 
always  take  a  high  rank,  among  the  state  papers  of  that  period.    Un- 
der the  influence  of  these  conventions.  Congress,  after  much  deblite, 
proceeded  to  modify  the  preceding  tariffs,  by  an  act  of  the  14th  of 
July,  183%  to  Uke  effect  after  March  1st,  1833  ;  and  with  respect  to 
woollens,  cottons  and  iron,  provided,  that  foreign  wool,  unmanffac- 
lured,  the  value  of  which  should  not  exceed  8  cents  per  pound,  should 
be  duty  free ;  and  if  its  value  exceeded  8  cents,  should  pay  a  duty 
of  4  cents  per  pound  and  40  per  cent  ad  valorem. — That  woollen 
cloth  called  kerseys,  plains  or  kendal  cottons,  not  exceeding  in  value 
35  cents  a  square  yard,  should  pay  5  per  cent  ad  valorem ;  that  worst- 
ed stuffed  goods,  shawls,  and  other  manufactures  of  silk  and  worsted* 
10  per  cent — worsted  yam  20  per  cent — woollen  yam  4  cents  per 
pound,  and  fifty  per  cent  ad  valorem — mits,  gloves,  binding,  blankets, 
hosiery,  and  carpets  and  carpeting,  25  per  cent,  except  Brussels,  Wil- 
ton and  treble  ingrained  carpeting,  which  were  to  be  at  63  cents  the 
square  yard,  and  all  other  ingrained  and  Venetian  carpeting,  35  cents 
the  square  yard ;  and  except  blankets,  whose  value  should  not  exceed 
75  cents  each,  which  were  to  pay  only  5  per  cent  ad  valorem — flannelf» 
bockings  and  baizes  to  pay  15  cents  the  square  yard— coach  laces  35 
per  cent ;  merino  shawls,  and  all  other  manufactures  of  wool,  and 
ready  made  clothing  to  pay  50  per  cent  ad  valorem. 

All  manufactures  of  cotton  to  pay  twenty  five  per  cent  ad  valorem, 
excepting  cotton  twist,  yarn  and  thread,  the  duty  on  which  was  to  re- 
main as  fixed  in  1824 ;  all  manufactures  of  cotton,  however,  not  dyed, 
printed,  colored  or  stained,  not  exceeding  in  value  thirty  cents  the 
square  yard,  to  be  valued  at  that  rate ;  and,  if  dyed,  printed,  colored 
or  stained,  not  exceeding  in  value  thirty  five  cents  the  square  yard, 
to  be  valued  at  the  same  rate,  and  nankeens  from  China  to  pay  twenty 
per  cent  ad  valorem. 

Hammered  iron  was  to  pay  ninety  cents  per  112  lbs.  and  rolled 
iron  930  per  ton. 

By  the  same  act,  teas  imported  from  China,  or  any  place  beyond 
the  cape  of  Good  Hope  in  American  vessels,  and  all  coffee  to  be  duty 
free ;  and  the  doty  on  brown  sugar  was  reduced  to  two  and  a  half 
cents  per  pound. 


J 


478 

Thif  act  WM  a  compromise  between  the  difierent  parties  dies  la 
Congress,  on  the  great  question  of  the  tariff. 

It  did  not  prove  satisfactory  to  a  majority  of  the  people  of  Sovth 
Carolina ;  and  that  State  not  only  declared  it  unconstitutional,  btC 
assumed  the  right  of  nullifying  this,  as  well  as  the  other  tariff  acts» 
and  declared  that  the  same  should  never  be  enforced  there,  and  eren 
went  so  far  as  to  raise  troops,  for  the  express  purpose  of  resisting  by 
a  military  force,  all  attempts,  on  the  part  of  the  general  goTeromen^ 
to  carry  them  into  effect  in  that  State. 

This  was  met  by  a  proclamation  of  the  national  ezecutiTe,  expres- 
sing his  determination  to  see  that  these  laws  should  be  executed,  and 
by  an  act  of  Congress,  vesting  the  President  with  more  ample  pow- 
ers, for  this  purpose. 

In  this  extraordinary  state  of  things.  Congress,  during  its  session 
in  the  winter  of  1833,  and  before  the  act  of  the  previous  session  had 
gone  into  operation,  passed  a  new  act,  by  which  the  duties,  fixed 
either  by  the  act  of  July  14th,  1832,  or  by  any  preceeding  acts,  whicii 
exceeded  twenty  per  cent,  on  the  value,  should  be  reduced  ten  per 
cent  annually,  until  the  30th  of  June,  1842 ;  and  also  declared,  that 
after  that  period,  duties  should  be  laid  **  for  the  purpose  of  raising 
such  revenue  as  may  be  necessary  to  sn  economical  administration  of 
the  government ;"  and  that  the  duties  required  to  be  paid  by  a  tax  on 
imports  should  be  assessed  upon  their  value,  at  the  port  where  the 
same  should  be  entered,  under  regulations  to  be  prescribed  by  law. 
The  duties  on  woollens,  were  to  be  paid  in  cash,  immediately,  and 
the  duties  on  all  other  articles,  to  be  paid  in  cash,  after  June  90Ui, 
1842,  and  the  credit  system  to  be  then  entirely  abolished.  The 
fifth  section  of  this  act,  not  only  declares,  what  articles  shall  be  ad- 
mitted duty  free,  after  1842 ;  but  also  attempts  to  limit  the  power  of 
all  future  legislatures,  as  to  the  amount  of  duties  on  imports,  to  a 
sum,  not  exceeding  twenty  per  cent  ad  valorem — And  the  last  sec- 
tion, after  repealing  the  act  of  the  preceding  July,  and  all  other  acts 
inconsistent  with  it,  has  the  following  proviso,  **•  Provided,  that  noth- 
ing herein  contained  shall  be  so  construed  as  to  prevent  the  passage 
prior  or  subsequent  to  the  said  30th  day  of  June,  1842,  of  any  act  or 
acts,  from  time  to  time,  that  may  be  necessary  to  detect,  prevent,  or 
punish  evasions  of  the  duties  on  imports  imposed  by  law,  nor  to  pre- 
vent the  passage  of  an  act,  prior  to  the  30th  day  of  June,  1842»  in 
the  contingency,  either  of  excess  or  deficiency  of  revenue,  alterinf 
the  rate  of  duties  on  articles,  which,  by  the  aforesaid  act  of  July  Hth, 
1832,  are  subject  to  a  less  rate  of  duty,  than  twenty  per  cent  ad  Tmlo- 


479 

rem»  io  such  a  manner,  as  not  to  exceed  that  rate,  and  to  as  to  adjust 
the  revenue  to  either  of  the  said  contingences.^* 

If  we  rightly  understand  the  principles  and  bearing  of  this  act,  no 
future  Congress,  after  1642,  are  to  impose  any  duties  on  imports,  but 
such  as  may  be  necessary  to  an  economical  administration  of  the 
government,  nor  can  such  duties  be  laid  or  assessed,  in  any  other 
manner,  than  upon  the  value  of  the  articles  at  the  port  of  entry ;  nor 
can  such  duties  ever  exceed  twenty  per  cent,  on  such  value,  and  must 
then  be  paid  in  ready  money.  Without  wishing  to  disturb  this  act* 
we  cannot  but  observe,  that  some  of  its  principles  are  certainly  differ^ 
cnt  from  those  which  have  heretofore  governed  in  the  imposition  of 
duties,  in  this  country,  and  we  believe  in  every  other  country. 

Specific  duties  are  entirely  excluded ;  and  little  difference  can  be 
made,  between  duties  on  articles  of  luxury,  convenience  or  necessity. 
We  have  always  considered  it  an  axiom,  in  political  economy,  that 
articles  of  luxury  should  pay  higher  duties,  than  those  of  convent* 
ence,  and,  much  higher  than  those  of  necessity. 

This  act  proclaims  before-hand  to  the  world  how  all  future  legis- 
latures, are  to  be  governed,  in  the  imposition  of  duties  on  imports — 
that  little  or  no  regard  is  to  be  had,  either  to  domestic  industry  or 
foreign  restrictions^  thus  placing  some  of  the  best  interests  of  the 
country,  in  no  small  degree,  in  the  power  of  foreign  rival  nations. 
The  act  is,  also,  a  departure  from  the  usual  course,  in  attempting 
to  bind  future  legislatures,  as  to  the  amount  of  duties  to  be  im- 
posed, as  well  as  the  mode  and  manner  of  imposing  them.  If  one 
legislature  cannot  bind  another,  in  ordinary  cases  of  general  policy, 
much  less  can  this  be  done,  in  relation  to  the  imposition  of  duties,  the 
amount  of  which,  as  well  as,  the  mode  of  doing  it,  must  depend  on 
the  state  and  condition  of  the  country,  at  the  time  of  their  imposition; 
and  may,  also,  depend  on  the  conduct  of  other  nations. 

We  would  also  here  observe,  that  many  of  the  advocates  of  this  bill, 
disavowed  any  intention  of  giving  up  the  protective  principle.  The 
objects  they  had  in  view,  in  urging  its  passage,  must  meet  the  appro- 
bation of  every  American  patriot — few  sacrifices  are  too  great  to  pre- 
serve the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  union — and  we  hope  and  trustt 
with  them,  that  before  the  year  1842,  the  manufactures  of  this  eooo- 
try,  (the  great  importance  of  which,  to,  at  least,  two  thirds  of  its  in- 
habitants, the  following  pages  will  shew,)  will  have  attained  such  a 
degree  of  maturity  and  perfection,  as  to  be  able  to  sustain  themselves, 
under  the  provisions  of  this  act.  But  if  a  new  state  of  things  should 
arise,  if  the  conduct  of  the  nation,  heretofore  so  desirous  of  hiring 


.* 


% 


480 


the  United  States  hind  themselves  not  to  lay  duties  beyond  a  ccrtaiB 
amount,  or  of  any  other  nation,  should  be  such,  as  greatly  to  injvre 
the  manufacturing  interest  of  this  country,  future  legislatures,  wooMy 
no  dpubty  be  competent  to  meet  the  case  and  apply  the  remedy. 

THe^rogress  of  domestic  manufactures,  under  the  protective  sys- 
tem, thus  briefly  alluded  to,  is  a  subject  of  inquiry,  not  less  useful  to 
the  political  economist,  than  it  is  interesting  to  the  inhabitants  of  this 
country.  It  cannot  be  deemed  of  small  importance  to  a  people, 
whose  number  at  the  present  time,  (Jan.  1835)  exceeds  fourteen  mill- 
ions, and  whose  annual  increase  is  about  half  a  million,  to  know  to 
what  extent  they  now  are,  or  hereafter  may  be,  dependent  on  foreign 
nations,  for  articles  of  the  first  necessity ;  and  among  these,  the  vari- 
ous manufactures  of  wool,  cotton,  and  iron,  may  claim  the  first  rank. 
The  average  value  of  imports  into  the  United  States,  from  1821  to 
1830,  inclusive,  amounted  to  eighty  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  aver- 
age value  of  the  exports  of  foreign  products,  during  the  same  period, 
was  nearly  twenty  three  millions ;  leaving  the  average  annual  value 
of  consumption,  about  fifty  seven  millions. 

We  have  taken  this  period,  because  it  was  a  time  of  peace  in  this 
country  and  in  Europe ;  and  during  which,  with  the  exception  of  189&, 
when  great  speculations  took  place  in  cotton,  trade  took  its  ordinary 
and  natural  course.  From  fifty  seven  to  sixty  millions,  therefore,  may 
be  deemed  the  ordinary  annual  consumption  of  foreign  articles  of 
every  description,  in  the  United  States. 

Of  this  sum,  the  value  of  woollens  (with  the 

exception  of  carpeting,)  was     .        .        •       $7,799,247 

Cottons, 7,328,024 

Silks, 5,449,874 

Rolled  and  hammered  iron,  ....         1,762,000 
The  manufactures  of  iron,  about  •        4,000,000 

The  manufactures  of  flax,    ....        2,270,000 

Wines, 1,295,907 

Spiriu 1,521,614 

Molasses, 2,259,561 

Teas, 1,648,145 

Sugar,  brown  and  white,       ....        3,009,443 

Coflce, 2.862,467 

Salt, 2,060,000 

Hemp, 625,208 

The  average  annual  amount  of  domestic  exports  during  this  period, 
was  $53,304,911.    In  this  extensive  country,  differing  so  materially. 


■ 


481 


in  climate  as  well  as  soil,  the  productions  most,  of  course,  be  differ^ 
ent ;  and  it  is  highly  useful,  in  a  political  as  well  as  a  commercial 
point  of  view,  to  inquire,  as  to  the  relative  amount  and  importance 
of  these  various  productions,  which  are  exported,  and  go  |»  pay  for 
the  foreign  articles  consumed  here.  It  will  be  found  on  ezamination« 
that  the  average  annual  amount  of  the  principal  domestic  productions, 
exported  from  1821  to  1890,  was  as  follows,  viz. : — 

The  average  value  of  cotton  was  .  $26,462,906 

Tobacco, 6,704,206 

Domestic  manufactures  (exclusive  of  gold  and 
rtilver,)  from  1826  to  1830,  .        .      6,483,661 

Wheat  and  flour, 6,162,804 

The  products  of  the  forest,  about   .  •      4,000,000 

The  products  of  animals,        ....      2,600,000 

Rice, 2,000,000 

The  fisheries, 1,600,000 

The  imports  of  1831, 1832,  and  1833,  were  lAuch  larger  than  in  the 
preceding  years,  being,  on  an  average,  about:  $209,000,000,  and  the  '  S 
average  exports  for  the  same  period,  was  about  ^86,000,000.  The 
amount  of  woollens  left  for  consumption,  after  deducting  the  exports 
from  the  imports,  on  an  average  of  these  three  years,  was  about 
$1 1,370,000,  and  of  cottons,  about  $8,778,000.  Many  of  the  imports 
during  this  period,  were  probably  sent  and  sold  here  on  foreign  account 
What  proportion  the  consumption  of  foreign  goods  bears  to  that 
of  domestic,  cannot  be  ascertained,  with  much  accuracy.  While  we 
are  furninhed  with  official  documents,  shewing  the  extent  of  the  ex- 
ternal commerce,  and  the  amount  of  foreigrn  articles  consumed  in  the 
United  States,  we  have  very  few  of  this  character,  with  respect  to 
the  extent  and  value  of  the  internal  commerce  of  the  country,  and  of 
its  domestic  productions  and  consumption.  And  no  one  has  directed 
his  inquiries  to  this  subject,  without  finding  the  want  of  authentic 
documents  to  which  he  could  refer ;  nor  without  feelings  of  regret  that 
some  more  efficient  and  systematic  plan  had  not  been  adopted,  either  ' 
by  the  general  or  state  governments,  for  obtaining  accurate  informa* 
tion,  so  absolutely  necessary  for  correct  legislation  on  subjects  io 
interesting  to  the  community  at  large. 

In  the  absence  of  authentic  official  documents,  we  can  only  avafl 
ourselves  of  such  information  as  we  have  been  able  to  collect  from 
individuals,  or  from  bodies  of  men  who  have  at  times  roett  for  the 
purpose  of  inquiring  as  to  particular  branches  of  domestic  industry* 
or  from  information  occasionally  communicated  to  Congress. 

Gl 


% 


482 


It  will  be  remembered,  that  one  principal  object  of  the  Ck>iiTeiitiea 
before  alluded  to,  which  met  at  New  York  in  October,  1S31,  was,  to 
collect  information  with  respect  to  particular  manufactures  ;  and  that 
for  this  4>urpo8e,  committees  were  appointed,  composed  of  genilemea 
selected  from  different  parts  of  the  United  States. 

The  attention  of  these  committees  was  directed  to  the  manufactiires 
of  cotton,  woo],  iron  and  steel,  salt,  hats,  cabinet  wares,  glass,  sugar 
and  molasses,  and  to  the  subject  of  chemistry,  as  connected  with 
manufactures  and  the  mechanic  arts.  The  reports  of  these  commit- 
tees are  before  the  public,  and  contain  the  best  accounts  of  the  par- 
ticular branches  of  domestic  industry,  which  were  the  objects  of  in- 
quiry, that  have  fallen  within  our  notice.  They  were  probably  drawn 
up,  in  some  instances  at  least,  by  those  who  had  an  interest  in  the 
particular  manufactures  to  which  their  attention  was  called.  Their 
characters,  however,  will  not  admit  the  belief,  of  intentional  mii- 
statements  or  misrepresentations. 

It  is  also  well  known,  that  in  the  winter  of  183%  the  House  of 
Representatives,  while  it  had  under  consideration  the  subject  of  the 
modification  of  the  tariff,  directed  the  Secretary  of  the  IVeasury,  to 
collect  information  respecting  the  manufactures  of  the  United  States; 
and  the  circular  of  the  Secretary  issued  in  obedience  to  this  order,,  bore 
date  February  7th,  and  required  returns  to  be  made  to  him  before  the 
close  of  the  session  of  Congress.  The  time  was  much  too  short,  for 
an  object  requiring  so  much  research  and  labor ;  and  the  returns 
made,  although  making  two  large  printed  volumes,  were  so  defective 
and  imperfect,  that  no  digest  has  been,  or  can  be  made  from  them,  of 
the  extent  or  value  of  the  manufactures  of  this  country.  The  ac- 
counts of  particular  manufactures,  given  by  the  committees  of  the 
Convention  here  mentioned,  are  more  to  be  relied  on,  and  in  some 
instances,  were  used  by  the  agents  employed  by  the  Secretary. 

The  report  on  cottons,  made  by  the  committee  of  the  Convention, 
presents  a  detailed  and  interesting  view  of  the  manufacture  of  that 
article  in  various  establishments,  in  the  states  of  Virginia,  Maryland, 
Maine,  Vermont,  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  Rhode 
Island,  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania  and  Delaware.*  It 
informs  us,  that  in  these  twelve  states,  there  were  in  operation,  in 
1831,  cotton  factories  to  the  number  of  ...  .  795 
Having  a  capital  (in  fixtures  principally,)  of  .    $40,614,984 

Number  of  spindles  in  operation  was  .        1,246,503 


♦  See  Table  No.  I. 


483 

Number  of  jrarda  of  cloth  made,       ....   230,461,900 

Pounds  of  yarn  sold, 10,642,000 

Pounds  of  cotton  used, 77,757,316* 

Males  employed,      •        .         •        .         .         18,530 
Females,     do. 38,927 

Children  under  twelve  years,    .        .        .  4,691 

62.148 

The  annual  value, 826,000,000 

And  the  annual  amount  of  wages,     ....  $10,294,944 

And  in  these  factories  there  was  used  pounds  of  starch,  1,641, 2&3 

Barrels  of  flour  for  sizing, 17,245 

Cordn  of  wood, 46,519 

Tons  of  coal, 24,420 

Bushels  of  charcoal, 9,205 

Gallons  of  oil, 300,338 

Value  of  other  articles, $599,223 

That  the  spindles  building  were,       .        .        •        •  172,024 

Hand  looms, 4,760 

And  the  total  of  dependents  were     ....  117,620 

In  addition  to  this,  the  committee  in  the  same  report,  estimated  tbe 
amount  of  capital  employed  in  shops — 

For  making  machinery,  at $2,400,000 

The  annual  value  of  machinery  made,  at           .         .        3,500,000 
And  the  annual  wages, 1,248,000 

The  capital  in  bleacheries  was  also  estimated  at        .        $900,000 

The  annual  product,  at 1,036,760 

The  annual  wages,  at 209,814 

The  capital  employed  in  printing  cottons  was  estimated  at  $1,000,000 

Annual  value,  at 1,500,000 

Annual  wages,  at 402,965 

And  number  of  yards  printed,  at       ...         .      525,000,000 

Making  the  annual  value  of  all  these  establishments,     $32,036,760 
And  the  annual  amount  of  wages,     ....      12,155,723 

This  report,  it  will  be  noticed,  includes  only  twelve  states ;  and 
with  res]>ect  to  the  other  states,  as  well  as  the  returns  actually  made 
from  these  twelve,  the  committee  say:  **In  the  southern  and  western 
states,  no  less  than  thirty  establishments  have  been  reported  to  the 


•  Making  two  hand  red  and  fourteen  tboiuand  eight  hundred  and  eighty  two 
bales,  of  the  average  weight  of  361  ^^  poundn. 


^ 


484 


committee ;  but  having  no  accurate  returns  from  these  etates,  ihejr 
hare  preferred  to  omit  them  altogether.    Some  reluctance  has  alsoi  .  -^ 
been  found  among  the  manufacturers^  in  giving  mll'the  details  requireA^     1 
of  them.    A  great  proportion  of  them  have  mistaken  the  intent  flf     ' 
the  question  respecting  the  capital*  which  ^ey  employt  &nd  retonMi 
only  that  which  was  invested  in  fixtures.    The  committee  have  act 
thought  it  proper  to  alter  the  amount  so  returned ;  but  they  wUl  take 
the  opportunity  of  iMi3dng,  that  so  general  has  been  this  errors  that 
they  have  no  doubt  that  one  fourth  to  one  third,  might  with  propriety 
be  added  under  this  head  to  the  total  amount."    This  statement  of 
the  committee,  evinces  no  disposition  to  give  an  exaggerated  accoimi 
of  the  extent  of  ^e  manufactures,  which  was  the  object  of  their  in- 
quiry.   That  numerous  cotton  establishments  then  existed  in  the     * 
other  states,  is  well  known ;  some  of  which  we  ourselves  bad  an  op- 
portunity of  visiting,  situated  in  Ohio  and  Kentucky,  in  the  summer ' 
of  1830. 

It  will  be  observed,  that  this  report  does  not  include,  the  cotton 
manufactured  in  families,  either  from  the  yarn  purchased  from  the 
factories,  or  spun  in  families  by  machinery  made  for  that  purpose. 
When  this  is  added  to  the  value  manufactured  in  foctories  in  those 
states,  from  which  no  returns  were  made,  the  whole  value  of  the  cotton 
manufactures  of  the  United  States,  at  the  time  referred  to  in  the  re- 
port, could  not  have  been  less  than  $40,000,000 ;  and  at  the  present 
time,  (1834,)  must  considerably  exceed  that  amount.  While  the  Uni- 
ted States  were  consuming  more  than  seventy  seven  millions  of 
pounds  of  their  cotton,  in  their  own  establishments,  they  were  sup- 
plying nearly  three  quarters  of  all  the  cotton  manufactured  in  Europe. 
In  1830,  according  to  a  document  in  our  possession,  the  consump- 
tion of  cotton  in  Great  Britain,  France,  and  the  rest  of  the  continent 
of  Europe,  was  1,190,536  bales;  and  that  of  this  the  United  States 

furnished, 753,389 

Brazil  and  the  West  Indies,  .        .        .  276,036 

East  Indies, 78,300 

Egypt  and  Levant, 82,842 

That  of  this  Great  Britain  consumed,        .        .       805,475 

France,  251,875 

Rest  of  the  continent, 125,186 

Of  that  consumed  bv  Great  Britain,  the  United 

States  furnished,  ....        539,058 

Brazil  and  the  West  Indies,      .  196,408 

East  Indies,  45,229 

Egypt  and  Levant,  ....  24,780 — 805,475 


485 

Of  that  consumed  by  France,  the  United  States 

famished,              171,033 

Brazil  and  the  West  Indieys       ....  46,301 

Egypt  and  Levant, 34,541 

251,875 

Of  that  consumed  by  the  rest  of  Europe,«the  United 

*    Sutes  furnished, 43,296 

Brazil  and  the  West  Indies,      ....  34,227 

East  Indies,  32,140 

Egypt  and  Levant, 23,621 

^  123,186 

In  the  report,  to  which  we  have  referred,  the  committee  estimate 
*^die  whole  cotton  crop  of  the  United  States,  for  the  year,  ending  Oct. 
1st,  1831^  at  1,038,847  bales. 
In  the  Atlantic  States,  486,103,  of  306  lbs.        lbs.  148,747,616 

««     Western  States,         552,744,  of  411  lbs.  227,177,784 

1,038.847  375,025,302 

Amount  uf  cotton  exported  in  1831,        •  •        276,079,780 

Leaving  for  home  consumption,  .        .        .    lbs.  98,946,522 

Table  No.  II,  shews  ^e  number  of  bales  imported  into  Great  Brit- 
ain, from  different  parts  of  the  world,  in  each  year,  from  1814,  to 
1830,  with  the  number  of  bales  re-exported — number  of  pounds  re- 
tained for  spinning,  with  its  money  value,  together  with  the  price  per 
pound,  for  each  year ;  and  table  No.  Ill,  exhibits  the  quantity  re- 
tained for  home  consumption  and  for  spinning,  on  an  average  of  the 
years,  from  1798  to  1806,  and  from  1807,  to  1812;  and  in  each  year, 
from  1814  to  1830,  together  with  the  declared  value  of  piece  goods 
and  yam  exported,  during  the  latter  period. 

The  bales  fronV  Brazil  contain  but  about  one  hundred  and  eighty 
pounds  each  ;  and  those  from  other  countries,  considerably  leas,  than 
thorte  from  the  United  States.  To  enable  the  reader,  therefore,  to  see 
the  actual  quantity  received  by  Great  Britain,  from  the  United  States 
and  other  countries,  we  here  present  the  number  of  pounds,  from 
each  country,  for  (he  years  1827,  1828  and  1829. 


486 


United  States, 

Brazils, 

East  Indies, 

Egypt, 

British  West  Indies 

All  other  parts, 


Tean  18S27— Iba. 

216,924,812 

20,716,162 

20,930,542 

4,084,741 

7,165,881 

2,626,771 


182B-4b«. 

151,752,269 

29,148,279 

32,187,901 

6,454,386 

5,893,800 

2,328,987 


lo7,1873M 

28,878,386 

24,857.800 

5,894,489 

4,640,414 

1,308,935 


272,448,909        227,760,642        222,767,411 

In  1831  and  1832,  the  whole  quantity  innported  into  the  united 
kingdom,  averaged  287,000,000  pounds,  of  which  219,000,000  was 
from  the  United  States,  leaving  68,000,000  from  all  other  countries. 
The  quantity  re-exported,  during  these  two  years,  was  20,000,000  each 
year,  leaving  for  home  consumption,  267,000,000  pounds.* 

The  total  value  of  cotton  goods  annually  manufactured  in   Great 
Britain,  Mc  Cnlloch  estimates  at  £36,000,000,  sterling,  or    about 
$72,000,000,  based  on  the  following  data- 
Raw  material,  at  seven  pence  per  pound. 
Wages  of  833,000  weavers,  spinners,  bleachers,  6lc,  at 

£24  a  year  each.         ..*... 
Wages  of  111,000  engineers,  machine  makers,  smiths, 

masons,  joiners,  &^c.,  at  £30  a  year  each. 
Profits  of  the  manufacturers,  wages  of  superintendants, 

sums  to  purchase  the  machinery,  coals,  6lc. 


£6,000,000 

20,000,000 

3,333,000 


6,666,000 

£36,000,000 

The  capital  employed,  is  estimated  by  the  same  writer,  at  £56,000,- 
000  sterling.  « 

Capital  in  the  purchase  of  the  raw  material,       .        .        £6,000,000 
Do.    invested  in  spinning  mills,   power  and  hand 
looms,  work  shops,  ware  houses,  &^c.,  35,000,000 

Do.   in  payment  of  wages,  ....        15,000,000 


£56,000,000 
Famishing  subsistence  for,  from  1,200,000  to  1,400,000  persons. 

From  the  above  accounts  it  appears,  that  in  1831,  the  consumption 
of  cotton  in  the  United  States,  was  about  one  third  of  the  consitmp- 
Uon  of  Great  Britain  in  the  same  year,  about  equal  to  that  of  France, 
and  nearly  double  that  of  the  rest  of  the  continent  of  Europe. 

*  These  acconnts  of  the  importation  and  consamption  of  cotton,  are  from  the 
British  cnstom  house  books,  as  given  by  Marshall,  Mc  Calloch  and  the  board  of 
trade. 


487 

The  increase  in  thii  country  has  been  more  rapidt  than  in  Great 
Britain.  The  quantity  consumed  in  the  latter,  has  varied  in  different 
years. 

The  average  consumption  from  179S  to  1806,  was        lbs.  51,525,068 

from  1807  to  1812,  was  79,628,187 

from  1814  to  1820,  was  114,000,000 

In  1830,  the  consumption  was  .        .        .        •        255,426,476 

And  in  1831  and  1832,  was  ....        267,000,000 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  quantity  consumed  in  the 
United  States,  prior  to  the  late  war  with  Great  Britain,  nor  since,  for 
any  regular  periods.  In  1810,  Mr.  Gallatin  estimated  the  quantity 
used  in  manufacturing  establishments  at  three  millions  six  hundred 
thousand  pounds  ;  and  if  we  add  to  this  the  quantity  used  in  familietf 
the  whole  quantity  consumed  in  the  United  States,  might  be  from  ten 
to  twelve  millions ;  this,  however,  is  merely  conjectural.  In  1831t 
according  to  the  report  of  the  committee  of  the  convention  before 
referred  to,  the  quantity  consumed,  in  the  manufacturing  establish- 
ments of  twelve  states,  exceeded  seventy  seven  millions  pounds ;  and 
the  whole  quantity  then  consumed  in  the  United  States,  could  not 
have  been  less  than  from  ninety  to  one  hundred  millions. 

That  the  consumption  of  cotton  has  increased  in  the  United  States* 
since  1831,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  In  1833,  the  number  of  bales  con- 
sumed at  Lowell,  was  thirty  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  seven,  and 
must  also  have  increased  in  other  places.  The  number  of  bales 
therefore,  consumed  in  this  country,  including  that  consumed  in  fam- 
ilies, in  1834«  could  not,  we  apprehend,  be  far  from  three  hundred 
thousand.  If  we  consider  the  village  of  Lowell,  as  consuming  one 
ninth  of  the  whole  used  in  the  United  States,  it  will  exceed  two  hun- 
dred and  ninety  three  thousand  bales. 

This  vast  increase  in  the  manufacture  of  cotton,  in  both  countries, 
has  been  owing  to  the  magic  power  of  machinery — that  for  spinning« 
invented  by  Arkwright,  and  that  for  weaving,  by  Cartwright,  two 
self  taught  EIngliab  artists — and  the  material  for  this  wonderful  ma- 
chinery has  been  principally  furnished  by  the  cotton  gin  of  the  Amer- 
ican artist,  NVhitney.  The  machine  invented  by  this  great  philosophi- 
cal mechanic,  now  produces  in  the  United  States,  nearly  four  hun- 
dred millions  of  pounds  of  cotton  annually,  worth  from  forty  to  fifty 
millions  uf  dollars ;  and  which,  when  manufactured,  furnishes  cloth- 
ing for  the  human  race,  to  the  value  of  more  than  two  hundred  mill- 
ions. 


488 


WOOLLENS.  .^.tK      ^ 


^  The  manufacture  of  wool  has  greatly  iajptfaJMHEiCAiriDg  the  period 
under  review  ;  but  to  what  extent  cannot  be  Aaceiflined  with  as  much 
certainty,  as  in  the  cane  of  cotton.  The  number  of  sheep  in  the  Uni- 
ted States  in  1831,  was  estimated  at  twenty  millions.  This  estimate 
was  not  made  from  actual  returns,  and  of  course,  must,  in  some  meas- 
ure be  founded  on  conjecture.  In  1825,  the  number  of  sheep  in  the 
State  of  New  York,  from  actual  returns,  was  three  millions  foor  hun- 
dred ninety  six  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  nine ;  and  it  was  sup- 
posed that  this  was  about  one  quarter  of  the  whole  number  in  this 
country,  making  the  number,  at  that  period,  in  the  United  States 
about  fourteen  millions. 

That  the  number  has  increased  since  that  time  no  one  can  donbtt 
so  that  the  number,  may  now  be  estimated  at  more  than  twenty  mill- 
Ions.  Experience  has  proved,  that  flocks  of  sheep  can  be  doubled  in 
this  country,  in  a  very  short  period ;  and  no  doubt  remains,  that  the 
United  States  can  easily  produce  wool  more  than  sufficient  for  their 
own  consumption.  The  committee  of  the  convention,  who  had  this 
subject  under  their  consideration,  estimated  the  quantity  of  wool, 
produced  in  this  country,  at  fiAy  millions  of  pounds,  worth,  on  an  ave- 
rage of  the  years  1829,  1830  and  31 ,  forty  cents  per  pound,  aiaking 
$20,000,000,  and  that  its  value,  when  manufactured,  was  940,000,000. 

This  included  all  made  in  families,  as  well  as  in  factories  ;  and  the 
same  committee  estimated  the  proportion  of  wool  used  in  the  latter, 
to  that  in  the  former,  as  three  to  two. 

The  amount  thus  estimated  by  the  committee,  we  apprehend,  in- 
stead of  exceeding,  fell  short  of  the  reality ;  and  we  think  that  the 
ralue  of  the  woollen  manufactures  of  the  United  States,  at  the  pres- 
ent time,  (January  1835,)  cannot  be  far  from  sixty  five  to  seventy 
millions  of  dollars.  In  1831,  the  quantity  of  wool  imported  was 
five  millions  six  hundred  twenty  two  thousand  nine  hundred  and  sixty 
pounds,  valued  at  $1,288,909,  and  in  1832,  four  millions  forty  two 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty  eight,  worth  $098,721.  In  the  for- 
mier  year,  more  than  two  millions  came  from  England,  and  in  the  lat- 
ter, only  three  hundred  twenty  three  thousand  pounds,  from  that  coun- 
try, and  about  two  millions  from  the  Levant,  Turkey  and  Egypt,  being 
low  priced  wool.  The  number  of  sheep  in  Great  Britain,  is  estimated 
both  by  Marshall  and  Mc  Culloch,  at  thirty  two  millions,  producing  one 
hundred  sixty  millions  of  pounds  of  wool ;  and  the  quantity  of  foreign 
wool  imported  into  that  country,  is  annually  from  twenty  five  to  thirty 
millions  of  pounds ;  the  greatest  part  of  which  comes  from  Germany. 


489  , 

In  1830,  the  amonit  inporied  wu  thirty  two  millions  three  hundred 
thirteen  thouetnd  ei|bl  liundred  and  fiAy  nine  pounds,  and  of  thii 
there  came  from       ^ 

Germany,  Ibe.  20,073382 

Spain  and  Coloniea, 1,643,616 

New  Holland  and  Van  Dieman^e  Land,  1,907,909 

The  number  of  sheep  in  France  has  been  estimated  at  thirty  two 
millions,  though  the  estimated  quantity  of  wool,  produced  in  that  coun- 
try, falls  short  of  that  in  England.  In  1828,  Mr.  Dopin,  gives  tb« 
quantity  of  wool  in  France,  from  an  account  taken  sometime  previoos 
to  that  period,  at  forty  millions  seven  hundred  fifty  six  thousand  nine 
hundred  and  ^fiy  killogrammes  when  unwashed,  being  only  aboat 
eighty  two  millions  pounds.  He  imagines,  however,  that  at  the  tin* 
he  wrote,  the  quantity  had  increased  one  fifth,  which  would  make  tb* 
quantity  in  1828,  about  one  hundred  millions.*  The  quantity  of  »•• 
rino  wool,  at  that  time,  was  about  one  million  five  hundred  thoaeand^ 
and  mixed,  about  eight  millions  five  hundred  thousand  pounds.  Tlio 
quantity  of  wool  imported  into  France,  was  then  about  sixteen 
millions  of  pounds.  In  1834,  the  value  of  the  manufactures  of  woolf 
in  France  was  400,000,000  francs,  about  980,000,000. 

The  number  of  sheep  in  Prussia  in  1828,  was  eleven  millions  six 
hundred  and  six  thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty,  of  which,  one 
million  seven  hundred  and  thirty  four  thousand  one  hundred  and  five 
were  Merinos,  four  millions  ^we  hundred  and  fiAy  eight  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  seventy  seven  cross  breeds,  and  five  millions  three 
hundred  and  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  forty  seven,  nativee.t 

In  Great  Britain,  the  number  of  sheep  is  about  two  to  each  inhab- 
itant— in  France  and  Prussia,  the  number  is  about  equal  to  the  inhab- 
itants, and  in  the  United  States,  calling  the  number  of  sheep  twenty 
millions,  is  about  one  and  a  half  to  each  individual.  In  the  state  of 
New  York,  however,  in  1825,  the  number  was  a  little  more  than  two 
to  each  person ;  and  in  Vermont,  in  1831,  the  number  of  sheep  beinf 
seven  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  six  hundred  and  seven,  the  propor- 
tion was  about  two  and  a  half  to  each  inhabitant. 

With  respect  to  the  value  of  the  manufactures  of  wool  in  €hreai 
Britain,  difi*erent  estimates  have  been  made,  by  the  distinguished  sta- 
tistical writers  of  that  country.  Marshall  estimated  their  value  io 
1828,  at  £1(1,374,000,  calling  the  price  of  domestic  wool  9d.  sterlinf 


•  Dapin's  Forces  prodactivcs  et  eommereiales  de  la  France.  S  tom.  p.  168. 
t  0se  Blarshall'k  itatistics  of  London,  dc 


r 


per  pound,  and  twenty  fire  millions  pounds  of  ibreign  wool  at  %Hm 

making  the  whole  valae  of  wool,  £8,187,000y  and  doublini^  this  wmm 
for  the  value  of  whole  when  manufactured.  BlACoUoch,  however,  es- 
timates the  value  of  woollen  manufactures,  in  that  country^  at  £rom 
90,000,000  to  £22,000,000  sterling. 

Although  the  returns  in  relation  to  the  manufactures  of  the  United 
States,  made  to  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1832,  in  pursuance 
of  an  order  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  were  generally  deficieot; 
yet  they  show,  that,  in  some  of  the  states,  the  manufacture  of  wool*  cot^ 
ton  and  iron  had  been  carried  to  a  great  extent,  in  fixed  establishoieDts. 
In  Massachusetts,  the  value  of  woollens,  in  these  establishments  ex- 
ceeded 86,500,000.  In  the  county  of  Wurcester  alone,  in  that  state,  tbt 
manufacture  of  wool,  amounted  to  $2,409,500,  and  the  value  of  ag- 
ricultural products  consumed  by  the  laborers,  in  the  woollen  estab- 
lishments, in  that  county,  according  to  returns  of  the  manufaciarert» 
was  $1,776,000. 

In  estimating  the  value  of  woollens  made  in  this  country,  it  should 
be  borne  in  mind,  that,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  fixed  establish- 
ments for  the  manufacture  of  this  article,  lately  erected,  household,  or 
family  manufactures  of  wool,  and  mixtures  of  wool  and  cotton,  are 
still  carried  on  to  a  great  extent. 

In  the  year  1810,  the  whole  number  of  fulling  mills  in  the  United 
States,  as  returned  by  the  marshalls,  was  one  thousand  six  hundred 
and  eighty  two,  and  the  carding  machines  one  thousand  six  hundred 
and  thirty;  and  in  1825,  in  the  state  of  New  York  alone,  the  number 
of  the  former  was  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty  two,  and  of 
the  latter^  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty ;  and  it  will  be  re- 
membered, that  the  number  of  looms  in  this  country,  in  18101,  was 
three  hundred  and  twenty  four  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninstj 
eight,  principally  in  families. 

In  1825,  the  number  of  yards  of  fulled  cloth  made  in  families  in 
the  State  of  New  York,  as  official  returns  nhew,  was  two  millions 
nine  hundred  and  eighteen  thousand  two  hundred  and 
thirty  three,  valued  at        .  •  .  $2,018,233 

The  number  of  yards  of  flannels,  and  other  woollens, 
not  fulled,  was  three  millions  four  hundred  and  sixty 
eight  thousand  and  one,  valued  at  twenty  cents  per  yard,         603,600 

Making,  $3,611,833 

The  value  of  the  same  kinds  of  cloth,  made  in  families  in  that  state, 
at  the  present  time  (January,  1835)  must  be,  at  least,  $4,500,000;  and 


491 

there  can  be  litde  doubt,  that  the  hoosebold  manufaeturea  of  wooK  in 
New  England,  lAoat  equal,  if  not  exceed,  tboae  of  New  York.  The 
agent  appointed  fay  (he  secretary  of  the  treaaury,  to  aacertain  the 
manufacturca  in  New  Hampshire,  states,  in  hia  return,  that  in  one 
hundred  and  twenty  five  towns,  whose  population  was  one  hundred 
and  forty  eight  thousand  six  hundred  and  forty  seven,  one  half  of  the 
clothing  for  the  inhabitants  was  nnade  in  families ;  the  value  of  ihe 
whole  being  estimated  at  $2,380,04a  The  greatest  pari  of  the  cloth 
made  in  these  towns  must  have  been  woollen. 

We  apprehend,  that  the  aum  of  ten  dollars,  is  not  too  high  an  eati- 
mate,  for  the  annual  cost  of  the  woollen  and  cotton  clothing  of  eaA 
inhabitant  of  the  United  Statea.  It  will  be  recollected,  that  the  ae^ 
retary  of  the  treasury  in  1832,  required,  from  those  selected  to  col» 
lect  information  relating  to  manufactures,  an  answer  to  the  followisf 
questions,  among  others,  **  the  proportion  which  the  production  of 
American  manufactures  bears  to  the  consumption  f"  and,  also,  aa  to 
the  **  extent  of  individual  and  household  manufactures  of  the  United 
States  ?'*  The  6rst  of  the  above  questions  is  certainly  a  very  import^ 
ant  one ;  and  a  correct  answer  to  it,  is  a  great  desideratum  in  this  coun* 
try.  Few  answers  were  given  to  these  questions,  and  the  moat  of 
them  were  generally  vague  and  indefinite,  and  were  not  baaed  on  aneh 
data,  as  would  authorize  a  safe  calculation  for  the  whole  United  Statea. 
The  agent  for  New  Hampshire,  however,  and  those  employed  by  hitaOf 
attended  to  these  subjects  of  inquiry,  much  more  than  the  agenta  in 
the  other  states ;  and  his  answer  will  tend  to  elucidate  the  queatios 
now  under  consideration.  He  states,  in  his  return,  '*  that  in  the  coun- 
ties of  Rockingham,  Stafford,  Grafton  and  Coos,  containing  one  hon- 
dred  and  twenty  tive  towns,  and  one  hundred  and  forty  eight  thousand 
six  hundred  and  forty  seven  inhabitants,  the  expense  of  each  individ- 
ual, annually,  for  cloths  of  all  descriptions  for  wearing  appareU  ia 
$16,00,  making  the  expense  to  the  whole  population,  of  $2,380,000. 
**  Allowing*'  he  adds,  **  seven  persons  to  a  family,  there  would  be 
twenty  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty  families,  the  average  ex- 
penae  to  each  of  which,  for  bedding,  carpeting,  table  linen,  dt.e.  k 
$19,00,  equal  to  $403,712;  so  that  $2,783,860  are  yearly  expended  for 
cloths  for  wearing  apparel,  bedding,  carpeting,  dt.c.  Something  more 
than  one  half  of  theae  cloths  are  manufactured  in  families.*'  The 
expenae  of  clothing  each  individual  in  the  counties  of  New  Hamp* 
ahire,  above  referred  to,  was  $16,00;  and  as  this  clothing  moat 
have  consisted,  principally,  of  woollens  and  cottons,  we  think  the 
anm  of  $10,00  for  each  person  in  the  United  States,  for  this  kind 
of  dothingt  cannot  be  deemed  an  over  estimate. 


/ 


498 

The  whole  annual  production  of  woollens  and  cottons,  in  Gviil 
dn,  18  about  £66,000,000,  exported  £23,000,000,  leaTinf  for 
home  consumption  £33,000,000,  or  about  $160,000,000.  This  would 
make  about  ten  dollars  a  bead,  fur  the  people  of  that  country  ;  and 
if  we  suppose,  that  one  half  of  the  people  of  Ireland  are  clothed  with 
English  woollens  and  cottons,  it  will  giire  about  eight  dollars  a  head 
And  we  may  surely  calculate,  that  the  people  in  the  United  States 
are  generally  better  clothed,  as  well  as  better  fed,  than  the  people  in 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 

Supposing  the  whole  American  population  to  be  fourteen  millions, 
the  Talue  of  woollens  and  cottons  for  their  clothing,  at  $10,00  each, 
would  be  $140,000,000 ;  and  deducting  the  amount  of  foreign  arti- 
cles of  this  kind,  estimated  at  $18,000,000,  would  leave  $122,000,000 
for  domestic  production,  and  even  at  $8,00  per  head,  would  leave 
$94,000,000. 

The  manufacture  of  carpets  has  lately  increased  in  this  conntry 
very  rapidly,  and  requires  particular  notice. 

We  are  enabled  to  inform  the  reader,  from  an  authentic  scarce, 
that,  in  December,  1834,  there  were  in  operation,  in  the  United 
States,  at  least,  live  hundred  and  eleven  carpet  looms,  in  from  eighteen 
to  twenty  factories — of  which  eighteen  were  for  Brussels,  twenty  one 
for  what  are  called  treble  ingrained,  four  hundred  and  twenty  four 
for  other  ingrained,  forty  four  for  Yenitian,  and  four  for  damask 
Yenitian ;  and  that  the  number  of  yards  of  carpeting,  produced  yearly 
from  these  looms,  was  as  follows : — 

Ttrdbk 

Brussels, 21,600 

Three  ply, 31,600 

Other  ingrained, 964,000 

Yenitian,            132,000 

Damask  Yenitian, 8,400 

Making,  ....  1,147,600 

The  average  value  of  this  carpeting  may  be  estimated  at  $1,00  per 
yard. 

The  American  market  is  now,  in  a  great  degree,  and  will  ere  long 
be  entirely  supplied  with  carpeting  of  all  kinds  from  a  domestic 
source.  The  average  quantity  of  carpeting  imported,  from  1828  to 
1832,  was  five  hundred  and  thirty  six  thousand  two  hundred  and 
ninety  six  yards,  valued,  at  the  place  from  whence  imported,  ml 
$416^944.    In  1833,  the  quantity  of  Brussels,  Wilton,  and  three  ply. 


.    498 

imported,  was       •        .        .        yards,  104,106  valued  at  $147,890 
Ingraioed  and  VenitiaD,                 .     ««      240,006        «'  171,006 

All  other, **  337        "  100 


««     344,113  $310,692 

In  some  of  the  states,  large  quantities  of  carpeting  of  an  inferior 
quality  are  made  in  families.  The  agent  for  New  Hampshire,  in  his 
return  to  the  secretary,  says  that  the  amount  of  carpeting  made  in 
the  counties  of  Rockingham,  Stafford,  Grafion  and  Coos,  mostly  in 
families,  and  sold  in  other  states,  exceeds,  in  his  opinion,  the  amounot 
of  foreign  articles  consumed. 

IRON. 

Iron  and  its  various  manufactures,  may,  in  importance,  claim  a 
preference  over  all  others.  For  national  defense  it  is  absolutely  in- 
dispensable ;  and  it  is  essential  to  the  prosperity,  and  even  existence 
of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  the  mechanic  arts.  Without  it,  the 
merchant  cannot  build  his  ship ;  and  if  he  could,  neither  the  farmert 
nor  the  manufacturer,  nor  the  mechanic  could  furnish  him  with  any 
thing  to  carry  in  it.  Without  it,  man  never  has,  and  never  can  make 
much  progress  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life.  The  most  untutored  sav- 
age, in  the  remotest  island  of  the  Pacific,  soon  learns  its  value,  and 
will  barter  any  thing  he  possesses,  for  a  hatchet  or  a  knife,  to  enable 
him  the  better  to  shape  his  canoe,  or  to  point  his  arrow.  Indeed,  it  la 
almost  literally  true,  that  where  there  is  no  iron,  there  is  no  civil- 
ization. Well,  therefore,  might  Hamilton,  in  his  report  on  manufac- 
tures before  referred  to,  recommend  this  branch  of  domestic  economy, 
to  the  special  patronage  and  protection  of  the  national  Legislature. 
**  The  manufactures  of  this  article"  he  says,  referring  to  iron,  '*  are 
entitled  to  a  preeminent  rank ;  none  are  more  essential  in  their  kinds, 
nor  so  extensive  in  their  use.  They  constitute  in  whole  or  in  part, 
the  implements,  or  the  materialM,  or  both,  of  almost  every  useful  oc- 
cupation.   Their  instrumentality  is  every  where  conspicuous.'' 

To  encourage  the  production  and  manufacture  of  this  article,  he 
not  only  proposed  duties  on  imports  of  foreign  iron  and  its  manufac- 
tures ;  but,  also,  with  respect  to  fire  arms,  and  military  weapons  ne- 
cessary for  national  defense,  suggested  the  propriety  of  making  them 
at  the  public  expense. 

This  encouragement  was  the  more  necessary,  at  that  time,  because 
the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  had  a  few  years  before,  with  a  view* 
no  doubt,  to  prevent  the  rivalry  of  foreign  nations  in  this  particular 
manoiaeture,  paiaed  an  act  (26ih  Geo.  III.)  prohibiting  the  eanyiog 


4M  *■* 


■ 


* 


tf 


f 


chH  of  the  realm,  all  the  various  tools  or  instruments  then 
the  various  manufactures  of  iron.  This  may  be  considered  a  nopple 
ment  to  the  various  acts  passed  prior  to  the  American  revoluiioif 
prohibiting  the  manufacture  of  iron  in  the  colonies. 

We  have  no  data  by  which  to  ascertain  the  quantity  of  iron  prodo- 
ced  in  the  United  States,  prior  to  1810.    At  that  time,  according  to 
the  returns  of  the  marshals,  the  quantity  of  bar  iron  made  in  this 
country,  was  twenty  four  thousand  four  hundred  and  seven ly  ooe 
tons,  then  valued  at  $%640,778 ;  of  which  ten  thousand  nine  hundred 
and  sixty  nine  tons  were  made  in  Pennsylvania.     From  that  time  to 
1830,  the  quantity  had  increased  to  one  hundred  and  twelve  thoosaiid 
eight  hundred  and  sixty  six  tons.    This  appears,  from  a  report  of  the 
eommittee  of  the  Convention,  in  1831,  appointed  to  investigate  this 
subject — a  report  drawn  up  with  no  little  care  and  attention.    B 
thews,  that  in  addition  to  the  quantity  of  the  bar  iron  above  men- 
tioned, one  hundred  and  ninety  one  thousand  6ve  hundred  and  thirty 
six  tons  of  pig  iron  was  also,  at  that  time  made  in  this  country,  and 
that  the  value  of  both  amounted  to  $13,329,760 ;  and  that  in  making 
this,  no  less  than  twenty  nine  thousand  two  hundred  and  fifty  foor 
men  were  employed,  and  one  hundred  and  forty  six  thousand  two  boa* 
dred  and  seventy  three  subsisted,  whose  annual  wages  was  88^778,490; 
and  that  in  their  support,  the  fiu*mer  furnished  food  to  the  value  of 
$4,000,490. 

The  average  quantity  of  hammered  iron  imported  into  the  United 
States  from  1821  to  1830,  was  about  twenty  six  thousand  two  hun- 
dred tons  annually,  and  of  rolled  iron,  about  five  thourand  six  hun- 
dred ;  making  for  both,  ^irty  one  thousand  eight  hundred  tons; 
and  which  as  before  shewn,  was  valued  at  $1,762,000.  The  whole 
quantity  of  hammered  and  rolled  iron  consumed  in  the  United  States, 
in  1830,  may  be  estimated  at  about  one  hundred  and  forty  four  thou- 
sand six  hundred  and  sixty  six  tons,  much  the  greatest  part  of  which 
was  of  domestic  manufacture.  . 

The  value  of  the  various  foreign  manufactures  of  iron  consumed  in 
this  eountry  on  an  average,  from  1821  to  1830,  was  about  four  mill- 
ions of  dollars  yearly,  making  the  whole  amount  of  foreign  iron  and 
its  manufactures,  annually  consumed  in  the  United  States,  not  fcr 
from  $5,762,000. 

This  country  receives  about  one  half  of  all  the  hardware  and  cut- 
lery exported  from  Great  Britain.  The  whole  value  exported  from 
that  kingdom,  on  an  average  of  the  years  1827, 1828, 1829,  and  1830^ 
was  $6,624,000 ;  of  which  $3,276,000  was  sent  to  the  United  States. 


'^i^ 


^*  '496 


•Til 


TNbf  rodoelion  of  iron  in  Great  Britain  has  greatly  increased  withi  ,    TT 

in  a  few  years  past — in  1706  it  wai  only  one  hundred  and  twenty  £?•         ^     /;•  , 
Ihouaand  tons, — in  1806,  two  hundred  and  fiAy  thousand,— in  ISiO,         • 
was  four  hundred  thousand, — and  in  1827,  was  about  seven  hundred 
thousand  ;  about  three  tenths  of  which,  according  to  Mc  Culloch,  is  -^.>' 

used  as  cast  iron,  and  consumed  principally  in  Great  Britain  and  Ire-       ^^  v^ 
land — the  other  seven  tenths  is  converted  into  bars,  bolts,  rods,  dec — 
and  the  amount  of  various  sorts  exported  in  1832,  was  one  hundred       .  j  -.^ 
and  ten  thousand  one  hundred  tons.    Iron  is  now  often  substituted  in ,    .   « .    -i 
Great  Britain  for  wood  and  stone,  in  building  bridges,  aqueducts,  and 
even  steam  boats  and  certain  parts  of  dwelling  houses.  .;^'      ^ 

The  produce  of  the  iron  mines  of  Russia,  is  estimated  by  Malta     ^  *  2^ 
Brun,  at  six  millions  of  poods,  or  two  hundred  and  forty  millions  of     «^  '   ^ 
pounds ;  and  according  to  Dupin,  the  quantity  of  iron  made  in  France        ^ 
in  1825,  was  one  hundred  and  ten  millions  five  hundred  and  one  thou-    n^' 
sand  killogrammes,  or  about  two  hundred  an4  twenty  one  mfllions  of  \  • 

pounds.*  JJJr^^  \        x. 

The  iron  mines  of  the  United  States  are  inexhaustible,  as  well  as  *^  ^ 
the  material  necessary  for  the  manufacture  of  their  produce.  New 
beds  of  ore  are  constantly  found,  in  different  parts  of  this  country. 
Iron  ore  in  abundance  has  been  discovered  in  Tennessee ;  and  it  has 
been  there  manufactured  to  such  an  extent,  that  in  1832,  iron  and 
eastings  were  exported  from  that  state  to  the  amount  of  $800,000. 

To  what  extent  the  manufacture  of  this  article  has  been  carried  in 
the  United  States,  cannot  be  ascertained  with  precision ;  we  can  only 
approximate  the  truth.  It  is  well  known,  however,  that  the  con* 
sumption  of  foreign  iron  and  its  manufacture,  bears  but  a  compar- 
atively small  proportion  to  that  of  domestic  It  will  be  remem- 
bered, that  in  1810,  the  manofactores  of  iron  were  estimated  at 
$14,364,620.  When  it  is  considered  that  the  quantity  of  bar  iron 
made  in  this  country  in  1831,  exceeded  four  times  the  quantity  made 
in  1810,  and  that  the  demand  for  iron  of  various  kinds  has  greatly 
increased  since  that  period,  for  steam  engines,  machinery  for  mano- 
facturing  and  other  establishments,  for  carriages,  for  buildings,  and 
for  various  implements  in  agriculture  and  the  mechanic  arts,  little 
doubt  can  be  entertained,  that  the  value  of  iron  made  and  manudie- 
tured  in  the  United  States,  must  be  from  forty  to  forty  five  millioos 
of  dollars.  The  value  of  nails  alone,  cannot  be  less  than  between 
four  and  five  millions.    In  1830,  one  hundred  steam  engines  were 

t  Dnpin'k  Forces  prodoctivss,  Ac.  ds  la  Fraace,  tooii.  9,  p.  90t. 


496 

/Hade  at  Pittsburgh,  and  in  1831,  sugar  mills  and  steam  en||Mi  I* 
the  Talue  of  9300,000  were  made  at  Cincinnati. 

ifitliring  the  period  under  review,  many  new  branches  of  the  mattv- 
facture  of  iron  have  been  established,  and  are  now  almost  daily  bdng 
established  in  different  parts  o{  the  United  States,  and  which  it  is  ia- 
possible  to  particularize — among  these,  however,  may  be  enameia- 
ted,  in  addition  to  steam  engines  and  machinery  for  a  great  yarieiy  of 
purposes,  the  manufacture  of  stoves,  chain  cables,  mill  and  croaa  col 
saws,  spades  and  shovels,  wood  screws,  sickles,  hammers,  gimblets, 
brazier^s  rods,  door  locks  of  various  kinds,  latches,  surgical  instn- 
ments,  knives,  razors,  and  many  other  articles  of  cutlery,  ▼arioos 
kinds  of  carpenter's  tools  ;  and  there  is  a  vast  increase  in  the  mana- 
iacture  of  muskets  and  rifles,  and  of  edge  tools  generally. 

LEATHER. 

.  The  manufacture  of  leather  is  of  great  importance  in  every  cooa- 
try,  and  particularly  in  the  United  States ;  and  has  been  more  or  ka 
encouraged  by  duties  on  imports  of  articles  of  this  material,  from  the 
commencement  of  the  government.  In  consequence  of  thiji,  the 
home  market  has  long  since  been  supplied  by  the  American  manufte- 
turer ;  and  boots,  shoes,  and  saddlery,  for  many  years,  have  been  ex- 
ported from  this  country,  to  the  amount  of  between  three  and  foor 
hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year.  The  business  of  making  shoes, 
boots,  saddlery,  harness  and  trunks,  is  carried  on  in  almost  every  vill- 
age and  town  throughout  the  United  States.  The  inhabitants  of  some 
towns  are  almost  exclusively  employed  in  making  shoes  alone.  In 
the  town  of  Lynn,  in  Massachusetts,  the  number  of  shoes  made  in 
1832,  was  one  million  six  hundred  and  seventy  five  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  eighty  one — valued  at  $942,101 ;  giving  employment  to 
one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  forty  one  males,  and  one  thooaaod 
seven  hundred  and  seventy  five  females.  Many  of  the  fishermen  of 
Marblehead,  not  finding  a  market  for  their  fish,  have  lately  turned 
shoemakers. 

The  manufacture  of  leather  is  carried  on  to  a  great  extent  in  the 
States  of  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.  From  fifty  three  tanneries 
in  the  former  state,  there  was  sent  to  the  city  of  New  York,  in  1831, 
sole  leather  to  the  value  of  $1,578,900, — when  to  this  was  added,  the 
sole  leather  of  other  tanneries,  and  also  the  upper  leather,  calf  skinst 
goat  and  sheep  skins,  from  the  other  principal  tanneries,  the  value 
was  estimated  at  $3,468,060. 


« 


497 


V 
.* 


/ 


-  / 


l(||  quantity  of  sole  leather  conaamed  in  the  United  Sutea,  haa 
be^D  eatimated  at  thirty  two  milliona  of  poanda ;  of  which  it  is  lop- 
poaed,  the  State  of  New  York  produces  twelve  milliona  thra^liBiH        ^ 
dred  and  fifteen  thousand  pounds.*  ^^ 

The  total  annual  value  of  the  manufiictore  of  this  article  in  the  T^f 

United  States,  must,  in  some  measure  be  conjecturaL    It  is  believedy 
that  it  cannot  be  less  than  from  forty  to  forty  five  millions  of  dollara.  %  * 

This  estimate  cannot  be  deemed  too  high,  when  it  ia  considered,  that  i\i  '•. 
the  value  of  boots  and  shoes  alone  for  fourteen  millions  of  people 
must  be  from  928,000,000  to  $34,000,000  a  year,  allowing  to  each 
person  for  shoes  and  boots,  from  two  to  two  and  a  half  dollars  a  year. 
The  whole  value  of  the  manufacture  of  leather,  in  Great  Britain* 
with  a  population  of  sixteen  millions,  is  estimated  by  Mc  CuUocht  at 
£12,600,000,  or  about  $60,000,000 ;  and  in  making  this  estimate,  he 
allows  eight  shillings  and  sixpence  sterling  a  year,  to  each  perioa 
for  shoes,  making  for  the  whole  population,  £0,800,000,  or  about 
•33,000,000. 

The  imperfect  returns  of  the  Marshals  in  1810,  made  the  valae  of 
the  leather  manufactures  of  the  country  at  that  time,  about  SlSvOOOyOOO; 
and  in  Pennsylvania  alone,  the  value  was  $3,165,067. 

That  the  value  has  more  than  doubled  since  that  time,  there  can  ba 
little  doubt,  when  it  is  considered,  that,  on  an  average  of  the  yeara 
1830,  1831,  and  1832,  raw  hides  and  skins  were  imported  to  the  value 
•f  $3,000,000,  much  the  greatest  part  of  which,  were  manufactured 
in  the  United  Sutes. 

HATS. 

The  American  manufacturer  has  long  since  supplied  the  domeatie 
market  with  hats,  and  a  surplus  for  exportation.  In  1831,  the  vaHia 
of  hats  made  in  this  country,  was  estimated  at  $10,600,000,  ezeloaiya 
of  caps  of  various  sorts ;  and  the  number  of  men  and  boys  employed 
directly  in  this  branch  of  domestic  induatry,  was  estimated  at  fifteao 
thousan^  and  of  females,  three  thousand ;  and  the  amount  paid  for 
their  labor  was  calculated  to  be  $4,200,000. 

The  manufacture  of  caps  of  various  kinds,  is  carried  on  alao  to  a 
great  extent — an  establishment  of  this  description  in  Albany,  haa 
employed  in  this  business,  from  six  hundred  to  seven  hundred  peraonav 
and  has  paid  wages  to  the  amount  of  $100,000  a  year.  And  we  beg 
leave  here,  to  refer  to  a  branch  of  domestic  industry,  carried  oa  prio* 
cipally  in  Massachusetts,  in  making  braid,  or  straw  bonneta,  and  pain 

'  Annnal  Regisler  for  183S. 
63 


,.  f 


-4 


•  498 

leaf  hats.  The  valae  of  these  articles,  made  in  1832,  as  appwA  bf 
the  returns  made  to  tlie  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  was  from  HQOOfilfJO 
to  1000,000.  We  may,  therefore,  safely  estimate  the  value  of  hats* 
caps  and  straw  honnets  of  all  kinds,  and  palm  leaf  hats,  made  in  th« 
United  States,  at  815,000,000. 

CABINET   WARE. 

The  value  of  cabinet  ware  was  estimated,  in  1831,  at  $10,000,000; 
employing  fiAeen  thousand  men,  who  received  for  their  labor  about 
$4,700,000.  The  value  of  household  furniture,  exported  in  1832, 
was  $109,038 ;  and  in  1833,  was  $200,635. 

SALT. 

The  domestic  manufacture  of  salt  is  very  great  in  some  parts  of 
this  country ;  and  being  an  article  of  necessity,  its  protection  and 
encouragement  should  never  be  abandoned  by  the  government.  The 
experience  of  the  last  war,  proved  the  impolicy  of  a  dependence  on 
foreign  nations,  for  this  essential  article  of  consumption.  In  1829 
and  1830,  the  capital  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  domestic  salt, 
was  estimated  at  not  less  than  $6,964,988,  and  the  quantity  manufac- 
tured, at  four  millions  four  hundred  and  forty  four  thousand  nine 
hundred  and  twenty  nine  bushels  ;  and  the  average  price  at  the  places 
where  manufactured,  from  forty  to  fifty  cents  per  bushel,  making  in 
value  about  $2,000,000.  This  article  is  made  more  or  less  in  most 
of  the  states ;  principally,  however,  in  Massachusetts,  New  York, 
Virginia,  Pennsylvania  and  Ohio.  Of  the  above  quantity,  five  hun- 
dred and  sixty  seven  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  nine  buabels, 
was  made  in  Massachusetts,  one  million  two  hundred  and  ninety  one 
thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty  in  New  York,  one  million  in  Vir- 
ginia, six  hundred  thousand  in  Pennsylvania,  and  four  hundred  and 
forty  six  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  in  Ohio. 

And  we  would  here  state,  that  the  committee  of  the  Senate  of  Penn- 
sylrania,  in  a  very  able  and  valuable  report  made  in  March,  1834*  on 
the  subject  of  the  coal  trade  of  that  state,  declare,  that  the  salt  then 
made  in  the  western  part  of  Pennsylvania,  was  yearly  about  one  mill- 
ion of  bushels. 

The  quantity  of  this  article  imported  for  a  number  of  years  past, 
has  been  about  four  million  five  hundred  thousand  bushels. 

SUGAR. 

Sugar  may  be  properly  classed  as  one  of  the  domestic  manufactures; 
and  among  the  advantages  derived  from  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana, 


■\ 


499 

that  of  enabling  the  United  Staten  to  make  for  themselves  this  ralni* 
ble  and  essential  article  of  consumption,  is  not  the  least.  To  encour- 
age its  production,  it  will  be  remembered,  that  in  1816,  an  addition  of 
half  a  cent  was  laid  on  imported  brown  pugar,  making  the  whole  duty 
three  cents ;  and  experience  has  proved  the  policy  of  this  measure. 
The  quantity  manufactured  in  Louisiana,  varies  with  the  seasons. 
From  1820  to  1826,  the  quantity  was  from  twenty  live  to  thirty  thou-  V, 

sand  hogsheads  per  annum,  and  of  molasses,  was  about  one  million 
two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  gallons.  From  1826  to  1832,  the 
quantity  of  each  was  as  follows : — 

Yean.  Sngsr— hhds.  Moliw    silfcm 

1826-7  32,086  1,604,260 

1827-8  46,116        .        .        2,266,760      .  -' 

1828-9  .        87,966  4,398,260      ^ 

1829-30  46,000  2,300,000 

1830-31  78,000  3,900,000 

1831-32  76,000  3,660,000 

The  average  quantity  of  foreign  sugar  annually  consumed  in  the  Uni- 
ted States,  from  1820  to  1830,  was  about  fifty  seven  millions  of  poanda— 
and  estimating  the  hogsheads  produced  in  Louisiana  to  average  eleven 
hundred  pounds  each,  the  quantity  consumed  in  the  United  States  is 
about  one  hundred  and  forty  millions  of  pounds.  Louisiana  will  soon 
furnish  sugar  enough  for  the  whole  consumption  of  the  United  States ; 
and  those  well  acquainted  with  the  subject,  are  of  opinion  that  this 
supply  can  be  continued  for  twenty  five  years  to  come.  The  sugar 
plantations  of  that  state,  now  furnish  a  market  for  about  four  millions 
of  the  productions  of  the  other  states ;  those  at  the  west,  famishing 
sugar  mills,  steam  engines,  and  provisions,  and  those  at  the  north,  the 
manufactures  of  wool,  cotton,  and  various  other  articles. 

REFINED   SDOAR. 

The  refining  of  this  article,  has  long  been  an  object  of  importance  i     ' 

in  this  country,  and  refined  sugar  has  become  an  article  of  exportation* 
The  amount  now  manufactured  in  the  United  States  may  be  safely  ea- 
ti mated  at  $2,000,000.  It  has  been  been  proved  on  trial,  that  prima 
Louisiana  sugars,  are  equally  valuable  for  refining,  with  those  of  the 
West  Indies.  A  large  refinery  has  lately  been  established  near  New 
Orleans,  called  the  New  Orleans  Sugar  Refinery,  where  thirty  hoga- 
heads  of  raw  sugar  per  day  have  been  refined.*    The  whole  nomber 

•  See  "  Manual  on  the  cuUivatioD  of  the  sugar  cane,  and  the  fabrication  and 
refinement  of  sugar,"  prepared  by  Professor  SillinaaD,  under  the  direciioo  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury — a  work  of  no  little  research,  and  containing  BOek 
valuable  information  on  the  subjects  to  which  it  relates. 


I 


600 

of  Migar  refineriM  in  the  United  States,  is  thirty  eight ;  mud  in  1811* 
the  vdoe  of  domestic  refined  sugar  exported,  was  $21&,704 ;  in  183^* 
was  074,673,  and  in  1833,  was  only  $40327. 

GLASS. 

We  have  been  not  a  little  gratified,  with  the  account  of  domeatic 
nanufacture  of  glass,  furnished  by  the  committee  of  the  New  York 
Conrention,  to  whom  was  referred  this  important  subject  The  re- 
port of  this  committee  informs  us,  that  the  manufacture  of  flint  glass, 
is  now  almost  equal  to  the  domestic  consumption — ^that,  for  the  man- 
ufacture of  this  article,  there  were,  in  1831,  twenty  one  furnaces,  con- 
taining one  hundred  and  forty  pots,  and  located  at  the  following  pla- 
ces, viz : — 


At  Boston  and  its 

vicinity. 

6  furnaces, 

with 

38 

"    Providence,  R. 

I. 

.        . 

2 

ct 

«t 

12 

*'    New  York  and  its 

vicinity, 

3 

«c 

«c 

22 

•«    Philadelphia, 

1 

cc 

M 

6 

**    Baltimore, 

2 

ct 

U 

12 

••    Pittsburgh, 

4 

1. 

M 

32 

"     Wellsburgh, 

2 

M 

t« 

12 

•♦    Wheeling, 

1 

«C 

iC 

6 

M 
44 
«« 
44 
44 
44 


That  the  value  of  flint  glass  made  in  these  establishmenta,  was 
about  01,300,000 ;  and  that  two  of  these,  having  four  furnaces,  with 
twenty  eight  pots,  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  Boston,  made  annually,  to 
the  amount  of  $400,000,  having  a  capital  of  $450,000,  and  paying,  in 
yearly  wages,  $140,000. 

American  flint  glass  is  of  an  excellent  quality,  rivalling,  in  solidity 
and  elegance,  that  of  foreign  countries.  The  first  manufactory  of 
flint  glass  in  the  United  States,  was  established  at  Pittsburgh,  in  1812, 
and  here  the  manufacture  of  this  article,  has  since  greatly  extended ; 
and  we  have  rarely  felt  more  pleasure  or  surprize  than  in  witnessing 
the  making  of  this  article,  in  a  place,  which,  but  a  few  years  before, 
was  in  the  midst  of  a  wilderness.  In  1832,  domestic  glass,  principal- 
ly flint  glass,  was  exported  to  the  amount  of  $100,856. 

Nor,  during  the  period  under  review,  have  the  Americans  been 
less  successful,  in  the  manufacture  of  window  glass,  and  glass  bottles 
of  diflerent  kinds.  The  New  England  crown  glass  manufactory,  sit- 
uated in  Boston,  having  a  capital  of  $150,000,  makes  glass  of  this 
description,  to  the  value  of  $100,000  a  year.  In  addition  to  this,  the 
committee  advise  us,  of  at  least,  twenty  three  manufactories  of  cylin- 
der window  glass  then  in  this  country,  ten  in  Pennsylvania,  (foor 


501 

behif  at  PitUlnirgh  and  four  at  Browniille,)  two  at  Wheeling  in  Yir 
finia,  two  in  Maryland,  two  in  New  York,  two  in  Ohio,  one  in  Mat- 
aachoaetts,  one  in  New  Hampshire,  one  in  Vermont,  one  in  Ck>nnectl- 
cat,  and  one  in  the  District  of  Colombia.  These  had  a  capital  of 
$600,000,  employed  eight  hundred  men,  whose  wages  were  $230,000» 
and  made  annually  one  hundred  seventy  two  thousand  five  hundred 
boxes  of  glass,  or  eight  millions  six  hundred  twenty  five  thousand  feet, 
valued  at  $851,000. 

The  most  extensive  manufactory  of  green  bottles,  demijohns,  apoth* 
ecaries  ware,  and  shop  furniture,  is  that  of  Dyott,  near  Philadelphia ; 
employing  from  two  hundred  and  fifty  to  three  hundred  men  and 
boys,  and  melting  about  twelve  hundred  tons  per  annum.  Near 
Boston  is  a  manufactory  of  glass  bottles,  having  a  capital  of  $50,000^ 
making  annually  six  thousand  gross,  and  employing  sixty  five  men 
and  boys. 

By  the  report  of  this  committee,  the  whole  value  of  glass  made  in 
the  United  States,  was  as  follows — 

Flint  glass, $1,:K)0,000 

Crown  window  glass,        ....  160,000 

Cylinder  window  glass,      ....  851,000 

Glass  bottles,  phials,  apothecaries  ware,  demijohns, 

carboys,  dbc 200,000 

$2,601,000 

Employing  men, 1,800 

Whose  wages  amount  to  ...  $600,000 

From  additional  information  obtained,  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the 
report,  it  was  supposed,  that  the  amount  of  the  domestic  manufacture 
of  glass,  was  $3,000,000.  In  Dec.  1834,  the  number  of  glass  works 
in  Pittsburgh  had  increased  to  ten. 

The  value  of  window  glass  imported,  and  consumed  in  the  United 
States,  for  five  years  past,  has  not  exceeded  annually,  about  $60^000. 

SPIRITOUS   LIQUORS 

Have  been  generally  classed  among  the  manuiactarea  of  this  countryt 
and  have  constituted  no  small  item  in  the  list  of  mauu&ctured  arti* 
cles.  In  1810,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  the  quantity  made,  was 
about  twenty  five  millions  of  gallons,  five  millions  from  molasses,  and 
the  remainder  from  grain  or  fruit ;  and  the  whole  was  then  valued  at 
$14,088,776,  being  more  than  one  tenth  of  all  the  manufactures  of 
the  United  States,  and  between  one  third  and  a  half  of  the  manufae* 
tures  of  wool,  cotton  and  flax«  at  that  time. 


§ 


SOS 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  quantity  bow  made  in  tlui 
country.  Before  the  temperance  reformation,  its  increase  kept  pact 
with  the  population.  By  this  ratio,  the  quantity  now  made  and  con- 
sumed, could  not  be  much  less  than  about  fifty  millions  of  gallonst 
and  the  value  about  920,000,000,  but  to  the  consumer,  by  the  quart, 
pint  and  half  pint,  more  than  double  that  sum. 

That  the  consumption  has  greatly  decreased  in  some  parts  of  the 
United  States,  in  consequence  of  the  numerous  aasociations  of  indi- 
Wduals,  against  their  use,  cannot  be  doubtetTl  Yet  It  is  a  lamentable 
£Bu:t,  that  large  quantities  are  still  made,  particularly  in  the  states,  bar- 
ing a  great  surplus  of  grain.  We  regret  to  state,  that,  in  1833,  53,680 
barrels  of  whiskey  were  brought  to  Cincinnati,  by  the  Miami  canal. 
We  cannot  but  hope,  the  people  of  the  west,  will  ere  long,  find  some 
other  mode  of  sending  their  surplus  grain  to  market,  than  through  a 
medium,  so  destructive  to  the  health  and  morals  of  the  people.  To 
the  political  economist,  as  well  as  to  the  philanthropist  and  christian, 
it  is  a  subject  of  the  deepest  regret,  that  so  many  millions  of  doUars, 
should  be  annually  lost,  and  worse  than  lost  to  the  community. 

SILK. 

The  consumption  of  foreign  silk,  in  the  United  States,  in  yearly, 
about  hve  millions  and  half  of  doUars,  and  constitutes  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  domestic  consumption  of  this  elegant  and  valuable  arti- 
cle of  dress  ;  and  yet,  there  is  no  doubt,  that  silk  may  be  made  and 
manufactured  in  this  country,  as  well  as  in  Europe.  The  experiment 
made  in  Connecticut  proves  this.  This  experiment  was  long  since 
made  in  the  town  of  Mansfield  in  that  state,  and  we  trust,  that  the  fol- 
lowing brief  historical  sketch  of  the  first  introduction  of  the  mulberry 
tree  into  that  village,  and  the  progress  and  present  state  of  the  silk 
manufacture  ihere,  will  not  be  found  an  uninteresting  record  of  vil- 
lage industry. 

The  white  mulberry  tree  was  first  introduced  into  Mansfield,  by  an 
enterprizing  citizen  of  that  town,  about  the  year  1760 ;  and  exertions 
were  made  by  him,  at  that  time,  to  introduce  it  in  other  towns,  but 
without  success.  From  this  time,  however,  until  the  close  of  the 
war  of  the  revolution,  little  was  done. 

The  attempts  thus  made  to  introduce  the  culture  of  silk,  attracted 
the  attention  of  the  legislature  of  Connecticut,  soon  after  the  close 
of  the  war ;  and  in  1783,  a  bounty  of  ten  shillings  lawful  money,  was 
given  for  every  hundred  white  mulberry  trees  planted,  and  this  boun- 
ty was  to  continue  until  1793 — a  bounty,  also,  of  three  pence 
allowed,  for  every  ounce  of  raw  silk  made. 


603 

This  little  encouragement  stimulated  the  inhabitants  of  Mansfield  to 
persevere  in  the  business,  previously  commenced  ;  and  in  1793,  three 
hundred  sixty  two  pounds  of  raw  silk  was  made  in  that  town ;  and 
the  culture  of  it  has  ever  since  been  successfully  prosecuted,  so  that 
about  three  fourths  of  the  families  of  that  town  are  engaged  in  it, 
making,  in  a  favorable  season,  from  one  to  ninety  pounds  each ;  and 
the  quantity  of  raw  silk  now  made  in  that,  and  the  neighboring  towns, 
is  estimated,  from  six  to^even  thousand  pounds,  valued  at  930,000. 

Many  persons  in  Coi^fAticut  have  lately  turned  their  attention  to' 
the  planting  of  mulberry  trees  ;  and  that  state,  in  1832,  again  offered 
a  bounty  of  one  dollar,  for  every  hundred  of  these  trees  of  three 
years  growth,  and  of  fifty  cents,  for  every  pound  of  silk,  reeled  ac- 
cording to  the  most  improved  method  of  reeling,  and  capable  of  being 
manufactured  into  the  various  silk  fabrics ;  and  in  May,  1S34,  this 
bounty  was  extended  to  the  Chinese  mulberry,  and  a  company  was 
incorporated  for  the  purpose  of  manufacturing  silk ;  and  the  sum  of 
815,000,  part  of  the  bonus  of  the  Exchange  Bank,  established  at 
Hartford,  was  to  '*  be  paid  to  said  company,  to  be  expended  in  the 
encouragement  of  the  growth  and  manufacture  of  silk  ;'^  and  the  com- 
pany were  to  pay  thirteen  and  one  third  per  cent,  of  this  sum  to 
Messrs.  Gay  and  Bottom,  as  a  remuneration  for  their  expenses  and 
labor  in  inventing  and  constructing  machinery  for  the  weaving  of  silk, 
on  condition  they  would  permit  the  inhabitants  of  Connecticut  to  use 
their  machinery,  without  any  charge,  for  their  patent  of  the  same. 

The  following  estimate  of  the  net  proceeds  of  one  acre  of  well 
grown  trees,  set  one  and  a  half  rods  apart,  (furnished  us,  by  a  gentle- 
man of  Mansfield,)  will  shew,  that  few  acres  in  the  United  States, 
afford  grreater  profits.  An  average  product  of  an  acre  is  forty  pounds 
of  silk  a  season — ^This,  at  ^ve  dollars  a  pound,  is  #200 

Labor  and  board,  estimated  at     .        .        •  $80 

Reeling  the  silk,        ,        .        •        .        .  34 

—  114 

Net  proceeds, §80 

This  subject  is  now  claiming  the  attention  of  people,  in  various 
parts  of  the  United  States ;  and  we  would  here  suggest,  whether  the 
farms,  attached  to  houses  of  industry  for  paupers,  might  not  be  plant- 
ed with  the  mulberry ;  and  a  part  of  the  inmates  of  these  houses,  b« 
hereafter  profitably  employed,  in  rearing  and  feeding  silk  worms. 


604 

CHEMICAti. 

The  application  of  chemistry  to  manufactures  and  the  arts,  is  wefl 
.known ;  but  of  the  extent  of  such  application,  or  rather  of  the  ezleat 
of  the  manufacture  of  chemicals  in  the  United  States,  we  were  igno- 
rant, until  we  saw  an  able  report  on  this  subject  made  by  a  commit- 
tee of  the  New  York  Convention.    This  report  informed  us,  that,  in 
1831,  there  were  not  less  than  thirty  chemical  establishments  in  this 
country,  having  a  capital  of  $1,168,000,  (|pfl||baking  varioas  chemi- 
cal articles,  to  the  annual  value  of  $l,OO^fiiO,  and  emplojriog  nine 
hundred  hands.     This  kind  of  manufacture  was  secured,  principsDy 
by  the  tariff  of  1824.    The  committee  state,  that  the  general  price  of 
chemical  articles,  in  the  United  States,  was,  at  that  time,  one  half  less 
than  before  their  domestic  manufacture,  under  the  tariff  of  1824 ;  and 
In  some  instances,  the  difference  was  much  greater — ^That  in  1820,  the 
price  of  Epsom  salts  was  from  eleven  to  twelve  cents  per  pound — in 
1824  a  duty  of  four  cents,  was  imposed  on  foreign  salts  of  this  de- 
scription ;  and  the  price  in  1831,  was  three  and  a  half  cents  per  lb. 

American  chrome  yellow,  was,  for  a  short  time,  exported  to  Great 
Britain,  not  being  embraced  in  the  tariff  of  British  duties. 

The  British  manufacturer  of  this  article,  however,  soon  procured 
a  duty  upon  its  importation,  amounting  to  a  prohibition.  Ahout  four 
millions  of  pounds  of  copperas  is  now  made  in  the  United  States, 
three  millions  of  pounds  in  Vermont,  five  hundred  thousand  in  Ohio, 
and  five  hundred  thousand  in  other  States.  This  article  is  sufficient 
for  the  supply  of  this  country,  and  in  1832,  was  sold,  at  two  and  two 
and  a  half  cents  per  pound. 

Among  the  articles  made  in  these  various  chemical  establishments* 
are  calomel  and  other  mercurial  preparations,  glauber  salts,  rocheUe 
salts,  tartar  emetic,  ammonia,  sulphate  of  quinine,  oil  of  vitriol,  tar- 
taric acid,  aqua  fortis,  prussian  blue,  chrome  yellow,  chrome  green, 
nitric  acid,  muriatic  acid,  barilla,  oxalic  acid,  chloride  of  lime,  chlo- 
ride of  soda,  refined  salt  petre,  refined  borax,  refined  camphor,  acetic 
acid,  acetate  of  lead,  nitrate  of  lead,  prussiate  of  potash,  bi-chromate 
of  potash,  ^.c. 

Most  of  the  materials  used  in  these  establishments,  are  the  produce 
of  the  United  States ;  and  nearly  the  whole  of  this  branch  of  domes- 
tic industry,  is  a  clear  gain  to  the  United  States. 

LEAD. 

The  lead  mines  in  the  United  States  have  been  as  productive  as  aiij 
in  the  world.  Those  on  Fever  River,  and  in  Missouri,  produced  the 
following  quantities,  in  each  year,  from  1823  to  1832. 


605 


Ymn. 

Perer  Rivar— Poonda. 

Mtaoari-Poandb 

Total— FooadiL 

1823     . 

335,130    . 

1                    •                  •                    •                    < 

336.130 

1824    . 

175.220    . 

1                    •                  •                    • 

176,290 

1826    . 

664.530    . 

386,500    . 

1,061,120 

1826    . 

968,842    . 

.      1,374,002    . 

.      2,333,804 

1827    . 

6.181.180    . 

010,380    . 

6,092,660 

1828    . 

.     11.106,810    . 

1,206,020    . 

12,311,730 

1829    . 

.      13.34^160    . 

.      1,106,160    . 

,    14.641,730 

1830    . 

.       8.3a%6    .        , 

8,060    . 

8,332,018 

1831     . 

6.38CI01    . 

67,180    . 

.      6,449,080 

1832    . 

4.281,876    . 

1        •       •        •        1 

,      4,281,876 

60,752,626  5,161,252  56,003,888 

The  great  increase  in  the  years  1828  and  1820,  reduced  the  price 
so  low,  as  to  render  the  working  of  the  mines,  to  such  an  extent,  uo- 
profitable. 

American  manufactures  of  white  and  red  lead,  as  well  as  shot,  now, 
nearly  supply  the  domestic  market  In  1821,  the  quantity  of  white 
and  red  lead  imported,  was  about  four  millions  of  pounds,  valued  at 
$322,568,  and  the  quantity  in  pigs,  bars  and  sheets,  was  three  miUions 
one  hundred  and  ninety  seven  thousand  four  hundred  and  nine  pounds, 
and  the  quantity  of  shot  was  two  millions  two  hundred  and  ninety 
thousand  five  hundred  and  ninety  six  poundsi,  both  valued  at  $204,710. 
But  since  1830,  the  value  of  white  and  red  lead  has  averaged  about 
$30,000  a  year ;  and  in  1833,  the  value  of  pig,  bar  and  sheet  lead, 
was  $60,660,  and  of  shot  only  $86,00. 

The  value  of  white  and  red  lead  made  in  this  country,  must  rest,  in 
some  measure,  on  conjecture.  In  1810,  the  value,  as  returned  by  the 
marshals,  was  $326,560,  principally,  from  the  city  and  county  of 
Philadelphia. 

The  amount,  at  the  present  time  (1834)  cannot,  we  believe,  be  less, 
than  $1,000,000.  In  1833,  two  establishments  for  the  manufacture  of 
these  articles,  existed  in  Salem,  Massachusetts,  and  made  the  follow* 
ing  quantities,  viz , — 


White  lead, 
Red      do. 
Sugar  of  lead,    . 
and  which  was  valued  at  $106,000. 


2,081,801  pounds. 
.    42,236 
.    20,666 


4« 


SOAP    AND   CANDLES. 


The  American  manufacturer  has  long  since  more  than  supplied  tb« 
home  market  with  the  articles  of  soap  and  candles,  so  n^ecaaarjr  in 

64 


i 


506 

the  domestic  economy  of  every  country.  The  annual  value  of  tlieae 
articles  exported,  including  spermaceti  candles,  is  about  $1,000,0001 
The  amount  necessary  for  home  consumption,  cannot  be  less,  it  is  be- 
lieved, than  from  nine  to  twelve  millions  of  dollars.  EstimatiDg  the 
number  of  families  in  the  United  States,  at  two  millions  three  handred 
and  thirty  thousand,  and  allowing  four  and  a  half  dollars  to  each  hm- 
ily,  for  these  articles,  the  amount  will  be  about  $10,500,000. 

The  quantity  of  spemaceti  candles,  made  in  the  United  States,  in 
1831,  was  about  two  millions  seven  hunSM  and  thirty  thousand 
pounds,  worth  $709,800 ;  and  the  annual  value  of  this  kind  of  can* 
dies  exported,  is  about  $250,000,  leaving  for  home  consumption  to 
the  amount  of  $460,000. 

PAPER. 

Paper  was  made  in  New  England,  and  probably  in  other  parts  of 
North  America,  a  little  more  than  a  century  ago. 

In  September,  1728,  an  act  was  passed,  by  the  assembly  of  the 
Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay,  for  the  encouragement  of  the  mano- 
facture  of  this  article.  This  act  granted  to  Danl.  Henchman  and  oth- 
ers, the  right  of  making  paper,  on  condition,  that,  within  the  first  fif- 
teen months,  they  would  make  one  hundred  and  forty  reams  of  brown 
paper,  and  sixty  reams  of  printing  paper.  This  small  beginning  is 
referred  to,  in  the  report  of  the  board  of  trade  before  mentioned, 
made  in  1731 ;  in  which,  speaking  of  the  manufactures  of  Massachu- 
setts, the  board  say  '*  By  a  paper  mill  set  up  three  years  ago,  they 
make  to  the  value  of  £200  sterling.*' 

The  manufacture  of  paper,  particularly  of  the  coarser  kind,  no 
doubt,  increased,  and  was  carried  on,  to  a  considerable  extent,  before 
the  revolution.  It  was  mentioned  by  Hamilton,  in  1791,  as  one  of 
the  manufactures,  which,  in  no  inconsiderable  degree,  supplied  the  do- 
mestic market ;  and  Coxe  in  his  view  of  the  United  States,  published 
not  long  after  the  date  of  this  report,  states,  that,  there  were  then  forty 
eight  paper  mills  in  operation  in  Pennsylvania. 

In  1810,  the  value  of  paper  made  in  this  country,  was  about 
$2,000,000;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  it  has  trebled  in  value 
since  that  period,  and  must  be  now  from  five  to  six  millions  of  dol- 
lars.   The  value  of  paper  made  in  Connecticut,  in  1832,  was  $546,000. 

The  general  government  has,  from  its  commencement,  encouraged 
the  manufacture  of  this  article,  not  (mly,  by  a  protecting  duty  on  im- 
ported paper,  but  by  admitting  the  raw  material,  of  which  it  is  made, 
duty  free.  The  value  of  rags  imported,  in  1832,  was  $460,387,  and 
in  1833,  $411,785,  principally  from  luly  and  Trieste. 


507 

This  protection  and  encouragement,  has  nearly  excladed  foreign 
paper,  from  the  American  marliet ;  the  value  imported  into  the  United 
dutes,  in  1833,  being  only  $63,083. 

TOBACCO. 

The  value  of  manufactured  tobacco,  cannot  now  be  least  than  about 
t%000,000,  as  in  1810,  it  was  nearly  one  million  and  a  half;  and  in 
1832  and  1833,  the  value  of  manufactured  tobacco  exported,  was,  on 
an  average  about  $860^000.  The  quantity  brought  down  the  lower 
aections  of  the  James  River  canal,  in  1833,  was  two  millions  two  hun* 
dred  and  thirty  thousand  and  nine  hundred  pounds. 

CABLES   AND   CORDAGE. 

The  manufacture  of  cables  and  cordage  is  necessary  for  the  public 
mnd  private  vessels  of  the  United  States :  and  when  it  is  considered, 
that,  by  the  returns  of  the  marshals,  in  1810,  the  value  of  these  ar- 
ticles then  manufactured,  exceeded  $4,000,000,  we  may,  perhaps, 
-safely  calculate  their  value,  at  the  present  time,  at  $5,000,000. 

<»OLD   AMD   SILVER,     JEWELRY   OP   ALL    KINDS,     AND   PLATED   WARS. 

The  American  manufacture  of  these  articles,  will  bear  a  compari- 
aon,  in  point  of  durability  and  elegance,  with  those  of  any  other  na- 
tion.  Domestic  manufactured  articles  of  this  description,  now  adorn 
the  persons,  and  decorate  the  side  boards,  and  tea  tables,  as  well  as 
the  equipages,  of  the  people  of  the  United  States.  Their  value,  it  is 
believed,  must  now  be  from  three  to  four  millions  of  dollars. 

The  value  of  the  manufactures  of  gold  and  silver,  and  all  articles 
composed  wholly  or  chiefly  of  pearls,  precious  stones,  dec.  imported 
bto  the  United  States,  in  1833,  was  only  $151,556. 

BRASS,   COPPER,   TIN,    PEWTER   AND   BRITTANNIA   WARE. 

Nor  have  the  American  artists  been  less  successful,  in  the  manufac- 
ture of  other  useful  and  elegant  articles  of  brass,  copper,  tin  and  Brii- 
tannia  ware.  Domestic  articles  of  this  description,  now  manufactured, 
must  amount,  in  value,  from  two  to  three  millions  of  dollars ;  and« 
in  a  great  measure,  supply  the  home  market 

In  1833.  the  manufactures  of  copper  imported  (exclusive  of  cop- 
per bottoms),  was,  $33,244 
Of  brass,  (exclusive  of  sheet  and  rolled  brass)  370,764 
Of  Un,          .                                                .          .     11,887 
Of  pewter,    ......     11,945 

$^7,840 


^  508 

b  1832  tike  Talue  of  the  maniiractares  of  copper,  brass,  tin,  BriU 
tannia  ware,  including  clasps,  made  in  Connecticut,  was  #430,060. 

COMBS   AND    BUTTONS. 

Those  unaccustomed  to  examine  into  the  extent  and  value  of  the 
various  minor  articles  manufactured  and  consumed  in  this  country, 
would  hardly  suppose,  that  combs  and  buttons,  were  deserving  of 
their  notice,  or  were  worthy  of  a  place  in  the  list  of  domestic  manu- 
factures. And  yet,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  the  value  of  these 
articles,  deemed  so  necessary,  either  for  use  or  ornament,  or  for  both, 
now  made  in  the  United  States,  exceeds  $1,500,000. 

The  value  of  domestic  buttons,  made  in  1832,  was  estimated  at 
$800,000 ;  the  value  of  those  that  were  gilt,  being  $300,000,  and 
others,  $500,000.  These  were  made  in  Waterbury  and  Meriden,  in 
Connecticut,  and  in  several  towns  in  Massachussetts. 

Combs,  of  ivory,  horn,  shell,  and  wood,  were  made  in  different  parts, 
of  the  United  States,  the  same  year,  to  the  value,  at  least,  of  from 
$700,000  to  $800,000.  In  MassachusetU  alone,  in  1832,  the  value, 
of  combs  of  all  kinds,  was  about  $450,000. 

These  articles,  not  only  supply  the  home  market,  but  constitute  a 
part  of  American  domestic  exports.  The  value  of  combs  and  but- 
tons exported  in  1832,  was  $124,305,  and  in  1833,  $142,970. 

FINE    PORCELAIN. 

Among  the  manufactures  of  a  finer  kind,  lately  introduced,  we 
take  pleasure  in  noticing  that  of  fine  porcelain.  Two  or  three  man- 
ufactories of  this  kind,  have  been  lately  established  in  this  country, 
and  bid  fair  to  rival  those  of  other  and  much  older  nations.  The  va- 
rious articles  of  this  description  made  at  Philadelphia,  in  a  manufac- 
tory owned  by  Mr.  Hemphill,  are  of  a  superior  quality ;  and  an  ex- 
amination of  the  whole  process  of  this  species  of  manufacture,  can- 
not fail  to  be  highly  gratifying  to  any  visiter ;  and  we  cannot  ba 
hope,  that  sufficient  protection  and  patronage  will  be  afforded,  to 
these  establishments,  to  enable  the  enterprising  individuals,  concern- 
ed in  them,  to  succeed. 

PLEASURE   CARRIAOES. 

The  making  of  pleasure  carriages  and  coaches,  may  very  properly 
be  classed  among  the  important  and  valuable  manufactures  of  this 
country.  The  annual  value  made,  must  bey  in  no  small  degree,  con- 
jectural. We  cannot  estimate  it  at  less,  than  between  three  and 
four  millions  of  dollars. 


509 

In  1832,  the  value  made  in  the  city  of  New  Haven  alone,  amounted 
to  $221,000,  and  in  1634,  to  $275,000;  and  thia,  we  apprehend,  could 
not  have  been  more  than  one  fifteenth  of  those  made,  in  this  extensive 
country.  This  would  make  the  value  annually  made  in  the  United 
States,  more  than  $4,000,000. 

PLAX   AND   HEMP. 

The  quantity  and  value  of  articles  made  from  these  materials,  at 
the  present  time,  (1834)  cannot  be  ascertained  with  any  degree  of 
certainty.  Tlie  use  of  cotton,  has,  in  a  great  degree,  superceded  that 
of  flax.  In  1810,  the  quantity  of  linen  cloth,  made  in  families,  as 
returned  by  the  marshals,  was  twenty  three  millions  ^ve  hundred 
and  three  thousand  five  hundred  and  ninety  yards,  then  valued  at 
$8,261,361 ;  in  some  of  the  states,  however,  that  made  from  flax,  was 
not  distinguished.  In  New  York,  the  quantity  made  from  flax,  was 
five  millions  three  hundred  and  seventy  two  thousand  six  hundred  and 
forty  five  yards,  valued  at  $2,014,741,  or  about  40  cents  per  yard  ; 
and  in  Virginia  was  ^ye  millions  one  hundred  and  fiAy  dre  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  ninety  eight  yards,  valued  at  $1,718,500,  or  33} 
cents  per  yard.  Since  that  period,  we  have  no  data,  by  which  to  de- 
termine either  the  relative  increase  or  decrease  of  the  linen  manu- 
facture, nearly  the  whole  of  which  is  still  carried  on  in  families.  In 
proportion  to  the  population,  it  has,  no  doubt,  decreased.  In  1824, 
the  quantity  of  linen  and  cotton  cloths  made  in  families,  in  the  state 
of  New  York,  was  eight  millions  and  seventy  nine  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  ninety  two  yards,  then  valued  at  $1,211,008,  or  15  cents  a 
yard.  The  returns  did  not  shew  the  quantity  made  from  flax,  but  it 
was  probably  one  half. 

The  manufacture  of  cotton  bagging  has  increased,  with  the  increase 
of  cotton,  an4  has  become  an  article  of  no  small  importance  to  the 
cotton  planter. 

Aboiit  one  million  and  one  hundred  thousand  bales  of  cotton,  are 
raised,  in  the  United  States,  requiring  about  five  yards  of  bagging  for 
each  bale,  making  dve  millions  and  a  half  of  yards  necessary  for  the 
annual  consumption.  The  average  quantity  of  this  article  imported, 
in  the  years  1832  and  1833,  was  one  million  one  hundred  and  twelve 
thousand  3rards,  leaving  for  consumption  of  domestic  production,  say 
four  millions  and  four  hundred  thousand  yards,  which,  at  20  cents  per 
yard,  is  $880,000.  The  price  of  domestic  linen,  is  now  much  lets, 
than  in  1810 ;  and  the  whole  value  of  the  domestic  manufacture  of 
flax  and  hemp,  in  the  United  States,  ought  not,  perhaps,  to  be  ettimi- 
ted,  higher  than  between  five  and  six  millions  of  dollars. 


510 

Various  other  manufactures  haye  been  established  and  are  sow 
being  established  in  this  country ;  among  these,  we  may  enumerate 
looking  glasses,  the  printing  and  binding  of  books,  umbrellas,  bmalMS 
of  all  kinds,  brass  nails,  stockings,  gloves,  wafers,  webbing,  laee  and 
fringes,  mathematical  and  musical  instruments,  silk,  whips,  pocket 
books,  ready  made  clothing,  earthen  ware,  oil,  powder,  beer,  ale  and 
porter,  wire,  brick,  types,  glue,  clocks,  printing  presses,  lampe,  spec- 
tacles, coffee  mills,  suspenders,  wool  and  cotton  cards,  oil  clotli% 
bellows,  printer's  ink,  India  rubber,  and  many  others  which  hsTC  not 
come  to  our  notice. 

When  the  value  of  these  are  added  to  those  before  mentioned,  the 
aggregate  value  of  the  manufactures  of  the  United  States  cannot  be 
estimated  at  less  than  from  three  hundred  and  twenty  ^ve  to  three 
hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  dollars. 

When  the  reader  compares  this  amount  with  that  of  foreign  articles 
consumed  here,  which,  afier  deducting  teas,  wines,  coffee,  and  spices, 
will  not  exceed  fiAy  millions  of  dollars  a  year,  he  cannot  fail  doly  to 
appreciate  the  importance  of  this  branch  of  domestic  industry ;  and 
must,  we  imagine,  be  sensible,  not  only  of  their  importance,  bat  the 
absolute  necessity  of  sustaining  them. 

With  respect  to  the  total  production  and  consumption  of  the  United 
States,  estimates  have  varied  from  seven  hundred  to  fourteen  hundred 
millions  of  dollars.  This  difference  is  not  surprising,  when  it  is  con- 
sidered, that  all  estimates  of  this  kind  in  this  country,  rest  so  much  oo 
conjecture.  The  first  supposes  the  expense  of  each  person  to  be  fifty 
dollars  a  year,  and  the  latter,  that  this  expense  amounts  to  one  hun- 
dred dollars.  These  are  the  two  extremes — one  is  too  low,  and  the 
other  probably  too  high ;  and  yet  it  is  difficult  to  fix  upon  any  inter- 
mediate sum,  founded  on  such  data  as  will  be  satisfactory.  When  it 
is  considered,  that  the  expense  of  supporting  paupers  in  this  coantrj, 
on  an  average,  cannot  be  less  than  fiAy  dollars  a  head,  or  about  one 
dollar  per  week,  the  first  estimate,  even  including  the  slave  popula- 
tion, must  be  too  low. 

Estimates  have  been  made  of  the  total  amount  of  production  and 
consumption  of  several  nations  of  Europe ;  yet  such  is  the  difference 
between  the  state  and  condition  of  the  people  of  most  of  those  na- 
tions, and  the  people  of  the  United  States,  arising  from  a  variety  of 
causes ;  and  such  the  difference  in  the  price  of  many  necessary  articles, 
that  these  estimates  cannot  generally  be  a  sure  basis  of  similar  esti* 
mates  in  this  country.  The  state  and  condition  of  the  people  of  die 
Netherlands,  approximates  nearer,  we  believe,  to  that  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  than  any  other  European  nation. 


511 

The  tnoual  productions  of  the  Netherlands,  sboat  ihe  year  1888, 
with  a  population  of  six  millions,  was  estimated  at  £113,370,166 
sterling,  or  about  •544,176,000;  making  the  annual  expense  of  each 
person,  about  ninety  dollars.  If  we  take  this  as  a  rule,  and  call  the 
population  fourteen  millions,  the  total  production  of  the  United  States 
would  be  about  twelve  hundred  millions  and  a  half.  But  as  the  ag- 
ricultural productions  of  the  United  States  must,  we  think,  be  lower 
than  those  of  the  Netherlands,  we  ought  not,  perhaps,  to  estimate  the 
yearly  expense  of  each  person  in  this  country,  higher  than  from 
eighty  to  eighty  five  dollars,  which  would  make  the  total  production 
of  the  United  States,  from  eleven  to  twelve  hundred  millions. 

We  have  before  stated,  that  the  general  government,  under  the 
present  constitution,  at  its  commencement,  in  the  imposition  of  du- 
ties, kept  in  view  the  encouragement  and  protection  of  the  manulae- 
turing  interests  of  the  country.  A  recurrence  to  the  tariff  of  Julyt 
1789,  will  shew,  that  it  was  the  intention  of  Congress  to  encourage 
and  protect  the  production  and  manufacture  of  the  following  artidest 
among  others,  viz. :  malt  liquors,  candles  of  tallow,  spermaceti  and 
wax,  soap,  cheese,  boots  and  shoes,  steel,  paper,  hats,  nails  and  spikest 
hemp,  manufactured  tobacco,  window  glass,  slit  and  rolled  iron  and 
castings,  coaches  and  carriages,  and  wool  cards.  The  debates  on  this 
tariff  clearly  evince,  that  in  imposing  higher  duties  on  these  articles 
than  on  others,  the  great  statesmen  of  that  day  intended  to  promote 
the  manufacture  of  them  in  their  own  country. 

A  difference  of  opinion  then  existed,  as  to  the  extent  of  such  pro- 
tection, but  not  a  doubt  was  expressed,  as  to  the  power  of  Congress 
to  afford  it 

Nor  were  the  people  themselves,  at  that  time,  unmindful  of  the 
principal  reasons  which  induced  them  to  adopt  the  new  form  of  goT- 
emment.  No  sooner  had  Congress  met  under  its  authority,  tlian  they 
presented  petitions  to  that  body,  praying  for  the  immediate  exercise 
of  those  powere  with  which  it  was  invested,  for  the  promotion  of  the 
manufacturing  as  well  as  the  eommercial  interests  of  the  eountry. 
The  petitioners  from  Baltimore  say :  **  The  happy  period  having  now 
arrived,  when  the  United  States  are  placed  in  a  new  situation ;  whea 
the  adoption  of  the  general  government  gives  our  sovereign  legisla- 
ture, the  sole  and  exclusive  power  of  laying  duties  on  imports ;  your 
petitionera  rejoice  at  the  prospect  this  affords  them,  that  America* 
freed  from  the  commercial  shackles  which  have  so  long  bound  befy 
will  see  and  pursue  her  true  interest,  becoming  independent  tn/od, 
as  well  as  in  name ;  and  they  confidently  hope,  that  the  encourage^ 


*m 


512 

ment  and  protection  of  American  manufactureSf  will  claim  the  earii- 
eet  attention  of  the  supreme  legislature  of  the  nation ;  as  it  is  aa 
nniTersallf  acknowledged  truth,  that  the  United  States  contain,  witUa 
their  limits,  resources  amply  sufficient,  to  enable  them  to  beeooM  a 
great  manufacturing  country,  and  only  want  the  patronage  and  sap- 
port  of  a  wise,  energetic  government." 

The  people  of  New  York  pray  Ck)ngres8,  for  the  protectioo  of 
commerce  and  the  arts  ,*  and  thoi^e  of  Boston,  in  their  petition  de- 
clare, *'  that  on  the  revival  of  our  mechanical  arts  and  manufactures^ 
depend  the  wealth  and  prosperity  of  the  northern  states;'*  and  re- 
quest, **  that  heavy  duties  may  be  laid  on  such  articles  as  are  mana- 
factured  by  our  own  citizens,  humbly  conceiving,  that  the  impost  is 
not  only  considered  by  Congress,  as  an  object  of  revenue^  but,  in  its 
operation,  intended  to  exclude  such  importations,  and  ultimately  es- 
tablish these  several  branches  of  manufacture  among  oorselTes.'' 

These  petitions  were  presented  to  Congress  in  the  spring  of  1780, 
and  prove,  that  the  people  and  their  representatives,  then  agreed  in 
sentiment,  on  the  importance  and  necessity  of  attending  to  the  maa- 
nfacturing,  as  well  as  the  commercial  interest  of  the  country. 

Not  satisfied  with  the  protection  given  by  the  tariff  act  of  Jaly, 
1789,  the  House  of  Representatives,  in  January,  1790,  directed  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  make  a  report  on  the  subject  of  manu- 
factures, **  and  particularly,  to  the  means  of  promoting  such  as  will 
tend  to  render  the  United  States  independent  on  foreign  nations,  for 
military,  and  other  essential  supplies." 

In  obedience  to  this  order,  Hamilton  made  his  report  on  mannlac- 
tures  already  referred  to. 

We  have  rarely  heard  the  principles  contained  in  this  report  con- 
troverted. Most  of  the  reasons  then  urged  by  the  Secretary  in  fitvor 
of  protecting  domestic  manufactures,  continue  with  unabated  force, 
with  respect  to  a  great  part  of  this  country — we  allude  more  partiea- 
larly  to  those  based  on  the  restrictions  imposed  by  foreign  nations. 

**  The  restrictive  regulations,*'  he  says,  **  which,  in  foreign  markets, 
abridge  the  vent  of  the  increasing  surplus  of  our  agricultural  produce, 
serve  to  beget  an  earnest  desire,  that  a  more  extensive  demand  for 
that  surplus  may  be  created  at  horned* 

The  "  free  trade  system**  was  then  urged  by  some,  against  that 
proposed  by  Hamilton ;  and  as  the  answer  to  this  objection,  given  in 
this  report  is  applicable  to  the  present  time,  the  reader,  we  hope,  will 
eicuse  the  following  extract. 


¥ 


518 

**  If  the  §jnti&m  o(  perfect  liberty  to  indiistry  and  eommercey**  Mtyv 
Hamilton,  **  were  the  prevailing^  system  of  nations,  the  argomentat 
which  dissuade  a  countrj,  in  the  predicament  of  the  United  States, 
from  the  zealous  pursuit  of  manufactures,  would  doubtless  have  great 
force.** 

**  It  will  not  be  affirmed,  that  they  might  not  be  permitted,  with  few 
exceptions,  to  serve  as  a  rule  of  national  conduct  In  such  a  state  of 
things,  each  country  would  have  the  full  benefit  of  its  peculiar  advan« 
tages,  to  compensate  for  its  deficiencies  or  disadvantages.  If  one 
nation  were  in  a  condition  to  supply  manufactured  articles,  on  better 
terms  than  another,  that  other  might  find  an  abundant  indemnification 
in  a  superior  capacity  to  furnish  the  prodnce  of  the  soil.  And  a  free 
exchange,  mutually  beneficial,  of  the  commodities  which  each  waa 
able  to  supply,  on  the  best  terms,  might  be  carried  on  between  themt 
supporting  in  full  vigor,  the  industry  of  each.  And  though  the  cir- 
cumstances which  have  been  mentioned,  and  others,  which  will  be 
unfolded  hereafter,  render  it  probable^  that  nations  merely  agriculio* 
ral,  would  not  enjoy  the  same  degree  of  opulence,  in  proportion  to 
their  numbers,  as  those  which  united  manufactures  with  agriculture ; 
yet  the  progressive  improvements  of  the  lands  of  the  farmer,  might, 
in  the  end,  atone  for  an  inferior  degree  of  opulence  in  the  mean  time ; 
and,  in  a  case  in  which  opposite  considerations  are  pretty  equally 
balanced,  the  option  ought,  perhaps,  always  to  be  in  favor  of  leamng 
industry  to  its  own  discretion.*' 

"  But  the  system  which  has  been  mentioned,  is  far  from  character- 
ixing  the  general  policy  of  nations.  The  prevalent  one  has  been 
regulated  by  an  opposite  spirit.  The  consequence  of  it  is,  that  the 
United  Slates  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  situation  of  a  eoontry 
precluded  from  foreign  commerce.  They  can,  indeed,  without  difi* 
culty,  obtain  from  abroad,  the  manufactured  supplies  of  which  they 
are  in  want ;  but  they  experience  numerous  and  very  injurious  im- 
pediments  to  emission  and  vent  of  their  own  commodities.  Nor  it 
this  the  case  in  reference  to  a  single  foreign  nation  only.  The  regu* 
lations  of  several  countries  with  which  we  have  the  most  extensive 
intercourse,  throw  serious  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  principal  sta- 
ples of  the  United  States.  In  such  a  position  of  things,  the  United 
States  cannot  exchange  with  Europe  on  equal  terms ;  and  the  waol 
of  reciprocity  would  render  them  the  victim  of  a  system  which  should 
induce  them  to  confine  their  views  to  agriculture,  and  refrain  froM 
manufactures.  A  constant  and  increasing  necessity  on  their  part,  §os 
the  commodities  of  Europe,  and  only  a  partial  and  occasional  dsmsmi 


i 


/ 


514 

p 

for  their  own,  in  return,  could  not  but  azpoae  them  tH  a  state  of  im- 
pOFerishmentf  compared  with  the  opulence,  to  which  their  political 
and  natural  advantages  authorize  them  to  aspire.'^ 

How  far  the  present  situation  of  the  United  States,  in  regard  to 
foreign  restrictions,  is  similar  to  that  described  in  the  foregoing  ex- 
tract,  will  be  noticed  hereafter.  The  policy  of  countervailing  foreign 
restrictions,  was,  not  only  recommended  by  Hamilton,  but  also,  by 
Jefferson,  in  his  report  made  to  Congress,  in  December,  1703,  in  case 
they  could  not  be  removed  by  negociation. 

The  war  however  in  Europe,  and  the  consequent  relaxation  or  total 
removal  of  those  restrictions,  rendered  any  additional  countervailing 
actff,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government,  at  that  time,  unne- 
cessary. 

On  the  return  of  peace,  however,  for  a  short  period,  in  1801,  under 
the  treaty  of  Amiens,  some  of  the  American  manufacturers,  again,  in 
some  degree,  felt  the  pressure  of  foreign  restrictions,  and  applied  to 
Congress  for  relief;  and  the  committee  of  commerce  and  manufac* 
tures,  (for  both  these  great  interests,  were  then  and  long  after,  entrus- 
ted to  the  same  committee,)  in  their  report  on  these  petitions,  again 
recognize  the  power^  as  well  as  the  duty  of  Congress  to  protect 
manufactures. 

**  In  the  present  juncture,*'  the  committee  say,  *'  our  infant  manu- 
factures peculiarly  demand  and  merit  the  protection  of  government.^ 
The  war,  however,  being  soon  after  renewed,  rendered  any  extensive 
legislative  protection  then  unnecssary.  When,  however,  these  wars, 
as  well  as  that  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  ceased ; 
and  the  nations  of  Europe  again  resorted  to  their  old  restrictive  sys- 
tems, countervailing^  acts,  on  the  part  of  the  American  government^ 
were  indispensable,  for  the  preservation  and  protection  of  the  manu- 
^facturing  and  agricultural  interests  of  the  country. 

The  tariff  of  1SI6,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  was  framed  with  this 
view  ;  and  we  had  an  opportunity  of  knowing,  that  the  constitutional 
power  of  Congress,  to  do  this,  was  then  questioned  by  no  one,  in  the 
debates  on  this  tariff.  And  yet  some  part  of  this  act  presented  this 
question,  directly  to  the  consideration  of  that  body.  We  allude  par- 
ticularly to  that  part,  which  went  entirely  to  exclude,  by  the  minimum 
principle,  the  low  priced  East  India  cottons,  from  the  American  mar^ 
ket.  In  the  debates,  on  this  part  of  the  act,  it  was  declared,  that  a 
total  prohibition  of  these  cottons  was  intended  ;  and  yet  the  constitu- 
tional power  of  Congress  to  do  this,  was  called  in  question  by  no  one« 
though  its  policy  was  doubted  by  many.    In  the  House  of  Represen- 


If 


\ 


/ 


I  515  - 


tatlTes,  the  motion  to  strike  out  this  part  of  the  act,  was  nepitivecl 
a  tnajority  of  thirty  one ;  and  the  journals  will  shew  that  six  out  of 
eight  of  the  memhers  of  South  Carolina,  were  in  the  majority. 

The  power  of  the  national  legislature,  to  afford  protection  to  this 
portion  of  American  industry,  was  not  questioned,  until  182D  or 
1824.  Up  to  this  time,  no  one  seemed  to  doubt,  that  this  power,  ex- 
tended, to  the  promotion  of  the  manufacturing,  as  well  as  the  commer- 
cial interests  of  the  country. 

The  principles,  which  should  govern,  in  the  exercise  of  this  power* 
are  plain  and  obvious.  They  have  reference  to  national,  and  not  in- 
dividual benefit  It  should  never  be  exercised  for  the  benefit  of  the 
few,  to  the  injury  of  the  many.  The  inrrease  of  American  shipping, 
for  instance,  was  deemed  advantageous  to  the  nation  at  large ;  and 
therefore,  the  discriminating  tonnage  and  other  duties  were  imposed. 
And  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  navigating  interests  of  the 
country,  the  distant  trade  with  China,  has  been  always  given  to  Amer- 
ican vessels  alone,  by  the  discriminating  duties  on  teas.  This  gave 
the  American  merchants,  a  complete  monopoly  of  that  trade — a 
trade,  which,  now  amounts  to  about  eight  millions  a  year.  And 
when  the  China  merchant,  is  heard  objecting  to  the  tarilF,  on  the  prin- 
ciples of  *'  free  trade,^^  he  might  well  be  asked,  whether  thai  trade  cwbl 
hefree^  which  he  alone  can  carry  on  ?  And  the  manufacturer  or  the 
agriculturist,  might,  also,  ask  him,  whether  tea,  might  not  be  cheaper* 
if  allowed  to  be  brought  here  as  freely  in  foreign,  a«  in  domestic  ships. 

The  power  of  Congress,  however,  thus  to  encourage  and  pnitect 
American  shipping,  has  never  been  questioned ;  and  yet,  who  will 
venture  to  assert,  that  the  manufacture  of  clothing,  is  not  as  necessa- 
ry, for  the  well  being  of  a  nation,  as  the  manufacture  of  ships  ? 

Congress  has  not  limited  its  power  of  protection,  merely  to  the 
imposition  of  duties  for  that  purpose ;  but  has  extended  it,  to  the  ex- 
emption of  raw  materials,  necessary  for  certain  manufactures,  from 
any  duty  whatever.  The  list  of  exemptions  has  increased,  with  the 
increase  of  manufacturrs ;  and  in  ISIO,  protection  and  encouragement 
in  this  way  was  extended  even  to  literature  and  the  fine  arts.  By  that 
act,  philosophical  apparatus,  instruments,  book)*,  maps,  charts,  statues, 
casts,  paintings,  drau-in<:s,  engravings,  specimens  of  sculpture,  cabi- 
nets of  coins,  gems,  medals,  and  all  other  collections  of  antiquities* 
statuary,  modeling,  paintinir*  drawing,  etching  or  engraving,  special- 
ly imported  by  order,  and  for  the  use  of  any  society  incorporated 
for  philosophical  or  literary  purposes,  or  for  the  encouragement  of 
$kefau  artSf  or  by  order  and  for  ibe  use  of  any  seminary  of  learning* 


by  V'. 


¥  •■■ . 


\  i 


SM 


git «  !• 
U 
ako,  an  eqoal  |iawcr,  to 

1^  ^V^^V^F   Hp^^^^^^^    ^BB^^^B    V^B^^^W  ^^^^B^^^fc^  ^    ^ 

WUe  ve  catertaia  mo  do«H  ti»t  die  Mtionl  govcimBcst 
the  p^vcr  to  a&vd  proicctMi  to  the  ■■■ifM  iiiiaff  as  vail  mm  wm 

istercat,  we  do  aof  hrtitair  to  aaj,  that,  iD  a 
Oilcaalva  mm  the  Uasicd  Stalasy  difleriag  ao  BatcriaDjr  ia  aad, 
aad  prododioaav  thw  power  alioold  be  ezercifed  with  ao  littla 
aad  care,  both  ia  the  aelectioa  dmbjeeU  to  be  protected,  aad  aa  to 
msiemi  mi  aach  protectioa.  With  rcapect  to  objectm,  Ha^iltoa  vcij 
jaatljr  aajrs*  **  Eterj  oatioa  oafht  toeodeav€»r  to  poaaeaa  wiUna  itirit 
aD  the  eaaeatiab  of  oatioiial  aappljr :  theae  compiiae  the  ahraaa  mi 
mwimistemee,  haJntaium,  eloikimg  aod  deftnceJ"  ^  The  poaaeaiioa  mi 
Iheit,*^  he  adda*  ^  ia  aceeaaarj  to  the  protectioa  of  the  bod j  pofitk ; 
to  the  mafeiy^  aa  well  aa  to  the  weUare  ^l(lbe  society ;  the  waaf  mi 
•ither*  ia  the  waot  of  ao  important  orgaa  tff^litical  life  and  motioa  ; 
aod,  ia  the  rariooa  criaea,  which  await  a  state,  it  omat  aeverel j  feel  ikm 
tStctm  of  any  loch  deficiency.  The  extreme  embarraaamenta  of  ibe 
Uaited  Statea,  during  the  late  war,  (the  war  of  the  revolotioa,)  horn 
aa  incapacity  of  soppljrinf  themselrea,  are  atill  mattera  of  keen  reo> 
oUection.  A  future  war  might  be  expected  again  to  exemphfy  Om 
miachiefa  and  dangers  of  a  sitoation,  to  which  that  incapacity  ia  itill, 
^  ia  too  great  a  degree,  applicable,  anleaa  changed  by  timely  and  Tigor* 
ooa  exertions.  To  effect  thia  change,  as  faat  as  shall  be  prudent,  aier- 
iU  all  the  attention  and  all  the  zeal  of  our  public  coancila ;  'Isa  ikm 
next  great  work  to  be  accomplished.^* 

The  effect  of  such  protection  is,  not  only  to  render  the  United 
Statea  independent  of  foreign  nations,  as  to  the  essentials  of  national 
supply ;  but,  also,  by  inducing  domestic  competition,  to  render  theaa 
ultimately  cheaper  to  the  consumer.  This  has  been,  long  since,  proT* 
ed,  in  this  country,  in  the  articles  of  nails,  hats  and  leather ;  and  kla- 
ly,  in  that  of  coarse  cottons.  No  class  of  the  community,  it  is  belieT* 
•d,  suffered  more,  by  the  exclusion  of  the  low  priced  East  India  cottooav 

•  Mr.  Wilde. 


V 


517 

mder  the  tariff  of  1810«  thai  the  enterprizing  merchants  of  8alein« 
in  Masaacbasetttf,  who,  at  one  time,  before  this,  had  their  fifty  thipi 
beyond  the  cape  of  Good  Hope. 

It  will  be  recollected  by  the  reader,  that,  of  the  fifty  three  or  four 
millions  of  annual  exports  of  domestic  produce,  as  before  stated,  cot- 
ton alone,  constitutes  nearly  one  half,  or  more  than  twenty  five  mill<- 
ions ;  and  in  1833,  it  constituted  more  than  one  half  of  such  exports. 
The  great  difference  in  the  value  of  domestic  exports  of  the  southern* 
and  the  middle,  western  and  eastern  states,  arises,  in  no  small  deg ree* 
from  the  great  advantages  which  the  staples  of  the  former,  ha?e  had 
OTer  those  of  the  latter,  in  the  European  markets,  since  1814. 

While  American  cotton,  and  we  may  add,  tobacco  and  rice,  find  a 
ready  and  stable  market,  in  Europe,  American  flour  and  grain  of  all 
kinds,  beef,  pork,  lumber  of  all  sorts,  most  of  the  products  of  the  cod 
and  whale  fisheries,  are,  either  entirely  excluded,  or  only,  occasion- 
ally  admitted,  and  then,  from  necessity.  The  former,  are  not,  to  any 
great  extent,  and  never  can  be  produced  in  that  quarter  of  the  world ; 
but  the  latter,  either  come  in  competition,  with  the  same  kind  of  pro- 
ducts there,  or  interfere,  materially,  with  the  system  of  economy* 
each  nation  has  adopted  for^itself. 

This  free  and  certain  maiket  for  cotton  has,  in  a  great  degree,  oe- 
casioned  the  unprecedented  fncrease  of  this  great  staple  of  the  south ; 
while  the  want  of  such  a  market,  has  prevented  that  increase,  in  the 
staples  of  other  parts  of  the  United  States,  that  would,  otherwise* 
have  taken  place. 

The  value  of  imports,  from  Europe,  in  1832,  amounted  to  f02,216,- 
676,  and  the  value  of  exports  of  domestic  produce,  to  that  quarter  of 
the  world,  the  same  year,  was  $44,676,463 ;  and  of  this,  the  value  of 
cotton,  tobacco  and  rice  was  /$38,506,257,  leaving  that  of  all  other 
domestic  articles,  only  $6,170,206. 

Great  Britain,  in  consequence  of  her  restrictive  policy,  takes,  but  a 
small  proportion  of  American  produce,  except  cotton,  tobacco  and 
rice,  in  exchange  for  the  vast  amount  of  her  manufactures,  received 
by  the  United  States.  While  the  latter,  in  1832,  imported  from  the 
former,  goods  to  the  amount  of  $34,848,662,  domestic  produce,  to  the 
amount  of  $26,632,068,  only,  was  exported  from  the  United  States,  to 
Great  Britain ;  and  of  this  sum,  the  value  of  cotton,  tobacco  and  rice, 
was  $24,002,632,  leaving  for  all  other  domestic  articles,  $2,620,800. 

If  we  take  the  whole  population  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Ala^ 
bama,  Mississippi  and  Louisiana,  two  thirds  of  the  population  of  Vir- 
ginia and  Tennessee,  and  (he  half  af  that  of  Maryland,  North  Caro- 


iii» 


^ 


518 

lina  and  Kentucky*  it  will  araount  Uf  about  four  millions.      The 
principal  prodnedons  of  these  four  millions,  being  cotton,  tobacco  and 
rice,  are  freely  ta^i^  in  Europe,  to  the  amount  of  more  than  thirty 
eight  millions  of  dollars  a  year ;  while  most  of  the  productions  of  the 
other  eight  millions  of  inhabitants,  are,  either  not  received  at  all,  or 
to  the  trilling  amount  of  about  six  millions  in  value,  except  in  timet 
of  scarcity  or  distress,  arising  from  war,  or  other  calamities.    In  1833, 
able  hundred  eighty  five  thousand  nine  hundred  and  thirty  fonr  bar- 
rels of  flour  were  inspected  in  the  city  of  New  York ;  yet,  during  that 
year,  only  seventeen  thousand  four  hundred  and  seventy  nine  barrels 
of  this  flour  was  exported,  from  that  place  to  Europe,  and  only  two 
hundred  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty,  to  all  foreign   countries, 
leaving  seven  hundred  eighty  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  fifty 
four  to  be  consumed  in  that  city,  or  some  other  parts  of  the  United 
States. 

The  average  amount  of  exports  of  domestic  produce  from  this  coun- 
try, from  1821  to  1830,  as  before  stated,  was  953,157,206;  and  of 
this,  cotton,  tobacco  and  rice,  was  $33,157,206,  leaving  for  all  others, 
920,368,252 ;  and  if  we  take  from  this  sum,  the  amount  of  manaftic- 
tured  articles,  being  $5,485,661,  it  will  leave  only  $14,664,044.  Thus, 
while  four  millions  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States,  freely 
export  their  surplus  produce,  to  the  amount  of  more  than  thirty  eight 
millions  of  dollars,  the  other  eight,  export  only  to  the  amount  of 
about  twenty  millions ;  and  more  than  one  quarter  of  this,  is  made  up 
of  manufactured  articles. 

The  value  of  the  imports  consumed  by  these  eight  millions  of  in- 
habitants, must  exceed  the  amount  of  their  exports  of  domestic  pro- 
duce, from  fifteen  to  twenty  millions.  The  difference  must  be  paid 
for,  by  them,  either  by  purchasing  the  produce  of  the  south,  or  by 
the  profits  arising  from  the  carrying  trade,  or  from  both. 

We  may  here  ask,  whether  this  state  of  things,  in  relation  to  the 
intercourse  between  the  United  States  and  the  dilferent  countries  of 
Europe,  so  far  as  respects  two  thirds  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  is  that  mutual  exchange  of  productions,  between  nations,  which 
constitutes  commercial  reciprocity  ?  or,  in  any  manner,  can  be  con- 
sidered as  "free  trade?" 

Freedom  of  trade,  as  we  understand  it,  consists  in  an  unrestricted 
exchange  of  productions,  between  nations,  as  between  individuals  of 
the  same  nation. 

**  No  one,"  says  Mc  Culloch,  "  thinks  of  performing  every  thin^^ 
for  himself,  nor  of  making  at  home,  wkA  would  cost  him  more  to 


619 

make  thao  to  bof.  The  Uilor,  as  Dr.  Smith  ban  remarked,  does  Dot 
attempt  to  make  his  own  shoes,  but  buys  them  from  a  shoemaker ; 
the  shoemaker,  on  his  part,  does  not  attempt  to  mak^hiaown  clothes, 
but  employs  a  tailor ;  and  the  farmer  makes  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other,  but  obtains  them,  in  exchange  for  his  corn  and  his  cattle.  Each 
individual  finds  it  for  his  advantaget  to  employ  himself,  in  some  par- 
ticular business,  and  to  exchange  a  part  of  his  peculiar  produce,  for 
such  parts  of  the  produce  of  others,  as  he  may  have  occasion  for.*' 
**  And  it  is  not  very  easy,*'  he  adds,  **  to  see,  how  that  conduct  which 
is  universally  admitted  to  be  wise  and  proper  in  individuals,  should  be 
foolish  and  absurd  in  the  case  of  a  state,  that  is,  of  the  total  number 
of  individuals,  inhabiting  a  particular  tract  of  country.**  Again,  the 
same  author  says,  **  Commerce,  whether  carried  on  between  individu- 
als  of  the  same  or  of  different  countries,  is  founded,  on  a  fair  prit^ 
ciple  of  reciprocity — buying  and  selling  are,  in  it,  what  action  and 
re-action  are  in  physics,  equal  and  contrary.  Those,  who  will  not 
buy  from  others,  render  it  impossible  for  others  to  buy  of  them.  Ev- 
ery sale  implies  an  equal  purchase^  and  every  purchase  an  equal  sale. 
Hence,  to  prohibit  buying,  is  exactly  the  same  thing,  in  effeeU  as  to 
prohibit  selling.** 

With  these  views,  Mr.  l(e  Culloch,  is  in  favor  of  an  abolition  of 
commercial  restrictions  in  Great  Britain ;  because  he  conceives,  it 
would  greatly  promote  '*  the  wealth  and  prosperity**  of  that  kingdom* 
He,  however,  is  candid  enough  to  say,  **  that  if  it  could  be  shewn* 
that  the  freedom  of  commerce,  though  beneficial  to  other  countries, 
was  really  injurious  to  England,  we  should  be  the  very  last  to  pro- 
pose the  repeal  or  modification  of  any  restrictions.*^  ^  Wliat  should 
we  have  to  fear,^*  he  adds,  **  from  the  abolition  of  all  prohibitions  t 
We  export  the  produce  of  every  one  of  our  principal  manufactures* 
as  cotton,  wool,  iron,  leather,  ^c,  to  every  market  of  the  world; 
so  that  the  possibility  of  their  being  injured  by  the  admission  of 
similar  articles  from  abroad,  is  quite  out  of  the  question.** 

We  are  not  disposed  to  controvert  the  general  principles  of  free 
trade,  as  here  laid  down,  by  Mc  Culloch ;  nor  to  quarrel  with  his 
views  of  the  commercial  policy  of  his  own  country.  His  princi- 
ples of  free  trade,  as  between  individuals  of  the  same  country,  are 
based  upon  the  supposition,  that  the  shoemaker,  (to  take  the  case  put 
by  him,)  will  always  freely  take,  in  exchange  for  his  shoes,  the  com 
and  cattle  of  the  farmer ;  and  that  the  farmer  will,  as  freeljr*  take  his 
shoes,  in  exchange  for  the  product  of  his  farm ;  and  on  terms  mutii- 
aUy  advanUgeous.     But*  kt  us  suppose,  that  the  ahoemaftert  shouU 


i 


■ 


at  last,  tell  the  itrmer,  that  ht  eo«ld  no  loagert  take  hia  com  and  ka 
cattle,  for  shoea  |  or  could  only  take  them,  occasionally,  wheo  ha  was 
unable  to  proddfe  sufficient  for  himself.    To  this  the  farmer  mast  at* 
cessarily  reply,  ^'then,  sir,  I  can  no  longer  take   your   shoea— I 
.^.  amst  look  out  for  some  other  indirkloal,  who  will  take  the  only  articles 
^    of  produce  I  have  to  give,  in  exchange  for  them,  or  I  must  ram  shoe- 
maker myself.^' 
•  The  case,  we  agree,  as  Mc  Culloch  says,  should  be  the  same  betwi 

Bations,  as  between  individuals.  When  Great  Britain,  therefore, 
Aises  to  take,  in  exchange  for  her  woollens,  her  cottons,  and  her 
shoes,  the  corn  and  the  cattle,  d^c.,  the  produce  of  the  labor  of  two 
thirds  of  the  people  of  the  United  States ;  and  the  latter  can  obtain 
equivalents  for  that  produce,  in  no  other  part  of  the  world,  can  abe 
reasonably  complain,  that  these  two  thirds  should  attempt  to  maka 
these  articles  for  themselves  ? 

And  yet  Briliab  statesmen  and  economists  complain  of  this,  as  a 
violation  of  the  principles  of  free  trade ;  and  are,  also,  good  enoogh 
to  inform  the  Americans,  that  this  manufacturing  for  themselves,  is 
directly  opposed  to  their  best  interests.  The  distinguished  author  al 
the  dictionary  of  commerce  and  navigation,  on  this  subject,  has  the 
following  remarka. 
>  **  The  exploded  sophisms  of  the  mercantile  system,  though  renonn- 

ced  by  every  statesman  in  Europe,  have  acquired  a  noxious  influence 
in  Congreas,  and  been  put  forth  with  as  much  confidence,  as  if  their 
soundness  neither  had  been,  nor  could  be  questioned.  From  181  d, 
downwards*  the  object  of  the  American  legislature  has  been  to  bolster 
up  a  miMnrfacturing  interest,  by  imposing  oppressive  duties  on  moat 
manufactured  articles,  imported  from  abroad^*' 

Mr.  Mc  Culloch,  then  informs  the  Americans,  of  the  inmenae  pe- 
cuniary sacrifices  they  are  making,  in  thus  bolstering  up  a  manofactn* 
ring  interest;  taken  from  calculations,  with  which  the  American  pubUc 
is  familiar.  **  Instead  of  the  goods  manufactured  in  the  states,*'  he  aays, 
"  being  as  cheap  as  similar  ones  manufactured  in  Europe,  they  are  ad-  ' 
mitted  to  be,  at  an  average,  from  thirty  to  a  hundred  per  cent,  dearer ; 
the  extent  of  the  pecuniary  sacrifice  that  is  thus  imposed  on  the  union, 
has  been  variously  estimated  by  American  writers ;  but  we  have  been 
assured  by  those,  who  have  the  best  means  of  knowing,  that  it  may 
be  moderately  estimated  at,  from  $50,000,000  to  $60,000,000,  or  from 
about  iC114XX)^000  to  £13,000,000;  and  this  immense  burden-— a  bur- 
den nearly  three  times  as  great,  as  the  whole  public  expenditure  of 
the  republic,  is  incurred  for  no  purpose  of  public  utihiyt  and  fa  pro- 


1 


691 

doetiire  of  Dothing  but  nuschief.  The  whole  effect  of  the  scheme  it« 
to  divert  a  certain  amoant  of  the  national  capiialy  from  the  produc- 
tion of  cotton,  wheat,  rice,  tobacco,  d&c,  (the  equivribnte  lent  foreign- 
ers, in  payment  of  manufactured  goods)  to  the  direct  production  of 
these  goods  themselyes !  And  as  the  latter  ipecies  of  industry  is  <H^« 
Vfue  suitable  for  America,  a  taxi»f  £13,000,000  is  imposed  on  thep 
union,  that  the  manufacturers  may  continue  a  losing  business.  We 
shall  not  undertake  to  decide,  whether  the  absurdity  of  this  system* 
or  its  costliness  be  its  most  prominent  feature.'^*  % 

In  making  these  remarks,  Mr.  McCuUoch,  like  most  other  British 
statesmen  and  economists  when  upon  this  subject,  kept  his  eye  no  doubt 
on  cotton,  as  almost  the  only  production  of  the  United  States  ;*and 
(rom  the  culture  of  which  no  portion  of  American  capital  ought  to 
be  diverted.  This  is  not  surprising,  when  it  is  considered  that  about 
one  twelfth  of  the  whole  population  of  Great  Britain,  is  supported  by 
the  cotton  manufactures;  and  that  the  stoppage  of  a  few  thousand 
spindles  throws  as  many  hundred  persons,  on^the  parishes,  for  sup- 
port ;  and  that  nearly  one  half  of  all  the  domestic  expoili  of  that 
Jungdom,  consists  of  the  manufactures  of  this  article.  If,  indeedf  ae- 
cording  to  McCulloch  and  his  authorities,  the  United  States,  for  msny 
years  past,  have  lost  fiAy  or  sixty  millions  of  doUars  a  year  by  man- 
ufacturing for  themselves,  it  is  somewhat  strange  they  have  not,  ere 
this,  become  utterly  bankrupt ;  and  stranger  still,  that,  during  this  ^ 
same  period,  thev  should  have  been  able  to  )>ay  off  a  national  debt  of 
$120,000,000,  and  have  expended,  from  ninety  to  a  hundhtf  millions» 
in  internal  improvements,  by  means  of  canals  and  rail  roads* 

The  different  situations  of  the  people  inhabiting  diflerent  por- 
tions of  this  extensive  country,  in  relation  to  a  foreign  market  for 
their  respective  productions,  as  above  exhibited,  certainly  present  ^ 
subjects  of  serious  consideration  and  reflection,  not  merely  to  the 
American  statesman,  and  economist,  but  to  every  individual,  in  this 
great  community.    ' 

While  the  people  of  the  middle,  eastern  and  western  states,  should 
not  call  upon  those  of  the  south,  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  their  peculiar 
advantages;  yet  they  day  still  ask  them,  to  consider,  whether,  if  their 
fellow  citizens,  inhabiting  higher  and  less  favored  latitudes,  cannot 
exchange  with  foreign  nations,  the  products  of  their  labor,  for  essen- 
tial supplies,  they  are  not  necessarily  compelled  to  make  them  for 
themselves  ?  4 


«  McCoUoch  on  coiniBarce,  New  York  cditioa,  183X 


§ 


593 

Perfect  unanimily.  in  measures,  lenillng  lo  enunterart  ihis 
policy,  so  far  rts  lliatpnlicy  atTccU  a  large  port  iif  ilic  communtty.  WM 
not  to  be  expecftd.  Too  mucli  should  not  be  altcmpieil  ■!  one*. 
Mutual  forbearance,  and  even  miKUtil  sacrifices  to  local  interetU  and 
•^feelings,  are  reijuisiie.  If  the  governuieiii  over  this  exl^Miwt^  caa»- 
■  •try  was  not  established.  Without  n  cumpromise  of  views  Mi^BtemM. 
either  real  or  imaginary.  It  wuuld  bs  a  luiracle,  inileed,  if  its  long  eo>- 
tinuance  can  be  secured  in  any  other  way.  With  theie  vii'w*.  iIm 
eonipromisc  act,  as  it  ia  called,  was  passed  ;  and  ii  is  our  wiah.  ibai  il 
■bould  have  a  full  and  fair  experiment ;  ami  we  most  siocefely  liopc,  il 
will  subserve  ihe  interest  of  every  part  of  this  great  community. — 
Wc*  cannot  but  ubacrve,  howeier,  that  in  the  conllict  of  opiniMt 
which  h>a  arisen,  on  ttis  qtieelion.  New  England  has  been  placed  in  a 
)teculiar,  aiM  we  nay  add,  nnforlunate  siluation.  She  has  been  ac- 
cused of  Ijoing  iht  author  and  supporter  of  the  sysieni :  and  on  that 
accDunl,  Inwards  her,  hare  been  directed  some  of  the  kecnpii  ahafu 
of  reproach  and  calumny.  Whatever  of  good  or  evil  there  may  he 
in  the  By«{em,  New  England  was  not  its  author. 

In  1MI6,  il  i^  well  known,  that  she  voted  with  the  aouih,  and  ■^nat 
NelpTork.  New  Jeraey,  reunsylvanta,  and  ihe  western  sUtea,  on  the 
great  question  of  t(ie  extent  of  pruiectiun  to  be  aflorded,  tu  the  Bmr- 
ufacLiire  of  coiion. 

The  committee,  who  reported  the  tarilT- bill  of  that  year,  rceon- 
mcndcd  a  doty  of  thirty  per  cent  on  all  imported  cotton  good*;  and 
on  the  qmstinn  of  reducing  il  to  tivcniy  £ve.  Warty  two  thirds  of 
the  New  Sp^nd  members  in  ihe  House,  voted  for  its  reduction, 
while  out  <w  ^rty  three  members  from  New  York,  New  Jmty  and 
Pennsylvania,  who  voted  on  the  qucation,  nine  only  were  In  laror  »f 
^  iL  The  question  of  reduction,  was.  therefore,  carried  byjbc  Ntw 
England  votes,  joined  with  those  of  the  souih. 

On  the  larifT  of  \VH4,  the  votes  of  the  New  England  stales,  i(«|« 
6t\een  for,  and  twenty  three  against  it,  while  Hkhse  of  the  alaiea  of 
New  York,  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  Kentucky  and  Ohio.^aiood 
seventy  eight  for,  and  nine  ngainsi;  Bnd>  On  the  tarilT  of  I83N,  tli« 
Totes  of  the  former,  were  sixteen  for,  aji^  twenty  ihree  a^tnst, 
and  those  of  the  laiter  stood  eighty  for  and  onlf  six  against  iL  8«Miie 
of  the  New  England  votes  on  the  tarilT  of  ie2K  were  probably  gor- 
erDcd^y'lbeiktails  of  the  bill. 

Depri*4  BS  New  England  wns.  after  the  close  of  the  long  wmn  tii 
Europfe,  nf  a  jnarkpt  for  her  usuni  products,  and,  also,  of  the  carrying 
trade,  which  those  wars  threw  into  her  hands,  wo  D«v«r  doubiad,  but 


lh*t,  in  Rctf  dcfcnBC,  sbtf  iDUst  gradually  lurn  li«r  utleiiiiiin  lt>  niKnD- 
fkcturea,  in  sucli  a  manner,  however,  a»  nut  lo  injure  b«r  ^real  com- 
laercid  anil  narigaiing  inlcrcst,  H')iic!i  cbe  had  dway*  oheriaht-d.  and 
which  \i  now  nearly  equal  m  iliai  of  every  othrr  part  of  the  United 
Sialca.     When,  thcrcrure,  stic  ha«  b«vn  curupulleil,  partly  in  selftle- 


i|ueacc«ra  B}>tcni.  which  iliil  not  original* 
iderable  porlJAO  vf  txtr  capiul  and  labor,  M 
J,  thai  she  should  be  charged  uiili  all 
hich  thai  aydlem,  hai  been  lup- 


irAl- 


ohun- 


fenae.  and^rily,  in 

wiUihcr,  to  diverl  a 

roanufac lures,  il  is  hard,  indi 

the  evils,  whether  real  or  imaginary 

posed  lo  produce.* 

Under  •  syttpm,  which  iho  national  legislature  adopted.  New  En- 
gland as  well  as  other  parU  of  the  United  Suits,  has  become  ^Wpl; 
interested  in  mannraciures.  particularly  lliosa,  of  wiiol  and  cuttun. 
The  village  of  Lowell  alone,  in  December,  l^iQS.  had  a  c«t)ltal 
cd  in  manufacturing  establish  men  Is,  principally  cotton,  lo  the  i 
of  $6,560,000  in  twenty  two  mills,  having  iliroe  thousand  Gt 
dred  end  ninety  eight  looms,  and  ninety  seven  thousand  and  foi 
dred  spindles,  employing  in  the  cotton  mills  four  ihouituni^lii 
dred  and  seventy  five  females,  and  one  thouiiand  one  hnndrcJanri  iiAy 
five  males,  in  the  whole  five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  thirty^on- 
Burning  annually  eleven  millions  four  hundnd  and  twenty  four  ihou- 
aand  and  four  hundred  pounds  of  cotton,  and  miliiDK  ili'riy  «i\  mil- 
tioni  and  forty  four  thousand  yards  of  coltou  cloth.  Ln- 
manufscluring  village,  and  no  place,  tve  believe,  hn«  <  . 

inulacutreaalunc,  with  greater  rapidity, orwiih  il  >' 

1,  baa  had  an  equal  number  of  operaiives.  In  iHSOt  it*  pupulaUou 
c  hundred,  and  in  December,  1S33,  (tiA*  wtimated 
I  fbouiaud  :  and  mive  llian  one  third  of  these  Wire  then  em- 
ployed  in  Aa  cotton  ci>tablishincnts:t  and  we  beg  leave  here  to  ob- 
serve, that  ibU  is  mote  than  one  iiuarter  of  the  whole  number  uf  per- 
KtDs  employed  in  MaocbBater,  t)ie  greatest  manufacturing  eraporiuni 


from  n 


^pjUthot 


•  Tn«»«  ehai^ei  I 

b»  as  Um  floor  uf  Cal||TMt,S 

AWt&rei 


If  and  jDUly  ineuJy-^<t>Nuigai>l 
tn  told  evriy  d^^id  Mi.  Sici 


naile.  not  onl|r  in  panipblet*  and  in  newspapers, 
panicDlsrly  in  1S3B;  bai,  they  were  Iheo,  vetf 
igoished  member,  from  Praniflvanta. 

ibat  ibu  policy  of  proicctioB  is  a 


■gland  >|Mrmul'  grimtuig  oppruMun  on  tie  nuib.  Now,  sii,  this  sj 
W,liltraUf  ftrttd  n%  Siv  JChj^IkW  bf  Xew  York  anil  PrnliqiltaDia ;  soil 
Til  genii*  men  »oolil  nnl  psviorpr  Pen  n*)' I  van  is  lo  sbiM  P<j»&flaDiJ, 
llabebaddoan"  Andbetddcd.  "  ihai  u  vonld  bp  buaasdpbbaaurabla 
Nl,  Ib  our  soaU,  aOd  liear  N*v  tlnglaud  abiued,  on  svcooal  of  maMias, 
Itotwvliarsadepitd."  •  8e«  Table  No.  IV. 


^\ 


624 

of  cotton  in  England,  and  probably  in  tbe  world,  and  having  a  pop- 
ulation of  one  hundred  and  eighty  seven  thousand  and  twenty  two. 
In  1832,  the  number  of  cotton  mills  in  Manchester  was  sixty  eight, 
emplojring  twenty  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty  five  persona,  five 
4hou8and  three  hundred  and  sixty  one  adult  males,  seven  thousand 
^  m^d  thirty  five  adult  females,  chillren  under  eighteen,  males,  four 
thousand  two  hundred  anfl  eighty  six,  and  females,  three  thousand 
nine  hundred  and  three.* 

.  ^Of  the  cotton  cloth  made  at  Lowell,  eight  millions  of  jrards  were 
printed,  worth  from  twenty  to  twenty  eight  cents  per  yard  ;  and  the 
value  of  the  whole,  estimated  at  ten  cents  per  yard,  was  $3,604,000. 
And  it  is  not  a  little  extraordinary,  that  an  American  village,  the 
growth  of  about  ten  years  only,  should  produce  cotton  goods  ap- 
proaching i#value  to  nearly  one  half  of  all  the  foreign  cotton  goods 
consumed  in  the  United  States,  on  an  average  of  ten  years,  from  1831 
to  1830.    And  it  may  be  here  asked,  in  what  way  could  the  labor  of 
these  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  seventy  five  females,  and  one 
thousand^one  hundred  and  fifty  five  males,  be  equally  productive  in 
New  England  ;  and  whether  the  produce  of  their  labor  employed  in 
anyVher  way,  could  be  exchanged  for  an  equal  amount  of  cotton  or 
any  other  goods,  in  Great  Britain,  or  any  other  part  of  the  world. 
In  1831,  the  quantity  of  cotton  consumed  in  New  England  was  a 
m.  little  more  than  fifty  one  millions  of  pounds,  being  about  equal  to  the 
quantity  consumed  in  Great  Britain,  on  an  average  frqpn  1796  to  1806; 
and  the  qiAitity  consumed  in  1833,  must  have  been  more  than  sixty 
millions  of  pounds. 

That  the  various  manufacturing  establishments  in  this  coimi^  have 
increased  the  home  consumption  of  agriculiural  productions,  to  % 
.      great  extent,  particularly  flour  and  grain,  cannot  be  doubted.* 

New  England  alone  now  consumes  annually,  at  least,  nine  hundred 
thousand  barrels  of  flour,  brought  from  other  parts  of  the  union. 
This  does  not  rest  merely  on  conjecture.  In  1832,  the  quantity  of 
flour  brought  into  the  port  of  Boston  was  three  hyndred  and  eigUly  six 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  nine  barrels,  and  in  1833,  was  four  hundred 
and  forty  five  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  five,  making  for  these 
two  years  eight  hundred  and  thirty  two  thousand  one  hundred  and  forty 
four— the  quantity  exported  from  this  place  to  foreign  countries,  in  these 
two  years,  was  one  hundred  and  nineteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  for- 
ty six  barr^j^  leaving  for  home  consumption  seven  hundred  and  twelve 

«  See  second  annual  report  of  the  board  of  trade  to  Parliament,  made  in*  18S3L 

* 

V 


^  68B 

thoastnd  six  hundred  and  sixty  tefeo,  or  three  hundred  and  fifty  six 
thousand  in  each  year.  In  1832,  the  quantity  brought  to  the  mann-  ^  f. 
facturing  town  of  Providence  was  eighty  four  thousand  six  hundred 
and  sixty  seven  barrels,  (none  of  which  we  believe  was  exported.) 
This  would  make  for  those  two  places  four  hundred  and  forty  thou* 
sand  barrels  a  year;  and  this,  we  tpprehead,  could  not  be  more  than 
one  half,  at  least,  of  the  whole  brought  to  New  England.  And 
we  would  observe,  that  the  whole  quantity  of  flour  exported  to  Eu- 
rope in  1833  was  about  two  hundred  and  twelve  thousand  barrelff  * 
and  in  1833  was  only  about  fifty  thousand ;  and  that  the  average 
quantity  exported  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  in  the  same  two  years, 
was  nine  hundred  ten  thousand  and  six  barrels. 

The  quantity  of  Indian  corn  consumed  in  New  England,  brought 
from  other  parts  of  the  union,  cannot  be  less  than  between  two  and  three 
millions  of  bushels  a  year,  when  it  is  considered,  that  in  1833,  one 
million  and  four  hundred  thousand  were  brought  into  the  port  of  Bos- 
ton alone,  and  only  sixteen  thousand  one  hundred  and  eighty  six  bush- 
els of  this  was  exported.  And  the  whole  quantity  of  this  article  ex- 
ported from  the  United  States,  the  same  year,  was  but  four  hundred 
and  eighty  seven  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy  four  bushels^ 

That  this  great  consumption  of  flour  and  com,  in  New  England,  and 
we  may  add,  of  pork  and  many  other  productioni  of  the  farmer,  has 
been  occasioned,  in  no  small  degree,  by  her  manufactures,  cannot  be 
doubted.  To  tnee  the  great  and  mutual  interests  necessarily  arising 
out  of  this  union  of  manufactures  with  agriculture,  would  lead  us  far 
beyond  our  design.    These  interests  are  seen  and  felt  not  merely  in  ^   ^ 

the  vieioity  of  the  manufacturing  establishments,  but  many  hundreds 
of  miles  in  the  interior,  as  well  as  along  the  sea  coast  The  manufac- 
turer of  Lowell  and  Providence  consumes  the  flour  of  Rochester,  of  ,'■ 
Cleaveland  and  Cincinnati,  as  well  as  that  of  Philadelphia,  Baltimore 
and  Richmond — the  former  takes  the  flour  of  the  latter,  in  exchange 
for  his  cottons— this  exchifige  the  American  wheat  grower  has  not  been 
able  to  make  with  the  manufacturer  of  Great  Britain,  or  any  other 
country  but  his  own,  since  1814. 

The  American  cotton  planter,  also,  now  finds  a  home  market  for 
from  one  fifth  to  one  quarter  of  all  his  cotton  crop ;  and  this  market 
will  increase  with  the  vast  increase  of  population  in  the  Mississippi 
valley. 


t 

■  4 


J 


I 

i 
3 


,  M  .s  .s .  Miii  M .  m 

S  s  '    f=«  K    sf 


iiiiiiii 


627 


•^4 

;5  0 


o"*** 


lj 


sa  § 

o  ^ 
22  tf  "^ 
o  5  « 

ip  1!  "i 

s  fc  ^ 

a  2f  ^ 
2  ••  o 

Si 


.^ 


^f  w»  W  C» 


lO  X  ** 


^  CO 


f£^^QS 


"^  p^   m^  mm  *4  wrt  »^  •*   »^  Qf  I 


.  S'iSS'g's  S  $*8  2  S^S'sis*^ 


3 


I 


•*        *  .-T    1^*'      ^   »^  .^T'  sJt  m^  f^        •"  .^' 


SJo 


O  9  I&  OD 


ai9 


i 

I 


l^i6^^iOWC0W^COCQW**C0^**^* 


^ 

^ 


®^S8§'2Stss5 


t 

e 

I 


s 


s 


3SS  —  Sc*t^5i?$*'CiS  —  Sio 


3s 

11 


SS9S8 

2  V  21  n  «Ia 


8 


2f  SSffi®  ^sfs'aS^tf  5arf«*®^=:® 

^•1  ^5  55  cj  wM  •■  ^5  C3  C»  ^*  # -  v»  35  ***  ^*  !S  •■■ 


I  ?IISl7f2Pffli?8g 


1 


528 


TABLE  No.  in.  • 

Statement  of  the  quantity  of  cotton  in  Great  Britain^  retained  for 
home  consumption  and  for  spinnings  on  an  average^  of  the  yeart^ 
from  1796  to  1806,  and  from  1807  to  1812 ;  and  in  each  year^  from 
1814  to  1830»  together  with  the  declared  value  of  cotton  piece 
goods  and  of  cotton  yarn^  exported^  for  each  year^  during  the  lot" 
ter  period. 


Yean 

from 

1798 
to 
1806 
1807 
to 
1812 
1814 
1815 
1816 
1817 
1818 
1819 
1820 
1821 
1822 
1823 
1824 
1825 
1826 
1827 
1828 
1829 
1890 


Retained  for  home 
consompUoiL-Pounda. 


51,525,668 
79,526,187 


52,604,646 
92,010,306 
86,580,951 
116,647,615 
172,018,985 
132,844,160 
141,912,267 
113,890,759 
120,694,636 
177,032,888 
131,201,368 
205,934,408 
150,231,690 
250,618,325 
208,316,627 
190,829,866 
265,426,476 


Retained  for  splnlng. 
Pounds. 


Declared  value  ex-  |  Declared  Taloe 
ported — Piece  gooda.  '•xportcd.-Yarn. 


51,525,668 
75,680,251 


52,604,646 
90,537,000 
90,350,000 
110,530,000 
1 12,235,000 
110,235,000 
128,735,000 
128,000,000 
142,000,000 
152,000,000 
165,000,000 
168,000,000 
151,000,000 
198,000,000 
218,000,000 
220,000,000 
245,000,000 


£17,393,796 
19,124,061 
13,072,758 
14,178,021 
16,643,579 
12,388,833 
13,843,567 
13,786,952 
14,534,253 
13,751,416 
16,240,006 
15,046,902 
10,522,407 
13,956,826 
13,545,638 
13,420,544 
15,294,943 


£2,907, 
l,78I,077i 
2,707,385 
2,131,629 
2,554,0591 
2,707,6121 
2,940,32S 
2,30&,( 
2,700,^ 
2,625,^47 
3,135,490 
3,206,7291 
3,491,568 
3,541,568, 
3,594,946^ 
3,974,0391 
4,133,7411 


Quantity  imported  from  different  countries,  in  1827, 1828,  and  1829. 


United  States,    . 

Brazils, 

East  Indies, 

Egypt, 

British  West  Indies, 

All  other  parts. 


1827. 

lbs.  216,924,812 
"    20,716,162 
20,930,542 
4,084,741 
7,165,881 


« 

t« 
it 


1828. 

151,752,289 

29,143,279 

32,187,901 

6,454,386 

5,893,800 

2,328,987 


1829. 

157,187,396 

28,878,386 

24,867,800 

5,8M,480 

4,640,414 

1,308,985 


2,626,771  . 

Total  United  Kingdom,     ••  272,448,900    $27,760,642    222.767,411 
Proportion  of  G.  Briuin,    **  268,752,4W    225,71^403    221,118,(>t5 

3,696,414        2,047,239         1,648,766 

lbs.  288,674,863 


'«  of  Ireland, 

Total  quantity  imported  In  1831, 

exported 

Leaving  for  consumption. 

Total  quantity  imported  in  1832, 
••        ••  exported        ** 

Leaving  for  consumption, 

Imporltj  from  the  United  States,  in  1831, 

"     ill  1832, 


i% 


(4 


22,308,565 


266,366,298 

lbs.  286,832,525 
18,027,940 


t« 


it 


268,804,585 
lbs.  219333,028 
219,766,768 


tt 


699 


g 


c 


? 


^1 


2 
■? 
^ 


I 


" 


I 


^ 


S  si 


t^co 


^ 


l~"8fSf 


a"  8" 


-I 

ill 

CD  3 


'  2    *      g-  8" 


fasf  a" 


i!i   S8%: 


0» 


s  s 


•I  •*■  IS 


&.rTlf 


Jo  ^R 


&2 
33 


¥ 


5      ^o 
5     ^ 


09 


£22S  3'5 


^ 


.8= 


CO 


25||^ 


n 


CO 


I  ^"  a" 

5  (MB 

a 


•^2 

Si 

Mi 


§§ 


•^ 


eowSS.i: 


s|illl  § 

•ji  a  o  m    « 


1=    ^. 
i 


I 


^  o  3  o  o    r    * -^ 


^      »  a  w  g  3 


"5.2  go© 


•  _- 


67 


I  • 


-  i 


880 

The  thread  span  per  day  would  encompass  otir  globe,  on  the  eqixmtor,  twdfc 
times  and  upwards. 

Arerage  wages  of  females  per  week  (clear  of  board)  $2,  in  all  the  mills. 

Average  wages  of  males  per  day  (they  board  themselves)  $1  86. 

Total  cloth  bleached  for  market,  80,000  yards  per  week. 

Medium  prndace  of  a  loom  per  day  on  No.  14  yam,  38  to  4S  yards ; 
on  No.  30  yam,  25  to  30  yards ;  No.  14,  from  38  to  53  yards  per  loom, 
per  day,  depending  upon  the  state  of  the  machinery,     *  .         f^,4S0JM 

To  the  above  may  be  added  the 

Middlesex  Company,  which  has  erected  a  long  and  elegant  woollen 
mill  in  addition  to  their  other  works,  and  expends  per  annum  150  tons 
anthracite  coal,  500  cords  hard  pine  wood,  100  cords  oak  wood ;  con- 
sumes 490,000  lbs.  wool,  10,500  gallons  olive  oil,  1,450  gallons  wbmie 
oil,  1,500,000  teasles  per  annum;  employs  60  men  at  $1  85  per  day, 
(board  themselves,} 200  girls  at  $3  10  per  week,  (board  themselves;) 
operates  64  looms  on  casimeres,  making  900  yards  per  day;  40  looms 
on  broadcloth,  making  250  yards  per  day;  commenced  operations 
with  one  mill  in  1820,  new  mill  1833;  has  2,880  spindles  in  operation, 
SI  fulling  mills  for  fulling,  and  15  gig  mills  for  warping.— Capital  of 
Middlesex  Company, 500^001 

Machine  shop,  which  can  prepare  machinery  for  a  mill  of  5,000 
spindles,  complete  in  all  its  parts,  in  four  months ;  expends  2,000  lbs. 
of  cast  iron,  and  1,000  lbs.  of  wrought  iron  per  day,  and  employs  900 
hands  at  average  wages  of  $i  30  per  day,  (they  boarding  themselves.) 
Capital  of  locks  and  canals,  which  the  Company  owns,  and  machine 
shop, 000,000 

06,550,000 

The  consumption  of  charcoal  in  all  the  works  at  Lowell  may  be  esti- 
mated at  500,000  bushels  per  annum. 

This  sum  is  all  paid  in,  with  the  exception  of  $300,000  on  the  unfin- 
ished mills  in  the  Lawrence,  in  all  the  incoiporated  Companies. 

Boston,  December,  1833. 


531 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Casals  first  made  in  Egypt  and  China— The  Italians  and  Hollanders  first  can* 
struct  them  in  Europe — Extended  over  the  Continent — First  made  in  England  by 
the  Dake  of  Bridgewater  in  17G(V— Few  constrocted  in  the  United  States  prior 
to  1814 — Two  principal  objects  in  view  in  their  constraction — One  to  form  a 
safe  internal  water  communication  along  the  sea  board,  and  another  to  connect 
the  eastern  with  the  western  waters— Brief  view  of  the  population  and  resourcca 
of  the  western  country — Advantages  of  steam  navigation  qn  the  western  rivers 
and  lakes— Number  and  tonnage  of  steam  boats  aod  other  vessels  and  boats  em- 
ployed there— Estimate  of  the  value  of  the  surplus  produce  Of  the  western  conn- 
try — An  account  of  the  population  and  wealth  of  some  of  its  principal  cities  and 
towns,  and  their  rapid  increase — An  account  of  the  principal  canals  in  the  Uni- 
ted States— Particular  accounts  of  those  of  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio  and 
others ;  their  length,  co^t,  and  amount  of  business  done  upon  them — Estimated 
length  and  cost  of  all  the  canals  in  the  United  States — Compared  with  the  ex- 
tent and  cost  of  those  in  England  and  France — Canals  in  Pennsylvania  em- 
ployed in  the  transportation  of  coal — An  account  of  the  coal  fields  and  coal 
trade  of  Pennsylvania— Valuable  report  of  a  committee  of  the  senate  of  that 
state  on  this  subject — An  account  of  Rail  Roadv  in  the  United  States — Lately 
introduced  here,  as  well  as  in  Europe,  for  general  transportation — Their  rapid 
increase  in  the  difierent  states— Some  account  of  the  business  done  upon  them 
— Number  of  passengers,  from  Albany  to  Schenectady,  from  New  York  to  Phil- 
adelphia, and  from  Baltimore  to  Harper's  ferry,  on  these  roads,  in  1834 — Extant 
and  estimated  cost  of  Rail  Roads  now  or  soon  to  be  completed. 

Canals,  or  trtificial  water  commanieationt,  exitted  in  Egypt  at  a 
rtry  remote  period — to  remote,  indeed,  that  history  has  left  us  as  ig- 
norant of  the  era  of  their  first  construction,  as  it  has  that  of  the  build- 
ing of  the  pyramids  of  the  same  country.  History  does  not  inform 
us,  with  certainty,  either  the  time  when,  or  by  whom,  the  great  ca- 
nafl  was  constructed,  which  formerly  connected  the  Nile  with  the 
Red  sea. 

In  China,  canals  can  be  traced  beyond  the  Christian  era ;  and  littla 
improvement,  in  their  construction,  has  taken  place,  in  that  country, 
since  the  Europeans  became  acquainted  with  them. 

luly  and  Holland  have  the  honor  of  first  introducing  this  kind  of 
internal  improvement  into  Europe — and  it  is  now  calculated,  that 
about  one  twenty  sixth  part  of  Holland,  is  uken  up  by  canals.  Tbof 
were  gradually  introduced  into  the  diflerent  countries  of  Europe,  and 
by  means  of  canals,  and  rivers,  an  internal  water  communication, 
now  eonnecti  the  great  seas,  which  surround  that  quarter  of  tha 


S38 

world.  The  Caspian  is  connected  with  the  Baltic,  through  the  Wol- 
ga.  Lake  Ladoga,  and  intervening  canals — and  the  Baltic  is,  also, 
connected  with  the  Black  Sea,  through  other  rivers  and  artificial  wa^ 
ters.  At  the  west,  the  German  or  Northern  ocean  commoDicates 
with  the  Baltic,  likewise,  hy  canals,  through  Holstein,  and  throngh 
Sweden  by  lake  Wenern.  The  famous  canal  of  Languedoc,  in  tba 
•oath  of  France,  forms  a  communication  between  the  Meditairanean, 
and  the  Atlantic,  and  the  equally  famous  Caledonian  canal,  in  the 
north  of  Scotland,  forms  a  similar  communication  between  the  North- 
ern ocean  and  the  Irish  sea. 

Most  of  the  great  rivers,  in  different  parts  of  Enrope,  are,  abo, 
connected  by  canals,  thereby  greatly  facilitating  the  intercoarse  be- 
tween different  nations,  as  well  as  between  different  parte  of  the  same 
nation.  In  the  north  of  Germany,  the  Elbe,  the  Oder,  the  Vistah 
and  the  Niemen,  are  so  connected  by  canals,  as  to  form  a  water  com- 
nunnication,  about  one  hundred  miles  south  of  the  Baltic,  from  the 
frontiers  of  Russia,  to  the  city  of  Hamburgh,  a  distance  of  about  five 
hundred  miles. 

England,  at  first,  attempted  to  improve  her  internal  navigation,  hy 
removing  obstacles  from  her  'rivers ;  and  numerous  acts  of  ParKa- 
nent  were  passed,  for  this  purpose ;  and  it  was  not  until  1700,  that 
the  enterprising  and  persevering  spirit  of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater, 
first  introduced  the  system  of  artificial  water  communication  In  that 
country — and  since  that  period,  England,  like  Holland,  has  been  cov- 
ered with  her  hundred  canals.  Her  mountains,  indeed,  presented 
obstacles,  unknown  in  Holland ;  but  her  vast  capital,  and  the  extraor- 
dinary ingenuity  and  talents  of  her  Brindleys,  her  Telfords  and  her 
Smeatons,  overcame  difiiculties  apparently  insurmountable.  Her 
mountains,  to  make  ways  for  canals,  have  been  perforated,  to  the  ex- 
tent,  in  the  whole,  of  more  than  forty  five  miles. 

To  this  kind  of  internal  improvement,  little  attention  was  paid  by 
the  Americans,  until  after  the  close  of  the  late  war  between  the  Uni* 
ted  States  and  Great  Britain. 

Prior  to  their  separation  from  the  parent  country,  they  had  little  in- 
ducement to  undertake  them — from  the  peace  of  1783,  to  the  adop- 
tion of  the  present  constitution,  they  had  not  the  means;  and  their  pe- 
euliar  situation  and  employment  during  the  long  wars  in  Europe,  ren- 
dered internal  improvements  of  this  kind  less  necessary. 

The  experience  of  the  late  war'  between  the  United  States  and 
Ghreat  Britain,  and  the  consequent  long  peace  in  Europe,  together 
with  the  vast  expansion  of  American  population,  has  proved  the  im- 


6S3 

portance  and  necewity  of  internal  improvemento  of  thii  kind,  at  well 
ai  qihert,  in  ihii  extensiye  countrj.  And  since  I8I&1  the  United 
States  have  progrefM^d  in  these  improvements,  with  a  rapidity*  sur- 
passing thai  of  any  other  nation.  Most  of  the  canals,  on  the  conti* 
nent  of  Earope,  have  been  constructed,  at  the  expense  of  govern- 
roenta — in  England,  chiefly  at  the  expense  of  individuals ;  and  in  the 
United  States,  they  have  been  made  by  states  and  by  individuals,  aided 
occasionally  by  the  general  government 

In  locating  canals  in  this  country,  two  principal  objects  have  been 
kept  in  view^-one  to  make  a  safe  water  inland  communication,  along 
the  Atlantic  border,  in  case  of  a  war  with  any  nation,  whose  marilima 
force,  might  exceed  that  of  the  United  States — another  and  very  im- 
portant  object  has  been,  to  connect  the  waters  of  the  west  with  those 
of  the  east,  and  thereby  facilitate  the  intercourse  between  these  two 
distant  sections  of  this  country.  The  vast  expansion  of  popnlation 
at  the  west,  and  the  great  and  growing  resources  of  that  portion  of 
the  union,  has  rendered  this  kind  of  improvement  of  vast  importance ; 
and  has  created  rival  interests,  at  the  east,  in  order  to  secure  the  ad- 
vantages of  this  intercourse. 

Before  noticing,  however,  the  various  canals,  and  other  improve- 
ments, already  completed  or  in  progress  for  this  and  other  objects,  we 
shall  present  some  brief  sketches  of  the  population  and  resources  of 
the  western  country.  Vie  include,  under  this  name,  the  states  of 
Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois  and  Missouri,  the  terri- 
tory of  Michigan,  and  those  portions  of  Pennsylvania  and  Virginiaf 
which  lie  beyond  the  Alleghany  mountains. 

In  1790,  the  whole  population  of  this  country,  was  only  two  hun- 
dred and  thirty  seven  thousand  and  eighty  four,  and  in  1830,  the 
number  of  its  inhabitants  had  increased  to  three  millions  two  hun- 
dred and  sixty  four  thousand  four  hundred  and  thirty  eight ;  and  the 
number,  at  the  present  time,  (January  1835),  must  be  between  four 
and  five  mjUions,  exceeding  the  whole  population  of  the  United 
Sutes  in  1790. 

The  reader  need  not  be  informed,  that  this  population  extends  over 
a  country,  unrivalled  in  the  extent  and  magnitude  of  its  navigable 
waters,  as  well  as  in  the  fertility  of  its  soil.  The  valley  of  the  itfls- 
sissippi,  as  it  is  usually  called,  it*  watered  by  rivers,  some  of  which, 
only  of  the  third  rate,  extend  a  thousand  miles ;  and  it,  also,  indented 
by  lakes,  whose  magnitude  justl/entitles  them  to  the  appellation  of 
island  seas. 


?» 


534 

This  great  incretse  of  inhabiUnts  within  so  short  a  period*  mfibtds 
coQlhaiTe  eTidence,  that  this  part  of  the  United  States,^  is  destined  to 
sustain  a  vast  population)  and  of  furnishing  resources,  far  beyond  all 
ordinary  calculations.    We  cannot  but  regret  our  inabiliiy  to  presoU 
tlie  reader,  with  as  accurate  an  account  of  the  exports  and  surplus 
produce  of  this  fertile  country,  as  of  its  population.     These  exports 
pass  through  many  channels  to  their  various  places  of  destination 
along  the  Atlantic  sea  board.    They  reach  New  York,   by  the  Erie 
canal  and  the  Hudson — Philadelphia,  by  Pittsburgh,  and   the  canab 
and  rail  roads  of  Pennsylvania — Baltimore,  through  Wheeling,  by 
the  Cumberland  road,  and  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  rail  road — Wash- 
ington, partly  by  the  same  route,  and  by  the  Cheasapemke  and  Ohio 
canal — Richmond  and  Charleston,  in  various  ways  across  the  moon- 
tatns,  and  New  Orleans  by  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers.     Tlie 
amount  carried  through  these  various  channels,  must  necessarily,  in 
a  great  degree,  be  conjectural.     From  our  own  observations,  how- 
ever, and  from  other  sources  of  information,  we  are  satisfied  that  the 
value  of  the  exports  from  this  country,  destined  either  for  the  con- 
sumption of  other  parts  of  the  union,  or  for  shipments  abroad,  6r 
exceeds  the  whole  exports  of  the  United  States  in  the  year  1790. 

The  exports  of  the  western  country  consist,  principally,  of  cotton, 
tobacco,  flour,  wheat,  pork,  beef,  hams  and  bacon,  lard,  butter,  flax 
seed,  linseed  oil,  com  and  corn  meal,  wool,  bees  wax,  tallow,  ginseng, 
cheese,  live  cattle,  horses,  hogs;   and  various  kinds  of  manu&c- 
tures,  such  as  sugar  mills,  steam  engines,  iron  and  iron  castings,  cot- 
ton bagging,  hats,  cabinet  ware,  flint  and  window  glass,  candles,  types, 
beer,  whiskey,  porter,  cooper's  ware,  cordage,  6lc.  6lc, 

By  an  estimate,  in  our  possession,  in  which  we  place  confidence, 
the  amount  of  the  exports  of  Tennessee  alone,  in  1832,  was  $6,190,0001 
These  consisted  of 

One  hundred  and  twenty  thonsand  bales  of  cotton, 
valued  at        .....  .        $4,000,000 

Corn  and  live  stock,  ....  1,000,000 

Four  thousand  hhds.  of  tobacco,  190,000 

Iron  and  castings,    .....  800,000 

Other  articles,         .....  900,000 


00^190,000 

From  that  part  of  the  state  of  Kentucky,  which  lies  north  and  east 
of  Kentucky  river,  and  a  few  counties  bordering  on  its  south  side, 
the  exports  in  1832,  were  valued  as  follows,  viz : — 


586 

Hogs  tli?e  tnd  io  pork,  btcon,  Urd,  $1,000,000 

Horned  cattle 200,000. 

Jr- 

Horsei  and  mules, 500,000 

Hempen  fabrica, 750,000 

Tobacco, 1       .  150,000 

Iron  castings,  pigs,  and  bars,  50,000 

Wool,  ginseng,  Slc* 100,000 

$2,750,000 

Estimating  the  surplus  produce  of  the  remainder  of  Kentucky  at 
two  millions  and  a  half,  we  shall  have  for  that  state  95,260,000. 

The  surplus  produce  of  the  state  of  Ohio,  it  is  believed,  may  be 
calculated  at  about  too  millions.  The  exports  of  Cincinnati  alone,  in 
1S33,  were  valued  at  %5,000,000.*  This  amount  does  not  proba- 
bly exceed  the  truth,  when  it  is  considered,  that  the  number  of  hogs 
slaughtered  in  that  city  in  1833,  was  one  hundred  and  twenty  three 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  nine,  which  would  make  as  many, 
and  probably  more  barrels  of  pork ;  and  in  the  same  year,  twenty 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  eighty  barrels  of  pork  came  to  that 
city  by  the  Miami  canal,  making  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
barrels  in  the  whole,  and  which  at  nine  dollars  per  barrel,  would  be 
$1,350,000;  and  that  in  1834,  the  number  slaughtered  was  one  bun* 
dred  and  fifty  thousand.  And  we  cannot  but  here  remark,  that  the 
whole  quantity  of  pork  exported  from  the  United  States  in  1833,  was 
only  one  hundred  and  five  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy  bar* 
rels,  leaving  in  favor  of  Cincinnati,  forty  five  thousand  barrels. 

The  exports  of  Cleaveland,  on  Lake  Erie,  in  the  same  year,  was 
$1,704,000  coastwise,  and  $250,000  to  foreign  places,  and  from  Hu- 
ron, $274,840 ;  and  from  the  county  of  Muskingum,  on  the  river  of 
that  name,  and  from  the  flourishing  village  of  Zanesville,  with  her 
numerous  flouring  mills,  as  ascertained  by  tliose  well  acquainted  with 
the  facts,  was  $500,000.  The  value  of  the  exports  from  these  places 
alone^  make  about  seven  millions  and  three  quarters ;  and  when  it  is 
considered,  that  the  quantity  of  tobacco  raised  in  Ohio  in  1633,  was 
ten  thousand  hogsheads,  only  three  thousand  of  which  is  included  in 
the  above  exports  from  Muskingum,  and  when  to  these  are  added  the 
exports  from  the  8ciota  valley  and  from  many  other  places  on  the  Ohio 
river  and  on  the  Lake,  we  apprehend  that  the  surplus  produce  of  Ohio 
cannot  be  less  than  $10,000,000 — making  for  the  three  states  of 

•  See  Directory  of  Ciacinnati  for  18M. 


V 


636 

Tennessee,  Kentucky,  and  Ohio,  $21,370,000.  The  Conmierce  of 
Pittsburgh  stands  next  to  that  of  Cincinnati,  in  the  western  coantry ; 
and  in  1834,  must  have  greatly  increased  in  consequence  of  the  eom- 
pletiop  of  the  Pennsylmnia  canals  and  rail  roads,  from  that  city  to 
Philadelphia.  We  harelio  means  of  ascertaining  the  value  of  exports 
from  this  place,  but  we  apprehend  it  must  have  been,  in  1834,  os  much 
•s  four  millions,  and  the  value  from  Wheeling  at  least  one  million. 

Indiana  is  now  supposed  to  contain  half  a  million  of  inhabitants ; 
and  in  183L  the  value  of  produce  carried  down  the  Wabash,  in  one 
thousand  or  twelve  hundred  boats,  was  about  9750,000 ;  and  in  1834, 
probably  exceeded  a  million.    When  we  add  to  this  the  valne  of  ex* 
ports  from  the  rest  of  Indiana,  from  Dlinois,  from  Missouri,  and  the 
Territory  of  Michigan,  we  hazard  nothing  ii^^stitoating  the  whcrfe  sor* 
plos  produce  of  what  we  have  called  the  wMBfn  country,  in  1834^  at 
from  #28,000,000  to  $30,000,000 ;  being  about  fifty  per  cent,  more 
than  the  whole  exports  of  the  United  States  in  1790. 

This  amount  of  surplus  produce,  requires  for  its  transportation  to 
its  various  markets,  a  large  amount  of  tonnage,  either  in  steam  boats, 
flat  or  keel  boats,  canal  boats  or  lake  vessels. 

The  number  of  steam  boats  on  the  western  rivers  January  lot,  1834, 
was,  according  to  estimation,  about  two  hundred  and  thirty,  measa- 
ring  thirty  nine  thousand  tons.  Twenty  Ave  of  these  orer  two 
hundred  tons  each,  plyed  between  Louisville,  New  Orleans,  and  Cio* 

cinnati, measuring    8,484  tons. 

Seven  between  Nashville  and  New  Orleans,  **  2,585     ** 

Four  between  Florence  and  New  Orleans,  .        .    "  1,617     *• 

Four  in  the  St.  Louis  trade,        .        .        .        .     ^  1,002    ** 

Seven  in  the  cotton  trade,  .  .    ''  2,116     ** 

Fifty  seven  not  in  established  trades,  from  120  to  200  tons,  8,641     ** 
The  residue  under  120  tons  in  various  trades,  14,668     ** 


39,000 


The  annual  expense  of  running  these  boats,  is  estimated  at 
•4,644,000. 

The  number  of  flat  bottom  and  keel  boats  has  been  calculated  at 
four  thousand,  with  a  tonnage  amounting  to  one  hundred  and  sixty 
thousand, — making  the  whole  tonnage  on  the  western  rivers  about 
two  hundred  thousand. 

In  the  autumn  of  1834,  the  number  of  American  steam  boats  on 
Lake  Erie  was  thirty  one,  whose  average  tonnage  was  about  three 
hundred  and  forty  three  each — the  number  of  schooners  two  hundred 


S8T 

tnd  thirtj  four,  tTeraging  eighty  (iTe  ions,  and  three  brigtt  with  en 
a?erege  tonnage  of  two  hundred  and  fifteen* 

Tonnage  of  tteam  boats  on  the  Lake,        •  10,033 

••        Of  schooners,     .  *  #  '  19,890 

Of  brigs,    ......  645 

3^168 

Making  the  whole  tonnage  of  the  west,  exclusive  of  that  of  eaml 
boats,  about  two  hundred  and  thirty  thousand. 

The  benefits  of  steam  navigation  on  the  western  rivers,  can  oolj 
be  duly  appreciated  but  by  considering,  that  on  the  Mississippi,  9Bi 
twenty  two  of  its  tributary  streams,  more  than  eight  thousand  milea 
are  traversed  by  boata  propelled  by  steam. 

If  any  thing  could  sljme  the  traveller  with  greater  surprise,  or  cooM 
more  interest  the  political  economist,  than  to  witness  these  self  mo- 
ving machines,  traversing  in  every  direction  the  numerous  rivers  which 
extend  their  winding  courses  through  this  immense  country,  it  would 
be  the  number  and  size  of  the  villages,  towns,  and  cities,  which,  as  if 
by  magic,  have  at  once  sprung  up  along  their  banks,  and  upon  the 
shores  of  the  lakes,  with  which  the  country  for  so  many  hundreds  of 
miles  is  indented.  Of  these  Pituburgh,  Wheeling,  Cincinnati,  and 
Louisville  on  the  Ohio,  and  St.  Louis  on  the  Mississippi,  as  well  •• 
some  others  situated  on  the  canals,  and  along  the  lake  shores,  should 
receive  at  least  a  passing  notice. 

The  city  of  Pituburgh,  situated  at  the  head  waters  of  the  Ohio^  is 
well  known  to  be  the  manufacturing  emporium  of  the  west.  Its  pop- 
ulation in  18^,  was  seven  thousand  two  hundred  and  forty  eight,  is 
1830,  twelve  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty  eight,  and  in  ISBit 
with  its  suburbs,  Alleghany  town,  Birmingham,  dec  was  supposed  to 
be  thirty  thousand.  In  December,  1834,  while  we  are  writing,  tho 
Pittsburgh  Gazette  informs  us,  that  there  were  in  that  city,  sixteen 
**  founderies  and  engine  factories*^  of  the  largest  denomination,  besides 
numerous  others  of  less  magnitude — nine  '*  rolling  mills,*'  cutting  two 
tons  of  nails,  and  rolling  eight  tons  of  iron  per  day — six  **  cotton  fac- 
tories,^ having  twenty  thousand  spindles  and  one  hundred  and  sixteen 
power  looms — six  extensive  **  white  lead  factories'' — six  **  steam  saw 
UkWW^ — four  ^  steam  grist  mills" — five  extensive  **  breweries" — ten 
extensive  '*  glass  works,"  and  upwards  of  '*  one  hundred  steam  en- 
gines in  full  operation,"  besides  ^innumerable  establishments  for 
ploughs,  timber,  wheels,  screws  of  all  kinds,  butts,  brass  work  of  ev- 
ery description,  locks,"  dec  dec. 

68 


^ 


536 

The  ipdrease  of  the  population  of  Pittsburgh,  especitUy  since  181^ 
has  arisen,  principally,  from  her  manufacturing  establishments.     la 
the  midst  of  a  vast  region  of  coal,  her  various  manufactories,  worked 
by  steam,  are  furnished  with   fuel  of  this  kind,  at  the  cheap  rate  of 
about  two  cents  per  bushel.    This  city  is  destined  to  increase  ia 
wealth  and  population,  not  merely  from  the  increase  of  her  roanofiie- 
tnres,  bur  from  the  great  advantage  of  her  pcisition,  being  the  point 
to  which  canals  and  rail  roads  already  completed,  or  in  progress,  from 
Philadelphia,  New  York,  Baltimore,  and  Washington  are  directed. 
This  was  the  favorite  spot  fixed  upon  by  the  French,   in  1763,  for 
a  military  station,  for  the  purpose  of  commanding  and  securing  the 
whole  country  west  of  the  Alleghany,  then  claimed  as  their  property. 
Here  the  French  then  built  Fort  Du  Quesne,  so  well  known  in  histo- 
ry, by  which  they  were  enabled,  not  only  to  command  the  navigation 
of  the  Ohio,  which  was  the  great  passway  from  Quebec  to  New  Or> 
leans ;  but  from  whith,  for  the  three  first  years  of  the  war  of  17S0, 
they  issued  to  commit  depredations  along  the  western  frontiers  of 
Virginia  and  Pennsylvania.     In  1758,  however,  the  place  was  aban- 
doned, and  the  fort  destroyed  by  the  French  themselves,  on  the  ap- 
proach of  the  British  and  colonial  troops,  under  the  comnnand  of 
General  Forbes.     Fort  Pitt  was  then  built  near  the  same  spot,  and 
garrisoned  by  British  soldiers.     A  view  of  this  favorite  spot,  and  par- 
ticularly of  the  remains  of  the  British  fort,  still  visible  in  1830,  (the 
stone  magazine  being  in  the  midst  of  a  garden  in  a  dilapidated  condi- 
tion) cannot  fail  to  be  accompanied  with  historical  recoUeetions,  pe- 
cnliarly  interesting  to  an  American.     It  reminds  him  of  the  great 
statesman  whose  name  it  bears,  by  whose  energetic  counsels,  this  vast 
country  was  wrested  from  the  hands  of  France — and,  at  the  same 
time,  brings  to  his  recollection,  that  here,  also,  was  firi«t  displayed 
the  cool  intrepidity  and  military  skill  of  one,  who  afterwards  wrested 
the  same  country  from   the  grasp  of  Great  Britain   herself.     The 
changes  which  this  spot  has  undergone  since  the  period  first  alluded 
to,  excites  in  him  feelings  of  a  different  character,  but  not  less  inter- 
esting.    Difierent  scenes  now  indeed  present  themselves.     The  noise 
of  the  mechanic's  hammer  is  heard,  instead  of  the  Indian^s  yell — the 
smoke  of  a  hundred  steam  engines  is  now  seen,  instead  of  the  smoke 
of  as  many  savage  fires — and  numerous  large  vessels  in  the  room  of 
Indian  canoes,  are  now  seen  stretched  along  the  banks  of  the  Monon- 
gahela  and  the  Alleghany. 

Wheeling,  in  Virginia,  situated  on  the  Ohio,  where  the  great  na- 
tional road  crosses  that  river,  is  a  flourishing  commercial,  as  well  as 


589 

BMnnfiietoriiig  town*  Its  population  in  1818,  wti  ettimated  at  one 
thousand,  in  1830,  by  the  cennus,  was  fi?e  thousand  two  hundred  and 
twenty  two,  and  in  November,  1833,  was  calculated  at  eight  thousand. 

The  number  of  manufactories  of  all  kinds,  at  the  latter  period,  was 
one  hundred  and  thirteen,  employing  one  thousand  three  hundred 
men,  and  whose  annual  products  amounted,  by  estimation,  to  about 
91,300,000.  It  is  the  great  thoroughfare  from  Baltimore  to  the  west- 
ern country  by  the  national  road,  and  eight  daily  stages  are  employed 
in  the  transportation  of  passengers  to  and  from  the  town. 

Cincinnati,  situated  about  450  miles  below  Pittsburgh,  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  Ohid,  has  been  justly  called  the  Philadelphia  of  the  west 
It  resembles  that  city,  not  only  in  the  regularity  and  uniformity  of 
its  streets  and  houses,  its  markets,  its  hundreds  of  large  waggons,  Ia 
the  streets  on  mdrket  days,  and  its  water  works ;  but,  also,  in  ite 
literary  and  humane  institutions ;  for,  although  but  of  yesterday,  it 
already  has  its  theological  and  medical  seminaries,  its  reading  roomtt 
its  libraries,  its  museums,  its  hospital  and  lunatic  asylums  and  its  eye 
and  ear  infirmaries. 

Few  settlements,  it  is  well  known,  were  made  north  of  the  river 
Ohio,  pror  to  1705 ;  when  a  long  Indian  war  was  closed,  and  Indian 
boundaries  settled  by  the  treaty  of  Greenville.  At  this  period,  the 
Tillage  of  Cincinnati,  contained  only  ninety  four  cabins,  ten  framed 
houses,  and  about  five  hundred  inhabitants ;  and  in  1830,  it  was  the 
seventh  city  in  the  union,  in  point  of  population,  numbering  no  leae 
than  twenty  four  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty  one  inhabitants. 

The  progress  of  its  populaiion,  during  some  periods,  since  1806» 
has  been  unexampled,  as  shewn  by  the  following  accounts. 

T«uni.  No.  of  inhabiUmti. 

1805 

1810 

1813 

1819 

1824 

1896 

1830 

The  number  of  the  inhabitants  in  1820,  was  from  an  actual  enume- 
ration made  in  December  of  that  year,  and  the  number  in  1830,  was 
from  the  United  States  census,  taken  in  June — so  that  the  population 
of  Cincinnati,  increased  eight  thousand  six  hundred  in  about  three 
years  and  a  half.  And,  although,  the  increase  has  not  been  so  great, 
•tnee  1830,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  the  population  of  this  city, 


2,320 — increase 

in  five  years, 

1,370 

4.000 

«t 

three  •* 

1,680 

10,283 

•< 

six     " 

6,383 

12,016 

M 

five     " 

1,733 

16,230 

U 

two    •* 

4,214 

24,831 

(• 

four    «« 

a6io 

/ 


540 

at  the  present  time,  (January,  1835,)  cannot  be  mnch  lesa  than 
thousand.  This  astonishing  increase  of  inhabitants,  required  an 
increase  of  buildings,  to  acconnmodate  then),  and,  in  fact,  in  1828t  the 
number  of  houses  built  in  the  city  was  four  hundred  and  ninety  six,  of 
which  two  hundred  and  seventeen  were  of  brick. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  the  Miami  canal,  which  passes  about 
sixty  five  miles,  through  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  productire  val- 
leys of  the  west,  enters  the  Ohio,  at  Cincinnati,  and  contributes  not 
a  little  to  its  prosperity  and  wealth.  The  flourishing  town  of  Dayton 
is  situated  at  the  head  of  this  canal.* 

Louisville  is  situated  on  the  Kentucky  side  of  the  Ohio,  about  one 
hundred  and  forty. miles  from  Cincinnati.  Its  location  opposite  the 
Mis  of  the  Ohio  liver,  gives  it  the  advantage  of  being  the  great  oat- 
let  of  a  large  portion  of  the  surplus  produce  of  Kentucky,  and  is,  no 
doubt,  destined  to  be  the  largest  commercial  place  in  that  state.  la 
182CH  the  number  of  inhabitants  was  four  thousand  and  twelve,  in 
1826,  seven  thousand  two  hundred,  and  in  1830,  ten  thousand  three 
hundred  and  forty  one.  The  rail  road  now  constructing  from  Lex- 
ington to  this  place,  will  greatly  contribute  to  its  prosperity. 

St.  Louis  is  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  about  twelve  hon- 
dred  miles  from  the  mouth  of  that  rirer,  in  the  State  of  Missouri.  It 
was  settled,  principally,  by  French  emigrants  from  Kaskaskias,  soon 
after  the  peace  of  1763,  when  France  ceded  to  Great  Britain,  her 
right  to  all  the  country  east  of  the  Mississippi.  It  came  to  the  Uni- 
ted States  by  the  cession  of  Louisiana  in  1803;  and  its  population  at 
that  time,  was  about  nine  hundred  and  twenty  five.  This  place  now 
commands  the  principal  trade  of  the  state  of  Missouri;  and  bids  fair 
to  be  the  great  emporium  of  the  country  west  of  it.     In  1830,  build- 

*We  shall  never  forget  our  astonishmeDt,  at  the  rapid  improvements,  in  this 
part  of  the  western  country,  when  on  the  first  of  Jaly,  1830,  we  visited  the 
village  of  Dayton,  and  particularly  the  elegant  mansion  and  beautiful  garden  of 
one  of  its  first  settlers,  (Mr.  Philips,)  who  informed  as,  that  only  twenty  four  years 
prerioos  to  that  time,  the  spot  on  which  his  house  stood,  was  a  wilderness,  which 
he  himself  had  cleai;ed — then  in  the  midst  of  a  flourishing  village,  with  a  popu- 
lation of  about  three  thousand,  and  within  a  few  rods  of  a  canal  navigable  to  Cin- 
cinnati. 

The  passage  along  this  canal,  presented  views,  of  extensive  and  Inxurioos 
fields  of  wheat,  com,  oats  and  grass,  and  several  flourishing  villages,  situated  oa 
or  near  its  banks.  The  village  of  Hamilton,  being  several  feet  lower  than  the 
general  level  of  the  canal,  wasleA  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  it,  bat  its  enter- 
prising inhabitants  by  means  of  artificial  banks,  formed  a  lateral  canal, or  basta, 
tar  tht&r  use,  and  which  was  several  feet  higher  than  the  village  itself. 

* 


541 

ing  lots,  on  the  main  street,  were  selling  for  one  hundred  dollars  per 
foot,  front.  Its  popalation  cannot  now,  (January,  1836,)  be  less  than 
se?en  or  eight  thousand. 

Numerous  villages  have  sprung  up  along  the  south  shore  of  Lake 
Erie ;  and  among  these,  are  Cleaveland,  Huron,  Erie,  6Le.  These 
and  some  others  are  ports  of  entry,  where  there  are  custom  housest 
and  regular  accounts  of  eiports  and  imports  are  kept.  Table  No.  I« 
annexed  to  this  chapter,  gives  a  view  of  the  commerce  of  Cleavelandt 
from  1825  to  1833.  From  this,  the  reader  will  perceive,  that  in  1825* 
the  exports  from  this  place,  coastunse,  were  only  $50,000,  and  the 
imports  9132,645,  and  that  in  1833,  the  former  had  increased  to 
•1,794,000,  and  the  latter  to  $4,700,000,  and  that  in  the  same  year, 
the  foreign  exports  amounted  to  9260,000.  Its  population  in  1830, 
was  one  thousand  and  seventy  six,  and  in  January,  1835,  was  four 
thousand  two  hundred. 

In  1833,  the  exports  from  Huron  were  $274,840  09,  and  the  im- 
ports, $1,599,472  50. 

The  city  of  Detroit  is  situated  on  the  strait,  as  the  name  imports, 
between  lakes  Erie  and  Huron,  and  was  settled  by  the  French  soon 
after  they  traversed  these  inland  waters  of  North  America.  It  feQ 
within  the  limits  of  the  United  States,  as  settled  by  the  peace  of  178S. 
Its  population  in  1830,  was  two  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty 
two,  and  has  doubtless  greatly  increased  since  that  period ;  and  its 
location  is  favorable  to  its  being  a  large  inland  commercial  place* 
In  1834,  it  owned  thirteen  steam  boats,  one  brig,  thirty  three  schoon- 
ers and  thirty  five  sloops,  with  an  aggregate  tonnage  of  four  thou- 
sand nine  hundred  and  thirteen. 

Chicago,  in  Illinois,  situated  nearly,  at  the  head  of  lake  Michigan, 
is  destined,  no  doubt,  to  be  an  important  commercial  port,  on  that  lake* 
From  the  opening  of  the  navigation,  in  the  spring  of  1834,  to  Sep- 
tember 30th,  of  the  same  year,  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  eighty 
vessels,  with  cargoes,  entered  this  port;  and  some  of  them  were 
from  the  south  shore  of  lake  Ontario— one  commercial  house,  at  Os- 
wego, had,  in  the  summer  and  hU  of  that  year,  five  vessels,  employed 
in  the  trade  between  that  port  and  Chicago,  a  distance  of  about  twelve 
hundred  miles,  carrying  salt,  iron,  and  other  articles,  wanted  along 
the  Illinois,  and  the  upper  valley  of  the  Mis«issippi.  These  vessels 
passed  from  lake  Ontario  to  Erie,  through  the  Welland  canal. 

This  interior  trade  will  increase  with  the  population,  and  will,  tn 
long,  require  a  ship  canal  round  the  falls  of  Niagara,  on  the  Ameri- 
side ;  and  probably,  from  Utica  to  Oswego. 


54S 

To  secure  the  tdranta^es  of  this  grett  and  growing  trade  of  the 
V        west,  Was  one  of  the  principal  objects  of  some  of  the  canals^  alreadj 
completed,  or  in  progress ;  and  to  which,  with  others,  in  the  United 
States,  we  now  in?ite  the  attention  of  the  reader. 

Pennsylvania,  it  is  believed,  first  formed  and  commenced  a  plan* 
for  uniting  the  western  and  eastern  waters,  by  an  inland  water  com- 
munication.  As  early  as  1700,  the  legislature  of  that  state,  at  the 
suggestion  of  a  society  established  **  for  promoting  the  improvement 
of  roads,  and  inland  navigation,"  appointed  commissioners  to  explore 
*  neveral  routes,  for  a  water  communication  between  the  Delaware  and 

the  Lakes  ;  who  reported  in  favor  of  a  route  by  the  way  of  the  Jiioi- 
ata,  to  be  partly  by  canals,  and  partly  by  rivers. 

Towards  carrying  this  plan  into  execution,  two  private  companies 
were  incorporated-^one  called  the  Schuylkill  and  Susquehanna  cob- 
pany,  in  1791 — the  other  by  the  name  of  the  Delaware  and  Schuyl- 
kill company,  in  1792,  each  with  a  capital  of  $400,000. 

The  public  mind,  however,  was  not,  at  that  time,  prepared  for  a 
work  of  this  character  and  magnitude.  After  expending  hetwaeo 
four  and  five  hundred  thousand  dollars,  not  probably,  in  tlie  meet  jn* 
dicious  manner ;  from  a  failure  in  the  payment  of  the  subscriptioDa 
and  other  causes,  the  work  was  abandoned,  by  both  companies,  in 
1795  and  1796. 

This  plan  was  not  again  resumed,  in  earnest,  by  Pennsylvania,  un- 
til 1825.  In  the  mean  time,  the  State  of  New  York,  had  completed 
her  great  canal,  connecting  the  waters  of  the  Hudson  with  lake  Erie, 
and  to  which  the  attention  of  the  reader  is  now  invited. 

It  has  been  a  question,  who  was  the  first  projector  of  this  splendid 
work — for  splendid,  indeed,  it  may  be  justly  called,  when  it  ia  con- 
sidered, that  it  is  the  longest  canal  in  the  world,  and  for  one  of  its 
length,  constructed  in  the  shortest  period.  No  canal  in  the  empire 
of  China,  unconnected  with  rivers,  it  is  believed,  is  of  equal  length. 
That  of  Languedoc,  in  France,  is  only  one  hundred  and  forty  eight 
miles  long,  and  was  fourteen  years  in  building,  although  done,  in  the 
reign  of  the  celebrated  Louis  XIV ;  while  the  Erie  canal,  ia,  in  length, 
^ree  hundred  and  sixty  three  miles,  and  was  constructed  in  about 
eight  years. 

Indeed,  the  whole  length  of  all  the  principal  canals,  in  France,  the 
Briane,  Languedoc,  Orleans,  Centre  and  Saint  Quintin,  is  only  three 
hundred  and  thirty  miles  and  a  half.* 

*  Balletin  de  la  Soci^t6  Francaise  Statistique  Universelle,  1881,  p.  111. 


548 

There  caii  be  no  doubt,  that  Gouverneur  MorrU,  first  suggested  the 
idea  of  uniting  the  eastern  and  western  waters  of  New  York.  In 
1803,  he  mentioned  the  subject  in  earnest  to  Mr.  De  Witt,  the  intelli- 
gent surveyor  general  of  that  state — and  even  as  far  back  as  1777, 
in  descanting  with  his  usual  ardor,  zeal  and  forecast,  on  the  advauta- 
ges  America  would  derive  from  being  independent,  he  mentioned 
among  other  things,  an  artificial  water  communication,  between  the 
Hudson  and  lake  Erie. 

In  1806,  the  legislature  of  New  York,  with  a  view  of  carrying  this 
plan  into  effect,  directed  the  necessary  surveys  to  be  made ;  and  in 
1810,  appointed  a  board  of  commissioners  to  prosecute  the  business ; 
consisting  of  Gouverneur  Morris,  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  De  Witt 
Clinton,  Simeon  De  Witt,  William  North,  Thomas  Eddy  and  Peter 
B.  Porter ;  and  the  next  year  the  names  of  Rubert  R.  Livingston  and 
Robert  Fulton  were  added. 

These  commissioners,  in  pursuance  of  directions,  from  the  New 
York  legislature,  applied  to  Congress,  and  to  some  of  the  states,  for 
aid  in  this  great  work,  but  without  success.  They  were  met  by  sneers, 
sarcasms,  and  even  ridicule  from  some,  and  by  incredulity  and  igno- 
rance from  many. 

Regardless,  however,  of  these,  they  ventured  to  recommend  the 
prosecution  of  the  work,  at  the  expense  of  New  York  alone.  Their 
report  to  the  legislature,  in  1812,  from  the  pen,  no  doubt,  of  Mr. 
Morris,  evinces  an  equal  share  of  talent,  research  and  forecast. 

After  an  estimate  of  the  probable  expense,  they  venture  to  predict 
the  amount  of  tolls,  which  the  state  might  realize ;  and  as  this  pre* 
diction  has  so  soon  been  verified,  the  reader  will  pardon  the  follow- 
ing extract,  from  this  report 

**  It  is  impossible,'*  say  the  commissioners,  **to  ascertain,  and  it  i» 
difiicult  to  imagine,  how  much  toll  would  be  collected.  The  amount 
of  transportation  might  be  estimated,  by  subjecting  probabilities  to 
calculation.  But  like  our  advance  in  numbers  and  wealth,  calcula- 
tion outruns  fancy.  Thingrs,  which  twenty  years  ago  any  man  woqM 
have  been  laughed  at  for  believing,  we  now  see.*' 

"  At  that  time  the  most  ardent  mind,  proceeding  on  established  facta, 
by  the  unerring  rule  of  arithmetic,  was  obliged  to  drop  the  pen  at 
results,  which  imagination  could  not  embrace.  Under  circumstances 
of  this  sort,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  those  microcosmie  minds, 
which,  habitually  occupied  in  the  couKideration  of  what  is  little,  are 
incapable  of  discerning  what  is  great;  and  who  already  stigmatized 
the  proposed  canal  as  a  romantic  scheme,  will  not  oosparingiy  diatrib- 


/ 


544 

ute  the  epithets,  absurd,  ridiculous,  chimerical  on  the  estimate  of  wfatl 
it  may  produce. — The  commissioners,  must,  nevertheless,  have  the 
hardihood  to  brave  the  sneers  and  sarcasms  of  men,  who,  wtih  toe 
much  pride  to  study,  and  too  much  wit  to  think,  undervalue  what  thej 
do  not  understand,  and  condemn  what  they  cannot  compreheod.*' 

**  Viewing,"  the  commissioners  add,  ^Uhe  extent  and  fertility  of  the 
of  the  country  with  which  this  canal  is  to  open  a  communicalion,  it 
is  not  extravagant  to  suppose  that  when  settled,  its  produce  will  equal 
the  present  export  of  the  Atlantic  States ;  because  it  contains  more 
land,  and.  that  land  of  a  superior  quality.'* 

The  commissioners,  after  stating  certain  facts,  as  the  groand  of 
their  estimate,  say,  '^  standing  on  such  facts,  is  it  extravagant  to  be- 
Here,  that  New  York  may  look  forward  to  the  receipt,  (at  no  distant 
day)  of  one  million  of  dollars  net  revenue  from  this  canal.  The  tile 
of  an  individual  is  short.  The  time  is  not  distant  when  thoiie  wlia 
make  this  report,  will  have  passed  away.  But  no  time  is  fixed  to  the 
existence  of  a  Slate ;  and  the  first  wish  of  a  patriot's  heart  is,  that 
his  may  be  immortal."  $ 

'^  But  whatever  limit  may  have  been  assigned  to  the  duration  of 
New  York,  by  those  eternal  decrees,  which  established  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  it  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  she  will  be  blotted  from 
the  list  of  political  societies,  before  the  efiects  here  stated  shall  have 
been  sensibly  felt.  And  even,  when,  by  the  fiow  of  that  perpetual 
stream  which  bears  all  human  institutions  away,  the  constitution  shall 
be  dissolved  and  our  laws  be  lost,  still  the  mountains  will  stand,  the 
same  rivers  run.  New  moral  combinations  will  be  formed  on  the  old 
physical  foundations,  and  the  extended  line  of  remote  posterity,  after 
a  lapse  of  ten  thousand  years,  and  the  repeated  revolutions,  when  the 
records  of  history  shall  have  been  obliterated,  and  the  tongue  of  tra- 
dition have  converted,  (as  in  China,)  the  shadowy  remembrance  of 
ancient  events,  into  childish  tales  of  miracle,  this  naiional  vx>rk  shall 
remain.  It  shall  bear  testimony  to  the  genius,  the  learning,  the  ia- 
dustry  and  intelligence  of  the  present  age." 

Sanguine  as  the  commissioners  were,  as  to  the  advantages  New  York 
would  ultimately  derive  from  the  tolls  of  the  projected  canal — extrav- 
agant as  their  calculations  might  appear  to  many,  if  not  to  most  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  little  did  they  imagine,  that  in  the  short 
period  of  eight  years,  from  its  completion,  the  tolls  would  reach  the 
amount  of  their  estimate. 

If  Gouvemeur  Morris  may  justly  claim  the  merit  of  projecting  tUa 
great  work,  the  merit  of  iu  execution  no  less  justly  belongs  to  Do  Witt 


545 

(3uiton«  who,  in  coDJunction  with  hb  able  and  patriotic  coHeagneff 
perse?ered  against  a  powerful  opposition  arising  from  party  politics, 
as  well  as  from  prejudice  and  ignorance.  The  war  between  the  Uni- 
ted States  and  Great  Britain,  which  began  soon  after  the  date  of 
this  report,  retarded  the  commencement  of  this  work,  until  1817.-— 
On  the  4th  day  of  July  of  that  ykar,  the  first  excaTation  was  made, 
and  the  canal  was  completed,  in  October,  l^SfiS,  at  an  expense  of 
•0,027,466.  ^    ^ 

In  October,  1817,  a  eanal  connecting  the  waters  of  lake  Cham- 
plain  with  the  Erie  canal,  nine  miles  from  Albany,  a  distance  of  sixty 
three  miles,  was  commenced,  and  finished  at  the  close  of  1823,  at  an 
expense  of  $1,179,871.  -^ 

Tolls  were  not  collected  on  these  canals,  to  much  extent,  mitil  the 
antumn  of  1822,  and  since  that  period,  they  ha?e  been,  as  follows, 
▼iz: — 


Oolti. 

Yean. 

ooyfc^ 

44,486 

1828 

897,265 

1829 

971,685 

319,320 

1830 

1,056,922 

621,345 

1831 

1,192,435 

760,769 

1832 

1,196,008 

847,769 

1833 

1,422,605 

1834 

1,313,155 

1822 

1823 
I824V 

1825 
1826 
1827 


The  amount  of  tolls  on  the  Erie  canal  alone  in  1832,  was  $1 ,085,602, 
and  in  1833,  was  $1,290,136. 

Table  No.  II,  shews  the  ?alue  of  property  brought  down  to  Albany 
and  West  Troy,  on  the  Erie  and  Champlain  canals,  in  1633 — and 
Table  No.  Ill,  contains  a  statement  of  property  which  passed  Vtica, 
on  the  Erie  canal,  during  the  years  1833  and  1834. 

By  the  first  Table  the  reader  will  perceive,  that  the  value  of  articles 
brought  to  Albany  and  West  Troy  in  1833,  amounted  by  estimation, 
to  $12,737,783  62 ;  and  that  if  the  value  of  the  articles  which  entered 
the  Hudson  river  at  Waterford,  were  added,  the  amount  could  not  ba 
less  than  $13,000,000— the  value  of  those  brought  to  Albany,  being 
estimated  at  $8,419,859  70,  and  those  at  West  Troy  at  $4,317,823  82. 

It  will  be  perceived,  that  the  value  of  the  whole  of  the  domea- 
tic  exports  of  the  United  States  the  same  year,  was  only  ^bout  ht^ 
and  half  times  greater  than  the  value  of  articles  thus  brought  down 
these  canals ;  and  that  if  the  value  of  cotton  is  deducted,  it  would  ^ 

not  equal  three  times  this  amount.    It  is  also  worthy  of  notice,  that 
the  quantity  of  boards  and  scantling  which  came  down*  was  mora 

60 


546 

than  one  hundred  millions  of  feet ;  exceeding  by  twenty  four  milliMt 
the  whole  quantity  of  the  same  articles  exported  from  the  Uirilad 
States  for  the  same  period — and  that  the  number  of  barrels  of  iloar 
which  came  down,  was  nine  hundred  and  twenty  three  thousand  two 
hundred  and  sixty  one — the  bushels  of  wheat  nine  hundred  and  twenty 
one  thousand  five  hundred  and  seven,  which  would  make  one  handred 
and  eighty  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  six  barrels  of  flour ;  and  that 
the  quantity  of  flour  by  these  canals,  therefore,  exceeded  the  whole 
quantity  exported  the  same  year,  about  one  hundred  and  forty  six  bar- 
rels. The  tons  of  merchandise,  6lc.  which  went  np  the  cmnala  id 
1B33,  was  about  one  hundred  and  seven  thousand. 

If  the  reader  should  not  be  surprised  at  the  extent  and  value  of  the 
internal  commerce,  which  these  facts  disclose,  we  think  he  cannot 
fail  to  be  so,  when  he  is  informed,  that  the  actual  number  of  boats  oa 
these  canals,  is  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  twenty  eight,  giv- 
ing employment  to  about  eleven  thousand  men  and  boys  ;  being  bat 
little  less  than  one  sixth  of  the  whole  number  epnployed  in  the  foreign 
and  coasting  trade  of  the  United  States,  in  1830;  and  is  but  seven- 
teen hundred  short  of  the  number  engaged  in  the  navigation  of  the 
State  of  New  York. 

It  is  well  known,  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  money  employed  in 
the  construction  of  these  canalt*,  was  procured  on  loan  by  the  State, 
on  a  long  credit.  The  amount  thus  obtained,  was  not  far  from  eight 
millions,  at  five  and  six  per  cent,  about  half  of  which  was  not  redeeoi- 
able  until  1837,  and  the  other  half  not  until  1815.  The  credit  of  the 
state,  and  the  irredeemability  of  the  stock  for  so  long  a  period,  prodo- 
ced  great  competition  among  the  capitalists  in  Europe,  as  well  as  in 
•  the*United  States,  and  the  premiums  on  the  various  loans  amoantcd 
to  the  sum  of  $223,367. 

Never  was  credit  more  profitably  employed,  both  as  respects  the 
state  itself,  and  its  individual  citizens. 

The  expenditure  of  the  money  created  a  fund,  out  of  which  the 
money  thus  borrowed,  will  be  repaid  in  a  very  few  years,  while  the 
fund  itself,  instead  of  being  in  the  smallest  degree  exhausted,  is  daily 
increasing  in  value.  It  has,  probably,  already  added  to  the  produc- 
tive capital  of  that  state,  not  far  from  one  hundred  millions  of  dollars. 
For  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  in  the  years  1(^  and  1834,  the 
value  of  the  productions  which  came  to  market  by  the  canals  alone« 
and  which  would  never  have  existed,  or  could  not  have  come  to  mar- 
ket, but  by  the  aid  of  this  internal  navigation,  was  between  ^rt  and 
six  millions  in.  each  year.    The  value  of  timber  and  lumbar  of  all 


647 

Uodtf  it  will  be  percei?ed«  in  1833,  exceeded  two  millions  of  dollara ; 
and  a  very  nmall  proportion  of  this  could  ha?e  found  its  way  to  mar- 
ketf  except  by  canals — nor  can  it  be  doubted,  thai  as  much  or  more 
than  one  half  of  the  flour  which  came  down  that  year,  would  not  ha?e 
been  produced  at  all. 

By  means  of  this  extensive  water  communication,  through  a  coua« 
try  naturally  extremely  fertile,  the  farms  of  the  west,  are  placed  near- 
ly upon  an  equality  with  those  of  the  east,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  great 
market  towns  and  cities.  Indeed  it  has  created  large  towns  and  cities 
at  the  west,  along  the  borders  of  the  canal  itself.  The  effect  it  had 
upon  the  population  of  Albany,  Utica,  Rochester,  and  Buflfalo,  will 
be  perceived,  on  comparing  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  these  placet 
in  1825,  when  the  canals  were  just  completed,  and  in  1830,  five  yean 
only  after  they  had  been  in  full  operation. 

Na  of  inhabitants— 1826.  Na  of  inhabitant*— 18301  . 

Albany,^                           15,971  24,209 

Utica,                   .             6,040  .  8,323 

Rochester,  .                     6,271  9,260 

Buffalo,  .                     2,600  6,321 

And  we  would  here  add,  that  in  1834,  by  actual  enumeration,  the 
population  of  Utica  exceeded  ten  thousand,  and  that  of  Buflfalo,  had 
increased  to  twelve  thousand  five  hundred. 

Other  canals  of  minor  importance,  have  also  been  constructed  in 
New  York,  at  the  expense  of  the  state. 

The  Oswego  canal  extends  from  Salina  to  Lake  Ontario,  connect- 
ing the  waters  of  that  Lake  with  the  Erie  canal,  partly  by  means  of 
slack  water  navigation,  a  distance  of  thirty  eight  miles ;  the  expense 
of  which  was  t626,116. 

Cayuga  and  Seneca  canal  from  Geneva  on  the  Seneca  Lake,  to 
Montezuma,  on  the  Erie  canal,  a  distance  of  twenty  miles,  construct- 
ed at  an  expense  of  $214,000. 

Chemung  canal,  from  the  head  waters  of  the  Seneca  Lake  to  Tioga 
point,  eighteen  miles,  with  a  feeder  of  eighteen  miles,  making  togeth- 
er thirty  six  miles,  the  cost  of  which  was  estimated  in  1833,  at 
•335,849. 

Crooked  Lake  canal,  extending  from  a  lake  of  that  name,  to  Seneca 
Lake,  seven  miles,  cost  $130,101. 

The  Erie  and  Champlain  canals,  have  also,  navigable  feeders,  to  the 
extent  of  eight  miles. 

The  whole  extent  of  canals  therefore,  constructed  and  owned  by 
the  State  of  New  York,  in  1833,  was  five  hundred  and  thirty  five 
■lilei,  and  their  aggregate  cost  $1 1,418,394. 


ti 


548 

The  State  of  New  York  has  lately  authorized  the  congiractioii  of 
the  Chenango  canal,  extending  from  Utica  to  Binghampton,  a  diatanee 
of  about  eighty  miles.  This  canal  was  put  under  contract  in  1834^ 
and  will  probably  be  finished  at  the  close  of  1836,  at  an  expense  of 
about  $1,800,000.  As  this  is  authorised  to  be  done  at  the  expense  of 
the  state,  and  will,  no  doubt,  be  completed,  we  add  it  to  the  list  of  the 
state  canals,  making  their  whole  dintance,  about  six  hundred  and  M- 
teen  miles,  and  their  cost,  about  $13,218,394. 
•  «  In  1823,  the  Legislature  of  the  State  of  New  York  incorporated  a 
private  company,  to  construct  a  canal  from  the  Hudson  to  the  Dela- 
ware, to  be  connected  with  a  canal  and  rail  road  in  Pennsylvania,  to 
the  coal  mines  in  Luzerne  county.  This  canal  commences  at  Ron- 
dout  creek,  on  the  Hudson,  about  ninety  miles  from  the  city  of 
New  York ;  extends  to  port  Jarvis  on  the  Delaware,  about  fifty  nine 
miles,  then  up  the  Delaware  to  the  mouth  of  tlie  Lackawana  river 
twenty  four  miles — ^up  the  Lackawana  to  Honesdale,  twenty  six, 
making  the  whole  length  of  the  canal  about  one  hundred  and  nine 
miles — a  rail  road  sixteen  miles  in  length,  extends  from  the  head  of  the 
canal  at  Honesdale  to  Carbondale,  making  the  total  length  of  the  canal 
and  rail  road  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  five  miles.  This  canal 
\wa8  commenced  July,  1825,  and  was  finished  in  October,  1828.  The 
whole  expense  of  the  canal  and  rail  road  was  $2,305,599  53.  The 
section  of  the  canal  in  New  York,  cost  about  $1,424,974 ;  that  in 
Pennsylvania,  about  $582,123,  and  the  rail  road  about  $308,000. 

A  bank  in  the  city  of  New  York  is  connected  with  the  company. 
The  principal  object  of  this  canal  was  to  supply  the  city  of  New  York 
with  coal,  from  the  coal  fields  of  Pennsylvania ;  and  to  assist  the 
company,  in  this  great  work,  the  state  of  New  York,  loaned  its  credit, 
to  the  amount  of  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  dollars,  in  four  and  a 
half  and  five  per  cent  stock. 

The  quantity  of  coal  brought  down  this  canal,  in  the  year 

1830  was     ...        .        tons  42,000 

1831  "      .        .        .        .  "    52,000 

1832  "      .        .        .        .  •*    84,5T7 
...                        1833    "      .        .        .        .           "  111,777 

-^  The  state  of  New  York,  it  is  well  known,  contemplate  a  ship  ca- 
nal round  the  falls  of  Niagara,  and  also  from  Oswego  to  Utica.  The 
expense  of  the  former  has  been  estimated  at  $930,826  03,  with  thirty 
two  locks  of  ten  feet  lift,  twenty  five  feet  wide,  and  one  hundred 
twenty  feet  between  the  gates ;  and  the  whole  length  of  the  canal 
about  nine  miles. 


549 


A  ship  canal  aronnd  these  fallii,  on  the  British  side,  called  the  Wet- 
land canal,  connecting  Lakes  Ene  and  Ontario,  has  been  in  operation 
for  two  or  three  years.  The  whole  cost  of  this  canal  np  to  Jannar]r 
1st,  1835,  was  £411,079,  sterling,  or  about  $2,000,000.  During 
the  year  1634,  there  passed  through  this  canal  five  hundred  and  ser- 
enty  schooners,  three  hundred  and  thirty  four  boats  and  scows,  and 
sixty  six  rafts,  the  amount  of  tonnage  being  thirty  seven  thonsand 
nine  hundred  and  seventeen.  Among  the  articles  transported  on  this 
canal,  for  the  first  time,  in  1834,  was  four  hundred  tons  of  coal,  for 
Upper  Canada.  The  tolls  in  1832  were  £2,432,  in  1833  £3,618,  and 
in  1834,  £4,300. 

The  following  table  shews  the  increase  in  quantity  of  the  staple 
articles  transported. 

1632. 

5,422 

155,170 

146,136 

75,992 

34,546 

1,032 

240 

176 

The  great  and  successful  exertions  of  the  state  of  New  York,  in 
order  to  secure  the  trade  of  the  west,  at  last,  aroused  the  attention 
of  Pennsylvania  again,  to  the  same  subject.  O 

In  1825,  a  convention  was  held  at  Harrisburgh,  for  the  purpose  of 
taking  into  consideration,  the  general  subject  of  interna]  improve* 
ments.  An  extensive  system  of  internal  communication,  either  by 
canals  or  rail  roads,  and  so  as  to  accommodate  and  benefit  almost 
every  section  of  the  state,  was  agreed  npon  by  this  convention,  and 
afterwards  adopted  by  the  state  legislature. 

The  first  law  authorizing  the  construction  of  canals  and  rail  roads, 
at  the  expense  of  the  state,  passed  February  25th,  1826 ;  and  excava- 
tions commenced,  at  Harrisburgh,  on  the  4th  of  July  of  the  same 
yesr. 

The  main  line  was  to  connect  the  Delaware  with  Iske  Erie,  by  the 
way  of  Pittsburgh.  This  was  to  consist  of  a  rail  road  from  Philadel- 
phia to  Columbia,  on  the  Susquehana,  from  thence  by  a  canal  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Junista  and  up  that  river  to  Hollidaysburgh,  the  eastem 
base  of  the  Alleghany  mountains,  a  distsnce  of  one  hundred  and  sev- 
enty one  miles — thence  by  a  rail  road  across  the  Alleghany,  thirty  six 


Barrels  of  pork,    . 
Bushels  of  wheat. 
Number  of  staves. 
Feet  of  square  timber. 
Barrels  of  salt. 
Tons  of  merchandize. 
No.  of  schooners  passed, 
^*  of  boats  and  scows. 


1833. 

18M. 

0,660 

23,422^ 

220,675 

364,010 

161,702 

302,066 

30,042 

04,380 

46,662 

60,641 

I.363t 

1,813^ 

433 

670 

287 

334 

•'4 


miles  to  Johnstown,  on  the  river  Conemaugh,  and  from  Johnstova, 
the  western  base  of  the  Alleghany,  by  the  Conemaugh,  Kiskeminetas, 
and  Alleghany  riFcrs,  to  Pittsburgh,  one  hundred  and  ^ve  miles,  ma- 
king the  distance  from  Philadelphia  to  Pittsburgh  three  hundred  and 
ninety  foor  miles — from  Pittsburgh  down  the  Ohio  twenty  eight  miles, 
Co  the  Big  Beaver,  up  this  river  to  New  Castle  twenty  four  milei, 
thence,  by  the  summit  of  Conneaut  lake,  to  the  town  of  Erie,  on  lake 
Erie,  about  seventy  eight  miles,  making  the  whole  distance  from  Phil- 
adelphia to  lake  Erie,  by  this  route,  five  hundred  and  twenty  four 
miles,  of  which  one  hundred  and  eighteen  is  by  rail  roads,  twen- 
ty eight  by  the  Ohio  river,  and  three  hundred  and  seventy  eight  by 
canals. 

To  accomodate  other  parts  of  the  state,  there  is,  also,  a  canal  froa 
the  junction  of  Duncan's  island,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Juniata,  op 
the  Susquehanna  to  the  forks  at  Northumberland,  and  thence  up  the 
north  branch  to  a  point  two  miles  below  Wilksbarre,  distance  ninety 
six  and  a  half  miles ;  and  from  the  junction  at  Northumberland,  a  canal 
proceeds  up  the  west  branch  to  the  head  of  the  pool  of  the  Muncy  dam, 
in  Lycoming  county,  twenty  six  and  a  half  miles.  In  addition  to 
these,  there  is  a  canal  from  the  Alleghany  river,  at  the  town  of  Frank- 
lin, up  French  creek,  in  Crawfurd  county,  twenty  two  and  a  half 
miles ;  and  one  from  Bristol  to  Easton,  on  the  Delaware,  fifty  nine 
and  three  quarter  miles.  We  would  here  observe,  that  the  state  ca- 
nals of  Pennsylvania,  being  in  extent  six  hundred  and  one  miles,  to- 
gether with  the  state  rail  roads  connected  with  them,  one  hundred  and 
eighteen  and  half  miles  in  length,  making  for  both  seven  hundred  and 
twenty  miles,  now  approximate  towards  a  completion ;  and  that  the 
state  had  .actually  expended  upon  them,  including  repairs,  and  for 
damages  to  individuals,  up  to  the  1st  of  January,  1836,  the  sum  of 
$90,142,726  17;  and  it  has  been  estimated,  that  their  whole  expense 
would  exceed  twenty  two  millions. 

The  foUowing  tolls  have  been  collected  on  them  from  1890  to  1834, 
in  each  year  ending  on  the  31st  of  October : — 

Tean.  ToUn 

1830 #27,012  90 

1831          ....  38,241  20 

1832 60,900  57 

1833          ....  161,41969 

1834 323,636  00 

The  whole  distance  between  Philadelphia  and  Pittsburgh  was  not 
open  for  transportation,  until  sometime  in  1834 ;  and  the  following  ia 


of  produce  brought  down  the 
ending  on  the  31st  of  October. 


barrels. 

132^23 

bushels. 

163,240 

«« 

147,786 

«4 

12,376 

4« 

3.466 

.    lbs. 

607,374 

.     lbs. 

10,428 

.     lbs. 

900,806 

bushels. 

361,213 

.    lbs. 

4,017,362 

M 

2,411,060 

it 

217,286 

gallons. 

646,460 

.    lbs. 

8,667,412 

a 

17,681,640 

.    feet. 

201,281 

(« 

4,403,443 

651 

the  quantity  of  the  principal  articles 
state  canals  and  rail  roads,  in  that  jear. 

Flour, 

Wheal, 

Corn, 

Grass  seed. 

Potatoes, 

Butter  and  Cheeset 

Beef  and  pork. 

Lard  and  tallow, 

Salt, 

ProFisions, 

Wool,     . 

Cotton,  • 

Whiskey, 

Tobacco, 

Iron, 

Timber, 

Sawed  lumber. 

The  merchandize  carried  up  was  about  38,000  tons. 

In  addition  to  these  state  canals,  three  private  companies  have  been 
incorporated  in  Pennsylvania,  one  called  the  Schuylkill  canal  and       ^ 
navigation  company,  one  the  Union  canal  company,  and  the  third,  the 
Lehigh  navigation  company. 

The  first  was  incorporated  in  1816,  and  was  commenced  io  1810; 
and  has  been  in  operation  for  several  years.  It  begins  at  the  Fair 
Mount  water  works,  near  Philadelphia,  and  extends  to  Reading,  and 
thence  to  Mount  Carbon ;  its  length  is  one  hundred  and  ten  milea, 
forty  five  by  slack  water  navigation,  by  means  of  thirty  one  dams,  and 
the  rest  by  canals.  The  expense  of  this  slack  water  and  canal  navi- 
gation has  been  very  great,  amounting,  on  the  1st  day  of  January, 
1834,  including  real  estate  and  damages,  to  $2,974,660  00 ;  and  yet 
the  tolls  have  lately  been  such,  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  the 
coal  trade,  that,  the  shares,  originally  86000,  were  sold  in  June,  1833, 
for  $127  00.  Table  No.  IV,  shews  the  business  of  this  company,  ^^ 
from  its  commencement,  to  January  0th,  1834.  From  this  it  appears, 
that,  in  1826,  the  tolls  were  only  $16,775  74,  in  1833,  $326,480  03, 
and  in  1834,  $209,^1  05. 

The  tonnage  of  the  articles  ascending  and  descending  this  nariga- 
tion,  in  1833t  was  as  follows : — 


558 


ToniMif  dfirwifcic 

Merchandize* 

• 

14,190 

Coal, 

.     258,971 

Fish, 

•        < 

2,597 

Flour, 

12,107 

Salt, 

•                   a 

3,434 

Whiskey, 

1,759 

Plaster,     . 

•                   1 

26,494 

Lumber,    • 

13,470 

Grain, 

•                   1 

1,339 

Grain,       • 

9,337 

Iron, 

•                    « 

2,886 

Iron, 

2,016 

Blooms,  pig  1 

iron  and 

Blooms,  pig  iron  and 

castings. 

• 

779 

castings. 

4,607 

Nail, 

•        * 

16 

Nails, 

1,695 

Lime  and  lime  stone. 

12,275 

Lime  and  lime  ston 

e,         53,219 

Iron  ore,   • 

•        * 

11,706 

Iron  ore,  . 

2,252 

Bricks, 

•        ■ 

184 

Butter, 

448 

Porter, 

•        < 

199 

Leather,    . 

254 

Lumber,    • 

•        < 

2,532 

Marble  and  stone. 

2,383 

Marble  and  Stone,    . 

467 

Brick, 

411 

Coal, 

•        « 

1,512 

Wood, 

1,790 

Gravel, 

•        • 

2,149 

Tobacco,  . 

61 

Fluur, 

•        « 

382 

Sundries,  . 

901 

Sundries, 

•        • 
Mount, 

1,057 

Pork, 

Passing  Fair  Moun 

28t 

Passing  Fair  ] 

84,197 

t,       350.898 

Locks  only. 

•        • 

598 

Locks  only. 

1,156 

Tons,  84,795  Tonn,  361,054 

The  union  canal  connects  the  Schuylkill  and  the  Susquehanna,  mod 
extends  from  a  place  on  the  former  near  Reading,  to  MiddleCown 
on  the  latter,  eighty  two  miles,  with  a  feeder  of  twenty  two  milea. 
The  expense  of  this  canal,  in  1828,  was  $1,600,000,*  and  has  proba- 
bly increased  since  that  period.  Its  tolls  are  now  increasing — in 
1832,  ending  November  1st,  they  were  $69,061  6,  in  1833,  they 
amounted  to  $103,462  45,  in  1834,  to  $120,000;  and  in  1833,  the  ton- 
nage which  passed  on  this  canal,  was  as  follows : — 

Flour,  70,595  barrels. 

Wheat  and  rye,  324,260  bushels. 

Whiskey,  12,408  barrels. 

Iron,  bar,  pig  and  castings. 

Iron  ore,  .... 

Coal  bituminous  and  anthracite, 


6,723  5 
8,106  10 
1,551  2 
7,205  2 
2,506  10 
5,488    3 


•  See  a  work  entiUed  "  loland  Nayigatioo  of  United  States,"  1830. 


R6r7  15 

%005  16 

188    8 

1%658  13 

1,916    6 

3,104  19 

9,154    7 

653 

Lumber,  14,677,750  feet, 

Shingles,  5,991,600    '* 

SUfes,    . 

Gypsum, 

Fish,  14,370  barrels. 

Salt,  124,200  bushels,     . 

Merchandize, 

Sundries,  consisting  of  com,  flax  seed,  tobacco,  hemp, 
clover  seed,  lard,  butter,  limestone,  marble,  bricks, 
leather,  pork,  ^c.       ....  9,809    8 

85,876    6 

The  Lehigh  canal  and  navigation  extends  from  Eaaton  on  the  Del- 
aware,  up  the  Lehigh  to  the  celebrated  coal  mines,  at  Mauch  Chunk* 
a  distance  of  forty  six  miles. — It  is  a  large  canal,  admitting  single  boats 
of  one  hundred  and  ^(iy  ton^,  or  two  of  seventy  five  tons  each.  Ita 
original  cost  was  $1,568,000.  The  following  was  the  quantity  of 
coal,  brought  down  this  canal,  in  the  years  1831,  1832  and  1833. 

Yrara.  Toss. 

1831 43,000 

1832            ....  76,000 

1833 123,000 

We  have  before  noticed  the  canal,  in  Pennsylvania,  from  Honeidale 
to  the  mouth  of  Lackawanna,  twenty  six  miles,  being  a  continuation  of 
the  Hudson  and  Delaware  canal,  the  expense  of  which  was  $582,123^ 

The  whole  extent  of  canal  navigation,  therefore,  in  Pennaylvania, 
in  1834,  may  be  estimated  at  eight  hundred  and  sixty  ooe  milesy  and 
the  cost  of  the  same,  at  about  $23,000,000. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  principal  bosinesa  of  the  private 
canals  in  Pennsylvania,  and  particularly  those  of  the  Schuylkill  and 
Lehigh,  has  been  from  the  coal  trade  in  that  state,  and  which  ia  ere- 
ry  day  becoming  more  important ;  and  is,  probably,  destined  in  fu- 
ture, to  be  of  the  first  magnitude.  The  anthracite  coal  of  Peim- 
aylvania,  did  not  attract  the  attention  of  that  state,  until  about  the 
years  1821  and  1822.  In  the  former  year,  only  one  thovsand  and 
seventy  three  tons  was  brought  to  market,  and  in  the  latter,  two  thou- 
sand four  hundred  and  forty,  of  which,  one  hundred  and  eighty  Ions 
was  shipped  coastwise.  In  1833,  however,  no  less  than  about  six 
hundred  thousand  tons  were  taken  from  the  anthracite  eoal  fields, 
valued  at  about  $3,000,000 ;  and  this  coal  is  now  extensively  need  in 
diffnrent  parts  of  the  United  States. 

70 


1'. 


&54 

The  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania,  has  lately  reiy  wiaely  inslitiiled 
an  inquiry  into  the  extent  of  the  coal  regions  of  that  slate,  as  wdlaf 
the  extent  of  the  trade  already  carried  on,  in  that  valuable  minertl. 

A  committee  of  the  senate  of  that  state,  has  lately  made  a  Tery  n- 
teresting  report  on  this  subject.  This  committee  did  not  limit  its  is- 
quirics  to  the  anthracite  coal  fields,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Alleghaay, 
but  extended  them,  to  the  bituminous  coal  regions,  on  the  west  aide 
of  the  Mountains. 

According  to  the  report  of  this  committee,  the  anthracite  coftl,  in 
that  state,  is  *^  confined  to  three  fields  or  deposits,  that  of  Manch 
Chunk,  Schuylkill  and  Lyken^s  valley;  of  Beaver  Meadow,  Shamo- 
kin  and  Mahoney  ;  and  of  Lackawanna/' 

- -Without  adverting  to  the  particular  limits  or  boundaries,  assigned 
by  the  committee,  to  each  of  these  fields,  it  is  sufilicient,  in  this  place, 
to  observe,  that  the  committee  was  of  opinion*  that  each  of  these 
fields  was  ''about sixty  five  miles  in  length,  and  five  in  width,  embra* 
cing  an  area  of  three  hundred  and  twenty  five  square  miles,  or  two 
hundred  and  eight  thousand  acres  each,  making  an  aggregate  of  nine 
hundred  and  seventy  five  square  miles,  or  six  hundred  and  twenty 
four  thousand  acres.  Some  of  the  lands'^  the  committee  add,  ''in 
the  first  district  are  worth  three  or  four  hundred  dollars  an  acre ;  oth- 
ers are  of  less  value,  and  some  parts  worth  little  or  nothing.  The 
lands  in  the  third  field,  being  generally  valuable,  as  well  for  miniiig 
as  agricultural  purposes,  may  be  valued  at  an  average  rate  of  thirty 
dollars  per  acre ;  and  taking  the  whole  districts  together,  it  is  believed, 
twenty  dollars  per  acre  is  not  too  ^igh  a  valuation.  At  this  rate  our 
anthracite  coal  fields  are  worth  twelve  millions  four  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  dollars.''  Although  not  more  than  about  six  hundred 
thousand  tons  of  this  coal,  in  the  year  1833  were  taken  from  these 
fields,  almost  entirely  from  the  first  and  third,  yet  towns  and  villages 
have  grown  up  in  their  neighborhood ;  and  canals  and  rail  roads  have 
been  constructed  in  order  to  bring  the  coal  to  market;  and  the  reader 
cannot  fail  to  be  surprised  at  the  committee's  estimate  of  the  ralne  of 
improTements,  and  property  connected  with  and  consequent  upon  the 
anthracite  coal  trade  of  Pennsylvania,  from  these  three  coal  fields,  yfvu 

Rail  roads  and  canals  made  by  companies  and  individuals,  inclu- 
ding also  parts  of  state  canals,  four  hundred  and  eighty  nine 

mile $9,750,973  42 

CoUeries,  boats,  cars,  die.  6ie.                          .  1,270,280  00 

Capital  invested  in  coal  lands,  4^900,000  00 

Mining  capital, 4^000  00 

Value  of  towns,  in  the  coal  fields,    •         .         .  3,375,000  00 

•19,170^217  42 


555 

The  whole  quantity  taken  and  tent  to  market  during  the  year  1838, 
Che  committee  say,  was  Tons. 

From  the  first  field, 429,^33 

second  do.  600 

third  do 161,777 


Total bn,2\0 

The  quantity  of  this  kind  of  coal  mined  and  carried  to  market,  was 
considerably  less  in  183 1«  than  in  the  preceding  year.  This  is  attrib- 
uted to  the  large  stock  on  hand,  at  the  close  of  1833,  and  the  general 
stagnation  of  business,  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  1834. 

The  bituminous  coal  fields  of  Pennsylvania,  lie  beyond  the  Allegha* 
ny  mountains ;  and  according  to  the  estimate  of  the  same  committee, 
embrace  an  area  of  twenty  one  thousand  square  mileSj  or  thirteen 
millions  four  hundred  thousand  acres.  Little  of  this  coal,  has,  as 
yet,  found  its  way  east  of  the  mountains  ;  but  vast  quantities  of  it  are 
consumed  in  the  vicinity  of  its  production,  and  in  the  western  country 
generally  ;  and  it  is  of  incalculable  value,  in  the  manufactures  of  that 
[K>rtion  of  the  union.  The  quantity  consumed  by  the  steam  engines 
in  Pittsburg,  exceeds,  according  to  authentic  statements,  two  millions 
of  bushels  a  year ;  and  in  the  manufacture  of  a  million  of  bushels  of 
salt,  in  the  counties  of  Pennsylvania  west  of  the  mountains,  more 
than  five  millions  of  bushels  are  consumed.  In  addition  io  this,  the 
committee  before  alluded  tu,  estimate  tlie  quantity  used  in  families  in 
Pittsburgh,  and  its  suburbs,  at  three  millions  six  hundred  thousand 
bushels,  and  in  stores,  offices,  and  in  manufactories  not  using  steam 
power,  at  two  millions,  making  the  whole  quantity  consumed  in  that 
city  and  vicinity,  about  seven  millions  six  hundred  thouMnd  bushels, 
or  two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  tons ;  and  which,  at  one  dollar  and 
twenty  cents  per  ton,  would  amount  to  about  $306,000.  The  quantity 
of  foreign  coal  now  consumed  in  the  United  States,  u  about  eighty 
four  thousand  tons.     See  Table  No.  V. 

When  the  various  uses  to  which  coal  is  or  may  be  applied,  is  con- 
sidered, the  future  value  of  the  coal  fields  of  Pennsylvania,  are  be- 
yond calculation.  In  Great  Britain,  the  quantity  of  this  article  which 
is  mined,  is  about  seventeen  millions  of  tons  a  year— about  two  milltona 
five  hundred  tliousand  of  this,  is  procured  in  Scotland,  and  the  rest 
from  about  twelve  cual  fields,  in  England  and  Wales,  in  very  unequal 
proportions.  Of  the  va^t  quantity  thus  annually  procured  in  Great 
Britain,  about  three  millions  of  tons  is  connumed  in  the  smelting  of 
iron  and  other  mineral* — about  six  miliii»n-,  are  shipprd  seamays. 


556 

including  fire  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  to  foreign  eoantriea«ftiid  eight 
hundred  thousand  to  Ireland — about  five  millions  of  tons  are  conTCf- 
ed  by  inland  canals  and  rail  roads,  and  the  remainder  is  conaumed  in 
the  districts  of  production,  particularly  in  South  Wales,  Staffordshin 
and  Salop,  in  mining  processes.  The  value  of  this  miDcral  in  Great 
Britain,  is  now  estimated  to  exceed  all  other  mineral  productions; 
coal  being  valued  at  £6,000,000  sterling,  and  all  other  minerals  at 
£5,000,000,  that  is,  iron  at  £3,000,000,  copper,  £1,500,0001,  and 
£500,000  for  tin,  lead,  6lc^ 

The  cheapness  of  coal  in  England  gives  her  a  great  adrmntage  over 
other  nations,  and  particularly  France,  in  various  kinds  of  bnsinesi, 
and  especially  in  that  of  manufactures. 

In  a  late  inquiry  before  a  government  commission,  in  France,  oa 
the  subject  of  manufactures,  it  appeared  in  evidence,  that,  in  the  mas- 
ufaeture  of  cloth  at  Sedam,  the  cost  of  coal,  was  from  two  and  a  bilf 
to  three  per  cent,  of  its  value. 

In  New  Jersey,  the  Morris  canal  was  completed  in  1831,  extending 
from  a  point  on  the  Delaware,  opposite  Easton,  to  Newark,  ninety 
miles.  The  cost  of  this  canal,  was  about  $2,000,000 — ^inclined  planes 
are  here  used,  instead  of  locks.  This  canal,  was  intended  for  the 
coal  trade  of  Pennsylvania. 

During  the  year  1834,  the  Delaware  and  the  Raritan  rivers  have  been 
connected  by  means  of  a  canal  from  Brunswick  to  Borden  town,  about 
thirty  miles.  This  canal,  it  is  well  known,  is  calculated  for  sloop 
navigation,  and  has  been  constructed  by  a  private  company,  at  an  ex- 
pense, with  its  feeder,  of  about  $2,500,000. 

The  Delaware  is  likewise  now  connected  with  the  Chesapeake,  by 
a  canal  for  sloop  navigation,  of  about  sixteen  miles  in  length.  In 
consequence  of  a  deep  cut,  of  about  seventy  feet,  for  a  considerable 
distance,  and  other  unexpected  difficulties,  the  cost  of  this  canal  was 
#2,201,864.  The  United  Sutes,  Pennsylvanis,  Maryland  and  Del- 
aware, contributed  to  its  construction  ;  and  it  first  became  navigable, 
in  October,  1829. 

The  enterprizing  citizens  of  Baltimore,  not  less  desirous  than  their 
neighbors,  of  continuing  and  securing  the  great  and  growing  trade 
of  the  west,  have  commenced  a  rail  road  to  connect  their  city 
the  Ohio :  and  which  we  shall  notice  hereafter,  when  on  the  snl 
of  improvements  of  this  description. 

•  Marthal's  Digest  of  the  Commerce,  &c.  of  Great  Britain,  p.  S37. 


567 


\ 


I 


'  With  lh«  tame  ? iew»  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,  waa«  alio, 
eommenced*  in  1898,  and  b  now  in  progress.     This  canal,  was  ori*  .   y 

ginally  intended  to  extend  from  the  tide  waters  on  the  Potomac,  at 
Oeorgetown,  to  Pittsburgh,  a  distance  of  three  hundred  and  forty  one 
miles,  and  six  hundred  and  seventy  six  yards. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  improvement  of  the  navigation  of 
the  Potomac  was  one  of  the  first,  if  not  the  first  contemplated,  in  the 
United  Slates.  As  early  as  the  33d  of  December  1784,  commission- 
ers, on  behalf  of  the  States  of  Virginia  and  Maryland,  met  at  Annap- 
olis, on  this  subject,  at  which  meeting  General  Washington  presided. 
This  meeting  laid  tbe  foundation  of  the  proceedings  of  those  two 
states,  in  relation  to  tbe  improvements  in  the  navigation  of  the  Po« 
tomac 

The  idea,  however,  of  a  canal  the  whole  distance  from  Georgetown 
to  Pittsburgh,  was  not  entertained  until  about  1820 ;  and  charters 
were  aiVer  wards  obtained  from  the  legislatures  of  the  states  of  Virginia, 
Maryland  and  Pennsylvania,  and  also,  from  Congress,  empowering  a 
company  to  carry  this  into  effect ;  and  in  June,  1828,  this  company 
was  organized  and  the  ground  was  first  broken,  with  much  ceremony, 
on  the  4th  of  July  of  that  year,  by  John  Quincy  Adams,  then  Presi- 
dent of  tbe  United  Sutes. 

The  capital  of  the  company  consisted  of 
10,000  shares,  subscribed  by  the  United  Sutes,  being        $1,000,000 
10,000      "^  **  by  the  city  of  Washington,  1,000,000 

6,000      *«  '*  by  the  State  of  Maryland,  500,000 

2,600      **  **  by  the  town  of  Alexandria,  260,000 

2,600      ««  **  by  Georgetown,    .        .  260,000 

0,084      ««  '*  by  private  individuals,  608,400 

$3,608,400 
*rhe  cost  of  the  work  was  estimsted,  by  the  United  Sutes  engi- 
neers, at  the  sum  of  $22,375,420,  including  a  long  tunnel  through 
the  Alleghanies.  By  an  estimate,  however,  afterwards  made  by  other 
engineers,  including,  it  is  believed,  only  a  rail  road  across  the  monn- 
Uins,  the  cost  was  reduced  to  nearly  one  half  of  that  sum.    , 

On  the  first  of  January,  1834,  about  one  hundred  and  nine  miles 
of  this  canal  was  completed,  at  an  expense  of  $3,707,202. 

The  funds  of  the  company  have  been  exhausted,  before  the  canal 
has  reached  the  extensive  coal  and  iron  region,  situated  on  or  near 
the  sources  of  the  Potomac,  and  from  which,  principally,  tbe  revenues 
of  the  canal  are  to  be  expected. 


•^.  • 


558 

'  Thq  company,  has,  therefore,  applied  to  Cong^eM  for  furtlMr  «id» 
and  which,  no  doubt,  will  be  afforded.  The  traiiaporlation  of  coal, 
has  been  one  of  the  principal  sources  of  revenue  of  the  canals  ia 
England,  and  will  be  so  in  the  United  States.* 

On  passing  south,  we  next  meet  with  the  Dismal  Swamp  canal,  con- 
necting  the  waters  of  the  Chesapeake  with  those  of  Albemarle  Sound, 
Extending  from  Norfolk  in  Virginia,  into  North  Carolina,  through  a 
swamp,  whose  name  it  bears,  a  distance  of  about  twenty  eight  miles. 

The  funds  for  this  canal  were  furnished  originally  by  indiTiduals,  by 
the  State  of  Virginia,  and  by  the  United  States,  the  latter  to  the  amount 
of  •200,000. 

TBt  whole  expense  of  this  canal  op  to  the  close  of  the  year  1833, 
was,t900,000.  The  tolls  for  the  year  ending  November  30ih,  1833, 
amtiaated  to  $33,290  45;  and  of  this  sum,  $18,392  20,  was  colleet- 
ed  on  the  following  articles  of  lumber,  transported  on  the  same,  diiring 
that  year,  viz. : — 

74,134  cubic  feet  of  mast  timber, 
'   270,014      "      "    of  other  timber, 

53,670      *'      **    of  plank  and  scantling, 
2,302,515  pipe  staves, 
4,780,714  hogshead  staves, 

57,422  barrel  staves, 
4,995,019  long  shingles, 
2,040,127  two  feet  shingles, 
18,489,280  small  shingles, 
128,563  garden  poles, 
50,880  fence  rails, 
16,045  cooper's  bolts, 
151,669  cooper*s  staves, 
6,673  garden  posts, 
1,634  cords  of  wood. 

The  other  principal  articles  brought  to  market  on  this  canal  the 
same  year,  were — 

11,840  bales  of  cotton, 

2,113  hogsheads  of  tobacco, 

2,576  kegs  and  boxes  of  manufactured  tobacco, 
10,788  barrels  of  flour. 


•  For  the  progresB  aad  state  of  this  caaal,  tec  the  able  report  of  Mr.  Merocr, 
chairman  of  the  commiUee  on  roads  and  canaU,  made  to  the  House  of 
Utives,  April  17th,  1834. 


659 

0,851  barrels  of  fish, 
14,673      ^       of  tar  and  turpentine, 
247,5221  bushels  of  corn, 
15,428      '*       of  potatoes, 
7,663      "       of  wheat, 
1,653      *'       of  beans  and  peas, 
3,332      *•       of  flax  seed, 
140,500  pounds  of  bacon, 
257  barrels  of  wine, 
209      "       of  spirits  of  turpentine .• 

We  would  here  obsenre,  that  the  State  of  Virginia  long  since  estab- 
liihed  a  system  for  the  purpose  of  affording  aid  to  individual  enter- 
prise, in  the  internal  improvements  of  that  state.  By  this  the  state 
agreed  to  furnish  two  fifths  of  the  funds  in  making  turnpike  n>ada« 
river  improvements,  canals,  and  rail  roads ;  and  to  carry  this  systeoi 
into  effect,  established  a  Board  of  public  works,  with  a  fund  for  inter* 
nal  improvement.  This  fund  on  the  30ih  of  September,  1833»  per- 
manent and  disposable,  amounted  to  the  sum  of  82,415,586  60. 

This  state  has  therefore  become  interested  in  most  of  the  great  pub- 
lic improvements  of  the  character  above  mentioned,  lately  undertaken 
by  her  citizens. 

The  navigation  of  many  of  her  rivers  has  been  improved  by  means 
of  dams  and  short  canals.  The  greatest  improvement  has  been  made 
in  James*  River,  at  and  above  the  city  of  Richmond,  called  the  Jamee 
River  canal,  divided  into  what  is  called  the  Lower  and  Upper,  or 
Mountain  Section,  comprising  a  distance  of  from  thirty  to  forty  miles, 
and  which  cost  about  one  million  of  dollars. 

The  receipts  and  expenditures  on  these  canals  for  the  years  1832 
and  1833,  were  as  follows,  viz. : — 

Lower  James  River  canal — gross  amount  of  tolls  and  other  profits — 

1832.  1883. 

ToIIh,         ....        $59,456  46  .      $54,268  74 

Water  renu,  .  9,916  67  .  2,406  67 

RenU  of  lots,     .  .        .      647  50  547  60 


$70,050  63  $57,212  91 

Salaries  of  officers,  r^irs,  ^c.     14  416  77  14,796  67 

Net  profits,    $55,633  86  $42,416  M 


•  Set  eighteenth  Anniw]  Report  of  tbt  Board  of  public  works  of 
made  to  the  Oeneral  Anembly,  Decembtr  18th,  1833. 


560 


1838L 


I 


Blue  ^idge  canal — groM  amount  of  tolls,  fS.S'TO  07 
Salaries  of  officers,  repairs,  dec.  1,M4  96 


Net  profits,      •1,605  11  ^1.536  46 

The  following  is  a  lut  of  the  articles  paying  toll,  on  th«  Lower 
Section,  in  1832  and  1833,  ascending  and  descending — 

, ^ — ' ^ 

1832. 

Unenumerated  articles,  lbs.         .        8,046,700 
Sacks  of  salt,     .        .        .        .  25,452 

Hhds.  of  ram,  wine,  and  French  brandy,       370} 


4i 


of  whbkey, 
Tnn^f  bar  iron, 
Vj  nrf  plaster, 
BasMs  of  com, 
Feet  of  plank. 
Barrels  of  flour, 
Bushels  of  coal. 
Shingles  and  staves. 
Tons  of  hay. 
Hogsheads  of  tobacco 
Bushels  of  wheat. 
Laths, 

Tons  of  pig  iron. 
Cords  of  wood. 
Producing  in  tolls, 


Hogsheads  of  tobacco, 

**  of  stems, 

Bushels  of  wheat, 
Barrels  of  flour. 
Bushels  of  corn, 
••      of  coal, 
Tons  of  bar  iron, 

**    of  pig  iron, 

*'    of  stone. 
Cords  of  wood. 
Staves, 
Hoop  poles. 
Feet  of  plank,   . 


1,606} 
254A 
2,743 
17,115 
53,300 
460 
2,758 
131,900 
42i 
1 
283 
4,000 


*• 


«< 


$8,869  15 


1832. 

.     17,734 

867 
.  210,969 
.  175,0931 
.     11,066 
.  665,137 
291H 
635} 
1,186 
4,616 
.  226,600 
.  115,400 
1,052,600 


0,208^209 
90,981 


1.8D4f 
»?« 
3,1461 

68,800 

470 

3.044 

215,400 

<4 

144 

9,500 
30i 
6 
•10,138  80 

Detcending. 


.  14,114 
1,040 
.  133,659 
.  151,908 
.  19,219 
.  6n,664 

528A 

746 

.   3,808i 
5,163 
.  210,100 
.  84,100 
1,062,400 


501 


Uoenumerated  articleiiv  lbs. 

661,600 

619,100 

Hogsheads  of  whiskey, 

133i 

83i 

Manufactured  tobacco,  lbs. 

2,465,400 

2,230,000 

Empty  boats,  (small) 

T7 

74 

*'      (large)  . 

8 

0 

Tons  of  hay, 

.        .           17} 

78| 

Hogsheads  of  rum,     . 

.     .        U 

.        .            2| 

Producing  in  tolls. 

.     t60,4^  18 

.     •43,040  37* 

In  South  Carolina,  the  Santee  and  Cooper  rivers  have  been  united 
by  a  canal  of  twenty  two  miles  in  length,  at  an  expense  of  f660,067t 
and  which  has  added  to  the  commerce  of  Charleston.  In  Georgia,  the 
Savannah,  Ogeechee,  and  Altamaha  canal,  has  been  coropletedt  beiog 
in  length  sixty  six  miles.  We  have  not  learnt  the  expense  of  iu^ 
struetion,  or  the  business  done  upon  it.  From  its  length,  afid '] 
suming  it  to  be  built  of  the  usual  size,  it  must  have  cost  a  million  of 
dollars. 

The  spirit  for  canal  and  rail  road  improvements  has  crossed  the  Al- 
leghany ;  and  the  canals  of  the  State  of  Ohio  may  well  claim  the  at- 
tention of  the  economist,  as  well  as  the  traveller.  Nearly  four  hun- 
dred miles  of  artificial  inland  navigation,  have  been  completed  through 
a  country,  a  little  more  than  forty  years  ago  a  perfect  wilderness. 

The  Ohio  canal  unites  Lake  Erie  with  the  Ohio  river,  extending 
from  Cleveland  to  Portsmouth,  and  (including  its  feeder)  is  three  hun- 
dred and  twenty  four  miles  in  length.  It  runs  nearly  through  the 
center  of  the  state;  was  commenced  in  July,  1825,  and  finished  in 
October,  1832.  The  Miami  canal,  situate  in  the  west  part  of  the  state, 
extends  from  the  town  of  Dayton  to  the  city  of  Cincinnati,  a  distance 
of  about  sixty  6ve  miles ;  and  has  lately  been  connected  with  the 
river  Ohio,  by  a  lockage  of  about  one  hundred  and  ten  feet. 

To  aid  in  the  construction  of  these  canals.  Congress  made  liberal 
grants  of  land.  Most  of  the  necessary  funds,  however,  were  pro- 
cured on  the  credit  of  the  state,  payable  at  distant  periods. 

Having  the  benefit  of  the  experience  of  others,  Ohio  has  constmct- 
ed  her  canals  at  a  much  less  expense  than  other  great  works  of  the 
kind,  either  in  this  or  any  other  country.  Their  whole  cost  was  only 
about  95,500,000. 

If  any  thing  were  wanting  to  prove  the  extraordinary,  and  we  may 
add,  unparalleled  enterprise  of  the  people  of  the  west,  such  works  at 
these  would  aflford  such  proof.     The  inhabitants  of  this  new  country 


•  8«t  Reporu  of  the  Board  of  public  works,  for  the  fears  18IS  a&d  MS. 

71 


563 

Tentured  to  incur  a  debt  of  many  millions,  in  anticipation  of  Man 
benefiti*,  and  have  drawn  upon  posterity  for  payment ;  and  there  caa 
be  little  doubt  that  the  expenditure  of  the  money  has  created  a  fosd 
which  will  enable  posterity  to  meet  it. 

The  tolls  already  annually  collected,  go  far  towards  paying  the  in- 
terest of  this  debt.  In  1832,  the  amount  collected  was  #1 11,42^  m 
1833,  •187,026,  and  in  1834,  it  exceeded  two  hundred  and  fiTe  thou- 
sand— and  will,  ere  long,  be  sufficient,  not  only  to  pay  the  iaterest, 
but  to  create  a  fund  for  the  payment  of  the  principal. 

We  would  here  also  state,  that  a  canal  has  lately  been  authorised^ 
beginning  on  the  Ohio  canal  at  Bolivar,  to  meet  the  great  Pennsylva- 
nia canal  on  the  Ohio  river,  about  thirty  miles  below  Pittaburgh,  a 
di^nce  of  seventy  six  milen,  called  the  Sandy  and  Beaver  Caoal; 
the  cost  of  which  has  been  estimated  at  $1,250,000,  and  the  stock 
taken  up  and  the  work  actually  commenced. 

Among  the  canals  at  the  west,  that  round  the  falls  of  the  Ohitt 
called  **  Louisville  and  Portland  canal,*'  though  only  about  two  mileB 
in  length,  ought  not  to  pass  unnoticed.*  It  is  calculated  to  admit  tbt 
passage  of  the  largest  steam  boats  on  the  western  waters.  Its  top 
water  line  is  two  hundred  feet,  its  bottom  fifty  feet,  and  its  deptli  va- 
ries from  four  to  forty  two  feet — its  sides  are  sloping  and  paved  with 
stone,  and  it  has  over  it  a  beautiful  stone  bridge,  between  Louisville 
and  Portland.  Its  locks  consist  of  a  guard  luck  and  three  lift  locks ; 
the  former  is  one  hundred  and  ninety  feet  long  in  the  clear,  forty  two 
feet  high,  and  fifty  feet  wide ;  the  latter  each  one  hundred  and  eighty 
five  feet  long  in  the  clear,  fifty  in  width,  and  twenty  high»  all  baaed  oo 
solid  rock — and  the  stone  masonry  in  these  locks  is  supposed  to  equal 
that  of  thirty  common  locks  on  the  Erie  canal.  These  locks  and 
especially  the  guard  lock,  are  larger  than  any  in  the  United  States, 
and  we  believe  in  Europe,  with  the  exception  of  those  on  the  canal 
lately  constructed  from  Amsterdam  to  the  Helder,  which  admits  the 
largest  East  Indiamen  to  the  former  place. 

The  Louisville  and  Portland  canal,  was  made  at  an  expense  of 
$940,000,  including  interest  on  the  money  advanced,  up  to  its  opening 
January  1st,  1831. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  steam  boats,  and  flat  and  keel  boats« 
which  passed  this  canal,  in  the  years  1831,  1832,  1833,  and  one  half 
of  1634. 

1831  406  steam  boats,   421  flats  and  keels,  76,323  tons. 

1832  453     "        *'         179    "  **        70,109     " 

1833  876    "        "        710    "  "      169,885     ** 
First  half  of  1834  630    **        •«        139    "  "       98,128    •* 


563 

The  lolls  received,  in 

1831  amounted  to  $12,750  77 

1832  ««  •«  25,756  12 

1833  ««         ««         .        .  60,736  02 


$00,243  81 

In  1828,  Congress  granted  to  Alabama,  400,000  acres  of  land, 
for  the  purposeuf  improving  the  Tennessee  river  in  that  State,  and 
particularly  making  a  canal  round  the  muscle  shoals. 

The  expense  of  a  canal  round  these  shoals,  on  the  north  side,  a 
distance  of  thirty  five  miles,  was  estimated  at  $1,361,050 — three  hun- 
dred nine  thousand  eight  hundred  and  ninety  three  acres  of  the  land 
granted  for  this  object,  has  been  sold  fur  $608,004,  and  up  to  1834 
$336,394  only,  was  expended. 

A  canal  from  some  point  on  the  Wabash  to  the  Maumee  of  lake 
Erie,  has,  for  some  time,  been  contemplated ;  and  for  this  object.  Con- 
gress has  granted  large  tracts  of  the  public  lands.  The  States  of  In- 
diana and  Ohio,  have  lately  agreed  to  construct  this  canal,  extending 
from  Tippacanoe  on  the  Wabash,  to  a  place  on  the  Maumee  of  the 
lake,  a  distance  of  two  hundred  and  eleven  miles— one  hundred  and 
thirty  six  in  Indiana,  and  seventy  five  in  Ohio.  In  the  former  state, 
seventy  miles  is  under  contract,  and  about  thirty  five  finished.  This 
canal,  will,  therefore,  beyond  a  doubt,  be  completed  in  a  very  few 
years. 

The  first  canals  in  New  England  were  made  round  the  falls  of  Con- 
necticut river. 

They  were  constructed  by  private  companies  and  under  the  patron- 
age of  Col.  Jeremiah  Wadsworth,  an  active  and  enterprizing  citiien 
of  Hartford. 

The  most  important  of  these  works,  were  made  round  the  Hadley 
falls,  in  Massachusetts,  and  cost  about  $200,000 ;  and  are  still  in  use. 

Those  of  a  later  date  in  New  England,  are  the  Middlesex,  Cumber- 
land and  Portland,  Blackstone,  Farmington,  and  Hampshire  and 
Hampden  canals. 

The  Middlesex  canal,  extending  from  Boston  to  Merrimac  river* 
about  thirty  miles,  was  authorized  as  early  as  1780,  but  was  not  com- 
pleted so  as  to  be  navigable,  until  1804.  It  is  connected  with  a  canal 
and  slack  water  navigation  on  the  Menrimac,  as  high  as  Concord  in 
New  Hampshire — the  canals  along  the  river,  being  about  fifieen  miles 
in  length. 


564 

The  Cnmberland  and  Portland  canal,  in  Maine,  extends  friHii  Ac 
city  of  Portland  to  Sabago  pond,  about  twenty  miles,  excluslTe  of  tlw 
improved  navigation  of  the  pond  itself,  and  the  waters  connected 
therewj^ — It  is  used,  principally,  for  the  transportation  of  lamber. 

The  Blackstone  canal  is  about  forty  five  miles  in  length,  extending 
from  Providence  to  '  Worcester,  and  has  been  in  operation  three  or 
four  years. 

The  Farmington  canal  extends  from  the  city  of  New  Haven,  to  tlie 
south  line  of  Massachusetts ;  where  it  is  connected  with  the  Hamp- 
shire and  Hampden  canal,  which  goes  to  Northampton,  on  the  Con- 
necticut river,  about  thirty  five  miles. 

These  canals  were  made  by  private  incorporated  companies,  at  ai 
expense  of  about  82,468,000,  and  in  the  aggregate  extend  about  one 
hundred  and  ninety  seven  miles.  As  yet,  they  have  afforded  little 
profit  to  the  stockholders. 

From  the  best  estimate  we  have  been  able  to  make,  the  number  of 
miles  of  canal,  in  the  United  States,  completed,  on  the  first  of  Janv- 
ary,  1836,  and  which  would  not  long  after  be  completed,  is  abont 
two  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty  seven,  and  their  cost  abcnit 
$64,673,009.  It  will  be  observed,  that,  in  this  entimate  we  include 
the  Chenango  canal,  in  the  State  of  New  York,  the  Wabash  and 
Ere  canal,  and  the  Sandy  and  Beaver ;  these  having  been  previoosly 
commenced,  under  circumstances,  which  seem  to  ensure  their  comple- 
tion in  a  reasonable  time,  and  at  an  expense  of  about  $5,700,000. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  number  of  miles,  in  New  York, 
was  estimated  at  seven  hundred  and  fifteen  ;  and  the  cost  at  815,126,- 
611 — in  Pennsylvania  eight  hundred  and  sixty  one  miles,  and  the  cost 
at  $23,000,000,  calling  the  expense  of  the  state  canals,  $16,500,00a 

This  expenditure  for  canals,  has  been  made  principally  within  the 
last  fifteen  years. 

The  whole  amount  expended  for  canals,  in  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 
land, from  1760  to  1824,  a  period  of  sixty  four  years,  (and  little  has 
been  expended  for  cana1t«  since,)has  been  estimated  at  £3 1,000,000 ster- 
ling, or  $148,800,000 ;  and  the  number  of  miles  of  canal  constructed, 
during  the  same  period,  was,  also,  estimated  to  be  twenty  seven  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles.* 

We  would  here,  also,  observe,  that  the  expense  of  the  are  great 
canals  in  France,  to  which  we  have  before  alluded,  was  125,400,000 


•  See  Wood  on  rail  roads,  American  edilion  by  George  W.  Smith,  p.  423. 


565 

liTret,  or  a  Ktlle  more  than  $25,000,000.  It  will  be  remembered,  that 
when  three  of  these  canals  were  made,  monej  was  more  valuablOf 
than  at  the  present  time — that  of  Briare  was  commenced  in  1005,  and 
finished  in  1(V12,  that  of  Languedoc,  was  finished  in  1680,  and  |^t  of 
Orleans,  in  1692.* 

Tlie  great  canal  of  Gotha,  lately  finished  in  Sweden,  cost  $10,430,* 
100,  of  which  $6,378,324  was  paid  by  the  Swedish  government. 
This  canal  connects  the  Northern  sea  with  the  Baltic,  from  Gotten- 
burgh,  through  lake  Wenern  and  other  lakes — its  width  at  bottom  ia 
forty  eight  feet  and  depth  ten  feet,  admitting  vessels  drawing  nine  and  a 
half  feet  water,  and  the  vessels  are  towed  through  the  lakes  by  atotm 
boats.    It  was  commenced  in  1810,  and  finished  in  1832. 

RAIL    ROADS. 

Rail  roads  intended  for  general  trade  have  lately  become  fashiona- 
ble in  Europe  and  the  United  States,  and  have  come  in  competition 
with  canals. 

They  have  long  been  used  in  Europe  in  collieries  and  mines  of  dif- 
ferent kinds,  fur  the  purpose  of  transporting  coal,  iron,  &.c,  to  canalsi 
or  other  water  communication;  and  were  only  considered  as  prop- 
er auxiliaries  to  the  latter.  It  is  only  since  1824,  they  have  been  made 
and  used  for  general  trade,  and  the  transportation  of  passengers ;  but 
since  that  period,  they  have  increased  in  Europe,  and  in  the  United 
States,  beyond  all  ordinary  calculations. 

Among  those  established  and  in  use  in  England,  the  Liverpool  and 
Manchester,  the  Stockton  and  Darlington,  the  Cromford  and  Peak 
Forest,  the  Sirhoway,  the  Brewton  and  Shields  and  the  Glamorgan- 
ahire,  were  the  most  considerable,  in  1831  and  1832;  none  of  which 
exceeded  thirty  three  miles  in  length.  That  of  Liverpool  and  Man- 
chester was  the  most  expensive,  having  cost  more  than  a  million  ster- 
ling. The  most  considerable  in  France,  are  the  following,  viz  :  one 
from  Sl  Etienne  to  Lyons,  thirty  four  miles  in  length,  built  at  an  ex- 
pense of  9,799,247  francs,  or  about  $1,960,000 — one  from  St  Etienne 
to  Andrezieux,  thirteen  miles,  which  cost  1,556,000  francs,  (exclusive 
of  wagons,)  or  about  $31 1,000,  and  one  from  Andrezieux  to  Roanne, 
forty  two  miles,  (exclusive  of  places  of  depots,  and  wagons,)  cost 
3,025,7^  francs,  or  about  $600,000. 

The  longest  road  of  the  kind  in  Europe,  which  is  completed,  or 
nearly  so,  is  from  the  town  of  Budweis  on  the  Moldau  river  in  Bohe- 


•  See  BuUetia  ds  la  Socihtk  Frso^aise  Suiistiqae  Unirerselle,  4me  Livraison, 
Novcmbrtet  DtccBBbrt,  1830,  p.  111. 


I 


J 


^  566 

miat  to  Lintz,  on  the  Danube  in  Austriat  a  distance  of  eighty  ndei. 
the  expense  of  which  was  estimated  at  only  £160,000  sterliog,  or  ahoU 
•800,000.* 

Miyy  others  have  been  projected,  both  in  England,  and  oo  the 
continent  of  Europe,  some  of  which,  in  all  probability,  may  haTe  beta 
completed. 

Rail  ways,  were  first  used  in  the  United  States,  and  particularly  ia 
PennsylTania,  for  the  same  purposes,  as  in  Europe ;  and  ways  of  this 
kind,  rudely  constructed  of  wood,  may  now  be  seen  by  the  traTeller, 
In  the  coal  region  of  the  west,  conducting  the  coal,  from  ita  moontaia 
beds,  to  the  banks  of  the  rivers  ;  and  in  some  instances,  directly  ialt 
the  factories,  where  it  is  used.  Since  the  year  1826,  they  haTe  beta 
extended  through  the  United  States,  and,  as  in  Europe,  haTe  beea 
used,  for  general  internal  trade,  as  well  as  for  the  transportation  of 
passengers. 

Such,  indeed,  has  been  the  rage  for  this  kind  of  internal  improfe- 
ment,  that  between  one  and  two  hundred  private  conipanies  have 
been  incorporated,  for  t^is  object,  in  different  parts  of  the  United 
States. 

It  is  not  our  intention,  even  were  it  in  our  power,  to  trace  the  vari- 
ous routes,  contemplated,  in  these  various  acts  of  incorporation — 
many  of  them  will,  probably,  never  be  commenced,  or  if  commenced, 
finished. — In  this,  as  well  as  in  every  thing  else,  which  is  new  and 
connected  with  individual  interest,  fancied  benefits  outrun  sober 
calculations.  We  shall  only  notice,  and  that  in  a  general  way,  some 
of  the  principal  of  those  already  completed,  or  in  such  progress,  as 
to  ensure  their  completion. 

In  New  England,  (to  begin  at  the  north,)  a  rail  way  of  three  miles 
in  extent,  was  constructed  at  Quincy  in  Massachusetts  in  1825  or 
1826,  at  the  expense  of  about  $11,000  per  mile,  for  ibe  purpose  of 
transporting  the  valuable  granite  of  that  town,  to  tide  water.  Three 
rail  roads  are  now  constructing  from  Boston,  one  to  the  manufactu- 
ring town  of  Lowell,  a  distance  of  about  thirty  miles,  one  to  Wor- 
cester, about  forty  miles,  and  one,  about  the  same  distance,  to  Provi- 
dence. These  three  roads,  at  an  expense  of  abont  one  million  of 
dollars  each,  will  be  completed,  in  all  probability,  'in  183&.  From 
Providence,  a  rail  road  was  commenced,  in  1833,  to  Stooingtoa,  ia 
Connecticut,  a  distance  of  about  forty  eight  miles,  the  expense  of 
which  is  estimated  at  about  81,140,000. 


*  Wood  on  rail  roads,  editioa  by  Greorg«  W.  Smith. 


667 

In  the  Sute  of  New  York,  the  Hudson  and  Mohawk,  the  Bchenee- 
tody  and  Saratoga  rail  roads,  are  well  known — the  former,  alK>ut  fif- 
teen miles  in  length,  has  cost  nearly  91,000,000,  and  the  latter  twenty 
one  miles  long,  will  haTe  only  cost,  including  every  thing,  about 
•367,000.  A  similar  road  has  lately  been  esUblished  and  the  atoek 
taken  up,  from  Troy  to  Saratoga,  twenty  four  miles,  and  which  it  if 
said  will  be  finished  in  1835,  at  an  expense  of  9300,000.  A  rail  road 
from  Harlaem  to  New  York,  is  nearly  completed.  Further  west 
in  that  state,  a  similar  road  is  nearly  finished,  from  Ithica,  the  head 
of  the  Cayuga  lake  to  Owego,  on  the  Susquehannah,  twenty  nine 
miles,  at  an  expense  of  about  $400,000 ;  and  a  short  road  connecting 
Rochester  with  lake  Ontario. 

The  rail  road  between  Schenectady  and  Utica,  was  chartered  in 
1833 ;  and  it  is  well  known,  that  stock  to  the  amount  of  $14,000,000 
was  aubscribed  by  individuals — this  road  is  now  in  progress,  and  willy 
■o  doubt,  be  completed,  as  soon  as  a  road  of  that  length  and  magni- 
tude can  be  done.  Its  length  is  seventy  seven  and  a  half  miles,  and 
the  estimated  cost  $1,500,000. 

Albany  is  the  great  tlioroughfare,  to  and  from  the  western  country, 
as  the  following  account  of  the  numberof  passengers,  on  the  Mohawk 
and  Hudson  rail  road,  for  the  years  1833  and  1834,  will  shew : — 

Passengers  departing  from  Albany  in  1833,  60,509 

**  «*      from  Schenectady       «•     .         .        50,166 

116,764 

Passengers  departing  from  Albany  in  1834,         •        78,188 

«'  *'      from  SchenecUdy,      '*    .  66,290 

143,478 

The  number  of  passengers,  on  the  Mohawk  and  Hudson  road,  in 
1834,  exceeded  the  number  between  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  on 
the  Camden  and  Amboy  road,  more  than  thirty  three  thousand,  the 
number  on  the  latter  being  only,  as  will  be  seen  hereafter,  one  hun- 
dred and  ten  thousand. 

We  would  here  observe,  that  the  rail  road  from  New  York  to  lake 
Erie,  through  Binghampton,  so  long  in  contemplation,  has  been  lately 
accurately  surveyed  and  pronounced  practicable,  to  strike  the  lake 
somewhere  between  Dunkirk  and  Portland,  a  distance  of  four  hun- 
dred and  eighty  three  miles,  the  expense,  with  a  single  track,  being 
csUmated  at  $4,762,260. 

The  Camden  and  Aroboy  rail  road,  sixty  one  miles  in  length  is 
now  completed,  and  brings  the  cities  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia, 
in  the  vicinity  of  each  other,  the  travel  of  five  or  six  hours  being  only 


#' 


568 


required  from  one  city  to  the  other.  The  cost  of  this  road,  iDcIii£of 
real  estate,  steam  boats  connected  with  it,  locomotive  cars*  wbmrvM, 
iLC  was  about  •2,000,000. 

The  number  of  passengers  on  this  road,  the  past  season,  (1834,)  was 
one  hundred  and  ten  thousand,  and  the  gross  income  said  to  be  aboA 
$500,000.  This  road  is  connected  with  the  Raritan  and  Delaware 
canal. 

A  road  from  the  manufacturing  village  of  Patterson,  to  New  York, 
about  sixteen  miles,  is  nearly  finished,  but,  at  what  expense,  we  have 
not  ascertained.  In  addition  to  these  a  road  is  now  in  progress,  froa 
Jersey  City,  through  Newark  and  Elizabethtown  to  Brunswick. 

The  rail  roads  as  well  as  the  canals  of  Pennsylvania,  exceed,  is 
number,  extent  and  expense,  those  of  any  other  state. 

The  Philadelphia  and  Columbia  road,  and  the  portage  road,  over 
the  Alleghany,  constitute  a  part,  as  before  stated,  of  the  great  inland 
communication  between  the  Delaware  and  lake  Erie ;  and  were  con- 
structed at  the  expense  of  the  state. 

The  former  is  eighty  two  miles  in  length,  and  the  expense,  wboi 
completed,  #i]]  be  about  $3,500,000,  or  more  than  $44,000  per  mDe. 

In  crossing  the  Alleghany,  the  Pennsylvanians  had  to  encoanfar 
difficulties,  apparently  insurmountable,  as  the  New  Yorkers  had,  ia 
passing  the  rocky  ridge  at  Lockport.  The  portage  rail  way  across 
the  Alleghany  mountains,  is  certainly  one  of  the  boldest  works  of  the 
kind  undertaken  and  completed,  in  this  or  any  other  country.  Ii  is 
thirty  six  miles  in  length ;  and  in  this  distance,  overcomes,  a  rise  and 
fail  of  two  thousand  five  hundred  and  seventy  feet ;  and  in  one  part 
of  it  has  a  tunnel  of  nine  hundred  feet  cut  through  a  solid  rock  ;  it 
has  ten  stationary  steam  engines,  and  ten  inclined  planes,  five  on 
each  side  of  the  mountain ;  and  the  ropes  alone,  necessary  on  these 
inclined  planes,  would  reach  more  than  eleven  miles,  and  their  ex- 
pense has  been  more  than  twenty  thousand  dollars — and  what  is  still 
more  singular,  a  rigger's  loft  has  been  erected  for  these  ropes,  on  the 
summit  of  the  mountain,  where  riggers  are  employed,  at  an  annual 
expense  of  more  than  sixteen  hundred  dollars.  The  whole  expense 
of  this  stupendous  work,  will  be  about  $1,750,000. 

In  addition  to  the  state  rail  roads,  many  roads  of  this  kind  have 
been  made  and  are  now  making  in  Pennsylvania,  by  companies  and 
individuals,  the  most  of  which  are  connected  with  the  coal  mines,  and 
have  been  constructed  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  transporta- 
tion of  coal,  from  these  mines,  to  the  canals,  or  other  water  coromv- 
nications.    The  most  considerable  of  these  are  the  Philadelphia  and 


569  •^\ 

TreDtoD,  which  will  soon  be  completed,  the  Philadelphia  and  Grerman- 
town,  the  Little  Schuylkill,  Mine  Hill  and  Schuylkill,  Mount  Carbon, 
Danville  and  Pottsville,  Schuylkill  valley,  Mauch  Chunk,  Room  RaSt 
West  branch.  Mill  creek.  Pine  grove^  Lykens  valley  and  Carbondale, 
and  many  collateral  roads,  connected  with  these  at  the  mines.  A  lat- 
eral rail  road  is  made  from  the  state  road  to  Columbia,  about  twenty 
miles  from  Philadelphia  to  West  Chester,  a  distance  of  nine  miles,  at . 
an  expense  of  about  $100,000.  About  forty  five  miles  from  Philadel- 
phia, on  the  Columbia  rail  road,  a  road  is  located  to  Port  Deposit, 
on  the  Susquehannah,  through  Oxford,  a  distance  of  about  thirty  one 
miles,  to  meet  a  similar  road  from  Baltimore.  The  whole  extent  of 
rail  roads  in  Pennsylvania,  made  by  computes  and  individuals,  is 
about  three  hundred  miles. 

The  New  Castle  and  French  town  rail  road,  sixteen  miles  in  length* 
connects  the  Delaware  river  with  the  Chesapeake,  in  the  state  of 
Delaware.  This  road  cost  about  $400,000,  and  is  one  of  the  best  in 
the  United  States. 

The  enterprising  citizens  of  Baltimore,  in  1820,  perceiving  that,  in  ) 
consequence  of  steam  navigation  on  the  western  waters,  and  the  ex- 
ertions of  other  states,  they  were  losing  the  trade  of  the  west,  be- 
gan seriously  to  consider  of  some  mode  of  recovering  it  A  commu- 
nication with  the  Ohio,  by  a  canal,  was  first  contemplated.  But  the 
report  of  the  engineers  sent  out  by  the  government  of  the  United 
States,  by  which  the  cost  of  such  a  cansl  was  estimated  at  more  than 
twenty  two  millions  of  dollars,  induced  them  to  substitute  a  rail  road; 
and  for  this  purpose,  in  February,  1827,  they  obtained  acts  of  in- 
corporation from  Maryland  and  Virginia.  The  company  was  author- 
ized to  strike  the  Ohio  river,  at  any  place,  between  Pittsburgh  and  the 
mouth  of  the  Little  Kanaway.  The  distance  to  Pittsburgh  was  about 
three  hundred  and  thirty  miles. 

This  was  the  most  extensive,  and,  we  may  add,  the  boldest  project 
of  the  kind  ever  undertaken,  by  any  government  or  by  individuals. 
The  road  contemplated,  was  about  four  times  the  length  of  any  sim- 
ilar one  in  Europe,  and  over  ground  much  higher,  and  more  difficnllt 
than  any  other  before  occupied  for  such  a  road.  But  neither  the  bold- 
ness of  the  plan,  nor  the  difficulties  attending  its  execution,  prevented 
an  immediate  subscription  to  the  amount  of  $4,000,000,  towards  car- 
rying it  into  effect — the  state  of  Maryland  and  the  city  of  Baltimore, 
each  furnishing  $600,000  of  this  sum,  and  individuals  the  remainder. 
The  work  was  commenced  on  the  4th  of  July,  1828,  but  waa,  for  a 
long  time  retarded,  by  a  dispute  between  the  company,  and  the  Chta* 

72 


■  M 


570 


apeake  and  Ohio  canal  company,  as  to  prior  right  of  location  in  cer- 
tain parts  of  the  route.  This  dispute,  however,  has  been  adjusted, 
and  on  the  first  of  December,  1834,  the  road  was  finished  to  Harper** 
ferry,  so  as  to  admit  the  passage  of  cars  to  that  place,  a  distance  of 
about  eighty  two  miles,  and  at  an  expense  of  towards  three  millioiif 
of  dollars.  At  Harper's  ferry,  this  road  meets  with  another  rail  road 
from  that  place  to  Winchester,  in  Virginia,  which  is  now  in  progress 
— from  Winchester,  it  is  calculated  that  a  road  will  be  continoed  to 
the  Ohio,  either  at  Parkensburgh,  by  crossing  the  mountains  firom 
Winchester,  or  by  ascending  the  valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  to  Staon- 
ton,  and  then  to  Jennings  gap,  and  the  white  sulphur  springis  to  Gnj- 
andotte.  j^ 

The  tolls  collected  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  rail  road,   from  Oc- 
tober Ist  1833,  to  September  30th,  1834,  was  from 
passengers,  ....  SS9,181  19 

From  tonnage,  ....  1 16,254  79 

$206,436  58 

The  expenses,  during  the  same  period,  was  8132,862  41,  leaving  a 
net  revenue  of  $72,574  58. 

The  number  of  passengers  on  the  road  the  same  year,  was  ninety 
four  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty  four,  and  the  tonnage  of  arti- 
cles fifty  six  thousand  one  hundred  and  twenty — nineteen  thousand 
nine  hundred  and  twenty  eight  going  westwardly,  and  thirty  six  thou- 
sand one  hundred  and  ninety  one  eastwardly.  The  commodities  con- 
stituting this  latter  tonnage  were  as  follows : — 

Flour,  bbls.  182,21  U, 

Tobacco,  hhds.  801,  . 

Grain, 

Meal, 

Provisions, 

Live  stock,    . 

Whiskey, 

Granite, 

Soap  stone. 

Paving  stone, 

Lime  and  Lime  stone, 

Fire  wood,     . 

Lumber, 

Bark, 

Ore, 


Tons. 

CwL 

On. 

Lb 

17,630 

4 

3 

1 

311 

19 

1 

2 

522 

15 

0 

0 

741 

8 

3 

1 

160 

14 

1 

3 

23 

5 

0 

0 

130 

4 

1 

2 

7,723 

5 

3 

2 

70 

7 

2 

0 

1,568 

16 

1 

I 

1,231 

13 

3 

1 

997 

13 

0 

2 

114 

1 

2 

0 

244 

16 

3 

2 

1,138 

3 

2 

I 

Tods.     < 

Cwt  i 

^n. 

Lbi 

1,518 

10 

1 

1 

16 

10 

1 

3 

4 

3 

1 

3 

176 

17 

3 

0 

457 

0 

3 

0 

14 

10 

0 

1 

31 

18 

0 

1 

1,302 

8 

3 

0 

571 


Iron,  •  •  .  • 

Wool,      .... 

Cotton,  .... 

Leather, 

Hardware,      .... 

Cotton  goods, 

Paper,  .... 

Miscellaneous,     . 

36,191     18    3    3* 

The  Baltimore  and  Ohio  rail  road  company,  are  now  constructing  a 
lateral  rail  road  to  the  city  of  Washington,  ^pmmencing  about  eight 
mites  from  Baltimore.  It  is  about  thirty  two  miles  in  length,  and 
will  probably  be  completed  in  1835.  The  expense  of  making  it  is 
estimated  at  $1,500,000,  and  on  the  Ist  of  October,  1834,  about  nine 
hundred  thousand  dollars,  had  been  expended  upon  it. 

To  secure  the  trade  of  the  Susquehannah,  a  rail  road  has  been  pro- 
jected from  Baltimore,  to  strike  that  river  in  Pennsylvania,  by  the 
way  of  York ;  but  what  progress  has  been  made  in  it,  we  have  not 
ascertained.  The  citizens  of  Baltimore  had,  at  various  times,  ex- 
pended many  hundred  thousand  dollars,  in  improving  the  navigation 
of  the  Susquehannah,  lying  within  the  limits  of  Maryland,  by  which 
they  had  enjoyed  no  small  share  of  the  trade  of  that  river.  This 
trade,  however,  they  were  losing,  in  consequence  of  the  internal  im- 
provements of  Pennsylvania,  and  of  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake 
canal ;  and  to  regain  it  this  road  was  projected. 

A  company  has,  also,  lately  been  established  to  make  a  rail  road 
from  Baltimore  to  Port  Deposite  on  the  same  river,  a  distance  of 
forty  one  miles,  to  meet  a  similar  one  to  that  place  in  Pennsylvania. 
This  road  has  beep  surveyed  and  located,  and  will  probably  soon  be 
made  by  the  company. 

As  we  proceed  south,  we  find  that  Virginia,  also,  has  her  rail  roads 
already  in  operation,  and  others  in  contemplation.  In  this  state  a 
rail  road  has  been  constructed  from  the  tide  waters  on  James  river, 
near  Richmond,  to  the  coal  mines  in  Chesterfield  county,  a  distance 
of- thirteen  and  a  half  miles.  It  was  commenced  in  January,  1830, 
and  was  in  operation  in  July,  1831 ;  and  was  made  for  about  88,000 
per  mile,  and  has  been  very  profitable  to  the  stockholders. 


•  See  eighth  annaal  report  of  the  Preaident  and  Directois  of  the  Baitiinore  aod 
Ohio  Rail  Road  company.    1834. 


572 

A  rail  road  from  Petersbur^h  to  Weldon  on  the  Roanoke,  a  dit- 
tance  of  sixty  miles,  has  been  in  operation  for  about  two  years.  In 
NoTember,  1833,  there  had  been  expended  upon  it  $516,334  80,  and 
its  income  for  a  year  ending  October  31st,  1S33,  was  S37,574  14.* 
This  road  was  calculated  to  divert  a  part  of  the  trade  of  the  rirer  Ro- 
anoke, from  Norfolk  to  Petersburgh.  To  prevent  this,  a  similar  road 
has  been  projected,  and  is  now  in  progress,  from  Portsmouth  to  a 
place  on  the  Roanoke,  in  North  Carolina,  opposite  Weldon,  a  distance 
of  seventy  seven  miles ;  the  estimated  cost  of  which  is  only  9475,0001 
A  company  has,  also,  been  lately  chartered,  to  construct  a  rail  road 
from  Winchester  to  Harper's  ferry,  to  meet  the  road  from  Baltimore 
to  that  place,  and  whiok  will  soon  be  completed.  Virginia  has,  also, 
long  contemplated  to  secure  a  share  of  the  western  trade,  by  connect- 
ing James  river  with  the  Ohio,  by  the  way  of  the  Great  Kanaway.  A 
company  has  been  for  some  time  formed,  to  effect  this  ^eat  object, 
by  connecting  the  rivers,  with  canals  or  rail  roads.  The  expense  has 
been  estinutted  at  somewhat  more  than  eight  millions,  but  the  whole 
stock,  it  is  believed,  has  not  yet  been  taken  up. 

Rail  roads  have  been  contemplated  and  commenced  in  North  Caro- 
lina, but  we  have  not  learnt,  that  any  have,  as  yet,  been  completed, 
or  have  been  undertaken,  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  ensure  their  com- 
pletion. 

South  Carolina  has,  already  completed  the  longest  rail  road,  now 
in  operation,  in  any  part  of  the  world.  It  extends  from  Charleston 
to  Hamburgh,  on  the  Savannah  river,  opposite  to  Augusta,  a  distance 
of  one  hundred  and  thirty  five  and  a  quarter  miles.  It  was  commenced 
in  1830,  and  was  opened  for  use  throughout,  in  1833.  It  is  built  on 
piles,  and  may  be  considered  as  a  continuous  bridge.  Its  original 
cost,  including  preliminary  surveys,  locomotive  engines,  cars,  deposi- 
tories, inclined  planes,  stationary  engines,  purchase  of  land,  dec.  was 
$904,500.  Where  these  piles  are  above  the  surface  of  the  ground,  it 
has  been  considered  necessary,  to  fill  up  the  space  with  earth,  and  this 
has  been  partly  done  ;  and  this,  with  other  items,  increased  the  cost 
of  the  road,  up  to  October  31st,  1834,  to  91,336,615  09.  The  stock 
is  considered  valuable.  From  May  to  October,  1834,  a  period  of 
six  months,  the  company  received,  for  transportation  of  passengers 
and  cotton  on  this  road,  $83,445  42.  The  number  of  passengers, 
during  this  period,  was  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  seventy 
five,  paying  $35,140  45,  and  the  quantity  of  cotton  transported  the 


♦  See  eigbteeaih  unnual  report  of  the  Board  of  public  works. 


573 

•tme  time,  was  twelve  thousand  seven  hundred  fifty  six  bales,  and 
which  paid  947,904  97. 

In  Georgia,  a  company  has  been  incorporated  to  make  a  road  from 
Augnsta  to  Athens,  and  we  are  informed  that  the  stock  has  been  ta- 
ken np,  the  route  surveyed,  and  will  probably  be  made,  and  at  an  ex- 
pense of  about  $10,000  per  mile.  The  distance  is  about  one  hundred 
and  fourteen  miles.  This  road  is  considered  a  continuation  of  the 
Charleston  road,  and  naturally  connected  with  it  From  Athens,  it  is 
contemplated  to  extend  it  to  Decatur  on  the  Tennessee  river,  and 
thus,  in  this  direction,  connect  the  trade  of  the  west,  with  the  city 
of  Charleston. 

In  Alabama,  a  rail  road,  round  the  Muscle  shoals  in  the  Tennessee 
river,  was  finished,  about  the  Ist  of  December,  1834.  It  extends  from 
Tuscumbiat  through  Cortland  to  Decatur,  a  little  more  than  forty 
five  miles ;  twenty  fiye  of  which  was  made  in  1834. 

This  road  must  be  advantageous  to  a  great  extent  of  country  ad- 
joining the  Tennessee  river,  above  the  muscle  shoals  ;  as  that  river 
above  these  shoals,  is  navigable  for  steam  boats,  as  high  up  as  Knox- 
ville,  a  distance  of  about  four  hundred  miles. 

The  completion  of  one  work  of  this  kind  naturally  leads  to  the 
contemplation  of  others  in  its  neighborhood,  either  in  connection  with 
it,  or  to  share  in  the  benefits,  which  it  promises.  Various  roads,  there- 
fore, of  a  similar  kind,  have  been  projected,  in  Georgia,  Alabama,  and 
Tennessee,  some  of  which  have  been  surveyed  ;  but  as  most  of  them, 
are  of  a  recent  date,  our  information,  does  not  enable  us  to  judge  as 
to  the  prospects  of  their  completion. 

An  important  road  of  this  character,  has  been  commenced  in  Ken- 
tucky, and  will,  no  doubt,  be  soon  completed.  It  extends,  from  Lex- 
ington, through  Frankfort,  the  seat  of  government,  to  Louisville,  a 
distance  of  about  ninety  miles.  The  work  upon  it  wa9  commenced 
in  April,  1832,  but  during  the  summer  of  1833,  was  suspended,  on  ac- 
count  of  the  cholera.  In  September,  1834,  twenty  three  miles  were 
finished,  and  by  the  first  of  January  following,  it  was  completed  and 
used  to  Frankfort,  twenty  eight  miles.  The  cost  of  this  road,  with 
a  single  track,  was  estimated  at  $1,032,000;  and  its  actual  expense 
thus  far,  has  not  much  exceeded  the  estimate — the  estimated  cost  to 
Frankfort  being  $356,000,  and  the  actual  cost  to  that  place,  about 
$370,000.  This  road,  we  understand,  has  been  built  in  a  substantial 
manner.* 


•  For  information  respecting  this  road,  we  are  indebted  to  oor  obliging  friend 
Mr.  Winter,  the  sopcrintendant. 


574 

Other  roads  of  this  kind  have  been  contemplated  and  aathorised«  k 
the  western  states,  and  some  of  them  will  no  doubt  ere  long*  be  fia- 
ished.  The  state  of  Indiana  has  lately  authorized  a  loan  of  about  a 
■Billion  and  a  half  to  make  similar  roads  in  that  state. 

In  Louisiana,  a  rail  road  has  been  completed  from  New  Orleana  !• 
lake  Ponchartrain,  about  six  miles,  at  an  expense,  inclading  machioa- 
ry  and  real  estate,  of  $443,443  76. 

The  rail  roads  before  noticed,  which  were  completed  on  the  fint 
of  January,  1835,  or  would  not  long  after  be  completed,  are  in  length 
taken  together,  about  sixteen  hundred  miles,  and  their  cost  not  ftr 
from  $30,000,000.  The  aggregate  length  of  those  in  PennsylTaaia, 
is  about  four  hundred  and  eighteen  miles,  made  at  an  expense  estima- 
ted to  exceed  $7,000,000. 

When  the  cost  of  the  rail  roads  in  the  United  States,  is  added  to 
that  of  the  canals,  it  will  be  found,  that  there  has  been,  or  will  sooa 
be  expended  in  this  country,  on  these  two  kinds  of  internal  improve- 
ment, a  sum  not  less  than  about  $94,000,000;  and  this  has  been  done, 
principally,  since  1817. 

In  reviewing  the  foregoing  brief  account  of  the  canals  and  rail  roads 
of  the  United  States,  it  will  be  perceived,  that  the  two  principal  objects 
originally  contemplated  in  making  them,  have,  in  a  great  measure, 
been  accomplished.  A  safe  internal  water  communication,  along  or 
near  the  Atlantic  sea  board,  has  been  completed — ^large  vessels  can 
now  go  from  the  Hudson  to  the  Delaware,  through  the  Ran  tan  and 
Delaware  canal,  from  thence  through  the  Delaware  and  Chesapeake 
canal,  and  Chesapeake  Bay,  to  Norfolk  in  Virginia,  and  from  Norfolk 
through  the  Dismal  Swamp  canal,  to  Albemarle  Sound  in  North  Car- 
olina. 

The  eastern  and  western  waters  are  now  connected,  not  only  from 
the  Hudson  to  lake  Erie,  through  the  State  of  New  York ;  but  also* 
from  the  Delaware  to  the  Ohio,  and  to  the  same  lake,  through  Penn* 
sylvania. 

This  has  greatly  facilitated  the  intercourse  between  the  east  and 
the  west,  to  the  immense  advantage  of  both ;  and  has  bound  tbem 
together  by  ties,  which,  we  trust,  can  never  be  broken. 

In  addition  to  this  evidence  of  the  great  and  growing  wealth  and 
resources  of  this  country ;  it  will  be  remembered,  that  the  United 
States,  during  the  same  period,  have  paid  off  a  national  debt  of  more 
than  $120,000,000. 

This  has  been  done,  in  pursuance  of  an  act  passed  by  Congress*  on 
the  3d  day  of  March,  1817,  entitled  *'an  act  to  provide  for  the 


575 

demption  of  the  public  debU^  By  this  act,  the  sum  of  910,000,000f 
was  appropriated^  annually,  and  Tested  in  the  commissioners  of  the 
sinking  fund,  and  was  to  be  applied  to  the  payment  of  interest  and 
charges,  and  to  the  reimbursement  or  purchase  of  the  principal  q£ 
the  public  debt.  And  the  faith  of  the  goTemment  was  pledged,  that 
this  sum  should  not  be  diverted  to  any  other  object,  except  a  certain 
part  of  it,  in  case  the  United  States,  should  be  at  war  with  a  foreign 
power.  And  we  beg  leave  here  to  state,  that  the  late  William  Lowndes 
of  South  Carolina,  a  statesman,  whose  modest  but  sterling  worth, 
and  pure  patriotism,  was  known  by  actions  rather  than  by  words,  was 
the  author  of  this  act — an  act,  under  whose  silent^  but  sure  opera- 
tion, a  national  debt  of  more  than  $120,000,000,  in  the  short  period 
of  eighteen  years,  has  been  extinguished.  But  the  nation  still  owes 
a  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  memory  of  the  author  of  this  measure, 
which  can  never  be  extinguished. 


'pMtui  ttiaan  f  0  u^unu  |aiox 


-rtBii(iaiS9iitIiniiii|dii( 


imifilf 

■gSSSPSSSS. 


»1»qinMI>jaja«mnK 


5?sgs||eg 


i 
•t. 


tuodia  aSiBJOi  Jo  «Dfi\ 


tiJQdiD}  nS|3joT  Jo  an[tA 


1   pauodaii  ipixd  JO  sntiA 


-inoi  pniodia  ■pool  jo  bdiia 


qiiM  [>U|Ui*l9wu  jonqnn 


J.  — i,j.[-C*0 


S8 


iiiisiii 


677 
TABLE  No.  II. 

The  whole  quantity  of  property  received  at  AJbany,  by  canalSf  on 
which  freight  is  charged  by  the  ton,  in  1833,  amoanted  to  152,035 
tons  of  2,000  lbs.  each,  or  305,870,000  pounds. 

The  following  are  enumerated  in  the  collector's  returns,  riz : — 
734,133  barrels  flour,  av.  vaL    $5  50  $4,037,731  50 

22,022      *•       ashes. 


•4 


ii 


beef  and  pork, 
whiskey,  . 


•4 


4C 


13,480 
10,008 

873  hhds. 
17,116  bushels  salt, 
208,504      '*        wheat, 
122,044      '*        coarse  grains, 
257,252      '•        barley,     . 
2,187  boxes  glass, 

The  following  not  chargeable  by  the  ton. 
20,060  cords  wood,     . 
74,350  cubic  feet  timber, 
55,338,547  feet  lumber, 
74,350  shingles. 


•• 


•• 


44 


44 


44 


value, 

4* 

per  ih. 


20 

458.440 

10 

134,800 

12 

238,806 

40 

34,020 

40 

6,846 

1  m 
621 

335,815  75 

76,840 

60 

154,368  20 

2  25 

4,020  75 

$4 

83,840 

20 

14,870 

15 

830,078  20 

3  50 

250,225 

t6,671,665  40 

The  articles  upon  which  toll  is  charged  per  ton  enu- 
merated above,  weigh  217,520,000,  lbs.  whilst  the  arti- 
cles actually  received,  amounted  to  305,870,000  lbs. 
leaving  not  enumerated,  88,341,000  lbs.  Amongst  these 
may  be  named,  wool,  butter,  cheese,  lard,  eggs,  dried 
fruit,  feathers,  cabinet  ware,  wooden  ware,  brooms,  to- 
bacco, seed,  6ic.  The  articlcH  wool,  butter,  cheese,  lard 
and  seed  reported  by  the  collector  at  West  Troy,  weigh- 
ed 7,1^,816  lbs.  and  were  worth  9836,632  46— and  the 
tame  amount  may  safely  be  set  down  for  Albany,  • 
leaving  still  not  enumerated,  81,156,184  lbs.  The 
average  value  of  the  articles  enumerated  is  two  and  a 
half  cents  per  pound.  It  would  be  safe,  therefore,  to 
estimate  the  amount  not  enumerated,  at  one  cent  per 
pound,  say  Hl,156,lH4  lbs.  at  one  cent  per  lb.  is 

The  article  of  staves  is  entirely  omitted  in  the  list  of 
lumber — a  sinf^le  hou^e  in  Albany,  received  in  1833,  to 
the  am't  of  975,000 — this  may  be  safely  enumerated  at 


836,632  46 


811,561  84 


100,000 


•8,410,850  70 


Amount  of  merchandize,  furniture  and  sundries,  sent  up  the  canal, 
from  Albany,  68,321  tons,  or  136,642,000  pounds.  Amount  of  toll 
received  at  Albany,  in  1833,  $323,680,  or  being  an  increase  over  ISSS, 
of  $87,053  56. 

Number  of  boats  arrived  and  departed,  16,834. 


73 


/ 


678 


TABLEf  No.  II.— Continued. 

Statement  of  freight  from  the  west  and  norths  which  passed 
through  the  West  Troy  side  cut^  into  the  Hudson  river ^  during 
the  year  1833. 


45,493,516  feet  of  boards  and  scantling  av.  val., 
1,562,960  cubic  feet  of  timber, 
17,562  shingles, 
10,273  cords  of  wood, 
4,098  tons  staves,     . 
8,565    •'   stone, 
189,128  barrels  flour,     . 
17,731      "       beef  and  pork 
9,161      ''       ashes, 
11,681      ''       salt, 
9,016  boxes  glass, 
623,003  bushels  wheat, 
84,196      "       barley, 
52,640      **       oats  and  corn, 
609,693  pounds  wool,    • 
609,951      <'       tobacco,     . 
2,122,736      "       butter  and  lard, 
3,422,448      "       cheese, 
419,088      ''       seed,  say  8,340  bushels, 


•i 

it 

4« 
(I 
4« 
4t 
•  < 
•( 
<i 
<( 
it 


19,003  barrels  domestic  liquor, 


u 
It 

i< 

i4 

) 

<( 


$15        9682,402  74 
20     212,592  20 

3  50   41,417 

4  41,092 
10     40,960 

2     17,030 

5  50  l,ai0,2M 
10  117^10 
20    183,220 

2     23,362 
2  25   22,540 
1  12i  700,878  38 
60   56,517  60 
62(  32,900 
40  243,877  20 
6   36,597  06 
10  212,273 
6  205,346  88 
2    16,680 
12    288,836 


•4,155,5^6  06 


16,256,776  pounds  of  articles  not  enumerated,  estim- 
ated value,  one  cent  per  pound,  as  in  the  Albany 
statement,  is 

Total  value  entered  at  West  Troy. 

RECAPITULATION. 


162,567  78 
$4,317,823  82 


Total  value  of  property  received  at  Albany  by  canals,    $8,419,859  70 
do.  do.  at  West  Troy,  do.        4,317,823.^88 

$12,737,783  52 

In  the  above  estimate,  property  that  entered  the  river  at  Water- 
ford  is  not  included.  This  would  increase  the  amount  to  at  least 
$13,000,000. 


579 
TABLE  No   III. 


^•• 


An  account  of  the  property  which  passed  Utica  on  the  Erie  CanaU 

in  the  years  1833  and  1834 


Domeitic  spirits, 

Boards  and  scantling, 

Timber, 

Shingles, 

Staves, 

Flour, 

Provisions, 

Salt, 

Ashes, 

Lime, 

Beer, 

Cider, 

Wood, 

Wheat, 

Coarse  grain. 

Bran  and  ship  stuffs, 

Peas  and  beans. 

Clover  and  grass  seed 

Wool, 

Cheese, 

Butter  and  lard. 

Gypsum, 

Stone, 

Merchandize, 

Furniture, 

Clay, 

Coal, 

Pig  iron. 

Hops, 

Fur  and  peltry. 

Dried  fruit,    . 

Sundries, 

Iron  ware, 

Bar  and  pig  lead 

Flax  seed, 

Tobacco, 

Hemp, 

Cotton, 

Apples, 

Potatoes, 


•• 


«• 


4i 


it 


(i 


1833. 

1,609,612  gallons. 
40,804,371  feet. 
1,733,255     '* 
55,287  M. 
g,264523   " 
066,813  barrels. 
27,919      " 
62,860 
29,508 
15,357 
586 
284 
4,808  cords. 
1,175,423  bushels. 
302,578      " 
300,518      '* 
8,260      " 
1,460,628  pounds. 
1,116,673       * 
1,857,944 
4,554,215 
18,750,501 
8,805,039 
157,357,574 
7,595,732 
1,821,565 
6,423,090 
1,810,215 
443,326 
268,521 


44 
•  ( 
•4 
i( 
»i 
(i 
ii 
4« 
44 
44 
44 


44 
44 
44 
4< 
44 


18M. 

1,461,051  gallons, 
38,290,991  Teet. 
1,522,637    " 
41,061  M. 
10,416,705    " 
1,157,059  barrels. 
39,888      " 
70,868 
30,502 
6,135 
638 
622 
5,383  cords. 
1,197,304  bushels. 
402,216      " 
349,303      " 
29,486      " 
2,144,551  pounds. 
1,135,225 
3,173,147 
4,499,008 
10,615,023 
16,619,755 
140,743,996 
10,672,802 
2,351,153 
4,551,960 
2,005,158 
487,586 
399,832 
.     60,376 
3,458,190 
1,439,111 
.     30,376 
1,221,102 
538,840 
1,765,882 
77,891  bales. 
720  bushels. 
4,809      " 


44 
44 
4< 
41 
44 
4< 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
44 
4» 
U 
44 
44 


N.  B.  Several  articles  at  the  close  of  the  above  list,  were  not  spe- 
cified, until  1834,  and  which  occasioned  a  decrease  in  the  merchandiia 
of  that  year,  of  4,560,000  pounds. 


/ 


% 


580 


o 

CQ 

-< 
H 


8 


•S 
ho 

P 


99 


6 


^ 


5 

i 


as 
S3 


3 


II 
I? 


S 


£ 


1 
"5 

I 


I 
I 


S 


S8888SS88g 


oS  S  o  kO 

^  O  t*  O  00  CO  lO  CO  CD 


88^8oi0"^«*SS 


52 


o 


S2  =  « 


O^  O  CO  t^  lO 


gs'sgfgfif^^'ss 


f^SoSSeoSSS 


v-N  O  ^  O  QD 

82585 


8SSSg%8?:&?:S8SS^SS 


•^    ^i 


lis 


lO  CD  f^  QO  O  O  *-• 
^  01  ^^  ^  ^^  ^  C9 

XOD^  QD  QD  ^  QD 


•k       ^       »       a^       •>       »        » 

^  ^  B  QD  CI  ^  09 


li 


i^Sd?1S88SSoS 

SSSSSSeloeSw 


88888888S2 


^  — 


0)  QD  q5  ^  S 
^  f^  1^  —  ^ 


$^S$$|:£SSS 


2  w5SSaD 


QO»C>i2>sCl3«5t 

^S8"^S8g|'i 


M^ 


o 
CQ 


^  o  a-* 

O  «  C9   9 
—  O  3  •* 

•o  O  t,  g 

o  **  C 


U    fc.    0   «    Q 

O  si  •;  S  2 
■a  k  S  B  a 

SCSI'S 
•2-3  C.3 

SJ^  o  "  a 

rsjss 

.C  a  a-^  ij 
fl  a  ex  V 

*«  ?»  ^  ^  J 

.9  *^  g  8  ^ 
•2  a  »  o - 

S  b  ^  2  ^ 


s 


561 


<> 


■e  V 


•i;  b  e 

"is 


■CT" 
J 

h 

a 


9 
XX 


O  ^  f^  ^  c- 


^  ?0  ^  ■*  'T 
CO  — X>^  p- 


_.  f*  0<  lO  ®  f* 


3d  HF  i8 

»  •>  ■> 
f^^  ©f 


1-^ 
1.  e 


•> 

g 

o 


fr*  r»  O  »^ 


•>  ^       •       •»      •» 

l^       Of* 


S    S  S    S  S  2S 

O  »*  :0  ;p  %0  iQ  >0  tO 

S  S  3 

^  %Q  iQ 


u  •  e 
5§c. 


*^  ^^^cococvo222oooF* 


*  •SSj^S^^^^'^^^ 


w  o  59  — 


—  «» 


IT 


♦-'#32  = 


jSoSISiaSSoS  — Sso 


SS?^8^J!f5§JSSf  . 


z 


si 


SSS  Sd 


4 


582 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Popalation  of  this  country  prior  to  its  separation  from  Great  Britain  known  onlj 
by  estimates — Estimated  number  of  its  inhabitants  in  1700,  1750,  and  1775— 
Number  according  to  enumerations  made  under  the  present  constitntioo — In- 
crease of.  the  whites  and  slaves,  in  each  ten  years  since  1790 — Dtfiereoce  be- 
tween the  white  males  and  females — Increase  of  population  in  several  coimtdes 
in  Europe — Population  of  Qreat  Britain  at  various  periods. 


It  should  not  be  forgotten,  that  the  increase  of  the  wealth  and  re- 
sources of  thlQ  country  to  which  we  have  adverted  in  the  preceding 
chapters,  was  owing  in  no  smalt  degree  to  the  great  increase  of  an 
active,  enterprisng,  and  intelligent  population ;  and  to  this  subject,  in 
conclusion,  we  invite  the  reader's  attention. 

s 

The  number  of  inhabitants  in  this  country,  prior  to  its  separation 
from  Great  Britain,  rests  principally  on  conjectural  estimates.  About 
the  year  1700,  the  number  in  the  colonies  now  the  United  States,  was 
estimated  at  only  two  hundred  and  sixty  two  thousand  ;  and  in  the 
different  colonies  as  follows : — 


Massachusetts, 

70,000 

New  York,  . 

30,000 

Connecticut,    . 

30,000 

New  Jersey, 

15,000 

Rhode  Island, 

10,000 

Pennsylvania, 

^,000 

New  Hampshire,     . 

10,000 

Maryland,    . 

25,000 

Virginia, 

40,000 

120,000 

North  Carolina,    . 

5,000 

South  Carolina,   . 

7,000 

262,000* 

This  estimate  is  too  conjectural  to  be  relied  on  with  any  degree 
of  certainty — the  number  in  Virginia,  although  it  probably  includes 
the  whites  only,  is  too  low. 

Before  the  revolution,  the  Board  of  trade  occasionally  called  upon 
the  Governors  to  give  an  account  not  only  of  the  trade  and  manufac- 
tures, but  also  the  number  of  inhabitants  of  the  colonies  over  which 
they  presided.  In  some  of  the  colonies,  in  order  to  answer  these 
calls,  actual  enumerations  were  made — this  took  place  in  Connecticut 
in  1756  and  in  1774,  and  we  believe  in  Massachusetts;  while  in  oth- 


*^9d  Vol.  Holmes'  Annals,  p.  54. 


683 


«TS,  ettinates  were  made,  founded  upon  the  namber  of  tazaUe  polliy 
or  the  number  of  the  militia. 

In  1740  or  1750,  the  number  in  the  colonies  was  estimated  i^t  abovl 
one  million  of  whites,  and  the  number  in  each  colony  as  follows  :-^ 


New  Hampshire, 

90,000 

Pennsylvania, 

250,000 

Massachusetts, 

200,000 

Maryland,     . 

85,000 

Rhode  Island, 

35,000 

Virginia, 

90,000 

Connecticut,     . 

80,000 

North  Carolina,     • 

35,000 

New  York, 

90,000 

South  Carolina,    . 

30,000 

New  Jersey,     . 

50,000 

Georgia, 

6,000 

Virginia  here  again  was  placed  too  low,  as  well  as  Connecticut,  as 
the  latter  colony  in  1750,  by  actual  enumeration,  contained  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  six  thousand  nine  hundred  and  seventy  five  white 
inhabitants.  In  1775,  it  became  necessary  for  Congresa  to  ascertain, 
as  near  aa  possible,  the  actual  population  in  each  colony,  as  the  three 
millions  of  continental  money  then  issued,  was  agreed  to  be  apportion- 
ed among  the  colonies,  and  to  be  redeemed  by  each,  *'  according  to 
the  number  of  inhabitants,  including  negroes  and  mulattoes,  in  such 
colony.**  The  number  in  each,  exclusive  of  slaves  at  the  south,  as 
ascertained  and  settled  at  that  time,  was,  from  the  best  informatioii 
we  have  obtained,  as  follows  : — 


New  Ilampyhire,     . 

102,000 

Delaware,  . 

37,000 

Massachusetts, 

352,000 

Maryland, 

174,000 

Rhode  Island, 

58,000 

Virginia,     . 

300,000 

Connecticut,    . 

202,000 

North  Carolina, 

181,000 

New  York, 

238.000 

South  Carolina, 

03,000 

New  Jersey,   . 

138,000 

Georgia,     . 

27,000 

Pennsylvania, 

341,000 

'■ 

2,243,000 

The  slave  population  at  the  south,  was  then  estimated  about  five 
hundred  thousand,  which  would  make  the  whole  population  at  that 
Ume,  about  two  millions  seven  hundred  and  fifty  thousand.  We 
would  here  observe,  that  the  population  then  settled  was  that  by 
which,  during  the  war  of  the  revolution,  the  taxes  and  expenses  of 
the  war,  were  apportioned  among  the  states.  New  Hampshire  com- 
plained that  her  number  was  too  high  ;  and  in  1782,  caused  an  actual 
enumeration  to  be  be  made,  by  which  it  appeared,  that  the  number  of 
her  inhabitants,  was  only  eighty  two  thousand — Congress,  however, 
refused  to  alter  her  proportion  of  her  taxes  on  that  account 

The  enumerations  which  have  been  made  under  the  present  eensti- 
lotion,  and  which  must  uke  place  in  every  ten  yeers,  shew  the  fol- 


1 
I 


'f  584 

lowing^pulation  of  the  United  States,  from  1790  to  1830,  a  period 
of  forty  years. 

^,  1790 3,929,326 

-'  '  1800 5,300,768 

1810     ....     7,239,903 

1820 9,638,131 

•    1830  ....  12,866,020 

The  proportion  of  the  white  and  free  persons  to  the  slmTes,  and  tfat 
increase  of  each,  during  the  same  period,  was  as  follows : — 

Yean. 

1790 
1800 
1810 
1820 
1830 

The  number  of  free  white  males,  and  free  white  females,  ia  the  Uni- 
ted States,  in  each  of  the  above  years,  was,  as  follows : — 

1790.         1800.        1810.        1890.         1830. 

Males,         1,615,625    2,204,421    2,987,571    3,395,133    5,355,133 
Females,      1,556,839    2,100,068    2,874,433    3,866,804    5,171,115 


Whites,  and  free 
persona. 

Increase 
of  whites,  Ac 

Slaves. 

lacwii— ,4ta 

3,231,630 

.           • 

697,696 

•          • 

4,416,717 

1,185,087 

893,041 

196346 

6,048,539 

1,631,822 

1,191,364 

298^83 

8,100,093 

2,051,554 

1,538,038 

340.674 

10,865,977 

2,765,884 

2,000,043 

408,006 

Difference,       58,786       104,353       113,138        128,329        184,018 

As  the  whole  population  in  1800  was  ^ye  millions  three  hundred  and 
nine  thousand,  if  the  number  had  doubled,  during  the  preceding  cen- 
tury, every  twenty  five  years,  the  population  in  1700,  would  hare 
been  about  three  hundred  and  twenty  seven  thousand,  in  1725,  six 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  in  1750,  one  million  three  hundred  and 
ten  thousand,  in  1775,  two  millions  six  hundred  and  twenty  thousand; 
and  this  probably  would  not  be  far  from  the  truth,  including  the  slave 
population. 

Tables  No.  I,  II,  III,  lY  and  Y,  shew  the  population  of  each  stale 
and  territory,  according  to  the  enumeration  taken,  every  ten  yean, 
under  the  present  constitution. 

The  vast  emigration  from  the  old  states  to  the  more  fertile  lands  of 
the  west,  since  the  peace  of  1783,  has  greatly  lessened  the  increase  of 
their  population  since  that  period.  This  is  strikingly  manifest  in  the 
state  of  Connecticut — in  1756,  her  population  was  one  hundred  and 
twenty  nine  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninety  four,  and  in  1774,  was 
one  hundred  and  ninety  seven  thousand  eight  hundred  and  ^fiy  six, 
mtiking  an  increase  in  eighteen  years,  of  sixty  seven  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  sixty  two.  In  1790,  the  population  of  thu  state  was 
two  hundred  and  thirty  seven  thousand  nine  hundred  and  forty  six. 


585  f 

•Dd  in  183(1,  wii  two  hundred  and  ninety  seven  thousand  six  Ipuidred 
and  sereniy  ft^e,  an  increase  of  only  fifty  nine  thousand  sereii  hun- 
dred and  twenty  nine,  in  forty  years. 

To  enable  the  reader  to  compare  the  increase  of  the  population  §£ 
the  United  Sutes,  with  that  of  the  nations  of  Europe,  we  here  subjoin 
the  annual  increase  of  the  inhabitants,  for  erery  million  of  people,  in 
several  European  countries,  together  with  the  period  required  for 
doubling  their  number. 


Would  doable  In 

In  Prussia,  increase  for 

every 

million  is 

27,027 

26    years. 

Great  Britain     *' 

•4 

16,667 

42       *' 

The  Low  Countries, 

»< 

•  4 

12,37% 

66i     ^ 

The  two  Sicilies, 

u 

44 

11,111 

63       *• 

Russia, 

•• 

44 

10,627 

66       " 

Austria, 

CI 

44 

10,114 

60       «« 

France, 

•  4 

44 

6,636 

105  yean.* 

Since  1801,  Great  Britain  has  followed  the  example  of  the  United 
State,  and  every  ten  years  has  enumerated  her  inhabitants,  and  the 
number  of  her  people,  according  to  such  enumeration,  has  been  as 
follows : — 

1801  10,012,646  1811  12,600,814,  Inc.  of  161  pr.ct 

1821  14,391,624,  Inc.  of  14  pr.ct.     1831  1 6,647,378,  Inc.  of  16ipr.ct. 

The  whule  population  of  the  United  kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland  in  1821,  (including  the  army  and  navy)  was  twenty  one  mill- 
ions one  hundred  and  ninety  three  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety 
four,  and  in  1831,  was  twenty  four  millions  two  hundred  and  sixty  six 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  eighty  nine,  being  an  increase  of  14i  per 
cent  during  that  time. 

In  England  and  Wales  the  inerease,  from  1821  to  1831,  was  very 
different  in  different  districts — in  the  mining  districts,  according  to 
Marshall,  the  increase  was  30  per  cent,  in  the  manufacturing,  25i9 
and  in  the  metropolitan  19 ;  while  in  the  inland  towns  and  villages 
it  was  only  7}  per  cent.  The  mining  and  manufacturing  districts,  no 
doubt,  drew  many  people  from  the  inland  towns  and  villages,  during 
this  period — for  it  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  productions  of  the 
iron  mines  had  increased  nearly  three  hundred  thousand  tons,  and  thai 
the  consumption  of  cotton  had  increased  from  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  seven  millions,  to  about  two  hundred  and  sixty  millions  of 
pounds,  in  that  country,  during  this  ten  years. 

. i>  ■ 

•  Dopin's  Forces  prodnctives,  dke.  Tome  L  pp.  47,  48b 

74 


t 


CO 

SI 


Co 


^  ss 


o 
CQ 


•X3 


"^ 


IS 


•S 


I 


586 


liimiifif 


3*f^§iii'^is 


s 
s 


s 

(0 


O  CD    0)    O  QO 

^  o  e  cb 


c  c 


i^X^^id 


^? 


ssssss 


III 


1^ 


=s 


B 

hi 


I 


i^i:  55  lo  S  3  (fo  5  w  «  w  S  P  X  1^  S  § 


c 
9 


I 


a 

m 


©©•JtWCiWO^^XWiOtCXSCOO^  — 

?5xxio  — Sip»oxx--ft«?iSSf^ 


s 


ft.        • 


ri  ! 


M 


IfSimilSIBIMIIIIIMlI 
■  s  umWMifiMkA  lis 


ip|SJ|s.|a|||=2^|||^Sa2lS 


SIS 


ipiiHiiiiiiiiiiisiiiisi 


aWflslllSsSsglflllllll!! 


:|||||P|i||pp3.||||pS| 

iiiii^liiiiiiHisiiisiii?! 
|s.l|||.||||||p;ii|j||.pf| 
iillMsitiiliisfltitssfs 


,2  El- 


1    a          1  ill  1  •  II  i 

1 

i 

■ 

N- 

IIIIPI 

4 

s 
« 

- :  .  -SS||g|||.||||||  IliSS^il^ 

1 

iiii 

^P^IIpllllllP^II  ps^s^l 

i 

' 

^ 

a     - 

a   i 

■         ^-i 

^I^P                                ^ii^r^2.| 

iif 

11 

III 

ift||L;;    -■:   ^       .:,  x;:  sppssp 

mmmmm^^n 

hll 

IIIPiPliPillBiPil 

4 

^{1 

illPllliHillllillisSP^ii 

1 

11 

1 
j 

1 

J 

lllifiilii 

2                                                   ^              a 

iICpIlIirailHigiMIIIIlIilf 

^i||i2;s'-3iiipis"2rs<-'""S2a''— '"-"■ 


1 H  m.mmMmmimunu 


i|jpS^'"S3ig85''g'°'S'3'a'S;53g"'''''''-"   - 


,  iNirniEipsiiiiiiiiissiiiiif 


£S2S-2-SR2:SS32" 


^ 


nisimiiiiiipiiiMipisi 

SSS2Sa2gS"S"SSS!SI:8SS'-*=";f-'-' 


'^'5i|=ISSS||s|32|S||f|5||i|| 

52S2S"2"-«aSS»2S'-'°"'-''- 

3  iUimilSIIJIIIMS  s  5  3 1? 

s'.  c  ,  T.  7'n  ^  'r'  n '-"--.'"'-  "J "'  !:  ^ T  "r *  ■"  =s c- 4  "s  -; 81 "  i-n 


'■;"g,':s;33E=a»2=2E-  '  ' 


^i5M[^ola5.3a<aj 


g  ■  -ass    sja  sslg 
NTSIMSfllFSIIIsSlBpsaf sws*]g 

6|   5||^|SIJ||SS|^|jf|J|»Jjj!aj3!:j!S5-S 


IIBSSSSSBSsgsss- 


sit  I 


iSS^ggSg! 


gj"*ls8*i 


111-     I       ^-,_-    LiBf"*tJ«.-    irfrf-  -■  ef  i^ 


'=~lp55SI5HsITPIiF^ 


sill 


sM» 


5r5!ISSiSs3 


sissysgigsi 


.»l=SiE 


IFlpljflU 


ill 


»isssi: 


ilS 


a  IS 


In. 


is 

I!  ;si 


*  * 


« 


691       f 


,     .    ►*   • 


M 
P 


6 


• 
• 


i 

I 
1 


I 


t 


I 

I 


1.8  SPS 


(O 


flb  *^     *^     ^     ^B 

S9933 

POOOO 


-a 
a 


s 

h 


IpP. 


fc.  fc.  ••  3 

-  t;  t»  tj  P 

8  s  S  S  fi^ 
9  0  B  0 

SSSS9 

|S!S89 

poooo 


1 

1 


» 

i 


C'O'0  • 

*  '  0  3 

rsas 

=S5S 

hm 

o 

8 

I 


aa:: 


3 


12  a  s  B  A. 
^  B  0  o  o 

$■^393 

M 

**  ••  ■'»•  ^a  '^* 


i 


I 

I, 


I 


•      •    • 


•    •    •    • 


ta  *•  3 

33- 
2999 

fooo 


i 


=  939 

POOO 

i 


i 


r  • 


•  • 


•      • 


•   f 


"8 


Il 

.    .-    .    .    .--,,«g522B»-g5g    .    .«•                 Mje 

i^ 

-■■""■"i'»|||||P|||-=sSE=| 

s 

1 

■-■-^■-i-^llipillll'sr^iSil 

"";"::"'^il!IIPirT^p| 

,;:::"  :^"^^illiliil;:^r^p|| 

t 

h 

i 

-"-• 'Sggssiasiss:  •  .-j  ■  .  .~js 

;;;-';;i"l|ijlpi.||.;;"i"s=i 

•■■■-■-i=!i|p.i|lll|i--»rgis|| 

snmm.mA-n^^nsi 

»5Sa  =  =  "  =  =  2  .  .    ~       -     s 

■  ■  ■-'  ••ssisiiij.ij.iir  -srisiii 

i 

j 
1 

1 

,-  ■  , f 

B  3  rf_-e(_V-n-  --  _- 


3  »SS58?SS9SISSSSS5JIS8»!SiS8sli      sS 


||«I8SS=JSIJJBISS=«SJSS8S"S5!8  Si 


;"a'»s:£ESR*«''  -a" 


!?ii 


— • 1 1 


|jia=3=sjg3|j;jljj5ssjjS5j,,.—,jlj 


r 


;=55£=|l.||l||3iilsSi55SS""ik 


5=SsS=|;|||||SS|»pil5ss!t:|j| 


Seigisi 


illllllpS=pJiS6==«5!b 


«#:"■ 


S96 


0 

H 


O 


•  ^  ^  2S  9  9L 

.W  "      «■     w      w 


00  a 

•^  ^  V      w       w      «« 

V 

a 

fa 


s 

^ 

«o 

s' 

c% 

•* 

n 

8 


■9 

a 


> 


•*  C3"55 


gCT3tJ 


coo  ^H  ^H 

.S8'!8"8'l 

^      M  ~  s  s  s 

flw  -* 

9  O 


i 


M        ■«        «k        *•        **       ate 

C>.CQeo^H  ^H 

O  -    ••    -     Q« 
•  O  9 

S  JJ-    •    -    - 
•i*  «o  ••    -    -    •• 

i 

a 


CO 

s. 


I 


2 

a 

a 

o 
H 


»N  ^^  *N  WiM  CO 


g?i 


S2: 


^         ^         *«         ak         •% 


lA 


tODO 

Pk  M  •% 

i^CO 


S£SS9SSi£SS8| 


-    3 


lA  S 


,, ^ 

9 


ssgg^ss^sss 


o 


81 


<M     •a  > 
rt    *  a  o. 
Ji    -s'  9 

c  o 


SSS.S 


9 
•9 


•9 
C 


O 

c 

I" 

a  « 


n^ 


■  •»  ^  •«  M  ^ 

2"S8'*85SfSgS*88i 


8 


0  g 


9. 
P 


l£SSSg9SS^9S8 

9T?  ^H 


♦::■ 


%.  *  .^ 


I  • 


INDEX. 


Agricaltare,  prodacts  of,  classified,  95. 
Animals,  produce  of,  exported  from  1803 

to  1A38.  106. 
AreeDtine  Republic,  commerce  of  the 

UDited  States  with,  236. 


B. 


Balance  of  trade,  166. 
Banks  of  the  United  States,  history  of, 
413;  first  National  Bank  established 
in  1781,  415;  Bank  of  the  U.  Slates 
created  in  1791,  416;  expires  in  1811, 
421;  embarnused  state  of  the  finances 
of  the  government,  consequent  there- 
on, 432;  plans  for  a  new  bank,  422; 
one  established  in  1816,  428;  its  great 
utility,  439;  its  constitutionality,  440; 
state  of  in  1833,  445;  removal  of  the 
public  money  from  in  1833,  446;  Stale 
Banks,  number  of  in  1811,  430;  de- 
preciation of  their  notes  in  1814,  431 ; 
number  of  at  various  times,  449;  and 
'     table  of,  460;  safely  fund  system  ofl 
New  York,  435;  banking  system  of 
Scotland,    profitable    and    safe,  437  ;i 
banking  system  of  England,  454.         [ 

Beef  and  pork  exported  from  1791  to 
1833,  106;  see  Tables  No.  V,  VI,  VII 
and  VIII,  p.  12^-130. 

Belgium,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with  in  1833,  239. 

Bills  of  credit  first  issued  by  Mass.,  414; 
large  amount  issued  by  (Jongress  from 
1775  to  1780;  depreciation  of  the  same, 
415. 

Bonaparte's  Berlin  decree,  376;  his  con- 
tinental s}'stem,  377;  Milan  decree, 
381;  Rambouillet  decree,  389;  Mr. 
Jefferson's  estimate  of  his  character, 
406. 

Bremen,  HambanEr,  &c.,  commerce  of 
the  United  States  with,  236. 

British  East  Indies,  commerce  of  the 
United  States  with,  186. 

British  West  Indies  and  North  Ameri- 
can   Colonies,  189;   uniform   policy 

-  pursued  by  the  British  govennotatj 
concerning  this  commerce,  190;  herj 
reasons,  190;  history  of  the  state  of 
this  commerce  at  rarioos  periods,  190 
— ^811;  disadvantageous  situation  of 


American  Merchants  in  respect  to  it, 

205. 
British  produce  and  manufactures,  ex* 

ports  of.  Table  No.  I,  256. 
Buenoa  Ay  res,  commerce  of  the  United 

Stafb  with,  226. 
Bullion,  imports  and  exports  of,  from 

1821  to  1833,  148. 
Butter  and  cheese  exported  from  1803  to 

1833,  106. 
Buttons,  manufacture  of  in  the  United 

States,  506. 


C. 


Cabinet  Ware,  manufacture  of  in  the 
United  States,  498- 

Cables  and  cordage,  manufactures  of  in 
the  United  Sutes,  507. 

Canals,  their  early  history,  531 ;  intro- 
duction of  into  the  United  States,  533; 
account  of,  542 — 564. 

Candles,  manufacture  of  in  the  United 
States,  506. 

Carpets,  manufacture  of  in  the  United 
States,  41». 

Carrying  trade  of  the  United  States,  145 
—151. 

Census  of  the  United  States  at  yarioos 
periods,  582. 

Central  llepublic  of  America,  commerce 
of  the  United  States  with,  226. 

Chemicals,  manufacture  of  in  the  United 
States,  504. 

Chili,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  226. 

China,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  245;  see  Tables  No.  XIII,  XIV, 
XV,  XVI,  XVII,  XVIII,  XIX,  XX 
and  XXI,  299—306. 

Cleveland,  Ohio,  commerce  of.  Table 
I,  576. 

Coal  trade  of  Penn.,  553 ;  and  Tables  No. 
IV  and  V,  560, 581. 

Cocoa,  exports  of  from  1791  to  1616, 
146;  exports  of  from  1821  to  1833, 
147. 

Cod  fishery,  state  of  previous  to  the  reyo- 
lution,  37;  difficulties  concerning  it, 
withGreat  Britain,  37, 38;  agreement 
respecting  between  Great  Britain  and 
the  United  States,  38;  Quantity  of  ffth 
exported  from  1791  to  1833,  i9;  val- 
ue of  fish  exported  from  1802  to  1833, 


* 


i 


508 


INDEX. 


40 ;  see  Tables,  No.  VI,  VII,  VIII  and 
IX,  p.  84—88. 

Coffee,  exports  of  from  1791  to  1816, 
146:  exports  from  1821  to  1833,  147; 
see  Tables,  No.  VII  and  VlII,  p.  ICl, 
162. 

Colonial  Policy  of  Great  Britain,  26. 

Columbia,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  226. 

Combs  and  buttons,  manufacture  of  in 
the  United  States,  508. 

Commerce  of  the  United  States  with  the 
various  parts  of  the  world,  in  1802, 
1803  ana  1804,  170;  depredations  on 
by  France  and  Great  Britain,  373;  see 
Table  No.  V,  p.  58—83. 

Constititation,  new,  went  into  opiTation 
March,  1789,  32. 

Consamption,  average  annual,  of  foreign 
articles  in  the  United  States,  480. 

Conventions,  tariff  and  anti-tariff,  of 
1831,  476. 

Copper,  amount  coined  in  the  U.  States 
in  1834,  459. 

Cotton,  two  sorts  of  cultivated  in  the 
United  States,  109;  Whitney's  ma- 
phine  for  cleaning,  109;  amount  ex- 
ported from  1791  to  1804,  HI;  amount 
exported  from  1805  to  1833,  with  the 
value  of  the  same,  111 ;  exports  of  to 
Great  Britain,  112;  to  France,  114: 
see  Tables,  No.  XI,  XII,  XIII,  and 
XIV,  p.  134—137,  ^o  Tables,  No.  II 
and  III,  527, 528. 

Cotton  manufactures  of  the  U.  States, 
468;  of  Great  Britain,  annual  value 
of,  486;  see  Table  No.  I,  p.  526. 

Cotton  gin  invented  by  Mr.  Whitney, 
109. 

Cuba,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  222. 

Currency,  see  Banks. 

Customs,  receipts  from,  from  1791  to 
1833,  306 ;  see  Tables  No.  I  and  II,  p. 


D. 


Danish  West  Indies,  commerce  of  the 
United  States  with,  235. 

Debt  of  the  United  States  in  1763,  27; 
duties  on  imports  proposed  by  the  Con- 
gress in  1783  for  the  payment  of  it,  29; 
extinguished,  574. 

Denmark,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  234. 

Distilleries  in  Pennsylvania  in  1810, 
103. 

Dutch  East  Indies,  commerce  of  the  U. 
States  with,  242. 

Dutch  West  indies,  and  American  Col- 
onies, commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  341. 


E. 


Embargo  act  of  Dec,  1807,  383. 

Expenditures  and  Receipts  of  the  Uni- 
ted Slates,  329;  see  Table  No.  VI,  p. 
340—343. 

Exports  of  the  United  States  from  1790 
to  1833,  35 ;  those  of  domestic  ongia 
classified,  36;  exports  for  1792,  167: 
to  all  parts  of  the  world,  value  of  in 
1802,  1803  and  1804,  173 ;  see  Tables 
No.  I,  II,  lU  and  IV,  p.  50—57. 

F. 

Fisheries,  see  Codfishery  and  Whale- 
fishery. 

Flax  and  hemp,  manufactures  of  in  the 
United  Slates,  509. 

Flaxseed,  exports  of,  115. 

Ploridas,  negotiations  coDcemiog  the 
purchase  or;  16;  purchased  in  1819,  dl. 

Flour,  exports  of,  see  Tables  Nos.  I  and 
II,  p.  119—121. 

Forest,  productions  of,  47. 

France,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  213. 

French  W.  India  Islands,  do.  do.  S16. 

Furs,  exports  of,  48;  trade  of  the  United 
States  in,  250. 

O. 

Ginseng,  exports  of,  48. 

Glass,  manufactures  of  in  the  United 
States,  500. 

Grold,  amount  coined  in  the  Uoited  States 
in  1834,  459. 

Grold  and  silver  coin,  imports  and  ex- 
ports of,  from  1821  to  1833,  148 :  see 
Tables  Nos.  I  to  IV,  153—156. 

Grain,  distillation  of  in  the  U.  S.,  108. 

Great  Britain  end  Ireland,  commerce  of 
the  United  States  with,  177;  see  Ta- 
bles Nos.  VII,  VIII,  IX,  X,  293—296; 
exports  from,  see  Tables  Nos.  XI  and 
XII,  p.  297  and  296. 


Hamburg,   Bremen,  &c.  commeroe  of 

the  United  States  with,  236. 
Hats,   manufacture   of  in  the  United 

States,  497. 
Havanna,  number  of  vessels  entered  and 

cleared  from,  in  1827,  224. 
Hayti,  commerce  of  the  United  Slates 

with,  219. 
Hemp  and  flax,  manufactures  of  in  the 

United  States,  509. 
Holland  and  dependencies,  commerced 

the  United  States  with,  238. 
Horses  and  mules  exported  from  1803  to 

1833»  106. 


I. 

Imporls  inlo  United  Siatei  ni  JiiTereol 
ptiiodi,  llhi,  mude  uf  viiluiii^-,  IM, 
from  nil  pnrts  i>l  llie  world,  Viiiui;  ol 
in  MH,  IsUG  and  IH04,  171 ;  .we  Tn- 
ble  .\u.  V,  p.5«— «3;  Tables  11,111. 
IV,  V,  VI,  p.  a57-3M. 

]n.|.  and  exports  or  Great   Bi 


.rdeclsr- 


,  Itil. 


e  of  the  Uniled  Stales 


Landi,  public,  saksof.  314;  i 
lioa  uf  ihe  ((Ufstiun  of  l>ie  tight  ofl 
Cunci^^,  u,  -ell,  314;  price  of  Ihc 
lam'  ,   .      ■:.]'-•.  iinonni  jeeeii-ed 

fruL  'I'.-'iion  of  ceding 

ill-  •  -lolesiti  winch 

they  lie,   cnn^dersd,  Sdii;    Kt  Table 


II,  H;  iraniifrrred 
tiiirchanedbv  Ibe 


Li.ii..ij  Mwir^vJ  ...  I'lesidcni  Ji'iTeriuij. 
91. 
Lowell,  cattan mill) of,  Table  Vl,p.  Sd9 


Msiii'irs,  '-oiiimeree of  ibe Uciietl  Swie^ 

Mjinn.i"iJt.  ■.inihe  Uniled  Slale^  hi 
lory  of,  Itil  ;  ralue  of  in  1910,  47 
eiporu  of,  Mc  Table  No.  XV.  p.  13H— 


Oik  bark  and  other  df  et,  eipona  of,  49. 


nanufaclure  of  in  ibe  Uuiled 


iheOnilcd^l:! 
Political  condi^i. 


414. 

Mexico,  cnminerce  of  the  United  Stales 

with,  ;&i5. 
Mini  of  the  United  Statn.  A'.. 
Mules  and  honra  exiwrted  fruia  18IKI  to 

IH33,  Mi. 

N. 

Kavy  of  the  United  St.-iies,  VjO. 
Won  inlercDurM!  with  France  ntxl  Oreai 
BritaiD,  sulatitiited  fur  thv  einhnik'n. 

North  Eaatcro  boundarr  of  ihe  Uoittd 


600 

3;  arbilralion  of  the  King  of 

:)icrlanrt«  coDceming,  S;  this 
I  nul  confirmed  by  tEe  Secate 
'tilled  Slateii,  b. 
int  Cuaat  uf  America,  com- 
if  the  United  State*  wnb,  SSO. 


eU.H.  with,  2B7. 


ri,  manufacture  of  ID  Ihe  United 
.  'Mi. 

Pork,  baci'D.laril  and  lire  hon  ezporleit 
•        "USti>lB33,  ir-    —     

Tables  No*. 

m— iM. 

Pork  and  beef  eiporled  from  1791  to 

1S33.  105. 
PuniiKtl   and  drjio: 

of  itie  Cnilcd  hl^ii^.a  \riin,  vsi. 
Po»lngc,  receimslui  i.i  1832,  3!B. 
Poil  office  and  p..-i  lu.-nl.  in  ihe  United 

Slates,  3-J8 ;  lee  Table  No.  V,  p.  33S~- 

3:19. 
Pol  and  pearl  aahes,  exports  of,  47. 


Rail  Road*.  1b  Europe,  5G5 ;  the  United 

Slates,  56&-A74. 
kccfipU  and  eipendilUTCH  of  the  United 

Slaie9i,3S    >«e  Table  No.  VI,  p.  340 

—3(3, 

ijf  the  United  Statei,  whence 


.1  307. 


Lu»ia.  comtaefce  <if  the  United  Statea, 

*Hh,230. 
liii»i«u  le^riloriri.  in  North  America, 

butin.laiy  brlwi-ii    and    the    United 

Slates,  Milled  miau,  6. 


eoo 


INDKX. 


s. 


Salt,  manufacture  of  in  the  U.  States,  498. 

Sea,  product:^  of  36. 

Sheep,  exported,  from  1803  to  1833, 106 ; 
number  of  in  Great  Britain,  488 ;  in 
France,  489 ;  in  the  United  States,  489. 

Silk,  manufacture  of  in  the  United  States, 
502;  foreign,  consumption  of,  502. 

Silver,  amount  coined  in  the  United 
States,  in  1834, 459. 

Silver  and  gold  coin,  imports  and  exports 
of,  from  1821  to  1833, 148. 

Soap  and  candles,  production  of  in  the 
United  States,  505. 

SpaiUj  difficulties  with  concerning  boun- 
daries, 1 ;  commerce  of  the  U.  States, 
with,  219 ;  do.  with  Spanish  West  In- 
dies and  American  Colonies,  221. 

Spanish  possessions  in  North  America, 
boundary  between  and  the  United 
States,  7. 

Spermaceti  candles,  production  of  in  the 
United  States,  506. 

Spirits,  amount  distilled  and  consumed 
in  the  United  States,  103,501  ]  dimin- 
ished of  late,  104. 

Steamboats,  number  of  on  the  western 
rivers,  Jan.  1834,  536. 

Sugar  exporu  of  from  1791  to  1816,  146; 
do.  from  1821  to  1833. 147  ;  destina- 
tion of  in  1807 and  1825,  149;  manu- 
facture of  in  the  United  States,  498 ; 
refineries  for,  499 ;  see  Tables  No.  Ill, 
IV.  V,  and  VI,  p.  157—160. 

Sweden,  commerce  of  the  United  States 
with,  232. 

Swedish  West  Indies,  do.         do.     233. 


T. 


Tariff  of  the  United  States  on  woollens 
and  cottons,  474;  that  of  1789,  511 
intention  of  its  framers,  511;  that  of 
1816,  514 ;  constitutionality  of,  514 
that  of  1824,  522. 

Taxes,  direct,  in  the  United  States,  309 
see  Table  No.  Ill, p.  335,336. 

Territories  of  the  United  States,  mode 
in  which  they  have  been  acquired,  1. 


Tobacco,  107;  amount  exported  from 
1791  to  1833, 108^roductioD  of  iathe 
United  States,  507;  see  Tables  Mo. 
IX  and  X,  p.  131—133. 

Tonnage  of  the  United  States,  314; 
amount  registered, 'enrolled  and  licen- 
sed, from  1789  to  183S,  319 ;  compari- 
son of  with  that  of  Great  Britain,  354; 
see  Table  No.  VI,  p.  966—892,  and  No. 
I,  361 ;  foreign  tonnage  entering  the 
ports  of  the  United  States,  Table  No. 
IV,  364;  tonnage  of  Great  Britain, 
Table  No.  V,  3&. 


V. 


Vegetable  food  exported  from  the  United 
States,  from  1802  to  1833,  104. 

Vessels,  number  belonging  to  the  United 
States  in  1830,  350;  see  Table  No.  11, 
362. 

W. 

>  '  ■     ■■■ 

War  of  1813  against  Great  Britain,  403. 

Western  coaninr  of  the  United  States, 
resources  of^  533. 

Whale  fishery,  commenced  at  Nantuck- 
et, 41 ;  destroyed  during  the  war  of  the 
revolution,  41 ;  number  of  vessels  en- 
gaged in  it  during  the  winter  of  1831 
— 5,  42 ;  number  engaged  in  the  sperm 
fisher)'--quantity  of  spermaceti  oil 
brought  home  from  1815  to  1830.  44 — 
slate  of  this  fishery  in  Great  Britain, 
45;  value  of  common  vhale  oil  and 
bone,  and  of  spermaceti  oil  and  can- 
dles, exported  from  1803  to  1833,  46: 
see  Tables  Nos    X,  XI,  XII.  XIU, 

,    XIV  and  XV,  p.  89—94. 

'Wheat,  cultivation  of,  95;  vheat  and 
wheat  fion^  amount  exported  from 
1791  to  1833,  96;  value  of  do.  since 
1803,  96;  principal  foreign  markets 
for  do.  98. 

Whitney's  cotton  ^in,  109;  its  immense 
value  to  the  United  Slates,  110. 

Woollen  manufactures  in  the  United 
States,  468,488;  encouraged  by  the 
tariflf,  474. 


^' 


1 

—  "SJ33SS33;S  ■  ■"-• -[b 

s 

'^''IllilPIII'"-"--! 

!*■"■"' 

"5«a|J||||||||-srsii|| 

\f'  '■ 

=s~i|||||||||r -rs|i|| 

'i  ■  ■  ■'" 
s   .  .  . 

SSSSS2S2HS          '        ~-|| 

^   .  .  .  .- 

i.... 

KS5SS325SS .'        "     g 

i 

s 

1 

g  ■  ■  ■■"' 

s   -  .  . 

■s=-|||5.|p||r'*i-'a=| 

ii  ■  ■ ■  ' 
3a   .... 

-|=s||J.|||||||--'S"SS£| 

a 

2     .    .    . 

--||jl|l||||--=ri|l|| 

i     .   .    .    ." 

1.... 

"■■«i||.|l||l|||  ■^fipjl 

* 

!!llliliitif!.f-i|JtJ 

2      ■d.g«0«je3;2gj;J.«B    .g..„«„    . 


!9l: 


3=l!==yp||8S5»=8Sl5lss"53  ^ 


"»«IS=||a|a|S.8»isp!iSsa=-s5 


:ii3|S|S|S||iSg5sSS5IS8ss2Eg 


J  Ssssg5|||s=j!y5sg3|i55s«=!!i 


a«;il35S|?35pSjs=ieeSJ|i=a=58 


"!S»S»S5!SS6l85sas5|8S»="»8 


|s  S'SSS8J|8l|EI5!iSis|||=ss=s5 


;|s=SigslS85!S||gas8Si|i5e3t!S 


^'«6|=lllllll3«B=|iS5iB==»58 


If 

3  ^ 


^i; 


