PROLOGUE TO WAR 

ENGLAND AND 
THE UNITED STATES 

1805-1812 

by BRADFORD PERKINS 

This book is the first full-scale study 
of the coming of the War of 1812 since 
the work of Henry Adams. Using ma- 
terials either overlook^' 1 _ 3red by 
other scholars. Mr. Perkins reexamines 
pre lous interpretations of the coming 
of the war. He contends that diplo- 
matic disasters cannot always be ex- 
plained in rational terms and that 
emotional factors more often than not 
dictate the course of history. He shows 
how the hotheads of the two countries 
made folly beget folly, until a war that 
neither side wanted became a reality. 

Prologue to War begins in 1805, 
when the Essex case ended a lengthy 
period in which Britain, even though 
she was fighting for her life against 
Napoleon, treated American neutral 
commerce with relative leniency. Brit- 
ain increased the impressment of 
seamen from American ships in order 
to build up her navy, and instituted a 
heavy blockade of Europe to deprive 
Napoleon of essential goods and to 
preserve British dominance of the 
Continental market. 

Mr. Perkins traces the effort to settle 
Anglo-American difficulties through 
the Monroe-Pinckney treaty of 1806, 
the Erskine agreement and the Order 
in Council of 1809, and the repeal (too 
late to prevent the American declara- 
tion of war ) of the Orders in Council 



Perkins 
Prologue "to war 



^ 



f| 

i^ 

|||l:|^l 
S-SJfjiif^oo 
;S:r'; : vili& 
e ; c^|;B . /- : ^ : ^- : : " f 



DA 




v wmtr'irC'* 



PROLOGUE TO WAR 



PROLOGUE 

TO 




ENGLAND 
AND THE UNITED STATES 

%^/ 

BY BRADFORD PERKINS 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
BERKELEY AND LOS ANGELES 1961 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 

BERKELEY AND LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON, ENGLAND 
1961 BY THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 6l~I4Ol8 

DESIGNED BY WARD RITCHIE 



FOR NANCY 



PREFACE 

Relations with England dominated American diplomacy until 
1914, if not indeed until 1945. Although unexplored areas in this 
vast panorama still exist, this book examines a relatively familiar 
one, the quarrel preceding the second and last war between Great 
Britain and the United States. In 1941, after examining all avail- 
able studies of the coming of the War of 1 812, Warren H. Good- 
man observed "the need for a comprehensive work on the subject. 
... In this century, only monographs on restricted phases of the 
topic have appeared j no recent writer has attempted to correlate 
and synthesize the various sets of causes." l Since that time only 
A. L. Burt's relatively short analysis and H. C. Allen's even more 
restricted survey have appeared. 

I owe much to the various scholars cited in the footnotes and 
mentioned in the Note on the Sources. For the most part, however, 
this study rests upon an examination of manuscript materials, in- 
cluding many not previously used, and upon contemporary news- 
papers and pamphlets. Most notably, no scholar since Henry 
Adams has examined more than the most obvious English mate- 
rials. I have therefore devoted much of my attention to the devel- 
opment of British policy, virtually caricatured by too many Ameri- 
can historians. 

Previous interpretations and old emphases seem to me inade- 
quate. I believe scholars have overemphasized the tangible, rational 
reasons for action and, while not ignoring, have given too little 
heed to such things as national pride, sensitivity, and frustration, 
although the evidence for this sort of thing leaps to the eye. Emo- 
tion, chance, and half choices often mold the relations between 
states as much as or more than cool reason. Such clearly was true 
in the years between 1805 and 1812. 

In this and a succeeding volume I hope to treat the period from 
1805 to 1825 as a whole, organizing my study around a central 

1<( The Origins of the War of 1812: a Survey of Chang-ing Interpretations," 
Mississippi Valley Historical Review, XXVIII (194.1-194.2), 185. 

vii 



I also owe thanks to the Public Record Office and the British 
Museum, where I spent most of a profitable year 5 to Widener 
Library, Harvard University, which, with its adjunct the Hough- 
ton Library , is an almost perfect working library j to the Manu- 
scripts Division of the Library of Congress, to the American 
Antiquarian Society, with its unparalleled newspaper and pam- 
phlet collections, only superficially tapped in two summers j and 
to the always helpful, growing library of my home base, the 
University of California, Los Angeles. Other libraries, from the 
shadow of Durham Cathedral to the palatial estate of Henry 
Huntington, have been equally kind to me, but my major effort 
has been concentrated in the repositories mentioned above. 

For the portraits which grace this volume I am indebted to many 
persons. Representations of Thomas Jefferson by Rembrandt Peale 
and of John Randolph by John W. Jarvis appear through the 
courtesy of the New- York Historical Society. The Pennsylvania 
Academy of the Fine Arts furnished me with a reproduction of 
Gilbert Stuart's James Monroe. The portrait of William Pinkney 
by Charles B. King appears through the kindness of the Maryland 
Historical Society and the Frick Art Reference Library. The Na- 
tional Portrait Gallery, London, furnished me with photographs 
of four portraits: Charles James Fox by Karl A. Hickel, Spencer 
Perceval by George F. Joseph (from a death mask by Nollekens), 
James Stephen by John Linnell, and Henry Brougham by James 
Lonsdale. Lord Ashburton and Major Simon Whitbread, re- 
spectively, sent me photographs of the portraits of Alexander Bar- 
ing by Thomas Lawrence and Samuel Whitbread by John Hopp- 
ner. The cooperation of Lawrence Gouverneur Hoes and the Frick 
Art Reference Library made possible the inclusion of John Vander- 
lyn's portrait of James Madison. Charles B. King's John C. Cal- 
houn appears through the courtesy of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, 
and the Long Island Historical Society furnished a photograph 
of the portrait of Henry Clay by an unknown artist. The Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts supplied a photograph of Gilbert Stuart's 
portrait of Josiah Quincy. Most of the portraits were selected 
because they show their subjects in the period covered by this book. 



IX 



PREFACE 

None of the research work on this volume could have been done 
without the cordial assistance of the University of California and 
particularly the Social Science Research Council. As a Faculty 
Research Fellow of the Council from 1957 to 1960, I have en- 
joyed opportunities for research not often available to a young 
scholar. I am extremely grateful to Elbridge Sibley and to the 
Committee on Faculty Research Fellowships for granting to me an 
opportunity which I hope will be considered well used. 

I have also benefited greatly from the assistance of my research 
assistant. Dr. Elmo Richardson, who has rescued me from numer- 
ous errors of fact, and of Mrs. Grace H. Stimson, of the University 
of California Press, whose patient editorial work resulted in many 
improvements of the manuscript. 

Two eminent diplomatic historians have helped to give this 
volume any merit that it may have. Samuel Flagg Bemis of Yale 
University read the entire manuscript, gave me the benefit of his 
wide learning, and suggested many helpful changes. My father, 
Dexter Perkins, has frequently rescued me from confusion and 
despond. His scholarly example remains for me a model, if an 
unattainable one. 

My chief debt is to a patient wife who has shared the burdens 
and joys of travel and the even more equivocal tasks of organiza- 
tion, composition, and supervision of publication. Neither my 
severest nor my most charitable critic, she has nevertheless been 
my most helpful one. To her I dedicate this volume. 

BRADFORD PERKINS 
September, 1960 
Los Angeles, California 
Harvard, Massachusetts 



CONTENTS 

I. BELEAGUERED BRITAIN I 

II, REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 32 

III. "IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?" 6j 

IV. THE TREATY OF 1 806 IOI 

V. EMBARGO: ALTERNATIVE TO WAR 140 

VI. CANNING AND PERCEVAL 184 

VII. AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 223 

VIII. WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 26 1 

IX. REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 3OO 

X. "THE ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY" 342 

XI. WAR AT LAST 377 

XII. "THIS UNNATURAL WAR" 41 8 

NOTE ON THE SOURCES 439 

INDEX 447 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Thomas Jefferson facing <page 176 

James Monroe 176 

Willta-m Pinkney 176 

James Stephen 176 

Spencer Perceval 176 

Charles James Fox facing $ a g& 3^8 

Alexander Baring 3 68 

Samuel Whltbread 368 

Henry Brougham 3^8 

James Madison 368 

John G. Calhoun 368 

Henry Clay 368 
John Randolph 
Josiah Quincy 



Is the Patriotism of 1776 no more? Is it all converted, into 
Fish, "Wheat, Flour, Rice or Cotton, or into the love of 
profit and of gold? The nation is surely paralized by these 
sordid motives, or they would speak a language That would 
operate like thunder and Lightning over the Land and Sea. 
Britain is our inviterate adversary France is not so, but 
pursues her own interest and ambition. Let us dread neither 
of them, for notwithstanding Their present appearances of 
power, They are both vitally sink^. While we are Vitally 
rising in the world. 

THOMAS RODNEY, l8o8 



Mr. Speaker, I would solemnly demand, what is this na- 
tional honor, this object of ministerial idolatry? Is she one 
of those infernal deities which can feed on nothing but com- 
mercial havoc and national ruin? Does she, like the demons 
of a Merina's temple, sit abstracted and ferocious, never 
smiling but on national distress, never propitiated but by 
human sacrifice? Then she is the last deity that a virtuous 
and republican people should worship. But this is not her 
character; she is a beneficent, healing, and curing goddess, 
allied inseparably to public virtue, prosperity, and happiness. 
. . . And such, notwithstanding the misdeeds that have 
been perpetrated in her name, she continues to this day. 

THOMAS GROSVENOR, 1 813 



CHAPTER 



I 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 



"Britain and the United States are destined to become . . . the 
predominating nations o Christendom. . . . Each an incum- 
brance to the other; when together, their severance seems to have 
been the signal for unequalled progress, and boundless prospects to 
each j not more in material dominion than in the solid and durable 
glory of widening the empire of rational thought throughout the 
world." 1 So wrote Richard Rush, the American minister at the 
Court of St. James, as he ruminated on the death of George III, 
long the very symbol of Anglo-American discord. During the 
1790*8 a rapprochement had been built upon a recognition of 
mutual interests, and when George III died in 1820 the Earl of 
Liverpool and Viscount Castlereagh were laboring to construct a 
new rapprochement. Unfortunately, in the intervening years the 
"rational thought" in which Rush took pride had too often been 
thrust aside by emotion and prejudice. A long, serious quarrel took 

1 Richard Rush, A Residence at the Court of London, Second Series (a vols.j Lon- 
don, 1845)) I> 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

place, a quarrel climaxed by the American declaration of war upon 
Great Britain in June, 1812. 

This friction really sprang from one simple fact: America chose 
to be neutral while Britain struggled for her life against Napoleon. 
To keep the Royal Navy manned for the contest, England forcibly 
enlisted seamen from American merchant ships. To deprive Napo- 
leon of essential goods, but particularly to preserve or reopen 
trade with the Continent upon which British prosperity presumably 
rested, England instituted unprecedented systems of blockade 
which she called executive Orders in Council. Thus the American 
seaman lost his liberty, the merchant his ships, and the farmer 
and plantation owner a market for his grain and cotton and tobacco. 
On the other hand, England objected that Americans covered 
French property with their flag or greedily sought to replace 
Britain in European markets, vitiating the effectiveness of English 
commercial warfare. The American merchant marine seduced mar- 
iners from their duty to the King. Not one of these grievances 
was new. All existed during the first rapprochement, when Feder- 
alist sympathy for Britain, the wisdom of William Pitt and his 
foreign secretary, and the valuing of compromise over confronta- 
tion prevented a clash that might as easily have come then as a 
decade later. 

As time passed, the ardors of war and the tribulations of neutral- 
ity, wore patience thin. The issues became aij-argument and then 
a war, for irrational and emotional reasons. 1 Too many English- 
men looked upon the Americans with contempt, insisting that the 
British government treat these bastard Englishmen as upstart com- 
mercial rivals and political incompetents. Too many Americans 
clung to the Anglophobia of Revolutionary days and desired to 
underscore the chastisement then inflicted upon England. They 
were touchily conscious that Britain, like other European powers, 
regarded America as an unimportant factor in world politics. "Brit- 
ain never has treated the Americans as an independent nation, and 
has only acknowledged it in words," the West's premier newspaper 
declared. The new Republican mood insisted upon the fullness of 
American rights. When the inadequate weapons of Jefferson and 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

Madison failed to secure these rights from England, war seemed 
the only alternative to national humiliation. Realistically, there 
was less cause^for war in 1812 than at other times. However, as 
Samuel Taylor Coleridge observed (perhaps repenting his earlier 
writings for Britain's most stridently anti- American paper), "The 
malignant witchcraft of evil passions reads good men's prayers 
backward, and . . . the hot heads in both countries . . . make 
folly beget folly, both the more wrong in proportion as each is 
right." 2 

From the Jay treaty until 1 805, hotheads were kept under fairly 
successful control. When, dressed all in somber black but intent 
upon Republican hosannas rather than an obituary or a lament, 
Jefferson delivered his second inaugural address in March, 1805, 
he found it possible to pass over foreign affairs with bland, naive 
generalities. "With nations as with individuals," the President 
declared, "our interests soundly calculated will ever be found in- 
separable from our moral duties, and history bears witness to the 
fact that a just nation is trusted on its word." 3 Jefferson's view 
of the moral imperatives and Britain's attack upon American in- 
terests soon led to a sharp clash. The happy and prosperous years 
ended shortly after the beginning of Thomas Jefferson's second 
term. 

For this the polarization of European power was chiefly re- 
sponsible. Horatio Nelson's guns reaffirmed British supremacy on 
the sea in October, 1805. For many years thereafter the Royal 
Navy was almost the only effective instrument in the contest 
against Napoleon. The black-hulled ships broke up France's over- 
seas trade and were used to foster what commerce Britain could 
find. That neutrals might suffer in this process troubled English- 
men but little, for, as one pamphleteer put it, "God and nature 
having put the power of the ocean . . . into our hands, we are 
fully entitled to exercise that power for our complete security, 

2 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.) June 21, 18095 Coleridge to Allston, Oct. 25, 1815, 
Jared B. Flagg, The Life and Letters of Washington Allston (New York, 1892), 
p. 117. 

3 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and, Pa-pers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 378. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

and so as to ensure us the full enjoyment o the naval prosperity 
consequent upon it." Defensively, the Royal Navy prevented an 
invasion of the British Isles, permitting England to continue re- 
sistance to a despot who brought almost the entire continent of 
Europe to heel. "Britannia needs no bulwark, / No towers along 
the steep 5 / Her march is o'er the mountain-waves, / Her home 
is on the deep," ran one of the most popular ballads of the day. 4 

If Britain controlled the seas, Napoleon dominated the land. 
Two months after Trafalgar he crushed the Austrians and the 
Russians with contemptuous ease at Austerlitz, driving the Haps- 
burgs to humiliating peace. In October, 1806, he annihilated the 
Prussians at Jena and Auerstadt. The next spring he bludgeoned 
back the Russians at Friedland, and in July, 1807, he and Czar 
Alexander arranged an accommodation at the raft-borne confer- 
ence of Tilsit. The Third Coalition had gone the way of those 
before it. "We have no friend, no support, no ally in the world, 
but our own courage and heroism," the London Times proclaimed 
in the month of Tilsit. Britain was beleaguered, isolated. "If Bona- 
parte does not by an attempt at Invasion or some other great 
imprudence give us an advantage," Charles James Fox wrote while 
a leading member of the British government, "I cannot but think 
this country invariably and irretrievably ruined. . . . To be Min- 
isters at a moment when the Country is falling and all Europe 
sinking, is a dreadful situation." 6 Fortunately for Britain, some- 
what less pessimistic statesmen were at the head of affairs after 
1807. 

Englishmen honestly thought that in facing Napoleon's chal- 
lenge they fought for the entire world. "We conquer but to save," 
a patriotic poet wrote in 1 805, and Robert Southey, a far greater 
one, called his country "Freedom's own beloved Isle." Politicians 

4 Nathaniel Atcheson, A Compressed View of the Points To Be Discussed in Treab* 
ing with the United States of America (London, 1814), p. 265 "Ye Mariners of Eng- 
land," Lewis Campbell, ed., Poems of Thomas Campbell (London, 1904), pp. 6667. 

6 Times (London), July 15, 1807$ Fox to Grenville, April 18, 1806, Boconnoc 
MSS (Papers of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville) , Lostwithiel, Corn- 
wall, Cabinet Members. Only in citing manuscript collections not rigorously or- 
ganized chronologically, or undated materials, do the footnotes include volume names 
or numbers or folio numbers. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

added their amens. England, said James Stephen, was "the bul- 
wark and safeguard of all nations which the ambition of the enemy 
sought to conquer or destroy." British naval power, said the Earl 
of Selkirk, was "the last stay of the liberties of the world." This 
prideful language, these expressions of a savior complex, provoked 
an American to observe that Britain was worse than France "for 
she, adds to her wickedness the crime of hypocrisy." 6 

More specifically, Englishmen believed that their military forces 
we*e defending America, and that in the event of British defeat 
she would find herself unable to protect her shores against Napo- 
leon. "The Alps and the Apennines of America are the British 
Navy," wrote the Times. "If ever that should be removed, a short 
time will suffice to establish the head-quarters of a Duke-Marshal 
at Washington, and to divide the territory of the Union into mili- 
tary prefectures.'JTn parliamentary debate over the War of 1812, 
the Earl of Liverpool rebuked the United States for failing to 
appreciate the "security and protection" England afforded. Amer- 
ica, he said, "ought to have looked to this country as the guardian 
power to which she was indebted, not only for her comforts, not 
only for -h^r rank in the scale of civilization, but for her very 
existence." 7 } 

The sharp contrast between British political isolation and the 
omnipotent power of the Royal Navy produced a very harsh policy 
toward neutrals. "The sea is ours, and we must maintain the 
doctrine that no nation, no fleet, no cock-boat shall sail upon it 
without our permission," the London Courier declared in 1811. 
Many Englishmen believed the holy crusade against Napoleon 
required Britain to exploit to the full her one effective available 
weapon. England must show no weakness that would encourage 
her enemy and increase neutral demands. She must use the naval 
power God had given her to break up the trade Napoleon carried 

6 "Battle of the Baltic," Campbell, o$. cit., p. 765 "Ode Written during the War 
with America," The Poetical Works of Robert Southey (New York, n.d.), p. 368; 
Hansard, XXI, 11395 XIV, 3495 Rush to John Adams, Aug. 8, 1812, Lyman H. 
Butterfield, ed., Letters of Benjamin Rush, II, American Philosophical Society, Mem- 
oirs, Vol. XXX (1951), pp. 1157^-1158. 

7 Times, Dec. 16, 18115 Hansard, XXIV, 585-586. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

on under neutral flags. "We had much better be at open hostility 
with both America and Prussia," wrote "A True Englishman" in 
1806, "than suffer them, as they do, to prostitute their flags to 
supply the enemy with the 'sinews of war. 3 " 8 Followers of Fox, 
Grenville, and Grey often warned that British obduracy might 
indeed drive America into the war. Their opponents, who occupied 
the seats of power after 1807, offered limited concessions to pre- 
serve American neutrality. But strident nationalists objected to 
any sign of weakness, even apology for the Chesapeake affair. 
When war came, some of the ministry's critics blamed it on too- 
great tenderness in the past. On the whole, Englishmen felt that 
the situation required an unyielding policy toward neutrals. 

Relations with the United States, the chief neutral, attracted 
far less attention, or at least less thought, than they deserved. 
Major issues, among them the conduct of the war, the treatment to 
be accorded Ireland, and the political implications of George II Ps 
renewed insanity, displaced American affairs from the center of 
the political scene. So too did titillating but less important matters 
like the sale of army commissions by the Commander in Chief's 
mistress and the raising of prices at Covent Garden. In 1809 Lord 
Auckland, an Opposition expert on American affairs, considered 
them "the least regarded & ill understood" major issue. More than 
a year later the Times, which did not particularly like America 
but understood the controversy's importance, wrote in discourage- 
ment: "There is certainly a great apathy in the public mind, gener- 
ally, upon the questions now at issue between us and our quondam 
colonies, which it is difficult to rouse, and perhaps useless to at- 
tempt." 9 This neglect played no small part in the coming of 
Anglo-American war. 

The American Revolution did not make Englishmen respect 
their victorious colonies. On the contrary, some dreamt of a chance 
to even the score and many others suggested that America's visible 
faults were owing to a premature separation from the mother 

8 Courier (London), Jan. 21, 1811 j A True Englishman, The War As It Is, and 
the War As It Should Be (London, 1806), p. 30. 

9 Auckland to Grey, Nov. 27, 1809, Charles Grey, Second Earl Grey, MSS, The 
Prior's Kitchen, Durham University, from ist Ld. Auckland; Times > March i, x8n. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

country. On the whole, America was considered an infant among 
nations uncouth, argumentative, boasting, essentially weak and 
entirely dependent upon Britain, ungenteelly grasping in com- 
mercial affairs. The British view, like all caricatures, contained a 
germ of truth. Candid Americans admitted that their own coun- 
try's assertiveness invited the British reaction. We have "monopo- 
lized with so little reserve every attribute of freedom, heroism, 
intelligence, and virtue," Benjamin Silliman said, "that we cannot 
be surprised if other countries, should be somewhat reluctant to 
concede, what we so indecorously demand." Be that as it may, the 
fact remains that America was, as the Edinburgh Review observed 
in 1812, "less popular and less esteemed among us than the base 
and bigotted Portugeze, or the ferocious and ignorant Russians." 10 
Even comparatively friendly journals like the Edinburgh Review 
took an extremely patronizing attitude toward the United States 
and its culture as a whole. 

London's most nationalistic newspaper wrote in 1 8 1 1 : 

Pre-eminently is America advantageous to Great Britain, and Great Britain 
is scarcely less than necessary to America, if the gradual formation of a 
learned class and of a natural gentry, if the growth of arts and sciences . . . 
if a stimulus for agriculture, if commerce and commercial cities that alone 
supply the stimulus, if union, if safety, if national independence be rightly 
placed among the necessities of a young and free country. It is British capital, 
which directly or indirectly, sets half the industry of America in motion: 
it is the British fleets that give it protection and security. 

10 Benjamin Silliman, A Journal of Travels in England, Holland, and Scotland 
(zd ed.; 2 vols.j Boston, 1812), II, 3385 Edinburgh Review, XX (1812), 460. Char- 
acteristic of the British attitude is the following- paragraph written to his mother 
by Augustus John Foster, then a young attach^ but later a somewhat more appre- 
ciative minister: "They & we are now the Two rivals in what has always given Power 
wherever it has extended, Commerce, but I trust that still & for a long time we shall 
maintain the immense superiority that we do now. They are next us in the Race, but 
in nothing else are they near us. We drove them into being a Nation when they were 
no more fit for it than the Convicts of Botany Bay, tho I must say that their leader 
Washington was a great Character, and one or two others whom the Tumult of the 
Day drove from their Counters, but since that, Interest and speculation seems to 
have taken fast hold of the whole Country to the Exclusion of every generous Feel- 
ing. . . . the Character of a Gentleman is very rare- to be found indeed here, but 
what has surprised me the Character of an Honest Man of Principle is ... full as 
rare." Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Dec. i, 1805, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Li- 
brary of Congress. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

Although at this time hoping for peace, the Courier often felt the 
young nation needed a thrashing before it would appreciate these 
truths. The Earl of Sheffield argued that firmness alone could 
check "that spirit of encroachment, that indiscriminate thirst of 
gain, that sordid jealousy" that fouled America's attitude toward 
her parent and protector^ 1 Time and again British nationalists 
warned the United States that war would not be unpopular, and 
America's British friends admitted this; British opinion would have 
supported a far more rigorous policy'toward the United States 
than the one actually adopted* 

Britain considered the American Constitution inadequate to the 
requirements of government, the nation weak in material strength 
and in will, and the Republican leaders sycophants of France 
through sympathy or through fear. The absence of aristocratic 
influence, even the most liberal Englishmen thought, condemned 
America to excesses and imbalance. "The mail takes twelve pas- 
sengers, which generally consist of squalling children, stinking 
negroes, and republicans smoking cigars," the Irish poet, Tom 
Moore, wrote at the beginning of the century. "How often it has 
occurred to me that nothing can be more emblematic of the govern- 
ment of this country than its stages , filled with a motley mixture, 
all 'hail fellow well met,' driving through mud and filth, which 
bespatters them as they raise it, and risking an wj>set at every step." 
Even the Edinburgh Review, which did not, like Moore, hate 
America, believed she prospered in spite of rather than because 
of her Constitution. "It has the appearance . . . rather of an ex- 
periment in politics, than of a steady permanent government," 
the magazine commented. Provisions encouraging party spirit 
(notably the presidential election) and federal-state conflict would 
have to be altered before America achieved real strength. 12 

As early as 1806 Jefferson complained that his country's love 



r, July 29, 18115 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, Strictures on the 
Necessity of Inviolably Maintaining the Navigation and Colonial System of Great 
Britain (new ed.j London, 1806), pp. 317318. 

12 Moore to Mrs. Anastasia Moore, June 13, 1804, Lord John Russell, ed, Mem- 
oirs, Journal, and Correspondence of Thomas Moore (8 vols.j London, 1853-1856), 
I, 161-162; Edinburgh Review, XII (1808), 469-478. 

8 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

of peace had "begun to produce an opinion in Europe that our 
government is entirely in Quaker principles." The President hoped 
that American vigor would destroy this impression, but his policies 
and those of his successor merely encouraged it. The almost total 
absence of military preparation, the empty sound and fury after 
the Chesapeake affair, the disreputable flight from the Embargo, 
successive huckstering legislation designed to find an alternative to 
war all these convinced England of America's weakness. Eight 
months before war finally came, the Times pronounced the tJnited 
States totally incapable of offensive warfare, and a few months 
later John Quincy Adams observed that the British "will yield 
nothing in Negotiation, because they have formed a settled opinion 
that America will not, perhaps that she cannot undertake a War, 
against England." 13 If war camey the British believed, they would 
determine the time and the place. ! 

On the other hand, Jeffersonians appeared sufficiently pro- 
French to give Napoleon aid short of war. Rejection of the Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty, the proclamation of 1807 banning Royal Navy 
ships from American ports, and slight differences between the 
demands made upon France and those made upon Britain as con- 
ditions of raising the Embargo all reinforced this British conviction. 
It became, a pro-American pamphleteer in London complained, 
"not less general, I had nearly said universal, than erroneous." 
As time passed and as the Republicans' obvious dislike of Na- 
poleonic autocracy became too obvious to ignore, some explained 
the American bias in terms of greater fear of Napoleon than of 
Britain. William Cobbett, for example, declared that the Ameri- 
cans detested France more than England but had been encouraged 
to press claims against Great Britain by ministerial weakness. 
George H. Rose, sent to America on a special mission at the end 
of 1807, summed up this feeling when he wrote: "Though Mr. 
Jefferson's Sympathy with the internal policy of France can no 
longer exist, His Antipathy to her Rival is unabated ; and though 

13 Jefferson to Thomas Cooper, Feb. 18, 1806, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge 
Collection), Massachusetts Historical Society j Times, Oct. 28, i8iij Adams to Abi- 
gail Adams, March 30, 1812, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), Massachusetts His- 
torical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

he may view Bonaparte with little of affection^ he certainly does 
it with considerable awe." Even Opposition leaders like Lord 
Grenville and Opposition journals frequently complained of 
American bias for France. Only a few important figures, among 
them Henry Brougham, Alexander Baring, and the American- 
born pamphleteer George Joy, steadfastly repudiated this accu- 
sation. On the whole, the British people shared the opinion of 
Robert Southey, who described the Republicans as the "Vile instru- 
mpnts of fallen Tyranny" after Napoleon's exile to Elba. 14 
/ Englishmen usually corresponded with Americans who were 
Federalists (or merchants, much the same thing), Federalist news- 
papers reached Britain more rapidly and in greater number than 
those of their opponents, and, as the American minister at London 
complained, Federalist pamphlets alone were reprinted in Britain. 
Thus Britain entertained illusory expectations of a Federalist re- 
turn to power and received news that confirmed the impression 
of American weakness and Republican Francophilia. When a long 
diatribe against the Embargo by Timothy Pickering reached Eng- 
land in the spring of 1 808, a member of the Cabinet exulted: "This 
letter . . . will prove a great embarrassment to the opposition, 
and particularly to Lord Grenville, in his promised motion for 
the recall of the Orders in Council." PAs predicted, Grenville's 
motion failed to get off the ground, The- Republicans complained 
that Federalist attacks were almost treasonable, and William Cob- 
bett, who with characteristic unpredictability shifted from violent 
opposition to forthright support of the American cause, warned 
Pickering and his confreres that they played into the hands of 
those in Britain who most hated the United States. 1 ' 5 Nevertheless, 
the flow of Federalist material to England continued. One-sided 

14 George Joy to Grenville, n.d., enclosed in Joy to Samuel Whitbread, Feb. 24, 
1809, Samuel Whitbread MSS, Southill Park, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire; Cobbett's 
Political Register (London), XIII (1808), 1145 Rose $rio to Canning, secret and 
confidential, Feb. 6, 1808, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record Office, FO 5/56; 
"Ode Written during the War with America," Works of Southey, p. 367, 

15 William Pinkney to Madison, private, Dec. 21, 1807, William C. Rives Col- 
lection, Library of Congress j Harrowby to Countess of Harrowby, April 28, 1808, 
Dudley Ryder, ist Earl of Harrowby, MSS, Sandon Hall, Staff ordshire 5 Cobbett*s 
Register, XX (1811), 397-398. 

IO 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

news helped confirm England's unfavorable portrait of the Ameri- 
cans. 

At no time did a powerful phil-American clique develop in 
either house of Parliament. When Charles James Fox, Lord Gren- 
ville, and their lieutenants urged compromise with the United 
States, they seldom argued in terms of affection for America. Fol- 
lowers of the Cabinet that issued the Orders in Council were more 
vindictive than the ministers, and the great mass of floating mem- 
bers (nearly half the House of Commons) was almost equally hos- 
tile. The temper of the Commons thus forbade important conces- 
sions to America. Many pensioners and placemen sat in the House, 
boroughmongers controlled a third or more of the votes, other 
and sometimes less important issues reduced the American ques- 
tion to second rank, and at the time of many important divisions 
the number of absentees (sometimes as many as two-thirds of the 
membership) would have scandalized even the American Con- 
gress. In 1809 Jefferson expostulated that the British government, 
compared at least with others since the age of Walpole, was "the 
most corrupted & corrupting mass of rottenness which ever usurped 
the name of government." 16 Bad though it may have been, and 
arrogantly unconcerned as it was with American affairs, this Par- 
liament and this system of government carried the war against 
Napoleon to a victorious conclusion. 

In the persons of the aged and presumably vindictive George III 
and, after his final attack of insanity, his allegedly more liberal 
son, the Prince Regent, royal influence played an important part 
in British politics. The Crown powerfully influenced, if it did not 
control, the election of at least a hundred members of Parliament, 
and the sovereign played an active role in the construction of new 
ministries. After William Pitt's death in 1 806 George III reluc- 
tantly accepted the Ministry of All the Talents, which included 
his old foe, Charles James Fox. The next year the weight of the 
Crown was thrown against the government and it fell from power. 
The King supported the ministry that followed, and in general 

16 Jefferson to William Lambert, Sept. 10, 1809, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library 
of Congress. 

II 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

he approved its policies. But he did not oppose the Talents because 
he objected to their comparatively mild American policy, and he 
neither sought to encourage nor enthusiastically praised the rigid 
line adopted by their successors. The Prince Regent, who took 
over the powers of the sovereign in 1810 and 181 1, was thought 
more liberal than his father, primarily because in his youth he had 
consorted with Fox. Americans hoped the Regent would return 
the heirs of Fox to power, and on several occasions American 
diplomats at London thought they detected conciliatory tend- 
encies in his conversation. But the Prince of Wales supported the 
ministry of Spencer Perceval and did not urge him to repeal the 
Orders in Council. After PercevaPs assassination the Regent made 
no effort to secure a pledge of repeal from the politicians arrang- 
ing a new ministry. As far as American affairs were concerned, the 
selfish, lazy Prince Regent played no more important a direct 
part than his father. 

Pitt's survivors, who defeated the Ministry of All the Talents 
in 1807, maintained themselves in power from then onward. Wil- 
liam Pitt had an undeservedly unfavorable reputation in the United 
States the Philadelphia Aurora congratulated America on the 
death of this "offence to God and to man" 1T but in his last 
months British policy toward the United States became more 
harsh. Most of Pitt's successors, like him devoted to vigorous 
prosecution of the war, unlike him failed to see the advantages of 
at least a partial understanding with the most important mari- 
time neutral j they also pushed aside the comparative economic 
liberalism that had been their master's. A notable exception was 
Earl Bathurst, a quietly unobtrusive and efficient protege of Pitt's 
who served for a long time as president of the Board of Trade and 
often occupied the Foreign Office ad interim. More than any other 
Pittite, Bathurst recognized the importance of preserving American 
neutrality, if only for economic reasons. 

Encouraged by American weakness, angered by the way neu- 
tral trade enriched the United States and eased pressure upon 

17 Aurora (Philadelphia), March zi, 1806. This obituary notice also described 
Pitt as "the English Robespierre" and "the late execrable frime minister of England." 

12 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

France, devoted to the strengthening of British commerce, most 
Pittites advocated a harsh policy toward Americans. )Their leader. 
Spencer Perceval, was always eager for battle with his parlia- 
mentary enemies and ready to face any Napoleonic challenge. 
His piety, simplicity, and uncompromising view of the war made 
him very popular in Commons. Perceval was also stubborn and 
intolerant of criticism, and his ideas, particularly in the commercial 
field, often simplified Pitt's almost to the point of caricature. Perce- 
val opposed toleration of American trade with the West Indies and 
sponsored the Orders in Council of November, 1807. His system 
received enthusiastic support from lesser members of the faction, 
perhaps most consistently from George Rose, a statistics-laden 
veteran at the Board of Trade, and from Daniel Stuart, editor of 
the Courier, one of the most important and certainly the most 
anti- American journal in London. Although cabinet colleagues 
sometimes doubted the wisdom of Perceval's policies, the force 
of his opinions and his strength in Parliament defeated major 
challenges until 1812. 

The transformation of the Pitt party, which had helped to con- 
struct Anglo-American understanding in the i79O ? s, is best illus- 
trated by the Earl of Liverpool. Although his father, the first 
earl, was a bitter enemy of the United States and its trade, as a 
young man Liverpool loyally supported Pitt's policy of concilia- 
tion. In 1 80 1 he became foreign secretary, and while at Downing 
Street he presided over the most moderate American policy Brit- 
ain adopted in the first forty years of American independence. 
Liverpool earned a reputation as a friend of the United States, 
and in 1807, when the United States returned the Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty for modifications, Secretary of State Madison ex- 
pected Liverpool, now again in the Cabinet, to support the changes 
America desired. 18 The weakness and the apparent Francophilia of 
the Jeffersonian regime caused Liverpool to abandon his early 
attitudes. He supported the Orders in Council, and minimized the 
dangers of American retaliation. In 1810 he wrote: 

18 Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Department of State Archives, 
National Archives, Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VI. 

13 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

The Situation of Affairs in America appears to us here to be as little likely 
to lead to any amicable settlement, as they have been at any time for the 
last three or four Years. It is a Satisfaction, however, to reflect, that the 
Cause of our Country appears to gain ground in many parts of the United 
States, and if some material Change should not occur in the System of the 
Government, the result will probably be, the Separation of the Eastern 
from the Southern States. This Event, whenever it takes place, (and it 
will take place at no very distant period) will have the effect at least of 
securing the British Possessions in North America, from any Danger ar- 
riving from Foreign Aggression. 19 

Liverpool was essentially a pragmatist, and when after the War 
of 1812 he felt British interests best served by reconciliation he 
loyally supported the policies of his subordinate, Castlereagh. In 
the critical years before the war the facts seemed to him to justify 
a more rigorous policy. In similar fashion many Pittites aban- 
doned the policies followed by their leader in the lygo's. 

Essentially a disciple of Pitt, and in his own mind the most 
logical heir, was George Canning. Canning served as foreign secre- 
tary from 1807 to 1809. Thereafter, thanks to his own arrogance 
and a quarrel with Castlereagh, he was out of the government 
and often opposed it in Parliament. The Americans regarded Can- 
ning as their worst enemy, a not surprising attitude in view of the 
language Canning allowed himself to use in his diplomatic corre- 
spondence and speeches. Canning considered America a perversion 
of republicanism j in 1813 he asked sarcastically, "Who would have 
expected to have seen this favourite child of freedom leagued with 
the oppressor of the world? " and added, "In the republic of 
America we look for the realization of our visions of republican 
virtue in vain." 20 Nevertheless, Canning, along with Bathurst, 
attempted to preserve American neutrality by modifying the Or- 
ders in Council, and in 1812 he supported the Opposition attack 
upon the entire system. Although he paid too little attention to 

10 Liverpool to Sir James Craig, April 4, 1810, MSS of the first and second Earls 
of Liverpool, British Museum (Add. MSS 38190-38489, 38564-38581), Add. MSS 
38323. 

20 Hansard, XXIV, 640-642. 

H 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

American sensibilities, the policy he favored was closer to the old 
Pitt tradition than the policy actually followed. 21 

Also somewhat apart from orthodox Pittites stood the tiny fac- 
tion called "the Saints." These evangelicals supported the Minis- 
try of All the Talents because it opposed the slave trade, but most 
of them later backed PercevaPs ministry. By far the most important 
for Anglo-American relations was James Stephen, a sturdy, ob- 
stinate, argumentative lawyer of the West Indian interest, and a 
man possessed of almost equal hatred of Napoleon and Jefferson. 
In 1805 Stephen's polemic, War in Disguise; Or y the Frauds of 
the Neutral Flags y touched off attacks upon American commerce. 
In succeeding years his pen and voice stirred up feeling against 
the United States. Stephen, who knew Perceval well and fre- 
quently advised him on maritime policy, was popularly supposed 
to be the father of the Orders in Council. He defended them 
vehemently until the very end, when he absented himself from 
the House of Commons to avoid listening to the announcement 
of suspension. As a faction, however, the Saints took no consistent 
position on American policy. One of them, William Wilberforce, 
philosophically apportioned the blame for friction equally be- 
tween the two countries. His desertion of the Orders in Council 
played an important part in their demise. 

Between the government's supporters and that large group 
most conveniently called the Opposition wandered a number of 
factions. Viscount Sidmouth, very unpopular with the country but 
in firm command of some twenty votes in Commons, had presided 
over the liberal American policy of Liverpool (then Lord Hawkes- 
bury) as head of the ministry from 1801 to 1804. Americans con- 
sidered him a friend, and in 1 8 1 2 he did decline to enter the Cab- 
inet until assured that the Orders in Council would be changed. 

21 Years later an American minister at London described Canning as "sarcastic 
as well as logical in debate, and sometimes allowing his official pen to trespass in the 
former field j but in private circles, bland, courteous, and yielding." Richard Rush, 
A Residence at the Court of London, ed. Benjamin Rush (30! ed. 5 London, 1872), p. 
236. Many years passed after Canning's first foreign-secretaryship before such a bal- 
anced estimate was possible, 

15 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

But Sidmouth did not like the Americans nor did he fear them. 
Neither he nor his followers participated actively in any but the 
closing debates over the orders. Marquis Wellesley, who headed 
another faction, was arrogant, ambitious, untrustworthy, and 
lecherous. Wellesley acted as though he were still a virtually inde- 
pendent sovereign in India, and he tended to look upon Americans 
as a slightly superior breed of the type he had defeated in the 
Mahratta wars. Except when forced while foreign secretary to 
turn his attention to American affairs, the marquis ignored them. 
He shared, however, the general prejudices of Sidmouth. 

The uneasy coalition of Foxites and Grenvilles, backbone of the 
Ministry of All the Talents and after 1 807 the core of the Opposi- 
tion, unvaryingly supported conciliation of the United States. 
They numbered approximately as many as the Pittites but were 
not so attractive to Sidmouths, Wellesleys, independents, and the 
Crown. 22 After Fox's death in 1806 they lacked effective leader- 
ship in the House of Commons. Friction between the two wings 
frequently deprived them of unity. "Are we not a good deal in 
the same situation with the poor Spaniards," one of them discon- 
solately asked, "united in nothing but our dislike of those to whom 
we are opposed . . . and fighting for the mere sake of fighting 
without an acknowledged executive Power to direct or controul 
our exertions?" With some justice a semiofficial American news- 
paper praised the Opposition as commanding "the best talents and 
the purest . . . patriotism of England," 23 but they were steadily 
worsted by less able but better-organized, more determined men. 

For this Lord Grenville, an intelligent man but a poor party 
leader, was largely responsible. Although Grenville did not favor 
absolute surrender to American demands (on impressment, for 
example), he frequently spoke proudly of the policy he had fol- 
lowed as foreign secretary under Pitt and urged a similarly mod- 
erate approach. He and his principal commercial adviser, Lord 
Auckland, favored liberal treatment of American trade, and they 

22 For a careful estimate of factional strengths in the Parliament of 1807 see 
Michael Roberts, The Whig Party, r 8 0718x2 (London, 1939), pp. 333345. 

23 George Tierney to Whitbread, Dec. 29, 1808, Whitbread MSS. 

16 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

bitterly attacked the Orders in Council for risking Britain's share 
of it. "With the friendship of America/' Grenville wrote in 1809, 
"we might rest a husbanding & defensive system on the basis of an 
extensive commerce, & so might still survive the storm. Without 
such a resource what hope have we?" Grenville's personal failings 
made him ineffective in forwarding his views. In power, he stressed 
the probable unfavorable consequences of any new departure. In 
opposition, he avoided as much as possible "the irksome & hope- 
less duties of Parliament," gloomily concluding that the govern- 
ment occupied a nearly impregnable position. 24 Throughout, he 
clung to a conviction that Napoleon could not be defeated, that 
Britain's days of glory had passed. Grenville's loss of fire, his de- 
cline since the fall of his cousin's ministry in 1801, was a catas- 
trophe for Anglo-American comity. 

Whereas Grenville had an undeserved reputation as an Ameri- 
canophobe, his political ally, Charles James Fox, was remembered 
in the United States as a friend of the Revolutionary struggle. 
Whatever Fox really thought of America per se in the closing 
years of his life (and he neither wrote nor spoke on the subject), 
he did favor a conciliatory policy toward her as best for Britain, 
and he opposed monopolistic, mercantilist trade policies of the 
sort that challenged America. The Foxite paper, the London 
Morning Chronicle, probably the most widely read in the kingdom, 
consistently took a pro- American line; Cobbett once suggested 
that the editor, James Perry, acted as though he "had a general 
retainer from the Americans." ^ Fox's nephew and protege, Lord 
Holland, steadily supported conciliation. He once summarized 
Foxite doctrine, a combination of economic liberalism and political 
sympathy, in the following words: 

In every friendly intercourse between two countries, there was ... al- 
ways a mutual advantage: but this reciprocity of interest was most remark- 
able, as it existed between the united states of America and Great Britain. 
. . . The republican institutions of America, like those of every govern- 

24 Grenville to Grey, May 26, 1809, Grey MSS; Grenville to Auckland, Sept. 16, 
1810, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British Museum (Add. MSS 344.12- 
344.71, 45728-45730)) Add. MSS 34458- 

25 Cobbett>s Register, XII (1807), 182. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

ment in which a true spirit of freedom prevailed, contained energies which 
were capable of being called forth to meet any difficult crisis that might 
occur. . . . Nothing therefore could appear . . . worse policy than to 
wish to see any thing like disunion among the people of the United States. 
Indeed, the more powerful and the more wealthy they became, the better 
it would be for this country. As they became more populous, the customers 
for our manufactures would become more numerous, and increase of riches 
would only give them increased means of consumption. 26 

Lord Howick, Fox's successor as factional leader in 1 806, shared 
with Holland a dislike of monopolistic ambition. While favoring 
"the utmost limit of reasonable concession/ 3 he nevertheless dis- 
trusted the Jeffersonian regime, saying that "in the language and 
the conduct of the latter Government, enough has appeared to 
create a well-founded doubt, whether this policy, however care- 
fully pursued, would have been successful." 2T His father's death 
transferred Howick to the House of Lords as Earl Grey in 1807, 
a crippling blow to him and his party, for Lord Henry Petty and 
Stephen Ponsonby, who attempted to fill the shoes of Fox and 
Howick, failed dismally. Not until Henry Brougham secured a 
seat in 1 810 did the Opposition find an effective leader, and even 
then only on the single issue of the Orders in Council. This able, 
offensively ambitious Scot marshaled the troops that brought down 
the orders in 1812, but he never achieved the parliamentary pri- 
macy that once belonged to Fox. 

Although they never attained the lead in Commons, Alexander 
Baring and Samuel Whitbread most forcefully presented the two 
strains of Opposition argument against the ministry's American 
policy. Whitbread, a self-made man in the brewing business, was 
stout, uncultured by the standards of British aristocracy, and often 
violent in debate. He was also probably the most extreme republi- 
can in Parliament, and his attitude sometimes embarrassed Grey, 
whose sister he had married. He was almost the only member of 
Parliament who praised America without reservation. In 1812 

26 Hansard, IX, 806-807. 

27 Grey to Grenville, Jan. 3, 1808, Charles Grey, Some Account of the Life and 
Opinions of Charles, Second Earl Grey (London, 1861), p. 190. 

18 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

he said that she was "extremely popular" with him and that he 
looked upon her Revolution "with reverence and admiration." 
In 1813, after war began, he declared, "If truth must be spoken, 
. . . America had always been in the right, . . . until, by the 
declaration of war she had changed her situation." 28 Whitbread's 
political arguments for America were paired by Alexander Baring's 
emphasis upon the value of her trade. Baring, who married a Fed- 
eralist senator's daughter and whose banking house had heavy in- 
vestments in the United States and handled the accounts of many 
American merchants as well as of the United States government, 
worked more than forty years for peace between the two countries. 
Although often attacked as a self-seeker interested only in the 
profits of Baring Brothers & Company, his devotion to liberal 
principles went further than that. None could deny that his writ- 
ings and his parliamentary speeches were, with the possible ex- 
ception of Brougham's, which began somewhat later, the most ef- 
fective statement of the argument that British prosperity depended 
upon the fostering of American trade. 

f Most Englishmen agreed with Baring that commercial consider- 
ations, not theories of government, ^vere the most important as- 
pects of Anglo-American relations, fehould America's trade be 
encouraged, even if it flowed to Britain's enemies or to neutrals, 
so that the United States could purchase larger amounts of British 
goods with her profits and perhaps, with her shipping, supply 
Great Britain with an indirect outlet for her own manufactures? Or 
should Britain consider the Americans commercial rivals whose 
prosperity must be checked, whose expanding commerce could 
only cut into British trade, destroy the benefits of empire, and 
weaken economic warfare against the archdevil of the Tuileries? 
Over these questions Englishmen contended throughout the Na- 
poleonic wars. 

Baring, Brougham, and many of the Opposition of course an- 
swered the first question with an unequivocal affirmative. The 
banker argued that England should encourage American trade 
with any nation whatsoever, since the Americans usually used the 

28 Hansard, XXI, 771$ XXIV, 632. 

19 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

proceeds of European sales to purchase British manufactures. The 
Americans carried on an extensive trade in English goods, pene- 
trating with these cargoes to ports of the Continent where English 
ships could not go ; to strike at American shipping was to destroy 
the best means of evading Napoleon's Continental System. Baring 
considered America more valuable as a neutral than she would be 
as an ally. The Edinburgh Review agreed, saying that "the neu- 
trality of the new world is our best safeguard from the subjuga- 
tion of the old. While America covers the ocean with her ships, 
England may defy the conqueror of Europe ; she will trade, in 
spite of him." Like Baring, Brougham stressed that American 
prosperity really benefited Britain: "Can any but the veriest drivel- 
ler in political science, doubt for a moment that her gains are our 
gains j . . . that the less she traded with other nations, the less 
she will trade with ourselves ; and that to confine her foreign com- 
merce to her trade with England, would be to diminish, if not to 
destroy this trade also." In stressing the importance of exports 
to America, the Opposition spoke the language of the compara- 
tively new, politically undervalued manufacturing interests. It 
challenged traditional economic theory, which held that one na- 
tion's commercial gains were another's losses, and minimized the 
plausible claim of shipping and colonial interests that they would 
be harmed by the growth of American shipping and exports. Fi- 
nally, as Lord Melville once reasonably pointed out, the benefit 
of expanded trade was mutual. America, too, might be asked to 
make concessioons to secure it. 29 

Until 1 8 1 1 and 1812, when a massive depression forced a reas- 
sessment, most Englishmen repudiated the arguments of Baring 
and Brougham, clinging stubbornly to maxims of the past. They 
looked upon America as a many-tentacled rival. Her ships plied 
the oceans as replacements for British merchantmen, capturing, 

59 Alexander Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders 
in Council; and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral 
Commerce of America (London, 1808), pp. 153156 and fassim; Edinburgh Re- 
view, XIV (1809), 4.755 Henry Brougham, Orders in Council; Or, An Examination 
of the Justice, Legality, and Policy of the New System of Commercial Regulations 
(ad ed.5 London, 1808), p. 575 Hansard, XII, 797. 

20 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

as one indefatigable English conservative complained, nineteen- 
twentieths of the carriage between the two countries as well as 
increasing shares of the traffic between Europe and outlying parts 
of the globe. 30 America undermined British colonies in the Carib- 
bean by producing competing crops on her own Southern planta- 
tions and by carrying to Europe the produce of non-British is- 
lands in that tropical sea, and then America had the temerity 
to ask for freedom to trade with British territories as well. When 
Fox and Grenville proposed legislation to regularize American 
trade with English colonies. Lord Mulgrave grumpily objected 
that "the great advantage of possessing colonies, was the enjoy- 
ment of an exclusive trade with them." Finally, traditionalists ar- 
gued that America eagerly replaced Britain in European markets, 
striking a blow at English commercial prosperity and relieving 
economic pressure upon Napoleon. In sum, the conservative na- 
tionalists believed that shipping and commerce lay at the root of 
England's greatness. These must be encouraged and encouraged 
too by application of the traditional remedies of restriction, regu- 
lation, and stifling of competition. "The commerce is connected 
with the strength and glory of England," one pamphleteer's 
peroration read, "and he who respects the strength and glory of 
England, will contemplate her Navigation and Colonial System, 
but with the sentiment . . . ESTO PERPETUA." 31 In war- 
time this system might be extended by the application of naval 
power*,,, 

Those who argued in this fashion usually had their way from 

1805 to 1812. Except for the brief Ministry of All the Talents in 

1 806 and 1 807, British governments sought not to foster trade but 
to monopolize it. To solve Britain's problems, increased pressure 
upon American neutral commerce often suggested itself. For some 
this was merely a tactical response to the international situation 

30 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, The Orders in Council and the American 
Embargo Beneficial to the Political and Commercial Interests of Great Britain (Lon- 
don, 1809), pp, 1416. 

^Hansard, VI, 10355 Jerome Alley, A Vindication of the Principles and State- 
ments Advanced in the Strictures of the Right Hon. Lord Sheffield (London, 1806), 
pp. 89-90. 

21 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

or a projection of the feeling that, in resisting Napoleon, Britain 
was defending the entire free world. For others it had the broader 
purpose of restricting American growth and her rise to the first 
rank of powers. British policy combined about equal parts of 
monopolistic mercantilism and a desire to strangle Napoleon. And 
although the British system included far more concessions to 
American sensibilities than is usually recognized, even basically 
Anglophile citizens of the United States, like Rufus King, com- 
plained against the monopolistic implications of English policy. 
In 1811 Henry Clay declared that "the real cause of British ag- 
gression, was not to distress an enemy but to destroy a rival." 32 
As Clay suggested, England had rejected the analyses of Baring, 
Brougham, and the Edinburgh Review. \ 

Few people in England or America jFully understood the two 
nations' commercial interdependence. The Earl of Sheffield, who 
wrote pamphlets bearing the lengthy but explanatory titles of 
Strictures on the Necessity of Inviolably Maintaining the Naviga- 
tion and Colonial System of Great Britain and The Orders in 
Council and the American Embargo Beneficial to the Political and 
Commercial Interests of Great Britain, erroneously argued that the 
United States was or could almost painlessly be made absolutely 
subordinate and dependent upon Britain in the commercial sphere. 
(Jefferson equally fallaciously thought his country could wield 
the whip hand.) Pessimists and alarmists, among whom Baring 
must sometimes be included, were wrong when they asserted that 
America could without difficulty ride out the storm of commercial 
restriction while Britain would be grievously harmed. (In the 
same 'fashion, many Federalists spoke of the impossibility of 
challenging the strong, resilient economy of Britain.) Anglo- 
American trade had multiplied rather than contracted after sepa- 
ration of the two nations in 1783, and each country was the best 
customer of the other. Neither could afford to toss away cavalierly 
this huge trade. 

The British West Indies, the colonial area trading most ex- 
tensively with the United States, did indeed seem at America's 

lsy zath Cong, ist sess., pp. 599601. 

22 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

mercy. Despite efforts to encourage alternative areas o supply, 
the islands drew most of their foodstuffs and cooperage materials 
from the United States. From 1801 to 1805 they annually im- 
ported nearly $6.5 million worth of American goods, after 1807 
commercial restrictions reduced this traffic, but in a twelve-month 
period in 1810-1811, when trade was comparatively free, more 
than $4.5 million worth of American provisions flowed to the Brit- 
ish colonies. The Americans believed that the West Indies need for 
food provided an obvious way of bringing pressure upon the en- 
tire empire. "If we shut up the export trade six months the Is- 
lands would be starved," a Republican commercial expert wrote 
in 1806; ". . . the West India islands are dependent on it [the 
United States] for the necessaries of life, both for the white and 
black population." 33 In seeming confirmation of this analysis, 
colonial governors frequently found it necessary to suspend the 
Navigation Acts so that American ships might bring grain and other 
goods to the British islands. 

On the other hand, America's role in the Caribbean strength- 
ened the arguments of British restrictionists. Beginning about 1 805, 
a huge oversupply of coffee and sugar developed in world mar- 
kets. Exports from British colonies fell off, to the dismay of planta- 
tion owners, financiers, and the shipping interest. To reduce com- 
petition the British government attempted to eliminate or at least 
restrict the quantity of cotton, sugar, and coffee the Americans 
carried away in exchange for cargoes they brought, but this was 
only a minor aspect of the problem. The chief challenges to British 
interest lay in the explosive development of American cotton ex- 
ports and the steady growth of American traffic in French and 
Spanish colonial goods imported into the United States and then 
reshipped to Europe, where they entered into competition with 
British colonial produce. In 1806 and again in 1807 American re- 
exports totaled $60 million. British colonialists, shippers, and the 
politicians they influenced called for action to reduce the pressure 

33 Jacob Crowninshield, "Some Remarks on the American Trade, 1806," ed. John 
H. Reinoehl, William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XVI (1959), 96-97. For an 
able discussion of the British colonial economy see Lowell J. Ragatz, The Fall of the 
Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 17631833 (New York, 1928). 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

of American competition, to which they ascribed the depression 
of English colonial trade. While this explanation oversimplified 
the case, there could be no denying that Americans profited tre- 
mendously from the reexport trade, as well as from the increas- 
ing export of her own cotton, nor that the loss of these profits 
would be a serious blow to the United States. 34 

No colonial trade compared in size, of course, with that carried 
on between the home islands and the United States. Under normal 
conditions this traffic was the most important branch of commerce 
for both countries and also the largest single component of inter- 
national trade. America often purchased roughly one-third of all 
British exports, including those to the colonies, and usually took 
more than did the entire continent of Europe. For the Americans 
this branch of trade was equally important. In 1806 more than 
$20 million worth of goods produced in America were shipped to 
Britain, four-ninths of all exports of domestic produce and more 
than the total trade to either France or Spain, despite the huge 
reexport trade to those countries. After passage of the Embargo 
Anglo-American trade declined, but the portion that continued 
was far more substantial than is generally recognized. 35 

Politically and economically the most important American com- 
modities shipped to Britain were foodstuffs and cotton. Despite 
a spectacular expansion of grain production during the Napoleonic 
Wars, the British Isles could not feed themselves. In 1807 Eng- 

34 Far less important, but still substantial, was America's trade with British India. 
Despite expiration of the commercial articles of the Jay treaty and thus of the formal 
basis for Indian- American trade, this commerce continued. The Americans came to 
have a share of Indian trade approximately half as large as that of the East India 
Company, and neither the British government nor authorities in India paid much 
heed to the company's reiterated desires to curb American rivals. In this area, at least, 
the ministry recognized that both countries benefited from the fostering- of trade. On 
this subject see Holden Furber, "The Beginnings of American Trade with India, 
i784.-i8i2," New England Quarterly, XI (1938;, 235265. 

35 This and succeeding paragraphs rest on information from widely scattered 
sources. Perhaps most important are Eli F. Heckscher, The Continental System (Lon- 
don, 1922) 5 William Smart, Economic Annals of the Nineteenth Century, I (London, 
1910) ; George R. Porter, The Progress of the Nation, rev. F. W. Hirst (rev. ed.j 
London, 1912) ; Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals . . . of the United States of 
America (Philadelphia, 1818)5 Francois Crouzet, L'Economie Britannique et le 
B locus Continental (2 vols. j Paris, 1958). 

24 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

land imported 2 million bushels of wheat from the United States 
and only 1.25 million bushels from all other countries. That year 
a young British diplomat at Washington wrote, "War with the 
World America excepted, which is our granary, I think we might 
maintain, but, I hope we shall not quarrel with our Bread & But- 
ter." Ordinarily American grain did not dominate the British 
market, primarily because Napoleon often tolerated huge exports 
from the Continent. From 1800 to 1812 the Americans provided 
only about one-quarter of all British wheat imports, and the chances 
of literally starving England into submission by cutting off this 
trade were slim indeed. Britain, a Federalist critic of Republican 
economic warfare wrote, "brews into beer more than we ever sell 
to her, and almost as much as we can spare to the whole world." 
The prospects of American supplies powerfully affected the price 
level in Britain, and the British West Indies and later Wellington's 
Peninsular army required American foodstuffs. It can reasonably 
be asserted, however, that the Anglo-American grain trade was 
most important as a means of disposing of an American surplus, 
not as a source of British supply. 36 

May the same be said of American cotton exports? From 1805 
until the declaration of war in 1812, America annually exported 
more than 46 million pounds of her cotton, and at least 80 per 
cent went to Great Britain. In a good year like 1807 the Ameri- 
cans received more than $13 million from England for cotton 
alone. Without the British market American plantations would 
have had no excuse for existence. In theory, an alternate market 
existed on the Continent, and American farmers often complained 
that the Royal Navy prevented them from exploiting it. (With 
more justification, the same complaint was made with respect to 
tobacco, another important export.) However, despite Napoleon's 

36 Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Nov. i, 1807, Foster MSS$ Cabot to Pickering, 
Dec. 1 8, 1808, Henry Cabot Lodge, Life and Letters of George Cabot (Boston, 1877), 
p. 4025 Crouzet, op. cit., I, 98100. Heckscher, op. cit., pp. 337338, estimates that 
Britain never imported more than one-sixth of the grain she consumed, and on the 
average only one-sixteenth. The standard treatment of this topic, from which figures 
in this paragraph have been taken, is W. Freeman Galpin, The Grain Supply of Eng- 
land during the Napoleonic Period, University of Michigan Publications in History 
and Political Science, Vol. VI (New York, 1925). 

25 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

efforts to increase European textile production, the Continent 
never absorbed more than a small fraction of the exports that 
normally flowed to Britain. For their part English mills depended 
heavily upon American supplies. Although Americans faced com- 
petition from British colonies and other areas, they provided al- 
most exactly one-half of all British cotton imports until the Em- 
bargo and made huge shipments of raw cotton spasmodically in 
later years. 

Two factors somewhat eased Britain's dependence upon the 
United States. In the first place, the glut after 1805 delayed the 
impact of reduced American supplies. Lord Sheffield even main- 
tained that Britain "benefitted [from the Embargo] by an ac- 
cumulating inactive stock [of cotton] being called into active de- 
mand." Second, the uncertainty of American supplies spurred the 
development of alternate sources. For example, Britain imported 
only 3,500 bags of cotton from Brazil in 1808. Thereafter the 
trade mushroomed almost as rapidly as that with America had a 
decade earlier, and in 1814 England bought more than 100,000 
bags of Brazilian cotton. Thus, although Great Britain found the 
United States by far the easiest and cheapest source of supply, 
America was not the only one; the day of "King Cotton," if it 
ever existed, still lay in the future. The United States, on the 
other hand, was almost entirely dependent upon England as a 
cotton market. 37 

Britain most needed the American market for her manufactured 
goods, particularly since it was precisely these that Napoleon most 
consistently prohibited entry to the Continent. Down to 1807 the 
Americans purchased about one-third of all exported British goods, 
roughly $50 million worth every year. The Embargo reduced but 
did not eliminate this trade (the proportion of British exports 
sent to the United States never dropped below 1 5 per cent) . After 
a revival in 1810, when America purchased $48 million worth 
of British goods, nearly one-quarter of English exports, the Ameri- 

37 Sheffield, Orders in Council, p. ax. In addition to the sources t'\ * above, see 
G. W. Daniels, "American Cotton Trade with Liverpool under the i^mbargx* and 
Non-Intercourse Acts," American Historical Review, XXI (19151916), 276287. 

26 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

can market finally dried up when nonimportation went into effect 
early in i8n. 38 In that year the United States imported only $6 
million worth of British goods, thus contributing mightily to the 
deepening of a depression that had already commenced in Eng- 
land. Custom, easy transportation, a viable credit system, and the 
slow development of American manufactures all conferred upon 
England a huge market in the United States, a market essential 
to her prosperity. 

Although Britain shipped large quantities of metal goods and 
pottery, books, and even some cheese and salt across the Atlantic, 
textiles were the major export. The great expansion of Midland 
mills had already begun, and particularly during war the chief 
market for cottons produced in Manchester, Birmingham, and 
lesser centers lay across the Atlantic. In 1806, for example, Britain 
sent to America cottons and woolens worth $4.1 million, more than 
half her textile exports and nearly one-quarter of all British ex- 
ports of whatever kind. American citizens needed English cloth 
almost as much as British factories required a market. Like other 
branches of commerce, the textile trade demonstrated the two na- 
tions' interdependence. 

Certain British interests, long especially cherished by Parlia- 
ment, claimed that America attained prosperity at their expense. 
"They think our prosperity filched from theirs," Jefferson ob- 
served in i8io. 39 Merchants, traders, and plantation owners 
blamed the West Indian depression on American competition. 
Shipowners expressed dismay at the rise of the American merchant 
marine, which, one anti-American pamphleteer claimed, deprived 
England of an income of $18 million a year. 40 More generally, 
many Englishmen, bearing the burden of a contest they believed 

38 See Heckscher, o$. cit., p. 324, for the percentages. They do not quite agree with 
the figures Heckscher gives for the value of the trade on page 245. See also Crouzet, 
o>p cit., II, 884, 886. 

39 Jefferson to William Duane, Nov. 13, 1810, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. 
Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.; 20 vols.j Washing- 
ton, 1903-1904), XII, 434. 

40 /on f ;|cV the House of Commons y LXVII (1812), 761, 7685 Joseph Marryat, 
Hints to Both Parties; or Observations on the Proceedings in Parliament ufon the 
Petitions against the Orders m Council (London, 1808), p. 20. 

27 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

a struggle for the world's freedom, felt jealousy rather than grati- 
fication when they saw America thriving. Almost all English 
travelers commented unfavorably on the acquisitiveness of Ameri- 
cans, the single-mindedness with which they pursued profit. Britons 
scoffed when, in his first inaugural address, Jefferson hailed his 
country as a "rising nation, spread over a wide and fruitful land, 
traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry, 
. . . advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal 
eye." Englishmen pointed out how much America owed to the 
Royal Navy, which, by driving Britain's enemies from the seas, 
had in effect conferred a huge commerce upon the neutral United 
States. "Their own fair Trade has increased immensely & yet," 
Augustus Foster complained, "they would have the carrying all 
the French & Spanish, there is not, thanks to our Tars, a single 
French or Spanish merchantman that now navigates these Seas 
& these Jews want to navigate for them." Many Americans agreed 
that their countrymen pushed too hard, that national interests had 
been subordinated to individual greed. "Where interest prevails 
& patriotism is little known," a Jeffersonian minister lamented 
when Massachusetts protested the Embargo, "we can hope noth- 
ing from the latter without some present hopes of the former. 
Prosperity has been at the helm & has corrupted us." 41 Extreme 
Republicans and British nationalists agreed on one thing, at least. 
Nominally, America showed a deficit in her trade with Britain. 
But English statistics are unsatisfactory and incomplete, and, as 
the Secretary of the Treasury himself pointed out, his reports, based 
upon costs at American seaports, included freightage on imports 
from Britain but omitted it on exports. The profits of transatlantic 
carriage, almost monopolized by the Americans, surely reversed 
the theoretical deficit. Furthermore, Americans often transferred 
the proceeds of European sales to Britain for expenditure there 
(Alexander Baring estimated that three-quarters were so trans- 

41 Richardson, op. cit., I, 3215 Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, May 3, 1806, Foster 
MSSj entry of Jan. 5, iSo8, The Diary of William Bentley, D.D. (4 vols.j Salem, 
19111914), III, 337. The French minister also considered Americans sordidly 
materialistic. See Louis M. Turreau de Garambouville, A$ergu sur la Situation Poli- 
tique des Etats-Unis d'Amerique (Paris, 1815), 

28 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

ferred) j Continental receipts probably financed about one-third o 
British exports to America. Secretary Gallatin argued, and jealous 
Englishmen like Joseph Marryat and Nathaniel Atcheson agreed, 
that the balance of trade actually favored the United States. 42 As 
a practical matter, whatever the trade balance, both countries bene- 
fited from Anglo-American trade. American agriculturists, Yankee 
shipowners, British capitalists, and Midland workmen owed much 
to the steady flow of commerce between Liverpool and London 
on the one hand, and New York, Boston, and Philadelphia on the 
other. 43 

At a time when the British merchant marine could barely 
maintain itself, the American maritime service grew steadily, ad- 
vancing from 558,000 tons in 1 802 to 98 1,000 at the end of 1 8 io. 44 
At a time when the trade of the British Empire suffered from the 
vagaries of war, American trade shot upward. Before the outbreak 
of Franco-British war the United States never imported or ex- 
ported goods worth more than $30 million in a single year. In 
1 807 exports and imports reached $108 million and $13 8. 5 million 
respectively. At a time when military expenditures multiplied the 
British national debt, the Americans cut theirs from $83 million 
in 1 80 1 to $45 million at the opening of 1812. The revenue that 
made this reduction possible came from increasing customs re- 
ceipts, the direct result of expanded foreign trade. 

Aside from colonial interests, Britons could scarcely object to 
the increased exportation of goods grown or harvested in the United 

42 Seybert, op. tit., p. 2195 Baring, op. cit*, p. 1535 Norman S. Buck, The De- 
velopment of the Organization of Anglo-American Trade, 1800 1 8 $o (New Haven, 
1925), pp. 1191305 Marryat, op. cit., p. 20 j Nathaniel Atcheson, American En- 
croachments on British Rights (London, 1808), pp. 89 ff. 

43 Liverpool steadily displaced London as the chief entrepot for American goods 
and the major port of export, which may explain the comparatively greater hos- 
tility of London merchants toward the United States. New York became the leading 
American seaport before 1800, although Massachusetts owned by far the largest pro- 
portion of ships engaged in foreign trade. 

44 The statistical information in this and succeeding paragraphs is drawn from 
Seybert, op. cit., and United States Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the 
United States, 17891045 (Washington, 194.9). For some purposes, particularly in 
connection with foreign trade, the Americans used a statistical year beginning Octo- 
ber i and ending September 30. In such instances, reference here is to the calendar 
year in which nine months of the commercial year fell. 

29 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

States. Most went to the British Isles and aided the British econ- 
omy. Even in 1801-1802, when Europe was at peace and the 
oceans were open, Britain purchased goods worth twice as much 
as the American produce shipped to France. In wartime the pro- 
portion was even higher ; in 1806 the United States exported $20 
million worth of her own goods to Britain and only $2.7 million 
worth to France. Total American domestic exports topped $41 
million in 1 806 and reached a peak of nearly $49 million in 1 807. 
That year, 64 million pounds of cotton, 1.2 million bushels of 
wheat, 62,000 hogsheads of tobacco, and large amounts of hemp, 
beef, corn, and other commodities were shipped abroad. Some of 
these goods were exported in larger quantities later on in terms 
of bulk, the peak of cotton and tobacco exports did not come until 
1 8 10 but a falling price level and reduced exports of foodstuffs 
meant that the peak value of 1807 was not again reached. Still, 
except during the Embargo, exports remained about double what 
they had been in the early 1790'$. Until at least 1807 the Ameri- 
can farmer was correspondingly prosperous. 

The reexport trade expanded even more spectacularly, from an 
infinitesimal amount in 1791 to $60 million in 1806. In 1806, 47 
million pounds of coffee, more than 146 million pounds of sugar, 
and nearly 2 million pounds of cotton imported into the United 
States were reexported to Europe. The government encouraged 
this commerce by returning, in the form of drawbacks, almost all 
customs duties levied at the time of the original importation. This 
trade permitted goods from French and Spanish colonies in the 
Caribbean, as well as the lie de France and Bourbon, to reach the 
home country. It cast the protection of a neutral flag over supplies 
Napoleon woefully needed, frustrating the Royal Navy's efforts 
to break up French commerce. It contributed to a worsening de- 
pression in the British West Indies by providing competitive goods 
that increased the oversupply in Europe. Britain scarcely benefited 
at all, for less than 5 per cent of all reexported commodities went 
to England and her colonies. Many Englishmen angrily pro- 
nounced American merchants and shipowners effectively allied 
with the Emperor Napoleon. 

30 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

The passage of time enables us to be dispassionate, to see that 
Alexander Baring argued correctly when he attempted to convince 
his countrymen that American prosperity was in effect their own. 
It is, however, characteristic of the entire period that emotion and 
not reason governed British attitudes. Faced with prospects so 
bleak that Lord Grenville virtually turned his back upon office 
to avoid responsibility for the national humiliation he considered 
inevitable, consoled only by a conviction that England acted as 
the defender and, God willing, the savior of the entire world, 
painfully aware that the Americans formerly symbols of suc- 
cessful rebellion and now of republicanism were steadily ad- 
vancing in wealth and self-esteem, Englishmen understandably 
allowed themselves to treat the United States in a brusque, cavalier, 
contemptuous fashion. To say this is not to condone the interrup- 
tion of American trade, to palliate the brutal attack upon the 
Chesapeake y to justify the forcible seizure of American seamen. 
In fact, Britain would best have served her own interests if she 
had done none of these things. But Britain was beleaguered, and 
those under siege are not likely to allow dispassion and long-range 
thinking to dominate their policy. 



CHAPTER 



II 



REPUBLICANISM 
AND NEUTRALITY 



Parliament met in the world's largest city, the metropolitan focus 
of Anglo-American civilization. By contrast, the American gov- 
ernment sat at Washington, a young city considered by most Eu- 
ropeans and not a few Americans almost a travesty of a national 
capital. 1 Only 6,000 people, settled in straggling little villages 
along the axis of Pennsylvania Avenue from the Eastern Branch 
to Georgetown, lived in the District of Columbia. The arrival of 
140 congressmen and 34 senators strained the modest capacities of 
Washington boardinghouses ; several congressmen often shared a 
bedroom, and the dining rooms frequently served as small caucus 

1 One British minister, Augustus John Foster, mildly challenged the opinions of 
other foreign visitors, but his comments are cool enough: "I would not, of course, 
compare the life we led at the American capital with the mode of spending time in 
any of the great European cities where amusements are so varied and manners are 
much more refined, but making allowances for its size and strange position I cannot be 
so severe in describing it as some travellers have been." Richard B. Davis, ed., Jeffer~ 
sonian America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by Sir Augustus John 
Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 195 4), p. 108. 

32 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

or committee rooms. For its formal business Congress had to make 
do with the north wing of the Capitol, completed in 1 807. The 
roof soon leaked, and acoustics in the legislative chambers, par- 
ticularly the House, were so bad that many a fiery oration escaped 
the hearing of congressmen distant from the speaker. At no time 
was Washington more than the political capital of the nation, for, 
whereas London was also the center of British economic life, in 
America the commercial cities of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
and Baltimore shared this function. Washington and London sym- 
bolized the contrast between republican America, a young nation 
with a white population of scarcely 5 millions, and aged, ordered 
Britain, with nearly four times as many people. 

Political life in the United States was in many respects simpler 
than in Britain, where factionalism made the tenure of govern- 
ments insecure. After 1801 the decline of Federalist strength con- 
ferred almost dictatorial powers upon the Republicans, provided 
they could maintain discipline. In 1805 the Federalists held only 
one quarter of the seats in each of the houses of Congress, and 
until the War of 1812 temporarily aided them, their share never 
much exceeded one-third. For this their own weakness was pri- 
marily responsible, for, the Louisiana Purchase aside, the Jeffer- 
sonians had accomplished remarkably little. Federalists allowed 
themselves to become identified with separatism, with disloyal 
Anglophilia, with supercilious disregard for less successful fellow 
citizens. Except in Connecticut they had to fight for their political 
lives, even in the old bastion of Massachusetts. The broad national 
appeal that once brought them support even in the South evap- 
orated, although a few Southern Federalists remained in Congress 
even after 1805. Federalism might profit from Jeffersonian mis- 
takes or Republican divisions, but it was sterile ; its days of useful- 
ness had passed. 

The Federalists lacked leadership as well as a positive program. 
John Adams' retirement to Quincy removed him from the scene 
almost as effectively as Aaron Burr's pistol had quieted Hamilton, 
and the party fell into the hands of lesser leaders neither so well 
balanced as Adams nor so bold as Hamilton. Rufus King of New 

33 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

York, whose services during and after the Constitutional Conven- 
tion entitled him to leadership, rusticated on Long Island, observ- 
ing the political scene, farming, playing with his nephews and 
nieces, but rarely attempting to influence the party. In foreign 
affairs, although an undoubted Federalist, King was a loyal Amer- 
ican, judging each issue upon its merits as he saw them and con- 
ferring his support upon the administration when he thought it 
acted wisely. 2 Had Federalism been led to constructive criticism 
by King or a man of his stamp, it would have had a reason and per- 
haps a hope for success. Instead, narrow and unreasonable men 
like Timothy Pickering, Barent Gardenier, and Josiah Quincy took 
command. Pickering in particular opposed any moderate course 5 
he was described by one critic as possessed of "the stern severity 
of a Roman Cato" and by an ally as "a perfect hater of democratic 
fraud and villainy," 3 and this severity and hatred became his most 
notable characteristics. In the Senate and in pamphlets and news- 
paper articles he showed himself willing to risk the Union itself 
if this would advance the cause of Federalism and Great Britain. 
Barent Gardenier, a New Yorker who led the Federalist clique in 
the House of Representatives during the Embargo, differed little 
from Pickering in his political outlook. His successor as file leader 
wrote of Gardenier, "He is a man of wit and desultory reading, 
accustomed to the skirmishing and electioneering violence of New 
York. He brings it all into debate in an honest, unguarded, incon- 
siderate manner, very well calculated to inflame the party passions 
opposed to him, but not to make converts." 4 Josiah Quincy, minor- 

2 John Quincy Adams also might have been considered for leadership. But, dis- 
couraged by the disloyal carping of other Federalists and doubtless also influenced by 
the treatment accorded his father in 1800, Adams drifted toward Republicanism, and 
in 1808 he attended the Republican caucus. That his sturdy nationalism and his in- 
terest in the rights of American neutral commerce found an easier home in the Re- 
publican party is an added condemnation of Federalism in this period. Similarly 
alienated by Federalism's drift were such persons as William Plumer of New Hamp- 
shire and, more slowly, Oliver Wolcott, the ultra-Hamiltonian secretary of the 
treasury under Adams. 

3 William Plumer to William Plumer, Jr., Dec. 30, 1805, Charles S. Hall, Benja- 
min Tallmadge (New York, 194.3), p. 184.5 Bigelow to Hannah G. Bigelow, Dec. 
29, 1 8 10, Clarence S. Brigham, ed., "Letters of Abijah Bigelow, Member of Con- 
gress, to His Wife, 1810-1815," American Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., 
XL (1931), 312. 

4 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, n.d., Edmund Quincy, Life of Josiah Quincy (Boston, 

34 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

ity leader in the war Congress of 1811-1812, had prejudices 
almost equally deep. For tactical reasons he imposed a flexible 
policy upon the party, but he never admitted the sincerity of the 
Republicans upon any important issue. From 1805 to 1812 Fed- 
eralists seldom offered more than carping, negative criticism. 

Pessimism and despair largely explain Federalist rigidity. Their 
enemies 3 victories convinced them that the people had been se- 
duced by visionary or corrupt politicians. It scarcely occurred to the 
Federalists, who had usually simply assumed that the people 
would follow the lead of the virtuous and the wellborn, to try to 
equal Republican organizational efforts, at least on a national 
scale. "Neither learning, morals nor wisdom seem any longer to 
be regarded as objects of public esteem & favour, 35 Rufus King 
wrote in 1807. King therefore continued in retirement, and active 
Federalists considered themselves the rear guard of a band of 
heroes, not the vanguard of a political movement. They opposed 
as evil almost anything the Republicans supported, to the dismay 
of some of their number like Noah Webster, who wrote: "There is 
a way to preserve the confidence of the populace, without a sacri- 
fice of integrity. In morality, an honest man must make no con- 
cessions that violate the laws of right. But political measures are 
rarely connected with moral right & wrong , at least the greatest 
proportion are mere matters of expedience." By 1811 the habit of 
rigid opposition against which Webster complained had become a 
fixation, leading the Federalists to absurd lengths. "Instead of a 
patriotic opposition to an oppressive government," their congres- 
sional leader complained, "they are in great danger of degenerat- 
ing into a mere faction, ready to quarrel with anything which may 
endanger, or adopt anything which will promote, party success." * 

A loosening grip upon the press contributed to the decline of 
Federalism, particularly since newspaper columns were the princi- 



1867), p. 134. Cf. John Randolph: "The gentleman has powers, and of no ordinary 
cast} and he has certainly given to the House a strong- proof of his candor, whatever 
it may have been of his discretion." Annals, loth Cong., ad sess., p. 1465. 

5 King to Noah Webster, n.d. [June 30, 1807?], Charles R. King, The Life and 
Correspondence of Rufus King (6 vols.j New York, 1894-1900), V, 355 Webster to 
King, July 6, 1807, ibid. y V, 38 5 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, n.d. [Dec., 18 1 1], Quincy, 
o<p. cit.y p. 241. 

35 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

pal vehicles of political propaganda. 6 The Boston Columbian Cen- 
tinel and the Connecticut Courant of Hartford spoke the language 
of Federalist orthodoxy in New England, and lesser journals 
echoed them. After 1 808 the Baltimore Federal Republican, man- 
aged by a former employee of the Department of State discharged 
by Madison, carried on a campaign of unequaled viciousness 
against the administration. On the whole the Federalists were ill 
served, at least south of the Hudson. Well before the War of 
1812 Republican newspapers outnumbered those of their rivals, 
and a majority of the most important newspapers in the land op- 
posed Federalism even if they did not unwaveringly support Jeffer- 
son and Madison. The National Intelligencer, edited at Wash- 
ington by Samuel Harrison Smith, profited from its monopoly of 
congressional reporting and its important position as administra- 
tion spokesman to become the most widely read paper in the coun- 
try. William Duane's Aurora often used its energy to attack rival 
Pennsylvania Republicans, but, as befitted an Irish republican, 
Duane even more consistently attacked Federalism and Great 
Britain. At Boston the Independent Chronicle carried the war to 
the enemy so aggressively that the French minister considered it 
America's most Francophile journal. Only in New York City, 
where but three of the fourteen newspapers were Republican and 
the strongest of these, the Columbian, was a supporter of Clinton- 
ian Republicanism rather than of the administration, was the party 
in a bad way. Jefferson frequently complained of the public press. 
Actually Republican papers were better edited and more widely 
distributed than those of their rivals. 7 

The violence of this propaganda caused frequent complaints of libel. In 1812 Gov- 
ernor Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts officially declared that 262 libelous articles 
had been published in the past thirteen months, not counting- those directed at for- 
eign governments or individuals or at rival newspaper editors. Republican Gerry 
declared that only twenty-five of these had appeared in Republican papers. Charles 
Warren, Jacobin and Junto } or Early American Politics as Viewed in the Diary of Dr. 
Nathaniel Ames (Cambridge, 1931), p. 213. 

7 Isaiah Thomas, History of Printing in America, II, American Antiquarian 
Society, Transactions and Collections^ VoL VI (2d ed. $ Albany, 1874), pp. 294 304 j 
Louis M. Se"rurier to Minister of Foreign Relations, March 10, 1812, Archives des 
Affaires Etrangeres, Correspondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of 
Congress), Vol. LXVII. 

36 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

The great triumvirate at the head o the Republican party ex- 
plains its success far more than increasing newspaper support or 
the erosion of Federalism. Thomas Jefferson's simple and often 
noble ideals, his insistence upon the unique virtue of the American 
experiment, his sturdy but moderate republicanism, his dislike of 
pomp and ceremony these appealed deeply to American citi- 
zens. Less loved but widely respected, James Madison admirably 
conducted the business of the Department of State and loyally sup- 
ported the efforts of Jefferson, with whom he was in close rapport. 
Albert Gallatin, similarly devoted, installed at the Treasury the 
fiscal simplicity required by Republican doctrine and often served 
as a useful balance wheel to restrain the ardors of his chief. Jef- 
ferson and his two lieutenants dominated American politics and 
American diplomacy. The battles were fought upon issues they 
pushed to the fore. 

Jefferson attracted the blind, even excessive, loyalty of many 
Republicans. In 1808 an idolatrous clergyman declared: "With 
the philosopher, the statesman, the patriot Jefferson at the helm, 
our country assumed an attitude which the angels of God surveyed 
with approbation, and which excited the rancors of the enemies 
of Freedom!" 8 Although Federalists attacked him while he lived 
and some nineteenth-century historians were critical, in our time 
Thomas Jefferson has become one of the central figures in the 
American pantheon Jefferson the democrat, the defender of un- 
derdogs, the man of catholic interests, the liberal philosopher, the 
uniquely perceptive American patriot. Perhaps it is time to reassay 
the Virginian, at least as chief executive and grand strategist of 
American diplomacy. Perhaps a half-felt sense of inadequacy 
caused Jefferson to order that no mention of his presidency be 
chiseled into the stone that marks his grave. 

In 1805 Jefferson had passed the age of sixty, a fact of more 
than ordinary significance since the story of his life is in part the 
story of a gradual shedding of youthful enthusiasms. He was tall 
and carelessly stooped, thin, freckled, grey of hair, somewhat shy 

8 John Foster, An Oration, Pronounced- by Rev. Jo An Foster > on the jth of July, 
1808 (Salem, 1808), pp. 1112. 

37 



REPUBLICANISM AND' NEUTRALITY 

and a difficult conversationalist in large groups or with strangers 
but brilliant and far-ranging when in full flight. As president he 
adopted informal, democratic protocol at the White House and 
abandoned the custom of personal appearances before Congress 
on the ostensible ground that the members might be overawed. 
The party's rank and file idolized him. 

Jefferson considered himself a philosopher, and in a sense he 
was. But, as Charles Wiltse has observed, Jefferson applied rather 
than originated theories of human behavior; he was a Locke or a 
Lenin, not a Hobbes or a Marx. To some at the time William 
Plumer, for example and to others since, he appeared almost too 
rational and studious. Wiltse comments, "Jefferson's humanity is 
always of the head rather than of the heart. ... If he claims 
equality for all men, it is not because he feels that men are equal, 
but because he reasons that they must be so." 9 True though this 
is, it misses another part of Jefferson's thought, the petty prejudices 
that sometimes influenced him. In 1819 John Quincy Adams, by 
this time himself a sturdy Republican, came upon a letter written 
by Jefferson nearly a decade before. Adams commented that the 
letter was "a mixture of profound and sagacious observation, with 
strong prejudices and irritated passions. It is a sort of epitome of 
his political opinions and feelings. Jefferson is one of the great men 
whom this country has produced, one of the men who has con- 
tributed largely to the formation of our national character to 
much that is good and to not a little that is evil in our sentiments 
and manners." 10 Jefferson's correspondence contains many flashes 
of philosophy, philosophy reflected in the course of action he 
urged upon the state. But the sage of Monticello never organized 
his thought in a cohesive whole (how many American political 
philosophers have?), and he was, far more than he realized, the 
prey of impulse and emotion. "Eclectic" and "adaptable" are the 
adjectives best applied to his concepts. 

By the time he left office in 1809, Jefferson had modified many 

9 Charles M. Wiltse, The Jefersonian Tradition in American Democracy (Chapel 
Hill, 1935)? P- 5- 

10 Entry of Dec. 27, 1819, Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John Quincy Adams 
(12 vols.j Philadelphia, 1 8 74.! 8 77) % IV, 492. 

38 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

of his theoretical precepts in the interest of realism as he saw it. 
Committed to a narrow interpretation of the Constitution, he ex- 
panded the activities of the federal government more, at least, 
than any president between Washington and Jackson. On his own 
admission he acted unconstitutionally in arranging the acquisi- 
tion of Louisiana, subordinating theory to national good. The 
Embargo was of such dubious constitutionality that the Republi- 
cans did not permit it to be submitted to the Supreme Court for 
review. The earnest advocate of republicanism, Jefferson once 
praised an elaborate pyramidal hierarchy of popular and elected 
assemblies rising from town meetings of the New England sort to 
Congress and the president. Later he came, with some justice, to 
consider the New England gatherings seditious and to doubt the 
wisdom of Congress, primarily because of "the wonderful credu- 
lity of the members ... in the floating lies of the day, . . . 
[of which] no experience seems to correct them. I have never 
seen a Congress during the last 8. years," Jefferson continued, "a 
great majority of which I would not implicitly rely on in any ques- 
tion, could their minds have been purged of all errors of fact. 35 n 
The minds of Congress and the people could not be purged, and 
in practice Jefferson fell back upon the theory that the adminis- 
trators of government were stewards of the people, in whose in- 
terests and with whose support the expert, the rational, and the 
intelligent might govern. The result of these two accommodations 
of theory to contemporary conditions was government that often 
differed only in form from that of John Adams. 

In the field of foreign policy the contrast between Jefferson and 
his predecessor became more marked. Jefferson strangely com- 
bined idealism and utopianism with pragmatism and cynical craft. 
He revered international law, interpreting it, however, in a fash- 
ion that coincided with American interests, a fairly easy task when 
the law of nations had not been codified and many of the available 
authorities had written to defend the rights of small neutrals. 
Next only to moral law and the general interests of humanity 

11 Jefferson to Madison, March 17, 1809, James Madison MSS, Library of Con- 
gress. 

39 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

(which justified the otherwise absurd concept that the American 
frontier should lie along the Gulf Stream) , the President believed 
that the usage of nations and treaties should govern international 
relations. 12 Rational application of these should and ultimately 
must bring an end to quarrels between states. Meantime it was 
better to insist upon one's rights than to compromise, better to 
reject, for example, any partial settlement of the problem of 
impressment until Britain agreed to abandon the practice entirely. 
Jefferson thus differed sharply from Adams, who never abandoned 
claims of right but was prepared to compromise them in practice 
if the United States could profit thereby. In this, too, Jefferson 
was somewhat in contrast with Madison, whose diplomacy after 
he became president was more flexible than that of his mentor and 
friend. 

Jefferson could also be an alarmist. In 1803 he seriously con- 
sidered an alliance with Great Britain, a futile and dangerous 
project entirely unnecessary to the task of keeping France out of 
Louisiana. In 1 805, with even less reason, he recurred to this plan, 
only to meet with stubborn opposition in his Cabinet. In 1806 the 
President procured from Congress, without quite admitting that 
he was doing so, an appropriation of $2 million to bribe French 
support in an American quarrel with Spain. Later the President 
leaped hastily into the Embargo, although the germ of his plan 
had been in his mind for years. For most of 1808 he clung stub- 
bornly to this measure, so disastrous to American prosperity and 
inefficacious in coercing Europe, only to abandon it, on the basis 
of exaggerated reports of impending rebellion in New England, 
when the Embargo most needed his support. These hasty, ill- 
digested actions Jefferson justified to himself as part of a larger 
search for justice and right. 

The President recognized that the world did not share his re- 
spect for international law. One of the most frequent themes in his 
correspondence is a protest against the way the din of Napoleonic 
struggles turned European statesmen from reason to emotion and 

12 Wiltse, op. cit., pp. 178 ff. 

40 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

even idiocy. "I consider Europe as a great mad-house, & in the 
present deranged state of their moral faculties to be pitied & 
avoided/' Jefferson declared in 1808. In Britain, he believed, "all 
the bulwarks of morality & right have been broken up." In 1 8 1 1 
he told Kosciuszko, "It would have been perfect Quixotism in us 
to have encouraged these Bedlamites, to have undertaken the re- 
dress of all wrongs against a world avowedly rejecting all regard 
to right." 13 Unfortunately, many of Jefferson's policies ignored 
the very emotionalism to him, lunacy against which he in- 
veighed. The Nonimportation Act, the Embargo Act, even the 
attempt to bribe Napoleon might have succeeded in normal times, 
but-they were themselves the fruit of international abnormality. 

Jefferson hated war. He felt that the greatest possible American 
contribution to the happiness of mankind lay not in a military 
crusade for justice but in the careful preservation of America's 
position as "the sole repository of the sacred fire of freedom & self- 
government" at a time when repression swept the world. "Peace 
. . . has been our principle, peace is our interest, and peace has 
saved to the world thiapnly plant of free and rational government 
now existing in it," he declaimed to Kosciuszko. On the other 
hand, as early as 1806 the President saw the danger of encourag- 
ing Europe to believe America treasured peace above all else. "This 
opinion," he said, "must be corrected when just occasion arises, or 
we shall become the plunder of all nations." As chief executive 
Jefferson did little to correct this opinion, but as the War of 1 8 1 2 
approached he became more and more reconciled to the use of 
force. In May, 1811, he still hoped for peace, but added: "When 
peace becomes more losing than war, we may prefer the latter on 
principles of pecuniary calculation." In 1812 he was sure the hour 
had come: "we are to have war then? I believe so, and that it is 
necessary, every hope from time, patience & the love of peace is 

13 Jefferson to David B. Warden, July 16, 1808, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library of 
Congress; Jefferson to George Gilpin, Sept. 7, 1809, ibid.; Jefferson to Tadeusz 
Kosciuszko, April 13, 1811, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E, Bergh, eds., The 
Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols. ; Washington, 19031904), 
XIII, 41. 

41 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

exhausted, and war or abject submission are the only alternatives 
left us. I am forced from my hobby, peace." 14 The dualism, the 
ambivalence in Jefferson's attitude was characteristic of his entire 
thought, supple rather than stubborn, accommodating rather than 
principled, ever flexible. 

Jefferson never quarreled seriously with his chief subordinates, 
James Madison and Albert Gallatin. The two Virginians and the 
Genevese-Pennsylvanian shared broad, general concepts which ran 
above the crosscurrents of compromise: a deep patriotic nationalism, 
a vague but nonetheless sincere liberalism, and a desire for peace. 
Jefferson, primus inter pares, never had to impose his major ideas 
upon unwilling lieutenants. He frequently sought and often ac- 
cepted the advice of the two secretaries. At first Jefferson polled 
his Cabinet on all important issues, granting to himself only one 
vote. Despite usual unanimity the system proved cumbersome 
and unsatisfactory. During the post-Chesapeake flurry of govern- 
mental activity, the President substituted consultation with indi- 
vidual members of the Cabinet, and after leaving office he praised 
this arrangement because it left the president freer to make the 
ultimate decisions. 1 ' 5 

Secretary Madison, self-effacing and inevitably cast into the 
shade by Jefferson's titanic figure, was no mere sycophant. If he 
seldom took issue with the President, it was because they shared 
common convictions or because, within a broad conceptual frame- 
work, Jefferson permitted his friend to lay out the details of 
policy. 16 On international affairs James Madison was probably 

14 Jefferson's farewell to the citizens of Washington, 1809, Joseph I. Shulim, The 
Old Dominion and Napoleon Bonaparte (New York, 1952), p. 279; Jefferson to 
Kosciuszko, April 13, 1811, Lipscomb and Bergh, o$. cit n XIII, 41425 Jefferson to 
Thomas Cooper, Feb. 18, 1806, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to William Wirt, May 3, 

1811, Lipscomb and Bergh, op. cit., XIII, 60 j Jefferson to Charles Pinckney, Feb. 2, 

1812, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge Collection), Massachusetts Historical Society. 

15 Jefferson to William Short, June 12, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, o<p. cit., XI, 
2275 Jefferson to Gallatin, July 10, 1807, ibid., XI, 267-2685 Jefferson to Walter 
Jones, March 5, 1810, ibid., XII, 371. 

^ Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), performs 
valuable service in emphasizing Madison's positive contributions to Jeffersonian diplo- 
macy, but in attempting to restore the balance he perhaps goes too far in the other 
direction. 

42 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

better informed than his chief, although his foreign correspondents 
were far less numerous. Despite the plague of many minor illnesses 
Jefferson, too, was not free from frequent migraine headaches 
Madison was a tremendous worker, and his contributions to the 
political success of the Republican party and the development of 
American policy were scarcely less than those of Jefferson him- 
self. 

Differences in age, temperament, position, and reputation made 
Madison definitely the subordinate of Jefferson until 1 809. Madi- 
son's mind ran in narrower channels. Although far abler at detailed 
analysis, he was less decisive, tending always to magnify the 
dangers of any proposed course. (This served him ill when he 
became president and lost or discarded Jefferson's guidance.) Fed- 
eralists called Madison the mere hired attorney of the President, 
a slander that had a bite of truth within it. An able advocate, a 
shrewd debater, a master at marshaling facts, down to 1809 the 
Secretary showed little boldness or originality. In January, 1806, 
a long pamphlet, the product of several month's labor by the 
Secretary, was quietly laid on the desks of Congress. It bore the 
forbidding title, An Examination of the British Doctrine, Which 
Subjects to Capture a Neutral Trade , Not Open in Time of Peace. 
Characteristically, the pamphlet was anonymous, although the 
author soon became known. Equally characteristically, it was an 
overwhelming and in many respects devastating, but almost totally 
dispassionate, dissection of one aspect of British maritime policy. 
It was verbose and too complicated for ordinary readers. Above all, 
the pamphlet contained no suggested remedy for the evil of Brit- 
ish insult, and it merited John Randolph's scornful comment: 
"After all, what does it contain? A remedy for the evil? No; a 
formal declaration that we are diseased! Sir, we wanted no ghost 
to tell us that." 17 An Examination of the British Doctrine, the 
chef-d'oeuvre of Madison's secretaryship, properly reflected his 
strengths and weaknesses. 

17 James Madison, An Examination of the British Doctrine, Which Subjects to 
Capture a Neutral Trade, Not O$en in Time of Peace (Philadelphia, 1806), re- 
printed in Gaillard Hunt, ed., The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.; New York, 
1900-1910), VII, 204-375 j Annals, 9th Cong-., ist sess., p. 600. 

4-3 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

Yet Madison was not a mere thinking machine. He had pride, 
ambition,, and independence coupled with haunting personal mis- 
givings which no doubt help to explain his frequent illnesses after 
becoming president. Reserved in official intercourse, in private life 
he was more sociable than Jefferson. A British diplomat, who dur- 
ing the trying months just before the American declaration of 
war thought him "rather too much the disputatious pleader," 
added that, at parties, Madison was "a social, jovial and good- 
humored companion full of anecdote and sometimes matter of 
loose description relating to old times, but often of a political and 
historical interest." 18 Almost without exception, those who knew 
Madison well liked him. But his compact figure, carefully pow- 
dered hair, and neat dress all in marked contrast to Jefferson 
furthered his reputation as a clerkly type of man. 

Secretary of the Treasury Gallatin performed somewhat the 
same function as Madison, acting as an occasional brake upon 
Jefferson and, in his own special field of finance, as the initiator 
of detailed policy. Gallatin also served as a channel of informal 
communication with Congress, partly because he lived nearer 
Capitol Hill and partly because his brother-in-law, Joseph Nichol- 
son, was until 1807 an important member of the House of Repre- 
resentatives. Although by common consent able and dedicated, 
Gallatin was not popular. His foreignness offended some Republi- 
cans perhaps also jealous of his ability. Some, restive under control 
but too craven to attack the more powerful Virginia chieftains, 
took their anger out upon Gallatin. Jefferson, who deeply re- 
spected Gallatin and recognized that finance and foreign affairs 
were closely mingled, unceasingly consulted the Secretary of the 
Treasury. When they did disagree Gallatin nevertheless devoted 
his full energies to support of the policy Jefferson desired. In the 
last eighteen months of Jefferson's administration Gallatin's pri- 
vate voice supported measures looking to war. Commenting on 
British and French insults, he wrote: "Let those nations pursue 
what course they please, I feel a perfect confidence that America 
will never adopt a policy which would render her subservient to 

18 Davis, of. cit., p. 155. 

44. 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

either, and that . . . she will meet with fortitude the crisis . . . 
which may result from the difficult situation in which she is 
placed." 19 

With the Republicans enjoying overwhelming majorities in 
both houses of Congress, the executive, when it bestirred itself, 
could work its will upon the legislature during most of Jefferson's 
two terms. John Adams, who had had his difficulties with Con- 
gress and clung to much of the old Washington idea of a president 
above party, complained that "Wisdom and Justice can never be 
promoted till the Presidents office instead of being a Doll and a 
Whistle, Shall be made more independent and more respectable; 
capable of mediating between two infuriated parties," 20 but Jeffer- 
son proved that by acting as party leader the president could exert 
irresistible leverage. Republican floor leaders were chosen and dis- 
charged by the president, party caucuses imposed discipline upon 
legislators (or at any rate most of them), and the administration 
provided the text of some legislation to be passed by its agents. 
Until the selection of Henry Clay nearly three years after Jeffer- 
son's retirement, the speaker of the House acted merely as one 
comparatively minor administration spokesman, and the vice- 
president never established an important position in the Senate. 21 
Not a single important piece of Jeffersonian legislation suffered 
defeat, and serious opposition did not appear until after a schism 
within Republican rankybrought into the open in 1805 by the 
proposal to bribe Francef, The Embargo and its supplements sailed 
easily through Congress despite the misgivings of many Republi- 
cans. \ 

On some occasions the President declined to direct his agents. 
In 1 806, probably because he felt that any American legislation 
threatening to cut into British exports would bring the ministry 
to its senses, Jefferson did nothing to indicate to Congress the 

19 Gallatin to Charles Pinckney, Oct. 24, 1808, Albert Gallatin MSS, New-York 
Historical Society. 

20 John Adams to Rush, July 25, 1808, Benjamin Rush MSS, Library of Congress. 

21 For Jefferson's leadership of Congress see Ralph V. Harlow, The History of 
Legislative Methods in the Period before 1825, Yale Historical Publications, Mis- 
cellany, Vol. V (New Haven, 1917)) 165-193. 

45 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

form he wished the legislation to take. The House of Representa- 
tives milled in confusion for weeks, and the Non-importation Act 
that emerged was a jest rather than a serious weapon against Eng- 
land. Similar silence at the White House contributed decisively 
to the confusion accompanying repeal of the Embargo Act during 
the last months of Jefferson's regime. Sometimes the President 
concealed from Congress the reasons for action he had taken or 
desired the legislators to take. In 1807, for example, he rejected 
the Monroe-Pinkney treaty without even submitting it to the 
Senate and, although in private conversations he explained his 
reasons to some senators, he withheld the treaty and the cor- 
respondence relating to it for more than a year. 22 The Embargo 
message, only one short paragraph, failed to mention several im- 
portant reasons for adopting this policy. In short, while Jefferson 
frequently explained his desires to legislators willing to execute 
them, on other important occasions he drew back into his shell. 
His choice of times to remain inert proved extremely unfortunate 
for his party and for the United States. 

The President found the management of Congress increasingly 
difficult during his second term. The Republicans were individual- 
ists, more skillful in opposition than in execution. The collapse of 
Federalism, which had served as a useful focus for their dislikes, 
actually weakened their vigor. Factionalism developed; New Eng- 
land Republicans showed hostility to their Southern brethren, 
the Quids professed to be more orthodox than Pope Thomas, and 
individual feuds and antipathies came into the open. From 1 805 
to 1808 these difficulties caused debate and delay more often 
than serious trouble. In the closing months of Jefferson's adminis- 
tration and throughout Madison's reign they often proved un- 
fortunately decisive. 

Most Yankee Republicans, even those who came from inland 
areas, took a far more favorable view of commerce than South- 
erners. Others who had triumphed by narrow margins over Feder- 

22 The documents and correspondence were presented to Congress only in March, 
1808, fifteen months after the treaty was signed at London. Annals, loth Cong., ist 
sess., pp. 18691870. 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

alist opponents tended to look askance at policies that might per- 
mit their enemies to return to power. Not a few, feeling that they 
had fought the party's most difficult battles and deserved a fair 
share of influence and power, were jealous of the primacy of their 
Southern colleagues. Jefferson rewarded several Yankee followers 
with cabinet positions 5 in 1805 he made Barnabas Bidwell the 
administration spokesman in the House of Representatives, and 
in 1807 General Joseph B. Varnum of Massachusetts became 
speaker of the House. None of the New Englanders proved par- 
ticularly helpful. The great Massachusetts merchant, Jacob Crown- 
inshield, who captured Pickering's seat in 1 802, died in the spring 
of 1808 after a long illness which deprived the party of his poten- 
tially important services. Bidwell proved a failure as House leader 
and later an embarrassment, for he decamped to Canada in 1810 
when a shortage was discovered in his accounts as county treasurer 
just at a time when Madison contemplated appointing him to the 
Supreme Court. "The republicans [here], talk of principles, but 
seek offices," the Republican governor of Massachusetts told Jef- 
ferson in 1808, "they talk of public good, but want places of 
emolument." 2S Unfortunately, this analysis was only too true. 
The most spectacular of the Republican dissidents, John Ran- 
dolph of Roanoke, owned a plantation fittingly named "Bizarre/' 
Randolph, the most splenetic orator in Congress, a vigorous whip- 
wielding foe of those who crossed him but courteous and gentle- 
manly to others, by turns an effeminate boy and an aging man 
plagued by real and psychosomatic illnesses, led the congressional 
Republicans during the first years of Jefferson's tenure. In 1 805 
he broke with the President, thereafter opposing with unique 
violence almost everything Jefferson supported. In 1 81 1 Jefferson 
wrote that his former protege's "exclusion [from Congress] alone 
would give greater security to our government, than the repeal 
of the British orders." 24 Randolph's political attitudes were usu- 
ally the product of his hatreds for Napoleon, for greedy ship- 

23 James Sullivan to Jefferson, April 2, 1808, Jefferson MSS. 

24 Jefferson to John W. Eppes, March 4, 1811, Thomas J. Coolidge, ed., "Letters 
of Thomas Jefferson," Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, ad Series, XII 
(1899), 270. 

47 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

owners who sought national protection for their filthy and selfish 
trade, and above all for Jefferson and Madison, who had betrayed 
the Republican cause as Randolph saw it. These hatreds, plus a 
feeling of kinship for Britain and fear of the effect of war, particu- 
larly as it might strengthen the federal government, made him 
oppose almost all measures of resistance to Britain. Although his 
scorn and sarcasm often spurred his opponents to resistance rather 
than surrender, Randolph was an extremely able debater (when 
healthy), a masterful parliamentarian, and a very troublesome 
enemy to the followers of Jefferson. 25 

Nathaniel Macon and James Monroe, two other Republican 
wheel horses, at times shared Randolph's feeling that Jefferson 
had abandoned the old party traditions of limited government, a 
peaceful foreign policy, and the superior importance of agriculture. 
For personal and political reasons Monroe broke with his fellow 
Virginians and became a silent but definite anti-Madisonian candi- 
date for the presidency in 1808. Thereafter he drifted steadily 
away from Randolph, back toward his original allegiance. Na- 
thaniel Macon, speaker of the House of Representatives until 
1807, followed somewhat the same path. In 1806 he joined Ran- 
dolph in opposing resistance to Britain on the issues of the reexport 
trade and impressment, partly because he was unwilling that the 
South should sacrifice for Northern interests and partly because 
he was convinced that "public force and liberty cannot dwell in the 
same country. 37 26 Macon soon abandoned Randolph and resumed 
support of the administration, perhaps in part because British 
restrictions began to harm the agricultural as well as the mer- 
cantile interest. Without these two veteran Republicans, Randolph 
and the handful of Tertium Quids, as they called themselves, did 
not seriously threaten the administration after 1 808. 

25 Benjamin Rush expressed a widespread view of Randolph when he wrote: "I 
have long: considered him as a mischievous boy with a squirt in his hands, throwing 1 
its dirty contents into the eyes of everybody that looked at him. A kicking or a 
horsewhipping would be the best reply that could be made to his vulgar parlia- 
mentary insolence. It is only because the body which he insults is what it is that he 
has been so long tolerated." Rush to John Adams, April 26, 1810, Lyman H. Butter- 
field, ed., Letters of Benjamin Rush, II, American Philosophical Society, Memoirs, 
Vol. XXX (1951), p. 1042. 

26 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., pp. 686698. 

48 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

In the Senate, too, there were stirrings of opposition to Jeffer- 
son, and Madison later suffered humiliation at the hands of sena- 
tors who called themselves Republicans. William Branch Giles 
of Virginia, a congenital opponent of almost everything not sug- 
gested by himself, grumbled a great deal against Jeffersonian 
policy. The President's tactful treatment of Giles and a broken 
leg that kept the Senator away from Washington in 1805 and 
1806 delayed a rupture. After supporting the Embargo in 1807 
and Madison's candidacy in 1808 Giles shifted to opposition. 
Maryland's Samuel Smith, a wealthy merchant, selfish and ambi- 
tious, almost always acted as his interests dictated, and his former 
Federalism made him distrust extreme Republicans. In 1805, 
commenting on an electoral campaign in Virginia, he wrote, "It 
is a struggle . . . between those who would carry Democracy to 
lengths dangerous to civil society, . . . and those whose good 
sense, talents, & abilities, produce the present state of things & wish 
to proceed no further in reform." 27 Smith would oppose extremists 
in his own party, even if it meant temporary alliance with some 
Federalists. 

While schismatics usually could find hallowed party doctrines 
to justify their rebelliousness, as a responsible national leader Jef- 
ferson could not permit himself to be enslaved by antique doctrine. 
His old prejudices against ocean commerce and native manufactur- 
ing gradually softened, although he still gave his greatest devotion 
to agriculture. In 1 809 he wrote, in characteristically simple and 
mechanical terms : 

An equilibrium of agriculture, manufactures & commerce is certainly be- 
come essential to our independence, manufactures sufficient for our own 
consumption of what we raise the raw materials (and no more) . commerce 
sufficient to carry the surplus produce of agriculture, beyond our own con- 
sumption, to a market for exchanging it for articles we cannot raise (and 
no more.) these are the true limits of manufactures & commerce. 28 

A desire for national self-sufficiency and his recognition of the 
interests of a large nonfarming segment of the population caused 

27 Smith to j Dec. 14, 1805, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress, Letter 

Book 18057. 

28 Jefferson to Sir James Jay, April 7, 1809, Jefferson MSS. 

49 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

Jefferson to shift toward this more realistic view of economic 
balance. 

Jefferson and his followers never abandoned one old Republi- 
can ideal, reduction of the national debt as rapidly as possible. 
Between 1801 and 1812 the government showed a deficit in only 
one year, 1 809. In the best years federal income was nearly double 
expenditure. In 1806 and 1807 two-fifths of the government's 
income went to reduce the debt, and in 1 808 Jefferson and Gallatin 
came within half a million dollars of dividing receipts equally 
between expenditures and debt retirement. Between 1801 and 
1812 the Republicans reduced the national debt by $38 million, or 
about 40 per cent. 

Increased customs receipts, not reduced expenditures, really 
produced the surpluses. Almost no income came from internal 
taxes, for the hated Federalist excises had been repealed. Despite 
increased sales of public lands after 1804, income from this source 
never much exceeded 5 per cent of the government's receipts. The 
Treasury depended almost entirely upon customs revenue, the 
fruit of America's prospering foreign trade. Except during the 
Embargo this ran at about double the Federalist level and made 
possible the debt retirement so cherished by Jefferson, Madison, 
and Gallatin. 

Republican fiscal policy had unfortunate consequences. Par- 
simony and retrenchment meant inadequate preparation for war, 
which reduced American influence and made Madison's task more 
difficult after 1812. Nearly total reliance upon customs revenues 
meant serious financial problems whenever trade restrictions or 
war reduced this income, and the abolition of internal taxes de- 
stroyed a potentially broad tax base. Concentration on debt reduc- 
tion allowed the government to ignore the creation of a federal 
credit system. Amortization of the debt and government on the 
cheap were not the prescriptions needed from 1807 to 1812. 

"The rage for sinking the national debt a few years earlier," as 
Robert R. Livingston called it, made Republicans desire to cut the 
armed forces to the bone, a desire so effectively implemented that 
in 1 806 the navy had only one frigate on active service. In addition, 

50 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

Republicans considered the armed forces potential agents of des- 
potism. In Macon's words, "It is not ... an easy matter to raise 
an army, but it is easier to do this than to get clear of one when 
raised. ... I scarcely know which is worst, war or an army with- 
out war." 29 Furthermore, the navy seemed a symbol of Federalist 
involvement in foreign quarrels at the behest of nonagricultural 
interests. Far more Republican, far cheaper, fully as effective for 
defense, less likely to involve America in foreign wars, Jefferson 
thought, was an armada of gunboats which could be manned by 
skeleton crews until sea militia sprang to arms in an emergency. 
Whereas U.S.S. Constellation had cost more than $300,000, a 
gunboat cost only $10,000 to $14,000. Jefferson built hundreds. 
After 1812 they became a macabre monument to his hasty, ill- 
digested ideas in a field of which he knew little. 

Most Federalists and not a few Republicans criticized the gun- 
boat policy. Seaport politicians objected that gunboats and harbor 
fortifications were inadequate for defense and utterly incapable 
of carrying war to the enemy. From London, after humiliating 
experience at the hands of Britain and France, James Monroe 
wrote: "It is by the means which we have of injuring them only 
that they regard us, and their regard is proportioned to those 
means. . . . They are infidels 'till the measure is executed, that 
we will resort to any other than such as embargoes, which affect us 
as much as them. 55 30 Monroe's heretical suggestion that a naval 
squadron be built failed to move Jefferson, and although Madison 
refurbished the navy he made no attempt to expand it. During the 
war session of 1811 12 Republican votes defeated a building 
program. Traditional sentiments produced these votes, along with 
a feeling that, it being too late to challenge Britain at sea, a building 
program might merely encourage her to strike before America 
accumulated an effective force. 31 The failure to develop military 

29 Livingston to Madison, Jan. 8, 1810, Madison MSSj Macon to Nicholson, 
Jan. 31, 1806, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress. 

30 Monroe to Randolph, June 16, 1806, Stanislaus M. Hamilton, ed., The Writings 
of James Monroe (7 vols.j New York, 18981903), IV, 464. 

8 * This argument appealed to Republicans of otherwise different views, among 
them Jefferson, Joseph Story, and John Quincy Adams. The elder Adams, however, 

51 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

defenses, like the policy of rigorous financial retrenchment, under- 
mined the effectiveness of American protests before 1812, con- 
vinced Britain she need never fear more than an ineffectual war 
against her, and cost the United States heavily when war came. 
In precisely those areas most requiring flexibility, Jefferson and 
his followers proved most rigid. 

Federalists accused Jefferson and orthodox Republicans of being 
sycophants of Napoleon. The truth was far more complicated. 
Affection for imperial France influenced only a tiny handful of 
Republicans, certainly not Jefferson himself. If the same was not 
true of the Federalists and Britain, still the Anglophilia of the 
bulk of the party and even of many of its leaders, who tended 
always to be more extreme than their followers, had very real 
limits. Appealing for national union in 1808 (but also no doubt 
well aware of the Federalists' reputation for placing British inter- 
ests ahead of American), Noah Webster rightly stated: "It is a 
truth beyond controversy that the number of men who would 
consent to surrender our national rights or succumb to the domi- 
nation of either power, who would place our independence under 
the protection of the British navy or our maritime rights under 
the protection of France is inconsiderable and comparatively of no 
weight or influence." 32 Views of the rival belligerents were the 
product of many things, among them the possibility of domestic 
political advantage, a general desire to preserve isolation and 
neutrality, a fairly widespread if often naive appreciation of the 
balance of power, and finally of differing sympathies. Policy and 
attitude fluctuated according to news of decisions at the Tuileries or 
Whitehall, on the rolling field of Austerlitz or the open sea off 
Cape Trafalgar. Generalization baffled perceptive diplomats, and 
stupid ones, like France's General Turreau, simply threw up their 
hands and despaired of firm analysis. "Their System with regard 

warned Jefferson that national unity and military effectiveness required the con- 
struction of frigates. "Without this," he wrote, "our Union will be a brittle China 
vase, a house of Ice or a Palace of Glass." John Adams to Jeflerson, June 28, 1812, 
Jefferson MSS (misdated at 1813 in Lipscomb and Bergh, o*f>. cit. y XIII, 289290). 
32 Noah Webster (fseud. Public Spirit), "To All American Patriots," May, 1808, 
Harry R. Warfel, ed., Letters of Noah Webster (New York, 1953), p. 301, 

52 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

to foreign countries is to have none," Turreau complained. ". . . it 
is the events of the day which determine their policies." ** In truth, 
American policy combined deep-seated principles with the prag- 
matism bewailed by Turreau. 

Most widely held of these principles was isolationism, already 
almost a national tradition. Although the undeclared Franco- 
American war and the Louisiana crisis both temporarily drew 
America into the European vortex, John Adams and Thomas 
Jefferson returned to isolation as rapidly as possible. No respon- 
sible American wanted an alliance with the Emperor Napoleon, 
however serious American complaints against Britain, and when 
the nation proceeded to war with England in 1812 it made very 
clear that this did not imply any connection with France. A few 
Federalists wanted to join the British crusade against France; in 
1806 Gouverneur Morris, writing to an English friend, bewailed 
the fact that "you stand alone, and those who ought to side with 
you keep aloof, are awed, and subdued," and regretted that Amer- 
ica had not become "your firm and useful ally." M Not many shared 
Morris' view. The most rabid Anglophiles, even those whose 
affection for Britain led them to sedition, rarely desired to join 
England's war. Sympathy and open commerce, but not alliance: 
such was the high Federalist creed down to 1812. 

Almost all Americans shared the President's feeling that, 
"Kindly separated by nature and a wide ocean from the extermi- 
nating havoc of one quarter of the globe; too high-minded to en- 
dure the degradations of the others; possessing a chosen country," 
the United States might best advance her prosperity and security by 
avoiding connections with Europe. "May God deliver us from the 
contagious politics, which have convulsed the old world . . . ," 
a Republican Fourth of July orator declared. "We wish not the 
deadly embrace of Gallic friendship, or the corrupted influence of 
the British cabinet; for the moment either become intermingled 
with our policy, from that moment we may date the defection of 

33 Turreau #5 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 20, 1806, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LIX. 

34 Morris to Marquis of Stafford, Sept. 14, 1807, Anne C. Morris, ed., The Diary 
and Letters of Gouverneur Morris (2 vols.$ New York, 1888), II, 500. 

53 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

our national prosperity and happiness." A Republican campaign 
committee in New York expressed the same thought by appealing 
(there is some irony in this) to the wise advice in Washington's 
Farewell Address. "This is the only true policy," the committee 
stated, "that American rulers can honestly or providently pursue. 
The moment we enlist ourselves by sliding even imperceptibly 
into European politics, intrigue and warfare, we must abandon 
our peaceful, commercial, and hitherto prosperous system" for full 
participation in the broils of Europe. 35 

Americans considered their way of life superior to that of 
Europe. They desired to preserve it by avoiding contaminating 
contact, not to expand it through aggressive crusading. George W. 
Campbell, at the time the most prominent congressman from the 
West, said in 1806, "It would have been well for us ... if the 
American flag had never floated on the ocean ... to waft to this 
country the luxuries and vices of European nations, ... to excite 
the jealousies and cupidity of those Powers whose existence . . . 
depends on commerce, and to court, as it were, their aggressions, 
and embroil us in their unjust and bloody contests." 36 Although 
Federalists and most Republicans rejected such anticommercial 
views, they shared the isolationist sentiment underlying Camp- 
bell's words. All agreed that the United States had a unique char- 
acter and unique interests best served by peace and withdrawal. 

Many Americans believed that the chance to pursue isolationist 
policies depended upon a balance of power in Europe. They 
counted upon La Grande Armee and the Royal Navy to form a 
rough equilibrium, not only giving the United States diplomatic 
leverage but at the same time preventing either France or Britain 
from turning possibly threatening attention to the United States. 
As good isolationists, of course, the Americans did not intend to 
commit their own power to prop up a European balance, but in 

35 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washing-ton, 1897), I, 3235 Estes Howe, An Oration, Delivered in 
Worcester, (Massachusetts^) on the Fourth of July, 1808 (Worcester, 1808), p. 135 
General Republican Committee, of the City and County of New York, A Circular 
Letter, . . . in Vindication of the Measures of the General Government (New 
York, 1809), p. 96. 

36 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., pp. 706-707. 

54 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

principle they hoped for one and in fact sometimes tried to exploit 
it. As Madison later admitted, the United States would not have 
gone to war against Great Britain in 1812 had the collapse of 
Napoleon been foreseen. 

President Jefferson wrote frequently of America's interest in 
the balance of power. After Trafalgar and Austerlitz, he com- 
mented on the "awful spectacle . . . the world exhibit [s] at this 
instant, one man bestriding the continent of Europe like a Colossus, 
and another roaming unbridled on the ocean, but even this is better 
than that one should rule both elements, our wish ought to be 
that he who has armies may not have the dominion of the sea, and 
that he who has dominion of the sea may be one who has no armies, 
in this way we may be quiet." Such reasoning naturally led Jeffer- 
son to hope for a European stalemate. In 1815 he even half re- 
gretted the conclusion of the European warfare, writing in lan- 
guage very similar to that he had used a decade before: "we were 
safe from the enterprise of Bonaparte because he had not the 
fleets of Britain to bring him here, and from those of Britain be- 
cause she had Bonaparte on her back, but we have now, the con- 
querors of Bonaparte to fear, with the fleets of Britain at their 
willing command. 5 ' 3T 

Most of his countrymen shared Jefferson's basic view. All Fed- 
eralists prayed for Napoleon's downfall, only a few for the de- 
struction of the French nation. An occasional Republican still hoped 
for British collapse, notably William Duane, who in 1806 de- 
clared that "nothing could more effectually secure and $er$etuate 
the 'peace and happiness of America than the humiliation of Eng- 
land, and her reduction to her natural place, among the third or 
fourth rank of powers in Europe." Most, like Jefferson himself, 
wished to see Britain chastised, not destroyed. In 1809 Senator 
Giles even justified war against England on the ground that Amer- 

37 Jefferson to Thomas Lomax, Jan. n, 1806, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to Camp- 
bell, Oct. 15, 1815, George W. Campbell MSS, Library of Congress. For an extended 
discussion of the Republican leader's position, see Lawrence S. Kaplan, "Jefferson, the 
Napoleonic Wars, and the Balance of Power," William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, 
XIV (1957)) 196217. Kaplan concludes that Jefferson was very interested in the 
balance of power, that he felt France no real threat to it, and that he unwisely 
slanted American policy in a pro-French direction. 

55 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

ica could not seriously increase the threat to British existence, surely 
a weird argument for war. Minister Turreau believed the principal 
reason Americans failed to hail Napoleon's struggle to destroy 
Britain's sea dominion was their belief that it was "necessary to 
maintain between these two rival Powers, a balance useful to the 
United States, since otherwise France would obtain on the ocean 
the same power that She has obtained on the continent." A Feder- 
alist journal circulating in the District of Columbia reminded con- 
gressmen assembling for the War Hawk Congress that "all parties 
in times past have agreed to what has been emphatically called the 
first article of our political creed, as it relates to other nations: 
That as jar as our influence extends y it ought to be used to kee^p 
them equally balanced; that on this defends the 'peace and safety 
of our country" 38 

The problem of course lay in the way one viewed the threat to 
the balance of power. Probably more Jeffersonians than admitted 
it publicly believed, like the President himself, that Napoleon 
posed a potentially dangerous threat to the United States. 39 After 
Austerlitz few Republicans thought a proper balance required 
further Napoleonic victories, although in 1809 the bitterly Anglo- 
phobe Aurora declared, "France has fought our battles had Brit- 
ain triumphed, we should have been enslaved." For the most part 
Republicans argued that the collapse of British resistance was "a 
remote and extremely improbable contingency," as Senator Giles 
put it. 40 Furthermore, Republicans believed an existing danger 
must not be subordinated to a distant, shadowy threat. They ac- 

38 Aurora (Philadelphia), March 15, 18065 Annals, loth Cong., 2d sess., p. 3795 

Turreau $"23 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Nov. , 1806, AAE, CP, E-U, 

Vol. LIXj Alexandria Daily Gazette, Nov. 2, 1811. Perhaps the most elaborate 
exposition of the balance-of-power thesis will be found in Robert Hare, A Brief View 
of the Policy and Resources of the United States (Philadelphia, 1810). At one 
point (p. 21) Hare declares that "our security from the oppression of either of the 
great belligerents, is in any considerable degree dependent on a due balance of their 
power." Thomas Ritchie's Richmond Enquirer also placed great emphasis upon the 
balance of power. 

39 In this connection see Plumer to Jedediah Morse, Feb. 24, 1806, William Plumer 
MSS, Library of Congress; Enquirer (Richmond), March n, 1806$ Pickering to 
Rebecca Pickering, Dec. 20, 1806, Octavius Pickering and Charles W. Upham, The 
Life of Timothy Pickering (4 vols.j Boston, 1867-1873), IV, 101. 

40 Aurora, July 31, 1809$ Annals, toth Cong., 2d sess., p. 378. 

56 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

cused Federalists of using the balance-of-power argument to con- 
done British crimes, and in some instances this led them to deny 
the validity of the argument altogether. In 1810 Henry Clay de- 
clared, "I cannot subscribe to British slavery upon the water, that 
we may escape French subjugation on land," and during the war 
session he sco fifed, "We are invited, conjured to drink the potion 
of British poison actually presented to our lips, that we may avoid 
the imperial dose prepared by perturbed imaginations." 41 In their 
inmost hearts, however. Republicans cherished the idea of a Euro- 
pean balance that would permit their nation to secure justice and 
enjoy peace. 

/Federalists took a far simpler view. They considered Napoleon 
the v mily real threat to equilibrium. As Fisher Ames expressed it, 
"If France dictates by land and sea, tve fall without an effort. The 
wind of the cannon ball that smashes John Bull's brains out, will 
lay us on our backs with all our tired honours in the dirt." Federal- 
ists did not minimize the chances of Napoleonic victory, and they 
celebrated as their own the triumphs of Nelson and Wellington, 
Some even declared that a "triumph over Great-Britain, at this 
critical moment would be more fatal to us than defeat." ** 

Closely aligned with English thought as they were in so many 
areas, the Federalists thus came to accept Britain's own view of 
herself as savior of the world. "Who," asked Timothy Pickering, 
"... can . . . see Britain struggling for existence, and magnani- 
mously opposing herself to a power which threatens, & with a rod 
of iron, to rule the world, and not bid her God-tyeed? Who can 
think of Trance lord of the navies as well as the armies of Europe,' 
and not contemplate America as one of her provinces?" George 
Cabot, arguing that Britain defended "the independence of the 
civilized world," pronounced her justified in ignoring the cavils 
of those for whom she fought. Scores ojL Federalist pamphleteers 
and speakers echoed the same theme^Timothy Pickering's famous 
toast, "The World's last hope Britain's fast anchored Isle," de- 

41 Annals, nth Cong., ist and zd sess., p. 581$ i2th Cong-., ist sess., p. 600. 

42 Ames to Pickering, Feb. 14, 1806, Timothy Pickering MSS, Massachusetts 
Historical Society, Vol. XXVII 5 Columbian Centinel (Boston), Dec. 23, 1807. 

57 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

livered at a Boston dinner for a British minister recently declared 
non grata by Madison, drew a roar of approval from its hearers. 
John Lowell, a wealthy Boston lawyer whose health forced him 
to professional retirement which he used to produce a steady stream 
of Federalist pamphlets, repeatedly stressed that "the fall of Brit- 
ish independence would destroy all hope of maintaining our own." 
Even moderate Federalists like Rufus King, who were prepared 
to admit some good in Jeffersonian policy and even to support 
limited resistance to Britain, believed England defended the world 
against French domination. "If England sink, her fall will prove 
the, Grave of our Liberties," King declared in i8o8. 43 

The truth or falsity of the rival American analyses is not the 
important thing. The point is that both parties saw, or forced them- 
selves to see, or believed the people saw, the European struggle 
in terms of the balance of power. They did not wish either great 
belligerent to secure an unalloyed triumph - y in particular, they 
did not desire Napoleon to become arbiter of the world. Almost 
without exception, Americans thought in terms of the national 
interest, which seemed to require rough parity in Europe. This 
often led Federalists to oppose any resistance to Britain because it 
would make her defense more difficult, and induced so deep a 
hatred of Jeffersonian policy that they frequently advised English- 
men how to destroy its effectiveness ; nevertheless, a great deal 
of^Pederalist sedition sprang from their view of world politics. 
f Of course, this view was also deeply colored by the powerful 
strain of Anglophilia that ran through Federalist)! The govern- 
mental structure and the social fabric of Britain seemed to the 
Federalists almost models of their kind. Not cool reason but emo- 
tion often caused Federalists to proceed from this sympathy to 
support of the British military cause. Republicans, on the other 
hand, detested Britain and indeed had originally built their party 

43 Samuel E. M orison, The Life and Letters of Harrison Gray Otis (2 vols. 5 
Boston, 1913), II, 21} Pickering- to Ames, Feb. i, 1806, Pickering- MSS, Vol. XIV; 
Cabot to Pickering 1 , Feb. 17, 1806, Henry Cabot Lodge, Life and Letters of George 
Cabot (Boston, 1877), p. 3535 John Lowell, An A$*peal to the People, On the Cause 
and Consequences of a War with Great Britain (Boston, 181 x), p. 355 King to Picker- 
ing, Feb. 5, 1808, Rufus King MSS, New- York Historical Society. 

58 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

almost literally on opposition to England and to apparent British 
influences in the United States. Their political views bespoke emo- 
tionalism as much as did those of Federalists, and in the eagerness 
of political strife both parties took positions far in advance of those 
they would have found justified by reason. In 1807, before the 
worst excesses of partisanship had begun, a federal judge com- 
plained, "I think myself sometimes in a Hospital of Lunaticks, 
when I hear some of our Politicians eulogizing Bonaparte because 
he humbles the English 5 & others worshipping the latter, under 
an Idea that they will shelter us, & take us under the Shadow of 
their Wings." 44 

Federalists loved Britain largely because she was, in Pickering's 
wards, "the country of our forefathers, and the country to which 
we are indebted for all the institutions held dear to freemen." 
America had learned much from British justice, particularly that 
it must serve the interests of man as well as of the state, and she had 
learned her lesson so well that many Federalists shared Henry 
Lee's opinion that Great Britain and the United States were the 
"only two nations of the many in the world who understand the 
meaning of liberty, . . . [the] best political blessing of God to 
man." Federalists considered the English constitution an almost 
perfect blend of aristocratic leadership and popular government, 
especially praiseworthy when contrasted with Napoleonic tyranny 
or the leveling democracy Jefferson was accused of desiring. They 
believed Britain far more Christian than France, where atheism 
and Romanism warred for supremacy. In law, in politics, in cul- 
ture, and in her moral condition England was a model state, blem- 
ished at worst by minor defects which time would quickly cure. Old 
Luther Martin, the Maryland politician who had long ago aban- 
doned his early principles and embraced Federalism, expressed 
his party's view when he wrote in 1 8 10 to congratulate the English 
minister, Francis J. Jackson, on his imminent return "to, not a 
fancied Eutopia, but to a glorious Reality to a Country, which 
the Creator in his infinite Goodness disconnected from the rest 

44 Richard Peters to Pickering, Feb. 4, 1807, Albert J. Beveridge, The Life of 
John Marshall (4. vols.j Cambridge, 1916-1919), IV, 6n. 

59 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

of the World, and destined . . . for the abode and the protection 
of all that is best, most perfect, most virtuous, most dignified, most 
noble of the human race, of all that distinguishes Man from the 
Brute and from the Daemon." 45 Language could scarcely go 
further than this, yet many Federalists shared Martin's senti- 
ments. 

Hatred of Napoleon was the twin of Anglomania. Federalists 
saw no redeeming quality in the despot of the Tuileries, and they 
frequently suggested that he threatened the moral fiber of the en- 
tire Christian world. Comparatively mild was a Pennsylvania con- 
gressman's assertion that Napoleon was "the great enemy of the 
liberties of mankind" or even the Alexandria Gazette's claim that 
he was "one of the greatest tyrants the world ever saw." When 
warmed to their task, Federalists described the Emperor and 
believed what they said as a "monster, at whose perfidy and cor- 
ruption Lucifer blushes and Hell itself stands astonished" or a 
"rival of satan himself in guile and mischief, and his most con- 
spicuous agent here on earth." Just after the declaration of war 
in 1812, a clergyman in Massachusetts stated that the "contest 
is no longer between rival candidates for fame, but immediately 
between Christ and Anti-christ, between Almighty God, and that 
atheistic Power, who exalts himself above all that is called God." 
Continuing the Biblical approach to politics, the minister assured 
his flock that the forces of God would triumph through Britain. 
"Her banners will wave victorious on the plains of Armageddon, 
while the blood of her enemies will flow to the horses bridels, and" 
this last apparently applied to Mr. Madison "the flesh of their 
vassal kings furnish a supper for all the vultures of heaven." 46 

The extravagance of the Federalists' love for England and of 
their detestation of Napoleon harmed them politically. If the argu- 

45 Pickering to Edward Pennington, July 12, 1812, Henry Adams, ed,, Documents 
Relating to New-England Federalism (Boston, 1877), p. 3895 Cabot to Pickering, 
March 12, 1808, Lodge, o$. cit. y p. 385 j Henry Lee to Madison, Aug. 19, 1811, 
Madison MSSj Luther Martin to Francis J, Jackson, Aug. 29, 1810, Francis James 
Jackson MSS, Public Record Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/59. 

46 Annals, nth Cong., 3d sess., p. 1007 (William Milnor) j Alexandria Gazette, 
May 15, 18125 Annals, nth Cong., 3d sess., pp. 1039104.0 (Blaisdell) j David 
Osgood, A Solemn Protest against the Late Declaration of War (Cambridge, 1812), 
p. 135 Elijah Parish, A Protest against the War (2d ed.j Newburyport, 1812), pp. 10, 
20 2 1 . 

60 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

ments had been reasonably expressed, the nation might have 
accepted the theses that Britain had made valuable contributions 
to the American heritage and that Napoleon offered nothing but 
a potential threat. The Federalists' emotion-charged words alien- 
ated many moderates upon whom they must count if they were 
to reverse Jeffersonian policy. The depth of their feeling, the 
hyperbole of their language created the impression that they 
placed Britain's cause above that of the United States. Sometimes, 
although not often between 1805 and 1812, the impression re- 
flected fact 3 more frequently, the dividing line between Anglo- 
philia and treason became blurred. Blunders by Jefferson and 
Madison presented Federalism with a golden opportunity to re- 
coup. Outside New England the party proved unable to take ad- 
vantage of it. In 1 8 1 2 Josiah Quincy, leader of the corporal's guard 
still fighting in the House of Representatives, wrote his wife that 
"there is a foolish leaning upon [Great Britain] . . . among 
some of our friends, which, at the same time that it does little 
credit to their patriotism, does infinitely less to their judgment. 
The truth is, the British look upon us as a foreign nation, and we 
must look upon them in the same light." 47 Quincy, who sometimes 
failed to act upon his own prescription, nevertheless accurately 
indicated Federalism's major failing. 

Federalists often accused their rivals of being pro-French. They 
brought forward little proof of their assertion. They simply as- 
sumed its truth, many of them because they believed that anyone 
who did not share their own feelings for Britain must be in league 
with Napoleon. "The obsequiousness of this country to the despot 
of Europe needs no proof or illustration from me," a Federalist 
clergyman stated in 1812. "This has been so often proved as to 
need no confirmation. I might as well prove that the sun shines." 
With more than a little justice, the Pennsylvania Republican 
hinted that the Federalists' own allegiance to Britain caused them 
to assume their rivals' connection with France. "The ghost of 
murdered Banquo was visible, only to the disordered imagination 
of the guilty Macbeth," this Republican journal noted. 48 

47 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, March 26, 1812, Quincy, o$. cit.j p. 254. 

48 Parish, Q'p. cit*, p, 1 1 j Pennsylvania Republican (Harrisburg) , Dec. 10, 1811. 

61 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

The Federalist charge was preposterous, for the old easy parallel 
Federalism and Britain, Republicanism and France had long 
since ceased to exist. (No more true was the alternate Federalist 
charge that Jefferson had allowed himself to be cowed into doing 
Napoleon's bidding.) Turreau and Serurier criticized the adminis- 
tration's attitude almost as frequently as British ministers did. John 
Melish, a British traveler who spent a great deal of time in the 
United States between 1806 and 1811, declared not only that 
most Americans desired an accommodation with Britain but that, 
"as to partiality for Bonaparte and the French, it was my sincere 
opinion, very deliberately formed, that there was none." 49 The 
undeclared naval war of the 'nineties, and above all the develop- 
ment of imperial rule, had caused Jefferson and his followers to 
abandon the view of France they took around 1789. InlSiO, when 
Napoleon announced repeal of the French decrees, many Republi- 
cans briefly raised their voices to praise him. Such praise was rare 
and for the most part confined to this particular period of time; 
especially during the war session did the Republicans assail the 
Corsican and deny that sympathy for his cause motivated their 
policy. 

Neither Thomas Jefferson nor James Madison had the slightest 
affection for Napoleon Bonaparte. Jefferson considered Napoleon 
a great and rapacious despot, the betrayer of a revolution that had 
once promised so much for human liberty and rational progress. 
The Republican leader's correspondence abounds with strictures 
upon Napoleon, and after the Emperor's first abdication in 1814 
Jefferson wrote, astonishment mingled with pleasure, "The 
Attila of the age [is] dethroned, the ruthless destroyer of ten 
millions of the human race, whose thirst for blood appeared un- 
quenchable, the great oppressor of the rights and liberties of the 
world, [is] shut up within the circle of a little island in the Medi- 
terranean." 50 Jefferson's lieutenant and successor shared his feel- 
ings. Even at the time he welcomed Napoleon's announcement of 

49 John Melish, Travels in the United States of America, in the Years 1806 & 1^07, 
and i(?op, i#io, & iBn (2 vols.j Philadelphia, 1812), Ij 212213. 

50 Jefferson to John Adams, July 5, 1814, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit., XIV, 145. 

62 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

repeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees, James Madison carefully 
avoided suggesting that America owed the Frenchman either grati- 
tude or affection. 

Since they considered Britain the chief threat to American inter- 
ests, however, the Republicans often wished Napoleon well. In 
1 807 William Duane summarized contemporary Republican opin- 
ion when he wrote, "Bonaparte, independent of the service he 
renders mankind by curbing the tyranny of Britain, cannot be an 
object of regard to us; but as the avenger of neutral wrongs, and 
the asserter of neutral rights every voice should be raised for his 
triumph. ... he is the best negociator we have." Duane wrote 
before the worst French excesses began, and not many Republicans 
were so bitterly Anglophobe as he. In the years preceding the War 
of 1812, Republicans sided only very reluctantly with Napoleon. 
Without doubt many of them shared the tortured feelings of a 
Baltimorean who expostulated, "What a cursed Gov*. is that of Gr. 
Britain, that we cannot wish her success against the worst of 
Tyrants , and that she damns the best cause by her motives, & her 
manner of advancing it! " 51 

Although most Republicans considered British policy not only 
insulting but also a threat to American prosperity, they often 
reached this conclusion comparatively reluctantly, and the rise of 
Napoleonic tyranny caused many of them to dream of an accom- 
modation with England. Randolph of Roanoke repeatedly empha- 
sized that the friendly France of 1778 and the republican France 
of 1793 had been replaced by a vicious enemy whose crimes should 
cause Americans to forget the Anglophobia that had so long 
plagued them. John Taylor of Caroline considered France, not 
Britain, the natural enemy of the United States because of the 
sharp contrast between their forms of government, America's un- 
willingness to see Spanish colonies fall under Napoleon's sway, and 
her destiny to play the role of the Emperor's chief rival should 
England fall. 52 Taylor steadily favored compromise with Britain, 

51 Aurora^ June 18, 18075 Nathaniel F. Williams to Story, Dec. 31, 1808, Joseph 
Story MSS, Library of Congress. 

152 Annah , xoth Cong., ist sess., pp. 1910-19115 John Taylor to Monroe, Nov. 24., 
1811, James Monroe MSS, New York Public Library. 

63 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

and in 1811 he urged his friend Monroe to accept appointment 
as secretary of state so that he could work for an Anglo-American 
settlement, Monroe himself definitely favored Britain over France 
from 1805 until 1811, shifting only toward the end to the War 
Hawk position. 

Nor was it only among the doctrinaire or Quid wing of the party 
that such sentiments could be found. Jefferson, through negotia- 
tions with Britain in 1806, and Madison, in conversations with 
David M. Erskine three years later, virtually offered to align 
American policy with Britain, although they asked important con- 
cessions in return. Jefferson in particular considered Britain per- 
fidious, selfish, politically corrupt, and tyrannical upon the seas. In 
1810, for example, Federalist suggestions that Britain, unlike 
France, could be trusted to show good faith caused Jefferson to ex- 
postulate, "Her good faith! The faith of a nation of merchants! 
. , . Of the friend and protectress of Copenhagen! Of the nation 
who never admitted a chapter of morality into her political 
code!" 53 Nevertheless, both Jefferson and Madison appear to 
have realized that, however difficult of attainment, an adjustment 
with England would best serve American interests. The acts sup- 
plementary to the Embargo were really pleas to Britain to come 
to some understanding with the United States. Both presidents 
dropped the early Republican demand that Britain abandon im- 
pressment. From 1808 to 181 1 administration policy, if it inclined 
in any direction, favored Britain over France, and down to the very 
eve of the declaration of war President Madison hoped against 
hope for a settlement with England. Even Henry Clay, the future 
leader of the War Hawks, declared in a famous oration in 1810 
that, if accommodation could be had with only one of the belliger- 
ents, he preferred that it be with Britain. 

It would of course be easy to overemphasize this half-concealed 
but very real desire for English friendship. Many Republicans 
considered it unobtainable if desirable; they shared the feeling of 
John Adams, by this time himself nearly a Republican, that the 
"deadly wounds . . . inflicted on both sides" had regrettably 

53 Jefferson to John Langdon, March 5, 1810, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit., XII, 
375- 

64 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

made reconciliation impossible. "Contempt and disgrace," said 
Adams, "never can be forgotten by human Nature, and hardly, 
very hardly forgiven by the sincerest and devoutest Christian- 
ity." 54 The legacy of Anglophobia the Republicans had carried 
with them from the 1790*3 had by no means disappeared, even 
though European political events had caused a reorientation of 
party policy. As American patriots and nationalists, the Republi- 
cans chafed under British insult. Unlike so many Federalists, they 
refused to accept the idea that American interests should be sub- 
ordinated to those of Great Britain. 

There was, furthermore, among some Republicans, if not a 
majority of the party or its leadership, a bitter, undeviating, un- 
alloyed hatred of the British, a hatred modified neither by time 
nor by political circumstances. Dr. Benjamin Rush thought that 
only one-tenth of the American people shared this hatred, and 
Augustus Foster, the last prewar minister to the United States, 
said that pure, distilled dislike of Britain was confined to a very 
few Americans. Still, the sentiment did exist, and episodes like 
the Chesapeake affair often fanned it into flame. The Independent 
Chronicle and the Aurora steadily spread anti-British vitriol over 
the nation. Duane went so far as to declare that only those nations 
that resisted England could prosper. "The friendship of Britain 
is damnable" he declared, "it is deadly it is destructive her 
blessings are curses" Other Republicans asserted that Britain main- 
tained herself on the plunder of war or that, facing a visible doom, 
she desired to draw a happier part of the world into the same 
vortex. "Her disposition is unfriendly $ her enmity is implacable; 
she sickens at our prosperity," a War Hawk declared in 1811, 
summarizing a strain never totally absent from Republican think- 
ing. 55 ! 

The attitudes of the administration party, which was so much 

54 John Adams to Lloyd, March 12, 1815, James Lloyd MSS, Houghton Library, 
Harvard University. 

65 Rush to Earl of Buchan, July 8, 1811, Butterfield, op. cit. } II, 10885 Davis, 
op. cit., p. 24.95 Aurora, March 17, 18065 A Citizen of Otsego County, "Union the 
Bond of Peace" The Origin and Progress of the Present Difficulties between the 
United States and Great Britain, and France Considered (Utica, 1809), p. 17; Inde- 
pendent Chronicle (Boston), March 23, 18075 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 459 
(R. M. Johnson). 

65 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

larger and so much less homogeneous than the Federalists, natu- 
rally presented a more complex picture than those of their oppo- 
nents. Different factions had quite different attitudes, and many 
individuals, like Jefferson himself, changed position from time to 
time. As a party the Republicans did not suffer from Anglophobia 
so deep they desired a war against England. They shared the gen- 
eral national desire for peace and isolation. They took the nation 
into the War of 1812 as a consequence of specific British actions, 
policies that threatened American interests and above all chal- 
lenged the self-respect of the young nation. As patriots, not as 
Anglophobes, the Republicans cast down the gage of battle. 



66 



CHAPTER 



III 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE 
A DREAM?" 



Neither YorktcS^n nor the Peace of Paris made American inde- 
pendence secure.) During the lySo's the young nation suffered 
humiliation at "British hands while royalist France, midwife at 
America's birth, treated her as an upstart ingrate and sought to 
maneuver her as a satellite. Even after the Constitution, many 
Americans considered the nation an experiment of doubtful per- 
manence. The French Revolutionary wars added to the buffet- 
ing America received. France demanded the support of fellow 
republicans 3 Britain paid little attention to neutpal complaints as 
she wielded her naval power against her enemy , ; The Washington 
administration secured American prosperity by the Jay treaty of 
1 794, but only at the cost of ignoring or compromising many claims 
against England and provoking an undeclared war with France 
which lasted from 1798 to 1800. Jiy 1805 America could look 
back upon twenty years of increasing prosperity interrupted only 
by the mild depression of 17973 the Pinckney treaty with Spain 

67 



* C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 

in 1795 and particularly the Louisiana Purchase had improved 
her position; politically and economically she daily gathered 
strength. These successes had often been obtained at the price of 
postponing the assertion of many American rights to a later day. 
This was the part of wisdom, not of greatness. 

In May, 1 803, Franco-British war recommenced after the inter- 
lude of the Peace of Amiens. America soon felt the effects of this 
struggle a outrance. For a decade the United States suffered 
severely at the hands of European belligerents. Like Holland and 
Denmark, she found herself treated as a pawn or a shuttlecock by 
Britain and France. In the autumn of 1 807 a ragged group of fron- 
tiersmen, gathered in a wretched little town on the Mobile, put 
their names to a declaration of American rights in which they asked, 
"Is national independence a dream?" * Far-reaching belligerent 
invasions of American sovereignty, rights, and honor made a nega- 
tive answer by no means obvious. 

Napoleon seldom showed respect for America. So great was his 
contempt that, as Admiral Mahan has said, he "blinked at the 
fundamental fact that, while Great Britain ruled the sea, the neu- 
tral was the ally of her enemy." 2 Instead of encouraging America's 
European trade, which would have benefited him directly and 
perhaps more quickly involved the United States in war with 
Britain, from 1807 onward he did everything possible to restrict 
it. John Armstrong and Joel Barlow, the American ministers at 
Paris, suffered humiliation at the Emperor's hands, either through 
active rebuke, condescending cynicism, or (if the American was 
fortunate) silent neglect. On the question of Spanish Florida, 
which Jefferson and many of his followers wished to acquire for 
America, Napoleon clearly showed his cynicism. He shifted his 
attitude his actions scarcely had the continuity to be called policy 
according to interests of the moment and particularly his esti- 
mate as to whether the carrot or the stick would prove most effec- 

1 James Caller et aL, The Declaration of the American Citizens, on the Mobile, 
with Relation to British Aggressions (Mobile, 1807), p, i. 

2 Alfred T. Mahan, The Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution and 
Empire, 1793-18 12 (2 vols.j Boston, 1892), II, 355. 

68 



"IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?" 

tive with the Americans. The Emperor's subordinates frequently 
urged him to adopt a more friendly policy toward the United 
States. Napoleon never considered this necessary. 
-* Not only contempt for America but even more an understand- 
able conviction that the British war was an overriding concern 
caused Napoleon to subordinate his American policy to efforts to 
cripple England's economy. Deprived of hope at sea by Nelson,, 
Napoleon believed commercial warfare "the only way to strike a 
blow at England and force her to peace." Specifically this meant 
"remorseless war against English merchandise/ 3 3 an effort to de- 
stroy her export trade, undermine the pound's stability, and some- 
times to force her to purchase French goods on very unfavorable 
terms. In November, 1806, an imperial decree issued at Berlin de- 
clared the British Isles in blockade (although Napoleon obviously 
lacked the naval power to enforce his edict) an^prohibited all trade 
with Englishmen or in British merchandise^esselFconimg from 
British ports were ordered seized. A little more than a year later a 
second major decree, this time promulgated at Milan, reinforced 
and expanded the Berlin Decree. Besides reasserting earlier prin- 
ciples, this declaration announced that ships that submitted to Brit- 
ish regulations or allowed themselves to be searched at sea by the 
Royal Navy would be considered to have lost their neutral charac- 
ter and would therefore be subject to confiscation. Since the great 
Frenchman dominated most of Europe, this attempt to destroy 
British trade was quite properly called the Continental System. 
/ The Continental System never completely sealed off Britain. 
\t various times Spain, Sweden, and Russia opened their ports to 
British goods, and John Quincy Adams rightly observed that the 
Continental System was somewhat like "an attempt to exclude the 
air from a bottle, by sealing up hermetically the mouth, while 
there was a great hole in the side." Furthermore, the states Napo- 
leon dominated had no desire to sacrifice their own commerce to 

3 Napoleon to King Louis of Holland, Dec. 3, 1806, Corres<pondance de Napoleon 
I er (32 vols.5 Paris, 1858-1870), XIV, 345 Napoleon to Eugene, Viceroy of Italy, 
Sept. 29, 1807, ibid., XVI, 66. 

69 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? J? 

serve Paris. Even in Holland, the neighbor of France ruled by 
Napoleon's brother, huge amounts of smuggling took place. There 
and elsewhere French officials often connived at violations of the 
system they were deputed to enforce. Finally, particularly after 
1809 but to a degree from the very beginning, Napoleon showed 
himself willing to permit trade that was nominally interdicted, 
provided only that his treasury profited or that Britain was de- 
prived of specie. By 1810 the Continental System had become, 
to quote Adams again, "little more than extortion wearing the 
mask of prohibition." 4 The drive for commercial advantage which 
became such an important part of the Continental System made it 
particularly offensive, since Napoleon forbade to the Americans 
trade that he actively prosecuted himself. 

Despite its weaknesses the Continental System often inflicted 
serious pain upon Britain. When Napoleon rigorously enforced 
his policy, as he did for a year following the Peace of Tilsit with 
Russia in July, 1807, and again from the spring of 1810 until 
the invasion of Russia in June, 1812, Britain felt the pinch. Her 
exports to the Continent decreased from a value of more than 
16.5 million in 1805 to less than 5.5 million in 1808. Unfortu- 
nately for Napoleon, adversity seemed merely to spur the British 
to greater efforts. Furthermore, as Napoleon should have seen, 
"the closing of Europe to British commerce could be ruinous to 
England only if it was accompanied by the closing of the immense 
American market." 5 It behooved Napoleon to conciliate the Amer- 
icans, to attempt to weld them to his system. 

Instead, the master of the Tuileries struck hard at American 

4 Entry of Dec. 29, 1809, Charles F. Adams, ecL, Memoirs of John Quincy Adams 
(12 vols.j Philadelphia, 1874-1877), II, 925 Adams #24 to Secretary of State, 
Sept. 8/20, 1 8 10, Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings of John Quincy Adams 
(7 vols. $ New York, 19141917), III, 507. 

* Francois Crouzet, VEconomie Britannique et le B locus Continental (2, vols. 5 
Paris, 1958), II, 857. This entire paragraph rests heavily on ibid. y II, 853872. 

Literature on the Continental System is extensive. In addition to Crouzet's recent 
volumes, which examine in great detail the impact of Napoleonic policy upon British 
industry and credit, see particularly Eli F. Heckscher, The Continental System (Lon- 
don, 1922) 5 Frank E. Melvin, Napoleon's Navigation System (Menasha, Wise., 
1919) 5 Audrey Cunningham, British Credit in the Last Napoleonic War (Cambridge, 
1910). Their differences in interpretation, however interesting in themselves, are of 
minor importance for an understanding of Franco-American relations. 

70 



if IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ' ' 

trade. The Berlin Decree, which baffled some American merchants 
and alarmed others, was not seriously enforced against them (nor 
against the British either, for that matter) until the summer of 
1807. Then seizures began, and soon, in the case of the Horizon, 
decided in November, French courts gave their stamp of approval. 
From that time forward Napoleon dealt harshly with American 
trade. The Milan Decree aimed fully as much at neutrals as it did 
at Britain, and the London Times even declared: "Its regulations 
cannot in the slightest degree affect the interests of England. It is 
exclusively directed against neutrals." 6 In 1808, on the ostensible 
ground that, since the Embargo confined American ships to port, 
all ships flying the American flag must really be British ships in 
disguise, Napoleon ordered the condemnation of any such vessels 
that appeared in the ports of his dominions. Rapacity, contempt for 
American retaliation, and anger at postembargo legislation caused 
him to persecute American commerce for some time thereafter. 
Considering his meager naval power, Napoleon captured a re- 
markable number of American merchantmen. Most of them fell 
into his hands when they were unwary enough to enter French 
ports, others were taken by French ships which eluded the British 
blockade, and some fell prey to Napoleon's satellites. In 1805 and 
1806 American losses to Britain far outnumbered those to France. 
From the end of 1807 onward there was little to distinguish the 
two foes of American commerce. In an official report in July, 1812, 
Secretary of State Monroe stated that Britain had seized 389 Amer- 
ican vessels since the Orders in Council of November, 1 807, orders 
which, with the Horizon decision, opened the most vigorous phase 
of commercial warfare. Under the Berlin and Milan decrees, Mon- 
roe reported, France had seized 307 American vessels. France had 
also taken 45 ships since allegedly repealing her decrees in 1810, 
and her satellites were charged with 117 further captures. Monroe 
had no satisfactory figures on seizures by Spain while she was an 
ally of Napoleon, but even so his totals showed Napoleon was 
responsible for the seizure of at least 468 merchantmen. More- 
over, the Secretary's report demonstrated that a ship had far better 

6 Jan. 4, 1808. 

71 



c c 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 



chances of acquittal or release in a British admiralty court than 
in a French one. 7 

Napoleon's policy toward American commerce was thus vehe- 
mently hostile. Logic seemed to call for an attitude that would 
encourage Americans to penetrate the British naval wall, bringing 
raw materials sorely needed by Europe and carrying away manu- 
factures that would profit the Continent and cut into British exports 
to America. Consistency seemed to require a policy that would 
lend credence to Napoleon's pose as defender of the rights of 
neutral commerce. Yet actually the Emperor showed as little re- 
spect for America's rights and even less for her political importance 
than did British leaders. He tried to scourge rather than inveigle 
America into hostility to England, repeatedly stating that she must 
suffer at his hands until she effectively resisted English outrages. 
In effect he attempted to direct the general course of American 
policy, refusing to admit that the United States had a right to 
choose passive neutrality. 

General Louis M. Turreau, French minister to the United 
States until early i8ir, was a fitting agent of Napoleon. Turreau, 
who had only a fraction of his master's intelligence, shared with 
Napoleon contempt for America. The general beat his wife (on at 
least one occasion to the accompaniment of violin playing by the 
secretary of legation designed to drown out her cries) and if he 
never used force with Jefferson and Madison this was the only 
resource he omitted. The Americans needed no glimpse at his 
dispatches to know that he considered them selfish, spineless, and 
incompetent. Ultimately Napoleon replaced Turreau with Louis 
Serurier, a more tactful diplomat but almost equally disdainful of 

7 Report of Secretary of State Monroe, July 6, 1812, American State Papers. Class I. 
Foreign Relations (6 vols.j Washington, 18321859), III, 583585. Monroe's 
figures have often been misconstrued, leading many to say that France alone seized 
more ships than Britain from 1803 onward or from 1807 to 1812. For this reason 
it seems advisable to reproduce the following figures drawn from this report. 

British seizures French seizures 

1803 to orders of 1807 528 1803 to Berlin decree 206 

After November, 1807 389 Under Berlin and Milan decrees 307 

Total 917 After "repeal" 45 

Total 558 

72 



< < I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 73 

American worth. Clearly the French monarch and his representa- 
tives considered American independence, perhaps not a dream, 
but at least a limited commodity. 

British assaults upon America exceeded Napoleon's in material 
impact if not in cynicism. Some conflict between Britain and Amer- 
ica was inevitable, for, as an English diplomat serving in Washing- 
ton put it, "The two greatest Commercial Nations in the Globe 
cannot move in the same Spheres without jostling one another a 
little where we were aiming blows at the French Marine, we want 
Elbow room and these good Neutrals wont give it to us, & there- 
fore they get a few side Pushes which makes them grumble." 8 
The Americans, however, felt they were subjected to more than 
"a few side Pushes. 5 ' Britain seized hundreds of American mer- 
chantmen and interrupted the sale of agricultural produce abroad 5 
she forced American seamen into service under the Union Jack 5 
her Canadian agents intrigued among Indian tribes resident in the 
United States ; she rejected or ignored American protests. From 
1805 to 1812 there was scarcely a moment when a storm did not 
loom over Anglo-American relations. Naval officers, diplomats, 
legislators, and statesmen plunged into the fray. Newspaper edi- 
tors and pamphleteers on both sides of the Atlantic added their 
bit to the cacophony. In 1810 William Cobbett complained that 
to the real issues there had been added "the greatest curse of all, 
. . . volumes innumerable written upon the subject. There have 
been, including both sides, not less than from six to ten able bodied 
writers, and (what makes the thing more serious) most of them 
lawyers, too, hard at work." 9 Cobbett despaired of renewed amity, 
and insult and accusation had indeed become almost habitual. In 
some ways it is surprising that war did not come until 1812. 

At no time after the renewal of European war in 1 803 did Amer- 
ican merchantmen enjoy immunity from British seizure. Secretary 
Monroe later reported that from 1805 to 1808 the Royal Navy 
made prize of one American ship every two days. (An American 

8 Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Feb. i, 1806, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library 
of Congress. 

* Cobbett?s Political Register (London), XVII (1810), 43. 

73 



* ' I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

living in England asserted at the time that the real rate was ten 
per week.) If Monroe's figures are complete, in 1805 and 1806 
one of every eight American ships that put to sea, in 1807 two of 
each nine, and in 1808 more than one in five were seized by the 
British. After 1808 both the number of seizures and the rate per 
American venture declined. In no year did Britain seize half as 
many American ships as she had in 1807, and less than one of every 
dozen vessels departing from port fell into British hands. 10 But this 
was only because American shipowners had become more wary or 
because American law forbade trade with Britain's enemy. As far as 
the British were concerned, they insisted as forcefully as before 
upon their right to decide what American trade should be per- 
mitted. They insisted that prosecution of the war against Napoleon 
must take priority over all other concerns. 

The British often carried on trade they denied to Americans on 
the theory that war against France could not be maintained unless 
the English economy remained strong. Even those Englishmen 
who deprecated a quarrel with the United States accepted this 
theory as a truism. Lord Grenville, for example, complained at 
"the stress w\ Jefferson lays on the supposed unreasonableness 
of our claim to deprive other nations of a trade w h . we carry on 
ourselves. . . . We have a right to prevent that w h . is injurious 
to us, & may if we think right relax that right in cases where we 
think the advantage to ourselves compensates or overbalances the 
injury." u Like that of Napoleon, British maritime policy became 
heavily tinctured with mercantilist, monopolistic hues. 

Contemptuous of a weakling power, jealous of American pros- 
perity, eager for prize money, British naval officers stretched their 
orders to the limit or beyond. Even James Stephen, spiritual father 
of the most aggressive attacks upon American commerce, warned 
from time to time that British commanders must be restrained. 

10 Report of Secretary of State Monroe, July 6, 1812, ASPFR, III, 583-5855 
Macall Medford, Oil without Vinegar y and Dignity without Price: Or, British, Ameri- 
can and West-India Interests Considered (d ed.j London, 1807), pp. 101102, 

11 Grenville to Auckland, Feb. 18, 1806, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS 
(Add. MSS 344.12-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 34456, 

74 



* * I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? >5 

"These steeds must be well reined in . . . ," he warned the minis- 
try in 1807. "The[ir] spirit is sometimes salutary, however rash 
or irregular it may overawe Kings or Cabinets but in this deli- 
cate case we have to do with a democratical society & with a mari- 
time people too, whose feelings resemble our own." 12 The British 
government never took action forceful enough to reduce the navy 
to obedience. No commander who violated American rights, even 
those rights the Cabinet recognized, suffered real punishment. 

British action within sight of the coast particularly irritated 
Americans, Cruisers mounted an almost continuous blockade until 
withdrawn a bit in 1 8 1 2 in a belated effort to lessen American 
resentment. Off New York, for example, they frequently halted 
almost every ship leaving the harbor. Sometimes one or two dozen 
merchantmen awaited British inspection, and even those not sent to 
admiralty courts for trial often lost a favourable tide, a useful wind, 
or perhaps even an advantageous market as the result of delay. 13 
Even the British consul at New York, who could not be accused 
of affection for the Americans, urged the navy to exercise restraint. 
In 1807 th e British minister at Washington wrote: 

I am persuaded that more 111 will has been excited ... by a few trifling 
illegal Captures immediately off this Coast and some Instances of insulting 
Behaviour by some of His Majesty's Naval Commanders in the very Har- 
bours and Waters of the United States than by the most rigid Enforcement 
of the Maritime Rights of Great Britain against the Trade of the United 
States in other Parts of the World. It may easily be conceived to be highly 
grating to the Feelings of an independent Nation to perceive that their 
whole Coast is watched as closely as if it was blockaded, and every Ship 
corning in or going out of their Harbours examined rigorously in Sight of 
the Shore by British Squadrons stationed within their Waters. 14 

12 "Coup d'oeil on an American War," n.d. [Dec., 1807], Spencer Perceval MSS 
(examined while temporarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London) , 

33/99- 

13 Basil Hall, Fragments of Voyages and Travels (new ed.j London, 1850), ist 

Series, p. 57. 

14 Barclay to Captain John P. Beresford, private, May 28, 1806, George L. Rives, 
ed., Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas 'Barclay (New York, 1894), pp. 
2422435 David M. Erskine #25 to Canning, Oct. 5, 1807, Foreign Office Archives, 
Public Record Office, FO 5/52. 

75 



' C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

David M. Erskine here touched upon one of the central reasons 
that British assaults aroused more resentment than those of France. 
Americans also complained strenuously against British admiralty 
courts. Whereas French judges admittedly acted virtually as agents 
of the Emperor, British tribunals at least claimed to be free to 
apply law rather than government policy. Their apparent hypoc- 
risy and the vices of some judges affronted Americans, who de- 
scribed the entire system as one of "lawless plunder." 15 Some 
American complaints, particularly against Sir William Scott, justice 
of the High Court of Admiralty, were unjustified, 16 but the system 
was bad enough without exaggeration. Ships were condemned on 
trivial evidence, and at least after the Essex case in 1 805 the burden 
of proof lay with the owner and not the captor of the ship brought 
to trial. Furthermore, admiralty courts burdened even innocent 
shipowners with heavy costs. One writer estimated that from $9 
to $13 million worth of American property was always awaiting 
trial by British courts. Another pointed out that court costs fre- 
quently reached $5,000 per case, and even as much as $2,000 or 
$3,000 when the case was dismissed in early stages. Still a third 
critic estimated that in fees, loss of market, and immobilization of 
ships admiralty courts cost American shipowners several million 
dollars yearly. Alexander Baring declared that captains of the 
Royal Navy always carried appeals to higher courts, hoping to 
force shipowners into compromise simply to escape the toils of 
British law. Privateersmen, Baring claimed, often brought into 
port ships that had violated no British decree whatsoever, extorting 
from the owner $500 or $600 as the price of not taking the case 
to court. 17 Such practices flourished because captors were seldom 

1>5 George Joy, The Dispute with America, Considered in a Series of Letters from 
a Cosmopolite to a Clergyman (London, 1812), p, 27. 

16 Rare praise of Scott by those friendly to American claims is to be found in ibid., 
p. 285 William Lyman to Madison, Jan. 14, 1806, Consular Letters, London, Depart- 
ment of State Archives, National Archives, Vol. IX j and, by an Englishman, in Alex- 
ander Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes and- Consequences of the Orders in Council; 
and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral Commerce 
of America (London, 1808), p. ysn. Baring declared that Scott tried "to distribute 
that real justice which unfortunately is not always within his reach." 

17 Medford, of. cit, 9 p. 102$ Jacob Crowninshield, "Some Remarks on the American 
Trade, 1806," ed. John H. Reinoehl, William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XVI 

76 



< I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ' 3 

burdened with more than a share of court costs, even when they 
lost a case. 

Federalists often pointed out, with justice, that America gained 
as well as lost from the efforts of belligerents, that by driving 
French ships from the seas Britain had fostered the development 
of the American merchant marine, that if only one ship of three 
escaped interception the merchant's balance would show an over- 
all profit. Fisher Ames once complained that his fellow Americans 
reacted too emotionally to British assaults upon their commerce. 
"We have hated those most who oftenest make us feel our im- 
potence. The British have done this, by their searches of our vessels, 
even while our trade became a monopoly in consequence of British 
naval triumphs," he expostulated. Ames misunderstood public 
opinion, which reacts more often to humiliation than to material 
hurt. British regulation of American commerce could no more be 
tolerated by a self-respecting nation than similar activities by 
Napoleon. The British Orders in Council, John Quincy Adams 
observed, "strike at the very root of our independence.'* 18 In this 
sense they were most deeply resented in the United States. 

Until 1 805 British assaults upon American commerce were rela- 
tively moderate, compared at least with those to follow. Attacks 
begun in that year reflected a broad national determination to step 
up the pace of war against Napoleon. This spirit found expression 
in James Stephen's famous pamphlet, War in Disguise. Neutrals 
and the enemy alone, Stephen argued, profited from British self- 
restraint, particularly from the Polly decision of 1800, which 
granted the reexport trade almost complete immunity from seizure 
when carrying goods, albeit circuitously, from enemy colonies to 
the metropole. Ship after ship sailed contemptuously past patrolling 
English vessels, often laden with goods converted only by fraud 
into nominally neutral property. To deprive Napoleon of the 
sinews of war and to prevent the United States from sheltering 

(1959), n^j John M. Taylor to Monroe, Aug. 6, 1806, James Monroe MSS, Library 
of Congress; Baring, o-p. cit., pp. 94~95> 95 n - 

18 Ames to Quincy, Dec. 6, 1807, Seth Ames, ed., Works of Fisher Ames (2 vols.j 
Boston, 1854), I, 405406; Adams to Harrison G. Otis, March 31, 1808, Ford, 
op. cit t> Ill, 200 20 1. 

77 



C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

enemy property under the Stars and Stripes, Stephen urged rigor- 
ous execution of the Rule of the War of 1756 the prohibition to 
neutrals in time of war of traffic closed to them in peace and com- 
plete disruption of the colonial trade, even when carried on through 
American ports and under the American flag. Such action would 
have the more than collateral advantage of restoring British ship- 
ping and commerce to their wonted preeminence. Basically, as 
befitted a publication that appeared on Trafalgar day, James 
Stephen's pamphlet was a clarion call for more aggressive exploita- 
tion of Britain's sea dominion, for stronger blows against the enemy 
and against neutrals. 

Stephen later denied that War in Disguise had been written at 
the Pitt ministry's behest. Only in a technical sense was this denial 
true, for Stephen submitted his manuscript to Sir William Scott, 
who in turn showed it to Pitt and then advised Stephen to print it 
privately, since "if it sh d carry our Pretensions somewhat higher 
than the Convenience of Publick Affairs may allow, it will commit 
Government less" than if it seemed to have "any stamp of Official 
Communication upon It." Soon after publication, the American 
minister forwarded a copy of War in Disguise to the Secretary of 
State, commenting, "It is said to be a ministerial work, or rather 
under its auspices." 19 This was the usual opinion in London. The 
semiofficial status of War in Disguise seemed confirmed when 
Stephen, whose identity as its author had become known, received 
from the Pittites a seat in the House of Commons. 

Stephen deserved his seat. War in Disguise, playing ably upon 
a growing chord in English sentiment, provided apparent justifica- 
tion for a shift in policy already under way and impressed even 
Pitt's enemies with its exposition of neutral subterfuges. Thus, for 
example, the Edinburgh Review called it "a pamphlet of great 
merit" and agreed with Stephen that frauds by neutrals required 
British counteraction. The London Times believed Stephen had 

19 James Stephen ($seud. The Author of "War in Disguise") , ed., The Speech of 
the Hon. J. Randolph . . . with an Introduction by the Author of "War in Disguise" 
(London, 1806), p. xviii; Scott to Pitt, Aug. 25, 1805, Chatham MSS, Public Record 
Office, Vol. CLXXVIj Monroe to Madison, Oct. 26, 1805, William C. Rives Collection, 
Library of Congress. 

78 



< C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ' ? 

clearly proved that "it was high time to put an end to a system so 
prejudicial to the commercial interests of the country. 3 ' Opponents 
of restrictive measures found themselves overwhelmed. Alexander 
Baring, who denied that American prosperity had been achieved 
at British expense, had to admit that this "delusive opinion" was 
generally held, primarily because the argument had been "too ably 
illustrated by the author of 'War in Disguise. 5 " Small wonder 
that Fox's protege, Lord Holland, called War in Disguise "an 
abominable & mischievous work." 20 

In 1 804 and 1 805 Pitt's government, closely in tune with rising 
public sentiment, increased the rigor of its American policy, and by 
the time William Pitt died early in 1806 a serious controversy had 
developed. Refusal to extend commercial articles of the Jay treaty, 
toleration of renewed impressment, hauteur in dealing with James 
Monroe, attempts to restrict the trade of American vessels with the 
British West Indies all these were parts of a policy Cobbett 
rightly assailed as "a pretty equal measure of arrogance and im- 
becility." The greatest American grievance was the Essex decision, 
which marked the end of British tolerance of the reexport trade. 
An American War Hawk later described this decision as "the foun- 
dation and commencement of the system of vexation and injury 
under which we ... [have] suffered." 21 England showed that, 
without even a bow to American sensibilities, she would alter her 
rules of maritime behavior as the spirit moved her. 

The Essex decision replaced the Polly decision as the chief guide 
for British courts. Sir William Scott's Polly decision, later com- 
municated to the Americans in even more explicit paraphrase, 
granted the reexport trade almost complete immunity from seizure. 
In effect, the decision stated that landing of goods in America and 
payment of even the smallest duties neutralized cargo being borne 
circuitously from the Caribbean to Europe. American reexports 
rose from $40 million in 1 800, the last year of the first Anglo- 

20 Edinburgh Review^ VIII (1806), i 355 Times (London), Oct. 24, 18055 Baring, 
op. cit., p. 25 Holland to Fox, Jan. 3, 1806, Charles J. Fox MSS, British Museum 
(Add. MSS 4.7559-4.7601), Add. MSS 47575- 

21 Cobbett? } s Register, IX (1806), 1705 Samuel McKee in American Statesman 
(Lexington, Ky.)> Sept. 7, 1811. 

79 



C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?J 

French war, to more than $60 million in 1805. The Rule of the 
War of 1756 became virtually a nullity, so unimportant indeed 
that Alexander Baring later maintained that it was resuscitated 
"merely because the only remaining neutral had a defenseless com- 
merce." In a series of minor decisions, admiralty courts sought to 
tighten enforcement of the Rule of the War of I756, 22 but Amer- 
ican merchants ignored these irritants as long as the overwhelming 
proportion of reexported cargoes crossed the Atlantic unmolested. 
Then, in the spring of 1805, Master of the Rolls Sir William 
Grant handed down the Essex decision of the Lords Commissioners 
of Appeals. 23 The Essex* cargo of wine, bound from Barcelona to 
Havana but briefly landed in the United States, was condemned 
although the owners had performed the requirements laid down 
in the Polly case. Grant held that the landing was an attempt to 
deceive, noted that virtually all duties had been returned as draw- 
backs, and emphasized that the owners, during the two years 7 grace 
given them to collect evidence of a bona fide importation into Amer- 
ica, had brought forward no proof. Since Spain had not permitted 
Americans to share in commerce between the home country and 
Cuba in time of peace. Grant confirmed the decision of a lower 
court condemning the Essex* cargo. Legalistically speaking, the 
decision distinguished but did not reverse the Polly case. In the 
earlier decision Scott explicitly upheld the Rule of the War of 1 756 
and merely stated that landing and payment of duties were but 
one test of a bona fide importation. In practice, of course, the Essex 

2 ^ Baring, O'p. cit. } p. 775 Orby H. Mootham, "The Doctrine of Continuous 
Voyage" (unpublished M.Sc. [Econ.] thesis, University of London, 1926), p. sSnj 
C. J. B. Gaskoin, "The Legend of the Essex" (typescript, Gaskoin MSS, London 
School of Economics), pp. 1113. Mr. Gaskoin, with whom the author was privileged 
to have correspondence, died before publishing his valuable work on the Essex, His 
entire manuscript of thirty-two pages is probably the most detailed single examination 
of this case and its implications. Gaskoin's verdicts are unreservedly hostile to the 
United States. 

23 The exact date of the decision is still open to question. James Stephen, War in 
Disguise- Or, the Frauds of the Neutral Flags (London, 1805), P- 60, gives the date as 
May 22, 1805. The only available transcript of this laconic decision is attached to 
Monroe #35 to Madison, Oct. 18, 1805, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII, where 
the date is given as June 22, 1805. The earlier date seems more likely, since it alone 
allows time for news of the decision to have reached captains at sea before the out- 
break of seizures early in July. 

go 



c c 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 



decision made it much easier to secure condemnation of reexports. 
Landing and payment of duties alone would no longer satisfy Brit- 
ish courts. 24 

I British commanders at first believed they had received license 
to seize all ships engaged in indirect voyages. Further decisions 
soon made clear their error, and toward the end of 1805 seizures 
fell off sharply as American shipowners exercised greater caution 
or developed shrewder subterfuges to conceal evasion of the arbi- 
trary British rule. In November Monroe reported home, "Our 
merchants here say that the rule . . . may be easily complied 
with, & will do no more harm except in the cases that have or may 
occur before it is known in America: that cargoes may be sold &c 
[in America before reshipment], & that fact is known and antici- 
pated here by those who make the rule." The number of reported 
seizures proved exaggerated. In February, 1806, Monroe com- 
plained to Fox that 1 20 vessels had been seized as a result of the 
Essex decision. By August, on the basis of better information, Mon- 
roe and Pinkney reduced the figure to 6i. 25 Certainly the new rule 
did not long discourage American merchants, for reexports dropped 
only about i per cent in 1 806. 

The decision's real importance lay deeper. In the first place, 
British courts abandoned the position that the captor must demon- 

24 Sir William Scott, Britain's foremost admiralty judge, loyally applied the prin- 
ciples of the superior court, beginning 1 with the case of the Enoch in July. But he 
obviously believed that it was unsound law and risky politics. In August he urged 
the Foreign Secretary to turn his attention to the problem and perhaps modify the 
principle. Scott to Mulgrave, Aug. 9, 1805, Law Officers Reports, FO 83/2204.. In 
October Mulgrave told Pitt that, because Scott was out of sympathy with the new 
policy, he would be of no help in preparing an answer to Monroe's written protests. 
Mulgrave to Pitt, Oct. n, 1805, transcript, Pretyman MSS, Cambridge University 
(Add. MSS 6958) , Vol. XVII. In November and December James Monroe and George 
Joy, an American in London, both reported to Madison that Scott had only feebly 
defended the principle when applying it in his own court. Monroe to Madison, Nov. 6, 

1805, Rives Collection; Joy to Madison, Dec. 31, 1805, James Madison MSS, Library 
of Congress. The Pitt government would have done well to have held extensive 
conversations with Scott on this matter, but Mulgrave preferred to scoff at his opinions. 

25 Monroe to Madison, Nov. 6, 1805, Rives Collection? Monroe to Fox, Feb. 25, 

1806, FO 5/515 Monroe and Pinkney to Holland and Auckland, Aug. 20, 1806, and 
enclosure, ibid. The British minister at Washington reported a year later that indirect 
trade between Spain and her colonies continued to be almost unmolested. Merry #44 
to Fox, Sept. 28, 1807, FO 5/49. 

81 



< IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 

strate a prize rightfully his ; henceforth the burden of proof lay 
with the shipowner. Second, the hasty enforcement of the new prin- 
ciple insulted the United States. Many ships sailed from American 
ports in the spring of 1 805 trusting that English practice of five 
years' standing would be continued. Without warning they were 
halted and haled into admiralty courts.lBuch action justified Amer- 
ican complaints that the Royal Navy sought plunder for itself 
rather than strangulation of Napoleon. Federalist merchants struck 
home when they asserted that "it cannot become the integrity and 
magnanimity of a great and powerful nation, at pnce, and without, 
notice, to reverse her rule of conduct." Most important of all, thei 
new departure clearly showed that Britain intendectxto act without 
concern for precedent or American sensibilities. In Jah^ary, 1806, 
Rufus King noted that although seizures had fallen offx^as the 
Business is fitted to the Rule 77 there was no assurance Britain would 
not proceed further and "put an end to . . . [all] Trade in Colo^. 
nial Articles between the U.S. & Europe." 26 |The Essex decision 
ended a comparatively long period of moderate interference with 
commerce and clearly foreshadowed increasing blows against Amer- 
ican trade. 

In July, 1805, a week after his return from Madrid and Paris, 
James Monroe protested the new seizures and then sought an in- 
terview with Foreign Secretary Mulgrave to expand upon his 
grievances. Mulgrave declined a special appointment, writing, "I 
am not aware of any recent occurrence of so pressing a nature" as to 
justify one. At a regularly scheduled interview toward the end of 
August, Lord Mulgrave obstinately defended the Rule of the War 
of 1756 and made no attempt to explain that the Essex principle 
was not so far-reaching as Monroe feared. The two men "parted 
as remote from an accord as could possibly be." Subsequently Mul- 
grave and his under-secretary, George Hammond, blandly insisted 
that no new principle had been adopted, a statement true only in 
the most legalistic sense. For the rest of the year Monroe had to be 

26 Protest of Boston merchants, New-York Evening Post, Feb. 7, 1806$ King- to 
Christopher Gore, Jan. 26, 1806, Rufus King* MSS, New-York Historical Society, 
Vol. XI. 

82 



C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? * * 

content with written protests. Only a hope that Austerlitz would 
reduce British arrogance and then the prospect of Fox's succession 
restrained the American diplomat from throwing up his position 
in disgust. 27 

It would have been easy to explain to the United States the true 
dimensions of the Essex decision. With reluctance, the Jefferson 
administration might even have accepted the new policy if assured 
that Britain did not intend to cut off all indirect trade in colonial 
produce. But the ministry did nothing until March, 1 806, when 
the King's Advocate, Sir John Nicholl, finally prepared a memo- 
randum which the Board of Trade passed on to American mer- 
chants. Nicholl, who defended the Essex principle and denied that 
it represented an abandonment of stare decisis, admitted the deci- 
sion had been abused: 

Some Vessels were seized which probably would not otherwise have been 
detained, under a notion that it was illegal for an American ship to convey 
Colonial Produce from America to Europe; and the misapprehension be- 
came so strong, that it was fully believed by many here, and by more in 
America, that special Instructions to that Effect had been issued by His 
Majesty's Government, though I believe such a measure never in the 
slightest Degree entered into its contemplation. 

Britain, said Nicholl, sought only to prevent fraudulent evasions 
of the Rule of the War of 1756, not to cut off the entire reexport 
trade of the United States. 28 

Not until May, 1806, nearly a year after the original verdict, 
did a British judge issue a full-dress amplification of the Essex 
decision. Then, when a new tack taken by the Ministry of All the 
Talents had in a sense made it superfluous, Sir William Grant chose 
to elucidate it in the case of the ship William. Grant reviewed 
prior cases, including the Essex case, to show the consistency of 

27 Monroe to Mulgrave, July 31, 1805, enclosed in Monroe to Madison, Aug. 6, 
1805, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII j Monroe to Madison, Aug. 20, 1805, 
and enclosures, ibid.; "Minute of a Conversation between Mr. Erving & Mr. Ham- 
mond," Aug. 30, 1805, ibid.; Monroe #35, #39 to Madison, Oct. 18, Dec. 23, 
1805, ibid. 

28 Sir John Nicholl to Board of Trade, March 20, 1806, Greenwich Hospital 
Miscellanea, Public Record Office, Adm 80/116. 

83 



* ' I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

British courts. He closed by reaffirming that American ships could 
no longer count on "mere voluntary ceremonies" in American ports 
to protect them. Unlike its predecessor, this decision was well ad- 
vertised in advance and soon spread before the world. The King's 
Advocate, doubtless to educate the new ministry to his point of 
view, secured Lord Auckland's attendance at the Cockpit to hear 
the decision. The next day Auckland reported to the ministry's 
leader, "The tendency of that Judgment is to set aside the Preten- 
sions of the Americans to legalize their cargoes by a fictitious land- 
ing & reshipping, & by a pretended payment of duties, &c. The 
Judgment was given with great ability ; but will create a very 
strong sensation. That whole subject calls for an immediate & very 
solemn Consideration." 29 Auckland's concern and that of the Brit- 
ish government arose too late to prevent serious friction with 
America. 

^Like seizures, the impressment of American seamen increased 
in\805 and troubled Anglo-American relations until war came. 
In coldly economic terms the loss of seamen counted far less than 
the loss of ships and cargoes, and the recruiting of British seamen 
by American ships more than balanced the loss of men through 
impressment. In terms of human right and national self-respect, 
impressment posed an extremely serious challenge. "This author- 
ized system of kidnapping upon the ocean," as John Quincy Adams 
called it, condemned Americans to many years service in the Royal 
Navy, sometimes even to death in a foreign monarch's battles. The 
American, tar could ask aid of "no judge, no jury, no writ of habeas 
corpus" He was forcibly enlisted in the Royal Navy as a result 
of a decision a boarding officer made as to his citizenship. He knew 

2& Christopher Robinson, ed., Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the 
High Court of Admiralty, V (London, 1806), 396-3975 Auckland to Grenville, May 
14, 1806, Boconnoc MSS (Papers of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville), 
Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Lord Auckland 1806. 

30 Adams, "Reply to the Appeal of Massachusetts Federalists," n.d., Henry Adams, 
ed., Documents Relating to New-England Federalism. (Boston, 1877), p. 178. On the 
entire subject of impressment, particularly as seen from the American side, the standard 
work, heavily relied upon here, is James F. Zimmerman, Impressment of American 
Seamen^ Columbia University Studies in History, Economics and Public Law, Vol. 
CXVIII, no. i (New York, 1925). 

8 4 



"IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 53 

that even if American representatives learned of his detention his 
release would probably be long delayed. Occasionally a seaman 
threatened with impressment mutilated himself, cut off his hand 
perhaps, to destroy his usefulness to the British; often he endured 
weeks of intermittent flogging before he consented to take up his 
assigned tasks on an English man-of-war. In the end the Royal 
Navy usually had its way. 

This practice, so evil in its effect upon individual seamen, had 
even more serious implications for the nation. No state that per- 
mitted crews under its flag to be mustered by a foreign officer, that 
tolerated detention of its citizens by another nation, could seriously 
maintain a claim to complete sovereignty. When John Adams de- 
clared that Jefferson "has not been behind either of his predecessors 
in his zeal for the liberty of American seamen," the ex-President 
merely invited criticism of himself as well as of Washington and 
Jefferson, for protests and half measures satisfied them all. By 
impressment even more than by seizures Britain challenged Amer- 
ica's stature. Replying to Federalist complaints that France treated 
American commerce as badly as Britain did, a Boston newspaper 
reminded its readers that "there is another atrocity incident solely 
to Great Britain, of the blackest and most savage complexion, which 
would alone convict her of being beyond all comparison to the 
greatest aggressor. We refer to the barbarous THEFTS OF 
AMERICAN CITIZENS!" 31 

Almost all Britons believed impressment vitally necessary. The 
number of men in the navy rose from 36,000 in 1792 to about 
120,000 in 1805. England's merchant marine lost as many men 
as it could spare, and large numbers of foreigners had to be enlisted 
in British service. The Edinburgh Review estimated that one- 
eighth of the navy's seamen were foreigners, and the American con- 
sul at London claimed that 1 5,000 Americans were serving in the 
Royal Navy, although not all Americans were impressed and many 

31 John Adams, "The Inadmissible Principles of the King of England's Proclama- 
tion of October 16, 1807, Considered," Charles F. Adams, ed., The Works of John 
Adams (10 vols.j Boston, 1850-1856), IX, 3275 Independent Chronicle (Boston), 
May 27, 1811. 

85 



* C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 35 

claimed as Americans were British subjects according to English 
law. 32 To maintain the existing level of manpower and above all 
to discourage desertion to American merchantmen it seemed im- 
perative to make use of impressment. 

Certainly voluntary enlistment could not meet Britain's needs. 
Service in the Royal Navy was onerous, and able-bodied seamen 
received only 30 to 35 shillings (about 7 dollars) per month. The 
Americans paid able-bodied seamen 25 to 35 dollars for service 
much less painful, and they made strenuous efforts to enlist Eng- 
lishmen, for America had far too few trained seamen to support 
her maritime expansion. Thousands of British seamen avoided or 
deserted service in the Royal Navy by joining the crews of Ameri- 
can merchantmen. "The temptation," a class-conscious English- 
man observed, "is greater than human Nature, or rather their 
nature can be expected to withstand." a3 These men, patriotic on- 
shore Britains believed, could not be granted immunity from serv- 
ice in the crusade against Napoleon, and the threat of recapture 
must be held over the heads of other seamen tempted to desert 
from the Royal Navy to American vessels. Unless impressment 
continued, the Royal Navy's strength was bound to evaporate. 

America's bitterest enemies, James Stephen among them, recog- 
nized that impressment humiliated the United States, particularly 
since naval officers often acted capriciously or cruelly toward crews 
mustered for their inspection. No responsible Englishman justified 
the forced enlistment of native Americans, although ministers 
often permitted Admiralty bureaucrats and naval commanders to 
evade requests for the release of Americans. On the other hand, 
nobody of importance save Cobbett favored ending impressment, 
although in 1806 the Ministry of All the Talents considered 
sharply limiting impressment in return for firm American com- 
mitments on the return of deserters. After criticizing excesses com- 
mitted by the navy, Sir William Scott declared that "the Right 

32 Christopher Lloyd, edL, The Keith Papers, III, Navy Records Society, Publica- 
tions, Vol. XCVI (1955), p. 1555 Edinburgh Review, XLI (1824), i6ij Lyman 
to Madison, Oct. 23, 1807, Consular Letters, London, Vol. IX. 

^Edinburgh Review, XLI, 1605 Jackson to , Sept. 22, 1809, Francis 

James Jackson MSS, Public Record Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/61. 

86 



C C I $ NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?> 

itself cannot be departed from 5 and being as clear in its principles, 
as it is in importance in its purposes, must neither be surrendered 
nor enervated by ... negotiations that may affect its utility." 
Even Alexander Baring opposed modifications, and the Edinburgh 
Review, otherwise a critic of governmental policy toward America, 
spoke of the "right which we undoubtedly possess of reclaiming 
runaway seamen." 34 

Englishmen believed impressment both imperatively required 
and easily justified. It had existed at least since Queen Anne's reign, 
most European states either practiced or recognized it, and the 
Americans had usually protested against specific incidents rather 
than the general principle since the first impressment of American 
citizens at the time of the Nootka Sound controversy. Americans 
did not deny the right of search when applied to goods. How could 
they question, the Quarterly Review asked, that "the right of 
search for seamen is precisely of the same nature as that for goods 
contraband of war. It is an instrument, as ancient as the navy itself, 
. . . perfectly conformable to the law of nations." Englishmen 
also pointed out that the United States encouraged British tars to 
forget their duty to king and country ("a damning evidence of 
American depravity," one magazine called this seduction) and 
therefore should not complain if press gangs sought to recover 
them. In 1813 Lord Castlereagh told the House of Commons the 
ministry insisted upon impressment not for the purpose of acquir- 
ing American seamen but for "the much broader and more impor- 
tant one of guaranteeing herself from being deprived of her own." 
Law and equity justified her, Castlereagh asserted. 35 

Only rarely did Englishmen express nagging doubts about the 
justice of the practice or justify it in terms of power alone. Never 
did they suggest that American press gangs might search British 
ships for wayward American citizens. The Annual Register once 

34 Stephen to Liverpool, private and confidential, March 2,5, 1814, MSS of the 
first and second Earls of Liverpool, British Museum (Add. MSS 38190-384.89, 38564- 
38581), Add. MSS 38257; Scott to Harrowby, Sept. 20, 1804, FO 5/104 j Baring, 
o$. cit., p. iooj Edinburgh Review, XX (1812), 455. At the same time both Baring 
and the Edinburgh Review urged great care in the exercise of this undoubted right. 

35 Quarterly Review (London) , VII (1812), 1 71 8 ; Gentleman's Magazine (Lon- 
don), Vol. LXXVIII (1807), Part I, p. 1805 Hansard, XXIV, 601-602. 

87 



* C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

scoffed at American appeals to "natural law the principles of 
morality" since these must be "almost ridiculous" until all nations 
agreed to observe them 5 until then Britain must fully exploit her 
"preponderating power at sea." 36 Although they came close to the 
truth, such arguments were not used nearly so frequently as they 
were in justifying new departures in the field of commercial regu- 
lations. 

Predictably enough, Federalists often accepted British argu- 
ments. Sometimes they emphasized that all Europe tolerated the 
practice or, more hopelessly, that America could not hope to end 
it even by war. 37 More often, however, they stressed the argument 
that Britain had a right to recover those who deserted British 
service. Luther Martin argued that America, by receiving English 
deserters in her ships, became the aggressor in events culminating 
in the British attack upon the U.S.S. Chesapeake. Dr. George 
Logan, working for peace as he had during the Franco-American 
quarrel a decade before, told his friend Madison that the United 
States had no right to erect "a sanctuary for fugitives," particularly 
so long as it insisted upon punishing deserters from its own military 
forces. The Columbian Centinel pronounced unjust the "AT- 
TEMPT to make American merchant ships an asylum for English, 
Scotch, and Irish runaway seamen," and warned that the recruit- 
ment of foreigners not only deprived natives of employment but 
threatened to involve America in a war for the interest of scum 
who deserted their own flags for the Stars and Stripes. 38 While 
there is no indication that such arguments convinced a majority 
of Americans, Federalists did create doubt in many minds and per- 
haps delayed exploitation of the impressment issue until just before 
the declaration of war in 1 8 1 2. 

The American government did not deny Britain's claim to her 
own seamen. Jefferson and Madison were prepared to tolerate 
impressment as long as it took place in British ports and was applied 

36 Annual Register, 1810 (London, 1812), pp. 258-259. 

^Columbian Centinel (Boston), July 25, Nov. 4, 1807. 

38 Luther Martin ('pseud. Vindex), The Honest Politician, Part I (Baltimore, 
1808), p. 36$ George Logan to Madison, Jan. 10, 1810, Madison MSSj Columbian 
Centinel , Dec. 9, 1807. 

88 



<C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?'' 

solely to British subjects, even though they might be serving in 
American ships. In 1807 Madison argued with some justice that, 
since almost all ships eventually visited England, all that was 
required of Britain was patience. 39 Britain felt that she could not 
afford patience, and since the 1790'$ she had been impressing sea- 
men on the high seas. All American governments challenged the 
legality of this practice. They recognized the right of search when 
used to seek out contraband or military personnel of the enemy, 
but they denied that the same right justified search for British 
seamen. The claimed right was made worse by the means of exe- 
cuting it, Americans declared. "That an officer from a foreign ship 
should pronounce any person he pleased, on board an American 
ship on the high seas, not to be an American Citizen, but a British 
subject, & carry his interested decision on the most important of 
all questions to a freeman, into execution on the spot," Madison 
complained, "is anomalous in principle, . . . grievous in practice, 
and . . . abominable in abuse." 40 

While Britain claimed no right to impress American seamen, 
she refused to admit that American naturalization relieved an emi- 
grant of obligations to his homeland. An American law of 1802 
authorized naturalization only five years after immigration. The 
United States insisted that naturalization conferred full rights of 
citizenship, absolving new citizens from former obligations, al- 
though, as Federalists and Englishmen frequently emphasized, 
American courts often denied the right of American citizens to 
abandon their allegiance and Congress never passed legislation to 
the contrary. Some Americans, among them Oliver Ellsworth and 
Rufus King, maintained that naturalization merely doubled a 
man's obligations. In King's words, "Naturalization when it con- 
fers new Rights, does not, and cannot dissolve, old duties the 
Performance of which within his own, or a common Jurisdiction, 
the former sovereign may compel." The United States govern- 
ment, however, maintained the contrary as far as those who as- 

39 Erskine #5 to Howick, Feb. 2, 1807, FO 5/52. For a review of American 
theory on this question, see Zimmerman, op. cit., pp. 19-21, 2526. 

40 Madison to Joy, May 22, 1807, Madison MSS. 

89 



'!$ NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

sumed American citizenship were concerned. In doing so it chal- 
lenged British practice. Thousands of former Englishmen were 
claimed as citizens by both countries. Many served on ships that 
might be boarded at any time by British officers, for of the nearly 
1 1 ,000 naturalized seamen registered with American papers in 
1805 an overwhelming majority had been born in Britain. Board- 
ing officers only too often failed to show much concern for niceties 
of legal theory, particularly in questions of citizenship, and John 
Quincy Adams was probably fairly near the mark when he claimed 
that three-quarters of those impressed had been born in America. 
Still, even officers who exercised restraint were bound to impress 
seamen claimed by the United States as citizens. Sharply contrast- 
ing views of allegiance created a large area in which disagreement 
was not only possible but inevitable. 41 

These opposing definitions, a tendency on both sides to doctor 
figures for political purposes, and delayed and incomplete reports 
make it extremely difficult to establish the precise dimensions of 
flight from British service on the one hand and impressment on the 
other. Rough estimates are possible, however. In 1812, the Ad- 
miralty claimed that at least 20,000 Englishmen were serving in 
the American merchant marine. Earlier Gallatin had estimated that 
about 9,000 Englishmen (English even by American definition) 
served under the American flag. In other words, about one-half 
of the able-bodied seamen serving on ships engaged in foreign 
trade were British. The Secretary of the Treasury calculated that 
the Americans recruited about 2,500 Englishmen each year. 42 

41 King to Peter B. Porter [?], Dec. IG, 1811, King- MSS, Vol. XIII; report of 
Secretary of State Monroe, Feb. 19, 1813, American State Papers. Class IV, Commerce 
and Navigation (2 vok; Washington, 1832-1834), I, 968$ John Quincy Adams, 
A Letter to the Hon. Harrison Gray Otis , . . on the Present State of Our National 
A fairs (Salem, 1808), p. 135 I-Mien Tsiang, The Question of Expatriation in 
America Prior to 1907, Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political 
Science, Series LX, no. 3 (Baltimore, 1942), pp. 32-40. Zimmerman, op. cit., pp. 
274275, notes that only 400 applications for release were refused on grounds of 
British citizenship, but this figure fails to include hundreds who reluctantly accepted 
the King's bounty after serving some time, or in some other way provided the navy 
with an excuse for denying discharge. It is impossible to determine with any degree of 
accuracy how many impressed seamen could actually be claimed as citizens by both 
nations. 

42 Unsigned memorandum, "Impressment of American Seamen," Feb. 21, 1812, 

90 



c i I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? 3? 

Although self-Imposed American restrictions on foreign commerce 
reduced recruitment after 1807 and even drove many foreigners, 
and native Americans as well., back to British employ, 43 it seems a 
fair guess that except during 1808 and 1809 at least 10,000 Eng- 
lish sailors served in American ships. The Royal Navy needed 
about this many new men every year to maintain its strength at 
existing levels. 

<; In his last report on impressment, in January, 1812, Secretary of 
State-' Monroe claimed that 6,257 Americans had been impressed 
since 1803. Almost every War Hawk journal printed this figure 
in boldface type. Yet this was little more than a rough estimate 
arrived at by totaling applications for the release of impressed 
seamen made by the American agent at London, the only channel 
officially recognized by the Admiralty. Monroe's report included 
only 200 cases not raised at London, entirely omitted 802 applica- 
tions made by the agents in 1 8 1 1, and failed to note that no report 
had been received for the last quarter of 1810. On the other hand 
the reports, and consequently Monroe's summary, included hun- 
dreds of duplicate applications and many others made on a more 
or less pro forma leasts without presenting an iota of proof of Amer- 
ican citizenship ,f 4 In a rough way these factors probably canceled 
one another outlleaving the total number of fairly reasonable ap- 
plications at abouV6,jOO but ignoring instances in which a seaman 

FO 5/1045 Gallatin memorandum, April 13, 1807, Rives Collection Gallatin to 
Jefferson, April 16, 1807, Henry Adams, ed., The Writings of Albert Gallatin (3 
vols. $ Philadelphia, 1879), I> 336$ Pickering to Jackson, April 8, 1812, Timothy 
Pickering' MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. XIV 5 Report of the Committee 
of the House of Representatives of Massachusetts, on the Subject of Impressed Seamen 
(Boston, 1813), 'passim; Louis Simond, Journal of a Tour and- Residence in Great 
Britain, during the Years rSzo and i8zi (2 vols.j New York, 1815), I, 253. 

43 The number of naturalized seamen registered with the American government 
dropped from 11,000 in 1805 to 1,100 in 1808, the year of the Embargo. In 1809 
there were 9,000 registrations. Succeeding years saw a renewed falling off, but the 
figures are incomplete. Report of Secretary of State Moaroe, Feb. 19, 1813, 4SPC&N, 
I, 968. 

44 Zimmerman, o-p. cit, t pp. 256, 267$ Samuel Taggart, Mr. Taggartfs Address 
to His Constituents, on the Subject of Impressments (Washington, 1813), p. 18. The 
'pro forma nature of many requests is revealed in various reports by Madison and 
Robert Smith printed in ASPFR, II, 776-798; III, 36-45, 348. Zimmerman, op. cit. f 
p. 2,66, argues that duplications were unimportant, but this statement is extremely 
doubtful. 

91 



C i I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 53 

found it impossible to make his plight known to American repre- 
sentatives. 

Federalists and Englishmen denied that anywhere near 6,257 
Americans had been impressed. Working from Monroe's figures 
and wringing the errors from them, a Massachusetts congressman 
purported to show that Britain had impressed far less than 800 
bona fide Americans. In 1813 a legislative committee in Massachu- 
setts similarly assailed the official figures, gathered evidence from 
51 shipowners purporting to show that only a dozen Americans 
out of thousands in their employ had been impressed, and even had 
the temerity to estimate that no more than 100 Americans had 
been impressed altogether. Federalists also emphasized Britain's 
willing release of those few Americans impressed by impetuous 
naval officers and expressed amazement that, when perhaps so large 
a proportion of American crews was British, there had not been far 
more vigorous impressment. 45 British claims were less extreme 
than those of their American friends. Even the Admiralty admitted 
that approximately 1,000 Americans had been impressed, and in 
1813 Castlereagh fixed upon 1,600 or 1,700, After the War of 
1812 the British released 1,800 seamen who liad been impressed, 
and this number of course did not include those who had escaped, 
died, or been released earlier. Since just under 2,000 Americans 
were ordered released as a result of intervention at London before 
1812, we may settle upon 3,800 as the rock-bottom figure, un- 
challengeable even on the basis of British calculations and British 
definitions of citizenship. 4e Beyond that it is impossible to go with 
any certainty, although" it may well be that the widely advertised 
6,257 actually reflected something near the truth. 

The number of seamen impressed might well have been much 
larger. Because naval expansion virtually ceased after Trafalgar, 
the practice was not pushed so vigorously as in 1804 an d 1805. 
Furthermore, the Ministry of All the Talents, more phil-American 

45 Taggart, of. cit. y pp. 18-19 ; Refrt on Impressed Seamen, pp. 10-1 1 and fassim. 

46 Admiralty endorsement on Monroe to Foster, June 8, 1812, FO 5/1045 Hansard) 
XXIV, 601-6025 Clement C. Sawtell, "Impressment of American Seamen by the 
British," Essex Institute, Historical Collections, LXXVI (1940), 327-3385 Zimmer- 
man, o-p. cit.) p. 268. 

92 



< IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?" 

than its predecessor, kept impressment under fairly tight control 
for months after coming to power in January, 1 806. Even William 
Lyman, the American agent for seamen, admitted that the situation 
was improving, and as late as November British negotiators felt it 
possible to claim that the theoretical problem had ceased to have 
any real meaning. 47 Finally, by reversing the flow of seamen to 
American ships, the Embargo checked the fairly heavy impress- 
ment that had occurred during most of 1 807. For some time press 
gangs relaxed and the Admiralty quite freely released Americans 
forced into the Royal Navy. 

Federalists claimed that impressment was inconsequential from 
1808 until 1812. Reports from London do not bear them out, al- 
though in the summer of 1 8 1 1 Lyman reported that far from being 
impressed many American sailors were actually "on the beach" in 
British ports. Requests for release, a rough index of activity, ran 
at the rate of 750 to 1,000 a year from 1809 onward. In May, 
1810, Lyman reported increasing press-gang activity, and his suc- 
cessor later asserted that during that summer impressment had 
been "carried to an extent beyond all former example," at least in 
British ports. The new agent, Reuben G. Beasley, protested stead- 
ily to the Admiralty during the first half of 1 8 12. 48 Lack of active 
concern at Washington by no means meant the problem had ended. 

The incidence of impressment at any given time simply revealed 
the degree of the Royal Navy's need. The forced enslavement of 
even a dozen Americans, any number sufficient to show that honest 
mistakes were not the sole problem, was in principle as important 
as the impressment of thousands. Daily mustering of crews under 
the Stars and Stripes by foreign officers and Britain's unwillingness 
to negotiate an end to the practice showed the incompleteness of 

4T Lyman to Madison, May 22, 1806, Consular Letters, London, Vol. IX; Holland 
and Auckland to Monroe and Pinkney, Nov. 8, 1806, FO 5/51. 

48 Lyman to Monroe, Aug. n, 1811, Consular Letters, London, Vol. IX; Zimmer- 
man, Q'p. cit., p. 2565 Lyman to Pinkney, May 10, 1810, Consular Letters, London, 
Vol. 1X5 Beasley to John W. Croker, Dec. 19, 1811, Admiralty Papers, Public Record 
Office, Adm 1/3856; Beasley to Monroe, Jan. 21, Feb. 15, June 25, 1812, Consular 
Letters, London, Vol. IX. One of the few students to challenge the usual view that 
impressment declined just before the War of 1812 is Patrick C. T. White, "Anglo- 
American Relations from 1803 to 1815" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University 
of Minnesota, 1954)^. 146. 

93 



<C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 55 

American freedom and, as old John Adams argued, suggested that 
"the spirits of Lord Bute and Lord George Germain [had] risen 
again at St. James's. 55 49 

In March, 1806, Jefferson 5 s friend, Judge John Tyler, wrote to 
him praising the war against Barbary but adding that "while we 
go to very great lengths to relieve 200 citizens from the shackles 
imposed by a barbarous nation, we seem to have doubts about the 
propriety of emancipating 3,000 now in the hands of Great Britain, 
who is said to be the most civilized nation in the world. . . . But, 
by the great God of heaven, I had rather not exist as a man or nation 
than to suffer such violations of the rights and liberty of our citi- 
zens. 55 50 A few Republican legislators, most notably Robert Wright 
of Maryland, shared Tyler 5 s feelings to the extent of urging that 
Britain be coerced into abandoning impressment. For the most part, 
however, Americans seemed not unwilling to tolerate this national 
degradation. Certainly from the beginning of 1808 until the War 
Hawk Congress impressment took a back seat to oth^r complaints 
against Britain. Americans showed more concern for their pros- 
perity than for national rights or the liberty of seamen. 

The administration's wavering course certainly did not add to 
the nation 5 s dignity. John Adams 5 administration had worked hard 
to secure the release of American seamen and attempted to negoti- 
ate an agreement with Britain for the reciprocal return of deserters 
which would have made it possible for England to end impress- 
ment on the high seas. While steadfastly refusing to admit the 
legality of impressment, however, the Federalists never risked na- 
tional humiliation by making a direct challenge they were unpre- 
pared to follow up. Not so Jefferson and Madison. In 1 806, having 
made an agreement on impressment a sine qua non of any settle- 
ment, they rejected a treaty negotiated by Monroe and P'inkney 
primarily because it passed over the subject in silence. A few months 
later, on the other hand, they considered surrendering all British 
seamen in American employ, or at least those who had served less 

49 xhe Inadmissible Principles of the King of England's Proclamation . . . ," 
Charles F. Adams, ed., Works of A dams > IX, 315. 

50 John Tyler to Jefferson, March 25, 1806, Lyon G. Tyler, The Letters and 
Times of the Tylers, I (Richmond, 1884), 211-212. 

94 



c c 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 



than two years, if only the British would give up impressment. Fig- 
ures produced by Gallatin showed the American merchant marine 
unable to stand the loss of men., and Jefferson and Madison dropped 
the project. 51 After the Chesapeake affair the administration united 
this attack upon a national naval vessel with the quite different issue 
of impressment from merchantmen, and for a time refused to con- 
sider the issues separately. Only a few months later, in negotia- 
tions with a special British envoy, they consented to separate the 
two. 52 After February, 1808, Jefferson and Madison virtually ig- 
nored impressment, except to seek the release of individual seamen. 
Secretaries of state repeatedly directed William Pinkney, the min- 
ister at London, to concentrate on commercial rights rather than 
seamen, and as late as the summer of 1811 the administration 
scarcely made anything of impressment in its extensive discussions 
with a new British minister. The feebleness of Republican leaders 
encouraged Americans to accept impressment as a price of peace, 
however galling to national pride. 

Britain's policy on seamen and on neutral commerce clearly sug- 
gested that she considered America a comparatively inconsequen- 
tial power. Even the concessions occasionally offered were at best 
partial recognition of American claims, liberal only in that they 
offered more than English political opinion desired. Other policies 
reinforced the impression given by the treatment of American 
ships and crews/ Officials in Canada freely communicated with In- 
dians south of the Great Lake|f These officials did not, as the Amer- 
icans charged, attempt to pf ovo^e the tribes to war with the United 
States. They did, however, seelc to make sure, particularly after 
the war scare following the Chesapeake affair in 1807, that if war 
came the tribes would not fight against England, and they steadily 

"^ Gallatin memorandum, April 13, 1807, Rives Collection; Gallatin to Jefferson, 
April 13, 1 6, 1807, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library of Congress; Madison to Gallatin, 
April 17, 1807, ibid,; Jefferson to Madison, April 21, 1807, ibid. In his memorandum 
Gallatin estimated that 67,000 men were in American crews, 42,000 of them in 
ships engaged in foreign commerce. He estimated 9,000 of the latter to be British, 
more than one-fifth of the crews and exactly half of the 18,000 able-bodied seamen, 
the most important component of the crews. 

152 This development may conveniently be followed in Madison's memoranda of 
his conversations with George H. Rose, the British envoy, in Gaillard Hunt, ed., 
The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1900-1910), VIII, i-n. 

95 



<C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? 5? 

sought to reduce American influence over Indians resident in the 
United States. Even the selection of ministers to Washington 
showed Britain's lack of respect. There appeared at the American 
capital first an untried youth, then a pair of arrogant professionals 
who acted more like commanders than negotiators, and finally, 
after a long and contemptuous interlude, a pleasant enough but 
inept young man of no particular reputation. 

In the face of British hauteur the American nation groped 
weakly toward effective national sovereignty. Commercial warfare 
failed to vindicate national rights. By reducing importations from 
Britain it did contribute to a growing campaign to cast off depend- 
ence upon Lancashire. In an amusing reversal, Jeffersonians be- 
came apostles of autarky. Almost every presidential message on 
the state of the union congratulated America on the growth of in- 
dustry, and President Madison even claimed this increase "more 
than a recompense" for losses suffered by shipowners and exporters. 
Some Federalists, on the other hand, so far forgot Alexander Ham- 
ilton's teachings as to argue that industry threatened the nation's 
well-being. "Who that has seen the happy state of society through- 
out our villages," the Connecticut Courant asked, "can wish it to 
be exchanged for the dissipated and effeminate manners and habits, 
which extensive establishments of manufactures, never fail to bring 
in their trains?" 53 

Manufacturing developed slowly. In 1810 there were 269 cot- 
ton mills and 153 iron furnaces in the United States, most of them 
very small. The British Board of Trade occasionally showed con- 
cern over the growth of American manufacturing, and in 1 8 1 1, on 
the basis of reports from the United States, William Cobbett wrote, 
"To American commerce, . . . now bid adieu, I think forever." 
Cobbett was premature. Congressmen affected homespun suits 
("more wretched Stuff cannot be conceived," the British minister 
sniffed), 54 newspapers congratulated the nation, and the census of 

153 James D, Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages anci Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 484-485; Connecticut Courant (Hartford), April 
6, 1808. 

154 Cobbett's Register, XIX (1811), 558$ Erskine to Canning, separate, Nov. 12, 
1808, FO 5/58. 

96 



c C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 

1 8 10 reflected increasing interest by adding new statistics on manu- 
facturing. However, although American industrial accomplish- 
ments foreshadowed the future, they did not substantially reduce 
present dependence upon Britain. 

In literature and the arts American dependence was even more 
substantial. Already West and Copley had won respect for Ameri- 
can painting, 55 but in most other areas there was little of which to 
boast. Only the most enthusiastic patriot could claim that such 
accomplishments as Alexander Wilson's study of American orni- 
thology were more than a beginning. The Porfolio> America's first 
literary magazine, was founded in 1801, but it was a pale copy of 
English models, pale at least in everything except its criticism of 
Republicanism. Americans preferred to receive their reading ma- 
terial from Britain, devoured accounts of English travelers in 
America for information about their own land, and accepted British 
standards. Samuel F. B. Morse, discussing alleged French influ- 
ence upon the United States with a member of Parliament, rightly 
answered that British influence predominated. "As a proof," Morse 
reported to his parents, "I urged the universal prevalence of Eng- 
lish fashions . . . and English manners and customs 5 . . . the 
neglect with which they treated their own literary productions on 
account of the strong prejudice in favor of English works } that 
everything, in short, was enhanced in its value by having attached 
to it the name English." 56 

Patriots thought this dependence undignified. Noah Webster 
and Joel Barlow, one a Federalist and the other a Jeffersonian, 
agreed that cultural independence was required to reinforce politi- 
cal separation from Britain. "I consider this species of dependence 
as extremely prejudicial, as it regards our political interest," Web- 
ster wrote to Barlow. "In truth, we shall always be in leading 
strings till we resort to original writers and original principles in- 

155 Copley's reputation gained him a commission to paint, for 1,650, a group por- 
trait of the Prince Regent and some friends. The Regent, however, refused to pay 
Copley, who was left with possession of the portrait. Arthur Aspinall, ed., The Letters 
of King George IV, I (Cambridge, Eng., 1938), a62n. 

56 Morse to Mr. and Mrs. Jedediah Morse, Jan. i, 1813, Edward L. Morse, ed., 
Samuel F. B. Morse, His Letters and Journals (2 vols.j Cambridge, 1914), I, 9091. 

97 



CC IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

stead of taking upon trust what English writers please to give us. 53 
In 1 806 Webster published the first fruit of his own lexicographical 
endeavors, A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language^ 
designed not only to emphasize American language but also, by 
questioning the authority of the great Dr. Johnson, to show that 
the United States could challenge British scholarship. The next 
year Webster's friend Barlow brought out the Columbiad > the 
culmination of twenty-five years of work to produce an American 
epic poem. Robert Fulton, to whom Barlow dedicated his work, 
heartily praised the ambitious undertaking: "The poem will be for 
ever quoted as proof of American Genius the printing will shew 
our perfection in that art, and the manner in which it is gotten up 
. . . will I hope shew the Europeans that there is some taste in 
America and will be more." 57 Webster's work was really only an 
introduction to later, more important studies, and Barlow's epic 
bored many who praised its patriotism 5 yet these were the major 
productions of American writers in the years just before the War 
of 1812. A more effective campaign for independence awaited the 
end of the war. 

British reviews laughed at American cultural pretensions. An 
exception was the Edinburgh Review > politically the most favor- 
ably inclined of all major English journals, which brutally criti- 
cized the volumes of Thomas Ashe and other British travelers 
hostile to the United States. But even the Edinburgh Review gen- 
erally assailed the work of American writers. A review of Chief 
Justice John Marshall's biography of George Washington sug- 
gested that such poor treatment of a noble American theme clearly 
demonstrated "the poverty of ... [American] literary attain- 
ments." The magazine saw little merit in the Columbiad > explained 
its faults as the natural consequence of the poet's work in a country 
with no literary tradition or audience, and condescendingly added 
that, if Barlow worked a few years in Britain, he might aspire to 
equality with the lesser English poets. In sum, the Edinburgh Re- 

67 Webster to Barlow, Nov. 12, 1807, Charles B. Todd, Life and Letters of Joel 
Barlow, LL.D. (New York, 1886), pp. 247-2485 Fulton to Trumbull, Dec. 16, 1806, 
Col. John Trumbull MSS, Yale University Library. 

98 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? >? 

view believed that the "destruction of her whole literature would 
not occasion so much regret as we feel for the loss of a few leaves 
from an antient classic. 35 5S Truthful though the comments of the 
Edinburgh Review and her even more strident competitors might 
be, or perhaps because they came so near the truth, they wounded 
American sensibilities. 

In many ways, then, the young American felt the sovereignty 
of his nation challenged and her character insulted by Britain. 
Some challenges suggested an inferiority of status most important 
in the realm of the spirit. It would be ridiculous to suggest that the 
impressment of American seamen or the interruption of American 
trade did not pose a material challenge, to argue that the loss of 
thousands of men and hundreds of ships had only a symbolic im- 
portance. These very tangible pressures played a fundamental part 
in the coming of war. Still, since the nation could, after all, prosper 
despite foreign interference, it is most important to recognize the 
moral implications of the challenges America faced. Britain treated 
the new republic as if Yorktown had been an incomplete victory. 
To many, like the citizens on the Mobile, independence seemed 
almpst a dream. 

K few months after a British frigate attacked U.S.S. Chesapeake, 
^he Speaker of the House of Representatives wrote: "It is highly 
Interesting to this Nation to remain in a State of peace, if it can be 
done on honourable Terms; but too much Blood and Treasure 
have been Expended in the acquisition of our Independence and 
importance as a Nation, for us to Relinquish the one, or Suffer the 
Other to be tarnished." Led by an irenic president, the nation chose 
what appeared to be an honorable alternative to war. Thanks to 
many things the weaknesses of Jefferson and Madison, the self- 
ishness of some citizens, the cowardice and the disloyalty of others 
the alternative road led only to further humiliation. "Hereto- 
fore," an eager young War Hawk, John C. Calhoun, wrote in 
1 8 12, "the conductors of our affairs, have attempted to avoid 
and remove difficulties by a sort of political management. They 
thought, that national honor and interest could both be maintained 

158 Edinburgh Review, XIII (1808), 14.8-1705 XV (1810), 24-40, 44.6. 

99 



CC IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 3 

and respected ... by commercial arrangements and negotia- 
tions. . . . This might suit an inconsiderable nation. . . . Ex- 
perience has proved it improper for us. Its effects have been distrust 
at home and contempt abroad." 59 These remarks could as aptly 
have been made in 1 805 or 1 807 or at any time after Jefferson led 
the nation to risk its honor by pressing claims that only war could 
vindicate. Not until Calhoun's day, however, did the truth of 
these sentiments seem apparent to the President and a substantial 
part of the Congress. Until then, America sought without success 
to preserve her honor simultaneously with her peace. 

5d Joseph B. Varnum to Plumer, Dec. 6, 1807, William Plumer MSS, Library 
of Congress 5 Calhoun to Dr. James Macbride, Feb. 16 [17?], 1812, Robert L. Meri- 
wether, ed., The Papers of John C. Calhoun, I (Columbia, S.C., 1959), 90-91. 



IOO 



CHAPTER 



IV 



THE TREATY OF 1806 



"Oh, my country! How I leave my country!" With these words, 
William Pitt died in his rented villa on Putney Heath shortly 
before sunrise on January 23, 1806. The expiring Chancellor's 
concern was understandable. He had just received news of Napo- 
leon's crushing victory at Austerlitz. Despite Nelson's success at 
Trafalgar the war seemed no nearer a victorious conclusion than 
it had when Pitt drove Henry Addington from power in 1804. 
As a war leader the great Pitt left much to be desired. Further- 
more, he stood alone at the summit of his party. His energetic 
disciples Liverpool, Canning, Castlereagh, and Perceval among 
them had not yet the prestige to succeed the master. Who, then, 
was to replace the man who had dominated English politics for a 
quarter of a century? 

While in theory the choice lay with the King, for the moment 
the answer was virtually forced upon him. No single leader could 
replace Pitt, but a coalition of Foxites and Grenvilles might. Re- 
luctantly the King turned to his old enemy, Charles James Fox, 
and to Lord Grenville; from the royal point of view each had 

101 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

dangerous ideas on the Irish issue, but at least they could keep the 
government going. Within a week the new ministry, dubbed by 
supporters the Ministry of All the Talents, entered upon its un- 
easy reign. 

All the Talents a euphemism, and an incomplete euphemism 
at that. The talented supporters of Pitt had no share in the new 
government, although the ministry extended feelers to Bathurst 
and, later in the year, to Canning. The government rested upon 
the Fox, Grenville, and Sidmouth factions, and in the distribution 
of offices a balance among these groups was far more important 
than ability. Grenville, more acceptable to George III than Fox, 
headed the ministry. Fox took the Foreign Office and installed his 
able lieutenant, Lord Howick (soon Earl Grey), at the Admiralty. 
Sidmouth and his conservative friend Ellenborough received cabi- 
net seats. All in all it was not a strong ministry. Grenville was tired, 
Fox ill, Sidmouth unpopular, and the others were untried. 

Most important of all, Fox and Grenville disagreed over almost 
every major issue of policy except Ireland. How should the war 
be fought? How financed? How far should Britain go in negotia- 
tions with Napoleon? These and other issues could be answered 
only by compromise, not by real decision. While nothing indicates 
that Grenville and Fox clashed over American policy, a Pittite 
pamphleteer was certainly correct in a more general sense when 
he commented upon the commission appointed to negotiate with 
Monroe and Pinkney : "The American commission was an epitome 
of the cabinet 5 in neither was there a combination, but a collision 
of talents. Every measure was a compromise. . . . The result was 
a total want of principle." l 

At the Foreign Office Fox found only fifteen subordinates to 
help him face multitudinous problems. Adjustment to Austerlitz 
and the exploration of chances of peace with Napoleon required 
most attention, but he could not ignore American relations. Events 
of the past year, notably the publication of War in Disguise, the 
Essex decision, and the implications of Trafalgar, had brought 

1 Thomas P. Courtenay (peud. Decius) , Observations on the American Treaty 
(London, 1808), p. 92. 

IO2, 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

affairs to a pitch unknown since the crisis preceding the Jay treaty. 
As far as the press of business and the parlous state of his health 
would permit. Fox had to give attention to the American problem. 
The fabled friend of American revolutionists, he seemed ideally 
suited for the task of making a settlement. Beside him stood his 
colleague, Grenville, architect of the first Anglo-American rwp- 
prochement a decade earlier. 

The beginning was promising. The American minister, James 
Monroe, informed Washington that he had high hopes of fair 
treatment from the new secretary, who had even promised to sus- 
pend seizures under the Essex precedent. Fox's lack of information 
prevented detailed discussions until April, but even this delay did 
not discourage Monroe. In the United States the administration 
permitted its kept journal to inform the people that the "past lives 
[of the members of the new Cabinet] are a pledge that they will 
be animated by principles of honor, of justice, and of reciprocity." 
The British secretary of legation, Augustus Foster, who although 
he had grown up among the Foxite coterie feared too great con- 
cession to the United States, wrote to his mother: "I hope they will 
keep old England firm; these Wretches speculate on our Debase- 
ment, & consequent Compliance with all their unreasonable de- 
mands." 2 

The new ministry did not plan to debase itself before Americans. 
It did see the need for some gestures, some concessions. Symboli- 
cally, Fox recalled the minister at Washington, Anthony Merry, 
who had alienated all but extreme Federalists, and sent in his place 
David M. Erskine, the thirty-year-old son of the famous liberal 
lawyer and present lord chancellor. Young Erskine had no diplo- 
matic experience and, at Washington from 1806 to 1809, never 
showed either perceptivity or strength. His American wife, a 
chunky damosel somewhat given to unusually deep decolletage, 
and his father's liberalism. (young Erskine had the motto, "Trial 

2 Monroe $40 to Madison, Jan. 28, 1806, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII j Monroe to Madison, private, March 
n, 1806, ibid*; Monroe $46 to Madison, April 20, 1806, ibid; National Intelli- 
gencer (Washington), March 29, 1806; Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, May 3, 
1806, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library of Congress. 

103 



THE TREATY OF I 8 O 6 

by Jury," painted on his coach) gained him a favorable reception. 
He restored good relations between the legation and the American 
government, partly because, to Foster's disgust, he affected the in- 
formality of Jefferson's court, but principally because he did not 
challenge American positions. The President and the Secretary of 
State liked Erskine - 7 in this sense he served Fox's purpose. 3 

In another gesture, the new Fox-Grenvilie ministry introduced 
legislation to regularize the trade of American ships with the Brit- 
ish West Indies. This trade, a direct violation of the Navigation 
Acts, had been permitted by local executive orders for years be- 
cause of the wartime shortage of British shipping. In April, 1806, 
Lord Grenville's friend Auckland, who believed the extension of 
American commerce should be encouraged, introduced a govern- 
ment bill regularizing and even extending this permission. His 
proposal soon came under attack from many Pittites who had en- 
dorsed similar concessions in the 1790'$. George Rose, in particu- 
lar, spoke at length about the sanctity of the Navigation Acts and 
the superfluity of conciliating a weak, contemptible nation like the 
United States. Sir William Grant (now in his politician's role) 
professed himself willing to meet reasoned arguments or even 
<c the last resort of nations to enforce their will the thunder of 
cannon," but he opposed concession to a nation wielding the unfair 
weapon of economic coercion. Not until July, and after a final 
session lasting until half past two in the morning, did the ministry 
secure passage of the American Intercourse Act. 4 

Another, and the most important, of Charles James Fox's ges- 
tures to the United States, necessarily disguised because of the 
growing obduracy of British opinion, fell woefully short of the 
mark. This was the Order in Council of May 1 6, 1 806, more com- 
monly known as Fox's Blockade, a device designed to supersede 

3 James Hillhouse to Rebecca Hillhouse, Jan. 2, 1807, Hillhouse Family MSS, Yale 
University Library; entry of March 2, 1807, Everett S. Brown, ed., William 
Plumer's Memorandum of Proceedings in the United States Senate, 18031807 (New 
York, 1923), p. 6355 Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Nov. i, 1807, Foster MSS. 

4 Auckland to Grenville, April 17, 18, 23, May 17, 1806, Boconnoc MSS (Papers 
of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville), Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Lord 
Auckland 1806; Grenville to Auckland, May 16, 1806, ibid.; Hansard, VI, 595597, 
834-839, 10315 VII, 94-100, 336-347) 686-729, 969-1010. 

IO4 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

the Essex case as the predominant regulation of neutral commerce. 
The Foreign Secretary disapproved of the Essex decision, not least 
because it replaced easily applied tests with complicated evidential 
problems certain to provoke controversy. In the early months of 
the new ministry seizures declined, either because of quiet hints 
from ministers or because their reputation as moderates enjoined 
caution upon naval commanders, but the basic problem still re- 
mained. 

In the spring of 1 806 Fox and Auckland began to search for some 
device to regularize the position of the American reexport trade 
or to replace the Essex decision. One suggestion, endorsed if not 
initiated by the King's Advocate, Sir John Nicholl, was to establish 
a system of certificates by which British consuls in America could 
affirm that cargoes from the United States were truly neutral prop- 
erty. By this method, in one stroke the Rule of the War of 1756 
would be preserved, yet the Americans could carry on an extensive 
trade with France in colonial produce. This system smacked too 
much of the French example and would certainly have been con- 
sidered an affront by the United States, since it openly demon- 
strated distrust of American governmental procedures. Thus, 
although at first the suggestion interested the Cabinet, Lord Gren- 
ville soon insisted upon dropping it. 5 The idea of a test of some 
sort, like that of the Polly decision but perhaps more rigorous, sur- 
vived to arise again during the Monroe-Pinkney negotiations. 

This tack temporarily abandoned, the government chose to go 
ahead with another scheme. It declared the entire northern coast 
of Europe from Brest to the Elbe under blockade but added that 
this blockade would be rigorously enforced only from the Seine 
to Ostend j elsewhere, neutral ships could visit enemy ports if they 
did not carry contraband or goods owned by the enemy, and if they 
neither came from nor were bound for other enemy ports. By this 

5 Auckland to Howick, private, May 3, 1806, Charles Grey, Second Earl Grey, 
MSS, The Prior's Kitchen, Durham University, from ist Ld. Auckland 5 Nicholl to 
Auckland, May 9, 1806, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British Museum 
(Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 3445^5 Grenville to Auckland, 
May 9, 1806, ibid.; Grenville to Auckland, n.d. ibid., Add. MSS 34457, fols. 194- 
1955 Nicholl to , n.d., ibid., fol. 198. 

105 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

measure the government gained praise from some, like the Times, 
who demanded vigorous action against the enemy, for the decree 
extended the areas under blockade. At the same time Fox and his 
colleagues intended to imply that the more inclusive but indefinite 
principle of Grant's decision would not be applied to American 
ships bound for enemy ports outside the critical zone along the 
English Channel As Lord Grenville put it, "With respect to 
America . . . you open to her for the carriage of Colonial Produce 
(whether the Enemy's or not, for after actual importation into 
the U.S. they are indistinguishable) not only the ports of the At- 
lantic & Mediterr*. but also those of Holland & Flanders, & I think 
ii>4he present state of commerce it will be right so to do." 6 
\ Unfortunately, although Fox's Blockade succeeded in reassuring 
Englishmen that its authors intended to fight the war with vigor, 
it faild^. in the equally important object of conciliating the United 
States./Probably because he feared an outcry from his country- 
men^ox withdrew an earlier promise to abandon the Essex prin- 
ciple explicitly. In Monroe's words, the new decree "imposed the 
suspension desired, but in a manner w h . seemed as if it was intended 
to mask the object from view." 7 This concealed abandonment of 
the British position satisfied neither American public opinion nor 
the Jefferson administration. For years the United States had pro- 
tested against blockades not maintained by cruising squadrons actu- 
ally in the vicinity. Now, from the very mouth of a ministry 
nominally friendly, there issued a new order extending blockades 
over hundreds of miles of coast. Whether Fox's Blockade was ever 
enforced in the traditional fashion, or whether it remained a purely 
nominal blockade, became the subject of debate in later years. In 
1806 America refused to accept the argument that the new order 
was simply another decree of the usual type. All but the most parti- 
san Federalists refused to believe that even the Royal Navy could 
maintain a blockade according to the old standards along such 
an extensive stretch of coastline. 

A fortnight after announcing Fox's Blockade, the British gov- 

6 Grenville to Auckland, n.d., Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 34457, fol. 195. 

7 Monroe #49 to Madison, May 20, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII. 

106 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

ernment received jarring news from New York that destroyed any 
hope, however unfounded, that the new decree would mollify 
the United States. Within American territorial waters a carelessly 
aimed shot from H.M.S. Leander, fired to warn a vessel that neg- 
lected to come to, struck and killed a member of the crew, John 
Pierce. With Piercers publicly exposed body to whet their temper, 
mobs roamed the streets of New York, a British flag was burned, 
and consul Barclay, who deplored his own navy's action, feared 
for a time that his house would be burned and he himself seized 
as a hostage. British officers on shore actually were arrested but 
subsequently secretly released by city authorities. (The British 
squadron commander, Captain Henry Whitby, later reported he 
had been ready to use force to recover them.) Federalist speakers 
emphasized that Jefferson's neglect of the navy encouraged British 
insults, but all parties agreed that Pierce must be avenged. The 
Aurora and the Richmond Enquirer even talked of a declaration 
of war. 8 

Had adequate naval forces been available, Jefferson and Madi- 
son might have taken strong action. As it was, they felt forced to 
fall back upon those favorite weapons of Jeffersonian diplomacy, 
a proclamation and a protest. 9 The President directed the three 
British ships off New York to leave American waters. To enforce 
compliance he cut off their supplies. At the same time the admin- 
istration instructed James Monroe to demand that Britain court- 
martial Captain Whitby. Then Jefferson and Madison sat back 
to wait, hoping they had satisfied the minimum demands of Ameri- 
can anger and that the British government would offer atonement 
for Whitby's action. 

Fox did his best to meet American expectations. When first re- 
ports of the killing reached London, the Foreign Secretary sent 

8 New-York Evening Post, April 26, 18065 Barclay to Merry, April 27, 1806, 
George L. Rives, edL, Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas Barclay (New 
York, 1894), pp. 2322335 Captain Henry Whitby to Captain John P. Beresford, 
May 6, 1806, enclosed in Beresford to William Marsden, May 19, 1806, Admiralty 
Papers, Public Record Office, Adm 1/496; New-York Evening Post, April 28, 18065 
Aurora (Philadelphia), April 29, 18065 Enquirer (Richmond), May 6, 1806. 

d Cabinet memorandum. May i, 1806, Paul L. Ford, ed., The Writings of Thomas 
Jefferson (10 vols.j New York, 18921899), I, 315-316. 

107 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

word to Madison that his government deeply regretted Pierce's 
death. This attitude contrasted markedly with that of the British 
press, which blamed the Americans for the incident and virtually 
dared them to make it a casus belli, The ministry ordered Captain 
Whitby home to face investigation a month and a half before 
James Monroe presented the formal complaint against him. By 
this time Fox lay on his deathbed at a ducal establishment in Chis- 
wick. One of his last acts or one taken in his name was to inform 
the American minister that Whitby had been recalled. 11 Unfortu- 
nately, this could not wipe away American memories of a fatal 
invasion of their national waters. 

After the beginning of the new ministry., as Fox sought to restore 
harmony to Anglo-American relations without affronting the un- 
ruly brass players under Stephen, a reedy obbligato wafted across 
the Atlantic from the United States. The notes seemed confused, 
for the leading wood winds declined to instruct their colleagues, 
but the central theme of commercial warfare clearly emerged. 
By cutting off Britain's market, perhaps merely by threatening to 
do so, America would compel England to accept her demands. 
This was good Republican doctrine upon which almost all agreed, 

10 Fox -#5 to Merry, June 6, 1806, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British 
Ministers to the United States, 17911812, American Historical Association, Annual 
Report) 1936, III (Washington, 1941), 223. The London Courier's comments (June 
3, 1806) were characteristic: "If, availing- itself, or influenced by that popular feeling, 
it [the American government] choose to push matters to extremities, we must inform 
it that Great Britain contemplates a contest with America without dread or dismay." 

11 Marsden to Admiral George C. Berkeley, June 22, 1806, enclosed in Marsden 
to Sir Francis Vincent, Sept. 6, 1806, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record Office, 
FO 5/515 Monroe to Fox, Aug. 4, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII; Fox 
to Monroe, Sept. 8, 1806, ibid,$ Monroe #51 to Madison, Sept. 13, 1806, ibid., 
enclosing the exchange of notes with Fox. Lord Howick, Fox's 'successor, hoped it 
would be possible to acquit Whitby without affronting the llmted States, or at most 
to convict him on a minor charge. At MoSrde^s-' request -the trial was delayed to permit 
witnesses to come from America. When it finally took place in April, 1807, the 
court-martial held that the charges against Whitby were not proved, to the substantial 
discomfiture of the United States. In 1808 Whitby even had the effrontery to ask 
compensation for the sea pay he had lost during the interval between his recall and 
his acquittal. Howick to Grenville, Sept. 20, 21, 1806, Walter Fitzpatrick, ed., Report 
on the Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Esq., Preserved at Drofmore (10 vols. 5 London: 
Historical Manuscripts Commission, 1892-1927), VIII, 345, 3505 Monroe 9^46 to 
Madison, April 20, 1807, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII j Whitby to Canning, 
Dec. 15, 1808, FO 5/6 1. 

108 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

but the way in which the pressure was to be applied caused seri- 
ous disagreement. On January 24, 1 806, Representative William 
Gregg of Pennsylvania introduced resolutions for a complete ban 
on imports from Britain. Not until the middle of April, and then 
only in emasculated form, did legislation emerge from the con- 
gressional mill. 

Internal Republican schisms and weak leadership caused the 
delay, for the Federalists decided to observe silence during the 
debates. 12 Gregg's resolutions were soon followed by far milder 
ones introduced by Joseph Nicholson. 

The National Intelligencer approved first one set and then the 
other, and rumors flew through Washington that the President 
preferred Gregg's to Nicholson's, or vice versa. Jefferson, who 
almost certainly privately favored the less effective but less risky 
Nicholson resolutions, kept silent. John Randolph rightly com- 
plained that "it is not for the master and mate . . . in bad weather, 
to go below, and leave the management of the ship to the cook and 
cabin boy." ^ 

Since cooks and cabin boys disagreed, this lack of administration 
leadership became particularly important. Representative Gregg 
("a MfsRepreseKfeLtive," Gallatin allegedly called him 14 ) argued 
for a strong course. Such action, he and allies like Jacob Crownin- 
shield argued, would show America's determination far better than 
half measures, might even cause England to back down before the 
ban went into effect. In any event, the more powerful the weapon 
the quicker the cure 3 Britain would be almost immediately forced 
to her knees by the sudden loss of the entire American market. To 
warnings that action of this sort might provoke British retaliation, 
Representative Gregg replied: "Great Britain is ... too well 

12 Quincy to Oliver Wolcott, Jr., Feb. 3, 1806, Wolcott Family MSS, Connecticut 
Historical Society, Vol. XX. 

13 Bayard to Richard Bassett, Jan. 31, 1806, Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of 
James A. Bayard y 17961815, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1913, 
II (Washington, 1915), 165; National Intelligencer, March 19, 26, 1806; entry 
of Feb. 25, 1806, Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John Quincy Adams (12 vols.; 
Philadelphia, 1874. 1877), I> 4 1 5? entry of March 8, 1806, Brown, op, cit. y p. 44.6; 
Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., pp. 771772. 

14 Richard B. Davis, ed. Jeffersonian America: Notes on the United, States of 
America . . , by Sir Augustus John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), p. 236. 

IO9 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

acquainted with her own interest, to persevere in this lawless sys- 
tem at the hazard of losing customers, whose annual purchases of 
her manufactures and other merchandise exceeds . . . thirty mil- 
lions of dollars." 15 

Republicans more cautious than Gregg disputed his predictions. 
Th-gpeupJ|id^^ -GalfafinV^^ 

Eppes^, widower of Jeff erson^s" daughter 5 antd'*Barhabas Bidwell, 
a-new- ^ongressm^s^^ 

influence In Aejfcfowe. These men preferred a selective ban, a 
mild but definite warning to England to mend her ways before 
the United States proceeded to harsher measures. They argued 
that it would be far wiser to forbid the importation only of goods 
that could neither be obtained elsewhere nor be made in America, 
for the Treasury vitally needed the duties on many British goods 
and the ordinary citizen required them for himself. A complete 
ban would harm the United States more than Britain. But the 
Nicholson group's chief argument was that the United States dared 
not run the risk of Gregg's policy. Through all of their speeches 
runs a steady theme of fear, fear either that any demonstration of 
vigor would prejudice negotiations at London or, worse, that 
Britain would reply with sterner measures. What Joseph Nichol- 
son and his followers wanted was to demonstrate to their constitu- 
ents and to Britain, at the least possible cost, that Congress was 
determined to defend American rights. As the fat, cynical Federal- 
ist, Samuel Taggart, put it, the Republicans believed "something 
must be done, they don't very well know what, but it is above all 
necessary to vent our indignation against Britain in some way or 
other." 16 They had no heart for a fight, and in the end Nicholson 
even proposed to delay action on his own mild resolutions. 

The Gregg resolutions, which at least had the virtue of direct- 
ness, might have attracted broader support had they not collided 

15 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., p. 540. The entire debate appears in this volume, 
pp. 167878 passim, but Senate speeches are rarely reported at length. Specific refer- 
ences are made here only for direct quotations. 

16 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, March 12, 1806, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters 
of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 189. 

IIO 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

with a deep prejudice that tortured many veteran Republicans. 
Even those who believed America pledged to defend commercial 
interests often regretted it; in George W. Campbell's words, "it 
would have been better for the American people, if Government 
had never given protection to commerce, out of sight of our own 
territory, or beyond the reach of cannon from our own shores." 
There was something uncomfortable, if not positively sinful, in 
hazarding the future of an ideal agricultural society to protect 
commercial interests, particularly since the controversy might be 
narrowed even further to a contest for the right to carry on a 
reexport trade in non-American produce. Crafty merchants, not 
honest farmers, benefited from such a trade. In vain did New Eng- 
land Republicans point out that it was impossible to exchange the 
entire agricultural surplus for specie, that merchants were forced 
to trade much of it for colonial goods they subsequently reexported 
to French dominions. For the sake of national honor, Republicans 
were ready to rally in defense of American rights; they were not 
ready to budge beyond the Nicholson resolutions unless propelled 
by administration pressure. "If the President had any plan, which 
he would assume the responsibility to propose, I have no doubt of 
his securing a majority to adopt it," wrote a bitter critic of Jeffer- 
son. 17 But no word came from the White House. 

Against this background congressional Republicans brawled for 
more than a month. For two weeks in March, after a long delay 
during which the Republicans found themselves unable to patch 
up their differences, debate raged in the House of Representa- 
tive/. On March 5 and 6, John Randolph delivered magnificent 
if disjointed speeches, each of them more than two hours long, 
in which he vilified Jefferson and Madison, warned that com- 
mercial warfare would lead to armed convict, and declared himself 
unwilling to fight for the re'export trade: \ 

No, sir, if this great agricultural nation is to be governed by Salem and 
Boston, New York and Philadelphia, and Baltimore and Norfolk and 
Charleston, let gentleman come out and say so. ... I, for one, will not 

1T Annals, 9th Cong-., ist sess., pp. 706-7075 Pickering to King-, Feb. 20, 1806, 
Rufus Kingr MSS, New-York Historical Society, Vol. XI. 

Ill 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

mortgage my property and my liberty, to carry on this trade. ... It is not 
for the honest carrying trade of America, but for this mushroom, this fungus 
of war . . . that the spirit of avaricious traffic would plunge us into war. 18 

"This fungus of war" Republicans flinched at the phrase. But 
on this occasion, as so often in the future, Randolph's lash drove 
them to rally together. Gregg's resolutions were beaten on March 
1 3, but by an overwhelming margin the Republican phalanx passed 
Nicholson's four days later. Randolph himself abstained, and only 
about a dozen Republican schismatics, sharing his feeling that agri- 
cultural prosperity should not be risked to aid the reexport trade, 
joined" the Federalist band in opposition. 

fkfter the success of Nicholson's resolutions, passage of a bill 
was largely anticlimactic. Presented on March 25, 1806, the bill 
listed for exclusion precisely those imports Nicholson had originally 
suggested: some metal goods, cloth made of hemp or flax, high- 
priced woolens, glass, finished clothing, and sundry other articles 
including "beer, ale, and porter." /The most important imports 
from Britain cottons, cheap wodlens, iron and steel did not 
appear on the list, and the House beat down attempts to add them. 
In a further demonstration of fear and leaderlessness, the House 
agreed to suspend the act until November 15 to allow time for 
further news from England 5 perhaps even the threat of lost mar- 
kets would induce British compliance, or perhaps Fox would ar- 
range a settlement. This last weakening of the act evoked from 
Randolph one of his most famous passages: 

Never in the course of my life have I witnessed such a scene of indignity 
and inefficiency as this measure holds forth to the world. What is it? A 
milk-and-water bill, a dose of chicken broth to be taken nine months hence. 
... It is too contemptible to be the object of consideration, or to excite 
the feelings of the pettiest State in Europe. . . . You cannot do without 
the next Spring and Fall importations; and you tell your adversary so. 
... [It is] a law which . . . cannot be executed, and than the execution 
of which nothing is further from the minds of its framers. 19 

Randolph's justifiable scorn availed naught. The House approved 
tiie bill, and after a brief delay the Senate concurred. Although an 

18 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., p. 557. 
p. 851. 



THE TREATY OF I 8 O 

absentee, James A. Bayard, favored the bill, John Quincy Adams 
cast the only affirmative Federalist vote in either house. 2 / 
, As Adams should hat^ seen, the Nonimportation Act of 1 806 
was worse than useless. When at last seriously enforced in the 
spring of 1808, nonimportation became an important ancillary to 
the Embargo, but the passage in 1806 of weak legislation to take 
effect only after months of delay was neither an effective act of 
coercion nor a wise prelude to friendly negotiation. Strong action 
against Britain required no justification, and an argument could 
be made for commercial warfare. None could be made for this bill 
As Randolph warned, the world's greatest commercial power was 
unlikely to be impressed by such a gesture. Indeed this posture of 
feeble defiance strengthened the hands of those in Great Britain 
who insisted that America was malignantly but ineffectively anti- 
British. /William Plumer, like Adams an independent, analyzed 
the act irbr more accurately than his fellow Yankee when he wrote: 
"It has not sufficient energy tb operate on the fears, but may wound 
the pride, of Great Britain." ^ 

The British reaction confirmed Plumer's analysis. Most Eng- 
lishmen considered the new law a bluff, potentially far more harm- 
ful to the United States than to England: "Can the Americans do 
without our goods? This is to ask: can they go naked . . . ?" 
Among ministers, only Lord Grenville expressed substantial fear 
of the act, and his concern sprang from its coincidence with loss of 
the Prussian market 5 anxious over its immediate effects, he was 
at the same time convinced that any ban would be "only tem- 
porary because Am a . wants to buy our goods at least as much as 
we want to sell them." Lord Auckland, the Cabinet's American 
expert, expressed a more general view when he called the Nonim- 
portation Act a "foolish and teasing measure." 22 And Britain was 
in no mood to be teased. In May and June, Fox and his under- 
secretary complained to Monroe. The Foreign Secretary said that 

20 Morton Borden, The Federalism of James A. Bayard (New York, 1955), p. 75 
entry of April 10, 1806, Adams, op. cit. y I, 43Z. 

21 Plumer to John Goddard, April 14, 1806, William Plumer MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

22 Cobbetfs Political Register, X (1806), 973; Grenville to Auckland, Sept. 6, 
1806, Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 344575 Auckland to Grenville, Nov. 25, 1806, Fitz- 
patrick, o$. cit., VIII, 442. 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

the law "had the air of a menace, and that it was not agreeable to 
do things by compulsion." Monroe vainly attempted to convince 
Fox that the postponed date of implementation showed that Amer- 
ica intended no menace. In September the British virtually told 
the Americans that they could not negotiate seriously while the 
act hung over their heads. The American representatives, Monroe 
and Pinkney, then promptly urged their government to push 
back still further the effective date. Even this did not satisfy Lord 
Holland, who pressed Monroe to recommend total repeal, since 
"it is very difficult to yield any thing while such a law is in force 
or even suspended in terrorem over our heads." 23 Except for 
Grenville's letter, all the evidence indicates that the threat of non- 
importation did not spur Britain to concession. On the contrary, 
both in the short and the long run it had a baneful psychological 
effect. 

Shortly after learning of the Nonimportation Act, Fox derived 
some solace from information that a special minister had sailed to 
join James Monroe in full-dress negotiations. Many people in 
America, even ardent Republicans, preferred renewed negotia- 
tions to commercial warfare. In February the Senate called upon 
the President to give Britain one more chance to demonstrate her 
reasonableness. Jefferson subsequently denied that he had had 
anything to do with this resolution. A number of opponents, re- 
membering the uproar when Jay was sent to England in 1794, 
believed that the administration "had the address behind the 
scenes to induce . . . the Senate without any direct application 
from the President to resolve that further negociation ... is 
requisite." 24 Senators, among them Samuel Smith of Maryland, 
then urged Jefferson to appoint a special minister to join Monroe, 
both to emphasize the importance of the negotiation and because 
Monroe had a reputation, undeserved at this time, for Anglo- 

23 Monroe #49 to Madison, May 20, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII 5 
Monroe #50 to Madison, June 9, 1806, ibid.; Holland and Auckland to Monroe 
and Pinkney, Sept. 4, 1806, FO 5/515 Monroe and Pinkney to Holland and Auckland, 
Sept. 10, 1806, ibid.; Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, Dec. 3, 1806, William C. 
Rives Collection, Library of Congress. 

24 Plumer to Jedediah Morse, Feb. 26, 1806, Morse Family MSS, Yale University 
Library. 

114 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

phobia. Here again Jefferson's views are doubtful. He seems to 
have hesitated before assenting to an appointment bound to affront 
his loyal friend in London. At last, as the President himself put 
it in an apology to Monroe two years later, "I found it necessary 
... to yield my own opinion to the general views of the national 
council, and it really seemed to produce a jubilee among them 
. . . from a belief in the effect which an extraordinary mission 
would have on the British mind." 25 

Jefferson's next problem was to choose a joint commissioner or 
perhaps, as he initially planned^ two commissioners. Various names, 
Burr and Randolph among the most implausible, circulated in 
Capital rumor mills, and Samuel Smith openly sought the job. 
But Jefferson concluded that, particularly if the mission should 
fail, a non-Republican should share the responsibility. The most 
serious consideration fell upon Rufus King, whose long, successful 
experience at London and close friendship with English politicians 
made him a natural candidate. King apparently would accept only 
if given a free hand, subject only to the normal processes of ratifica- 
tion if he signed a treaty; when Madison informed him that the 
new commissioner would carry detailed instructions, the New 
Yorker, who knew from past experience how little freedom this 
would give him, bowed out. 26 

So, to the astonishment of all, William Pinkney of Maryland 
received the appointment. The surprise was unreasonable, for 
Pinkney 7 s background justified his selection. For eight years he 
had served in London as a member of the Jay treaty commission 
hearing the claims of American merchants. This service had the 
advantage of having kept him safely outside partisan struggles 
at home, although Pinkney was generally believed to be a Fed- 
eralist. On his return home in 1804 Pinkney almost immediately 
established himself as a leader of the Baltimore bar. Early in 1 806 

25 Jefferson to Monroe, March 10, 1808, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, 
eds.. The "Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols. 5 Washington, 1903 
1904), XII, 4-5. See also Madison to Monroe, private, March n, 1806, James Madi- 
son MSS, Library of Congress. 

26 Merry $1 to Mulgrave, Jan. 2, 1806, FO 5/485 entry of April 22, 1806, 
Brown, o$. cit*, p. 491; Nicholson to Monroe, May 5, 1806, James Monroe MSS, 
Library of Congress. 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

he drafted for the merchants of that city a protest against British 
maritime practice, a memorial so able and so strong that Jefferson 
decided to send him to London. In the middle of March Pinkney 
expressed his willingness to serve, and the next month Jefferson 
nominated him. 

Ambition and patriotism probably explain Pinkney's accept- 
ance. He and his wife, the sister of Commodore John Rodgers, 
had ten children, and in Baltimore he earned about $ 15,000 a year. 
As a man largely self-made, William Pinkney well knew what it 
meant to abandon an extremely prosperous practice. But he was 
ambitious, and supremely confident that his talents would bring 
him success in whatever he undertook. His air of self-confidence 
was compounded by a certain foppishness, so that even Joseph 
Story, who deeply admired Pinkney, commented, "His first ap- 
pearance is not prepossessing. He has the air of a man of fashion, 
of hauteur y of superiority, and something, I hardly know what to 
call it, of abrupt and crusty precision." 27 Pinkney had a great deal 
to be egotistical about, for he was among the greatest lawyers of 
his generation. 

In 1806 Pinkney worked for an Anglo-American compromise. 
Doubtless he still believed Napoleon a greater threat than Britain 5 
perhaps he hoped to reconstruct the rapprochement his friend 
King had helped to build a decade before. From 1807 onward, 
after Monroe's departure and particularly after the Chesapeake 
affair, Pinkney became more bellicose than the administration at 
home. He loyally executed his superiors' commands, but his corre- 
spondence makes it obvious that a more decisive policy would 
have pleased him better. 

Neither Republicans nor Federalists viewed Pinkney in this 
light at the time of his appointment. Federalists grumbled that 
he had sold out. Most Republicans failed to see the wisdom of 

27 Story to Samuel P. P. Fay, Feb. 18, 1812, William W. Story, Life and Letters 
of Joseph Story, I (Boston, 1851), 216. There is no adequate biography of Pinkney, 
although a great deal of information can be found in Henry Wheaton, Some Account 
of the Life, Writings, and Speeches of William Pinkney (New York, 1826), and 
William Pinkney, The Life of William Pinkney (New York, 1853). A sketch by 
John J. Dolan is in the Dictionary of American Biography, XIV, 626629. 

116 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

appointing a Federalist to join Monroe. As late as 1 808 Republican 
senators threatened to oppose Pinkney's confirmation as perma- 
nent minister, arguing that his Federalist background made him an 
almost certain Anglophile. 28 Monroe and his supporters considered 
the appointment a trick inspired by Madison to cut a political rival 
down to size. "I hope," wrote John Randolph, "that Mr. Monroe 
. . . will have concluded all matters with the Court of London 
before that federal interloper P. can arrive to share the honor which 
does not belong to him." Monroe himself was bitterly disappointed, 
both from personal pique and because the appointment stymied 
promising conversations with Fox. 29 

William Pinkney and his family sailed from Baltimore on May 
21,1 806. Although he had been selected in March and the Cabinet 
had outlined his instructions at that time, Pinkney's departure was 
actually rather precipitate. He had no chance to see Jefferson, who 
was vacationing at Monticello, before leaving. Favorable winds 
speeded Pinkney's passage to Liverpool. He nevertheless had 
twenty-nine days to reexamine Madison's instructions, all fifteen 
sheets of them, and perhaps to reread the Secretary's learned 
disquisition on American rights, which Madison had thought- 
fully provided in twelve copies. Pinkney can hardly have been 
surprised by anything he read, but he must have realized, egotist 
though he was, that he faced an almost impossible task. 

Madison's instructions, drafted after consultation with the Presi- 
dent and unanimously endorsed by the Cabinet, listed a dozen 
items of complaint. For the most part the list was familiar, as in- 
deed it should have been since the instructions largely repeated 
earlier ones sent to Monroe. In the field of neutral rights, for ex- 
ample, Madison renewed requests Britain had refused before: 
elimination or at least narrowing of the list of contraband, accept- 

28 Gore to King-, Aug. 24, 1806, King MSS, Vol. XI 5 entry of April 19, 1806, 
Brown, op. cit. 9 pp. 488489, 4914925 Nathaniel Macon to Gallatin, June 28, 1806, 
Albert Gallatin MSS, New- York Historical Society; Macon to Nicholson, April 21, 
1806, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress; Pickering to King, Feb. 26, 
1808, King MSS, Vol. XII j Jefferson to Giles, Feb. 26, 1808, Thomas Jefferson MSS, 
Library of Congress (erroneously bound at 1806). 

29 Randolph to James M. Garnett, May n, 1806, John Randolph MSS, Library 
of Congress; Monroe to Jefferson, June 15, 1806 (not sent), Monroe MSS. 

117 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

ance of the doctrine of "free ships, free goods," a return to on- 
the-spot notifications of blockades, and so on. More original, and 
a combination of one-sided logic with wild improbability, was the 
suggestion that Britain recognize the Gulf Stream as the limit of 
American waters and withdraw her fleet behind it. 30 In his discus- 
sion of Anglo-American commerce, Madison offered little that was 
new, standing behind most-favored-nation status and reciprocal 
removal of discriminatory legislation, the American position since 
at least I794. 31 Since Essex seizures formed one of the principal 
sources of controversy, Madison naturally directed Monroe and 
Pinkney to seek some compensation for them and for other fla- 
grantly illegal spoliations. But he and Jefferson did not insist upon 
payment. 32 

Two sine qua non's, intended to prevent further friction, formed 
the heart of the instructions. One was some limitation on impress- 

30 Almost a year before, the Cabinet had agreed that the United States "ought to 
endeavor to assume" this position. Entry of July 8, 1805, Ford, of. cit., I, 308. In 
the instructions the envoys received permission to recede from this position and to 
seek instead an agreement that American waters extended only to four, or even one, 
maritime league from the coast. Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 7, 1806, 
Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VI. Monroe and Pinkney adopted this latter position, 
buttressing it with the administration's argument that it would reduce the number of 
incidents contributing to discord. But, as British naval officers and Lord Holland 
pointed out, unless France also accepted the new definition it would in effect grant 
a zone of immunity to her warships and privateers. Admiral John Markham to Holland 
[?], Nov. 9, 1806, Greenwich Hospital Miscellanea, Public Record Office, Adm 
80/1175 Holland to Monroe, Nov. 13, 1806, James Monroe MSS, New York Public 
Library. In the present discussion, except where otherwise noted, reference is to the 
instructions cited above. 

31 In the commercial area Madison showed flexibility. If unrestricted most-favored- 
nation status was unobtainable, he was prepared to accept mere equalization of the 
burden of charges on ships of both nations. He offered to accept restrictions on the 
cargoes American ships could carry away from the West Indies after bearing supplies 
thither. He did not insist upon the opening of British North America. But he did 
caution Monroe and Pinkney to draft any agreement in such a fashion that, if Ameri- 
can ships were not granted entry into Caribbean ports, British ships from the colonies 
could not demand entry into American ports under the most-favored-nation principle, 
and he warned that only extensive trading rights would justify the envoys in agreeing 
to forswear the right of discriminatory legislation to force open the islands. Madison 
was supremely confident that Britain's own needs "must necessarily produce that effect 
at no distant period." 

32 Madison laid down extremely detailed specifications here, but his failure to insist 
upon compensation as a sine qua non perhaps suggests that he too had come to realize 
that Essex seizures were not so numerous as the first reports had indicated. 

118 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

ment, either by substituting for it an agreement for the return of 
deserters or by arranging to confine the practice to British ports, 
as Rufus King had sought to do in 1803. As Madison well knew, 
these limitations would undermine the entire practice, at least in 
English eyes. "Yet," said the instructions, a so indispensable is 
some adequate provision for the case, that the President makes it a 
necessary preliminary to any stipulation requiring a repeal of the 
act shutting the market of the U. States against certain British 
manufactures." Similarly, the United States insisted upon more 
liberal treatment of the reexport trade as a condition of repeal of 
the Nonimportation Act. "It is much to be desired," wrote Madi- 
son, "that the general principle [of the right to trade freely in 
colonial goods] in its full extent, be laid down in the stipulation. 
But as this may not be attainable and as much ought not to be risked 
by an inflexible pursuit of abstract rights, . . . you are left at lib- 
erty if found necessary to abridge the right in practice." In short, 
the United States would exchange acceptance of the old Polly defi- 
nition of broken voyage (plus perhaps a requirement that goods be 
reshipped in a different vessel) for British repudiation of the 
harsher Essex restraints. The two sine qua nan's really meant that 
the United States demanded a return to the halcyon days before 
seizures and impressment became serious problems. 33 

The instructions reflected the constant desire of James Madison 
and his superior to limit war's impact and to extend commercial 
intercourse. They spoke the language of the Enlightenment and 
of the whole career of Thomas Jeif erson, its most consistent Amer- 
ican spokesman. Naturally American interests would benefit if Brit- 
ain accepted the proposed regulations, but this is not the sole rea- 

33 A memorandum by Jefferson conveniently summarizes the whole instructions, 
and shows that the basic outline was settled in March, although the instructions them- 
selves were not prepared until two months later: " . . we may enter into treaty with 
England, the sum of which should be to settle neutral rights, not insisting on the 
principle of free ships, free goods and modifying her new principles of the 'accustomed 
trade* so as to give up the direct, & keep the indirect commerce between colonies & 
their metropols, restraining impressmts. of seamen to her own citizens in her own 
ports, & giving her in commerce the right of the most favored nations without entering 
into details. Endeavor to get a relinqumt of her right of commerce with our Indians, 
or insist on security for our people trading with hers. Endeavour also to exclude 
hostilities within the gulph stream." Entry of March 14, 1806, Ford, o-p. cit., I, 310. 

119 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

son Jefferson and Madison advanced them. They deeply believed 
that restricted warfare and broadened commerce would improve 
the lot of all men. Philosophically, and from the point of view 
of abstract justice, there was much to commend the instructions. 
But, as Abbot E. Smith has commented, "it was less necessary that 
Madison should have a clear conception of the rights to which 
the United States was theoretically entitled, than that he should 
understand the European situation and have a fair notion of what 
he was likely to get without fighting." 34 

What, then, decided Jefferson and Madison to put these items 
forward? James Monroe thought them a trap designed to destroy 
his own political reputation. While this collateral benefit may 
have crossed Madison's mind it almost certainly was not decisive. 
Among other things, the President and the Secretary woefully 
overestimated the impact of nonimportation, blindly convincing 
themselves that this weapon would bring England to her knees. 
If the Nonimportation Act was the stick, the proposed commercial 
treaty was the carrot. Ignoring obvious evidence of British indiffer- 
ence to expiration of the Jay treaty's commercial articles, Jefferson 
and Madison clung to a conviction that England would recognize, 
at least ultimately, that she could not maintain her economy with- 
out extended American trade. Time, they felt sure, would make 
these obvious truths visible even to the blind. 

Jefferson and Madison expected much from Fox, described by 
the President as one in whom "I have more confidence than in any 
man in England." When Fox fell ill the President considered it 
a crippling blow, for "his sound judgment saw that political in- 
terest could never be separated in the long run from moral right, 
& his frank & great mind would have made a short business of a 
just treaty." Furthermore, European calamities, so Jefferson rea- 
soned, made good relations with one of the world's few remain- 
ing neutrals imperative for Britain. To quote him again, "the 
change in the ministry & the events of Europe will I think ensure 
a friendly settlement with her." as Jefferson and Madison, who 

34 Abbot E. Smith, James Madison: Builder (New York, 1937), p. 254.. 

35 Jefferson to Monroe, May 4, 1806, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit, y XI, 1095 
Jefferson to Monroe, Oct. 26, 1806, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to John Tyler, April 
26, 1806, ibid. 

1 2O 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

did not want to see Napoleon reign over all Europe, were realistic 
enough to attempt to exploit his victories for America's benefit. 

For other reasons it also seemed unwise to compromise. Na- 
poleon's support in the quarrel with Spain over Florida was so 
important that it must not be jeopardized by an Anglo-American 
accommodation, unless that settlement were so favorable that the 
Florida question shrank to secondary importance. Finally, par- 
ticularly after the militant declarations of the preceding winter, 
Jefferson feared the psychological consequences of a retreat: "The 
love of peace which we sincerely feel & profess, has begun to pro- 
duce an opinion in Europe that our government is entirely in 
Quaker principles." se 

More than two years later, when Jefferson at last released the 
instructions, some concluded that the administration had intended 
the negotiations to fail. The French minister reported, "They are 
long, diffuse and seem equally designed to embarrass the progress 
of the Plenipotentiaries as to direct them." Later, echoing a fre- 
quent Federalist theme, James A. Bayard argued: "Your Presi- 
dent never meant to have a treaty with Great Britain. ... If he 
had intended it, he would never have fettered the Commissioners 
with sine qua nons which were insuperable." 37 Such criticism missed 
the point. Madison and Jefferson were not sinister Machiavellians. 
They believed that Fox would grant American demands. If he 
did not, they were prepared to wait, confident that time would 
bring compliance. This fumbling and confused analysis speaks 
eloquently of the diplomatic ineptness of the President and his 
chief lieutenant. 

Pinkney reached London late in June, 1806. Probably to their 
mutual surprise, he and Monroe hit it off at once. During the entire 
subsequent negotiations there is not a hint of disagreement. On the 
whole, Monroe told Pinkney, the British government's attitude 
appeared favorable. Fox seemed on the verge of important con- 
cessions. Considering his reluctance to promise compensation for 

36 Jefferson to Cooper, Feb. 18, 1806, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge Collec- 
tion), Massachusetts Historical Society. 

37 Turreau #14. to Minister of Foreign RelationSj May 20, 1808, Archives des 
Affaires Etrangeres, Correspondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of 
Congress), Vol. LXI; Annals, xoth Cong., zd sess., pp. 394-395. 

121 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

seizures largely tactical, Monroe thought England would agree to 
return to the Polly principle and even hoped to reach a settlement 
on impressment. 38 Less hopefully., on the very day Pinkney reached 
London Fox fell fatally ill of dropsy,, the price finally exacted 
for a life of dissipation. To the extent that his influence was needed 
to keep the Cabinet in line (as the Americans erroneously thought), 
this was a crushing blow. 

To replace Fox, the Cabinet asked a young man. Lord Holland, 
and a diplomatic veteran, Lord Auckland, to take on what Gren- 
ville called "a work I fear of no light labor or difficulty." Holland 
and Auckland accepted with alacrity. At an introductory dinner 
given by Grenville, Lord Auckland said to the Americans, a note 
of warning against inflexibility tingeing his courtesy, "I trust we 
shall be able to do some good to mankind, if your powers are suf- 
ficiently extensive." 39 

Holland and Auckland made almost as harmonious a team as 
Monroe and Pinkney. Holland, Fox's favorite nephew, spoke for 
his dying uncle's faction in the Cabinet, Auckland for his old friend 
Grenville. The thirty-three-year-old Holland, already plagued 
by gout, had no diplomatic experience and none too great a knowl- 
edge of public affairs. He tended, his fellow commissioner believed, 
to proceed without sufficient regard for the necessity of conciliat- 
ing English pressure groups manufacturers, shipowners, colo- 
nials, the East India Company. On the other hand, as an expansive 
and friendly litterateur bearing Fox's family name, Holland very 
favorably impressed the Americans. Auckland, already over sixty, 
was far more experienced. He had been, among other things, the 
channel of clandestine peace feelers during the American Revolu- 
tion, the negotiator of a famous commercial treaty with France, 
and a long-time member of the Board of Trade. Auckland was the 
real cutting edge of the commission. On learning of his appoint- 
ment, Jefferson commented, with his invariable aversion to anyone 
connected with Pitt or Grenville, that the old diplomat was "too 

38 Monroe to James Bowdoin, June 20, 1806, Monroe MSS. 

39 Grenville to Auckland, Aug. 9, x8o6, Auckland MSS, Add, MSS 344565 Monroe 
and Pinkney #3 to Madison, Aug. 15, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XIV. 

122 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

much wedded to the antient maritime code & navigation princi- 
ples of England ... to make [us] expect either an early or just 
result." 40 Actually, Auckland had always worked and would, like 
Holland, continue to work for the settlement of Anglo-American 
disputes. 

Lord Grenville and Fox's successor. Lord Howick, deeply de- 
sired to avoid a serious clash with America. On the other hand, 
particularly after Fox died, the administration's political weakness 
made concession difficult. The service ministries and some im- 
portant segments of British opinion opposed significant concessions. 
As the Times put it, "If the Americans have any real ground of 
complaint, let them be removed ... 5 it is what is due to them. 
. . . But in doing this they cannot expect that we shall surrender 
to them the smallest particle of that equitable system of maritime 
policy in which we owe our greatness and our prosperity." Gren- 
ville and especially Auckland knew the danger of challenging 
such sentiment. Furthermore, congressional posturing had irri- 
tated them. No doubt Lord Auckland nodded smilingly as he read 
the opinion of a friend that "it is absolutely necessary that America 
should be taken off the high horse she has lately mounted but in 
taking a Lady off her horse care must be taken not to offend her 
delicacy or shew her legs." 41 

Negotiations ran on spasmodically from August 23 until the 
end of the year. Including intragovernmental discussions as well 
as sessions with the Americans, Auckland counted thirty or forty 
conferences, and he claimed that one marathon argument with 
Monroe and Pinkney lasted seven hours, another took four and a 
half hours. After initial exploratory conversations. Fox's final 
illness and death (he died on September 13) halted the negotia- 
tions. Toward the end of October Auckland and Holland recalled 
the subject to the government's attention, and for the next fort- 
night there was a flurry of activity during which the Americans 
agreed to abandon the sine qua non on impressment. A second 

40 Jefferson to Monroe, Oct. 26, 1806, Jefferson MSS. 

41 Timesy June 23, 1806; Lord Temple to Auckland, Aug 1 , 17, 1806, Auckland 
MSS, Add. MSS 34456. 

123 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

hiatus followed, then another brief spurt that arranged the prob- 
lem of the reexport trade. Basic agreement was reached by Decem- 
ber 6, but not until the last day of the year did the four plenipo- 
tentiaries meet at the Foreign Office to sign the treaty. 

The negotiators discussed practically every facet of Anglo- 
American relations except the disputed portions of the Canadian 
boundary. For the most part, the Jay treaty formulas were re- 
peated with respect to neutral rights and Anglo-American trade. 
The Americans insisted on an article on trade with India but then 
accepted a provision somewhat tightening the restrictions on Ameri- 
can ships, though not so much as the East India Company desired. 
By mutual agreement the treaty omitted stipulations on trade with 
the British West Indies. The sympathetic ministry dared not risk 
public protest by making a formal concession. On the whole, al- 
though Madison and the English commissioners each considered 
that the other party benefited most from these articles, the discus- 
sions confirmed an earlier prediction by Holland and Auckland 
that "in the Commercial arrangements there will be more detail 
than difficulty." 42 

In a trifling, tactical concession, the British accepted America's 
request to extend her territorial waters. Monroe and Pinkney did 
not press for the Gulf Stream line, and discussion centered on a 
boundary one or two leagues from shore. Sir John Nicholl, who 
steadily opposed concession, wrote that the American claim could 
not "be maintained as a matter of right . . . ; and if it be granted, 
it should be ... as a concession depending for its basis upon 
corresponding concessions/ 3 for it would severely handicap the 
Royal Navy. At the strong behest of its commissioners, the Brit- 
ish government finally agreed to a minor extension of American 
jurisdiction, provided that no third party not extending similar 
recognition should be sheltered from the Royal Navy by the new 
line. The British hoped that this concession, although made prac- 

42 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/51. Commercial discus- 
sions, extensively recorded in various journal entries and copies of letters in Adm 
So/iiy, are summarized in Wilson H. Elkins, "British Policy in Its Relation to the 
Commerce and Navigation of the United States of America from 1794 to 1807" 
(unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 1936), pp. 211246 and 

124 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

tically worthless by the reservation, would have a salutary effect 
upon the American psyche. 45 

As early as September 6 ? when Holland met the Americans for 
a Saturday conference in the nearly empty Foreign Office, the Brit- 
ish realized that impressment and the reexport trade formed the 
chief American concerns. At that meeting Holland began by re- 
iterating a request, previously made in a note prepared under the 
eye of the Cabinet, that the Nonimportation Act be suspended. 
Monroe and Pinkney immediately asked "with what colour . . . 
could they call upon Congress to undo what they had done, when 
nothing but the bare opening of a Negotiation had taken place." 
Would Lord Holland promise a favorable answer to their demands 
on impressment and indirect trade? To this Holland replied that, 
while the American position could not be accepted in toto y 

he & his Colleague were sincerely disposed to make any compromise on 
these two Points that could be devised, consistent with the Dignity and 
Interests of the two Countries, & that they were losing no time in collecting 
the Opinions of different Classes of Men, whose information was useful & 
whose sanction was, in some measure, necessary to secure any concession that 
might be made . . . from unmerited unpopularity & Misrepresentation. 

Holland's answer meant that, within limits which merchants and 
Admiralty officials would help to establish, he and Auckland, and 
presumably their superiors, agreed to negotiate on the basis of the 
American demands. Accepting his assurance at face value, Pinkney 
and Monroe thereupon replied that they would ask their govern- 
ment to suspend the act, as they soon did. 44 

Holland left the meeting with a clear picture of the American 
position. He understood that Madison's instructions made agree- 
ments on seamen and shipping sine qua now?. He even divined 
that these instructions were far more inflexible on impressment 
than on the reexport trade. The young lord warned Grenville that 

4a Nicholl to Howick, Nov. 17, 1806, Adm 80/1175 Holland to Auckland, n.d. 
[Nov. 18-20, 1806], Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 34457, fols. 199-2005 Holland 
and Auckland to Howick, private, Nov. 14, 1806, FO 5/51; entry of Nov. 21, 1806, 
journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

44 Entry of Sept. 6, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

125 



THE TREATY OF 1806 

"good humour & good will are only to be purchased by very con- 
siderable concessions on one or both of these points." 45 On the 
British side, the story of the ensuing negotiations lies in the con- 
struction of these concessions and the checkreins imposed upon 
Holland and Auckland by the Cabinet. On the American side, it 
lies in the decision of Monroe and Pinkney to reverse the priority 
between Madison's two ultimatums and consequently to sign a 
treaty relaxing the Essex principle but silent on impressment. 

The British very nearly agreed to end impressment on the high 
seas. Holland believed the Americans could be trusted, in exchange, 
to deliver up seamen fleeing from British service. Auckland was 
more doubtful, being particularly impressed by Admiralty evi- 
dence showing that the Americans often induced desertion from 
British ships and issued fraudulent certificates of American citizen- 
ship. Lord Auckland, meeting with Monroe and Pinkney while 
Holland was in close mourning for his uncle, "insisted much on 
the Difficulty which this notorious Practice would raise in fram- 
ing any Article for the due security of the essential Interests of the 
British Navy. Much conversation ensued on the Subject, but with- 
out any satisfactory result." 46 Nevertheless, when the British com- 
missioners, on October 20, submitted a long report to Howick 
designed to reinvigorate the negotiations made dormant by Fox's 
death, Auckland joined his young colleague in urging the govern- 
ment to accede to American wishes. 

Holland and Auckland believed that Britain, in return for the 
surrender of her traditional claim to impress on the high seas, 
would garner substantial advantages. Monroe and Pinkney made 
no objection to impressment in British ports, and, although this 
was a concession that the Federalist, King, had refused to make in 
1803, "they would probably suffer us to include within these limits 
the whole extent of the British Channel, though they would not 

45 Holland to Grenville, Sept. 6, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Cabinet Ministers. 

46 Auckland to Howick, Sept. 12, 1806, Grey MSS, from ist Ld. Auckland 5 entry 
of Sept. 22, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. The most detailed treatment 
of this subject is Anthony Steel, "Impressment in the Monroe-Pinkney Negotiation, 
18061807," American Historical Review, LVII (19511952), 352369. 

126 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

admit such a construction of jurisdiction to appear on the face 
of the Treaty." Furthermore, the American commissioners had 
offered the support of their government and courts "for the re- 
covery of our Seamen., within the limits of their jurisdiction." 
Holland and Auckland also believed the Americans would permit 
British captains to stop merchantmen at sea, muster the crew, and 
require the master (unless he agreed that a suspected man was 
indeed an Englishman and gave him up) to submit proof to a 
competent tribunal empowered to punish any captain who did have 
Englishmen in his crew. Auckland and Holland suggested that the 
agreement be limited to a short period, after which obvious short- 
comings could be corrected or the arrangement dropped. Obviously 
the British negotiators foresaw many difficulties. On the other 
hand, they did propose to surrender a practice Britain had insisted 
upon for centuries, primarily because, in their words, "without 
some regulation upon it, no permanent or sincere reconciliation 
with the United States can be expected." 4T 

At first the Cabinet reacted favorably. The commissioners re- 
ceived permission to discuss a pro jet with Monroe and Pinkney 
and did so in several conversations. Details alone seemed to be 
holding up agreement. But, on November 2/Howick, whose ex- 
perience at the Admiralty may have stiffened his position, wrote 
to Holland: "If the object for which we have hitherto insisted on 
our rights to impress British Sea Men on the High Seas could be 
obtained by any more gentle means, nobody would be a more stren- 
uous advocate for such a change than I should. But I cannot satisfy 
myself that any sufficient security could be devised, & I am cer- 
tain what is proposed would be none." The next day Sir John 
Nicholl submitted a report that ringingly vindicated the legality 
of impressment. On November 4 the Cabinet examined three 
alternative proposals, one submitted by the Americans and two 
concocted by Holland and Auckland. The ministers decided not 
to risk any relaxation of impressment, primarily because they 

47 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/51. Portions of this 
report are reproduced In Steel, op. cit^ pp. 356358. 

127 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

doubted that the Americans would execute their part of the bar- 
gain/ 8 

The next afternoon Auckland and Holland informed the Amer- 
icans that the Cabinet had decided to break off negotiations on im- 
pressment. Loyally executing Madison's instructions, "M r Mon- 
roe & M r Pinkney entered severally into long & warm arguments 
for the Purpose of refuting those reasonings on which the right 
is asserted & intimated that if a satisfactory Article could not be 
given to them as to this point, all the other Objects of Negotiation 
were of so secondary a nature that it would not be material to 
proceed to them." All hope seemed at an end. Two days later, con- 
vinced the Americans meant what they said, Lord Auckland urged 
Grenville to reconsider, arguing that "in the present state of the 
World . . . even a colourable reconciliation & friendship with the 
United States would be of an importance infinitely outweighing the 
Objections to the Article in question after such amendment as it 
might have admitted." 49 The British government remained ada- 
mant, and Auckland proceeded disconsolately to another session 
that afternoon. 

This meeting marked the turning point. To the Britons 5 amaze- 
ment, the Americans gave up what had seemed an irrevocable 
determination. The report of the British commissioners is the full- 
est statement of the arguments that swayed Monroe and Pinkney. 
Auckland and Holland emphasized the difficulty of constructing 
a stipulation 

such as would be consistent with the security of a Right essential to ... 
our Naval Power, & such at the same time as they & their employers would 
deem admissable. We urged strongly . . . that it would be neither friendly 
nor wise to press us further for a stipulation which might be injurious to a 
Claim from which we cannot depart, & which is at present exercised so as 
to afford no reasonable cause of complaint. We proposed to them to suspend 

48 Ho wick to Holland, Nov. 2, 1806, Grey MSS, to Ld. Holland 5 Nicholl memo- 
randum, Nov. 3, 1806, FO 5/1045 entry of Nov. 4, 1806, journal of negotiations, 
Adm 80/117. 

49 Entry of Nov. 5, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/1175 Auckland to 
Grenville, Nov. 7, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Lord Auckland 1806. 

128 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

or lay aside this part of the Negotiation, by receiving from Us an indefinite 
but conciliatory statement respecting it 5 & to proceed forthwith to the other 
Articles of the Treaty in which we foresee no insuperable difficulty 

In the result the American Commissioners gave way to these suggestions, 
though with some hesitation & reluctance. 

The elated Englishmen forwarded to Howick the draft of an of- 
ficial note to the Americans, sufficiently "indefinite but concilia- 
tory," promising that orders would continue to be given "for the 
observance of the greatest caution in the impressing of British 
seamen" and inviting the Americans to continue negotiations on 
other points. The next day, with Howick's approval, they sent 
the note to Monroe, who transmitted it to Pinkney with a cover- 
ing note of cautious approval. 50 

The Americans explained their decision to the Secretary of 
State in a lengthy apologia drafted by Monroe. They argued that 
the Grenville ministry, which sincerely desired to meet Madison's 
wishes, dared not risk a public outcry in England. The formal Brit- 
ish note, while avoiding the opprobrium of surrender by treaty, 
had been delivered after cabinet consultation and could be con- 
sidered as binding as any treaty stipulations. Rather than abandon 
the chance of gains in other areas, the commissioners had decided 
to accept a declaration in conformity with the spirit of Madison's 
demands, particularly since they believed that the Ministry of 
All the Talents had already restricted the practice. Finally, the 
ministers reported that, since they had emphasized that they were 
acting in violation of their instructions, the British government 
could not be surprised if Jefferson and Madison chose to disavow 
them. 51 Basically the decision came down to this: the commission- 
ers rejected the high principle of their superiors. 1 They considered 
impressment, at least as then carried onf a lesser evil than severe 
limitations on the reexport tradej national dignity less important 

50 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Nov. 8, 1806, Grey MSS, United States} 
Holland and Auckland to Monroe and Pinkney, Nov. 8, 1806, enclosed in Monroe 
and Pinkney $6 to Madison, Nov. n, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XIV j 
Monroe to Pinkney, Nov. 9, 1806, Monroe MSS. 

51 Monroe and Pinkney $6 to Madison, Nov. n, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, 
Vol. XIV. 

129 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

than material profit. Many Americans, both Republicans and Fed- 
eralists, agreed with them in 1806. 

Perhaps none of the proposals on impressment would have 
ended the issue. The voracious American appetite for seamen and 
the advantages of service on American merchantmen meant that 
Englishmen would almost certainly continue to flock to the Stars 
and Stripes. The British government, however, missed an excellent 
opportunity to bring the United States to its side and to reduce 
the vitiating drain of manpower. The margin was narrow. With 
Holland in the lead, the British nearly made an important con- 
cession, only to be restrained by the frowns of civil servants at the 
Admiralty, by Sir John NicholPs strident pseudo legalisms, by 
Howick's doubts, and above all by fear of parliamentary opposi- 
tion. Even after the Cabinet's decision, Lord Howick tried to con- 
struct something effective out of the various pro jets that littered 
his desk, and if pressed further the Cabinet might possibly have 
reversed itself. But the Americans' nerve cracked first, and they 
accepted the comparatively meaningless note of November 8. In 
the short run this was a victory for England if not for a ministry 
sincerely seeking reconciliation, but the triumph turned to ashes, 
first with Jefferson's decision to reject the treaty and some years 
later with renewed controversy that played a part in the coming 
of war. 

For various reasons, among them a desire to compensate Monroe 
and Pinkney for their surrender on impressment, the Cabinet ac- 
cepted fairly liberal rules for the reexport trade. The ministry did 
not feel bound by the Essex decision, which had occurred under 
the aegis of Pitt's government, and it had far less sympathy for 
British shipowners and colonialists than its predecessor. Although 
impressment might be defended as an imperative of war, breaking 
up the reexport trade smacked too much of commercial selfishness. 
Even Sir John Nicholl admitted that the requirement of trans- 
shipment in America had "for its object considerations more of 
commerce than of War." The British commissioners also sym- 
pathized with the American complaint against "the unsteadiness 
of our Rules of decision" brought on by elimination of the Polly 

130 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

criteria. Nicholl 3 the captor's losing counsel in that case, agreed 
that "in order to avoid practical Inconvenience and Litigation, it 
seems desirable that certain Criteria should be settled, rather than 
that each Case sh d . depend upon its own Circumstances." 52 

Prior to Fox's death Pinkney and Monroe made it clear that, 
like Nicholl, they particularly desired to regularize the situation. 
As Holland and Auckland later reported. 

The American Commissioners deny in general the principle of the rule of 
1756, but at present they more particularly complain that in the recent 
detentions we have transgressed the rule laid down by ourselves [in the 
Polly case]. . . . 

Thus without actually admitting our right to interfere even with the 
direct trade between the Colonies of our Enemies and the Mother Country, 
... all that they require of us, Is a clear and permanent definition of the 
circumstances which constitute the difference between a continuous and an 
interrupted voyage, it being already settled that whatever interrupts the 
voyage legalizes the trade. 

While recognizing that in theory the shipper's intent and not the 
amount of ceremony in American ports was decisive, the British 
commissioners nevertheless proposed to meet the American initia- 
tive. Sir John Nicholl, mobilized once again, drafted an article 
requiring that colonial goods be landed in America, warehoused 
for at least one month, and reshipped in a different vessel j Nicholl 
did not insist upon the imposition of customs charges in the United 
States which would equalize the cost of rival British and Ameri- 
can shippers. 53 Pinkney in particular strenuously resisted Nicholl's 
recommendations, and the negotiators had not reached agreement 
when discussions were suspended in September. 

When meetings resumed, impressment at first dominated the 
discussions. At the end of November, with that subject finally out 
of the way, Howick circulated through the Cabinet recommenda- 
tions made by Auckland and Holland. Pinkney's complaints had 

52 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/515 Nicholl mem- 
orandum, Dec. 15, 1806, enclosed in Nicholl to Auckland, private, Dec. 15, 1806, 
Adm 80/117. 

53 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/51. 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

centered on the proposals to require a delay in America and to 
reship goods in a different ship. Therefore the Cabinet decided 
to go back to an emphasis upon duty charges, insisting at the same 
time that only a limited amount of duty be returned on reexporta- 
tion. At a long meeting on December 6, and "after much Debate & 
Doubt/ 3 Monroe and Pinkney accepted this proposal in principle. 54 
The negotiators eventually agreed upon real charges of 2 per cent 
on colonial goods and I per cent on those from Europe, neither 
burden particularly onerous. 

In effect, the British ministry agreed to retreat from the Essex 
decision to the Polly decision, under which American trade had 
flourished. In practical terms, and omitting all questions of the 
basic legality of British practices, the Grenville government had 
made an important conciliatory gesture. Had the treaty gone into 
effect, British ultras would have complained vehemently 5 on re- 
ceiving rumors of relaxation of the Essex principle, for example, 
the Courier warned that "in less than three years the carrying 
trade of this Country will be annihilated. War, therefore, with 
America, . . . rather than concession! War with America rather 
than the abandonment of the rule of 1756." 55 Moreover, while 
accepting the British proposal as far as it went, Monroe and Pink- 
ney did not consider it to quiet all other American claims. They 
believed "the sole Office of this Article . . . [was] to give to 
certain defined Facts the Effect of breaking the Continuity of a 
Voyage. . , . It does not . . . determine, or admit . . . that in 
any Cases, the Voyages . . . will become illegal, if any or all of 
these Facts should appear to be wanting" 56 Still, because most 
shipowners would, for their own security, conform to the treaty 
regulations, the agreement promised to lessen friction and pave 
the way to continued American prosperity. 

Only a few days after agreement on the reexport trade, the 
negotiators learned of Napoleon's Berlin Decree. Holland and 

54 Ibid, and endorsements j Auckland to Grenville, Nov. 28, 1806, Fitzpatrick, 
of. cit. y VIII, 445 j entries of Dec. i, 6, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

65 Jan. i, 1807. 

56 Monroe and Pinkney to Holland and Auckland, Dec. 31, 1806, Monroe MSS, 
NYPL. No British records indicate that this letter was actually delivered, but the 
Americans expressed the same reservation orally. 

132 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

Auckland immediately told the Americans that Britain must now 
at least reconsider her decision to modify the Rule of the War of 
1756, since its rigorous execution might be required to meet Na- 
poleon's edict. Perhaps it would be best to put the negotiations to 
sleep until it could be determined whether or not the United States 
intended to resist Napoleon's pretensions. The American pair re- 
acted strongly. They assured the two lords that the United States 
would resist the new decree and argued that "surely it would be 
both magnanimous & Wise . . . of Great Britain to presume that 
the United States would do what they ought to do, & to proceed 
accordingly as i nothing had happened." The British gave in to 
this reasoning, but they insisted upon annexing to the treaty an 
official note reserving to England the right of retaliation against 
France, as well as nonratification of the treaty, if the Jefferson 
administration failed to take effective action. 57 

Monroe and Pinkney deemed the declaration a small price to 
pay for a treaty. The Berlin Decree, which threatened to destroy 
American commerce, shocked them as much as the British. The 
Americans seem to have considered Napoleon the greater threat, 
as they did throughout the negotiations, despite substantial griev- 
ances against Britain. They even suggested ways to improve the 
note by strengthening the passage that contrasted English restraint 
and the Emperor's sweeping edict, and Lord Holland permitted 
them to edit the final draft to make it as inoffensive as possible. On 
the morning of December 31, 1806, the four plenipotentiaries 
affixed signatures and seals to the treaty, ending what Auckland had 
earlier described as "our eternal negotiation." 58 

The treaty of 1806 provoked, and continues to provoke, con- 
troversy. British nationalists, considering reaffirmation of the Jay 
treaty's commercial articles a concession to the Americans, argued 
that Monroe and Pinkney ought to have paid a price for it. They 
objected that the United States had not surrendered her claim to 
trade with the British West Indies nor accepted the legality of 

57 Entry o Dec. 9, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

58 Auckland to Grenville, Dec. 27, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Lord Auckland i8o6j 
Holland to Monroe, Dec. 9, 1806, Monroe MSS, NYPLj Holland and Auckland 
to Monroe and Pinkney, Dec. 31, 18063 FO 5/515 Auckland to Monroe, Dec. 14, 
1806, Monroe MSS, NYPL. 

133 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

impressment nor agreed to end Its "war in disguise," The com- 
promise on reexport trade, one pamphleteer protested, was really 
"a stipulation, vexatious enough to continue the complaints of 
America, but too weak to secure the interests of Britain." The 
treaty's opponents believed that "we have not by our moderation 
obtained a reciprocity of advantage." 59 

Holland and Auckland answered these assaults in essentially 
political terms. They believed increasing hostility the only alterna- 
tive to a treaty, and they asserted that they had paid a small price 
for reconciliation. Commenting on attacks in the Courier and the 
Morning Post, Auckland's secretary wrote to him : 

Did you ever see such impudent & barefaced misrepresentations. Concession 
to America What concession was made to her except two additional miles 
of maritime jurisdiction & that so clogged with exceptions as to be merely 
an empty compliment. In the article on colonial trade greater difficulties 
were thrown in her way than those specified by Ld Hawkesbury in his letter 
to Rufus King [formally confirming the Polly principle] & yet the whole 
article is represented as a boon to America for which we have nothing in 
return. 

Auckland himself argued that the treaty contained not a single 
"abandonment ... of any one Claim, or Principle, or right, or 
Usage, Colonial or Commercial." He trusted however that the 
treaty would quiet America, "& I feel [this] ... in the disjointed 
state of the world to be a Result of great political Importance." 60 
Within a few months news reached England in April Jeffer- 
son's rejection of the treaty blasted Auckland's hopes. In February, 
when the President learned that his ambassadors intended to over- 
leap impressment, he and his Cabinet agreed to maintain the sine 
qua non on seamen and to refuse to give up commercial warfare, 
"the only peaceable instrument for coercing all our rights,' 5 as long 
as this and other issues remained. Jefferson believed a we had 
better have no treaty than a bad one. it will not restore friendship, 

59 Thomas P. Courtenay, Additional Observations on the American Treaty^ <unth 
Some Remarks on Mr. Baring's Pamphlet (London, 1808), pp. 73, 69, and passim. 

60 John Allen to Auckland, Nov. 12, 1807, Adm 80/116; Auckland to Sheffield, 
Jan. 5, 1806 [1807], Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 45729. 

134 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

but keep us in a state of constant irritation." Failing a treaty stipu- 
lation, the two nations might exchange informal promises on 
seamen. As long as Britain kept her share of the bargain the ad- 
ministration would prevent enforcement of the Nonimportation 
Act. 61 

On the last day of Congress the British minister received the 
treaty, which he hastily carried to Madison's office. The Secretary 
and subsequently the President examined it chiefly to confirm the 
fact that it omitted impressment, although both also noted with 
displeasure the annexed note on the Berlin Decree. That evening, 
when a Senate delegation brought bills for his signature, Jeffer- 
son curtly told the legislators he would call no special session 
since he intended to reject the treaty on his own responsibility. In 
Jefferson's mind refusal to ratify did not necessarily imply a break 
with England, and he continued to hope for an informal under- 
standing. The President believed "our best course is, to let the 
negotiation take a friendly nap"; meanwhile the Nonimportation 
Act would remain suspended. This moderation annoyed the French 
warrior-diplomat, Turreau, who reported, "These people here 
don't take a step forward against England but that they take two 
backward steps." 62 

For the forward step of nonratification Jefferson and Madison 
had no regrets. As they examined the treaty at leisure in the spring 
of 1807, more shortcomings appeared. The administration desired 
peace and prosperity as much as its agents did, but the price seemed 
exorbitant. Britain faced national extinction; she, not the United 
States, should be the supplicant at a time when the Prussian defeat 
at Jena meant that "no other nation on earth now left . . . can 
render her the least service." e3 A breach with America, Madison 

61 Memorandum of Feb. 2, 1807, Jefferson MSSj Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, 
private, March 20, 1807, Madison MSS$ Jefferson to Monroe, March 21, 1807, 
Lipscomb and Bergh, o-p. cit., XI, 167169. 

62 Jefferson to Madison, April 21, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, o*p. cit^ XI, 1935 
Turreau #13 to Minister of Foreign Relations, April 8, 1807, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LX. See also Erskine #8, #10 to Howick, March 6, 28, 1807, FO 5/52. The 
Administration considered offering a further inducement in the shape of a promise 
to forbid the enrollment of foreign seamen in American merchantmen, but Gallatin's 
researches caused the abandonment of this project. See above, pp. 90, 9495. 

63 Aurora , Feb. 2i> 1807. 

135 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

claimed in May, would bring starvation to the Caribbean colonies 
and loss of the home islands' only certain supply of foreign food- 
stuffs, and might even throw the United States into the camp of 
England's enemies, costing her not only her most important eco- 
nomic connection but perhaps the colonies as well. 64 

Moreover, the treaty implied American inferiority perhaps more 
clearly than that signed by John Jay in 1794 and so bitterly exe- 
crated by Republicans. Jay secured compensation for British seiz- 
ures, but his successors entirely failed to do so and perhaps, by 
their unaccountable failure to press this point, prejudiced future 
American claims. Jay's article on trade with India returned, but 
in tightened form. There was nothing but contemptuous silence 
toward American requests to share commercial traffic with Brit- 
ain's colonies in the Western Hemisphere. And, although the 
treaty rescinded the Essex decision, the provisions on the reexport 
trade showed deep suspicion of American procedures, exceeded 
the Polly decision (particularly by withholding permission to re- 
export Asian goods to the West Indies), and seemed to consider 
toleration of indirect trade as a gift extended by Britain and not 
a right. Commenting that "we have not the power of Resistance, 
and if we had, I fear we would not have the Will," Senator Smith 
at first favored accepting the provision; later this commercial 
spokesman concluded that, while American traders could prosper 
under it, the article was too dishonorable to accept. 65 The declara- 
tion on Berlin, even as emended by Monroe and Pinkney, affronted 
their superiors. Jefferson and Madison, who fully recognized Brit- 
ain's right to retaliate and would have approved reciprocal state- 
ments reserving her position and America's, did not like "the form 
& face chozen" for the unilateral announcement approved at 
London. 

Failure on impressment stirred American sensibilities most of 
all. Jefferson and Madison knew too well the proclivities of British 
commanders to believe that general directives would restrain them. 

64: Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI. These 
instructions contain the fullest official criticism of the terms of the treaty. 

65 Samuel Smith to Madison, March 14, 1807, Rives Collection 5 Samuel Smith 
to Madison, April 18, 1807, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress. 

136 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

As Madison dryly remarked, the "remedy proposed in the Note 
from the British Commissioners, however well intended, does not 
inspire the confidence here which gave it so much value in their 
judgment." National interest, Republicans held, required a formal 
stipulation, and at least one moderate Federalist believed Jefferson 
"absolutely obliged, if he regards the national honour, to send 
the Treaty back." In the most important passage in a formal cri- 
tique sent to London in May, Madison wrote that the President 
"cannot reconcile it with his duty to our seafaring citizens, or with 
the sensibility or sovereignty of the nation, to recognize even con- 
structively, a principle that would expose on the high seas, their 
liberty, their lives, every thing in a word that is dearest to the 
human heart, to the capricious or interested sentences which may 
be pronounced against their allegiance, by officers of a foreign Gov- 
ernment." 66 

The treaty deprived America of her most effective weapon, so 
Jefferson and Madison believed, for securing a binding limitation 
on impressment in the future. Toward the close of the negotiations 
Lord Auckland succeeded in inserting a ban on "the foolish and 
teasing measure of non-importation" and others like it. The United 
States pledged itself to lay down the weapon of commercial war- 
fare for ten years. Since the Republicans were unprepared to fight, 
this meant that for a decade seamen on American merchant ships 
must depend solely on protests and exhortation for their defense. 
This concession capped the general impression of American sub- 
ordination, an impression that caused the Irish-born editor of the 
Aurora to ask his readers, "Will you abandon your rights? Will 
you abandon your independence? Are you willing to become colo- 
nies of Great Britain?" 6T 

66 Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, Feb. 3, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI; King- to 
Gouverneur Morris, March 30, 1807, postscript, Charles R. King, The Life and. 
Correspondence of Rufus King (6 vols. $ New York, 18941900), V, 135 Madison 
to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI. In the February 
instructions, Madison had stated that impressments in American waters had "at no 
time been more numerous or vexatious," but this does not necessarily invalidate the 
belief, apparently shared by the British and American negotiators in London, that 
the total number of incidents in all theaters was comparatively low. 

67 March 10, 1807. 

137 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

In moral terms, Duane's queries answered themselves. But 
Monroe and Pinkney, faced with political realities, felt that Amer- 
ica could not afford utopianism. As Monroe commented, "in all the 
points on which we have had to press this gov*., interests of the 
most vital character were involved . . . , at a time too when the 
very existence of the country depended on an adherence to its 
maritime pretensions." The envoys signed the treaty when it 
appeared that Napoleon planned an immediate assault upon neu- 
tral commerce. America needed British friendship, both to rein- 
force pressure on France (which did not implement the Berlin 
Decree against American commerce until Jefferson rejected the 
treaty) and to encourage the apparent English drift toward greater 
rceognition of neutral rights indicated by Fox's Blockade and the 
disavowal of Whitby. Although "little more than a project," the 
treaty, Monroe said, started Britain in the right direction. "By ar- 
ranging our differences in peace with England her merchants would 
have calculated on its preservation, & embarked most extensively 
in trade [with us] .... The interest in that country for the con- 
tinuation of peace wo d . have increased daily," forcing any ministry 
to avoid a clash with the United States. 68 

At least, Monroe and Pinkney argued, they had obtained im- 
portant immediate advantages, and like the British they had sur- 
rendered in principle no claims that could not be reactivated later. 
While the treaty omitted impressment, the promised restraints 
and the actual rarity of the practice, which the reduction of rival 
naval power at Trafalgar might permit to continue, created fairly 
favorable conditions. Article XI, on the reexport trade, perhaps 
imposed more stringent requirements than the Polly decision or 
the King-Hawkesbury exchange of 1 801, which made only general 
reference to duties and drawbacks, but it did destroy the Essex 
decision. With ground rules clearly laid out, American merchants 
might continue the trade that had already brought so much pros- 
perity. 

Considering the comparative power of Britain and America, the 

68 Monroe to Jefferson, Jan. n, 1807, Feb. 27, 1808, Jefferson MSS$ Monroe 
to John Taylor, Jan. 9, 1809, Monroe MSS. 

138 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

Napoleonic threat, the later failure of commercial warfare to se- 
cure a reasonably speedy victory over England, considering too 
America's immense material interest in an arrangement with Brit- 
ain, Monroe and Pinkney seem justified. Nobody can be sure, of 
course, that ratification of the treaty would have led, as they hoped, 
to a further reconciliation or even prevented the antineutral pro- 
ceedings of the ministry that succeeded Grenville's in 1 807. But 
it is even more unreasonable to test the commissioners 3 hopes 
against British activities after the treaty failed, to say that the 
Orders in Council of 1807 or impressment proves that any agree- 
ment would at best have been transitory. At worst Britain would 
have had to make some gestures to preserve a rapprochement; at 
best she might have worked positively to improve it. Monl-oe and 
Pinkney not only spoke the traditional accents of American real- 
ism 3 they also opened the door to peace and uneasy friendship. 
They did these things at the cost of important moral considera- 
tions, and Jefferson and Madison expressed more nobly the new 
nation's aspirations. But if the administration rejected compromise 
in the interest of idealism and psychological equality, by its future 
course it condemned itself, lacking the will to vindicate these com- 
mendable objectives. Certainly "a quiet nap" could neither long 
endure nor prove truly restful. 



139 



CHAPTER 



V 



EMBARGO: ALTERNATIVE TO WAR 



Vice-Admiral Sir George Cranfield Berkeley, M.P., owed his ap- 
pointment as commander in chief on the American station to the 
Ministry of All the Talents. Grenville, at least, knew Berkeley 
well enough to have misgivings about his selection, 1 but the ad- 
miraPs brother commanded a number of votes that marched into 
the ministerial lobby at division time, as did Berkeley himself be- 
tween tours of sea duty. Consequently, Howick offered Berkeley 
the American command. In the spring of 1806 the admiral arrived 
at Halifax and initiated a steady stream of complaints against the 
Admiralty, against Jefferson, against the United States, which, 
with scant regard for normal channels, he forwarded directly to 
Grenville. 2 

Berkeley believed the United States would back down whenever 
Britain refused to compromise. In the spring of 1807, in Chesa- 

1 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, Oct. 23, 1807, Thomas Grenville MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 41851-4.1859), Add. MSS 41852. 

2 See the letters from Admiral Berkeley to Grenville in Boconnoc MSS (Papers 
of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville), Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Letters 
Jan. to Sept. 1806, under the following- dates: Feb. 12, 14, April 13, July 29. 

140 



EMBARGO 

peake Bay, a number of deserters from the Royal Navy received 
protection from local authorities, and many of them even enrolled 
in the United States Navy. One of these deserters, Jenkin Ratford, 
a short, swarthy former tailor from London, enlisted on U.S.S. 
Chesapeake and railed at British officers on the quays and streets of 
Norfolk. Since American authorities refused to return Ratford 
and the others, one solution alone occurred to Berkeley's unsubtle 
mind. The admiral "required and directed [his subordinates] in 
case of meeting with the American frigate the Chesapeake at Sea, 
and without the limits of the United States to shew to the Captain 
of her this order; and to require to search his Ship for the desert- 
ers." 3 Captain Salusbury P. Humphreys sailed in Berkeley's flag- 
ship Leopard to carry this fateful order to the ships at Norfolk. 

On June 22, a day after Humphreys arrived, the Chesapeake 
stood to sea, bound for the Mediterranean. She was hailed by the 
Leopard and, suspecting nothing, came to | Lieutenant JohnlVIeaHe^ 
boarded her to hand Commodore Barron a copy of Berkeley's order 
and a note from Captain Humphreys expressing hope that peace 
could be maintained. After fruitless discussion in Barren's cabin, 
Meade returned to his ship. Humphreys argued further through 
the hailing trumpet, then fired a shot across the Chesapeake*^ bow. 
Finally, as the captain later reported, "conceiving . . . that my 
Orders would not admit of deviation, I lament to state, that, I 
felt under the necessity of enforcing them, by firing into the United 
States Ship." After ten minutes of action (if such -a-wosd may 
be used fati-a^ nri&-sideLeajiimimd:e), Barron surrendered. A 
second boarding party from the Leopard mustered the American 
crew and removed four deserters, including Ratford, who was 
dragged from hiding. 4 

3 Berkeley to Humphreys, June i, 1807, enclosed In Berkeley to Marsden, July 4, 
1 80 7> Admiralty Papers, Public Record Office, Adm 1/497. For particulars of the 
provocation for this order and for the subsequent incident, see Henry Adams, History 
of the United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison (9 vols.j 
New York, 18891891), IV, 120, and, from, the British point of view, Anthony 
Steel, "More Light on the Chesapeake," Mariner's Mirror y XXXIX (1953), 243- 
265. 

4 Humphreys to Captain J. E. Douglas, June 22, 1807, enclosed in Douglas to 
William Wellesley Pole, June 24, 1807, Adm 1/1729. 

141 



EMBARGO 

Humphreys, who doubted the wisdom of Berkeley's order, 
executed it moderately. From among the scores of known deserters 
and Englishmen on the American ship, he took only four. Jenkin 
Ratf ord was soon hanged at Halifax. The other three were Ameri- 
cans, two of them Negroes and thus demonstrably non-British, but 
all three had escaped from the Royal Navy in a British ship's gig. 
The two Negroes, furthermore, had actually deserted from an 
American merchantman and enlisted in the Royal Navy in 1806. 
For his restraint Captain Humphreys, who was placed on half pay 
in 1808 while Berkeley escaped punishment, received no credit 
from either government. After all, whether so ordered by his 
superior or not, and whatever the provocation provided by the 
Chesapeake, called by one English scholar "a kind of fly-paper for 
picking up deserters and other wandering British seamen," 5 
Humphreys had violated American sovereignty. As Niles said, 
"It is of no importance . . . whether the men were Americans or 
not whether they had been impressed or entered the British 
service voluntarily." 6 

""Many British officers, with that paranoid attitude of whining 
superiority so common among them, chose to believe England the 
aggrieved party. When their supplies were cut off, certainly a 
mild enough act of reprisal, commanders in the* Chesapeake ^em- 
barked upon a campaign of petulant interference with American 
shipping. Berkeley at first believed the American outcry artificially 
maintained by Jefferson for political purposes, then shifted from 
a conviction that the Americans would only bluster to a real fear 
of war, pleaded for reinforcements, and even talked about an an- 
ticipatory attack upon New York as a salutary lesson. 7 

Actually, public opinion required no Jeffersonian stimulus. The 
whole nation demanded satisfaction. In Virginia, militia patrolled 
the coasts to prevent supplies from reaching British ships. Thomas 
Ritchie, editor of the Richmond Enquirer, abandoned the pen 

5 Steel, o$. ck., p. 265. 

6 Niles' Weekly Register (Baltimore), Sept. 28, 1811. 

7 Steel, of. cit., passim; Berkeley to Bathurst [?], Aug. 13, 1807, Francis Bickley, 
ed., Report on the Manuscripts of Earl Bathurst (London: Historical Manuscripts 
Commission, 1923), pp. 63655 Berkeley to Marsden, Aug. 17, 1807, Adm 1/4.97. 

142 



EMBARGO 

(and the pleasures of his honeymoon) for the sword, and Winfield 
Scott, a young lance corporal, captured a boat crew that landed to 
seek provisions. At New York a mob removed the rudder from 
an English ship, cut the rigging, carried off the sails, and demol- 
ished gun carriages. Consul Barclay's house had to be protected 
by police, and a traveling British diplomat found it wise to adopt 
an alias. All over the nation, public meetings denounced the British. 
In Boston the Federalist leadership unsuccessfully attempted to 
block one town meeting but then, as a measure of political pru- 
dence, found it expedient to endorse a second. Two thousand peo- 
ple gathered to hear a youthful Federalist deliver a strident speech 
in behalf of resolutions pledging support to the national govern- 
mofitl 8 ^\ 

\Some Americans urged a declaration of war, ind many more ex- 
pected one. "The probability of war," wrote William Wirt, "is 
very strong: because it is scarcely presumable that British arrogance 
& injustice will give us that satisfaction which alone will appease 
the spirit of this nation and between the alternatives of war & 
dishonorable surrender, our countrymen will not long hesitate." 
But many patriots wished to give Great Britain a chance to make 
atonement. From Boston Elbridge Gerry reported that "there is no 
desire here, to engage in a war with Great Britain, if it can hon- 
orably be avoided 5 . . . but if national redress cannot be ob- 
tained^ ... , peace . . . would cease to be beneficial & honor- 
able.^The old Republican wheel horse, Nathaniel Macon, urged 
restraint, adding, "Peace is everything to us, especially in this part 
of the nation." Robert R. Livingston, another staunch Republi- 
can, agreed that "our national happiness & prosperity depend upon 
the preservation of peace" and urged one more special mission to 
London. 9 Rallying, Federalist writers brought out pamphlets that 

8 Charles H. Ambler, Thomas Ritchie (Richmond, 1913), pp. 4243; Winfield 
Scott, Memoirs of Lieut. General Scott, LLX>., I (New York, 1864), 19205 Tench 
Coxe to Madison, July 2, 1807, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress; Richard 
B. Davis, ed., Jefersonian America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by 
Sir Augustus John Foster, 3 art. (San Marino, 1954), p. 2935 Samuel E, Morison, 
The Life and Letters of Harrison Gray Otis (2 vols.; Boston, 1913), I> 276277. 

9 Wirt to Peachey R. Gilmer, July 18, 1807, William Wirt MSS, Library of 
Congress 5 Gerry to Thomas Matthews, July n, 1807, Elbridge Gerry MSS, Massa- 

143 



EMBARGO 

defended Berkeley's order or at least suggested that Jeffersonian 
weakness had invited it. 10 Within a month after the attack talk of 
war had subsided, and at the beginning of September the French 
minister reported his disgust at the "fear and servile deference" 
shown toward Britain. The brief flame had burned itself out 5 the 
imperatives of honor became passive. Joseph H. Nicholson wrote 
to Gallatin, his brother-in-law, "The public mind has been suf- 
fered to brood so long . . . that I fear its ardor is cooling down. 
Spirit enough is however left, to blaze, when the constituted au- 
thorities will blow the coals." X1 

Initially Jefferson chose to play the part of a damper rather 
than a bellows. He sought to keep the public conflagration just 
short of open flame, hoping the heat of anger would force London 
to settle the Chesapeake affair and even abandon impressment. 
When he received word of Humphreys' brutal attack, the Presi- 
dent wrote the governor of Virginia to urge restraint so that Con- 
gress, when it met, could have freedom to decide "whether, having 
taught so many other useful lessons to Europe, we may not add 
that of showing them that there are peaceable means of repress- 
ing injustice, by making it the interest of the aggressor to do what 
is just." With cabinet approval Jefferson issued a proclamation 
closing American waters to British warships, a device designed to 
satisfy the popular demand for action and at the same time reduce 
the chance of further incidents. 12 The President explained that 

chusetts Historical Society j Macon to Gallatin, Aug. 2, 1807, Henry Adams, The 
Life of Albert Gallatin (Philadelphia, 1879), P- 3^ 2 > Livingston to Madison, July 
12, 1807, William C. Rives Collection, Library of Congress. 

10 David Everett ($seud. An American) An Essay on the Rights and Duties of 
Nations, Relative to Fugitives from Justice; Considered <with Reference to the Affair 
of the Chesapeake (Boston, 1807) 5 Thomas G. Fessenden, Some Thoughts on the 
Present Dispute between Great Britain and America (Philadelphia, 1807) 5 A Gen- 
tleman at New- York, The Voice of Truth; or. Thoughts on the Affair between the 
Leonard and Chesapeake (New York, 1807) ; John Lowell ($seud. A Yankee 
Farmer), Peace without Dishonour War "without Hope. Being a Calm and Dispas- 
sionate Enquiry into the Question of the Chesapeake (Boston, 1807). 

11 Turreau #43 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Sept. 7, 1807, Archives des 
Affaires trangeres, Correspondance Politique, 6tats-Unis (photostats, Library of 
Congress), Vol. LX; Nicholson to Gallatin, Sept. 10, 1807, Albert Gallatin MSS, 
New- York Historical Society. 

12 Jefferson to Cabell, June 19, 1807, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, 
eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed. 5 20 vols. 5 Washington, 1903- 

144 



EMBARGO 

"the usage of nations" required him to seek satisfaction before 
opening hostilities, that delay would permit American ships to 
return to havens at home, and that this was good Republican 
doctrine "the power of declaring war being in Congress, the 
Ex[ecutive] should do no act committing them to war, when it 
is very probable that they may prefer a non-intercourse to war. 5 ' l3 

As repeated accounts of British arrogance flowed in from Nor- 
folk, Jefferson became more bellicose. He and his Cabinet dis- 
cussed plans for an attack on Canada, canvassed the financial re- 
quirements of war,. and planned to use gunboats if the British 
squadron extended its harassment of shipping. Leaving the final 
decision until fall, Jefferson departed for Monticello on August i . 
There, further news from Europe led him to feel that war was 
nearly inevitable. Early in September, writing to a member of his 
Cabinet, he declared that a real settlement with England was 
unlikely, although if the Baltic were closed to her trade Britain 
might "temporize with us. But if peace among the continental 
powers of Europe should leave her free in her intercourse with 
the powers who will then be neutral, the present ministry . . . 
will not in my opinion give us the necessary assurances respecting 
the flag. In that case, it must bring a war soon, and if so, it can 
never be in a better time for us." 14 

Four days before the President fled the heat of Washington, 
Nicholas Biddle, a young friend of Madison's, sailed on UJS.S. 
Revenge bearing instructions to Monroe on the "assurances re- 
specting the flag" required by the United States. "A formal dis- 
avowal of the deed, and restoration of the four seamen to the ship 
from which they were taken, are things of course and indispensa- 
ble." Failing this, America reserved her right and here the in- 
structions hinted at war but left the way open to less decisive action 



1904), XI, 256257; memorandum of July 2, 1807, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library 
of Congress. Jefferson and the secretaries also agreed to mobilize the gunboats, recall 
naval vessels from the Mediterranean, and send strong instructions to Monroe. 

13 National Intelligencer (Washington) , July 8, 18075 Jefferson to Thomas M. 
Randolph, July 5, 1807, Jefferson MSS. 

14 Memoranda of July 26, 28, 1807, Jefferson MSS 5 Jefferson to Madison, Sept. 
3, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. tit., XI, 3585 Jefferson to Jacob Crowninshield, 
Sept. 3, 1807, ibid.y XI, 356-357- 

145 



EMBARGO 

"to resort to means depending upon the United States alone." 
The United States required more than a settlement of the Chesa- 
peake incident. "As a security for the future, the entire abolition 
of impressment from vessels under the flag of the United States 
[not merely from warships] ... is also made an indispensable 
part of the satisfaction" demanded. Madison directed Monroe to 
insist upon this great surrender without even offering, at least 
initially, any compensatory regulations to discourage the enlist- 
ment of British seamen in American ships. 15 

The instructions lay on Madison's desk for three weeks after 
they were drafted. Perhaps the administration delayed so that 
the demands could travel in company with reports of angry out- 
bursts from all parts of the Union, thus showing the British 
government that a united people was ready for war. Even then 
England was unlikely to be panicked into concession, for the 
President's proclamation had shown that the executive, at least, 
still hoped to preserve peace. Far more probably, Jefferson and his 
subordinates expected to be able to maintain national unity for 
months and decided to use it as a weapon to force affairs with Eng- 
land to a climax. If the ministry proved stubborn, they believed, 
the American people would endorse resistance more vigorously 
than when it could be argued that Berkeley spoke for no one but 
his cantankerous self. Although not always candid in letters to the 
obstreperous Philadelphian, William Duane, on this occasion Jef- 
ferson probably expressed very nearly his true feelings when he 
wrote: 

Although we demand of England what is merely of right, reparation for 
the past, security for the future, yet as their pride will possibly, nay prob- 
ably, prevent their yielding them to the extent we shall require, my opinion 
is, that the public mind, which I believe is made up for war, should main- 
tain itself at that point. They have often enough, God knows, given us 
cause for war before; but it has been on points which would not have 
united the nation. But now they have touched a chord which vibrates in 
every heart. Now then is the time to settle the old and the new. 16 

15 Madison to Monroe, July 6, 1807, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Instructions, all countries, Vol. VI. 

16 Jefferson to Duane, July 20, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit., XI, 291.' 

146 



EMBARGO 

By October America knew for certain that Britain would not 
surrender impressment. Although returning congressmen found 
in the National Intelligencer a scarcely cryptic invitation to choose 
between "a direct resort to war, ... or ... a surer reparation 
through the medium of commercial regulation/' Jefferson tended 
toward the more vigorous course. The first draft of his annual mes- 
sage reviewed British aggressions in language that seemed to in- 
vite a declaration of war. Gallatin returned the draft with many 
changes, warning the President that public ardor had cooled. The 
final version reprobated British actions in language sufficiently 
strong to alarm London. Still, the President neither asked for a 
declaration of war nor suggested that one was inevitable. 17 For 
more than a month the new Congress remained in uneasy uncer- 
tainty. 

Among the derelictions charged against Britain by Jefferson, 
an Order in Council dated January 7, 1807, figured most promi- 
nently after the attack on the Chesapeake. When Holland and 
Auckland required the Americans to accept a note reserving the 
right of retaliation against the Berlin Decree, they spoke of no 
theoretical contingency. Already the government was at work upon 
an order forbidding coastal trade between enemy ports. Grenville 
and Howick calculated that this would strike at French communi- 
cations and, particularly when garnished with an eloquently bel- 
ligerent preamble claiming that French action released Britain 
from the traditional limits of war, would demonstrate at home that 
the ministry intended vigor. At the same time the government 
hoped not to interfere seriously with America's transatlantic trade. 18 
On both scores the Cabinet miscalculated. Perceval and Castlereagh 
attacked the declaration as ineffective. After initial hesitation Mad- 
ison also attacked the order, on the grounds that it directly chal- 

17 National Intelligencer, Oct. 26, 18075 Gallatin to Jefferson, Oct. 21, 1807, 
Jefferson MSS 5 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers 
of the Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 4254305 Courier (London), Dec. 7, 18075 
Grenville to Thomas Grenville, Dec. 10, 1807, Thomas Grenville MSS, Add. MSS 
41852. 

18 Nicholl to Auckland, private, Dec. 12, 1806, William Eden, Baron Auckland, 
MSS, British Museum (Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 344575 
Auckland to Grenville, Dec. 18, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Lord Auckland 18065 
Auckland to Howick, Dec. 22, 1806, Charles Grey, Second Earl Grey, MSS, The 
Prior's Kitchen, Durham University, from ist Ld. Auckland. 

147 



EMBARGO 

lenged American interests (most merchantmen carried cargoes to 
Europe which could be sold only after calls at several ports) ; that 
it had been issued before the American reaction to Napoleon's 
policy was known, and, more particularly, that, by emphasizing 
the right of retaliation, it opened the door to an absolute destruction 
of neutral rights. 19 

Despite the Chesapeake affair, the January Order in Council, a 
royal proclamation reaffirming impressment, the hanging of Rat- 
ford, and increased seizures, Congress shrank from a breach. The 
legislature permitted the Nonimportation Act to go into effect at 
last 5 it confirmed Jefferson's expulsion of British ships from Amer- 
ican ports 5 and it debated military preparations at length. But no- 
body wanted war. Erskine and Turreau agreed that a declaration 
was highly unlikely. Gallatin felt that Congress was "certainly 
peaceably disposed." Jefferson pessimistically concluded that the 
representatives of the people would settle for the Nonimportation 
Act. He feared this was not enough to coerce Britain but would 
"end in war & give her the choice of a moment of declaring it." 20 
The Jeffersonian strategy of refrigerating the demand for war and 
then bringing it again to a boil had failed. 

Ominous reports soon arrived from Europe. In September Na- 
poleon began to enforce the Berlin Decree against American ships, 
and Champagny officially informed the American minister that the 
new decree would be rigorously executed. 21 Shortly after this news 
reached the United States, London reports indicated that the new 
British ministry intended to issue regulations of its own. Jefferson 
expected an announcement forbidding all trade with the Continent 
and even expressed an approving belief that "it would produce 
an immediate declaration [of war] here 5 & that it is the only thing 

19 Hansard, VIII, 6206565 Madison to Erskine, March 20, 1807, enclosed in 
Erskine $11 to Howick, March 30, 1807, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 
Office, FO 5/525 Madison to Erskine, March 29, 1807, enclosed in Erskine #12 to 
Howickj March 31, 1807, ibid.; Madison to Monroe, March 31, 1807, Instructions, 
Vol. VI. 

20 Erskine #25 to Canning-, Oct. 5, 1807, FO 5/52; Turreau #4. to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, Dec. 2, 1807, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LX; Gallatin to Hannah 
M. Gallatin, Oct. 30, 1807, Adams, Gallatin, p. 3645 Jefferson to Thomas M. 
Randolph, Oct. 26, 1807, Jefferson MSS. 

21 Champagny to Armstrong, Oct. 8, 1807, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LX. 

148 



EMBARGO 

which will. )J Federalists later claimed that news of the November 
orders reached-America only after the Embargo message had gone 
to Congress. Although this was true of their text, London papers 
arriving on December 1 8 made Jefferson so certain of the general 
content that he included a description in the first draft of his calif or 
an embargo, only to be dissuaded by the more cautious Madisony 
All congressmen knew that Britain was preparing to strike. To omit 
the orders from any list of precipitants of the Embargo, John 
Quincy Adams later scoffed, was like "laying your finger over the 
unit before a series of noughts, and then arithmetically proving 
that they all amount to nothing. 5 }/ 22 

Jefferson had totally miscalculated. In June and July he re- 
strained the demand for war, counting on his ability to reinvigorate 
it if Monroe failed to secure a settlement of the Chesapeake affair 
and an end to impressment. As this unrealistic hope dwindled, the 
President came more and more to anticipate and perhaps to wel- 
come a war. Down to the very moment of recommending an em- 
bargo, the President, although sometimes contradictory, spoke far 
more favorably and often of war, or at the very least of accepting 
the gage of battle cast down by Britain. News of enforcement of 
the Berlin Decree did not alter Jefferson's basic position, and four 
days before the Embargo message a Republican senator wrote, 
"(in confidence} the man in the Stone House is of opinion that 
the Die is Cast.' 7 23 But the popular spirit had evaporated, the 
orators had fallen silent. In July Jefferson could have had war but 
did not want it j now he probably wanted it but could not hope to 
get it. He fell back upon the supreme weapon of commercial war- 
fare, a general embargo. The choice was not entirely unpalatable, 
since if by some chance war should come, the recall of ships and 
seamen was only prudent. And the efficacy of commercial pressure 
was an article of faith among Republicans. 

22 Jefferson to Thomas M. Randolph, Nov. 16, 1807, Jefferson MSS; Jefferson 
to Madison, July 14, 1824., Rives Collection; Adams to Otis, March 31, 1808, 
Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings of John Quincy Adams (7 vols.j New 
York, 19141917), III, 20 1. 

23 Nicholas Gilinan to Eustis, Dec* 14, 1807, William Eustis MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

149 



EMBARGO 

Threats to the British pocketbook had a long, patriotic history 
in the United States. The first of these, in colonial times, aimed to 
prevent British sales in America, whereas in 1 807 the United States 
aimed principally to eliminate English sources of supply. This 
type of pressure had been tried briefly in 1794, prior to the Jay 
treaty, when an embargo quickly created a serious food shortage 
in the British West Indies. What had worked in 1 794 seemed even 
more premising now, for Britain had lost much of her European 
trade/ In 1806 Elbridge Gerry argued for an embargo, both to 
keep American shipping within the protection 6f its own harbors 
and to bring pressure to bear upon England. JA year later the 
Richmond Argus suggested closing all trad^until Europe came 
to its senses. Robert R. Livingston recommended an embargo "that 
we may keep what we have at home and daily get more of our 
seamen & property out of the reach of the piracy of Britain so as 
to leave, with the debts we owe them, a ballance in our hands to 
compensate the injuries we may receive." That summer the Secre- 
tary of State warned the British minister that, while a Chesapeake 
settlement might prevent war, only a general adjustment could 
prevent Congress from adopting "very strong Measures of Re- 
straint upon the Intercourse between Great Britain and the United 
States. 3 ' 24 For various reasons a general embargo rather than selec- 
tive pressure upon Britain became Jeff ersonian policy in December, 
1807. That the Embargo aimed chiefly at England was, however, 
understood in Washington, London, and Paris. 

Like most policy the Embargo reflected many motives, some of 
them quite indirect. Jefferson, who even in moments of unrelated 
crisis never lost sight of his Florida objective, doubtless hoped 
resistance to England would encourage Napoleon to favor Ameri- 
can ambitions to the southward. Failure to resist, on the other hand, 
might cause the French emperor to assail the United States 5 in the 
words of the Boston Independent Chronicle, "If, by the most 
humiliating concessions we could avoid a war with England, will 

24 Gerry to Madison, Feb. 19, 1806, Madison MSSj Joseph I. Shuliin, The Old 
Dominion and Napoleon Bonaparte (New York, 1952), p. 2305 Robert R. Livingston 
to Madison, July 12, 1807, Rives Collection 5 Erskine #22 to Canning, July 31, 
1807, FO 5/52, 

150 



EMBARGO 

the other nations at war with her be tame spectators of such a com- 
promise?" Later on the President also justified continuance of the 
Embargo as an experiment, so that "on future occasions our legis- 
lators may know with certainty how far they may count on it as an 
engine for national purposes." 25 

Without any doubt the chief aims of the Embargo were precau- 
tionary and coercive. Madison and, as time passed, Jefferson placed 
great faith in the coercive power of an embargo. Although they 
thought that total loss of the American market, already constricted 
by the Nonimportation Act, would hurt Great Britain, they counted 
most on nothing less than imperial starvation. In the Secretary's 
view no part of the Empire would escape. "It can no longer be un- 
known to the most sanguine partizan of the Colonial Monopoly," 
he said, "that the necessaries of life and cultivation can be furnished 
to ... [British Caribbean possessions] from no other source than 
the United States." The United States supplied vitally needed 
naval stores. "Lastly it should not be forgotten that the United 
States are one of the Granaries which supply the annual deficit of 
the British harvests," a particularly important point when Prussian 
and French grain might be withheld. 26 Such one-sided calculations 
minimized American dependence upon trade with Britain, and 
the whole project rested upon an assumption that England would 
react rationally( The Adamses, father and son, more realistic than 
the President, correctly pointed out that in time of war reason often 
went by the board. The Embargo "affects their interests no doubt," 
John Quincy Adams noted, "but nations which sacrifice men by 
the hundred thousands and treasure by the hundred millions in 
War, for nothing, w worse than nothing, pay little attention to 
their- real interests."! 27 

| Like Senator Adams, Jefferson supported an embargo primarily 

<l < 

^Independent Chronicle (Boston), Nov. 12, 18075 Jefferson to Gallatin, May 
i5> July **> sSoS, Gallatin MSS. 

26 Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI. For 
a convincing* demonstration that Madison had for years advocated commercial 
coercion, see Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), 
pp. 397-4-03. 

27 Adams to Ezekiel Bacon, Dec. 21, 1808, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), 
Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 

151 



EMBARGO 

to protect American property. Whether peace or war impended, 
under existing circumstances "it-would be the greatest folly for the 
Americans to sport their property between the contending powers 
of Europe.'* 28 Furthermore, by depriving the belligerents of 
American merchantmen as targets, an embargo "saves us the neces- 
sity of making their capture the cause of immediate war." In time, 
political developments or the growth of "some sense of moral 
duty" might change the whole equation. If not, the President by 
no means intended to maintain terrapin habits forever, wise though 
a temporary withdrawal into the shell might be. "The alternative," 
he said, "was that or war. for a certain length of time I think the 
embargo is a less evil than war, but after a certain time it will not 
be so. if peace should not take place in Europe, & if both France and 
England should refuse to exempt us from their decrees & orders, as 
we shall strenuously urge, it will remain for Congress ... to say 
at what moment it will become preferable for us to meet war." 29 
The President, through indecision and weakness, later permitted a 
policy initiated as a temporary precaution to become a semiperma- 
nent institution. 

Summarizing all the arguments, but giving priority to the pre- 
cautionary aspect, the National Intelligencer stated: 

The ocean presents a field where no harvest is to be reaped but that of 
danger, of spoliation and of disgrace. 

Under such circumstances the best to be done is what has been done ; a 
dignified retirement within ourselves. . . . 

It is singularly fortunate that an embargo, whilst it guards our essential 
resources, will have the collateral effect of making it the interests of all 
nations to change the system which has driven our commerce from the 



ocean. 30 



As a short-run insulation from danger, the embargo could be justi- 
fied. If maintained for long it became a craven surrender to Euro- 
pean edicts. As time went on, Republican emphasis shifted from 

^Independent Chronicle, Nov. 12, 1807. 

29 Jefferson to John Taylor, Jan. 6, 1808, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to Major 
Joseph Eggleston, March 7, 1808, ibid. 

30 Dec. 23, 1807. 

152 



EMBARGO 

"dignified retirement" to the originally collateral aim of coercion., 
a more positive course but also one open to the pragmatic test of 
success or failure. 

On December 17, 1807, Jefferson convened his Cabinet to dis- 
cuss an embargo message, perhaps, as John Quincy Adams later 
stated, after conversations with congressional leaders had convinced 
him that a declaration of war could, not be obtained. The ministers 
unanimously agreed to request a law forbidding the departure of 
all ships, American and foreign, and the Attorney General trans- 
mitted a resolution in this sense to a member of the House for 
introduction. Overnight Albert Gallatin came to the conclusion 
that the decision had been too "hastily adopted on the first view of 
our foreign intelligence, 55 particularly newspaper accounts of the 
November orders. He urged the President to eliminate controls on 
foreign ships, fearing retaliation against far more numerous Amer- 
ican vessels abroad, and to recommend a definite term for the 
embargo, for, said the Secretary, a l prefer war to permanent em- 
bargo." At a second cabinet meeting Gallatin's first suggestion was 
adopted, his second refused. In the afternoon Jefferson sent to 
Congress an extremely short message suggesting an embargo on 
American ships and goods and, more elliptically, war preparations. 
With the message Jefferson transmitted the British proclamation 
on impressment and Champagny's declaration that the Berlin 
Decree would be enforced, but at Madison's urging the President 
said nothing of impending British orders. At the Secretary's sug- 
gestion, too, the President specifically recommended an embargo 
instead of simply calling the possibility to Congress' attention. 31 

/The Senate rushed the Embargo through in one afternoon. On 
receipt of the message a committee headed by Samuel Smith with- 
drew to consider the draft, already prepared, of a bill. The four 
Republican members had a brief, spirited struggle with John 
Quincy Adams. Adams objected to the paucity of information 

31 Adams, "Reply to the Appeal of Massachusetts Federalists," n.d., Henry Adams, 
ed., Documents Relating to New-England Federalism (Boston, 1877), p. 1885 
Gallatin to Jefferson, Dec. 18, 1807, JefTerson MSS; Richardson, o$. cit., I, 4335 
Brant, o<p. cit., pp. 394395; Raymond Walters, Jr., Albert Gallatin (New York, 
*957)> PP- 198-199- 

153 



EMBARGO 

Jefferson provided, as well as to the bill's vagueness. In reply 
Senator Smith brought forward every argument he could think 
of, in particular urging faith in Jefferson and asserting that an 
embargo would give the administration an invaluable weapon in 
negotiations with a special British envoy about to arrive. Incom- 
pletely satisfied by Smith's arguments, the Massachusetts inde- 
pendent nevertheless consented to endorse the Embargo, to aid 
the President and to save commerce from loss. He had no faith in 
it as more than a short-term device and in February, 1 808, called 
foj/its repeal. 32 

Having secured unanimity within the committee, Smith re- 
pdrted the bilL/By a narrow margin the Senate agreed to suspend 
the rules requiring three readings on separate days, then turned 
to a brief, unreported debate on the bill's merits. The-^ill passed 
by a vote of twenty-two to six, with six senators absent.; 3 Among 
the minority were two Republicans, William Maclay ID? Pennsyl- 
vania and William H. Crawford of Georgia, who objected not 
to the Embargo but to overly precipitate action. Four or five hours 
after Jefferson recommended an embargo, the Senate had done 
his bidding. 

The House of Representatives proved slightly more recalci- 
trant, as much from indecision, weakness, and lack of leadership 
as from opposition to the President. Few people respected the 
Tenth Congress, for, as Senator Adams observed, the legislators 
repeatedly showed "great embarrassment, alarm, anxiety, and 
confusion of mind, but no preparation for any measure of vigor, 
and an obvious strong disposition to yield all that Great Britain 
may require, to preserve peace, under a thin external show of dig- 
nity and bravery." 3 * Republican unity had been undermined by 
a bitter battle to choose a successor to Nathaniel Macon as speaker. 
Joseph B. Varnum of Massachusetts triumphed by the thin mar- 
gin of one vote and immediately rewarded his supporters with 

32 Entry of Dec. 18, 1807, Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John Qmncy 

Adams (12 vols.j Philadelphia, 18741877), I, 4915 Stephen R. Bradley to , 

Sept. 21, 1824, Ford, op. cit., Ill, i68n-i69n. 

33 Annals, loth Cong., ist sess., pp. 50-51. 

34 Entry of Nov. 17, 1807, Charles F. Adams, op. cit., I, 476. 

154 



EMBARGO 

choice committee assignments. At Embargo time and later, internal 
frictions weakened the Republican majority's will, even if not 
enough to bestow success upon the Federalists. 

As in the Senate, Jefferson's message was immediately followed 
by introduction of a bill. Randolph, seeking the lead as usual, 
quarreled with Benjamin Crowninshield for this honor, and for 
a time the House engaged in vapid debate. Then the Senate bill 
arrived. The House, setting aside its own version, rushed through 
the first two readings of the new bill. Here, too, debates are un- 
reported, but enough opposition developed so that action could 
not be completed. The next day the House devoted an entire ses- 
sion to the Embargo, and John Randolph vehemently opposed it, 
perhaps shifting his ground because members emphasized the 
coercive rather than the precautionary purpose which he alone 
approved. Timothy Pickering even thought it might be possible 
to defeat the bill, but over the Sunday recess the administration 
brought pressure to bear upon Republican legislators. On Monday 
a solid phalanx of eighty Republicans overwhelmed various mis- 
chievous motions, and John Randolph failed to turned the tide 
with a tearful address not at all in his usual hectoring style. At 
eleven in the evening the House approved the bill by almost two 
to one. The forty-two opponents, said the President, were made 
up of "one half Federalists, % of the little band [Randolph and 
his coterie] , the other fourth of republicans happening to take up 
mistaken views of the subject." 35 Some of these Republicans, who 
objected only to Jefferson's furtive methods and his timing, soon 
supported the system, particularly after the mission of George H. 
Rose demonstrated that Britain spurned concession. Others drifted 
in the direction of Federalism without adopting its name. The 
defection of one Republican out of five, despite alarming news 
from Europe and heavy administration pressure, should have 

35 Annals , loth Cong., ist sess,, pp. 1216-1228; Pickering to Timothy Williams, 
Dec. 21, 1807, Timothy Pickering MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. 
XXXVIII; Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, Dec. 22, 1807, George H. Haynes, ed, 
"Letters of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1 8 14," American 
Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 225; Jefferson to Thomas 
M. Randolph, Dec. 22, 1807, Jefferson MSS. 

155 



EMBARGO 

warned the administration that the new policy would seriously 
challenge its command of the loyalties of the American people. 

At three in the afternoon the next day, December 22, 1807, 
Thomas Jefferson signed the Embargo Act. The act was scarcely 
more than a sketch of policy. Republicans disagreed as to its wis- 
dom or, if they supported it, as to its true purpose. Some, like 
Macon, considered it valuable for its coercive effect ; others, like 
Wilson C. Nicholas, endorsed it as a means to save American 
property. Being only vaguely understood, and with no terminal 
date indicated, the Embargo could appeal to many factions. Those 
who wanted war supported it as an indispensable prelude j those 
who wanted peace approved it either as an escape from harsher 
anti-British action or as a potentially powerful economic weapon 
that might bring England to her knees. Jefferson had secured his 
object, had pressured the Congress into passage of the act without 
revealing his own motives. But if he should fail either to advance 
to war or to secure British and French relaxation of the assault 
upon American commerce, the President's magnificent feat of 
legislative dexterity would turn to ashes in his mouth. 36 

The Embargo fell upon the people as a bewildering shock. "We 
are all much alarmed by the Embargo laid on," a Richmond cor- 
respondent wrote Nicholas, "not knowing how to judge of its 
probable duration, nor the real object for which the measure has 
been resorted to." Debate in both houses during the winter failed 
to clarify either of these points. Although urged to issue a public 
manifesto justifying the Embargo, perhaps rallying the nation be- 
hind a clearly defined policy, the administration for months de- 
clined to do so. In August, 1808, Jefferson finally composed a 
form letter to be sent to towns petitioning against the Embargo (he 
soon had to ask the publisher of the National Intelligencer to print 
150 copies to save interminable copying). His letter, even then, was 
hardly revealing. 37 

As a result, unscrupulous Federalists had a field day. They of 

36 This verdict coincides, except in shading, with the excoriation of Jefferson in 
Henry Adams, History, IV, 176177. 

37 Thomas Rutherford to Nicholas, Dec. 27, 1807, Wilson Gary Nicholas MSS, 

Library of Congress; Jefferson to , Aug. 26, 1808 (form letter), Jefferson 

MSSj Jefferson to Samuel H. Smith, Sept. 9, 1808, ibid. 

156 



EMBARGO 

course emphasized the hardships of withdrawal from the ocean, 
sometimes forecast that Britain would reply with war, and scoffed 
at the presumed effectiveness of pressure upon England, which, 
they pointed out, would receive a virtual monopoly of world ship- 
ping as compensation for loss of the American market. The most 
often reiterated argument was the totally fallacious one that Jef- 
ferson and his followers, through either fear or sympathy, had 
obeyed Napoleonic orders. Federalists pointed out that the new 
law hit Britain far more than France and reminded the people that 
a request for Minister Armstrong's correspondence from Paris had 
been refused during the Embargo debate j surely, they cried, some- 
thing sinister lay behind these facts. So shrill did the accusations 
of French influence become, and so touchy were the Republicans, 
that in March Congressman Campbell challenged a persistent 
tormenter, Barent Gardenier, to a duel in which he seriously 
wounded the New York congressman. 

Campbell's pistol silenced only one critic. For the most part 
Republicans had to depend upon the less decisive weapon of news- 
paper editorials. Editors concentrated on two themes, urging the 
nation to trust a beloved president and, particularly after official 
news of the November orders fell like a sledge hammer upon 
Anglophiles, claiming that the Embargo "dashed the philter of 
pillage from the lips of rapine." In the Aurora, Duane brought 
both themes together when he posed the rhetorical question: 
"Americans, have you not cause to revere the man whose policy 
has not only secured you by wise measures from war for three years 
past, but who has rescued you by a timely and effective measure of 
energy and prudence, from the fangs of piratical depredation?" 
Only rarely did administration journals emphasize the Embargo's 
coercive aspects, and they definitely denied that a desire to strike 
England more than France had played any part in passage of the 
measure. "Being one intended . . . chiefly for our own security, 
even if it should have an unequal operation on the different powers 
of Europe, should we," the National Intelligencer asked, "be 
under the less obligation to adopt it?" a8 In the spring Jefferson 

38 Scioto Gazette, July 19, 1808, quoted in Beverley W. Bond, The Civilization 
of the Old. Northwest (New York, 1934), p. 270; Aurora (Philadelphia), Jan. 21, 

157 



EMBARGO 

frequently wrote of the Embargo as a temporary measure. But in 
the summer of 1 808 he began to talk of it as a permanent policy and 
a weapon of coercion. 

Successful coercion required the almost unanimous support of 
the American people, both to enforce self-denial and make it clear 
to Britain that the United States did not flinch. Here Jefferson was 
disappointed, for opposition to his policy proved far deeper than 
he anticipated, thanks primarily to the pressure of economic dis- 
tress and a broad willingness to believe national honor no less 
sullied by one-sided trade than by head-in-the-sand withdrawal. 
All over the country, even in Jeffersonian strongholds, the Hydras 
of opposition arose. In August, from a vantage point at New York, 
Gallatin warned his chief that only Virginia, South Carolina, 
Georgia, and the nearly voteless West could be considered safe. 
The impending national election, he said, might well go against 
the Republicans if the Embargo continued. A month later the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury more accurately warned that, even if candi- 
dates bearing the Republican label formed a majority in the next 
Congress, the keystone of Republican policy would almost cer- 
tainly be overthrown, since "there is not patriotism & union suffi- 
cient to bear with patience, where there is no stimulus." 39 In the 
election, using the Embargo as almost their only issue, Federalists 
tripled their electoral vote of 1804 and doubled their share of the 
House of Representatives. 

Political discontent penetrated most deeply in Massachusetts, 
only recently redeemed from Federalism. Anglophilia ran deep in 
the Bay State, as did distrust of Virginia leadership, and many 
Yankees preferred the risks of wartime trade to embargo. Although 
Governor Sullivan won reelection by a narrow margin, at April 
elections the Federalists recaptured the General Court. The new 
legislature promptly elected, well ahead of time, a replacement for 
John Quincy Adams, and Adams, who knew at the time that his 

18085 National Intelligencer, Jan. 4, 1808. For a slightly different conclusion see 
Lawrence S. Kaplan, "Jefferson, the Napoleonic Wars, and the Balance of Power," 
William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XIV (1957), 200-202. 

39 Gallatin to Jefferson, Aug. 5, 1808, Jefferson MSSj Gallatin to Madison, Sept. 
9, 1808, Rives Collection. 

158 



EMBARGO 

vote for the Embargo would probably destroy him politically, 
equally promptly resigned from the Senate. By summer Governor 
Sullivan's will had begun to erode, along with that of many loyal 
Republicans, and Jefferson came to fear an outbreak of rebellion, 
although in August he was confident that his own supporters and 
"that portion of the federalists who . . . would not court mob- 
law would crush it in embryo." 40 It would be nonsense to suggest 
that all Massachusetts rallied to Federalism. Marblehead and 
Salem, for example, remained Republican, and in the latter town 
Joseph Story and William Gray, the state's most prominent ship- 
owner who actually shifted to Republicanism in 1 808, successfully 
led a fight against resolutions denouncing the Embargo. Ezekiel 
Bacon and Henry Dearborn assured Gallatin that Federalist suc- 
cesses were only hard won and perhaps temporary. Nevertheless, 
the Embargo resuscitated Massachusetts Federalism. This rebirth 
encouraged England to resist American claims for redress. 

In New York the Embargo destroyed ex-Governor Morgan 
Lewis' hopes of regaining his post in a three-cornered fight with 
Clintonians and Federalists. At state elections in April and May, 
1808, the Federalists made surprising gains at the expense of 
both rival factions j in 1809 they recaptured the New York legis- 
lature for the first time in a decade. In Jefferson's home state, senti- 
ment stirred in the Tidewater and the back country, and for the 
first time in many years the Federalists sent a strong minority to 
the legislature at Richmond. The Republicans actually lost only 
a few states, partly because many elections took place before Amer- 
icans felt the full impact of the Embargo. However, the rising 
Federalist vote, the equivocal Republicanism of many congress- 
men who saved their seats, and the defeatism of leaders like Sulli- 
van boded ill for the administration. 

If the Embargo was considered as a prelude to war, a precaution, 
or shock treatment of European psyches Jefferson talked of all 
these occasional violations did not much matter. In any event 
all risk would be borne by the transgressing shipowner. As the 
coercive emphasis increased in the spring of 1808, becoming the 

40 Jefferson to Gallatin, Aug. 19, 1808, Gallatin MSS. 

159 



EMBARGO 

only possible excuse for the continuation of a policy that had 
demonstrably failed in its other aims, airtight enforcement of the 
Embargo assumed new importance. The President devoted most 
of the energies of his last year in office to this task. Although Albert 
Gallatin found the entire policy distasteful, he labored with all 
his might to make the Embargo work, and Treasury agents were by 
far the most active body thrown into the fray. The Navy Depart- 
ment provided less help, for Robert Smith sent his few ships cruis- 
ing in often uncoordinated fashion along the coast, once proposed 
a gallivanting squadron cruise to the Caribbean (nominally to 
search out Embargo violators in more pleasant climes), criticized 
the whole scheme on semipublic occasions, and even encouraged 
the false belief that he himself had opposed it at cabinet meetings 
in December, 1807. 

The success of enforcement fluctuated wildly. In the interval 
between first news of the Embargo and the establishment of a 
regulatory system, American shipowners hastily dispatched hun- 
dreds of vessels to sea. With the connivance of the collector at 
New Orleans, forty-two ships escaped from that port alone. Most 
vessels sailing at this time did not return to American waters during 
the life of the Embargo. After this outburst the Embargo was com- 
paratively well enforced for some months, as the American people 
waited to see what lay in store for them. During the summer of 
1808 land traffic across the Canadian border, not sailings from the 
Atlantic coast, posed the chief problem. A few outbursts of law- 
lessness occurred in the South, some transgressions in Chesapeake 
Bay and at New York, and substantially more frequent violations 
in New England. Only at the end of the year, as it became apparent 
that not war but a long embargo was most likely, and as the politi- 
cal climate became more and more hostile to the whole system, 
did there arise the last great surge of criminality which destroyed 
the Embargo and shook its sponsor's reputation. By the time the 
Embargo became "a mere brtttum folmen" as Matthew Carey 
called it, 41 it had already failed as a measure of rapid coercion. 

The most notorious violations took place among vessels nomi- 

41 Matthew Carey, The Olive Branch, or Faults on Both Sides, Federal and 
Democratic ($d ed.; Boston, 1815), p. 37. 

160 



EMBARGO 

nally engaged in coasting trade. Areas contiguous to British pos- 
sessions developed an unaccountable demand for goods of all sorts, 
a high proportion of which slipped across the border by land or 
water. Nineteen thousand barrels of flour reached Passamaquoddy 
Bay, for example, in the first week of May. Many ships found 
themselves forced by often imaginary bad weather or constructed 
circumstance to run to foreign ports for safety, sometimes all the 
way across the Atlantic. Benjamin Crowninshield once reported 
two incidents of this sort to Gallatin. The Commerce, bound nomi- 
nally from Massachusetts to New Orleans, called at Havana on 
the fairly feeble excuse that her water casks were exhausted j while 
in Cuba, she took on a cargo of sugar. The captain of the Hope, on 
the same course, put in at Havana because of damage to his main- 
mast, which he claimed had been split by lightning, although 
Crowninshield sardonically noted that one of the crew had died 
at Havana, apparently from wounds suffered when he had set off 
a powder charge in the mast. 42 Against this sort of evasion, the 
administration fought back. It required heavy bonds for good 
behavior, and it established a system of licenses limiting the amount 
of provisions that could be shipped to any particular state. State 
governors issued the licenses, and Sullivan, for one, proved so 
liberal that the entire project became ludicrous. 

Until autumn, at least, the collateral effects of direct violations 
counted for more than any relief they gave Britain and France. 
The Embargo pitted American citizens against one another. The 
government marched troops to the frontiers, sent gunboats and 
frigates scurrying up and down the coast, passed law after law and 
issued directive after directive. And yet violations continued. As 
a result many Americans came to believe the Republicans had 
adopted Federalist methods without having the capacity to execute 
them, while at the same time the violations strengthened the con- 
viction of America's enemies abroad that her republican form of 
government made any forceful policy impossible. Gallatin, who 
saw this keenly, wrote in dismay, "I had rather encounter war itself 
than to display our impotence to enforce our laws.' 5 43 

42 Benjamin Crowninshield to Gallatin, Sept. 23, 1808, Gallatin MSS. 

43 Gallatin to Madison, Sept. 9, 1808, Rives Collection. 

161 



EMBARGO 

In addition to direct violations, important loopholes drained 
the system of effectiveness. While the Embargo anesthetized 
American shipping and exports, it did not affect foreign ships or 
goods. Although the Nonimportation Act banned certain British 
goods, effective application of this law did not begin until the 
spring of 1808, and in any event the list of forbidden items was 
comparatively limited. Throughout the Embargo large numbers 
of British ships arrived to sell cargoes of English wares, a circum- 
stance that must have made the Embargo even more galling to 
the owners of vessels tied up at the wharves. Foreign ships had to 
leave in ballast (or break the law, as many did), and under normal 
circumstances the voyages would have been unprofitable, but in 
the absence of American competition they could be made to pay. 
For some unfathomable reason the administration never secured a 
law forbidding the exportation of specie, so cash sale was still pos- 
sible. Consequently, although imports and arrivals from Britain 
fell off, they by no means ceased. Arrivals at Philadelphia, for 
example, though dropping by 50 per cent from 1807 to 1808, still 
continued at a rate about three-quarters of the average of preceding 
years. Just before learning of repeal of the Embargo, an experi- 
enced British civil servant wrote: "Every Article is permitted to 
enter the American ports as usual. . . . The Americans very good 
naturedly allow us openly to supply their wants, but will not supply 
ours in return, except by smuggling." 44 

Six hundred American vessels sailed for foreign ports with the 
permission of their government. Early in 1808, as Jefferson com- 
plained, "the H. of R. were surprised into the insertion [in a sup- 
plementary act] of an insidious clause permitting any merchant 
having property abroad, on proving it to the executive, to send a 
ship for it." 45 Presumably because he desperately needed other 
powers granted by the bill, the President accepted this rider. The 
clause encouraged merchants to make perjured declarations which 
would return a handsome profit, and the administration interpreted 

44 Edward G. Lutwyche to Sheffield, Feb. 25, x8o9, Earl of Sheffield MSS, Wil- 
liam L. Clements Library. See also Herbert Heaton, "Non-Importation, 1806-181 a," 
Journal of Economic History, I (1941), 187. 

45 Jefferson to Cabell, March 13, 1808, Jefferson MSS. 



EMBARGO 

the law to mean that merchants might export American goods to 
exchange for foreign wares contracted for but not paid for prior 
to December, 1 807. Jefferson and Gallatin did confine most of the 
operation of this clause to goods from the West Indies rather than 
from Europe. Nevertheless, it had serious results. In a report 
covering only the period to the end of September, the President 
acknowledged that 594 vessels totaling some 87,000 tons had re- 
ceived permission to sail 5 by December more than 400 of these 
ships had returned with cargoes which relieved the pressure upon 
British exporters. 46 Departures continued until January, 1 809, just 
before the entire system collapsed in ruins. 

The legislative history of the Embargo, which clearly shows the 
problems the administration had to face, also demonstrates the 
gradual rise to predominance of the coercive motive. Within a 
month after the original act, its deficiencies made necessary a sup- 
plementary law extending controls to the coasting trade, fisheries, 
and whaling, and establishing a complex system of bonds and 
penalties to give teeth to enforcement. In March Congress passed 
a second supplement. Its chief purpose was to outlaw exportation 
to Canada. Thus Congress demonstrated that the protection of ships 
and seamen and their withdrawal as a possible prelude to war were 
not the only motives for the Embargo system. In a speech that 
nearly got him expelled from the House, Barent Gardenier charged 
that the original act had been "a sly, cunning measure," designed 
to appear as a precautionary measure but really intended as the first 
shot in a campaign of pressure on Britain. 47 Actually, the Em- 
bargo's supporters appear not to have been so Machiavellian 5 
nobody proposed to follow embargo with war, and the emphasis 
therefore naturally shifted from precaution to coercion. 

When John Randolph twitted his opponents for having at- 
tempted "to cure the corns by cutting off the toes," a sturdy Repub- 
lican replied, "I will cut off the toes, feet, and head too, and perish 
with the whole nation rather than succumb." 48 Autoamputation 

^Columbian Centinel (Boston), Jan. 21, 18095 Richardson, o$. cit. 9 I, 4.58. 
47 Annals, loth Cong., ist sess., pp. 1653-1657. 
48 Ibid., p. 2136 (D. R. Williams). 



EMBARGO 

continued with an enforcement act which forbade shipments to 
parts of the United States adjacent to foreign lands unless specifi- 
cally approved by the President and authorized collectors to take 
custody of any unusually large stocks in border communities. This 
act became law on the last day of the session of 1808. 

In the summer of 1808, after gathering much information dur- 
ing a visit to New York ? Gallatin wrote to the President that "if 
the embargo must be persisted in any longer," new legislation must 
be passed to "invest the Executive with the most arbitrary powers 
& sufficient force" to execute them. He suggested that not a single 
vessel be permitted to move without presidential approval, that 
collectors be permitted to seize goods "any where" and to remove 
rudders and rigging from any suspected vessels, and that "a little 
army" be collected along the Canadian frontier. These suggestions, 
perhaps designed as much to shock the President into a reconsider- 
ation of his policy as to make the Embargo effective, did not shake 
the Chief Executive, who replied, "I am satisfied with you that if 
the orders & decrees are not repealed, & a continuance of the em- 
bargo is preferred to war (which sentiment is universal here), 
Congress must legalize all means which may be necessary to obtain 
it's end." 49 

The fruit of such talk was the last of this series of acts, not passed 
until January, 1809. The act of 1809, passed over wild Federalist 
shrieks against tyranny, permitted anticipatory seizures, forbade 
the loading of ships without permission from federal officials, pro- 
vided for the arrest of goods traveling toward the border by road, 
required almost impossible proof of innocence from the owners of 
ships "blown off course" or "captured" while engaged in coastwise 
voyages, and authorized an increased maritime force and the use 
of militia to enforce the laws. This string of restrictions, which 
came too late to breathe effectiveness into the Embargo, did show 
the lengths to which Jeffersonians were prepared to go. It also 
clearly demonstrated the coercive purpose of the system, revealed 
the pervasiveness of violations, and turned the hitherto largely 

49 Gallatin to Jefferson, July 29, 1808, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to Gallatin, Aug. 
ii, 1808, Gallatin MSS. 

164 



EMBARGO 

peaceable opposition of New England into nearly revolutionary 
remonstrance. Unwittingly, advocates of the Embargo had plunged 
a knife into its expiring body. All that now remained to be done 
was to concoct an alternative policy war or concealed surrender 
and total the losses and the gains of the great Jeffersonian experi- 
ment. 

Some argue that., in one sense at least, the Embargo was clear 
gain: America did not become involved in war. But did the Em- 
bargo preserve peace? Neither Britain nor France ever considered 
a declaration of war on the United States. War at American initia- 
tive was, to put it mildly, highly unlikely 5 the Embargo cannot be 
defended as a shrewdly applied Jeffersonian poultice which reduced 
congressional war fever. Had American ships continued at sea the 
resulting captures might conceivably have had to be considered 
a castts belli, it is true. The belligerents, however, seized less than 
i per cent of those ships permitted to sail during the life of the 
Embargo, and in any event for more than three years after repeal 
America did not make seizures an excuse for war. War immediately 
after the Chesapeake incident was possible, but by the time of the 
Embargo Act Jefferson had led his people farther from the brink 
than even he desired. The verdict, "not proved," must be passed 
upon the claim that the Embargo preserved peace. 

As coercion, the Embargo obviously failed. Domestic opposition 
of course undermined its effectiveness, and Jefferson's enemies 
were the enemies of national policy determined by Congress. Still, 
such opposition might have been foreseen. As early as February, 
1808, Senator Nicholas' brother warned, "The success of it must 
depend greatly on the impression which will be made abroad as 
to it's continuance and I fear the clamour of the federalists and 
the under tone of Mr, Madison's opponents will give no very 
favorable idea of our fortitude or perseverance." Yet the intensity 
of opposition surprised Jefferson. Instead of preparing the way 
for a graceful withdrawal, he sought to make the Embargo effective 
by more stringent enforcement. The President tied American pres- 
tige to the Embargo's success as a means of extorting European 
concession, a very risky gamble indeed. John Randolph, expressing 

165 



EMBARGO 

for once the thoughts of many, commented: "If it had any opera- 
tion on the belligerents I could be content to bear its ruinous conse- 
quences, but in France & England it is equally disregarded." 50 

Napoleon regarded the Embargo complacently. The Royal 
Navy had already interdicted most transatlantic trade. As for the 
colonies, which lost an important source of supply. Napoleon did 
not particularly value the few remaining in French hands. At first 
the Emperor objected to the Embargo because it fell short of war 
with England. In the autumn he gave it his blessing, since it fitted 
in nicely with his Continental System. An official report, largely 
his own, stated: "The Americans, a people who owe their fortune, 
prosperity, and almost their existence to commerce, have given 
the example of a great and courageous sacrifice. They have for- 
bidden ... all commerce . . . rather than shamefully submit 
to the tribute which the English attempt to impose upon the navi- 
gators of all nations." A short time later, in a message opening 
the Corps Legislatif, Napoleon repeated the same theme. The 
American representative at Paris reported in August, 1808: "We 
have somewhat over-rated our means of coercing the two great 
belligerents to a course of justice. . . . Here it [the Embargo] 
is not felt, and in England ... it is forgotten. . . . The Em- 
peror would prefer to it, a war on our part with G.B., but would 
prefer it, to any state of things, except that of a war." 51 

In Britain, too, the effect was far less than Jefferson had hoped. 
Consul Lyman told the President, "Not all the expences and 
burthens of the war excite so much apprehension or complaint as 
the want of our commerce," and William Pinkney more moder- 
ately reported that "the Embargo pinches here." But George H. 
Rose, on a special mission to the United States, correctly concluded 
that the Embargo hurt America most, and even David M. Erskine, 
the regular minister, who was more sympathetic to the United 

50 John Nicholas to Nicholas, Feb. 8, 1808, Nicholas MSSj Randolph to Nicholson, 
Nov. 13, 1808, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress. 

51 Champagny, "Report to the Emperor," Sept, i, 1808, Correspondance da 
Napoleon I er (32 vols.j Paris, 1858-1870), XVII, 5655 messag-e at opening of 
Corps Le"gislati, Oct. 25, 1808, ibid.) XVIII, 25; Armstrong to Madison, Aug. 30, 
1808, Madison MSS. 

1 66 



EMBARGO 

States, considered the measure ineffective. In England itself, min- 
isters, even in their private correspondence, repeatedly stated that 
the effect of the Embargo was trifling. The Earl of Sheffield, con- 
sistently enough, positively welcomed a policy that aided English 
shipping, and although the Marquis of Buckingham detested Brit- 
ish policy he felt that "the embargo has proved a very impotent and 
ruinous measure [to the United States], . . . equally insufficient 
as a measure of offense to us, or of security to her." Of course the 
loss of American trade could not be totally ignored, but it proved 
painful rather than catastrophic. In a private memorandum for 
Perceval written toward the close of the American experiment, 
James Stephen summarized a point of view fairly generally held: 
"The intended duress on our commerce has wholly failed, & while 
America has been more defied & plunged in great interior difficul- 
ties by that impotent measure of resentment, we are far more in 
a condition to despise it than when it was first adopted: the terrors 
of a suspension of American commerce have vanished from the 
minds of our Manufacturers & Planters, & our Merchants, are 
reaping lucrative fruits from our new commercial positions beyond 
their most sanguine hopes." 52 

Only small, vulnerable areas of the economy were severely 
affected by the loss of American supplies. Ireland's linen industry, 
almost entirely dependent upon American flaxseed, suffered as the 
price bounded up. The most important imports, grain and cotton, 
were not so deeply missed. Grain shipments from America declined 
by four-fifths in 1808, and the price of wheat rose sharply. For 
this rise the Embargo was only partly responsible, and the pressure 
never became so severe that the government found it necessary, 
as it had during past shortages, to ban distilling ; the Americans 

52 Lyman to Jefferson, Dec. 21, 1808, Jefferson MSS (incorrectly bound at 1806) j 
Pinkney to Madison, private, Sept. 7, 1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV 5 
Rose #3 to Canning 1 , Jan. 17, 1808, FO 5/565 Erskine $"20 to Canning-, June 4, 
1808, FO 5/575 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, The Orders in Council and the 
American Embargo Beneficial to the 'Political and, Commercial Interests of Great 
Britain (London, 1809) , $assim ; Marquis of Buckingham to Grenville, Feb. 12, 1809, 
Walter Fitzpatrick, ed., Report on the Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Esq., Preserved 
at Dro'pmore (10 vols.j London: Historical Manuscripts Commission, 1892-1927), 
IX, 2775 Stephen to Perceval, March 3, 1809, Spencer Perceval MSS ("examined 
while temporarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London), 33/44. 

167 



EMBARGO 

even failed to deprive Englishmen of their whisky. 53 Although 
cotton from the United States had a far larger share of the import 
market than grain, even here pressure proved ineffective. In the 
first quarter of 1808 arrivals dropped only slightly, and in the 
course of the whole year more than 1 2 million pounds of American 
cotton reached Britain. This was a far cry from the 44 million 
pounds imported in 1 807, and cotton prices rose steadily to a peak 
in October, 1808. The huge importations of 1807, which made the 
drop statistically impressive, had also created an oversupply that 
could now be absorbed, while non-American sources provided 30 
million pounds of cotton to relieve shortages. Few mills closed 
because of the lack of supplies. The Embargo, Lord Sheffield as- 
serted, "acted the part of a salutary medicine upon a previously 
diseased body" by reducing a British glut. 54 

Exports, not imports, were Britain's Achilles 5 heel. Here a com- 
bination of unforeseeable circumstance and the American failure 
to prohibit importations fatally delayed the Embargo's effect. Man- 
ufacturers of course suffered, and Baring charged that in Manches- 
ter only nine of more than eighty cotton mills were working full 
time. The share of British exports taken by the United States 
shrank from one-third to one-seventh, yet more than 5 million 
worth of British goods still flowed to the United States, embargo 
or no embargo. 55 At the same time alternative markets opened, 
particularly the Spanish Empire, where restrictions on trade ended 
after the Iberian rising against Napoleon in the spring of 1808. 
The drop in exports to the United States was almost exactly 
matched by a rise in shipments to other American ports, causing 

63 W. Freeman Galpin, "The American Grain Trade under the Embargo of 1808," 
Journal of Economic and- Business History, II (19291930), 71 1005 Eli F, Heckscher, 
The Continental System (London, 1922), p. 3375 Timothy Pitkin, A Statistical 
View of the Commerce of the United States (Hartford, 1816), p, 2205 Louis M, 
Sears, "British Industry and the American Embargo," Quarterly Journal of Eco- 
nomics, XXXIV (1919-1920), 105. 

54 Account of Feb. 29, 1809, Rufus King MSS, New-York Historical Society, Vol. 
XII j Sears, o^>. cit., p. 1005 Francois Crouzet, VEconomk Bntatmique et It B locus 
Continental (2 vols.j Paris, 1958), I, 394-3955 Sheffield, of. cit., p. 25* 

m Hansard, XII, 1194.5 Crouzet, o-p. cit., I, 308-3125 II, 860-861 j Heckscher, 
op. cit n p. 324.5 Pitkin, o^. aV., pp. 223-224$ George R. Porter, Th& Progress of 
the Nation, rev. F. W. Hirst (rev. ed.; London, 1912), p. 479, 

168 



EMBARGO 

the British consul at New York to exult, "The Spanish Colonies in 
the West Indies and on the Continent of America will now take 
from our manufacturers all that their Industry can supply ; and I 
am at times in doubt whether a continuance of the American Em- 
bargo will not operate beneficially to Britain." Before long the 
Latin American market became satiated, but in 1 808, both psycho- 
logically and practically, it cushioned the reduction of exports to 
Jefferson's America. 56 This, and this alone, was a factor in the 
equation that the President could not have foreseen. By the sum- 
mer of 1 808 it formed an obvious objection to his policy. 

The British West Indies proved less vulnerable to American 
pressure than expected. Prices of course rose sharply. Flour jumped 
from $7 to $22 a barrel when news of the Embargo arrived, and 
by fall reached $40. Although the Embargo worked comparatively 
efficiently in breaking up trade with English colonies, many ships 
that sailed to get goods "already owned" in the Caribbean carried 
grain and flour to exchange for them. The British government 
mobilized alternative sources of supply and quintupled its exports 
of flour to the colonies. Jamaica received just about half the normal 
supply in 1808, and this, though causing severe hardship and elim- 
inating reserve supplies, enabled life to continue. Early in the life 
of the Embargo, Erskine urged his government to show "the 
People of this Country that the Threat to starve His Majesty's 
Islands in the West Indies, is as vain as it is illiberal and disgust- 
ing." Canning, Perceval, and company were happy to oblige. 57 

This is not to say that the British government made no efforts 
to encourage violation of the Embargo. As early as March, 1808, 
Spencer Perceval proposed only slightly disguised inducements to 
American lawbreakers, but Canning and Castlereagh briefly dis- 
suaded him with the argument that "the Embargo . . . seems to 
be working so well for us without our interference, that ... no 

66 Louis M. Sears, Jefferson and the Embargo (Durham, 1927), pp. 284-285$ 
Heckscher, of. cit., pp. 174175, 245$ Barclay to Admiral John B. Warren, private, 
Sept. 3, 1808, George L. Rives, ed,, Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas 
Barclay (New York, 1894), p. 283. 

157 Galpin, of. cit^ pp. 91-945 Monthly Review; or Literary Journal (London), 
LIX (1809), 1735 Erskine #20 to Canning, June 4, 1808, FO 5/57. 

169 



EMBARGO 

new step should be taken." In April an Order in Council approved 
neutral trade to the West Indies, even by ships without papers, and 
also promised that ships engaged in trade approved by Britain 
would be exempt from seizure even if war should break out. Al- 
though phrased in general terms, this order obviously applied ex- 
clusively to violators of the American Embargo. William Pinkney 
considered it "a sneer upon our honor, national and individual," 
and the Secretary of State, with that hyperbole he favored in diplo- 
matic correspondence, agreed that a "more extraordinary and dis- 
honorable experiment is perhaps not to be found in the annals of 
modern transactions." Nevertheless the policy continued. Like the 
local authorities' cynical opening of Halifax to American ships, 
it tempted shipowners to send their vessels to sea whenever they 
could evade Gallatin's agents. 58 These British expedients reflected 
a political desire to speed Republican self-destruction at least as 
much as a hope to obtain needed supplies. 

The Embargo, then, failed as an instrument of coercion, al- 
though its continuation a few months longer might have allowed 
the United States to escape with honor, for early in 1809 the Brit- 
ish government began to show interest in the restoration of trade. 
The Embargo's failure was obvious by the fall of 1 808, before the 
onset of the moral, political, and economic rot that brought down 
the entire system in ruins. Events of the closing months were dra- 
matic and, for the nation as well as for Jefferson, tragic, but the 
President's failure predated that climax. He had woefully over- 
estimated British dependence upon American supplies, although 
the figures were at hand and even hurled in his face by Federalists. 
He had completely ignored the adaptability of British trade, al- 
though its transformations since the outbreak of war in 1792 ought 
to have been a warning. He had counted upon a rational reaction to 
pressure, although his own experiences in the American Revolu- 

58 Perceval memorandum, n,d., Perceval MSS, 29/9-105 Canning memorandum, 
March 28, 1808, ibid., 36/27-285 Castlereag-h memorandum, nd., ibid*, 3 6/29 j 
Henry Adams, History, IV, 3275 Pinkney to Madison, private, April 25, 1808, Rives 
Collection j Madison to Pinkney, July 18, 1808, Instructions, Vol. VHj Erskine #24 
to Canning-, July 14, 1808, FO 5/58$ Warren to Wellesley Pole, July 20, 1808, 
Adm 1/498. 

170 



EMBARGO 

tion ought to have shown him that faith often overwhelms realism. 
He had tolerated legislative errors (notably the permission of con- 
tinued imports in British ships and the rider of March, 1808, per- 
mitting American vessels to sail to get goods "already owned") 
which ripped the heart from the Embargo. In sum, he had per- 
mitted a device he had first endorsed as a measure of precaution to 
become one of economic pressure, and then had not even given 
this dubious weapon a full chance of success. It is true, as the sage 
of Monticello later pleaded, that "the rank growth" of violations 
exceeded everyone's expectations ; it is true that nobody foresaw 
the Spanish rising that opened Latin America to British ships. But 
neither of these elements was decisive, and some violations at least 
might have been foreseen. 

So, too, could the pain an extended embargo would bring to 
Jefferson's land. It took no particular wisdom to predict that the 
farmer and the merchant would suffer blows so deep that only a 
sparkling diplomatic triumph could compensate for them. Cotton 
prices fell nearly one-half, bringing ruin to many a planter. "Noth- 
ing is now heard of but Bankruptcies which have taken place & 
more which are apprehended," wrote Senator Nicholas' Richmond 
agents, and another Virginian wailed, "This Embargo will ruin 
this state if it continues long." At New Orleans wholesale prices 
of Western produce averaged 15 per cent lower in 1808 than in 
1807, a critical fall for marginal frontier farmers. 59 Shipowners, 
seamen, and seaboard towns suffered similarly. Five hundred ships 
lay tied up at New York, and the Embargo caught more than 200 
at Savannah. At Salem, Massachusetts, soup kitchens fed 1,200 
persons daily and one-fifth of the town was reduced to virtual 
beggary by the early months of 1 809. Even William Gray, a loyal 
supporter of the Embargo, admitted that his fortune had been 
reduced one-tenth or more in the first half year of the experiment. 

50 Q YV. Daniels, "American Cotton- Trade with Liverpool under the Embargo 
and Non-Intercourse Acts," American Historical Review } XXI (1915-1916), 2825 
Thomas Rutherford to Nicholas, Jan. 8, 1808, Nicholas MSS; John Kelly to Wil- 
liam Taylor, Jan. 6, 1808, Nathan Schachner, Thomas Jefferson (2 vols.j New 
York, 1951), II, 863; George R. Taylor, "Prices in the Mississippi Valley Preceding 
the War of 1812," Journal of Economic and Business History, III (1930-1931), 149. 

171 



EMBARGO 

Seamen., both Americans and British fugitives, fled to the English 
merchant service and even the Royal Navy with the assistance of 
British consuls, reducing the incidence of impressments in a way 
Jefferson had never intended. 60 John Trumbull lost his patrons 
and returned to England ; Albert Gallatin lost his customs receipts 
and found it difficult to balance the budget. In his annual message 
of 1808, Jefferson found consolation in the stimulus given to 
American industry, but there is reason to believe that the Embargo, 
by upsetting the nation's economy, had restrained rather than 
encouraged American manufacturing. 61 

Northerners and Southerners sometimes argued over the priority 
of suffering between their sections. Many complaints were po- 
litically motivated, aimed either at securing repeal of the Embargo 
or demonstrating the inanity of Jeff ersonianism. The United States 
was youthful and resilient 5 it could perhaps afford a year of 
privation. None of these things alters the essential fact that Jeffer- 
son had sacrificed the economic well-being of his country for a 
phantom, had asked superhuman self-denial from a nation that 
had perhaps been corrupted by prosperity. "We are almost the only 
sufferers," expostulated a Mary lander j "a chance of getting a liv- 
ing, is better than inevitable starvation" complained a Connecti- 
cut editor. 62 More and more Americans came to share these senti- 
ments, and economic reality supported them. 

Nor were economic losses the sole cost. The year of embargo 
destroyed national unity far more than two years of open warfare 
with Britain did later on. The nation was forced to fight political 
battles that had been all but settled before Jefferson's message of 

60 John Lambert, Travels through Canada, and the United States of North Amer- 
ica, in the Years 1806, 1^07, &f 1808 (sd ed.j 2 vols,; London, 1816), II, 214, 
294.5 James D. Phillips, "Jefferson's 'Wicked Tyrannical Embargo,'" New England 
Quarterly y XVIII (1:94.5), 4.725 entry of Aug. 12, 1808, The Diary of William 
Bentley, D.D. (4 vols.j Salem, 1911-1914), III, 3775 Warren to Wellesley Pole, 
Sept. 23, 1808, Adm 1/4985 Barclay to Captain Bromley, Feb. 15, 1808, Rives, 
op. cit. y p. 274. 

61 Caroline F. Ware, "The Effect of the American Embargo, 1807-1809, on the 
New England Cotton Industry," Quarterly Journal of Economics^ LX (1925-1926), 
672-688. 

62 Entry of Jan, 5, 1808, Diary of Bentley, III, 3775 William Patterson to Nich- 
olas, Dec. i, 1808, Nicholas MSSj Connecticut Courant (Hartford), Feb. 17, 1808. 

172 



EMBARGO 

December, 1807., Pickering, the Junto, and their cohorts verged 
toward sedition. John Quincy Adams, one of the victims, properly 
observed that "we have too many among us who, to say the least, 
are ready to let the rights of the country go, provided they can see 
their political opponents overwhelmed in the same ruin." ^ By 
stubbornly supporting a policy so harmful to the nation, so unlikely 
of success, and so conducive to the false charge of French influ- 
ence, the President at least acted the part of a catalytic agent in 
precipitating this poison. 

In the autumn of 1807 the United States had briefly enjoyed a 
particularly advantageous tactical position vis-a-vis England. The 
raft-borne negotiations at Tilsit had joined Prussia and Russia to 
Napoleon's Continental System, Junot controlled Portugal for 
his master, and by the Treaty of Fontainebleau Godoy committed 
Spain to a role as Napoleon's jackal. The attack upon Copenhagen 
drove Denmark to the French side. Not for the last time in her 
history, Britain faced a nearly united continent. At the same time, 
although the Emperor had begun to enforce the Berlin Decree 
against Americans, the balance of insult clearly lay with the Eng- 
lish, as far as the United States was concerned. Never again were 
conditions so favorable for the exertion of pressure, provided that 
pressure was effective and not merely self -immolating. Yet Jeffer- 
son turned to embargo, partly voluntarily and partly because he 
had too successfully dampened war sentiment after the Chesapeake 
affair. Within a few months the last remnants of willingness to 
endorse strong measures disappeared, American sentiment became 
muddied by Napoleonic insults, notably Champagny's cavalier 
treatment of Armstrong, the seizure and destruction of American 
ships, and particularly the Decree of Milan, which reached America 
early in 1808. In January Turreau fatuously reported that the 
nation was drifting toward war with Britain, but in May he had 
to admit that this analysis had been wrong and even claimed that 
he had never meant it. a A war with that Power would never obtain 
public assent," he stated, and the administration itself "intends, 
today more than ever, to stand equally balanced between France 

63 Adams to Giles, Nov. 15, 1808, Ford, of. dt., Ill, 247. 

173 



EMBARGO 

and England." 64 The tactical moment for pressure had passed. 
Only a doctrinaire pacifist or an unreasoning Anglophile, both of 
which Jefferson definitely was not, could take unalloyed pleasure 
frojp.-this. 

The Embargo had other unfortunate aspects. It provided an 
excuse for ineffective military preparations when force was the 
only language the world understood. According to Senator Adams, 
the President himself passed word that arming was unnecessary. 65 
In any event, after lengthy debates in which members loudly pro- 
claimed their willingness to make any sacrifice for the nation, Con- 
gress passed no military bills of any consequence. Second, the Em- 
bargo made Europe believe that commercial coercion could be 
scorned because it would harm the United States more than those 
against whom it was wielded. Consequently, the British proved 
far less willing to compromise in the face of renewed economic 
threats under Madison. Then, too, the policy Jefferson followed 
during his last year as president convinced Britain of America's 
essential cowardice. After the Leopards broadsides, the nation 
called for war and the administration insisted that Britain must 
drop impressment. In December the United States settled for an 
embargo, and the next month, without even waiting to see how 
this measure would affect England, the administration told Erskine 
and then the special envoy, George H. Rose, that the Chesapeake 
affair could be settled even if Britain did not agree to cease im- 
pressing seamen. 66 

Most important of all, instead of waiting for the Embargo to 
force British overtures, the Republicans openly sought an escape 
from their own Frankenstein. a l take it to be an universal opinion," 
Jefferson wrote, "that war will become preferable to a continuance 
of the embargo after a certain time." To avoid this catastrophe 
Jefferson appealed to the reason and the cupidity of the belliger- 
ents. In the middle of April, 1808, a report presented by Senator 

64 Turreau #7, $xo> #14 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan, 30, April 24, 
May 20, 1808, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXL 

6 Entry of March 29, 1808, Charles F. Adams, op, cit^ I, 524. 

66 Erskine #z to Canning, Jan. 28, 1808, FO 5/575 Rose #4 to Canning, Jan. 18, 
1808, FO 5/56. 

174 



EMBARGO 

Anderson but actually drawn by the Secretary of State recom- 
mended that the President be given the power to suspend the Em- 
bargo if conditions so warranted. 67 Within a few days this recom- 
mendation became law. 

Madison quickly instructed Pinkney and Armstrong to use this 
law as a lever at London and Paris and himself interviewed 
Erskine. Without entirely giving away American policy, upon 
which indeed the Cabinet did not settle for another month, he 
nevertheless made the Englishman understand that the United 
States would not insist upon repeal of the order of January, 1 807, 
but, on the other hand, would not require France to suspend the 
municipal regulations forbidding the landing of British goods even 
when carried in neutral ships. Otherwise the offers were roughly 
similar: if either power ended actions against American commerce 
while its rival remained obdurate, the United States would in turn 
suspend the Embargo in favor of the conceding power and turn a 
firm face toward the other. 68 

At the end of June Pinkney broached the subject with Canning. 
The Foreign Secretary at first contented himself with not un- 
friendly questions, but at their third meeting a month later he 
asked Pinkney to present his offer in writing. After a long delay 
during which Pinkney wrestled with various drafts of an official 
note, a fourth meeting was arranged at which the Secretary re- 
ceived Pinkney's note with cryptic vagueness. Canning then left 
town for a vacation, and when the American minister went to 
the Foreign Office to ferret out information he came away with a 
total blank. He noted uneasily that British spirits had been raised 
by American opposition to the Embargo, an influx of illegal cargoes 
from the United States, optimism about the Latin American mar- 
ket, and exhilarating news of Baylen and Vimeiro. 69 

67 Jefferson to Madison, March n, 1808, Lipscomb and Bergh, o$. dt., XII, 
ii 12 j Annals, roth Cong., ist sess., pp. 364368. 

68 Madison to Pinkney, April 30, 1808, Instructions, Vol. VI j Madison to Arm- 
strong, May 2, 1808, ibid.; Erskine to Canning, separate and confidential, April 26, 
1808, FO 5/5 7 j Erskine #17 to Canning, May 2, 1808, ibid. 

^ Pinkney to Madison, private, June 29, 1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV 5 
Pinkney to Madison, Aug. 4, Sept. 6, 1808, ibid.; Pinkney to Madison, private, Sept. 
7, 1808, ibid.; Pinkney to Madison, private, Sept. 10, 1808, Rives Collection. 

175 



EMBARGO 

Canning's answer, finally produced on September 23, justified 
Pinkney's fears. The silent, respectful Foreign Secretary of earlier 
meetings was replaced by the more characteristic Canning. Britain, 
he said, unreservedly rejected the American offer, nor could she 
consent to any important modifications of her system until Napo- 
leon gave prior evidence of weakness by abandoning his decrees. 
If intended as coercion, Canning declared, the Embargo was un- 
just, for it should have been directed solely at France, the power 
whose maritime innovations had forced Britain to retaliate. If, on 
the other hand, "as it has been more generally represented by the 
Government of the United States," Canning continued with acutely 
unpleasant reference to Madison's disingenuous declarations, 

the Embargo is only to be considered as an innocent municipal Regulation, 
which affects none but the United States themselves, . . . His Majesty 
does not conceive that he has the right or the pretension to make any Com- 
plaint of it; and He has made none. But in this light there appears to be not 
only no Reciprocity but no assignable Relation, between the Repeal . . , 
of a Measure of voluntary Self-restriction, and the Surrender by His Majesty 
of his Right of Retaliation against his Enemies. 

This sneer was followed by arrogance. While denying that Britain 
hated the United States or was jealous of her prosperity, Canning 
demanded respect for English methods on the ground that "the 
Strength and Power of Great Britain are not for herself alone, but 
for the world." 70 The Savior stood forth against the Antichrist 
of the Tuileries. 

Early in 1809, when both houses of Parliament weighed what 
Grenville called "the insulting and sophistical answer written by his 
Majesty's foreign secretary of state," the Foxite, Grenville, and 
Sidmouth factions attacked the government. The Times, although 
opining that "Mr. CANNING'S late Declaration was a keen and 
acutely reasoned State Paper," nevertheless found it "repulsive" 
because it seemed to condemn the country to a continuation of the 
endurance contest with France. Tierney, erroneously assuming that 

70 Canning to Pinkney, Sept. 23, 1808, enclosed in Pinkney to Madison, Sept. 24, 
1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV. 

176 




THOMAS JEFFERSON 
Portrait by Rembrandt Pe-d& 




JAMES MONROE 

Portrait by Gilbert. Stuart 




WILLIAM PINKNEY 
Portrait by Charles B* King 




JAMES STEPHEN 
Portrait by John Linnell 




Courtesy, National Portrait Gallery, London 

SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Portrait by George JF, Joseph 



EMBARGO 

the anger provoked by Canning's letter would determine America 
to continue the Embargo, asked, a ls it not deplorable, sir, that for 
the sake of a few pointed periods, and well-turned sentences, any 
individual . . . should do such incalculable mischief . . . ?" 
But the government had no regrets. Canning scarcely deigned to 
discuss his American policy, Bathurst sarcastically suggested that 
the Grenville family knew more than most about the dangers of 
arousing America, and Liverpool limited himself to a brief state- 
ment that America "had shewed no disposition to act properly 
towards us," since while demanding repeal of the orders she had 
consented to continuance of France's municipal regulations ex- 
cluding British goods. Summing up the government's attitude 
toward "an offer on the part of America to abandon a measure 
which has been proved to be injurious to no power so much as her- 
self," the Courier said, "we cannot allow that necessity calls 
upon us to depart entirely from our policy towards an enemy, 
in order that America may be relieved from a burden which she 
pettishly placed upon her own shoulders." ri 

The act of April, 1808, passed even before coercion had had a 
fair trial, simply convinced the British that in a contest of wills 
Jefferson and his people would first give way. At the same time 
the mere existence of the Embargo made it highly unlikely that 
a prestige-conscious ministry would offer anything that might be 
considered a surrender. Bathurst, who believed the Orders in 
Council no longer desirable, felt that "repealing them in conse- 
quence of the American Embargo would be fatal to this Country, 
and to the friends of this Country in America." All he could sug- 
gest was some device like that tried by Fox in 1 8o6, 72 and this was 
too much for his colleagues, who did not make even a first tentative 
gesture until it was obvious that the Embargo was dying. 

Rebuffed in its pleas to Britain and France, challenged by in- 
creasing opposition at home, the administration eddied without 
purpose in the closing months of Jefferson's regime. Madison 

71 Hansard, XII, 1 8 j Times (London) , Jan. ^3, 1 809 j Hansard, XII, 87, 800-801 j 
Courier, Feb. 20, 1809. 

72 Bathurst memorandum, July 29, 1808, FO 5/61. 

177 



EMBARGO 



talked alternately about strengthening the Embargo and replacing 
it with war, either against Britain or against both major belliger- 
ents. 73 Gallatin's position was even more complicated. Although 
formerly opposed to a permanent embargo, he now felt that the 
policy "having been adopted ought, if there was virtue enough in 
the eastern people, to be continued." Doubting Yankee virtue, he 
confessed himself baffled, and the papers from his pen reflect his 
uncertainty. He presented a report on means to make a permanent 
embargo effective, prepared for Congressman Campbell a mani- 
festo sternly demanding vigor but leaving open the choice between 
war and embargo, and capped his labors with a financial statement 
which seemed to show that the Treasury could stand the shock of 
war. These apparently contradictory productions are not incom- 
patible: Gallatin favored decisiveness, and he was prepared to sup- 
port any forthright policy. As he wrote to Jefferson, for himself 
and the Secretary of State, "considering the temper of the legisla- 
ture . . . , it would be eligible to point out to them some precise 
& distinct course. As to what that should be we may not all perfectly 
agree. ... I feel myself nearly as undetermined between en- 
forcing the embargo or war as I was on our last meetings. But I 
think that we must (or rather you must) decide the question 
absolutely, so that we may point out a decisive course either way 
to our friends." 7 * 

The prodding of his two chief lieutenants failed to stir Jefferson 
into action. The lame-duck President virtually abdicated, merely 
living out the days until he could depart for the quiet bliss of 
Monticello. a l think it fair to leave to those who are to act on 
them, the decisions they prefer, being to be myself but a spectator," 
he wrote. 75 Ideally speaking, the President would probably have 
preferred to continue the Embargo. As a compromise with political 
reality, he favored continuing it for a fixed period, with war to 

73 Madison to Pinkney, Nov. 9, 1808, Letters and Other Writings of Jam* 
Madison (Congressional ed.j 4 vols.j Philadelphia, 1865), II, 4255 Erskine #4,6 to 
Canning, Dec. 3, 1808, FO 5/58, 

74 Annals, loth Cong., ad sess., pp. 232-2365 undated memorandum, Gallatin MSS, 
Vol. XV 3 Henry Adams, Gallatin, pp. 412-413$ Gallatin to Jefferson, Nov. 15, 1808, 
Jefferson MSS. 

75 Jefferson to Levi Lincoln, Nov. 13, 1808, Jefferson MSS, 

178 



EMBARGO 

follow unless the European belligerents came to their senses in 
the interim. But he did not officially communicate these conclusions 
to Congress, and he allowed the usual channels of executive influ- 
ence to dry up. 

The situation in New England was chiefly responsible for Jeffer- 
son's paralysis. There, courts frequently refused to convict those 
charged with violations of the Embargo. Town after town voted 
memorials calling for repeal, and the General Court instructed 
Massachusetts congressmen to work for it. The Enforcement Act 
of January, 1809, provoked even more stentorian protest. The 
Massachusetts legislature, proclaiming its loyalty to the union 
"according to its original purpose, 7 ' violently attacked the exten- 
sion of federal power as a breach of the Constitution. "On such 
occasions," declared the Senate, "passive submission would, on the 
part of the people, be a breach of their allegiance, and on our part 
treachery and perjury," while the House proclaimed that "every- 
thing which freemen hold dear, is at stake." Governor Trumbull 
and the Connecticut legislature rallied behind their neighbors/ 6 

These inflammatory protests, supported by a rising tide of 
Violence a mob at Gloucester destroyed a revenue cutter, for 
example caused many supporters of the Embargo, including 
Jefferson, to wonde^whether it could be continued without pro- 
voking civil war." A flood of inquiries from Washington descended 
upon John Quincy Adams, and Adams later came to believe that, 
through his replies warning of the danger, "I was the efficient 
cause of the substitution of the Nonintercourse for the Embargo, 
which I verily believe saved the country from a civil war." Jeffer- 
son himself fixed the responsibility on Joseph Story, wM> arrived 
somewhat tardily at Washington as replacement for a dead con- 
gressman. Story, a "pseudo-Republican," Jefferson said, convinced 
Ezekiel Bacon that only a repeal of the Embargo could prevent 
civil war, and Bacon in turn convinced his colleagues in the House. 
The President oversimplified. Newspaper reports, letters, and 

76 Walter W. Jennings, The American Embargo, 1807-18 og 3 University of Iowa 
Studies in the Social Sciences, Vol. VIII, no. i (Iowa City, 1921), pp. 123-1*4$ 
Herman V. Ames, ed., State Documents on Federal Relations (Philadelphia, 1906), 
pp. 26-36, 38-42- 

179 



EMBARGO 

travelers from Massachusetts undermined Republican wills. Many 
congressmen eagerly sought escape from the Embargo throughout 
the session, although Story may have added his warnings at an 
important moment. When the President implied, as he did, that 
he himself was immune from the panic that swept Capitol Hill, 
he toyed with the truth, for the virus infected him as much as any- 
one else. In an admission that some honor would have to be jetti- 
soned to keep the nation afloat, he wrote, "We must save the 
Union j but we wish to sacrifice as little as possible of the honor 
of the nation." 77 

Joseph Story's course was not quite so clear-cut as legend sug- 
gests. A reluctant supporter of the Embargo, he desired to give it 
a fair trial. On his arrival at Washington in December, 1808, he 
discovered with surprise that many Republicans wished to continue 
it indefinitely. On January 4 he wrote home to ask if the amazing 
rumors of incipient rebellion were true, and at about the same time 
he received letters informing him that the danger of open resistance 
had diminished. Story did indeed fear that the new enforcement 
act would rekindle the crisis in Massachusetts, and he believed it 
would be very hazardous to continue the Embargo for any sub- 
stantial length of time. He did not anticipate an immediate revolt, 
to say nothing of an effective one. Story's open break with his 
party, maintained despite the pressure of administration whips, 
contributed much more to defeat of the Embargo than his alleged 
retailing of rumors of approaching civil war. 78 

The political hazards of stubbornness, hazards made more obvi- 
ous by Story's disaffection, and the failure to secure European con- 
cessions doomed the Embargo. A few congressmen, among them 

77 Adams to Charles F. Adams, Dec, 2, 1828, Samuel F. Bemis, John Quincy 
Adams and the Foundations of American Foreign Policy (New York, 1949), p. 15 on j 
Jefferson to Dearborn, July 16, 1810, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. aA, XII, 398-4005 
Jefferson to Thomas M, Randolph, Jan. 2, 1809, ibid., XVIII, 258-259. 

78 Story to Joseph White, Jr., Jan. 4, 1809, William W. Story, Life and Letters of 
Josef h Story (Boston, 1851;, pp, 174-1755 Joseph Story, "Autobiography," ibid*, 
pp. 183-1865 Story to Edward Everett, n.d. ibid., p. 187. For the information re- 
ceived from Massachusetts by Story at this time, see particularly the letters of Joseph 
White, Jr., in the Joseph Story MSS, Library of Congress, 

1 80 



EMBARGO 

Nathaniel Macon, Speaker Varnum, and Madison's brother-in- 
law, James G. Jackson, desired to continue it, but these men found 
few allies. With only two dissenting votes (one was Gardenier's), 
the House endorsed Campbell's Report, a ringing but meaningless 
declaration of unwillingness to submit to foreign aggressions. Con- 
gress passed the Enforcement Act, but more for reasons of con- 
sistency than for devotion to the system, which few people expected 
to last beyond the spring. The visible confusion and longwinded- 
ness of legislators caused Ezekiel Bacon to observe that the debates 
on the Embargo "might justly be esteemed not the least amongst 
those many inconveniences which were imputed to it." Most con- 
gressmen, wanting to get rid of the Embargo, sought an escape that 
would not dishonor them. The search was difficult because most 
of them refused to consider the logical alternative, war. At the end 
of 1808 Gallatin wrote disgustedly: "A majority will not adhere 
to the embargo much longer, and if war be not speedily determined 
on, submission will soon ensue." 7d 

As always, the Secretary of the Treasury had a keen eye for 
congressional currents. On January 24 Wilson C. Nicholas at- 
tempted to salvage something from the impending wreck by mov- 
ing that forcible resistance should, at a date to be fixed by Congress, 
replace the Embargo. He had always believed, Nicholas said, that 
"when the embargo failed, we must resort to the valor and patriot- 
ism of our citizens. Sir, we have too much reason to believe that 
the moment is at hand when nothing else can extricate us from 
our difficulties." Nicholas and others close to the administration 
proposed June I as the date of transformation. A majority was 
unwilling to wait that long, and more than half the Republicans 
joined the Federalists in rejecting it. In a last-ditch effort to save 
the Embargo, George Troup then moved to shelve the entire 
subject, but only twenty-five members voted with him. The House 
inserted March 4, fittingly enough the terminus of Jefferson's 
term, as the date of repeal. Next, it approved the repeal resolution 

79 Annals , loth Cong:., id sess., $assim; Varnum to Eustis, Nov. 19, 1808, Eustis 
MSSj Gallatin to Nicholson, Dec, 29, 1808, Adams, Gallatin, p. 384. 

181 



EMBARGO 

by seventy-six to forty. The date was February 3, 1809, a little 
more than thirteen months after the nation had embarked upon 
its campaign of privation. 80 

What followed was anticlimax, more closely connected with the 
birth of the Nonintercourse Act, although the Embargo's enemies 
feared that some legerdemain would reverse the decision. At sev- 
eral caucuses loyal Republicans pressed the deserters to accept the 
Nicholas plan. Led by Ezekiel Bacon, for Story had returned 
home, the dissidents, predominantly from New England and 
Pennsylvania, held firm. At the end of February the Noninter- 
course Act passed, not because it was popular but because it included 
repeal of the Embargo. In the words of one Northern Republican, 
"the people, as well as himself, were so heartily tired of the em- 
bargo that they would be glad to get anything else in place of it." 
A few days later Jefferson departed from a Washington to which 
he never returned, commenting, "Never did a prisoner, released 
from his chains, feel such relief as I ... on shaking off the 
shackles of power." 81 

His most ambitious venture in foreign policy had failed, save 
only in perhaps delaying the outbreak of war with England 
and that, until a less favorable time. The Embargo imposed many 
of the disadvantages of war on the nation by destroying trade j 
it secured none of the prospective advantages, such as the conquest 
of territory or the capture of enemy ships and commerce at sea. 
Diplomatically, Jefferson failed either to coerce or seduce the Euro- 
pean belligerents. Economically, the Embargo proved ruinous at 
home. Politically, it encouraged fissiparous tendencies in Republi- 
canism and temporarily reinvigorated the most unpleasant forms 
of Federalism. If Jefferson had acted strongly at the opening of 
his last Congress, he might have achieved an acceptable substitute 
for the Embargo. By his inertia he was negatively responsible for 
its continuation until February, 1 809, and for the disgraceful scenes 
of humiliation and panic which sullied America's reputation for 

80 Annah , loth Cong., 2d sess,, pp. 1172-1350. 

81 Brant, op. cit., pp. 478-479 j Annals, loth Cong 1 ., ist sess,, pp. 1541, 436, 
451-452; Jefferson to du Pont de Nemours, March 2, 1809, Lipscomb and Bergh, 
o-p. cit., XII, 259-260. 

182 



EMBARGO 

years. In 1810, writing of repeal, Jefferson said, "This is the im- 
mediate parent of all our present evils, and has reduced us to a low 
standing in the eyes of the world." 82 He himself was at least a 
godparent, for his system and his tactics encouraged the political 
rebellion of the Tenth Congress. The philosopher-king had asked 
too much of his people. 

82 Jefferson to Dearborn, July 16, 1810, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit. } XII, 399. 



CHAPTER 



VI 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 



Throughout the life of the Embargo the United States confronted, 
not the compromise-minded ministry of Fox and Grenville, but 
a new government dedicated to vigorous prosecution of the war 
against Napoleon. In March, 1 807, as a result of unwise, irresolute 
tinkering with the Irish problem, the Ministry of All the Talents 
fell from power. Few mourned its passing, even among ministers 
themselves. A new government under the nominal leadership of 
the Duke of Portland united Pitt's supporters and others who had 
served under Addington. The premier himself had little to recom- 
mend him save the weakness that made his lieutenants willing to 
serve under him rather than under one of their own number. 

Aside from Portland, the new government represented, far 
more than its predecessor, a gathering of talents. Four members 
Perceval, Hawkesbury, Canning, and young Palmerston subse- 
quently headed ministries of their own. Castlereagh became per- 
haps the greatest British foreign secretary, and Bathurst served for 
many years as an inconspicuous but very capable minister. Of 
course, these men had to make room for the inevitable baggage of 

184 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

borough-mongering noblemen, and several, notably Canning and 
Castlereagh, still showed signs of political immaturity. Grenville 
and Howick naturally remained outside the government, and Sid- 
mouth and Wellesley did not join it for some time. Still, the abili- 
ties were there, narrow and rough-honed though they might be. 
With relatively few changes in personnel, this Cabinet fought the 
war through to a triumphant conclusion. 

Behind the ducal fagade, Spencer Perceval was the most influen- 
tial minister. The expense of a huge array of offspring made him 
reluctant to abandon his legal practice to become chancellor of the 
Exchequer. In a transaction loudly criticized by the Opposition, 
Perceval received an almost unprecedented lifetime appointment 
as salaried chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and he abandoned 
the law and the attorney-generalship for an active role in the fight 
against Napoleon. By nature quiet and courteous, Perceval often 
flared up into anger when criticized. Habits of the law had bred 
in him a certain narrowness, but he also had determination, per- 
haps even stubbornness. With him the anti-Napoleonic crusade 
took absolute priority. He opposed all but minimum concessions 
to neutrals, and he never understood America's failure to see that 
the Emperor threatened world liberties. In his view, the Orders 
in Council and Wellington's war in Spain were England's two best 
weapons, and he resolutely refused to abandon either in the face 
of protests from the United States and from interested British 
groups. 

For the first eighteen months of the ministry's life, this dogged, 
unobtrusive man had as a colleague the mercurial George Can- 
ning, who received the Foreign Office. Canning had had subordi- 
nate experience as under-secretary in the Foreign Office in the 
1 790'$, and few in the House of Commons could equal him as an 
orator. Canning grasped more quickly than his colleague the essen- 
tials of a new situation, and he favored decisive action without 
abandoning flexibility. To the applause of his mentor, Pitt, Chan- 
ning had married money and position, but his own relatively un- 
patrician family background kept him out of the Establishment. 
Many doubted his political stability. By turns a Foxite, a supporter 

185 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

of Pitt, and then a more unyielding Pittite than the ex-Minister 
himself Canning had nevertheless negotiated for office with the 
Ministry of All the Talents, which obviously shared few of the 
principles of his dead patron. 

A diplomatic veteran personally friendly to Canning penetrated 
to the root of the matter when he wrote, shortly after Canning 
took office: "Canning possesses the peculiar talent of justifying 
ably and forcibly all he does . . . and that so rapidly and so elo- 
quently that it is very difficult not to be carried away by what he 
says. He is unquestionably very clever, very essential to Govern- 
ment; but he is hardly yet a Statesman y and his dangerous habit of 
quizzing (which he cannot restrain) would be most unpopular in 
any department which required pliancy, tact, or conciliatory be- 
haviour." * In interviews with William Pinkney, Canning was un- 
failingly patient and even courteous ; in their formal exchange of 
notes the American often worsted Canning simply because the 
latter could not restrain his pen. As Lord Henry Petty pointed out, 
when Canning's notes were published in America "the whole pub- 
lic mind . . . was insulted by his ill-placed irony." William B. 
Giles, for example, assailed Canning's "prevaricating letters and 
sophisticated expositions," and later complained that "he chooses 
to act by tricks and contrivances, ... by a mental retort, flowing 
solely from his own visionary mental conceits." Britain, said Giles, 
had entrusted her affairs to "a parcel of punsters" in "the adminis- 
tration of the energetic, the sarcastic, the facetious, the joking Mr. 
Canning." 2 The Secretary's official papers and his unrestrained 
parliamentary oratory affronted the United States nearly as much 
as his government's policies. 

England supported the new ministry primarily because it prom- 
ised energetic action, for Napoleon's triumphs propelled Britain 
not in the direction of peace but toward more rigorous warfare. 

1 Entry of March 14, 1807, James H. Harris, Earl of Malmesbury, ed,, Diaries 
and Correspondence of James Harris, First Earl of Malmesbury (ad ed.; 4. vols.j 
London, 1845), IV, 375. In a slightly different form, this chapter has appeared in 
American Historical Review, LXIII (19571958), i 22. 

2 Hansard, XII, 1208-1209; dnnals, loth Cong., 2d sess., p. 371 j nth Cong., ist 
and 2d sess., pp. 496497. 

186 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The rights of neutrals were scorned j as William Cobbett put it, 
in typically forthright language, "Our power upon the waves en- 
ables us to dictate the terms, upon which the ships of all nations 
shall navigate. . . . Not a sail should be hoisted, except by stealth, 
without paying us tribute." Such thinking produced, among other 
things, the brutal attack upon Copenhagen 3 significantly, the Op- 
position did not present a united front against this aggression. With 
feeling at such a pitch, it is small wonder that the Portland ministry 
did not adopt a liberal policy toward, as one conservative journal 
put it, "a nation that owes to it half the property she possesses, and 
is destined, to owe to it her preservation from the fate that has 
attended Continental Europe." 3 

During these years many Englishmen had little respect for 
Jefferson. "America," one statesman wrote, ". . . is no longer a 
bugbear 5 there is no terror in her threats." 4 Down to 1807 words 
and not deeds seemed to be the rule. Thereafter, evasion, domestic 
opposition, and its obviously great effect at home vitiated the effect 
of the Embargo. Although British diplomats sometimes warned 
that war was possible, they all usually reported the government 
torn by dissension, Federalism gaining ground, and hostilities un- 
likely. Even so, the government never treated the Americans so 
harshly as, for example, it treated the Danes. It desired American 
neutrality. Although the Cabinet's devotion to rigorous warfare 
made it avoid self-limiting devices like Fox's Blockade or the 
Monroe-Pinkney treaty, the ministry did make certain limited 
efforts to conciliate the United States. 

The new ministry, Jefferson complained, included men who 
were "true Pittites, and anti-American." Madison agreed but did 
not feel that this doomed the chances of improving the Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty. Among other things, he considered it possible that 
"the new Cabinet will be less averse to a tabula rasa for a new 
adjustment, than those who framed the instrument to be super- 

8 Cobbett* s Political Register (London), XII (1807), 420 j Leeds Intelligencer > 
Dec. 25, 1809. 

4 Sidmouth to Abbot, Oct. 18, 1807, Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester, ed., The 
Diary and Correspondence of Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester (3 vols.j London, i86i)> 

ii, I3 *. 

187 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

seded." He pressed for some enticing concessions on seamen, and 
he warned Jefferson that "a final failure of the negotiation must 
lead to a very serious posture of things." New instructions were 
therefore dispatched to Monroe and Pinkney toward the end of 
May, 1807. If Britain wanted a treaty, the instructions declared, 
she must accept at least six changes in the unratified document 5 
if she preferred broad informal arrangements, the American gov- 
ernment would accept them, provided they were equitable and did 
not tie America's hands. Of the ultimatums, Madison's instructions 
most emphasized impressment, although he also sought an indem- 
nity for past seizures and at least some modification of the note 
reserving Britain's right to retaliate against the Berlin Decree. 
When the Secretary's instructions reached London in July, 1 807, 
his agents immediately asked Canning to resume negotiations. 5 

This request embarrassed Canning. Many supporters of the 
Perceval government considered the treaty a craven surrender. 
In the Morning Post's view, "nothing but madness or folly could 
induce the Americans to refuse their acceptance." George Rose, to 
whom the Cabinet turned for advice, hostilely dissected the treaty 
in a long memorandum, and the Courier concluded that "it is a 
Treaty almost entirely in favour of America, with scarcely one 
stipulation favourable to the commerce of this country nay, so 
far from it, that it contains stipulations hostile to it." 6 On the other 
hand, the agreement promised at least an armistice with America, 
and British rejection would have outraged the Opposition. Cer- 
tainly the Foreign Secretary must have felt that by rejecting the 
settlement Jefferson had unwittingly saved him from a difficult 
decision. He permitted supplementary articles completed before 
Grenville's fall to die with their sponsors. At a farewell dinner 

5 Jefferson to Madison, May i, 1807, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, 
eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols. 5 Washington, 
1903-1904), XI, 1995 Madison to Jefferson, April 24, May 4, 1807, Thomas Jeffer- 
son MSS, Library of Congress; Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, 
Department of State Archives, National Archives, Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VI 5 
Monroe and Pinkney to Canning, July 24, 1807, Foreign Office Archives, Public 
Record Office, FO 5/54. 

6 Morning Post (London), April 20, 1807; unsigned Rose memorandum, n.d., 
FO 95/5155 Courier (London), Nov. n, 1807. 

.188 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

to Monroe, whose departure actually was delayed, he offered a 
fulsome toast to Anglo-American friendship, and a little later he 
announced (although perhaps insincerely) that had Jefferson ap- 
proved the treaty the British government would have followed 
suit. 7 Otherwise, Canning was complacently silent on American 
affairs. 

When the note from Monroe and Pinkney forcibly recalled 
them to his attention, Canning's first reaction was to seek domestic 
political advantage. He asked Holland and Auckland the extent 
of the assurances on impressment the two Americans said they had 
received. The two lords informed him that, after the formal article 
was dropped, "it was our private wish to keep that question in a 
state of presumed negotiation to the close of the war; still however 
maintaining the unimpaired exercise of the right though carefully 
avoiding every abuse of it." 8 No political mileage could be made 
out of this, and Canning certainly did not intend to accept an article 
on impressment, to say nothing of other changes sought by the 
Americans. For the rest of the summer he allowed the matter to 
rest. 

Only in October, 1807, did Canning finally bestir himself, com- 
posing one of those unnecessarily obnoxious communications that 
so angered Americans. Some of the excuses for nonratification, he 
cuttingly observed, "are such as can be Matter of Discussion only 
between the American Government and its Commissioners ; since it 
is not for His Majesty to enquire, whether . . . the commissioners 
. . . have failed to conform themselves ... to the Instruc- 
tions of their Government." Canning declared that to renegotiate 
on the basis of the rejected treaty "is a Proposal wholly inadmis- 
sible." 9 If there was to be a tabula rasa, both sides of the slate must 
be wiped clean. The Times later criticized "the sententious manner 
in which Mr. CANNING dismisses the ... mutilated deed," 10 

7 Canning to Holland, April 2, 1807, FO 5/545 Times (London), April 28, 1807$ 
Courier, Aug. n, 1807. 

8 Holland and Auckland to Canning, private, July 28, 1807, Greenwich Hospital 
Miscellanea, Public Record Office, Adm 80/117. 

& Canning to Monroe and Pinkney, Oct. 22, 1807, FO 5/54- 
10 Feb. 24, 1808. 

189 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

but few in Britain suggested that the Foreign Secretary had erred 
other than in the form of his answer. 

Canning broke his silence only after the Chesapeake affair had 
obliterated the treaty as an issue. On July 24, 1807, Admiral 
Berkeley's dispatches reached Portsmouth, and a courier galloped 
to London with them. In the Lords that evening, Holland asked 
for information on "the subject of much discussion, . . . the re- 
port of hostilities having actually commenced." Hawkesbury put 
him off with a conventional expression of the government's desire 
for peace. Then, along with Eldon, who left the woolsack, he 
departed for an emergency cabinet session. 11 The ministers decided 
to disavow and recall Berkeley, but they later gave him a more 
important command. Although Britain offered compensation for 
the attack, Canning firmly refused to allow President Jefferson to 
connect this incident with the general problem of impressment. 

In the context of the times these actions were less harsh than 
they sometimes appear. From the British point of view powerful 
provocation existed for some action against America, if not for an 
armed assault upon the United States Navy. Berkeley had of 
course reported the incidents around Norfolk that inspired his 
order. The admiral declared that, despite conciliatory efforts on 
his part, American authorities encouraged rather than discouraged 
desertion. In addition, the Chesapeake enlisted many Englishmen. 
Doubtless British guesses did not err on the side of moderation, 
but Berkeley at least claimed that the total was about 1 50. A later, 
completely independent estimate provided for the government 
placed the number at 200 and added that Decatur, who replaced 
Barron after the attack, had refused to permit 60 or 70 English- 
men to return to the Royal Navy although they desired to do so. 
Furthermore, the ministry soon learned that three of the four 
deserters taken from the Chesapeake had volunteered for service 
in the Royal Navy and only one Jenkin Ratford, an undoubted 
Englishman had been impressed. 12 These ameliorating circum- 
stances helped Berkeley escape severe punishment. 



IX, 926-9275 Star (London), July 27, 1807. 

12 Berkeley to Marsden, Feb. 2, March 23, July 27 (with enclosure), 1807, Ad- 
miralty Papers, Public Record Office, Adm 1/4975 Warren to Wellesley Pole, March 
28, 1808, and enclosure, Adm 1/498. 

190 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The fact that the Opposition had appointed the admiral virtually 
immobilized them. Lord Grenville believed that "there is not in 
any one writer on the Law of Nations a trace to be found of any 
claim to search Neutral Ships of War for deserters." While he 
therefore declined to defend Berkeley in the House of Lords, be- 
cause of his own responsibility and close ties with Berkeley's 
brother he followed a very restrained course. On the government 
side, Bathurst, the admiral's brother-in-law, worked to prevent 
hasty action, however justified. Bathurst was more interested in 
saving the admiral and his wife from a winter voyage home than 
in demonstrating to the American government that Britain dis- 
approved of the assault. 13 

In going as far as it did that is, in disavowing the attack and 
reaffirming that Britain did not claim a right to search warships 
the government acted contrary to English opinion. Almost every 
popular journal defended the attack and proclaimed its deathless 
devotion to the right of search, even when applied to neutral war- 
ships. The leading Opposition newspaper, the Morning Chronicle, 
supported later by the Edinburgh Review, stood almost alone in 
arguing to the contrary. Some papers, among them the Times and 
the Caledonian Mercury, expressed hope that war could be avoided. 
But even the Times generally defended Berkeley for his forth- 
rightness. "It is impossible an insult and act of manifest injustice 
like this [seduction]," said the Times, "could have been passed 
over by any British Officer who knew his duty, and left to a tedious 
and protracted discussion between the two Governments." The 
Caledonian Mercury commented: "We should think it a very great 
misfortune for this country to have to go to war with America at 
this time; but we should consider it as a much greater misfortune, 
if the Government of this country should tamely permit its rights 
to be violated, or its flag to be insulted by any power whatever." 14 

Other editorial writers, several using the heading "War with 

13 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, Oct. 23, 1807, Thomas Grenville MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 4.1851-41859), Add. MSS 418525 Thomas Grenville to Lord 
Buckinghamshire, Oct. 9, 1807, Richard P. T. N. B. C. Grenville, Duke of Bucking- 
ham and Chandos, Memoirs of the Court and Cabinets of George the III (4 vols.j 
London, 1853-1855), IV, 205$ Bathurst to Buckinghamshire, n.d., ibid., IV, 2x1. 

14 Times, Aug. 5, 18075 Caledonian Mercury (Edinburgh), July 30, 1807. 

191 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

America," made this language seem moderate. The Morning Post, 
strongly ministerial, argued that the "order of Admiral Berkeley 
to search the American frigate, appears to have been dictated by 
the most delicate caution, and to have enjoined nothing which was 
not fully justified by the extraordinary circumstances of the case." 
The paper added its trust that "Great Britain will not be ... 
scrupulous and delicate about forms in enforcing her maritime 
rights, when her very existence depends upon the due maintenance 
of them." The Courier declared it time "to pause in our career 
of forbearance" and added that, if by seducing British seamen 
"America has offered us an insult, she must either give us ample 
reparation, or we must go to war." When the Portland government 
decided to disavow the attack, the Courier went along grumpily, 
warning the Americans to expect more of the same medicine if they 
did not abandon their career of provocation. Enemies of the regime 
agreed, notably William Cobbett, who "contend [ed] for the right 
of searching for deserters, upon the general principle, that the seas 
are the dominion of those who are able to maintain mastery over 
all that swims upon them." 15 

The still new and insecure government might easily have 
whipped up support by cultivating such opinion. Instead, the 
Foreign Secretary acted quickly to minimize the effect of the un- 
fortunate clash. Upon the arrival of Berkeley's preliminary dis- 
patches, he wrote to Monroe, who as yet had received neither in- 
structions nor official information, that "if the British Officer 
should prove to have been culpable, the most prompt and effectual 
Reparation shall be afforded to the Government of the United 
States." Canning then called in George Sansom, spokesman for 
merchants trading with the United States. He told Sansom and 
this information was soon in the papers that, while he could not 
predict the future, his first exchanges with Monroe made him 
hopeful of a settlement. Through Sansom he assured the public 
that "Ministers will neither compromise the honour of their coun- 
try, nor give any sanction to a wanton attack upon any other State 

15 Morning Post, Aug. 6, 1807 j Courier, July 27, Aug. 10, 1807 j Cobb&ttfs Register, 
XII, 245. 

192 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

with which we are in amity." 16 This statement, which warned 
extremists that the Royal Navy might have been at fault, also made 
it quite clear that the British government did not intend to be 
rushed into either war or surrender. 

It is possible that the Cabinet considered asserting a right to 
search some foreign warships. The Foreign Office archives contain 
a long, rather inconclusive memorandum by Sir John Nicholl on 
this question. Nicholl justified hostile action, perhaps general war 
and perhaps merely the use of force against a specified ship, toward 
a state sheltering deserters, but he inclined to the belief that the 
decision should be made by the government, not by the commander 
on the spot, "tho even of this there may be possible exception." An 
equally lengthy memorandum, probably by Perceval, reviews the 
arguments pro and con but firmly states: "My opinion is clear 
that it is both most expedient & most right ... to give up the 
right of Search of Ships of War." On July 30 Lord Bathurst wrote 
that, although Berkeley's conduct had been unauthorized, some 
legal opinion held that the American attitude justified retalia- 
tion: 

It seems admitted by S r William Scott and S r John Nicholl . . . that our 
right of Search is derived from the circumstance of one of the parties being 
belligerent; and that the Neutral, by allowing men belonging to the Ships 
of War of the belligerents to enter into his Service, steps out of his Character 
of Neutral, by depriving the belligerent of his means of carrying on the 
War. All this would however have been a fitter subject of remonstrance 
from this Country, than an Order at once from our Admiral. Large allow- 
ances must be made for the provocations which he has for some time re- 
ceiv'd: and had this arrived after a Victory instead of a defeat in Poland, 
we should have thought he had acted with great Spirit, and had been fully 
justified in his Orders. 17 

16 Canning to Monroe, July 25, 1807, FO 5/34-5 Sun (London), July 30, 1807. 

17 Nicholl, "Principles and Positions Applying to the American Question," n.d. 
FO 5/104; "Memoranda of heads of arg* on the Execution of the Right of Search of 
American Ships of War & Trade," Spencer Perceval MSS (examined while tempo- 
rarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London), 29/31-33; Bathurst 
to Harrowby, private, July 30, 1807, Dudley Ryder, ist Earl of Harrowby, MSS, 
Sandon Hall, Staffordshire. See also Canning to George III, Aug. 2, 1807, Royal 
Archives, Windsor Castle. 

193 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The Cabinet thus reviewed the question before Canning declared 
to Monroe that His Majesty's government did not claim a right 
to search neutral warships. 

With this question settled, perhaps by default, the Foreign 
Secretary turned his attention once again to Monroe. Canning ap- 
parently decided that delay was the best course, especially after 
Jefferson raised the issue of impressment. The President's procla- 
mation banning the Royal Navy from American waters seemed to 
some Englishmen a provocative act requiring a riposte. Doubtless 
with the recent expedition to Copenhagen in mind, Hawkesbury 
talked about sending an emissary to America accompanied by a 
naval force and armed "with full power to commence hostilies" if 
the United States refused to withdraw the proclamation. Lord 
Buckinghamshire, a close friend of the Berkeleys, declared that 
the "inhospitality of M r . Jefferson's proclamation" should be met 
by an embargo on all American shipping in British ports. For the 
most part, however, Englishmen rightly regarded the proclama- 
tion as an indication that the United States did not plan to rush 
into hostilities. 18 Canning shared this impression, although he 
made a great deal of the proclamation in his notes to Monroe, 
arguing particularly that it would affect the amount of reparation 
to be tendered. 

Canning undoubtedly scored a technical triumph over Monroe. 
At a meeting on July 29, he agreed that the American would have 
to hand in a formal note of protest. When Monroe thereupon 
hastily produced a letter of complaint, on the basis of newspaper 
reports only, Canning had an opening which, after consultation 
with the Cabinet, he exploited to the full. His reply, sent four days 
later, rebuked the envoy for a protest "not brought forward either 
by the authority of the Government of the United States, or with 
any precise knowledge of the facts." He added haughtily that, 

18 Hawkesbury to , n.d,, Charles D, Yong-e, The Life and Administration 

of Robert Banks, Second Earl of Liverpool (3 vols.j London, 1868), I, 241-2425 
Buckinghamshire to Auckland, n.d., William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 34-457) &>1. 353$ 
Pinkney to Madison, private, Aug. 13, 1807, William C. Rives Collection, Library of 
Congress} Times } Aug. 10, 1807, 

194 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

after offering assurances that Britain would not condone Berkeley's 
action, "I may perhaps be permitted to express my Surprize . . . 
at the Tone of that Representation which I have just had the 
Honour to receive from you." The Foreign Secretary, very skill- 
fully anticipating Jefferson's course, emphasized his own agree- 
ment with Monroe that the Chesapeake affair was "of itself of 
sufficient Importance to claim a separate and most serious consider- 
ation," not mixed with other issues. 19 

Poor Monroe! At the end of August he received James Madi- 
son's instructions to unite impressment and the Chesapeake affair. 
After his experiences with the Monroe-Pinkney treaty, he dared 
not deviate from his orders. He weakly put forward the American 
position first at an interview and then in a lame, watered-down 
official note. The Foreign Secretary replied with a strong com- 
munication, the fruit of two days' reflection in the country. He 
firmly declined to link the two issues. He denied that troubles over 
impressment grew out of British hostility toward America, insisting 
rather that the similarity of the two peoples caused unavoidable 
problems. Then, in a very characteristic passage employing phrases 
he had already used orally and taking advantage of Monroe's in- 
cautious admission that citizenship was difficult to determine, Can- 
ning wrote that "these Circumstances cannot furnish an argument 
for the Suspension of the exercises of the right with respect to 
America, unless it be contended that multiplicity of frauds and 
difficulty of detection are reasons against Suspicion, or motives for 
acquiescence." Canning closed by somewhat modifying the harsh- 
ness of his position, informing Monroe that he would send a special 
minister to Washington to try to settle the Chesapeake problem. 20 

Both parties knew who had won the duel. Monroe abandoned 
his efforts and, with relief, handed the London mission to William 
Pinkney. Canning congratulated himself on his success: "If they 
had taken our atonement by itself, as we offered it, they would have 

19 Monroe to Madison, Aug. 4, 1807, enclosing Monroe to Canning, July 29, 1807, 
and Canning to Monroe, Aug. 3, 1807, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XIII. 

20 Memorandum of conversation with Canning, n.d. [Sept. 3, 1807], James Monroe 
MSS, Library of Congress \ Monroe to Canning, Sept. 7, 1807, Despatches, Great 
Britain, Vol. XII j Canning to Monroe, Sept. 23, 1807, ibid. 

195 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

appeared to gain something. But they have so managed Matters 
that we shall now appear to bully them even in making reparation. 
Nothing could be more advantageous for us than the course which 
they have taken." 21 

Canning's appointment of George H. Rose as special emissary 
has sometimes been criticized, largely because Rose's father had a 
reputation as an Americanophobe. Rose at least was not Canning's 
first choice. The Foreign Secretary offered the job to Nicholas 
Vansittart, an important member of the Sidmouth faction. After 
consulting his political allies, Vansittart declined, primarily because 
he was to act as a mouthpiece rather than a negotiator, simply 
reiterating Britain's refusal to join impressment with the Chesa- 
peake affair and reasserting her demand that Jefferson withdraw 
his proclamation. 22 Rose, the second choice, agreed to go. 

Canning's instructions to Rose were fully as unrealistic as those 
Madison had sent to Monroe, and, by the mission, the Foreign 
Secretary merely sought to gain further delay while American 
tempers cooled. In January, 1808, Jefferson and Madison agreed 
to separate the Chesapeake and impressment questions, too late to 
secure the reparation they could once have gained. Canning now 
insisted that this must be preceded by revocation of Jefferson's 
proclamation. When, in violation of his instructions, Rose arranged 
a compromise on this matter, he still had other demands that Can- 
ning had instructed him to make. On their rejection, Rose broke 
off negotiations in March, 1808. By that time, five months after 
George Canning's official reply to Monroe, the Chesapeake issue 
had been joined by other subjects of complaint more impartially 
weighted between Britain and France. "The premature fury," 
wrote Rose, ". . . was too violent to last, the feelings excited are 
deadened, and it would be difficult to move the Nation to War." 2S 

21 Canning to Lord Boringdon, Sept. 30, 1807, Morley MSS, British Museum 
(Add. MSS 48218-48301), Add. MSS 48218. 

22 Vansittart to Canning-, Oct. 6, 1807, enclosed in Vansittart to Sidmouth, Oct 6, 
1807, First Viscount Sidmouth MSS, County Record Office, Exeter, Devon. See also 
Auckland to Grenville, Oct. 16, 1807, Boconnoc MSS (Papers of William Wyndham 
Grenville, Baron Grenville), Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Lord Auckland. 

23 Rose #14. to Canning, Feb. 18, 1808, FO 5/56. For an extended discussion 
of the Rose mission, showing the inflexibility of Canning's instructions, see Irving 
Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), pp. 404-418. 

196 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

In many ways. Canning could feel that he had satisfactorily 
handled the Chesapeake affair. At home., he had steered a care- 
ful course, one that dampened the initial emotional outburst in 
Berkeley's favor and yet avoided outright surrender. Diplomati- 
cally, he had acted cautiously until it seemed that America again 
intended to bluster rather than fight. Essentially his policy was 
delay, and he succeeded in his object. He might, more imagina- 
tively, have used the American retreat on impressment as the path 
to a settlement, but such a course presupposed greater respect for 
America and more humility than Britain had. Canning had escaped 
making an apology and yet had avoided war. 

A proclamation recalling British seamen to the Royal Navy, 
issued in October, 1 807, is another indication of Canning's attitude. 
This document, although often criticized by Americans as arrogant 
(John Adams later called it "that most atrocious of all violations 
of the Law of Nations"), undermined anti- American feeling by 
strongly reaffirming the right of impressment while at the same 
time publicly stating that Britain did not claim a right to search 
warships. Cobbett attacked it as a surrender j James Stephen be- 
lieved it a concession, but a wise one j Vansittart considered it a fool- 
ish abandonment of a bargaining point. 24 Thus one cannot accuse 
Canning and the other ministers of issuing a proclamation which, 
in the context, was anti- American. 

After the possibility of immediate war over the Chesapeake had 
ended, but well before that issue became a nagging, unpleasant 
memory, the British government proclaimed the Orders in Council 
of November, 1807. These orders were the Portland ministry's 
greatest single contribution to eventual war. They ended a short 
period of comparatively lenient treatment of American commerce 
signalized by moderation in the High Court of Admiralty. They 
checked a trend toward Francophobia in the United States, a trend 
only interrupted by the Chesapeake affair, and provided a principal 
field of controversy between London and Washington in later 
years. For these Orders in Council George Canning certainly bears 

24 John Adams to Benjamin Rush, Dec. 29, 1812, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), 
Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXIj Cobbetfs Register, XII, 642, 673-683$ 
Stephen, "Coup d'oeil on an American War," n.d. [Dec., 1807], Perceval MSS, 
33/98105; Vansittart to Sidmouth, Oct. 21, 1807, Sidmouth MSS, 

197 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

a large share of the responsibility. But he was not their author, 
urged some modifications, and would have preferred a different 
system. 

Long before November, 1 807, it was obvious that British action 
was in the wind. As early as February Perceval, then in opposition, 
called for a complete interdiction of trade between Europe and the 
two Indies, and Joseph Marryat's well-received pamphlet, Con- 
cessions to America the Bane of Britain, argued that the Caribbean 
colonies 3 economic plight sprang chiefly from a a relaxation of those 
maritime rights which our forefathers fought and bled to estab- 
lish.^ In July a House of Commons committee produced a strident 
report, ascribed by Pinkney to George H. Rose, which urged strong 
measures against American commerce in order to save West Indian 
trade. Even the risk of war was justified, the report maintained, 
since the "one grand and primary evil [is] ... the facility of 
intercourse between hostile colonies and Europe, under the Ameri- 
can neutral flag." The outcries of West Indian interests were 
echoed by the East India Company, suffering from the double 
pressure of oversupply and a reduced European market, and by 
some manufacturers, merchants, and shipowners formerly engaged 
in European trade. 25 Commerce declined in the summer of 1807, 
particularly after Napoleon stepped up enforcement of the Berlin 
Decree in August. By the year's end all northern Europe was closed 
to trade except Sweden, soon for that reason to be attacked by 
Russia at Napoleon's behest. The nation of shopkeepers seemed 
in imminent danger of insolvency. 

"The best way of protecting our own Commerce," Sir John 
Nicholl wrote in August, "is by pressing upon that of the Enemy. 

25 Henry Adams, History of the United States during the Administrations of Jeffer- 
son and Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1889-1891), IV, 8o~8ij Joseph Marryat, 
Concessions to America the Bane of Britain; or the Cause of the Present Distressed 
Situation of the British Colonial and Shipping Interests Explained, and the Proper 
Remedy Suggested (London, 1807)5 Pinkney to Madison, private, Dec. 31, 1807, 
Rives Collection j Wilson H. Elkins, "British Policy in Its Relation to the Commerce 
and Navigation of the United States of America from 1794. to 1807" (unpublished 
Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 1936), pp. 194-196} Alexander Baring, An Inquiry 
into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders in Council} and an Examination of 
the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral Commerce of America (London, 
1808), pp. i2. 

198 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

... If they can have no Commerce but through our means, they 
will resort to us." In August neither Nicholl nor James Stephen, 
who offered the same advice to Perceval, could bring the Cabinet 
to break its usual summer vacation. Six weeks later the ministers 
began to reassemble. Castlereagh wrote to Perceval on October I, 
urging retaliation against Napoleon's commercial assault. The next 
day the Sun announced that the government would retaliate in 
some fashion, and within a week the Times called for "the prohi- 
bition of all carrying trade whatsoever, except that of British manu- 
factures and colonial produce 5 and . . . the seizure of all ships 
sailing in the European seas, except such as are bound to or from 
England." 2e 

The Cabinet worked out the Orders in Council during a fort- 
night at the end of October. On the twelfth, Perceval circulated 
a long memorandum which argued that, since Napoleon had long 
since cast off the restraints of international law, England might act 
similarly. Neutrals, said Perceval, "if they complain justly, . . . 
will direct their complaint against those whose proceedings against 
us & our Trade, make it indispensable ... to retaliate." Anyway, 
neutrals had abandoned their privileged status, since a state that 
failed to force Napoleon to observe its rights "ceases to be a Neutral, 
by ceasing to observe that impartiality which is the very life and 
soul of neutrality." 27 These arguments formed the core of the 
British defense of the Orders in Council for the next five years. 

The American government never admitted that the priority of 
sin rested with Napoleon, usually pointing to Fox's Blockade in- 
stead. And even Lord Sidmouth, to say nothing of Jefferson and 
Madison, objected that it was unfair to assert that America had 
tolerated the Berlin Decree, thus forfeiting her claim to British 
leniency. At the time of the November orders, Perceval and his 
colleagues had no idea how the Americans would react to the first 

26 Nicholl to Canning, Aug. 15, 1807, FO 83/22051 Stephen to Perceval, Aug. 17, 
1807, Perceval MSS, 33/15 Castlereagh to Perceval, Oct. i, 1807, Charles W. Vane, 
Marquess of Londonderry, ed., Correspondence, Despatches, and Other Papers, of 
Viscount Castlereagh, Second Marquess of Londonderry (12 vols.j London, 184.8- 
1853), VII, 87-885 Sun, Oct. 2, 18075 Times, Oct. 6, 1807. 

27 Perceval memorandum, Oct. 12, 1807, Perceval MSS, 36/2. 

199 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

real enforcement of the decree. Of the ministers, only Bathurst 
questioned the right that Perceval postulated. Canning wrote, "I 
have never for a moment doubted the justice of retaliating to the 
full extent." He soon warned Monroe and Pinkney that since "the 
American Government has [not] taken any . . . effectual Steps, 
with respect to the decree of France," Britain reserved the right of 
retaliation. 28 

Details of the November orders proved more troublesome than 
the decision, in general terms, to act. Perceval had proposed to 
cut off trade only in colonial produce. In cabinet discussion his 
plan was considerably broadened, apparently largely at the sug- 
gestion of Westmorland, the Lord Privy Seal. PercevaPs plan, 
to leave to neutrals and all recognized that this meant chiefly 
the United States direct trade with France in their own produce, 
was replaced by a clumsily stated but fairly complete ban on all 
trade with France and her satellites save that which passed through 
Great Britain, paying duties to the Crown. 

Only two cabinet members, Bathurst and Canning, expressed 
serious misgivings. Portland entered a mild protest but was almost 
ignored. Bathurst criticized the new orders most strongly, both in 
PercevaPs original form and in the final version. Canning recog- 
nized the dangers of the nakedly selfish form taken by the orders, 
with their almost open purpose of gaining for Britain a near monop- 
oly of trade with the Continent. Rather cynically he suggested that 
he preferred to "keep out of sight" the most flagrant discrimination 
in favor of British trade. Like Portland, he favored a less extensive 
but even tighter blockade, one less offensive to neutrals: "I would 

28 Sidmouth to Bragge Bathurst [Dec. i, 1807], George Pellew, The Life and 
Correspondence of the Right Hon^ le Henry Addington, Viscount Sidmouth (3 vols.j 
London, 1847), H> 4^75 Bathurst memoranda, n.d., Perceval MSS, 36/305 Canning- 
memorandum, Oct. 14, 1807, *bid.; Canning 1 to Monroe and Pinkney, Oct. 22, 1807, 
FO 5/54. All studies of this problem, the most detailed of which is Adams, op. cit^ 
rest primarily on the Perceval MSS, which contain numerous cabinet memoranda. 
Most historians have based their conclusions upon excerpts cited by Adams and by 
PercevaPs biographer. Spencer Walpole, thus opening the way to possible error. Most 
of the memoranda are unsigned, or at best signed with only a scrawled initial. Walpole 
guessed at the authorship of most of them, but at least several of his guesses are open 
to criticism. The memorandum assigned by Adams to Hawkesbury is almost certainly 
by Westmorland, although Walpole marked it with Hawkesbury's name. The Perceval, 
Canning, Bathurst, Castlereagh and Portland memoranda are signed or titled. 

200 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

rather confine the measures to a part of the Countries in the occu- 
pation of the Enemy (a large part to be sure 5 France & Holland 
for instance) and apply it in all its rigour to that part, than extend 
it to the whole, & relax it generally by complicated exceptions and 
regulations." 29 While the United States certainly would not have 
silently tolerated such a scheme. Canning was either somewhat 
more respectful of American rights or more aware of the possibili- 
ties of diplomatic controversy than his colleagues. 

By the exchange of memoranda sketched above, the general line 
to be taken was decided by October 26, 1807. On November 10 
the semiofficial Courier announced that stringent new regulations 
were in the offing, regulations that might require temporary sacri- 
fices but would strike down the baneful American reexport trade. 
On the eleventh William Pinkney rushed to the Foreign Office 
to try to prevent action, but only the Under-Secretary was there to 
meet him. It was too late. That same day the most important new 
Orders in Council were issued. The orders were extremely difficult 
to understand committees of merchants visited the Foreign Office 
several times seeking enlightenment but Perceval's summary was 
fairly accurate: "If you [France] will not have our trade, as far 
as we can help it you shall have none. And as to so much of any 
trade as you can carry on yourselves, or others carry on with you 
through us, if you admit it you shall pay [us] for it." 30 

The cabinet members agreed to certain relaxations to make the 
orders more palatable to the United States. They did so although 
this weakened their attempts to establish a commercial monopoly. 
Canning exaggerated when he described the concessions as proof 
that England "was actuated by the same Sentiments of Moderation 
by which His Majesty's conduct has been uniformly governed." 31 
Britain might consider it a concession to permit American domestic 

20 Bathurst memoranda, n.d., Perceval MSS, 36/205 Bathurst to Perceval, Nov. 
5, 1807, ibid., 36/2122$ Canning- memorandum, Oct. 14, 1807, ibid., 36/5. 

30 Courier, Nov. 10, 1807$ Sun > Nov. n, 18075 Pinkney to Madison, Nov. 17, 1807, 
Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV $ Perceval to Abbot, received Dec. i, 1807, Abbot, 
op, cit., II, 134. 

31 Canning #10 to Erskine, Dec. i, 1807, Bernard Mayo, ed. Instructions to the 
British Ministers to the United States, 17011812, American Historical Association, 
Annual Report, 1936, III (Washington, 1941), 242246. 

201 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

produce, except cotton, to proceed to the Continent without paying 
a transit duty in England. The United States considered the direct 
trade unquestionably legal and knew that, except in cotton, there 
was little competition between British colonial and American prod- 
uce in the European market. The obvious selfishness o the duty on 
American cotton embarrassed Canning and his colleagues ; within 
a few months they placed American and West Indian cotton on an 
equal footing by forbidding all cotton shipments to the Continent. 
This negative gesture failed to satisfy Pinkney or his superiors. 32 

Two more important concessions appeared in the thicket of con- 
fusing regulations. Contrary to the Rule of the War of 1756, Brit- 
ain did not interrupt direct trade between enemy islands and the 
United States. America had always eagerly sought this trade, and 
the Cabinet hoped that to permit it would show Britain's modera- 
tion. Second, the Cabinet agreed, over Castlereagh's objections and 
contrary to Perceval's original plan, to permit America to reexport 
even the produce of enemy colonies through Britain to Europe 
upon payment of duties. These relaxations of the Orders in Coun- 
cil aimed, in Perceval's words, "to make it quite Clear ... to 
America if she is wise to prefer the Neutral Trade, that will be left 
to her, to the total stoppage of her trade with the Enemy, & with 
ourselves too which war might occasion." 3S 

The Times inveighed against "this system of concessions to 
Americans." Grenville, Grey, and company bitterly assailed the 
government for cooperating in Napoleon's project to destroy 
international trade. But most of the nation fell into line behind the 
government. All the important newspapers except the Morning 
Chronicle, even some that had advocated moderation during the 
Chesapeake crisis, supported the orders. The appearance of energy 
secured for them what Alexander Baring called "that ephemeral 
popularity which but too generally attends measures of novelty 
and violence." It would be months before their economic effect 
could be weighed. As one of Grey's lieutenants put it, "Nothing 

32 Canning to Erskine, separate, March 4, 1808, Mayo, op. cit., p. 248 and n.j 
Pinkney to Madison, Feb. 23, 1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV, 

3a Castlereagh to Portland, Oct. 26, 1807, Perceval MSS, 36/15-161 Perceval 
memorandum, Oct. 12, 1807, ibid., 36/2. 

2O2 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

can be worse than the present State of Trade and therefore every 
novelty, which holds out even a chance of Improvement, is wel- 
come." 34 In the spring of 1808 London and Liverpool merchants 
trading with America showed signs of restiveness, but the Orders 
in Council remained generally popular at least until the summer. 

At the parliamentary session beginning in January, 1808, the 
Opposition attacked the new policy. Perceval blandly denied 
charges that he was jealous of American prosperity or would wel- 
come a war with her. War would harm both (although America 
most), he said. "The prosperity of America was the prosperity of 
Great Britain, and he was as anxious to preserve peace with Amer- 
ica, consistently with the rights and interests of this country, as any 
man." But international conditions required vigorous action, and 
the Orders in Council could not be further tempered. Perceval 
and his colleagues therefore sought legislative authority for charges 
upon goods in transit to Europe. With Lord Henry Petty, Baring, 
and Auckland's son in the van and Howick, recently advanced 
to the Lords as Earl Grey by his father's death, sorely missed 
the Opposition charged against the bill. They never rallied more 
than a third of the House of Commons to their side. After a session 
lasting until six in the morning, the House approved the Orders 
in Council Bill, and before the end of March the Lords added their 
approval. Although he admitted that Opposition members, par- 
ticularly Petty, had often spoken ably, Perceval concluded with 
satisfaction that "the discussion . . . has set those orders so com- 
pletely in their right light that there is no chance of their being 
able now to make any impressions upon the public against them." 35 

Although neither Monroe nor Rose received the new regula- 
tions before departing for America, Canning soon sent Erskine a 
lengthy justification of the orders, pointing out the lucrative chan- 
nels still left open to American trade. After conversations in Wash- 
ington, the British minister reported, "this Government does not 



34 TimeSy Nov. 17, 1807$ Baring", o<p. cit. y pp. 10-11 j Tierney to Howick, Nov. 12, 
1807, Charles Grey, Second Earl Grey, MSS, The Prior's Kitchen, Durham University, 
from Tierney. 

35 Hansard, X, 329 and $assim; Perceval to George III, March 12, 1808, Royal 
Archives; Perceval to George III, n.d., ibid., fols. 14039-14040. 

203 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

view those Modifications of the Principle of Retaliation in as favor- 
able a light, as I was commanded by you to represent them." Nor 
did the United States accept the general principles asserted by 
Britain. The wilder Republicans considered the November orders 

tantamount to a declaration of war." Actually, they were both less 
drastic and more humiliating. As Admiral Mahan later observed, 
taxation of goods bound for Europe was "literally, and in no meta- 
phorical sense, the reimposition of colonial regulation." 36 The 
Cabinet hoped that Jeffersonian cowardice and national selfishness 
would lead the United States to accept the potentially profitable 
status left to it, and the government attempted to leave open just 
enough trade to seduce the Americans into this course. While the 
price offered for American neutrality was certainly low, until 1812 
the policy of the United States seemed to vindicate the political 
judgment of Perceval and his colleagues. 

America answered the increasing virulence of the Anglo-French 
war upon commerce with the Embargo. Most Englishmen agreed 
that this "most singular act, . . , little short of an absolute seces- 
sion from the rest of the civilized world," was legitimized by inter- 
national law, "however we may complain of the spirit which has 
produced it." 37 Some thought the Embargo would harm England 
almost as much as a war with the United States. But most Britons 
at first considered it a positive assistance, despite the loss of Ameri- 
can suppli eSj or at least more harmful to France than to the British 
Empire. By restraining American shipping and exports the Em- 
bargo virtually ended the problem of neutral trade with France 
and conferred upon Great Britain a near monopoly of trade with 
the few remaining neutrals. The rising challenge to Jeffersonian- 
ism and the return of unemployed seamen to British service also 
served British interests. So George H. Rose reported, and Erskine, 
a man of very different political attitudes, agreed with him. 

, George Canning accepted this reasoning. When Pinkney brought 
him official notice of the Embargo, the Foreign Secretary received 

Erskine # I2 to Canning, April 3, 1808, FO 5/575 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), 
Ma Y 7, 1808; Alfred T. Mahan, Sea Power in Its Relation to the War of xSxs (z 
vok ; Boston, 1905), I, 178. 
, Jan, 27, 1808. 

204 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

view those Modifications of the Principle of Retaliation in as favor- 
able a light, as I was commanded by you to represent them. 3 ' Nor 
did the United States accept the general principles asserted by 
Britain. The wilder Republicans considered the November orders 
"tantamount to a declaration of war." Actually, they were both less 
drastic and more humiliating. As Admiral Mahan later observed, 
taxation of goods bound for Europe was "literally, and in no meta- 
phorical sense, the reimposition of colonial regulation." 36 The 
Cabinet hoped that Jeffersonian cowardice and national selfishness 
would lead the United States to accept the potentially profitable 
status left to it, and the government attempted to leave open just 
enough trade to seduce the Americans into this course. While the 
price offered for American neutrality was certainly low, until 1812 
the policy of the United States seemed to vindicate the political 
judgment of Perceval and his colleagues. 

America answered the increasing virulence of the Anglo-French 
war upon commerce with the Embargo. Most Englishmen agreed 
that this "most singular act, . . . little short of an absolute seces- 
sion from the rest of the civilized world," was legitimized by inter- 
national law, "however we may complain of the spirit which has 
produced it." 37 Some thought the Embargo would harm England 
almost as much as a war with the United States. But most Britons 
at first considered it a positive assistance, despite the loss of Ameri- 
can supplies, or at least more harmful to France than to the British 
Empire. By restraining American shipping and exports the Em- 
bargo virtually ended the problem of neutral trade with France 
and conferred upon Great Britain a near monopoly of trade with 
the few remaining neutrals. The rising challenge to Jeffersonian- 
ism and the return of unemployed seamen to British service also 
served British interests. So George H. Rose reported, and Erskine, 
a man of very different political attitudes, agreed with him. 

George Canning accepted this reasoning. When Pinkney brought 
him official notice of the Embargo, the Foreign Secretary received 

36 Erskine #12 to Canning:, April 3, 1808, FO 5/575 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), 
May 7, 18085 Alfred T. Mahan, Sea Power in Its Relation to the War of 1812 (2 
vols.; Boston, 1905), I, 178. 

37 Times, Jan. 27, 1808. 

204 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

requested Bathurst to meet with him to discuss future policy. Gren- 
ville eased the government's path by pledging the Opposition to 
refrain from recriminations if the government rescinded the Orders 
in Council. In mid-April Auckland, who planned to attack the 
orders in the House of Lords, wrote to Grenville: "It was hinted 
to me today that it was desirable to postpone this subject for a few 
days when it was probable that something w d . be announced re- 
specting it." 40 

The Opposition, the country, and America did not have long to 
wait. As early as July, 1808, Earl Bathurst suggested that the 
orders be replaced by a strict, geographically less extensive block- 
ade of France and her immediate dominions, "a strong Order 
against France, which would not be liable to the present Objections 
& which America would certainly not feel as an advantage gained 
over us." Nothing came of this plan, which closely resembled Can- 
ning's suggestions of 1807, primarily because of the Cabinet's un- 
willingness to seem to surrender to the Embargo. Nor did the Earl 
secure cabinet approval when he put forward the same proposal 
in October. 41 In April, 1809, Bathurst and Canning tried again. 
The president of the Board of Trade and the Foreign Secretary 
agreed that the Embargo's impending repeal provided a good 
psychological setting, and Canning urged speedy action since a 
"fresh arrival from America might embarrass us." Bathurst circu- 
lated through the Cabinet a memorandum accompanied by a note 
of approval from Canning. Not a single minister objected to the 
general proposal, although Perceval apparently convinced them 
that the orders of 1807 should be gently replaced rather than 
directly repudiated. On April 27 and 28 the most important mer- 
chants trading with America, including Alexander Baring, met 
with Bathurst to discuss details of the new system. 42 

40 Auckland to Grey, Jan. 27, 1809, Grey MSS, from ist Ld. Auckland j Canning 
to Bathurst, March 24, 1809, Francis Bickley, ed,, Report on the Manuscripts of Earl 
Bathurst (London: Historical Manuscripts Commission, 1923), pp. 86-87$ Grenville 
to Grey, March 30, 1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Grenville 5 Auckland to Grenville, 
April 19, [1809], Boconnoc MSS, Lord Auckland. 

41 Bathurst memorandum, July 29, 1808, FO 5/61$ Bathurst to Perceval, received 
Oct. 21, 1808, Perceval MSS, 33/107-108. 

42 Canning" to Bathurst, April 7, 1809, Bickley, op. <;//, p. 875 Bathurst memoran- 

2O6 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The new Order in Council closely followed the original 
Bathurst-Canning plan. It declared a general blockade against 
Napoleon, his immediate satellites, and French colonies/ 3 but 
opened Germany and the Baltic to American commerce. The new 
decree strictly regulated the issue o licenses to trade with Europe, 
attempted to prevent discrimination against American ships, and 
reduced license charges, although all these rules later came to be 
violated. The government sharply lowered or entirely eliminated 
duties on goods in transit through the British Isles to Europe. 
These points went far to meet the American government's com- 
plaints against the British system in substance, if not in principle. 
The Orders in Council of November, 1 807, passed quietly away. 
In reply to an Opposition taunt, Perceval explained that "they 
were not actually rescinded, but they were put in a state of modifi- 
cation which amounted to nearly the same effect." 44 

The ministry hoped the new order would lessen friction with 
America, although ministers denied making any concessions and 
insisted, in public, that the Republicans had acted first, baring their 
teeth at Britain's enemy by cutting off trade with France and clos- 
ing American waters to French warships. While the United States 
did not recognize blockaded Holland as a Napoleonic satellite, 
nobody believed that an attempt to trade with that country would 
cause serious controversy. In any event, it was felt, America should 
be required to concede something. 45 The major question, whether 
the United States would consider the broad new blockade an effec- 
tive and legal one, passed by default. The Cabinet assumed, or 
strongly hoped, that disappearance of the orders of 1807 would 
lead to good relations with the United States. 

In Britain the ministry came under fire from two opposite direc- 
tions, although the parliamentary Opposition generally fulfilled 

dum, April 12, [1809], ibid., pp. 87-88; Canning" memorandum, March 30, 1809, 
ibid.) p. 895 Perceval memorandum, n.d., ibid., p. 895 Courier, April 28, 29, 1809. 

43 This last provision rescinded a concession contained in the orders of 1807. 
Perceval suggested a limited opening" of the British West Indies as an equivalent, 
but Liverpool and Eldon blocked this move. Perceval memorandum, n.d., Bickley, 
op. cit., p. 895 Liverpool memorandum, n.d., ibid.; Eldon memorandum, n.d., ibid. 

44 Times , April 29, 1809. 

45 Canning to Bathurst, private, April 15, 1809, Bickley, 0$. cit., p. 90. 

207 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

Grenville's pledge to keep silent. Conservatives objected that the 
government had truckled to the United States. Journalistic enemies 
of the regime loudly proclaimed their satisfaction that the govern- 
ment had finally seen the misguidedness of a policy that wiser 
men had always opposed. The Morning Chronicle positively 
crowed over the corpse of the November orders, and added, "What 
has induced Ministers to make such concessions, so contrary to the 
boasted policy they have hitherto promulgated, we do not pretend 
to determine" Privately, Opposition leaders of course agreed. Lord 
Grenville wrote, "Ministers have at last given up their nonsensical 
orders in Council." 46 

Ministerial papers attempted to tread a narrow line between 
these two attitudes. Pointing out that the Embargo had been re- 
pealed, they denied that the new order was a surrender to America, 
although emphasizing that Pinkney had "been heard to express 
himself in the highest terms of satisfaction, of the liberality and 
candour of his Majesty's Ministers." While the old orders had 
been effective, government supporters argued, the Cabinet now 
desired to test American bona fides by a wise experiment. The 
Morning Post wrote that "after experiencing the most beneficial 
effects from . . . the Orders in Council . . . , our Ministers 
have fairly met, by a liberal regulation of those Orders, the 
amicable provision of the last Act of the American Legislature 
[the Nonintercourse Act], in respect to the terms upon which its 
commercial intercourse with this country should be renewed." 
The new blockade, it was claimed, would actually operate more 
effectively against French commerce, and the measure would bring 
greater unity in England, "as it concedes some points much dwelt 
upon by the Opposition, in both Houses of Parliament." 4T These 
arguments were expressed in a defensive manner 5 they were also 
obviously contradictory. 

Less than eighteen months after issuing the Orders in Council 
of November, 1 807, the Portland government had in effect aban- 

46 Morning Chronicle (London), April 28, 1809$ Grenville to Grey, April 28, 
1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Grenville. 

47 Edinburgh Evening C our ant, May i, 1809; Morning Post) April 29, 1:809$ 
Caledonian Mercury, May i, 1809. See also Courier, particularly April 28, 1809. 

208 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

doned them. The Embargo was perhaps partially responsible for 
this, although Britain refused to act until the Americans had been 
driven from their ground and had provided a plausible opening 
through the Nonintercourse Act. The course of the war, and par- 
ticularly the shift of the Spanish Empire to the British side, im- 
pelled England in this direction, since the November orders be- 
came partially obsolete. Doubtless Erskine's reports, which grossly 
exaggerated the new administration's desire for an accommodation 
with England, led the Cabinet to believe James Madison would 
modify Jefferson's policy. At any rate, the British government 
did shift its policy at a critical moment in the war, did seek at least 
a tacit understanding with the United States. All that seemed re- 
quired was similar wisdom and good spirit on the part of the new 
American government. If the Foreign Secretary and his colleagues 
had been better informed about the situation in the United States, 
they would certainly not have embarked so hopefully upon this 
course. As one shrewd merchant engaged in American trade wrote, 
"a good has been done, but with an ill grace, and I fear more from 
necessity than choice. If however other concessions are made, al- 
most equally essential, I think a foundation will be laid for the 
restoration of ... friendly intercourse." * 8 The ministry was 
fully satisfied that it had taken an important step, and it sat back 
to await American plaudits. 

William Pinkney reacted ecstatically to the new policy. Officially 
he reported that "a great Step has been taken towards the complete 
accomplishment of our Wishes." In a private letter to the Presi- 
dent, he wrote of his "hope that this Measure will open the Way 
to Reconcilement between this Country and America. . . . Our 
Honour is now safe, and by Management we may probably gain 
every thing we have in View." Such disparate personages as Sir 
Francis Baring, John Trumbull, and Napoleon shared Pinkney's 
opinion. 49 At almost exactly the same time, however, that the new 

48 Mullett to Whitbread, May 3, 1809, Samuel Whitbread MSS, Southill Park, 
Biggleswade, Bedfordshire. 

49 Pinkney to Smith, May i, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI 5 Pinkney 
to Madison, private, May 3, 1809, Rives Collection; Sir Francis Baring to King, 
May 2, 1809, Rufus King MSS, New- York Historical Society, Vol. XII 5 Trumbull 

209 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

order was issued, across the Atlantic the President and Secretary of 
State Robert Smith concluded negotiations with David M. Erskine 
which granted America even more favorable terms. The decree 
for which Earl Bathurst and George Canning had labored merely 
puzzled Madison, led newspaper editors to suspect thai England 
planned to go back on concessions made through Erskine, and was 
only rarely recognized for what it was, a major shift in British 
policy. 50 

Late in 1 808 David Montagu Erskine held important conversa- 
tions with American leaders. At the first of these, with President 
Jefferson, Erskine clearly showed that he feared war would follow 
embargo. First Madison and then Gallatin and Robert Smith 
played upon this fear, but Canning's subsequent actions indicate 
that Erskine's government did not take it very seriously. The 
Foreign Secretary found far more interesting a second aspect of 
Erskine's reports. The President and the President-elect allowed 
Erskine to understand that the administration preferred peace to 
war, although, they said, it was under heavy pressure from Repub- 
lican rank and file. In a private talk at Gallatin's home, the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury went even further (or so at least Erskine 
reported; Gallatin subsequently challenged his account). As did 
Madison in subsequent instructions to Pinkney, Gallatin pointed 
out that when nonintercourse passed it would place England and 
France on an equal footing. With it would end the discrimination 
of the Nonimportation Act and Jefferson's post-Chesapeake proc- 
lamation and thus the excuse for British complaints against Ameri- 
can bias. The Secretary added that a law forbidding the employ- 
ment of foreign seamen would soon come before Congress. Erskine 
claimed that Gallatin even stated that the United States might 
modify its opposition to the Rule of the War of 1756. The British 



to King 1 , April 30, 1809, ibid.; Champagny to Hataterive, May 13, 1809, Archives des 
Affaires )trangeres, Correspondance Politique, fitats-Unis (photostats, Libiary of 
Congress), Vol. LXII. 

50 Madison to Jefferson, June 10, 1809, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The Writings of James 
Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1900-1910), VIII, 62-63$ Enquirer (Richmond), 
June 1 6, 18095 Independent Chronicle (Boston), June 15, 1809$ Annals, nth Cong., 
istand 2d sess., pp. 1452, 1645. 

2IO 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

envoy believed that the incoming administration would embrace 
an opportunity to settle difficulties with Britain. 51 

The Foreign Secretary reacted optimistically to Erskine's al- 
ready exaggerated accounts. He thought that, chastened by the 
Embargo and by French insults, the United States would accept 
almost any terms. In a private chat at a diplomatic dinner and sub- 
sequently during a long Sunday conference at his home, George 
Canning told William Pinkney what he planned. Pinkney had no 
powers to negotiate and therefore merely urged Canning to send 
new directions to Erskine. 52 By failing to criticize the proposals, 
Pinkney seemed to indicate that he did not find them upsetting. 
This unfortunate reserve encouraged the Foreign Secretary to 
send visionary instructions to his agent in America. 

Canning's instructions he signed a whole series on January 23, 
1 809 repeated the ideas put forward to Pinkney. The first pro- 
vided for a Chesapeake settlement, but the commercial question 
was central. The Foreign Secretary offered to repeal the Orders 
in Council if America formally accepted three stipulations: British 
trade would be freely admitted to American ports while that of 
France remained excluded, opposition to the "made in Britain" 
Rule of the War of 1756 would cease, and Washington would 
permit the Royal Navy to seize American ships violating their own 
country's ban upon trade with France. 53 This last requirement, 
which really granted England the right to execute American law, 
showed how distorted was Canning's view of the situation in the 
United States. As Rufus King later commented, "should the U.S. 
[have] consent [ed], ... in their own Eyes, as well as in the 
eyes of others, not excepting those of England, they would appear 

51 Memorandum of Nov. 9, 1808, Paul L. Ford, ed., The Writings of Thomas 
Jefferson (10 vols.j New York, 1892-1899), I, 335-3385 Erskine #46, #4-7) 
#50 to Canning, Dec. 3, 7, 8, 1808, FO 5/58. For Gallatin's account see Gallatin 
to Erskine, Aug. 13, 1809, Henry Adams, ed., The Writings of Albert Gallatin (3 
vols.j Philadelphia, 1879), *> 458-461- 

52 Pinkney to Madison, private, Jan. 23, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI. 
58 Canning #i-#4 to Erskine, Jan. 23, 1809, Mayo, op. cit., pp. 264-267. 

Formal approval of these instructions and of the appointment of a special agent to 
carry them to America was not sought from the King until February 3, 1809, which 
suggests that cabinet discussions followed preparation of the instructions, but there is 
no written evidence that this is so. Canning to George III, Feb. 3, 1809, Royal 
Archives. 

211 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

to have voluntarily submitted to Terms of Humiliation and Dis- 
honor." 54 

Early in April, two and a half months after being framed, the 
instructions arrived at Washington by special messenger. Since 
Erskine had no desire to humiliate the United States, he abandoned 
some of the Foreign Secretary's requirements of his own volition, 
while Madison, working through the new Secretary of State, 
Robert Smith, induced him to drop others. In arranging reparation 
for the Chesapeake, the English negotiator failed to mention Can- 
ning's insistence upon formal revocation of the proclamation ban- 
ning British warships. He did get the Americans to drop a demand 
that Berkeley be punished, but in return he accepted a note, nomi- 
nally from Smith but actually written by the President, which 
insultingly declared that the United States believed punishment 
"would best comport with what is due from His Britannic majesty 
to his own Honor." 55 

The young Englishman knew Smith and Madison would never 
formally accept Canning's three stipulations, even to gain repeal 
of the orders. He did not reveal that they were sine qua non y s. 
Instead, knowing that he violated his instructions but insisting that 
he adhered to their spirit, the envoy accepted informal American 
explanations. The final settlement, the first important executive 
agreement in American history, took the form of an exchange of 
notes: Erskine promised that the Orders in Council "will have 
been withdrawn, as respects the United States on the lo th , day of 
June next," and Smith replied that trade with Britain would ac- 
cordingly be reopened. As Canning had originally suggested, 
Erskine and Smith left the working out of details until a special 
envoy could come from England. "In the mean Time," Erskine 
wrote, "no injury can be derived, I conceive, from that conditional 
Agreement." 56 

News of the agreement reached London by semaphore from 
Portsmouth on May 21. The next day Canning drafted an angry 

54 King; to Trumbull, July 31, 1809, King MSB, Vol. LXXX. 

55 Erskine $19 to Canning, April [18], 1809, and enclosures, FO 5/63. 
50 Erskine ^20 to Canning, April 20, 1809, an< J enclosures, ibid. 

212 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

rebuke to Erskine, stopping just short of formal disavowal o the 
arrangement. On the twenty-third the Cabinet discussed the situ- 
ation for four hours, which suggests that no formal decision had 
yet been made 3 there were even rumors, highly improbable but 
possible, that a majority of the Cabinet desired to accept the agree- 
ment, but that George III blocked this because of the insulting 
passage on Berkeley's punishment. 57 If Canning wavered tempo- 
rarily, he soon returned to his usual firmness. At a levee the next 
day, the Foreign Secretary drew Pinkney aside, "and, after ob- 
serving that he was sure that I had anticipated what he was about 
to say, informed me that they must disavow M r . Erskine," 58 Earl 
Bathurst informed merchants trading with America that the gov- 
ernment would not ratify the agreement, and a short time later 
Canning told the House of Commons that Erskine had acted in 
complete disregard of his instructions. Formal disavowal soon fol- 
lowed. 

Lord Grenville privately declared himself grieved that Britain 
had turned its back upon an opportunity to "cultivate . . . the 
only connection which promises us any real advantage." But Lord 
Grey was cautious, and the party newspaper did not exploit the 
issue at the time (although later it did so). Even the Times, then 
in a maverick stage, reversed itself within a week after initially 
praising the agreement as a step toward amity. 59 Not a single im- 
portant public voice challenged the government. 

As a matter of fact, both Opposition and ministerial papers criti- 
cized the ministry for its attempt to cushion the impact of repudia- 
tion in America. The government announced that American ships 
that sailed for Europe in a belief that the Orders in Council had 
been lifted would be permitted to complete their voyages. Annoyed 
at this concession to their rivals, 200 London merchants attended 
a protest meeting and sent a delegation bearing resolutions to wait 

57 Joy to Madison, May 24, 1809, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress; John 
Melish, Travels in the United States of America^ in the Years 1806 & i8oj, and 
1809, /<?/<?, & 1811 (2 vols.j Philadelphia, 1812), I, 355. 

58 Pinkney to Smith, May 28, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI. 

59 Grenville to Grey, May 26, 1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Grenville j Grey to 
Grenville, May 25, 1809, Boconnoc MSS, M r . Grey IA Howick Earl Grey, 1808- 
18135 Morning Chronicle, Jan. 21, 1 8 1 1 5 T*Vtf, May 23, 25, 26, 31, 1809. 



213 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

upon the Board of Trade. Along the same line, the Times com- 
plained that, "as American warehouses are now full of goods, they 
will of course be emptied, and the Continental markets supplied, 
we may say for years, after the permission to trade with them 
directly has ceased: so that the injury is not limited to the duration 
of two months, but will be sensibly felt by the English merchant, 
so long as the hoard of merchandize poured into the Continental 
markets during those two months is in a state of consumption." eo 
By its gesture to American sensibilities the government reaped far 
greater unpopularity than it did by rejecting the agreement itself. 

The disavowal nevertheless deserves very serious consideration. 
Why did Canning and his colleagues reject this settlement? As a 
preliminary, it must be emphasized that the minister departed 
widely from his instructions. Samuel Whitbread rashly accused 
Canning of misleading the House of Commons on the content of 
the instructions, but later he had to withdraw this charge. Other- 
wise the Opposition, except Erskine's father, found it best to ignore 
this point. The British, if not yet the Americans, considered the 
violation of diplomatic instructions a serious matter, seldom to 
be condoned, particularly in a young neophyte. 

Specifically, Erskine ignored orders by failing to insist upon any 
of Canning's three stipulations. In the Foreign Secretary's view, 
silence or mere oral agreement on these matters meant either that 
Britain abandoned an important position or that Madison had 
changed his attitude in an unfavorable way since Erskine's earlier 
reports. As Canning agreed, the Rule of the War of 1756 lay 
dormant in 1809, since France had lost not only all her own 
colonies except Guadeloupe, but also the trade of the Spanish 
Empire. 61 Still, the ministry wanted America on record, since the 
rule might again become important if Napoleon gained control 
of the Spanish dominions. It was far from acceptance to have the 
Secretary of State state orally that the rule would cause no trouble 
in the future, thus leaving him free to declare, as he did later, that 

60 Leeds Intelligencer > May 29, 18095 minutes of May 29, 1809, Board of Trade 
Records, Public Record Office, BT 5/19$ Times, May 26, 1809. See also Courier, 
May 26, 18095 Morning Chronicle, May 25, 27, 1809. 

61 Pinkney to Smith, June 23, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI. 

214 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

the United States continued to deny its validity. Similarly, Can- 
ning considered important Erskine's failure to win agreement that 
the Royal Navy might seize ships violating American law by trad- 
ing with France. Pinkney had not protested when the Foreign 
Secretary put forward this idea. Canning did not consider it equiva- 
lent for Smith to state,, as Erskine declared he did., that violators of 
American law could not expect assistance from their government 
if they fell into British hands, and Smith later denied he had even 
gone this far in the Washington conversations. 62 

Most important of all, Erskine did not secure a promise that 
the Americans would continue to prohibit trade with France. The 
Foreign Secretary later said "it was the sine qua non of the arrange- 
ment, that America should maintain her non-intercourse against 
France," and his conversations with Pinkney indicate that he con- 
sidered this the critical point. Erskine's agreement left the way 
open for an American understanding with Napoleon. As a matter 
of fact, just after the Smith-Erskine exchange, the Secretary of 
State directed Armstrong to offer to reopen Franco-American 
trade if, in reply to repeal of the November orders, Napoleon 
would remove "the illegal parts of the French decrees," specifically 
not including those portions of the Berlin Decree that most seri- 
ously harmed Britain. 63 Had he known this, Canning doubtless 
would have felt even more certain of the wisdom of rejecting the 
Erskine agreement. He had no desire to hand the Americans a 
lever they might use to pry open French ports for their own pur- 
poses. 

Lord Erskine may have been correct when he said, in defense 
of his son, that if a formal agreement had been signed and sent to 
a Senate "divided by contentious parties . . . not only the whole 
grace of the thing would have been lost, but so much ill blood 
stirred up ... that the whole thing must have blown up." 64 

62 Smith to Erskine, Aug. 9, 1809, enclosed in Erskine $34 to Canning, Aug. 31, 
1809, FO 5/63. 

^Hansard, XIV, 1025$ Pinkney to Smith, May 28, June 23, 1809, Despatches, 
Great Britain, Vol. XVI 5 Smith to Armstrong, April 21, 19, 1809, Instructions, 
Vol. VII. 

64 Lord Erskine to Grey, Aug. 27, 1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Erskine. 

215 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

Canning perhaps paid too little attention to American constitutional 
practices and party politics. Possibly Smith and Madison would 
have shifted the orientation of American policy if Canning had 
endorsed the agreement. But the important point is that if the 
three conditions were only informally accepted, the United States 
was not bound. Canning's central purpose had been to tie America 
for the future. 

Erskine completely misread Canning's intentions. On the basis 
of Erskine's reports, the Foreign Secretary believed it just possible 
that the new Republican administration would transform the policy 
of the old. Thus, although Canning spoke with cautious approval 
of the first "Symptom of a System of Impartiality," he really 
sought something more than an equally balanced America. As he 
put it, "the Sincerity of the good disposition professed by ... 
the new American Administration, is the point the most important 
in the View of the British Government." Would America, while 
staying out of the war, join Britain in economic pressure upon 
France? This was the question. The restrained, lawyerlike attitude 
of Madison and Smith did not meet Canning's hopes j their casu- 
istry over his stipulations destroyed hopes of finding a nonbelliger- 
ent ally. Canning did not share the obvious American desire to 
work toward eventual removal of all British and French restrictions 
on trade. He sought a system whereby Britain should "relax or 
modify His [Majesty's] Measures of Retaliation and self-Defence, 
in proportion as those of Neutral Nations should come in aid of 
them and take their Place." 6r> 

Then, of course, there was the important question of prestige. In 
Canning's view Erskine had acted "as if His Majesty had proposed 
to make Sacrifices to propitiate the . . . United States, in order to 
induce it to consent to the Renewal of Commercial Intercourse." 66 
Doubtless the Foreign Secretary, who found the American habit 
of publishing diplomatic correspondence annoying, thought ahead 
to the inevitable day when President Madison would publish evi- 

65 Canning 1 $2, $4 to Erskine, Jan. 23, 1809, Mayo, of. cit, 9 pp. 264, 2675 
Canning $"3 to Jackson, July i, 1809, ibid.) p. 284. 
QQ Ibid., p. 283. 

2l6 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

dence o his triumph, evidence showing how skillfully he had 
forced Britain to abandon conditions she had set. The arrangement 
Erskine accepted did no more than meet an offer previously ex- 
tended both diplomatically and, through the Nonintercourse Act, 
legislatively. England had steadily rejected suggestions of recipro- 
cal repeal since the early days of the Embargo. Must she now 
confess her weakness by assenting? Most Englishmen saw only 
one possible answer to this question. As Canning said to Pinkney, 
in the existing state of the world, Britain not only could not con- 
cede, she must not even seem to concede. 

Finally, and this is seldom noticed, the Erskine-Smith under- 
standing undermined the Order in Council of 1809. Lord Erskine 
later declared the real issue was not whether his son had violated 
his instructions, "but whether Ministers after they had them- 
selves revoked the orders in council by their order of the 26 th of 
April last, which reduced the differences with America to literally 
nothing were justified in not giving a latitude to their minister there 
to settle the small remainder." 6T His lordship missed the point. 
The April order had the form of a spontaneous act, not a surrender. 
This concealed, carefully framed offer to the United States re- 
opened much European trade j however, the Netherlands remained 
excluded so that the United States, which claimed a right to trade 
there, would also have to recede from its position. Whether Madi- 
son would have accepted this offer is problematical, but Erskine's 
broader concessions relieved him of the necessity of deciding. While 
George Canning would have preferred a tight agreement along 
the lines of his instructions, he must have been very angry that the 
less ambitious but still helpful plan embodied in the new Order 
in Council was never seriously tested. 

Historians have often criticized Canning and the Cabinet for 
acting on such reasoning, arguing that rejection of the agreement 
helped to bring war three years later. Would the Erskine agree- 
ment really have ended discord? Later on Napoleon was shrewd 
enough to announce voluntarily the repeal of his decrees; in 1809 
he might have tried the same gambit under pressure, and if he 

67 Lord Erskine to Grey, Sept. 28, 1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Erskine. 

217 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

had, we can only guess the consequences. Even without Napoleonic 
repeal, it is by no means certain that the Erskine agreement would 
have welded the United States to Britain for any length of time. 
The issue of impressment, for one thing, still remained, quiescent 
but potentially explosive. Actually, each side sought something 
quite different: America wanted neutral commerce (especially 
with France and her dependencies) restored to the seas 3 Britain 
wanted a nonbelligerent ally in the struggle against Napoleon. 

The ministers, then, may have shown little imagination j they 
may be criticized for refusing to run risks in the search for a raf- 
yrochement. They certainly showed that they valued apparent 
advantages (actually largely illusory) for British commerce higher 
than American friendship. They did not act as they did simply 
because they detested Republicanism, James Madison, or the 
United States. If anyone deserves chief blame for the Erskine 
agreement, it is the man whose name it bears. He first misled 
Canning about the situation in America, then fumbled the Foreign 
Secretary's attempt to bind the United States to Britain's side, and 
also fatally undermined the gesture put forward in the Order in 
Council of April, 1 809. 

In American hearts David M. Erskine aroused false hopes, the 
blighting of which contributed to a general feeling of frustration, 
national dishonor, and dissatisfaction. Probably no other event 
from 1783 to 1815 was so generally celebrated as the Erskine 
agreement. Church bells rang, cannons boomed, candles illuminated 
windows, and, most important of all, the heavy flow of commerce 
to England was, albeit briefly, renewed. For the benefits of the 
agreement, some pious folk looked "with sentiments of fervent 
gratitude, beyond human agency, up to that awful Being, who 
guides and governs the affairs of men." Most Americans con- 
sidered the Deity a passive spectator, and one of the attractive 
things about the Erskine agreement was that credit could be 
claimed by both parties. "One side rejoice because they think that 
the Embargo &c a . has brought England to terms," wrote Rufus 
King, and "the other side rejoice because they believe that the 
opposition to the late Measures of Congress has obliged the ad- 

218 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

ministration to abandon their system, and to accept a Reconcilia- 
tion with England." 68 

Then, three months later, came the news of Britain's disavowal. 
Ending the happy competition for credit, the parties now sought 
to apportion blame. Extreme Federalists blamed the administra- 
tion for its trickiness with Erskine, Erskine for his simple-minded 
abandonment of his instructions j sometimes they pointed out that, 
under the new Order in Council, "our trade will have the same 
latitude, it was to enjoy by Mr. Erskine's arrangements and as 
qualified by our own laws, except Holland, and French Italy." 
Administration journals, and in private such Federalist leaders as 
King and Christopher Gore, declared that Canning's three condi- 
tions were entirely inadmissible. Republicans argued that the 
entire affair had probably been a trick to open a temporary chan- 
nel of trade (two-thirds the normal amount of British exports went 
to the United States in 1809 as a result of the temporary relaxa- 
tion of controls), and asserted that rejection of an agreement con- 
cluded in good faith "has capped the climax of atrocity towards 
this country." President Madison reluctantly broke his vacation at 
Montpelier to confer with the Cabinet at Washington. In some 
embarrassment, for his authority to act was uncertain, he issued on 
August 9 a proclamation again prohibiting trade with England. 
America had been humiliated once more. The Secretary of the 
Treasury gloomily commented that 

we are not so well prepared for resistance as we were one year ago. All or 
almost all our mercantile wealth was safe at home, our resources entire, 
and our finances sufficient to carry us through the first year of the con- 
test. Our property is now afloat; England relieved by our relaxations might 
stand two years of privations with ease; we have wasted our resources with- 
out any national utility ; and, our treasury being exhausted, we must begin 
any plan of resistance with considerable and therefore unpopular loans. 60 

68 Timothy Woodbridge, An Oration, Delivered at Great Harrington . . . July 4, 
1809 (Stockbridge, 1809), pp. 15-165 King to Trumbull, April 24, 1809, King 
MSS, Vol. LXXX. 

69 Connecticut Courant (Hartford), July 26, 18095 National Intelligencer (Wash- 
ington), July 26, 18095 Gallatin to John Montgomery, July 27, 1809, Albert Gallatin 
MSS, New-York Historical Society. 

219 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The Erskine agreement, like the Embargo, had ended in total de- 
feat. This time, save perhaps for a certain precipitancy in accept- 
ing Erskine's promises, the administration could not be blamed. 

Canning knew that rejection of the agreement would seriously 
affront the United States. He attempted to repeat his post-Chesa- 
peake delaying tactics, particularly by the dispatch of another spe- 
cial envoy. For the mission the Foreign Secretary very unwisely 
selected Francis James Jackson, an arrogant man whose appoint- 
men to America Rufus King had blocked in 1801. Jackson it was 
who had transmitted the ultimatum that preceded the bombard- 
ment of Copenhagen, an ominous augury, although this time Jack- 
son bore no ultimatum. Through him, the Foreign Secretary again 
offered to settle the Chesapeake affair, despite the offensive passage 
on this subject in Smith's note. Canning wisely instructed his emis- 
sary not to press the original British offer on commerce, but rather 
to offer to transmit to London any American suggestions, and he 
did recapitulate the advantages conferred upon American com- 
merce by the order of 1 809. Although the instructions contained 
much argumentative and condescending language, Canning re- 
frained from directing Jackson to read them to the Secretary of 
State. Their substance was about what might have been expected, 
for Canning believed that Madison, Smith, and Gallatin had in- 
veigled Erskine into a one-sided agreement which they knew vio- 
lated his instructions. The Foreign Secretary expected American 
anger to last for some time, but nothing in the Republican record 
suggested that the President or Congress would do much more 
than complain. Since British warehouses bulged with goods just 
received from America, Canning saw little reason to take the diplo- 
matic initiative. 

Secured from adversity by an exceptionally high salary, the 
promise of at least one year's service, an entourage of eighteen 
servants, and the company of the formidable Prussian baroness he 
had married, "Copenhagen" Jackson reached Washington in Sep- 
tember. He took over the Erskines' double house. "A Scotchman 
with an American wife who would be a fine lady," the fastidious 
envoy commented after observing his quarters' uncleanly condt- 

70 Canning #i-#s to Jackson, July i, 1809, Mayo, op. cit., pp. 277-287. 

22O 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

tion, "are not the best people to succeed on such an occasion." So- 
cially, Jackson received great consideration from Robert Smith 
and the President ; professionally, he suffered a real defeat at 
their hands. Instead of simply following Canning's instructions 
to preserve silence after repeating the Chesapeake offer, Jackson 
let himself become involved in the sort of disputation at which 
Madison excelled. Goaded by American notes, signed by Smith 
but written by the President, Jackson committed one indiscretion 
after another. In November the President quite justifiably declared 
that he would have nothing more to do with Jackson and would 
insist on his recall. The baroness angrily reported to her brother- 
in-law, "Francis being accustomed to treat with the civilized courts 
... of Europe and not with savage democrats, half of them sold 
to France, has not succeeded in his mission/ 3 and Jackson himself 
sent the Foreign Office a forty-five-page apologia which took the 
legation secretary fourteen hours to copy. 71 But Madison had j had 
his triumph. "Copenhagen" Jackson spent the rest of his allotted 
year traveling about the United States. He accepted entertainment 
by Federalist bigwigs ready to welcome any enemy of Madison, 
and he prepared and subsidized propaganda in antiadministration 
journals. 72 

Shortly after Jackson's arrival in America, Canning's intrigues 
against Castlereagh blew the British government apart. Canning 
passed into the political wilderness. Until he returned to the For- 
eign Office in 1 822, Canning had little influence upon policy toward 
America, although in 1812 he supported the Opposition call for a 
committee of inquiry into the Orders in Council. At that time 
he made it clear that, while he still favored commercial warfare 
against France, he strongly objected to the license system and par- 
ticularly to its selfishness. 73 

When Canning left office in the fall of 1809, Anglo-American 

71 Jackson to Mrs. Jackson (mother), Oct. 7, 1809, Lady Jackson, ed., The 'Bath 
Archives: a Further Selection from the Diaries aud Letters of Sir George Jackson (2 
vols.j London, 1873), I, 17; Mrs. Francis J. Jackson to Sir George Jackson, Nov. 21, 
1809, tbid. 9 I, 575 Jackson #19 to Canning, Nov. 16, 1809, FO 5/64. 

72 Josephine Fisher, "Francis James Jackson and Newspaper Propaganda in the 
United States, 18091810," Maryland Historical Magazine, XXX (1935)) 931135 
Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record Office, FO 353/58-61 'passim. 

73 Hansard, XXI, 1139-1149. 

221 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

relations were strained. They had deteriorated since the fall of the 
Ministry of All the Talents. However, by comparison with his suc- 
cessor, the pompous and inflexible Marquis Wellesley, Canning 
followed a liberal American policy. The chief charge against him 
is the appointment of Jackson, a bad choice for a mission of tran- 
quilization, but even this failure had no immediate practical con- 
sequences. Despite defects of character which irritated Americans 
and later influenced historians, George Canning was not an Ameri- 
canophobe. He favored policies more moderate than those advo- 
cated by his colleagues and far more intelligent than those for 
which the British press shrilly called. The Foreign Secretary pre- 
vented the Chesapeake affair from becoming even more serious 
than it was. He questioned the wisdom of the Orders in Council 
of November, 1 807, and doubtless supported the almost unnoticed 
concessions they contained. He and Bathurst secured the virtual 
repeal of those orders through the new policy adopted in 1809. 
Perhaps Britain should not have rejected the Erskine agreement, 
but it was the minister himself, not Canning, who created the crisis, 
and even here the government attempted to lessen American re- 
sentment by conceding special privileges to ships that sailed after 
the agreement was signed. Thus, under Canning's leadership, 
Britain made several gestures to the United States. These conces- 
sions failed in their purpose, primarily because Canning and all 
England misunderstood Jeffersonianism and overestimated the 
amount of condescension America would tolerate. A lack of vision, 
a failure of understanding, rather than malevolence, may be 
charged against George Canning. 



222 



CHAPTER 



VII 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 



"The Lord the Mighty Lord must come to our Assistance, or I fear 
we are undone as a nation." * Thus wailed a Republican leader, 
not merely a carping Federalist, at the end of February, 1 809. But 
Jehovah did not deign to aid his chosen people. Instead, He sent 
James Madison as his vice-gerent, and the new President was no 
Moses. Madison never pointed out any route to a promised land 
of peace and plenty, and for more than two years the United 
States wallowed in purposeless humiliation. 

Although Federalism made a striking comeback in 1808, recap- 
turing New England, Madison easily won election as Jefferson's 
successor. Vice-President George Clinton, an ambitious schismatic, 
could not even gain a majority of the electoral vote of his own 
state of New York. In Virginia, where James Monroe encouraged 
the use of his name against Madison, the administration ticket 
beat him by five to one. Federalism, bankrupt and divided, no 

1 Macon to Nicholson, Feb. 28, 1809, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Con- 
gress. 

223 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

longer had a truly national appeal. Madison won almost by de- 
fault. 

The new president took up his station on March 4, 1809. "I re- 
pair," he said, "to the post assigned me with no other discourage- 
ment than what springs from my own inadequacies to its high 
duties. 53 This conventional self-depreciation seemed sincere on this 
occasion, for as Madison began his inaugural address he was pale 
and trembling. His audience strained to hear an oration that proved 
to contain nothing striking. In a dull, often platitudinous way, the 
President recited his principles in a series of clauses rather than 
individual sentences. Some Federalists, comparing the inaugural 
address with Jefferson's, concluded that the new administration 
would be more moderate. Actually the speeches simply reflected 
the different styles of thought of the two Republicans. The Na- 
tional Intelligencer described the speech as "chaste and nervous," 
meaning forceful, but actually "nervous" might better have been 
used in the more modern sense. The President apparently realized 
that his administration had not begun favorably. At the inaugural 
ball that evening he "seemed spiritless and exhausted," not tri- 
umphant. As soon as decency permitted, he hustled off to bed. 2 

Several years later an exceptionally scurrilous Federalist print 
unfairly described James Madison as the "political 'pirnf to Thomas 
Jefferson, and Vice-Roy to the Grand Emperor of France." The 
President disliked Napoleon as much as he disliked Perceval, and 
he seldom sought Jefferson's advice. Madison's mistakes were his 
own. Enemies (and even Republicans like Senator Worthington) 
thought him weak and irresolute. "Something may be expected 
from his timidity," the London Morning Post predicted, "but 
nothing from his justice or his liberality." Friends (and General 
Turreau) agreed with Gallatin that "Mr. Madison ... is slow 
in taking his ground, but firm when the storm arises." 3 Even his 

2 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 466-4685 Margaret B. Smith to Susan B. Smith, 

March , 1809, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The First Forty years of Washington 

Society . . . the Family Letters of Mrs. Samuel Harrison Smith (London, 1906), 
pp. 58-64; National Intelligencer (Washington), March 6, 1809. 

3 Federal Republican (Baltimore), Jan. 27, 18125 Roy J. Honeywell, "President 
Jefferson and His Successor," American Historical Review, XL VI (19401941), 64 

224 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

most loyal supporters did not claim that the President was a natural 
leader. 

The selection of a secretary of state revealed Madison at his 
worst. He planned to nominate Gallatin, but Senate opposition 
frightened him. Rather than fight, Madison at first thought of pur- 
chasing Senator Samuel Smith's support by offering the Treasury 
to the Senator's brother. When Gallatin, arguing that Robert 
Smith had scarcely distinguished himself as secretary of the navy, 
objected on the reasonable ground that Madison's plan would 
saddle him with the work of two departments, the President de- 
cided to leave his chief lieutenant at the Treasury. He named the 
utterly incompetent Robert Smith to the Department of State. 
This arrangement had no advantage save that it postponed quar- 
rels with Samuel Smith and Senator Giles, who, eager to secure 
the State Department for himself, had spearheaded the opposi- 
tion to Gallatin. Smith's appointment brought a disloyal subor- 
dinate into the administration's inner circle. It convinced ambitious 
congressmen that the new administration could be defied with im- 
punity and forced the President to take onto his own shoulders 
most State Department business. 

This episode merely marked the beginning of Madison's 
troubles. Gallatin aroused lesser men's jealousy, and his advance- 
ment to second position in the party hierarchy increased the num- 
ber of his enemies. The Secretary fought constantly with the 
Smiths, and the two brothers sometimes found allies in their rela- 
tive, Wilson C. Nicholas, and the erratic, ambitious Giles. De- 
spite Giles's untrustworthiness, Madison let him continue as nom- 
inal administration leader in the upper house. In January, 1809, 
congressional votes, nominally on naval policy but actually chal- 
lenges to Madison and Gallatin, showed how the President had 
lost control. More than half the Republican senators and one-third 
of the representatives deserted their leaders. 4 



75; Morning Post (London), April 17, 18095 Gallatin to Nicholson, Dec. 29, 1808, 
Henry Adams, The Life of Albert Gallatin (Philadelphia, 1879), p. 3 8 4- 

4 Gallatin memorandum, "The Navy Coalition o 1809," n,d., Albert Gallatin 
MSS, New- York Historical Society. 

225 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Seldom has Congress floundered more visibly than in the ten 
weeks from December, 1808, to Madison's inauguration. All 
agreed the nation must find some foreign policy upon which it 
could stand. But Jefferson had abdicated, Madison did not re- 
place him, and rebellious congressional cliques found common 
ground only in attacks upon authority. "I do not believe," David 
M. Erskine reported, "that there are ten men who think alike upon 
any one important measure." Federalists opposed both war and 
commercial restrictions in fact, everything. Some Republicans 
wanted to continue the Embargo system $ nonintercourse was orig- 
inally conceived as an adjunct to the Embargo, and in a last spasm 
the Enforcement Act of 1809 passed. Others, like Giles, George 
W. Campbell, and Attorney General Rodney, personally favored 
a declaration of war on one or both belligerents. Perhaps the larg- 
est group simply drifted, in Joseph Story's words, "without a guide 
or the wish for a guide." The net result was chaos. "You will see 
with regret," the President-elect wrote Pinkney in February, "the 
difficulty experienced in collecting the mind of Congress into some 
proper focus. On no occasion were the ideas so unstable and so 
scattered." 5 

Gallatin believed that above all the United States must not 
show the white feather by abandoning resistance. "If the Embargo 
is taken off/' he wrote, "I do not perceive yet any median between 
absolute subjection and war," 6 and he and presumably Madison 
concocted a plan to slide the nation toward war. They and friends 
in the legislature decided to continue the Embargo until June, with 
an understanding that Congress, in a special session, would then 
declare war against those who continued to mistreat American 
commerce. If the announced intention to go to war frightened Brit- 
ain or France, or if the American people became belligerent enough 
to support a declaration, or if European events made the com- 

5 Erskine $10 to Canning, Feb. d, 1809, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 
Office, FO 5/62; Story to Fay, Jan. 9, 1809, William W. Story, Life and Letters of 
Joseph Story, I (Boston, 1851), 1771835 Madison to Pinkney, Feb. u, 1809, 
Letters and Other Writings of James Madison (Congressional ed.j 4 vols.j Phila* 
delphia, 1865), II, 429. 

6 Gallatin to Nicholson, Oct. 28, 1808, Nicholson MSS. 

226 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

batants change their commercial policies, such a course might end 
in triumph or at least decision. All were unlikely. The proposed 
policy essentially only postponed the issue and sought to purchase 
acceptance of the Embargo for six more months by promising to 
lift it in the spring. 

As secretary of state and president-elect, Madison might have 
been expected to launch the new policy. Instead the task fell to 
Gallatin, who prepared a long paper designed to prepare the way 
for action. On November 22, 1808, Congressman Campbell pre- 
sented this manifesto to the House of Representatives. After re- 
viewing the disputes with England and France, the report declared, 
"There is no alternative, but war with both nations, or a continu- 
ance of the present system." Selective war or reopened commerce, 
which Britain's sea dominion would enable her to monopolize, 
would have the effect of alliance with one of the offending powers 
against the other. Although Campbell's Report stopped short of 
calling for a declaration of war, it did suggest that war might soon 
be forced upon the United States. The Tennessee congressman 
asked his colleagues to approve resolutions asserting their inten- 
tion to maintain American rights, closing American ports to the 
offending colossuses, and speeding military preparations. 7 The 
House completed action on Campbell's resolutions within a month 
and then resolved in favor of a special session at the end of May. 

So far so good, but behind the fagade lay rotten timbers. Fissures 
had already appeared, particularly in substantial Republican defec- 
tions in balloting on Campbell's resolution against trade with Brit- 
ain and France. New England Republicans pressed for an escape 
from the Embargo before June, and Southerners and administra- 
tion supporters sought to keep them in line. The leader of the New 
England group, Ezekiel Bacon, pessimistically described the situa- 
tion at the end of January in a letter to Joseph Story, who had re- 
turned to Boston: 

Our Southern friends . . . now tell us that they are entirely willing to 
limit the Embargo, if we will at the same time unite in authorizing Letters 

7 Annals, loth Cong., id sess., pp. 514-521. 

227 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

of Marque to issue upon its repeal, that they are willing to support our com- 
mercial rights by the present System or by War as we shall think best, but 
that they will never consent to take non intercourse & non-importation as 
a substitute for the Embargo, that they will in Preference to this give up 
the whole ground of resistance to belligerent aggressions. ... I am satis- 
fied that N. England will not bear the Embargo . . . [or] War, the 
other parts of the union will support their commercial rights in no other 
Way, because they say the Nation can do nothing short of it honorably. 
The Result, in my opinion is that the rights of Commerce will be abandoned 
by the Nation. 8 

House action on resolutions presented by Wilson C. Nicholas 
confirmed the accuracy of Bacon's prediction. Nicholas 5 proposal, 
that at a date to be fixed, presumably in June, the United States 
repeal the Embargo and use force to reestablish its rights, was the 
logical capstone to the structure that Gallatin and his friends de- 
sired. This added burden turned the fissures in the facade into 
ever-widening cracks which brought down the whole structure. 
The Virginian, in effect paraphrasing the argument of Campbell's 
Report, declared that he had always believed that "when the 
embargo failed, we must resort to the valor and patriotism of our 
citizens. Sir, we have too much reason to believe that the moment 
is at hand when nothing else can extricate us from our difficulties." 
The House refused to follow Nicholas either in his logic or his 
patriotism. In the debate only John W. Eppes supported his col- 
league without reserve- other members explored alternatives rang- 
ing all the way from immediate war to total submission. By an 
approximate two-to-one margin the House defeated a proposal to 
fix June I as the date for the decisive shift from Embargo to force, 
primarily because congressmen were unwilling, or believed New 
England unwilling, to tolerate the Embargo even that long. Then 
it voted approval of the section repealing the Embargo, to take 
effect within a month. On the evening of February 5 "a large & 
commanding Caucus of 50 or 60 was summoned," Bacon reported, 
"at which we nerveless seceders were pressed by all the force & 
all the weight of the Government machine to meet on the ground 

8 Bacon to Story, Jan. 22, 1809, Joseph Story MSS, Library of Congress. 

228 



HUMILIATION 

of immediate or contingent War." Bacon and Orchard Cook an- 
swered harangues by Nicholas, Eppes, Giles, and other bellicose 
Republicans. The seceders kept their nerve. 9 

The Gallatin-Nicholas-Campbell plan collapsed in a shambles. 
"The only honorable course was from Embargo to war," Nicholas 
wrote to Madison. "I fear we cannot now obtain it, and I fear we 
must submit to the plan least disgraceful." 10 The next day con- 
firmed Nicholas 5 fears, for the House defeated his proposal to 
vindicate American rights by force. Since, of Nicholas' scheme, 
only Embargo repeal remained, and that at an early date, the 
House had in effect voted in favor of submission to European 
arrogance only eight weeks after Campbell's nonsubmission resolu- 
tion had been well-nigh unanimously approved. The Republicans 
desperately caucused again, ultimately agreed that they could not 
agree on any course to vindicate the nation's honor, and decided to 
shift responsibility to the Foreign Relations Committee. Many 
Republican rebels and Federalists opposed this step, fearing that 
the committee might attempt to reverse the decision rescinding the 
Embargo, and reference to the committee was secured by the nar- 
row margin of sixty-five to fifty-five. Obviously no new bill, to 
stand a ghost of a chance of passage, could require very much in 
the way of national sacrifice. 

The House committee and Senator Giles both produced plans 
designed to conceal American disgrace as far as possible. The 
House version, presented by Wilson C. Nicholas for a committee 
of which he, Campbell, and Bacon were the most prominent mem- 
bers, apparently owed much to the suggestion of the President- 
elect, 11 who belatedly made his wishes known. It proposed only 
to prohibit trade with Britain and France and to close American 
ports to their armed vessels. In the Senate the proposal which a 
Federalist called "the hopeful and lowly begotten Child of Farmer 
Giles" was somewhat bolder. In addition to provisions like those 

9 Annal$ y loth Cong., zd sess., p. 1172$ Bacon to Story, Feb. 5, 1809, Story MSS. 

10 Nicholas to Madison, Feb. 9, 1809, William C. Rives Collection, Library of 
Congress. 

11 Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), pp. 
4.78-479. 

,229 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

put forward in the House Giles proposed to grant to the President 
the power to reopen trade with either country, should it cease to 
pillage American commerce, and to issue letters of marque against 
the nation that continued its unlawful edicts. Giles admitted that 
the plan did not meet his own wishes, which were for war. He 
hoped that by spring the country would be ready for a declaration, 
considered this the best stopgap that could be found, and warned 
against adopting any lesser plan: "Strike only one key lower, sir, 
and I fear it will end in national disgrace and dishonor." 12 

While the Senate accepted the lead of the Virginia musician, the 
House preferred to play a lower note. In the upper chamber Fed- 
eralists argued that, since Giles's plan virtually invited indirect 
or illegal trade with the major belligerents, it could not really be 
intended as a measure of coercion and must therefore be "nothing 
more than a part of that miserable mosquito system, which is to 
sting and irritate England into acts of hostility." 13 Although half 
a dozen dissidents, including William H. Crawford and Nicholas 
Gilman, joined with an equal number of Federalists to oppose it, 
a bill was jammed through in one day, its supporters declining to 
reply to their critics. The House of Representatives thereupon 
dropped its own bill, which nobody defended with even a sem- 
blance of enthusiasm. The low-noters, however, easily struck out 
letters of marque, the chief attraction to the proponents of vigor. 
On February 2,5, 1 809, administration supporters, led by Madison's 
brother-in-law, Congressman Jackson of western Virginia, tried 
unsuccessfully to restore letters of marque or add other positive 
provisions. Twice they sought adjournment to rally their dispirited 
forces. Speaker Varnum's vote defeated this maneuver, 14 and the 
resistance of Jackson and his friends collapsed. Two days later 
the bill passed by a vote of eighty-one to forty. Both Federalists 
and disappointed Republicans opposed it or, like Taggart on the 

12 Tallmadge to Tapping Reeve, Feb. 27, 1809, Charles S. Hall, Benjamin Tall- 
madge (New York, 1943), p. 2015 Annals^ loth Cong 1 ., 2d sess., pp. 353387. 

13 Annals, loth Cong., 2d sess., p. 407 (Bayard). 

14 As an indication of the rot within Republicanism, it is interesting to note that 
at the beginning of the session Varnum had been prepared to support continuation 
of the Embargo or a declaration of war. Varnum to Eustis, Nov. 19, 1808, William 
Eustis MSS, Library of Congress. 

230 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

one hand and Jackson and Campbell on the other, declined to 
vote. The Senate accepted this lesser version of its own bill the 
next day, with reluctance and greater opposition. 

The bill passed solely because it represented the lowest common 
denominator between those who would accept any substitute simply 
to confirm escape from the Embargo, and those who desired to 
make some sacrifices in defense of national interests and honor. 
Compromise is one of the strongest features of the American legis- 
lative system, but the Nonintercourse Act carried it to extremes. 
As a bitter Republican put it, just before the House vote, "the 
passage of this bill would be a novelty in legislation, for ... it 
had not a friend in the House." Moreover, the final result was a 
defeat for congressional supporters of the incoming administration, 
a defeat for which James Madison was at least partially responsible. 
The administration undoubtedly desired a bill at least appearing 
to be the prelude to forceful measures, not simply a retreat from 
the Embargo. But after Gallatin's initial efforts executive leader- 
ship virtually collapsed. Although Madison perhaps provided at 
least the language of Wilson C. Nicholas 5 proposal, the President- 
elect made no strenuous efforts to get it passed, hastily accepted 
its defeat and suggested the futile measure of nonintercourse as a 
substitute, and failed to lift a finger in support of letters of marque. 
"The fact is," Ezekiel Bacon wrote to Joseph Story, "the admin- 
istration have been completely beaten ... by the Non Inter- 
course." 15 Bacon asked Story to keep the information secret. Why, 
it is difficult to determine, for nothing could conceal the executive's 
political poverty. 

The Nonintercourse Act contained scraps of various plans. The 
act repealed the Embargo, closed trade, both export and import, 
with the British Empire and the areas controlled by Napoleon 5 
prohibited armed British and French ships from entering Ameri- 
can ports 5 and authorized the President to reopen trade with a 
power that ceased to violate American maritime rights. Nobody 
seriously believed that England and France, able to stand up 

15 Annals , loth Cong., ad sess., p. 1539 (William Milnor) 5 Bacon to Story, 
Feb. 26, 1809, Story MSS. 

231 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

against the Embargo, would be effectively coerced by this lesser 
pressure. "We have trusted our most precious interests in this leaky 
vessel," scoffed John Randolph in one of those colorful metaphors 
that studded his speeches, "and now, by way of amendment, we 
are going to bore additional holes in this machine, which, like a 
cask, derives all its value, if it have any, from being water-tight." 
Everyone knew that once American ships left their harbors they 
would go where they chose, for, as the Richmond Enquirer put 
it, the "calculation, that you can permit your vessels to go to sea, 
and whilst at sea, restrain them in their traffic, is void." In the first 
four months of the new administration seventy-nine ships sailed 
from New York in nominal search of a market in the Azores. 
There is no reason to believe that merchants elsewhere engaged in 
evasion on a lesser scale. 16 Here was commercial warfare clothed 
in provisions most troublesome to the United States itself, most 
burdensome to the honest American merchant. 

Without extorting concessions from Downing Street in exchange, 
the new system actually favored Britain over France. The Em- 
bargo had hurt Britain more than France since she carried on 
larger commerce with the United States; the Nonimportation Act 
and the Chesapeake proclamation singled out Britain for special 
resentment. The new act, closing American harbors to both coun- 
tries' armed vessels and prohibiting importations from either, put 
the rivals on an equal basis in law. In practice, these provisions 
actually worked against France, since the French had few over- 
seas alternatives as export markets or points of shelter for their 
ships. "This decision," the French foreign minister complained, 
"is unfavorable to France against which the United States can have 
no complaint that she has attempted to invade their sovereignty 
nor to have committed acts of violence against their coasts and their 
vessels." 17 

16 Annals , loth Cong., zd sess., p. 1466$ Enquirer (Richmond), Feb. 10, 18095 
Herbert Heaton, "Non-Importation, 1806-1812," Journal of Economic History, I 
(1941), 192. Per contra, not a single ship sailed from New York for the Azores while 
American commerce with Britain was opened by the Erskine agreement. Ibid. y p. 193. 

17 Champagny to Hauterive, June 13, 1809, Archives des Affaires trangeres, 
Correspondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXII. 

232 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Above all, the partial resumption of trade obviously favored 
England. The Royal Navy would make sure that relatively few 
American ships slipped into enemy ports, whereas the French 
could hope to intercept only a small proportion of those ships that 
chose to violate the law by sailing to England. Furthermore, within 
a short time a lively business developed in neutral ports, where 
British ships bearing English manufactures exchanged cargoes with 
American vessels carrying raw materials from the United States. 
Once again the Royal Navy saw to it that France did not similarly 
profit. Minister Turreau reported to Paris that "of every one hun- 
dred ships which leave the Ports of the Union for the high seas, 
the real object of ninety of them will be to satisfy the needs and 
the desires of England. 3 ' 18 

These effects of the new law, with the disgraceful scenes that 
had accompanied its passage, led Englishmen to consider it a vic- 
tory. Even before the act passed, David M. Erskine predicted 
that "it would be rather a nominal Prohibition than a rigorous 
Enforcement," and he never changed his opinion. Newspapers 
that supported the Portland ministry exulted over the American 
surrender. William Cobbett, who did not like the British Cabinet, 
grudgingly admitted that it had gained a victory. The Americans, 
wrote Cobbett, "know that their cargoes will come to England. 
. . . Aye, and they intend they shall come here, too ; only their 
silly, their empty pride, will not let them acknowledge it. . . . No 
triumph can be more complete than that of ministers, in this 
case." 19 Not for years did the United States recover from the 
effect of the Nonintercourse Act. 

With this feeble weapon the new administration faced the Euro- 
pean titans. Ritualistically, Secretary Smith wrote Pinkney and 
Armstrong that, if one power lifted its decrees, the special session 
of Congress planned for the spring would "authorize acts of hos- 
tility on the part of the United States against the other," Neither 

18 Turreau 9^13 to Minister of Foreign Relations, April 15, 1809, ibid-. Since 
Anglo-American trade was free for several months after the Erskine ageement, it is 
impossible to determine from annual statistics how much illegal trade was carried on. 

19 Erskine #12 to Canning, Feb. 10, 1809, FO 5/62$ Colberts Political Register 
(London), XV (1809), 533. 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Britain nor France, nor the American government itself, can have 
taken this very seriously. For the Americans, the conversations 
with David M. Erskine in the middle of April offered far more 
promise. They led to the temporary reopening of trade and ap- 
parent reconciliation with England. Seventy-two American vessels 
reached Liverpool in a five-day period in June, and Minister Tur- 
reau left Washington to avoid riotous celebrations. At its special 
session Congress promptly passed a law continuing nonintercourse 
with France. It did not even take up more stringent measures, as 
Smith had indicated it would, but David M. Erskine reported 
that, if France remained obdurate, these would probably follow 
soon. Then, in midsummer, there arrived news that Canning had 
rejected his subordinate's undertaking, primarily, Pinkney told 
Madison, because faltering at the last session of Congress had con- 
vinced Britain of America's "Inability to persevere in a System 
which was on the point of accomplishing all its Purposes." 20 An- 
gry, weak, baffled, and uncertain, Madison's government returned 
to the grounds of the Nonintercourse Act. 

The conversations with Francis James Jackson, which provided 
the administration with a technical diplomatic triumph, did not 
result in any substantive advantages. The special envoy declined 
scornfully to show any anger over the reclosing of British trade, 
observing sarcastically that "it was for America to determine 
whether it would be for her advantage to convey her Productions 
and receive those of other Countries through a circuitous Route, 
and by the expensive Intervention of a third Party." Nor did 
Jackson believe that the failure of his mission would be followed 
by hostilities: "That there is an Intention in this Government to 
go to War with Great Britain I do not believe; their Views do not 
assume that Magnitude; and if they did, support would not be 
given by the Country at large." New instructions sent to Pinkney 

20 Smith to Pinkney, March 15, 1809, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VII 5 Smith to Armstrong, March 15, 
1809, ibid.; memorandum of June 15, 1809, enclosed in Joseph Bailey to Canning 1 , 
June 17, 1809, FO 5/665 Turreau $ : ^^ to Minister of Foreign Relations, June 10, 
1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIIj Erskine #28 to Canning, July 3, 1809, FO 5/635 
Pinkney to Madison, private, Aug. 19, 1809, Rives Collection. 

234 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

in January, 1810, proved this accurate, for in them the American 
government took the initiative in seeking an accommodation de- 
spite the insults it had received. 21 

The only possible excuse for inviting a further rebuff was the 
hope that the reconstruction of the British ministry would lead to 
a policy more favorable to the United States. For months, with the 
tacit encouragement of colleagues who later abandoned him, Can- 
ning intrigued for Castlereagh's removal from the War Office, and 
failure of the Walcheren expedition brought these intrigues to a 
head. Tangled negotiations followed. The upshot was the departure 
from the Cabinet of both rivals (at a subsequent duel Castlereagh 
wounded Canning) and continuation of the government under 
PercevaPs leadership. The Duke of Portland, whose incompetence 
had been accentuated by a mild stroke, was put out to grass. The 
new ministry seemed very weak. Grenville and Grey rejected over- 
tures, Canning carried his followers (few in numbers, but effective 
workers) into opposition, and the Sidmouths remained outside the 
government. For some weeks offices went begging, and the Morn- 
ing Chronicle sanctimoniously complained that "it is really dis- 
graceful to a great Empire, that PERCEVAL and Co. should be 
allowed ... to put up to a sort of Dutch auction, the Great Of- 
fices of Government." When the Cabinet was finally completed, 
the Times expostulated, "Surely this is not to be borne." 22 Political 
experts agreed that the government would have to tread warily 
if it wished to retain power for even a few months. 

Since the Cabinet had divested itself of imaginativeness in oust- 
ing Canning and had shucked off at least the traditions of Whiggism 
by retiring Portland, only its weakness was encouraging to the 
United States. The State Department received word from its rep- 
resentative in London that, "though the Members of the late 
Cabinet, who have shewn themselves particularly hostile to our 
Rights and Interests, . , . are to be at the Head of the new Gov- 
ernment, they will be less adventurous and more manageable than 

21 Jackson #7, #19, to Canning-, Oct. 17, Nov. 16, 1809, FO 5/645 Smith to 
Pinkney, Jan. 20, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII. 

22 Morning Chronicle (London), Oct. 31, 1809; Times (London), Nov. i, 1809. 

235 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

heretofore on all American Topicks." The President was not so 
optimistic. He believed the change "likely to make bad worse" 
unless the affairs of England were brought to an "extremity" by 
"the quackeries and corruptions of an administration headed by 
such a being as Perceval." 23 

Richard Colley Wellesley, Marquis Wellesley, the one im- 
portant infusion of new blood, surprised Canning and the Oppo- 
sition, both erstwhile political allies, by accepting the Foreign 
Office. The marquis liked office, he knew that the ministry would 
give determined support to his brother in the Peninsula, and Perce- 
val needed whatever abilities and parliamentary accretions he could 
find. While not without capacity, as his service in India showed, 
Wellesley had most of Canning's failings and few of his strengths, 
although, primarily because his public papers had no fire, he never 
affronted American opinion as his predecessor had done. His per- 
sonal attitude toward the United States is practically indiscernible, 
since he generally accepted the Cabinet's lead. As this suggests, 
Marquis Wellesley's most notable characteristic was sloth. In the 
winter of 1810-1811 no instructions, other than formal circulars, 
issued from the Foreign Office, and Francis James Jackson later 
commented that Wellesley "never goes to the Office, and is visible 
nowhere but in his harem." George III, who detested Wellesley, 
had urged that Bathurst continue in the office he had taken 
ad interim. By that time, however, florid letters were already en 
route from Seville, announcing that "I have obeyed the Sum- 
mons of my Sovereign, & ... I enter the King's Councils 
with a firm intention of devoting my exertions to His Majesty's 
cause." 24 

Wellesley's response to the demand for Jackson's recall illus- 

23 Pinkney to Smith, Oct. 5, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI 5 Madison 
to Jefferson, Nov. 6, 1809, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The Writings of James Madison 
(9 vols.; New York, 1900-1910), VIII, 78-79. 

24 Jackson to George Jackson, Feb. 22, 1 8 1 1, Lady Jackson, ed., The Bath Archives: 
a Further Selection from the Diaries and Letters of Sir George Jackson (2 vols. 5 
London, 1873), *> aitf; George III to Perceval, Nov. 5, 1809, Royal Archives, 
Windsor Castle 5 Wellesley to Mulgrave, private, Oct. 30, 1809, Wellesley MSS, 
Series II, British Museum (Add. MSS 37*74~373i8), Add. MSS 37295. See also 
Wellesley to Perceval, private, Oct. 30, 1809, Royal Archives. 

236 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

trates his laziness. Early in 1810, when William Pinkney handed 
him a note on this subject, Wellesley's comments led Pinkney to 
believe it would not cause trouble. Although prompt action might 
have lessened American anger, six weeks elapsed before the For- 
eign Secretary acted. In March he finally prepared a reply de- 
signed, as he told the King, "to avoid all topics of acrimonious 
discussion, to render justice to M r Jackson's honest zeal for Your 
Majesty's service, & to conciliate the Government of America, 
without any compromise of the dignity of Your Majesty's Govern- 
ment." His note, intended to justify the envoy's motives without 
committing itself on the propriety of his actions, was so carelessly 
worded that Americans interpreted it as an outright attack upon 
the good faith of their government. A declaration that a charge 
d'affaires would succeed Jackson, a comparatively mild reproof if 
the hiatus between envoys did not last too long, became an added 
insult when months passed without any evidence that Wellesley 
had even begun to search for a successor. Although the British note 
did not please William Pinkney, when he learned of the American 
reaction to it he hastened to assure the President that "it is not so 
bad in Intention as it is in Reality, nor quite so bad in Reality as it 
is commonly supposed to be. It is the production of an indolent 
Man." 25 

If repudiation of the Erskine agreement, the installation of a 
new Cabinet, and the Jackson affair showed Madison he could not 
count on English good will, so too Napoleon's action demonstrated 
that the new administration needed more vigorous support than 
the Nonintercourse Act to gain its ends with that enemy. In May, 

25 Pinkney to Smith, March 21, 1810, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI; 
Wellesley to George III, March 13, 1810, Royal Archives ; Wellesley to Pinkney, 
March 14, 1810, enclosed in Pinkney to Smith, March 21, 1810, Despatches, Great 
Britain, Vol. XVI; Pinkney to Madison, private, Aug. 13, 1810, Rives Collection. 
Characteristically, Wellesley did not prepare instructions to Jackson until a month 
after Pinkney had been told that the minister would be recalled. Wellesley $i to 
Jackson, April 14, 1810, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to 
the United States , 1 7 p //<?/ 2, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1036, 
III (Washington, 1941), 302. Long before this the delay was already bothering 
Wellesley's colleagues, as their minutes on and suggested changes in the note to 
Pinkney demonstrate. Wellesley to Pinkney, draft, n.d., Wellesley MSS, Add. MSS 
37291, fols. 282-285; Perceval to Wellesley, n.d., ibid., Add. MSS 37295, fol. 439. 

237 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

1809, John Armstrong asked France, in response to the new 
American law, to modify or repeal her decrees, even clandestinely 
if necessary. Urged on by his foreign secretary, fearful of the new 
Order in Council's effect on American opinion, and briefly alarmed 
by Erskine's settlement, Napoleon considered concession. In the 
confused days after Aspern and Esslihg he found time to prepare 
a decree restoring American commerce to its status before the Milan 
Decree. Then word reached Schoenbrunn, where the Emperor 
had his headquarters, that the British government had repudiated 
Erskine. The threat of an Anglo-American reconciliation evap- 
orated, and the Nonintercourse Act failed to chastise or tempt 
Napoleon. In June Champagny directed authorities left behind at 
Paris to temporize with Armstrong. 26 

That summer, his position bolstered by the victory at Wagram, 
Napoleon stepped up his assaults on American commerce. On Au- 
gust 22, in a note prepared under his master's eye, the Duke of 
Cadore (to which title Champagny had advanced) informed Arm- 
strong that France would not relax her decrees until the British 
withdrew theirs. 27 For the rest of the year the French seized what- 
ever American ships they could and forced their satellites to adopt 
a similar policy. 

When Congress met in November, 1 809, America faced dolorous 
prospects. William A. Burwell, who favored effective action against 
Britain, confessed that "the spirit of the nation is evaporated, and 
... I despair of taking any measure . . . which would not 
meet with such opposition as to make it useless." French seizures, 
more numerous than Britain's, offset Jackson's gaucheriesj men of 
trade and some farmers desired free commerce above everything 
elsej and internal rivalries and lack of leadership destroyed the 
Republican party as an instrument of legislation. The President's 
annual message, which criticized the European powers and con- 

26 Armstrong to Minister of Foreign Relations, May 2, 1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. 
LXII; Champagny to Napoleon, May 26, 1809, ibid.; Napoleon to Champagny, 
June 10, 1809, Correspondence de Napoleon 1** (32 vols.j Paris, 1858-1870), XIX, 
no-in 5 Champagny to Hauterive, June 13, 1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIL 

27 Cadore to Armstrong, Aug. 22, 1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXII; Napoleon to 
Cadore, Aug. 17, 21, 1809, Correspondance de Nafoleon, XIX, 414, 438439. 

238 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

gratulated Americans on their good health and prosperity, re- 
frained entirely from recommending any policy. 28 In the first 
months of the session little was done. The Senate voted to outfit 
American frigates, a cheap gesture attractive to many only because 
it promised to embarrass Gallatin and the Treasury. Both cham- 
bers condemned Jackson. The effect was largely nullified by vo- 
ciferous opposition in the House, where debate often lasted until 
dawn and forty-one congressmen ultimately voted against a reso- 
lution supporting their own government. 

Once again the Secretary of the Treasury attempted to give some 
direction to Congress. His annual report revealed the first deficit 
in years and pointed out that partial commercial restriction was 
unenforceable. Therefore, the Secretary declared, the United 
States must either return to complete embargo or abandon the at- 
tempts at restriction, a so far at least as they affect the commerce 
and navigation of the citizens of the United States." Nathaniel 
Macon introduced a bill drafted by Gallatin which adopted the 
second alternative. The bill freed American merchantmen to go 
wherever they chose and permitted importation of British and 
French goods brought in American vessels. At the same time 
Macon's Bill #i closed American ports to merchantmen and 
warships of England and France, promising to remove this pro- 
hibition if either power rescinded its decrees. Since French ships 
could not and British merchantmen did not often come to the 
United States, this proposal could hardly be coercive. It would 
at least shift the burden of restriction from Americans to their 
oppressors, reopen trade, and assure increased receipts for the 
Treasury. The administration intended, as Bacon put it after talks 
with Gallatin, "to have a principal regard for our own Convenience, 
keeping up at the same time a sort of Protestation against the in- 
fringements of our rights." 29 

More subtle possibilities also existed. Britain might retaliate 
against the ban on her ships by excluding American merchantmen, 

28 Annals, nth Cong., ist and zd sess., p. n68j Richardson, o$. cit. y I, 473-477. 

29 Adams, o$. cit. y pp. 412-4135 Annals, nth Cong., ist and zd sess., pp. 754~755 J 
Bacon to Story, Nov. 27, 1809, Story MSS. 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

as Jackson seems to have wished $ if she did so, by her own actions 
England would make effective the ban on trade which supporters 
of the Embargo had long insisted would force her surrender. Or, 
as Jackson, Turreau, and Timothy Pickering believed, the free- 
ing of American ships might be "for the Purpose of bringing on a 
War with Great Britain by the Collisions that will arise out of an 
Attempt in this Country to renew it's commerce with France." 30 
(Some Republicans did find this a reason for swallowing the bill, 
but it probably played no part in the original plan.) Finally, a small 
number of bitter Federalists, particularly Barent Gardenier and 
Philip B. Key, favored Macon's Bill # i because "in its operation 
it will be complete non-intercourse with France and free trade with 
England" since the Royal Navy could control the destination of 
American ships. 31 

Ranged against the bill, in addition to Republican factionalists 
who opposed everything from the other end of Pennsylvania Ave- 
nue, was a motley alliance of Federalists and war men. The Fed- 
eralists desired completely free trade, and feared British retalia- 
tion if Macon's bill passed. Republican radicals wished to try 
convoys, letters of marque, war anything to show more spirit. 
"If the conduct of the nation were not more energetic," one of 
them said, ". . . we should forfeit the little character we had 
acquired, and call down on us the contempt of every nation on 
earthy we should become contemptible even in our own eyes. . . . 
We had . . . tried this system for several years j it had done no 
good, and it was time to try some other." 32 This argument was 
two years premature in 1810. By the narrow margin of seventy- 
three to fifty-two, the moderates and the administration men gained 
passage of the bill after three weeks of debate. 

Far more promptly, the Senate demonstrated its wishes. With 
Samuel Smith in the van it emasculated the bill on the very first 
day of debate, eliminating one provision after another until only 
the ban upon armed ships remained. Senator Smith later claimed 

30 Jackson #z6 to Canning, Dec. 13, 1809, FO 5/64. 

31 to Jackson, Jan. 22, 1810, Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record 

Office (FO 353/58-6i), FO 353/6i. 

32 Annals, nth Cong*., ist and ad sess., p. 1161 (Sawyer). 

24O 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

that he opposed the House bill because it would provoke retalia- 
tion, and all the Federalist senators voted with him on this ground. 
But Smith also claimed that the House version undermined Sen- 
ate efforts at stronger resistance/ 3 and a majority subsequently 
joined him in calling for convoys. Thus it is apparent that in the 
Senate, as in the House, motives were mixed. Over the anguished 
protest of young Henry Clay, who preferred "the troubled ocean 
of war, demanded by the honor and independence of the country, 
with all its calamities and desolation, to the tranquil and putrescent 
pool of ignominious peace, 33 34 the Senate passed the gutted bill. 

Deadlock ensued for five weeks. Conference committees failed 
to find a compromise. Both houses voted to stand firm, although 
by the margin of only two votes in the Senate (Federalist votes 
aiding) and seven in the House. On April 6, Nathaniel Macon 
wrote that he expected adjournment without any action having 
been taken. 

In this letter the ex-Speaker minimized proposals made that 
morning by Congressman Taylor of South Carolina, and it is an 
indication of the feebleness of administration leadership that two 
weeks later Macon still did not know whether or not these pro- 
posals had the blessing of the White House. 35 Yet they led to a 
solution, although nobody liked them and Macon reluctantly in- 
troduced them to the House in his capacity as committee chairman. 
Taylor's scheme was the epitome of weakness: the removal of all 
restrictions on commerce plus a promise to restore total nonin- 
tercourse against the recalcitrant if one of the European powers 
ceased to violate American commerce. The bill, which to Macon's 
discomfiture became known as Macon's Bill #2, in effect com- 
bined surrender and bribery, "held up the honor and character 
of this nation to the highest bidder." 36 

Both House and Senate tried to strengthen Macon's Bill #2. 
The House voted to add discriminatory duties of 50 per cent on 
imports from Britain and France. The Senate, with Smith again 



pp. 604609. 
pp. 579"582. 

35 Macon to Nicholson, April 6, 21, 1810, Nicholson MSS. 

36 A nnals , nth Cong 1 ., ist and id sess., p. 1772 (Gholson). 

241 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

in the van, amended the bill so that it permitted the President to 
use armed force in defense of commerce. Federalist senators voted 
for this amendment, doubtless as much to present Madison with 
an embarrassing choice as to further the interests of trade. Once 
again the two chambers deadlocked. Federalists gleefully ob- 
served the friction: 

A more completely divided, bewildered disorganized set of men hardly 
exists. . . . The Cabinet is I believe equally bewildered with Congress; 
the Senate and the House of Representatives act in such entire harmony 
that when the one says I will the other says I wont. No majority in one 
House can calculate on a majority in the other, nor do I believe the Presi- 
dent has really any majority that he can calculate upon in either. 

Finally, in desperation, each house dropped its demands. "The 
result," said Josiah Quincy, who could always be counted upon 
to describe Republican shortcomings in harsh language, "was . . . 
a sort of bargain that, if the Senate would agree not to protect 
commerce, the House would agree not to burden the people with 
an additional tax." 37 In the form originally suggested by Taylor, 
the^Sll passed both houses and became law in May, 1 8 10. 

/To most observers Macon's Bill #2 seemed to be surrender 
ak$ in that sense a fitting successor to the Nonintercourse Act. From 
far away St. Petersburg, John Q. Adams expressed his approval 
of the new law on the ground that it was less irritating to the 
belligerents than its predecessor, and William Plumer endorsed 
it on the frankly pusillanimous ground that "we cannot sn/tch 
the trident from George, or the thunder bolt from Napoleon.;; We 
ought to stand still, wait events, & shape our course accordingly." 
Adams and Plumer were almost alone. Governor Tyler of Vir- 
ginia complained, "We have lost our resentment for the severest 
injuries a nation ever suffered, because of their being so often re- 
peated," and asked, "Is not Tt^is an undeniable proof of the bad 
state of morals in our country?" fThe National Intelligencer > which 

37 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, April 27, 1810, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters 
of Samuel Taggert, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 3475 Annals, nth Cong., ist and 2d sess., 
pp. 2051-2052. 

242 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

avoided comment as far as possible, clearly showed that it ex- 
pected no good to follow. 88 

The President, who played no visible part in framing the new 
bill, took a characteristically mixed view of it. In general he con- 
sidered it feeble, noncoercive, and even disgusting. He also be- 
lieved, or at least ascribed to the bill's supporters the belief, that 
the captures that would inevitably follow would "teach the ad- 
vocates for open trade, . . . the folly, as well as the degradation 
of their policy' 5 and perhaps prepare the nation for war at the next 
session of Congress. Madison, with an almost unique perceptive- 
ness, also foresaw the possibility that the very imbalance of the 
bill, "which puts our trade on the worst possible footing for 
France," might inspire Napoleon to change his policy. 39 To take 
comfort from the losses facing American citizens and from the un- 
evenness of the bilPs effect was perhaps undignified, but these 
things were, indeed, the best that could be said for a law that 
marked the virtual abandonment of positive policy. 

The President never expected Macon's Bill #2 to bring about 
repeal of the Orders in Council. The next instructions to Pinkney 
even admitted that the act benefited British commerce. Britain 
considered the bill as the best possible evidence that the United 
States was too weak to support her claims either by commercial 
pressure or by war. Throughout the winter British diplomats had 
reported with increasing assurance that, despite the Jackson affair, 
American opinion was turning in their favor, making war impos- 
sible. When Macon's Bill finally passed, the British consul at Nor- 
folk commented that "after the Hurricane of Passion in which the 
Congress opened their Session, it is truly laughable to witness the 
miserable, feeble, Puff, in which they evaporated. It is indeed a 
very comfortable reflection that with every disposition to injure 
Great Britain, they have found themselves totally unable to do 

38 Adams to John Pope, Sept. 10, 1810, Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings 
of John Quincy Adams (7 vols.j New York, 1914-1917), III, 5015025 Plumer 
to Adams, May 18, 1810, William Plumer MSS, Library of Congress 5 John Tyler 
to Jefferson, May 12, 1810, Lyon G. Tyler, The Letters and Times of the Tylers^ I 
(Richmond, 1884), 247; National Intelligencer, May 28, 1810. 

3d Madison to Pinkney, May 23, 1810, Rives Collection} Madison to Jefferson, 
May 25, 1810, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress. 

243 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

so." London newspapers almost universally interpreted the act 
as a surrender to Britain brought about by the wise firmness o 
the ministry and the self-immolating effects of American com- 
mercial warfare. "Thus," declared the Sim, "after a long and 
obstinate perseverance, in measures which while they were in force 
destroyed the trade of America, reduced her revenue, and ruined 
her Merchants, the American Government has found it necessary 
to abandon her schemes of impotent resentment against Great 
Britain." 40 

America's political defeat opened pleasing commercial prospects. 
For the first time since 1 807, aside from the brief Erskine interlude, 
British ships, goods, and imports were freed from American re- 
striction and the added expense of clandestine or indirect trade. 
Exports to the United States almost regained the peak reached in 
1807, the last previous year of untrammeled commerce. The 
clamor of manufacturers against the Orders in Council subsided to 
a whisper. At the same time American shippers embarked accu- 
mulated goods in such quantities that a shipping shortage developed 
in the United States. "Our great Staple Trade has seldom, if ever, 
been more brisk than it is at this moment," a Leeds newspaper 
exulted. 41 In the long run this influx meant oversupply in Britain 
so great that the President's own tobacco sold at only threepence 
a pound. In the early summer of 1810 a halcyon day seemed to 
be dawning j the position of Perceval's ministry and the Orders in 
Council approached impregnability. 

French policy appeared to pose no danger to Britain. The Em- 
peror's entourage, it is true, steadily urged him to relax his decrees, 
and for some weeks early in 1 810 he toyed with the idea. Instead, 
his own greed and stubbornness, pique at the blatantly pro-British 
effect of the Nonintercourse Act, and Armstrong's irritating mix- 
ture of wheedling and obstinacy made him speed up his assault on 
American commerce. On March 23, 1810, by the Rambouillet 
Decree, the French monarch ordered all American ships that en- 

40 Smith to Pinkney, July 5, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII 5 James Hamilton to 
Jackson, May 21, 1810, Jackson MSS, FO 353/59; Sun (London), June 9, 1810. 
Intelligencer ', June n, 1810. 

244 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

tered his ports seized, whether or not they had touched at British 
ports or had been visited by the Royal Navy. "The late confisca- 
tions by Bonaparte," Madison wrote, "comprize robbery, theft, & 
breach of trust, and exceed in turpitude any of his enormities, not 
wasting human blood." 42 Anger perhaps caused some presidential 
exaggeration, but the truth was bad enough. 

Within a few months the Emperor abruptly reversed his course. 
He may have been alarmed by reports of rising Francophobia in 
the United States, although his contempt for the young republic 
makes this unlikely. He certainly saw an opportunity to embroil 
the United States with Britain by relaxing his decrees. Equally 
certainly, he recognized that the European economy required goods 
only the Americans could provide. As early as June, with the com- 
mercial motive uppermost in his mind, the Emperor considered a 
plan to withdraw the decrees insofar as they affected American 
trade. With considerable cynicism he proposed to replace them 
with customs regulations that would effectively prohibit the im- 
portation of goods for which he had no need or which were pri- 
marily the produce of Britain's colonies. Repeal, in Napoleon's 
mind, thus would be purely nominal: "We will engage ourselves 
to nothing," he said, "but we can ... let those goods which we 
need enter." John Armstrong informed the agent sent to consult 
him that only effective relaxation of the decrees for all American 
goods would satisfy. 43 As a result the Emperor dropped the idea 
for a short time. 

In July the American minister presented to the Duke of Cadore 
a copy of the National Intelligencer containing Macon's Bill. Ca- 
dore offhandedly dismissed it on the ground that France could 
scarcely allow her policy to be influenced by newspaper reports. 44 
At the end of the month the Foreign Minister's sense of punctilio 
was impatiently thrust aside by his master. The Emperor wrote to 
Cadore that Armstrong should be informed that, as a result of 

42 Madison to Jefferson, May 25, 1810, Madison MSS. 

43 Napoleon, "Notes for the Minister of the Interior," June 25, 1810, Corre- 
spondance de Napoleon, XX, 501502 5 Armstrong to Smith, July 18, 1 810, Despatches, 
France, Vol. XL 

44 Armstrong to Smith, July 10, 1810, Despatches, Frances, Vol. XI. 

245 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Macon's Bill, "my decrees of Berlin and Milan will not have any 
effect after November first," if in the interim the Orders in Council 
of 1807 should be repealed or a the Congress of the United States 
shall fulfil the engagement it has made to reestablish its prohibi- 
tions on English commerce." Two days later, still prodding his 
bewildered subordinate, Napoleon sent him the pro jet of a note 
to Armstrong, and on the morning of August 5, 1810, Cadore 
placed an official declaration of policy in the hands of the American 
minister. This note generally followed the tack of Napoleon's 
letter and pro jet, although the specific requirement that the United 
States prohibit trade with England was replaced by a vaguer de- 
mand that the Americans, "conformably with [Macon's Bill] 
. . . , shall cause their rights to be respected by the English." 45 
Whether this phrase was preferred as an unusual concession to 
American sensibilities or as a veiled invitation to pile more vigor- 
ous measures on top of nonintercourse with Britain is not clear. 

The Cadore letter, as the declaration came to be known, raised 
other and more serious questions. Was it really correct to say that 
the decrees were "revoked," when their effect was not to cease until 
November and then only if one of two conditions was fulfilled? 
Quite obviously not 5 as Cadore himself soon stated, the "decision 
of ELM. is ... conditional. Its execution will depend on the 
measures which the United States shall take if England persists 

45 Napoleon to Cadore, July 31, 1810, Corraspondance de Napoleon, XX, 6446455 
Napoleon to Cadore, Aug. 2, 1810, and enclosure, ibid., XXI, 125 Cadore to Arm- 
strong 1 , Aug. 5, 1810, enclosed in Armstrong to Smith, Aug. 5, 1810, Despatches, 
France, Vol. XI. Cadore stated in a report to the Emperor that at Napoleon's order 
he had made "kindly declarations" to Armstrong on July 25, but no record of this 
talk is preserved. Cadore also stated that he had prepared his letter to Armstrong on 
July 29 j this was probably one of the very early drafts. Cadore to Napoleon, "Frag- 
ment de rapport," July 30, 1810, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV. A draft of the Duke's 
letter, stating that France would repeal her decrees, "pourvu que" Britain withdrew 
her orders if the United States took measures against England, was changed by the 
Emperor, who inserted the phrase a bien entendu que," which became important in 
later discussions. Cadore to Armstrong, draft, Aug. 2 [?], 1810, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXIV. This change, as well as the alteration mentioned in the text, raises baffling 
questions, and with some hesitation it may be suggested that the alterations possibly 
sprang from a desire on Napoleon's part to make the phraseology as loose as possible, 
both to increase the chances of Anglo-American disagreement and to preserve his own 
freedom of action. The possibility that both changes were designed to make the note 
sound somewhat less peremptory cannot, however, be dismissed. 

246 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

in her orders of Council and in the principles of blockade which 
she has tried to establish," 46 This being so, did French action 
justify American action under Macon's Bill? Congress clearly 
failed to anticipate conditional action, and in the strictest legal sense 
the Cadore letter was inadequate. The law did not even authorize 
the President to call upon the recalcitrant belligerent to lift his 
decrees an action only to be followed in ninety days by noninter- 
course until the other ceased to violate American commerce, and 
the Napoleonic declaration referred to a date months in the fu- 
ture. Still, the Cadore letter at least raised the hope that the end 
sought by Congress could be attained. America's harassed situation 
made inevitable a political rather than a purely legal decision. 
The risks of acceptance, however, were enormous, unless the Em- 
peror clearly intended to follow the Cadore letter with more spe- 
cific action favorable to American commerce. 

Quite the contrary was true. On the very day of the Cadore let- 
ter, the Trianon tariff established customs regulations that effec- 
tively stopped most importations. This device, really the same 
scheme that Armstrong had refused to countenance a month earlier, 
showed that the commercial benefits of repeal would at best be 
minimal. The new tariff, which appeared in the Moniteur, reached 
America at the same time as the Cadore letter. Napoleon's second, 
even more important action was secret, although he could not con- 
ceal its implementation. By the so-called Trianon Decree (officially 
dated August 5 but actually made a few weeks later), he ordered 
the sale of sequestered American ships and cargoes. The decree 
applied only to arrivals since the spring of 1809 and did not spe- 
cifically order their condemnation, although transfer of the pro- 
ceeds to the treasury certainly implied that a final decision had 
been taken. When at last Albert Gallatin procured a copy in 1821, 
he declared that publication in 1 8 10 would have altered the entire 
direction of American policy. "It is unnecessary," he added, "to 
comment on such a glaring act of combined injustice, bad faith, 
and meanness as the enacting and concealment of the decree ex- 
hibits." Even in 1 8 10 the tenor of French policy was clear enough. 

40 Cadore to Turreau, Aug. 23, 1810, AAE, CP, E-TJ, Vol. LXIV. 

247 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

The Duke of Cadore admitted to Armstrong that arrivals, though 
no longer subject to automatic seizure under the Rambouillet De- 
cree, would be subject to the Berlin and Milan decrees at least 
until November. Armstrong also learned that release of ships al- 
ready in French hands was extremely unlikely, and he immediately 
perceived that the Trianon tariff virtually obliterated the com- 
mercial advantages to be drawn from the Cadore letter. All these 
things he reported to Washington, albeit in his usual imprecise 
way, before leaving for the United States on September I2. 47 

Accounts by way of England, which preceded Armstrong's dis- 
patches, reached America late in September. Federalist newspapers 
denounced the Cadore letter as a trick to bring about increased 
friction with England, They pointed out that the alleged repeal 
was so framed that Britain could have no motive to reciprocate 
and America, in commercial terms, scarcely a greater one: "After 
all, the bait does not half cover the hook." The Aurora hailed Na- 
poleon's action and urged the use of force to prevent British inter- 
ference with Franco-American trade, and the Lexington Reporter 
reached absurd (and ungrammatical) heights when it declared: 
"France has performed the penance which we demanded. . . . 
Thank God, the removal of the French decrees have placed us 
exactly again in the clean straight forward path." Reasonable 
Americans took a more moderate view. A Washington correspond- 
ent reported, "It is admitted on all hands, by candid men, that the 
manner in which French has accepted our proposition, is ungra- 
cious. The question, however, is, whether it is not better, all circum- 
stances considered, to close with the offer, than reject it." As late 
as October 24 the National Intelligencer declined to take a stand on 
the French offer or to predict the administration's decision. 48 

With the confidence that, we may presume, has characterized 

47 Gallatin $"186 to Adams, Sept. 15, 1821, and enclosure, Henry Adams, ed., 
The Writings of Albert Gallatin (3 vols.j Philadelphia, 1879), **> 196-1995 Cadore 
to Armstrong (dictated by Napoleon), Sept. 7, 1810, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV$ 
Armstrong to Madison, private, Aug. 5, 1810, Madison MSSj Armstrong to Smith, 
Sept. 10, 1 8 to, Despatches, France, Vol. XI. 

^Connecticut Courant (Hartford), Oct. 10, 18105 Aurora (Philadelphia), Oct. z, 
iSioj Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), Oct. 20, 1810$ Columbian (New York), Oct. 6, 
18105 National Intelligencer , Oct. 24, 1810. 

248 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

fish from time immemorial. President Madison believed it possible 
to feed on the bait without swallowing the visible hook. Delay 
would encourage Napoleon to pull his line from the stream, 
whereas immediate acceptance might cause Britain to cast even 
more appetizing food upon the water. At Madison's direction the 
Secretary of State sent word to London on October 19. If the 
eagerly awaited dispatches from Armstrong confirmed the authen- 
ticity of Cadore's letter (still known to the American government 
only through newspaper reports), and if Britain failed to withdraw 
her regulations, "on the first day of November the President will 
issue his proclamation conformably to the act of Congress, and . . . 
the non-intercourse law will consequently be revived against Great 
Britain." At the same time Robert Smith warned the young British 
charge, John P. Morier, that English obduracy would threaten 
"the future Harmony between the two Countries." 4g 

On November 2 the President officially proclaimed that the 
"edicts of France have been so revoked as that they ceased on the 
first day of the present month to violate the neutral commerce of 
the United States." Instructions sent to Paris on the same day 
showed that the President actually took no such simple view of the 
matter. The instructions avoided as far as possible any specific 
declarations which would require French response and were, in 
effect, a rather tortuous attempt to turn Napoleon's "bien entendu" 
back upon himself. They declared that the United States was acting 
upon the assumption that "the reservations under the expression 
'it being understood' are not condition precedent affecting the oper- 
ation of the repeal." Although necessary to justify action under 
Macon's Bill, the language of Cadore's letter made this dubious 
French correspondence unknown to Madison made it positively 
fallacious and the President wisely did not insist that France 
accept this interpretation before the United States acted. Similarly, 
the instructions declared that the American government presumed 
that France had agreed to restore sequestered American property 
or would soon do so, an action made a necessary preliminary to any 

49 Smith to Pinkney, Oct. 19, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII j Morier #15 to Welles- 
ley, Oct. 26, 1 8 10, FO 5/72. 

249 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

settlement in instructions sent to Armstrong as recently as July but 
actually extremely unlikely after the secret Trianon Decree. The 
President, however, again did not make American action against 
Britain dependent upon the accuracy of his anticipation. Finally, the 
instructions declared that America assumed that, in addition to the 
decrees of Berlin and Milan, all other maritime edicts violating 
her rights had been withdrawn. 50 James Madison well understood 
the equivocal nature of Cadore's letter but had determined never- 
theless to seize the opportunity it presented. 

Since this decision led ultimately to war, the President's reason- 
ing must be analyzed, his justifications examined. To him the mo- 
ment seemed fleeting. Napoleon's notorious combination of vola- 
tility and stubbornness made it likely that, if the United States 
delayed or haggled, the French autocrat would immediately swing 
back to the decrees he had so tenaciously defended. It could be 
argued that the prohibitory French duties and even the licenses 
which Napoleon, to Madison's great anger, made a condition of 
trade with his dominions were really "domestic regulations," for 
surely a state had a right to impose conditions upon trade with it- 
self. The issue of sequestered property was embarrassing, but only 
because the President had chosen, in the July instructions, to make 
restoration a condition of settlement. Macon's Bill #2 required 
the belligerents to cease their violations, not to make amends for 
past robberies. Finally, simply because Cadore's letter was so equiv- 
ocal, the President could adopt whatever interpretation seemed 
most desirable, perhaps even lead France to accept his view. 

Commercially, these arguments made little sense. "Municipal 
regulations" and licenses stifled trade with Europe nearly as effec- 
tively as the decrees. The approved trade did not compare in value 
with the American ships, nearly 200 in all, for which com- 
pensation had been sought. Yet if America did not secure pay- 

50 Smith to Armstrong-, Nov. 2, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII. These instructions 
declared that the United States would demand repeal of Fox's Blockade as well as 
of later Orders in Council, but they also warned that America did not consider herself 
pledged to^ make the abandonment of other blockades a condition of any agreement 
with Britain. While seeking to make England respect her rights, America did not 
accept the French definition of what those rights were. 

250 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

ment as a condition of anti-British action one could hardly expect 
so rapacious a man as Napoleon to grant it later on. Politically, 
Madison accepted great risks. Napoleon's entire career demon- 
strated his trickiness and bad faith. The Cadore letter left the door 
open for him to exercise these qualities and gave Britain a plausible 
excuse for refusing to relax the Orders in Council. Should it be 
demonstrated and only one day after the French promise al- 
legedly went into effect Madison could have no proof one way or 
the other that the Berlin and Milan decrees had not really been 
lifted, even for American commerce alone, the President would 
face serious criticism at home and abroad. 

Madison's decision rested primarily on one conviction which he 
felt compelled him to take the risk of accepting the French decla- 
ration. Recent history demonstrated that the United States could 
expect only humiliation if it tried to exert pressure upon both 
major belligerents at the same time. "The new scene opened by 
the revocation of the Fr. Decrees," Madison wrote in recalling 
his attorney general to discuss it, "will I hope terminate in a re- 
moval of the embarrassments which have been as afflicting as they 
have been unexampled. It promises us, at least an extrication from 
the dilemma, of a mortifying peace, or a war with both the great 
belligerents." As the Erskine agreement had already shown, the 
President was prepared to use agreement with one great power 
as a lever in negotiations with the other. In 1810 he was not san- 
guine about the prospects of British repeal. He took consolation 
in the thought that, even if this desirable end could not be attained 
without war, the nation would unite when the time came to assert 
its rights by force. "We hope from the step," he wrote to Jefferson, 
"the advantage at least of having but one contest on our hands 
at a time." 51 

Like so many Republican calculations, this one assumed that 
logic always governed men's decisions. Ignoring American parti- 
sanship and Anglophilia, Madison expected the people to rally 
behind the government's demand for justice from England. "I do 

51 Madison to Rodney, Sept. 30, 1810, Rodney Family MSS, Library of Congress 5 
Madison to Jefferson, Oct. 19, 1810, Hunt, ed., Writings of Madison, VIII, 109. 

251 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

not believe," he said, "that Cong 8 , will be disposed, or permitted 
by the Nation, to a tame submission ; the less so as it would be 
not only perfidious to the other belligerent, but irreconcilable with 
an honorable neutrality." 52 Minimizing England's emotional com- 
mitment to the Orders in Council, the President hoped Britain 
would seek material advantage through concession 5 if she did not, 
he expected Perceval to be too vulnerable to domestic criticism 
to press an armed conflict with the United States. These miscalcu- 
lations grew out of Madison's central mistake, a belief that Napo- 
leon could be trusted to execute the bargain he offered. The Presi- 
dent was not so foolish as to expect generosity, and the instructions 
of November 2 showed him at least fearful that Napoleon would 
narrowly construe the Cadore letter. But surely the Emperor 
would see the advantage of uniting America against England, and 
the even greater potential disadvantages of insulting a people al- 
ready restive under continued aggravation. Such seem to have 
been the presidential calculations. Hindsight shows us that most 
of them were wrong, but the initial decision is understandable. The 
President is most to be condemned for failing to revise his analysis 
when new facts became available. "The revocation of the De- 
crees of Milan and Berlin has become a personal affair with Mr. 
Madisson," the French minister reported nine months later. "He 
announced it by his proclamation and has consistently maintained 
it since." 53 Perhaps in part because he had suffered such deep hu- 
miliation through the Erskine agreement, James Madison refused 
to admit that he had erred. 

Napoleon considered the United States a harlot whose embraces 
could be cheaply purchased, and throughout the winter of 1 8 r O-i I 
Armstrong's successor, Jonathan Russell, struggled vainly to con- 
vince the Emperor that American charms deserved a higher price. 
Russell, a lawyer, merchant, and politician from Rhode Island, 
previously distinguished chiefly for his devotion to Republican 
orthodoxy, considered himself a Francophile and later warmly 

62 Madison to Jefferson, Oct. 19, 1810, Hunt, ed. 5 Writings of Madison, VIII, no. 

63 Serurier #22 to Minister of Foreign Relations, July 24, 1811, AAE, CP, E-U, 
v ol. LXV. 

252 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

advocated a war against Britain. At Paris, however, he found it 
impossible to accept Napoleon's policy without protest. At first, 
it is true, the new charge proposed for tactical reasons to suffer 
disappointment in silence: 

Having a right from the tenor of the verbal & written communications of 
this Government to consider the revocation of the Berlin & Milan decrees 
to be absolute, I have thought it unwise, whatever doubts the British Cab- 
inet may affect to entertain on the subject, to ask for an explanation here 
which might at once be construed into a justification of these doubts by 
indicating a participation in them and leave this government at liberty to 
give to those communications whatever meaning the views of the moment 
might decide. 54 

Increasing French hostility to American commerce, Britain's in- 
sistence upon clearer proof of revocation of the decrees, and finally 
the instructions of November 2 caused Russell to alter his tactics. 
To London he sent optimistic accounts of French policy and what 
meager evidence he could obtain showing that the decrees had 
been repealed, but he did so only to assist American efforts to bring 
the Orders in Council to an end. His reports to Washington and 
his talks with French officials show that his real views were quite 
different. From November onward, more and more firmly, even 
irritably, the American charge pressed the imperial government 
for explanations. "The Emperor was only asked," he repeated 
three times in one conversation, a to provide the opportunity for an 
honorable and vigorous war against England." 55 Russell became 
increasingly pessimistic as Napoleon's intentions unfolded. 

Imperial policy operated in three distinct spheres united by 
a common theme of disdain. Although he avoided directly saying 
so, Napoleon declined to release or make compensation for Ameri- 
can ships seized under his various decrees before November. The 
United States affected to consider him pledged to do so, but Jona- 
than Russell did not force this issue to a crisis. Second, the French 
monarch in effect withdrew most of the advantages he had presum- 

54 Russell to Smith, Sept. 26, 1810, Despatches, France, Vol. XII. 

55 Srurier to Minister of Foreign Relations, Nov. 7, [1810], AAE, CP, E-U, 

Vol. LXIIL 

253 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

ably granted to American ships coming to European ports. Vessels 
that arrived between November and the news of American prohibi- 
tions on English commerce in February were not permitted to 
depart or to sell their cargoes until the latter date. Napoleon's 
repeal, in other words, was shown to be conditional on effective 
American action toward British trade. Although Cadore's successor, 
the Duke o Bassano, finally informed Russell in May that post- 
November arrivals could proceed with their business, 56 France still 
insisted upon licenses and ciphered letters of permission from her 
consuls in America, thus stopping all but a trickle of trade between 
the two countries. The Continental System had been altered in 
form far more than in substance. 

The third phase of Napoleon's policy clearly showed that the de- 
crees had not been rescinded for American ships bound to and from 
enemy ports. A few ships visited at sea by the Royal Navy escaped 
condemnation when they came within the reach of French power, 
but the decrees, particularly that of Milan, were otherwise rigor- 
ously enforced. Ships touching at British ports continued to be 
seized, on the basis of Napoleonic reasoning very similar to that 
Canning used in demanding permission for the Royal Navy to 
enforce American prohibitions against trade with France. "One 
should say, 33 the Emperor declared in a session with his subordi- 
nates, "the Decrees of Berlin and Milan are repealed as to the 
United States j but, as all ships touching at English ports or des- 
tined there are ships without character, which American laws punish 
and confiscate, they may be confiscated by France. 33 One year after 
the Cadore letter, Jonathan Russell ruefully observed that the 
French had not released one ship bound to or from an English 
port. 67 All protests had been vain. 

Because an economic crisis gripped Britain by the end of 1810, 
Napoleon refused to relax his commercial warfare, even at the risk 
of American displeasure. Politically, he saw the advantage of 
refusing clarifying, liberalizing declarations. Russell believed that 

56 Bassano to Russell, May 9, 1811, ibid., Vol. LXVII. 

57 Note dictated in the councils of Administration and of Commerce, April 29, 
1811, Corres-pondance de Nafoleon, XXII, 14.4-1465 Russell to John S. Smith, private 
and confidential, Aug*. 2, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress. 

254 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

"the great object ... is to entangle us in a war with England. 
They abstain therefore from doing any act which would furnish 
clear & unequivocal testimony of the revocation of their decrees 
least it should induce the extinction of the British orders & thereby 
appease our irritation against their enemy." The French carefully 
arranged releases and condemnations to muddy rather than clarify 
the waters. 58 

The French attitude disheartened President Madison. His an- 
nual message, presented in December, disappointed Turreau, who 
considered it a "cold and methodical expose" rather than a rallying 
cry against England. It would have been much worse had not 
Gallatin urged his chief to adopt a more confident tone. Early in 
February, in one of those malicious or stupid indiscretions that soon 
cost him his post. Secretary Smith "declared . . . confidentially 
[to the British charge] his Opinion that those Decrees were not 
repealed, and that before the rising of the present Congress the 
whole of their restrictive commercial System would be entirely 
done away with." A partisan Federalist declared three weeks later 
that scarcely five members of Congress believed the decrees "effi- 
ciently repealed." 59 

Passage of a new nonintercourse bill directed at Britain adver- 
tised Republican doubts. Macon's Bill provided that trade should 
end ninety days after the President proclaimed that only one bel- 
ligerent, the other having rescinded its decrees, continued to violate 
American commerce j this action did not require legislative sanc- 
tion. Thus the nonintercourse bill introduced by John W. Eppes 
exposed doubts that the actions of Napoleon or Madison truly 
met the requirements of Macon's Bill, and bad news from France 
soon led Eppes himself to propose postponing the bill "until the 
doubts hanging over our foreign relations were dissipated." In 
debate, Republicans declared American faith pledged by the proc- 
lamation even if it were based on a Napoleonic lie. Randolph 

58 Russell to Monroe, private and confidential, July 13, 1811, Despatches, France, 
Vol. XII. 

50 Richardson, 0$. cit., I, 483; Gallatin to Madison, n.d., Rives Collection j Morier 
#12 to Wellesley, Feb. 4, 1811, FO 5/745 Taggart to Rev - J olm Taylor, Feb. 25, 
1811, Haynes, o$. cit t) p. 358 

255 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

harried them with lashing metaphor, Gardenier with ponderously 
impressive logic. Randolph's motion for outright repeal of Macon's 
Bill failed only by a margin of forty-five to sixty-seven. Congress 
then laid Eppes's bill aside for three weeks to await arrival of the 
new French minister, Louis Serurier, Serurier disappointed Re- 
publicans, for, as Quincy observed, "the Minister is as parsimonious 
as his master is voracious. He has not condescended to extend one 
particle, not one pinch of comfort to the Administration." 60 How- 
ever, news from France that post-November arrivals would be 
admitted when the United States cut off British trade decided the 
Republicans to go ahead. After scenes of turbulence and animosity 
exceeding even those of Embargo days, the Eppes bill was rammed 
through the House at sunrise on February 28, 1811. The Senate 
and Madison quickly added their assent. 

This commercial legislation, the last of a series running back to 
the Nonimportation Act five years before, contained interesting 
new provisions. The bill required American courts to accept Madi- 
son's proclamation as conclusive evidence of French repeal. In the 
absence of such a precaution, some of the many Federalists still 
on the bench might rule that the decrees had not really been 
rescinded, thus destroying the legal grounds for condemnation of 
ships trading with England. No government could permit hostile 
judges to overthrow its policy in such a fashion- on the other hand, 
this provision strengthened the Federalist claim that the govern- 
ment itself knew the decrees were still in force. Second, although 
the Eppes bill authorized the President to continue prohibitions 
on British commerce until the Orders in Council were removed, 61 
the act did not cut off all Anglo-American trade, chiefly because 
Americans wanted commercial warfare to be as little painful as 
possible. The new act, which turned away British ships and goods, 

60 AnnaUy nth Cong., 3d sess., pp. 863, 1017. 

61 Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), p. 250, 
suggests that the administration, through Eppes's original bill, aimed to correct an 
oversight in Macon's Bill, which failed to authorize a restoration of free trade if a 
belligerent revoked its decrees after nonintercourse against it had gone into effect. 
Doubtless this aspect was involved, but it was scarcely emphasized in debate or cor- 
respondence. Had Madison been confronted by British repeal, there seems no reason 
why he could not have proclaimed at least provisional repeal of nonintercourse until 
a special session met. 

256 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

did not prohibit the departure o American vessels or produce to 
England. Furthermore, virtually admitting that until passage of 
the act shippers might justifiably have expected nonintercourse 
never to go into effect, the law permitted the entry of cargoes em- 
barked from Britain before February. The last legal cargo of Eng- 
lish goods arrived at New York toward the end of April, bringing 
to a close spring importations of approximately normal size. There- 
after, although in the fall Niles* Register suggested that the act be 
better enforced or else retitled "An Act for the Better Encourage- 
ment of Roguery and Other Purposes," nonimportation seems to 
have been effective. With return cargoes forbidden by American 
law, exports to Britain also fell off sharply, although those of cot- 
ton and tobacco remained fairly stable. 62 

After Eppes's bill there could be no turning back if even the 
shreds of America's reputation were to be preserved. Still, to per- 
severe was not easy in the face of increasing evidence of French 
perfidy. The National Intelligencer professed to believe stead- 
fastness more important than adjustment to the facts: "Shall we, 
like chaff before the wind, be driven by every breeze that wafts a 
rumor across the Atlantic?" But in the same article the Intelli- 
gencer virtually admitted that not breezes but a gale blew from 
the Tuileries, for it declared: "If both [nations] continue their 
aggressions, we must eventually set them both at defiance." The 
administration's mouthpiece argued that no amount of sin on Na- 
poleon's part excused Britain, for "our rights are absolute, not 
contingent." 63 

Self-evident to Americans, this last assertion naturally received 
little endorsement in Great Britain. The Orders in Council had 
long been defended sometimes honestly, often insincerely as 
acts of retaliation to last only as long as the Continental System. 
Britons therefore considered the meaning of imperial action criti- 
cally important, and London newspapers joined battle over the 
Cadore letter. Opposition sheets urged repeal of the Orders in 

62 C. Northcote Parkinson, ed., The Trade Winds: a Study of British Overseas 
Trade during the French Wars (London, 1948), p. 2225 Niles* Weekly Register 
(Baltimore), Oct. 26, 18115 Heaton, o<p. cit. y p. 194; Francois Crouzet, ISEconomie 
Britannique et le Blocus Continental (2 vols.j Paris, 1958), II, 703704, 

63 May 1 8, 1811. 

257 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Council, primarily because they wished Britain to take advantage 
of Cadore's statement that the decrees would be lifted, even for 
English trade, if Britain abandoned the orders. The Times shilly- 
shallied, ultimately favoring British repeal despite suspicions of 
French fraud. Ministerial prints declared that no reasonable per- 
son, not even the creatures at Washington, could possibly consider 
the Cadore letter the sort of repeal that called for British reci- 
procity. The Courier, as always the most strident British paper, 
declared: "There is but one Navy in the World, the British 
Navy. ... As long as BONAPARTE persists in his present 
system, we warn all Powers that the Continent is in a state of 
blockade, and they must not presume to trade with it without our 
leave." * 

Merchants engaged in American trade steadily pressed the 
government to revoke the orders and thus prevent action under 
Macon's Bill. They were turned from one official to another 
from Rose to Bathurst to Wellesley to Under-Secretary Hamilton 
until at last they ceased their importunities. The government 
even refused to sanction the dispatch of one American vessel to 
French ports as a test case, to prove whether or not the decrees 
still stood. 65 Wellesley was equally obdurate with William Pink- 
ney. He wrote that the Cadore letter could not be considered 
sufficient evidence of repeal, adding that "whenever the repeal of 
the French Decrees shall have actually taken effect, . . . His 
Majesty will feel the highest satisfaction in relinquishing a system, 
which the conduct of the Enemy compelled him to adopt." Subse- 
quent notes repeated the same theme. 66 

^Morning Chronicle, Aug. 20, 18105 Times, Aug. 20, Dec. 20, 1810; Star (Lon- 
don), Aug. 1 8, iSioj Sun, Aug. 18, iSioj Courier (London), Jan. 21, 1811. 

165 Times, July i, 1811, printing an account by a participant. 

66 Wellesley to Pinkney, Aug. 31, 1810, enclosed in Pinkney to Smith, Sept. 3, 1810, 
Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume j Wellesley to Pinkney, Dec. 29, 
1 8 10, FO 5/72; Wellesley #i to Foster, April 10, 1811, Mayo, o-p. cit., pp. 3 10-3 18 j 
John S. Smith to Monroe, May 25, 1811, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVII. 
Wellesley also made it clear that the Cabinet would insist upon repeal of substitute 
regulations which restored the decrees in another guise and, for its own part, would 
not consent to withdraw regulations anterior to those of November, 1807, nor to 
relax its claimed right of blockade. 

258 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATIO 



N 



This British reaction ended the last hope of a bloodless American 
triumph. Madison had risked much in accepting Cadore's assur- 
ances at more than their face value, and by the spring of 1 8 1 1 
all the world could see he had failed. France had briefly roused 
American hopes, then quickly fallen back to a policy of tantalizing 
hints and crude menaces. Far from uniting American opinion 
against Britain as Madison had hoped, the President's policy, by 
reinforcing the plausibility of Federalist claims that he was a min- 
ion of France, led to disunity of the most dangerous kind. Welles- 
ley's declarations, challenging on all too supportable grounds the 
fundamental premise of American policy, diverted attention from 
permanent issues. As the National Intelligencer had observed, 
America's claims against Britain were absolute, not conditional. 
Madison's great folly was to emphasize the one claim that did 
involve conditions, rather than to recoil in search of new avenues. 
The President had placed American policy in an untenable posi- 
tion. Aside from another humbling surrender by the United States, 
only an uncharacteristic act of Napoleonic charity or abject British 
capitulation could provide a peaceful exit. The ultimate alternative 
was war, a war the administration sometimes considered likely and 
even desirable, but a war for which it had neither psychologically 
nor militarily nor even financially armed the nation. 

In March, 1811, the Eleventh Congress dispersed, leaving be- 
hind a record that reflected no credit on itself or the President. 
In the two years since Jefferson had ridden off to Monticello, 
the United States had continued its modest progress in manufac- 
tures. It had obtained a small portion of the Floridas and was on 
the brink of a campaign, equally lacking in nicety, to despoil the 
Spanish Empire of more of that province. The critical issues had 
not been solved. With a majority of two to one over the Federal- 
ists, Republicans had proved unable to develop any consistent legis- 
lative policy. Factionalism and administration reservations de- 
feated a bill to recharter the Bank of the United States, depriving 
the nation of an instrument sorely needed in any effective mar- 
shaling of financial strength. Just before Madison's inauguration, 
Republican factionalism spawned the Nonintercourse Act, and the 

259 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Eleventh Congress put Macon's Bill #2 on the statute book. Each 
bill represented a relaxation of will; each also provided a brief 
moment of triumph, triumph that only made the ensuing humilia- 
tion more bitter. The nation's capacity to absorb insult had been 
found generous. Whether or not it was inexhaustible remained to 
be seen. 

As chief executive during these years, James Madison was given 
much of the blame. This criticism often overshot the mark. The 
President knew what he wanted as a sequel to the Embargo, he 
acted decisively with Francis James Jackson, he showed boldness 
in accepting the Cadore letter, he even reached the reluctant con- 
clusion to support the Bank of the United States, which he had 
so firmly opposed twenty years before. Not decisiveness was lack- 
ing, but the quality of leadership. The effect of democratic theory 
upon Republican practice, the difficulties of succeeding a man who 
had long overshadowed him, the disciplinary decay that had set 
in before his inauguration all these created challenges that Madi- 
son had not the strength to overcome. 

"Jefferson by a system of intrigue and low cunning managed 
the party," wrote Samuel Taggart, but "M[adiso]n is a mere 
puppet or a cypher managed by some chiefs of the faction who 
are behind the curtain." Taggart's partisan language aside, this 
fairly accurately described the role once played by Jefferson. It 
woefully missed the mark with Madison. No one "managed" the 
President. On the other hand he himself did very little managing, 
of Congress or of public opinion. "Little better than a man of 
straw," not "half the independence of an old clucking hen" so 
too wrote the Federalist congressman. 67 That Taggart, Randolph, 
the opposition press, and even disgusted Republicans could make 
such claims is far more important than the truth or falsehood of 
what they said. The appearance of weakness was as fatal to an 
effective exercise of presidential leadership as weakness itself. 
American self-respect required more than had been tendered the 
nation in the recent past. 

67 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, April 27, 1810, Feb. 4, i8n, Haynes, of. dt., 
PP- 347 3 354- 

260 



CHAPTER 



VIII 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 



Even before the Eleventh Congress gathered for its last session, 
selection of a successor had begun. By the time Speaker Varnum 
closed the session and headed home to Dracut, most states, in- 
cluding all the large ones except Virginia, had held their elections. 
The next winter Congressman Wright declared that defeat of half 
of his former colleagues showed that the country repudiated their 
craven policies. 1 This Republican veteran, already sixty years old, 
did not claim that the new members represented a rising generation 
more vigorous than his own. Nevertheless, the Twelfth Congress, 
led as it so frequently was b^ very young men ex-Senator Clay, 
the bridegroom Calhoun, bitter Felix Grundy later acquired an 
aura of youthful vigor. The facts do not demonstrate that the 
American people consciously sought such a Congress in the elec- 
tions of 1 8 10 i i, nor is it clear that the Twelfth Congress deserved 
its reputation. 

An able historian summarized the usual view when he wrote, 
"Everywhere but in New England, men who temporized or fa- 

1 Annals, izth Cong-., ist sess., p. 472. 

261 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

vored negotiation were turned out of office and their places given 
to those . . . who frankly stood for war 5 young, energetic, active 
men, preponderantly from the West and the frontiers of the older 
sections." Thomas Jefferson, writing to James Monroe shortly 
after the Virginia election, took a sharply different view. The ex- 
President, then in a pacific mood which he assumed Monroe shared, 
stated: 

the last two Congresses have been the theme of the most licencious reproba- 
tion for printers thirsting after war, some against France, & some against 
England, but the people wish for peace, they feel no incumbency on them 
to become the reformers of the other hemisphere, and, to inculcate, with 
fire & sword, a return to moral order, when indeed peace shall become 
more losing than war, they may owe to their interests, what these Quixots 
are clamouring for on false estimates of honor, the public are unmoved by 
these clamours, as the re-elections of their legislators show, and they are 
firm to their Executive on the subject of the more recent clamours [for 
decisive action]. 2 

Isolated on his hilltop, Jefferson had cut back his newspaper sub- 
scriptions, and he was not privy to the views of Madison and the 
government. Was he therefore an inaccurate observer? 

The Twelfth Congress did not have markedly more new mem- 
bers than either of its two immediate predecessors. If those of the 
dozen replacements who entered the Eleventh Congress and later 
secured election to the Twelfth are considered as carry-overs, 
eighty-three veteran members returned to the new Congress along 
with fifty-nine new representatives/ The Tenth Congress contained 
ninety-six veterans, the Eleventh dighty-six. The Congress elected 
in 1812-13, after expansion made necessary by the census of 1810, 
had eighty-five old members and just under a hundred newcomers. 
The twelfth Congress merely conformed to the pattern of the 
times. JSome states, notably New York and South Carolina, re- 
turned far fewer new members than after the last preceding elec- 
tion. In other states there was a substantial turnover. This often 

2 Charles M. Wiltse, John C. Calhoun y Nationalist, 1782-1828 (Indianapolis, 
194.4), p. 53 j Jefferson to Monroe, May 5, 18115 Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library 
of Congress. 

262 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

reflected either a small shift in closely balanced constituencies or 
the habit of rotation in office. New Hampshire, for example, did 
not reelect one congressman from 1806 through 1812, and about 
one-third of the Pennsylvania and Virginia delegations were regu- 
larly new members. Many congressmen not reelected, perhaps 
half, declined to stand. John Taylor of South Carolina, the real 
author of Macon's Bill, did not run only because he was being 
promoted to the Senate. 3 

Although the Republicans gained about a dozen seats, 4 includ- 
ing some held by Clintonians and other dissidents, they did not 
quite recover the majority held during Jefferson's second term. 
The Republicans gained most in states north of the Potomac, par- 
ticularly in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania/ A few Republican 
veterans, among them John Rea of Pennsylvania and Matthew 
Lyon of Kentucky, each of whom had served four terms, lost con- 
tests with other Republicans. In general, no clear pattern emerges. 
It is not demonstrable that a great upsurge of public feeling flung 
aside Federalists and cautious Republicans in favor of avowed 
War Hawks, although in seven or eight states the election took 
place just after news of the Cadore letter arrived. 5 This news, 
unaccompanied by information revealing the equivocal nature of 
French repeal, should have provided those who favored strong 
action against Britain with an effective talking point. 

Equally doubtful is the contention that the new Congress con- 

3 James L. Harrison, ed., Biographical Directory of the American Congress, 69th 
Cong., xd sess., H. Doc. 783 (1928) provides the membership of all Congresses as 
well as brief sketches of the members. The sketches are not always entirely accurate, 
and they are often silent and sometimes incorrect on party affiliation. For membership 
and dates of birth the volume is very useful, and it provides most of the information 
in this and succeeding paragraphs. 

4 Niles? Weekly Register (Baltimore), Dec. 5, 1812, breaking down the party 
affiliations by states, concludes that the House contained 106 Republicans and 36 
Federalists. 

5 Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, North Caro- 
lina, and South Carolina all voted between October i and the end of 1810. For dates 
of election and the issue of credentials, see Credentials, i2th Congress, Legislative 
Section, National Archives. In Kentucky, on the other hand, the election took place 
in August, just after news of the Rambouillet Decree, which Henry Clay described 
as "an act of infamous treachery, if not of open robbery." This news apparently did 
not help the Federalist cause. Clay to Rodney, Aug. 6, 1810, James F. Hopkins, ed., 
The Papers of Henry Clay, I (Lexington, Ky., 1959), 481. 

263 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

tained an unusual proportion of young men. Of course Clay and 
Grundy were only thirty-five, Richard M. Johnson (a two-term 
veteran, incidentally) was thirty, Calhoun a youth of twenty-nine. 
On the other hand, two Republicans, William Findley and John 
Smilie, had been born in Ireland eighty years before, and Robert 
Whitehill boasted eighty-three years, at least eight more than the 
oldest Federalist. The Federalist file leader, Josiah Quincy, was 
only thirty-nine, and two of his lieutenants, Harmanus Bleecker 
and Henry M. Ridgely, were thirty-two. As a matter of fact, the 
average age of the members of the Eleventh and Twelfth Con- 
gresses was almost exactly the same. When Congress finally voted 
on war in June, 1812, those voting for it had an average age of 
forty-seven ; the opponents, just under forty-six. New members 
on both sides were of almost exactly the same age. 6 

Of course, Congress bore the stamp of its leadership, but leaders 
had been young before. Robert Goodloe Harper had not reached 
thirty-five when he led the Federalists during the undeclared war 
with France, and Randolph, Bacon, Eppes, and Campbell stepped 
forward to the front rank before reaching forty. In the new Con- 
gress, if such leaders as Richard M. Johnson, Langdon Cheves, 
and Peter B. Porter were youthful, they were also veterans of 
previous service. Essentially not youth but effectiveness, vigor, 
and tenacity distinguished the new leadership. 

Another generalization may be made about the new Congress : 
there is little evidence that individual contests were mandates 
against past diplomacy. In strongly Federalist Delaware, it is true, 
Henry M. Ridgely squeaked through by the infinitesimal margin 

6 The following table is compiled from Harrison, of. cit., omitting from the age 
calculations eight members whose birth date is unknown. 

For war Against <war 

Number Age Number Age 

Members of i2th, preceding, and succeeding Congresses 29 50.5 16 4.8.9 

Members of i2th and succeeding Congresses 24. 40.3 6 44.0 

Members of i2th Congress only 15 47.6 15 42.1 

Members of i2th and preceding Congresses n 51,8 12 47.5 

Total and average 79 47,0 49 45.9 

The average age of members of the House, including those not voting in June, was 
46.2 years when the Congress convened. 

264 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

of seven votes, 7 which may suggest growing restiveness in that 
state. In Pennsylvania and Massachusetts, where the Republicans 
did particularly well, the foreign policy issue did not stand alone. 
In the Bay State the Republican victory was so surprising that, 
according to Christopher Gore, it "entirely destroyed the spirit of 
the Federalists" ; feebly fighting the legislative election six months 
later, 8 they permitted the selection of a General Court that named 
Joseph B. Varnum to replace Timothy Pickering in the Senate. 
But in November, 1810, Bay State Republicans for the most part 
only regained congressional seats they had lost in the great reac- 
tion against the Embargo two years before. In Pennsylvania, voting 
took place just after Cadore's letter became known. The Republi- 
cans gained a near sweep, losing only one of the three Philadelphia 
seats and capturing the rest of the state. James Milnor, the Fed- 
eralist who succeeded in Philadelphia, ran nearly 2,000 votes be- 
hind the Republicans elected with him under the state's system of 
plural representation. 9 Frequently, in these states and others, per- 
sonality rather than principle as usual proved decisive. John G. 
Jackson, who had been crippled in a duel with a North Carolina 
Federalist congressman, observed disgustedly after the defeat of 
his anointed successor that "here the People vote for men more 
than principles." 10 

The danger in considering the election a barometer of public 
opinion is very apparent. The New York canvass, inconclusive in 
any event, took place in May, 1810, far too early to make it ex- 
pressive of sentiment at the time the War Hawk Congress met. 
In state elections held in 1811, Republicanism of the Clintonian 
variety defeated the orthodox. Felix Grundy of Tennessee won 
in a contest in which the principal issues were not questions of 
international relations but rather land policy, his recent arrival in 

7 John A. Munroe, Federalist Delaware, 1775-1815 (New Brunswick, 1954), p. 
235^ 

8 Gore to King, May 5, 1811, Rufus King MSS, New- York Historical Society, 
Vol. XIII. 

9 Credentials, izth Congress j Dice R. Anderson, "The Insurgents of 1811," Amer- 
ican Historical Association, Annual Re-port, 1911, I (Washington, 1913), 173- 

10 John G. Jackson to Madison, April 19, 1811, James Madison MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

265 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

the state, and his training as a lawyer, a profession mistrusted 
by rude frontiersmen. 11 In Maryland the election of three men 
who later voted for war proved but little, for they succeeded three 
retiring members who had advocated strong measures. In Virginia, 
where voting did not take place until April, 1811, the success of 
six Federalists, as well as Randolph and one of his followers, 
largely offset the election of fourteen administration supporters. 
The question of war does not appear to have been an issue, and the 
new congressman from Jefferson's district, Hugh Nelson, proved 
to be a peace man. John G. Jackson's seat fell into Federalist hands 
for the first time since 1793. Randolph's reelection, in a contest 
with John W. Eppes, perhaps showed a mild trend in favor of the 
government. Although Eppes did not actively campaign, he won 
a few more votes than the candidate who opposed Randolph in 
1 809 ; on the other hand, he was far better known than Randolph's 
earlier rival. 12 

Two states most often considered hotbeds of the war spirit, 
Kentucky and South Carolina, contributed to the haphazard over- 
all pattern. In the Blue Grass State, Anthony New, a War Hawk, 
trounced Matthew Lyon, a veteran Republican who had long since 
abandoned the radicalism that marked his views in the 1790'$. The 
other selections proved little. Three incumbent Republicans were 
returned unopposed, as was Henry Clay, who succeeded a man 
appointed to federal office. Clay, who had previously served briefly 
in the Senate, announced that he preferred "the station of an im- 
mediate representative of the people." This commendably demo- 
cratic sentiment was reinforced by an awareness that his particular 
talents would find a more fertile field in the lower house. Replying 
to Monroe's congratulations on his election, Clay wrote, "Accus- 
tomed to the popular branch of a Legislature, and preferring the 
turbulence ... of a numbrous body to the solemn stillness of the 

11 Joseph H. Parks, Felix Grundy: Champion of Democracy (University, La., 
194.0), pp. 33-37. 

12 Charles H. Ambler, Sectionalism in Virginia from 1776 to 1861 (Chicago, 
1910), pp. 91-925 Charles H. Ambler, Thomas Ritchie (Richmond, 1913), p. 56; 
William C. Bruce, John Randolph of Roanoke (2 vols.; New York, 1922), I, 591-592. 
For Randolph's explanation of his slightly reduced margin, see his letters to Joseph 
M. Garnett, March 19, April 16, 20, 1811, ibid., pp. 754, 750. 

266 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Senate Chamber, it was a mere matter of taste that lead me . . . 
to change my station.'* The Congressman-elect said nothing about 
any mandate to press affairs with Britain to a climax. 13 In South 
Carolina, where the Republicans already held all the seats, four 
incumbents (including Cheves, who served briefly in the Eleventh 
Congress) were returned. Lemuel J. Alston, a very wealthy lawyer 
often accused of Federalism, suffered defeat at the hands of a War 
Hawk. Calhoun ran for a seat given up by a rather elderly cousin. 
His speeches showed that he favored war, but the Republican 
tradition of the district and the half-hearted campaign of his op- 
ponent made success by an overwhelming margin inevitable. In 
most other districts, retiring members left the field to successors 
approved without a contest. 14 

The election of 1810 II presented a fuzzy picture, at best. 
Certainly some candidates, especially those striving to oust in- 
cumbents, promised that they would fight for a forthright national 
policy. Certainly a few results reflected growing discontent with 
the cowardice shown by Congress since 1808. Still, few newspapers 
claimed at the time that thenew House of Representatives differed 
much from its predecessor. Most congressmen came to Washington 
in the fall of 1811 unpledged, probably undecided. Events be- 
tween the elections and the congressional vote for war, an interval 
sometimes as lon^ as two years, tipped the balance in favor of 
armed resistance. \ 

In the spring o 1811, not the last congressional elections but 
the purging of a cabinet member most effectively served the nation. 
As a diplomat, Robert Smith was incompetent. Furthermore, he 
constantly betrayed administration secrets and criticized govern- 
ment policy. He never subordinated the interests of his brother's 

13 Credentials, i2th Congress 5 Ellery L. Hall, "Canadian Annexation Sentiment 
in Kentucky Prior to the War of 1812," Kentucky State Historical Society, Register, 
XXVIII (1930), 377; Bernard Mayo, Henry Clay, Spokesman of the New West 
(Boston, 1937), p. 360$ Reporter (Lexington, Ky.)> May 19, 18105 Clay to Monroe, 
Nov. 13, 1 8 10, James Monroe MSS, Library of Congress. 

14 John H. Wolfe, Jeffersonian Democracy in South Carolina^ James Sprunt Studies 
in History and Political Science, Vol. XXIV, no. i (Chapel Hill, 1940), p. 2415 
Wiltse, of. cit. f p. 51. 

267 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

faction to those o the administration, he brawled constantly with 
Gallatin (even their wives quarreled), and he was a party to 
rising journalistic attacks upon the Secretary of the Treasury which 
aimed to discredit the entire administration. At last, in March, 
1811, Gallatin offered his resignation, actually a politely worded 
demand that the President choose between his two secretaries, the 
loyal and the disloyal. Madison, who may have known of the 
resignation offer in advance, declined to accept it. Instead, he called 
in the Secretary of State and demanded his resignation, offering 
at the same time to appoint Smith minister to Russia. When the 
Secretary asked to succeed Pinkney at London, the President made 
it plain cruelly plain that he sought only to shelve Smith, re- 
plying that the London appointment was impossible since "it was 
a place of discussions & negotiations, calling for appropriate talents 
& habits of business." 15 

Although Robert Smith briefly considered the appointment to 
honorable exile at St. Petersburg what would John Quincy 
Adams, the incumbent, have thought had he known that the 
President so considered it? he soon decided on an open break 
with the administration. Writing to his brother, Smith declared 
that Madison's "overthrow is my object and most assuredly will 
I effect it." The chosen vehicle was a pamphlet published in June 
despite the Senator's warnings. In his Address to the People of the 
United States, the ex-Secretary ascribed to the President the two 
Macon bills, "as unwise as humiliating," and in general sought to 
show that Madison's policy had been pro-French. Some of Smith's 
details were accurate: abandonment of the demand that France 
make compensation for seizures as a condition precedent to action 
against Britain, Madison's refusal to permit Smith to grill the new 
French minister on the exact state of imperial policy. There were 
also obvious falsehoods j who could but laugh when Smith claimed 
that during the Jefferson administration Madison relied upon him 

15 Memorandum on Smith's resignation, April , 1811, Gaillard Hunt, ed., 

The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 19001910), VIII, 137149. 
Macon commented that Madison's offer of the St. Petersburg- legation was characteris- 
tic of the President, who "cannot yet say no quite easy enough." Macon to Nicholson, 
Sept. 21, 1811, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress. 

268 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

for stylistic improvement of diplomatic correspondence? And the 
address breathed such malignance and pomposity that few could 
take it seriously, even Federalists ordinarily delighted to have 
evidence of Madison's Francophilia. William Lee and Joel Barlow 
answered the Address, but in general the administration let the 
ex-Secretary hang himself with his own rope. It was, said Ran- 
dolph's friend., James M. Garnett, "one of the rare instances of a 
man's giving the finishing stroke to his own character, in his eager- 
ness to ruin his enemy." 16 

Before Madison challenged Smith, he had already decided that 
James Monroe should be the new secretary of state. The Presi- 
dent's choice was possible only because Monroe's feelings had 
undergone a steady change since he returned home in December, 
1807, and let his name be put forth against Madison in the presi- 
dential election. Early in 1 809 Monroe offered his services as a 
special envoy to London and Paris. Such a mission, he said, might 
result in a settlement with one power which would let America 
concentrate her fire against the other. (Monroe clearly showed 
that he preferred arrangement with Britain, since he believed 
Napoleon aimed ultimately at the conquest of America.) The 
outgoing president, who declined Monroe's offer, correctly in- 
terpreted it as evidence his old protege was drifting back into the 
fold. Toward the end of the year, when Monroe declined appoint- 
ment as governor of Upper Louisiana, he made it clear he would 
accept higher office if the new president offered it. 17 

In January, 1 8 1 1, Monroe became governor of Virginia. Before 
the election he declared that he intended to cooperate with the 
national administration, and Madisonian votes elected him. Jeffer- 

16 Smith to Samuel Smith, March 26, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Con- 
gress $ Robert Smith's Address to the People of the United States (Baltimore, 1811) 5 
Lee to Sarah P. Lee, Sept. 9, 1811, Mary L. Mann, ed., A Yankee Jefersonian: 
Selections from the Diary and Letters of William Lee (Cambridge, 1958), p. 1405 
Garnett to Randolph, July 23, 1811, John Randolph MSS, Library o Congress. 

17 Monroe to Jefferson, Jan. 18, 1809, Monroe MSS} Jefferson to Monroe, Jan. 29, 
1809, ibid.; Monroe to Jefferson, Feb. 2, 1809, Stanislaus M. Hamilton, ed., The 
Writings of James Monroe (7 vols.; New York, 189 8- 1903), V, 931015 Jefferson 
to Madison, March 30, 1809, Jefferson MSS; Jefferson to Madison, Nov. 30, 1809, 
Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson 
(Memorial ed.; 20 vols.; Washington, 1903-1904.), XII, 330-332. 

269 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

son congratulated the new governor, "altho* it is not a field on 
which much genius can be displayed," because the election restored 
Monroe to prominence and demonstrated Republican faith in him. 
John Randolph, on the other hand, wrote in his diary, "Richmond, 
Monroe, Traitor." From this point on, the already weakening tie 
between them was broken, although Monroe attempted for a time 
to preserve it. 18 

Reassured by the available evidence but still unwilling to risk 
rebuff, President Madison asked Senator Richard Brent to write 
to Monroe shortly after Congress adjourned. Would Monroe, the 
Senator's letter inquired, accept appointment as secretary of state? 
Brief but intense negotiations followed. Monroe obviously eagerly 
sought office, partly because he hoped to turn policy in an anti- 
French direction, and his Quid friends, Taylor of Caroline and 
Littleton Tazewell, urged him to join the Cabinet. On the other 
hand, Monroe disliked the weakness he thought he saw in admin- 
istration policy and clearly feared that connection with it would 
harm his own political fortunes. To Monroe's queries Madison 
replied with a letter that was in large part a masterpiece of obf usca- 
tion. He did state that "in favor of a cordial accommodation with 
G. Britain, there has certainly never ceased to be a prevailing dis- 
position in the Executive Councils, since I became connected with 
them." Reassured as to the neutrality of government policy, per- 
haps confident that he himself could provide the needed vigor, 
Monroe accepted office at the end of March. 19 On April 4, 181 1, 
he left Richmond by stagecoach, and on the morning of the sixth 
he took up his duties at the Department of State. 

Monroe's appointment caused a good deal of speculation. Some 
Federalists thought it showed that Madison, recognizing his errors, 
had decided to adopt a policy more favorable to England. Others, 
more cynical, explained the appointment as a political bribe to 

18 Jefferson to Monroe, Jan. 25, 1811, Monroe MSSj diary entry of Jan. 12, 1811, 
Bruce, 0$. cit. y I, 348, 

19 Monroe to Tazewell, March 14, 1811, Monroe MSSj Monroe to Brent, March 
18, 1811, ibid.$ Monroe to Madison, March 23, 1811, ibid.; Madison to Monroe, 
private, March 26, 1811, Madison MSS$ Monroe to Madison, March 29, x8xx, 
Monroe MSS. 

270 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

eliminate Monroe as a presidential candidate in 1812, and the 
British charge, Morier, went even further when he combined with 
this a suggestion that sheer economic necessity had influenced 
Monroe. 20 A number of considerations actually caused the gover- 
nor to accept national office. Despite the deep wound suffered at 
the hands of Jefferson and Madison, Monroe remained basically 
a loyal Republican, at least to the extent of believing that the suc- 
cess of Federalism or of factionalism would be fatal to the nation. 
His own appointment, he hoped, would contribute to party unity. 
Personal ambition, of course, also played a part in his decision 5 
in no other way could he so effectively restore himself to the front 
rank of presidential contenders, even if he would have to await the 
completion of Madison's second term. Finally, Monroe obviously 
expected to alter the direction of American policy. As al- 
ways, he considered peace with Britain the object of highest 
priority. He wanted to work for it j he assumed, like so many con- 
temporaries, that he could thrust his will upon Madison j and he 
was confident the British Cabinet would provide no insuperable 
obstacle. Within a short time Monroe would learn that British 
demands went far beyond any that he was prepared to accept. 

The first step toward conversion resulted from a naval clash 
in May, 1811, brought on by a spate of impressments near the 
American coast, "We are all in a Bustle," Samuel Smith wrote 
to his son, "in Consequence of the Cruel Conduct of Four British 
Cruizers who have been off the Coast for these few weeks, they 
press the Young Men from our Coasters & in one Instance a Young 
Man who never had been at sea before." Early in May Commodore 
Rodgers sailed from Norfolk in U.S.S. President) and the Ameri- 
can people leaped to the conclusion that he had been ordered 
to demand the release of impressed Americans. "Indeed the im- 
pressments can no longer be tolerated," Senator Smith continued. 
"Pusyllanimity has been Charged on the President," and the na- 
tion hoped that he had changed his course. Few desired that war 



Centinel (Boston), April 10, 1811$ Gore to King, May 5, 1811, 
King MSS, Vol. XIII j Federal Republican (Baltimore), April 4, i8nj Morier 
$23 to Wellesley, May 9, 1811, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record Office, 
FO 5/74. 

271 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

should follow, "but if it should, the Nation will meet it on this 
Ground with Alacrity, all parties are outraged, federal & Democrat 
are all ... united on this point." 21 When even Samuel Smith 
declared himself ready to rally behind the President, the national 
temper was certainly aroused. 

Actually, Rodgers apparently carried only general orders nearly 
a year old. Neither these orders nor any others that have come to 
light directed Rodgers to use force to recover seamen recently im- 
pressed, and Monroe subsequently denied that any such orders 
had been issued. The nation believed they had, and the National 
Intelligencer's equivocal language strengthened this impression. 22 

Just after sundown on May 1 6, 1 8 1 1 , after a long chase, Rodgers 
overhauled H.M.S. Little Belt, a Danish-built sloop taken at 
Copenhagen. A brief cannonade followed, and the Little Belt 
struck her colors. Each commander subsequently claimed the other 
had fired first. For the Englishman this would have been fool- 
hardy, considering the disparity of force, unless he was convinced 
that the President was French. On the other hand, a slight pre- 
ponderance of the evidence supports Rodgers 3 claim that the Little 
Belt did fire first. In any event, the evidence was conflicting enough 
to permit both governments to support their respective com- 
manders. Whatever Madison and his Cabinet desired, the public 
reaction made it prudent to do so. Even the Columbian Centinel y 
Boston's Federalist bellwether, supported the recovery of im- 
pressed seamen by force. This, it said, "would not be War, but 
Reprisal, justified by the Law of Nations." The National Intelli- 
gencer soon announced that commanders who forcibly vindicated 
national rights would get administration support. 23 

The conflict naturally produced an equivalent reaction in Eng- 
land. A few newspapers emphasized the difficulty of establishing 
which commander had fired first, and the Morning Chronicle 

21 Samuel Smith to John S. Smith, May 23, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS. 

22 Charles O. Paullin, Commodore John Rodgers (Cleveland, 1910), pp. 211212, 
22 off.} National Intelligencer (Washington), May 23, 1811. 

^Columbian Centinel, May 29, 18115 National Intelligencer > June 6, 1811. The 
Centinel combined its defense of the forcible recovery of deserters with the usual 
personal assaults upon Madison. 

272 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

charged that the clash, for the precipitation of which, however, 
it blamed Rodgers, sprang ultimately from the Cabinet's "folly in 
not confirming the arrangement that Mr. Erskine so sensibly 
made." Most papers threw the entire responsibility on the Ameri- 
cans. The Courier even called for war: "The blood of our mur- 
dered countrymen must be revenged, and war must ensue. The 
conduct of America leaves us no alternative." 24 The government 
contented itself with a well-publicized dispatch of naval reinforce- 
ments to the American theater. 

At Washington, Secretary Monroe's initial moderation pleased 
the new British minister, Jackson's long-delayed successor. Mon- 
roe's mildness did not last long. The administration accepted 
Rodgers' story, fixing blame on the Little Belt, and realized that 
America had been exhilarated by this retaliation for the insult 
offered to Barron four years before. In the middle of July and 
again in September, the United States government categorically 
declined to consider a British request for reparation, at least until 
the earlier Chesapeake affair had been settled. Even then, the 
British minister predicted, admission of guilt was highly unlikely. 25 

The Little Belt President clash helped breed the psychological 
setting for war. Englishmen considered it an unprovoked attack 
made successful only by the bully's size. They feared that, unless 
forced to apologize, America would lose all respect for the mistress 
of the seas. Most British newspapers reprinted a gleeful American 
statement that "She Stoops to Conquer, or the Mistakes of a Night, 
a new play with an old title, was performed with loud applause 
... off the Capes of Virginia, by the frigate President, and a 
British picaroon, to the gratification of all America." 26 This atti- 
tude, so offensive to Britons, was indeed widespread in the United 
States. The shrill cheers for Rodgers showed that the American 
people, while not yet ready for full-scale war, were ashamed of the 
debilitating, sterile policies of the recent past. 

Six weeks after the sea fight, a British minister at last arrived 

24 Morning Chronicle (London), July 17, 1811 j Courier (London), July 17, 1811. 

25 Foster #2, #7, #11 to Wellesley, July 2, 18, Sept. 17, 1811, FO 5/76. 

(London), July i, 1811. 

273 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

in America. Since August, 1810, a charge, John Philip Morier, 
had headed the legation. Morier told Jackson, "I had rather get 
into a soupe, by a conduct spirited & spurning at their infamous 
proceedings toward us, than by one of the milk and water kind," 
but he actually followed a moderate course. He became compara- 
tively popular in Washington and, years later, looked back upon 
his stay with complacent pleasure. 27 Although young, Morier had 
had diplomatic experience in Eastern Europe, and in other times 
his seminoble pedigree would have been considered a compliment 
to the United States. As it was, his junior diplomatic rank out- 
weighed everything else. As a matter of prestige, the United States 
could not continue Pinkney as minister to London while a mere 
charge headed the British mission to America. In 1 8 1 1 Pinkney 
returned home. 

Too late to prevent Pinkney's departure, the slothful marquis 
settled upon Augustus John Foster as the new minister. Foster's 
parents, unless one accepts the romantic stories that the Prince 
Regent actually sired him, were a member of Parliament and an 
earPs daughter who, upon being widowed, had become first the 
mistress and then the wife of the Duke of Devonshire. His aunt 
was married to the Earl of Liverpool, a cabinet member. After an 
Oxford education Foster toured Europe in the grand style, then 
served in the United States under Merry. Recently he had been 
charge d'affaires at Stockholm. 28 With his mother's assistance, 
Foster actively sought the Washington post, hoping it would lead 
to rapid advances in the diplomatic corps. His availability further 
condemns Wellesley for letting the post remain vacant so long. 

In 1 8 1 1 Foster was thirty-three. He was handsome, self-assured, 
and so confident of his superior breeding that he felt able to ignore 
American crudities and insults. Foster's diary and letters are full 

27 Morier to Jackson, Jan. 24, 1811, Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record 
Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/615 Morier to Bagot, Sept. 17, 1817, Sir Charles 
Bagot MSS, Levens Hall, Westmorland, Letters Received 1817. 

28 Foster's background is sketched in the introduction to Richard B. Davis, ed., 
Jeffersonian America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by Sir Augustus 
John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), and this volume of course contains his account 
of the winter in Washington. More information about the young man and his mother 
will be found in Vere Foster, ed., The Two Duchesses (London, 1898). 

274 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

of contemptuous comments he was particularly amused when an 
uncouth congressman urinated in his fireplace and when other 
legislators, confusing caviar for jam, had to spit out their overly 
large mouthfuls but he successfully concealed his contempt be- 
neath a bland exterior. At Washington Foster cut a wide social 
swath and spent, he later claimed, 9,000 on entertainment. "Mr. 
Foster is a pretty young gentleman," a Federalist commented. 
"But his appearance is too much that of a boy for a Minister Pleni- 
potentiary. He looks as if he was better calculated for a ballroom 
or drawing room, than for a foreign minister." Foster's diffident 
manner did not project British sternness to congressmen, and his 
inner antirepublicanism prevented him from accurately weighing 
events. "Foster is a very gentlemanlike young man, quite equal to 
do nothing at his post," Francis Jackson observed. Jackson incor- 
rectly thought this "now the best possible policy to follow." 29 
The days of Rose and of Jackson himself had passed. 

The Cabinet failed to see this. The ministers believed the United 
States would soon realize what seemed so obvious, that France 
had not really repealed her edicts. Then the Americans would 
either reverse their policy or insist upon effective French repeal, 
and then Britain might withdraw the Orders in Council. There 
seemed to be no hurry. Presidents had talked angrily, Congress 
had stirred before. Elections known to the Cabinet by April, 1 8 1 1, 
gave no clear hint of a new departure. Consequently the most 
important instructions handed to Foster merely rehearsed the 
arguments justifying the Orders in Council. Other instructions 
directed Foster to protest against the threat to Spanish West Flor- 
ida without using "any hostile or menacing language." England 
did not intend to "vindicate the Rights of Spain by force of Arms." 
Thus these foolish instructions ordered Foster to irritate the Amer- 
icans by criticizing their policy without authorizing him to make 
protests powerful enough to serve any useful purpose. On the other 

29 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, Dec. 30, 1811, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters 
of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 3745 Jackson to George Jackson, Feb. 19, 
x8n, Lady Jackson, ed., The "Bath Archives: a Further Selection from the "Diaries 
and Letters of Sir George Jackson (2 vols. ; London, 1873), I, 213. 

275 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

hand, instructions on the Chesapeake affair were tailored to fit 
Pinkney's view, as Wellesley understood it, of what the United 
States required. 30 

In preparing Foster's main instructions, on the Orders in Coun- 
cil, the Foreign Office drew heavily upon a memorandum prepared 
by Spencer Perceval. 31 Since Perceval was the most forthright 
defender of the orders in the Cabinet, the memorandum and the 
instructions, though loosely organized, are a comprehensive de- 
fense of the British position. The Orders in Council, Perceval main- 
tained, retaliated against the Berlin Decree, which released Britain 
from the restraints of international law. When the French aban- 
doned the principles of the Continental System, Britain would 
gladly withdraw her edicts. She could not consider the Cadore let- 
ter adequate, and its acceptance by the United States was an un- 
friendly act. The letter proclaimed not absolute but conditional 
repeal, as subsequent French action made clear. Even more im- 
portant, the repeal promised by Cadore was meaningless, since 
other French regulations had virtually the same effect as the Ber- 
lin and Milan decrees. These so-called municipal regulations, 
Perceval said, by "prohibiting all Commerce in British articles 
all over the Continent, would leave the most pernicious & injurious 
parts of the Berlin & Milan decrees in full force & operation." 
The Perceval ministry clearly intended to make America suffer 
the loss of a continental market as long as Britain did. Selfishness 
so naked could be clothed only in terms of economic necessity, not 
right} the British usually tried to keep this unattractive garb out 
of sight. 

The British government refused to consider Fox's Blockade of 
1806 part of the same system as the Orders in Council, but main- 
tained that it met the requirements of international law because 

30 Wellesley to Prince Regent, May 15, 1811, Royal Archives, Windsor Castle. 
For the instructions see Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to 
the United States, 1791-1812, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 
1036, III (Washington, 1941), 310 fE. 

31 Perceval memorandum, n.d., Spencer Perceval MSS (examined while temporarily 
on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London), A/i5$ Wellesley #i to 
Foster, April 10, 1811, Mayo, ed., Instructions, pp. 310318. The following para- 
graphs rest on these two sources. 

276 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Fox had proclaimed it only after receiving assurances that the 
Royal Navy could make it an effective and not a mere paper 
blockade. If Britain consented to lump this regulation with the 
Orders in Council, admittedly illegal except as retaliation, France 
could claim that Britain was confessing her own priority of guilt 
against the law of nations. At the same time, apparent acceptance 
of the extremely restrictive French definition of blockade would 
compromise England's right to restore blockades like Fox's if con- 
ditions later made them advisable. The last paragraph of the in- 
structions, doubtless prepared with an eye to future publication 
in navy-proud Britain, put the argument in high-flown language: 
"No Extremity can induce His Royal Highness to relinquish the 
ancient and established Rules of Maritime War, the maintenance 
of which is indispensable, not only to the Commercial Interests, 
but to the Naval Strength, and to the National Honor of Great 
Britain, as well as to the rights of all Maritime States, and to the 
general prosperity of Navigation and Commerce throughout the 
Civilized World." 

Two practical alterations, one soon withdrawn, somewhat sof- 
tened the instructions. The British government made it clear that, 
while insisting upon the legitimacy of blockades, it considered Fox's 
Blockade submerged in the Orders in Council. "That Blockade," 
read the instructions, "would not be continued after the repeal of 
the Orders in Council, unless it should be maintained by an ade- 
quate force . . . according to the acknowledged Law of Nations." 
PercevaPs memorandum reveals his fear that the United States 
would adopt the French view that blockades, to be legal, must 
include investment by land and sea. If America did not, however, 
this particular issue would disappear. The other, short-lived con- 
cession involved ships that had been captured after sailing from 
American ports in an honest conviction that the Cadore letter 
would bring about repeal of the Orders in Council. Condemnation 
proceedings against these ships, both Perceval's memorandum and 
the instructions stated, would be stayed "as long as any hope can 
be entertained of prevailing on America to correct that error [ac- 
cepting Cadore's letter], and to render justice to Great Britain." 

277 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Unfortunately, later in the month the Cabinet abandoned hope 
of changing America's mind and told Foster that condemnation 
would no longer be stayed. 32 

Some of Perceval's arguments had force. As he charged, French 
repeal had been conditional and incomplete. Napoleon's definition 
of blockade did not accord with traditional practice, nor could Eng- 
land possibly accept it. Fox's Blockade had perhaps conformed with 
the requirements of international law. It might even be that "the 
rights of all Maritime States, and . . . the general prosperity of 
Navigation and Commerce throughout the Civilized World" de- 
pended upon successful British resistance to Napoleon. Except 
with that messianic argument Britain could in no way defend her 
insistence that America tolerate the Orders in Council until Europe 
admitted English goods. Uncandidly, the instructions claimed that 
British policy had been "calculated for the purpose of encouraging 
the Trade of Neutrals through Great Britain," whereas actually 
the license system, revivified after temporary suspension following 
the Order in Council of 1809, notoriously discriminated against 
neutrals. The ministry, which announced tenderness for innocent 
American merchants deluded by their government and stayed con- 
demnation of their ships, did not release these vessels and, quickly 
abandoning hope for a major shift in American policy, soon vin- 
dictively condemned the innocents. Whether reasonable or not, 
the instructions of April, 1811, were undeniably obdurate. Can- 
ning's flashing phrases and Wellesley's ponderous sentences added 
up to about the same thing. Unlike Canning, the marquis had the 
misfortune to act when America was at last raising itself from 
the mire. 

Supplementary instructions prepared on the eve of Foster's de- 
parture showed that Britain, if she shifted her policy at all, in- 
tended to move toward greater firmness. Not only did Wellesley 
announce that court proceedings on the Fox would proceed, he 
also ordered Foster to protest the new nonintercourse legislation 

32 Wellesley #6 to Foster, April 29, 1811, Mayo, ed., Instructions, p. 323. Welles- 
ley to Prince Regent, May 15, 1811, Royal Archives, indicates that two weeks later 
these instructions had still not been dispatched. 

278 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

and to warn America, although discreetly, that Britain was not 
unarmed for a commercial contest. "A perseverance in the . . . 
hostile measures already commenced towards our Maritime and 
Commercial Rights and Interests," Wellesley huffed, "will com- 
pel us to resort to adequate means of [economic] retaliation." 33 

Augustus Foster sailed in H.M.S. Minerva early in May, 1 8 1 1. 
He left behind a broken romance with the girl who later married 
Lord Byron, but he carried with him a staff of seven servants and 
a new secretary of legation, Anthony St. John Baker. On June 29, 
when the Minerva arrived off Annapolis, a deserter leaped over- 
board to risk the three- or four-mile swim to shore. The same 
day William Pinkney sailed into the bay in U.S.S. Essex. Ignoring 
the possible symbolism of these events, Foster entered upon his 
duties with a good spirit. After a brief stay in Georgetown he 
established a new legation in the Seven Buildings, at Pennsylvania 
Avenue and Nineteenth Street, rejecting the old legation selected 
by Merry as too small and too distant for his purposes. On July 2 
Monroe introduced Foster to the President. Four days later, after 
an Independence Day celebration from which Foster prudently ab- 
sented himself, Madison entertained him pleasantly at the White 
House, and the secretaries soon followed suit. Already the new 
minister had begun talks with Monroe. CC I found in the American 
Secretary, a tone & manner of the most mild & conciliatory nature," 
he reported. 34 

This tone did not last long. Foster's instructions precluded any 
real mutuality, as the Secretary of State learned when the British 
minister revealed the contents at one of their first meetings. State 
Department files, not available to Monroe while he sulked at 
Albemarle, showed how much Britain had changed since the days 
of the Ministry of All the Talents, This information aided Madi- 
son, most effective and stubborn in private discussion, in bringing 
the new secretary to his own position. Even before Foster arrived, 
the administration newspaper declared that if his negotiations 

83 Wellesley #6, #7 to Foster, April 29, 1811, Mayo, ed., Instructions, pp. 

323-324$ Wellesley #8 to Foster, secret, April , 1811, ibid., pp. 324-325. 

34 Foster #i, #2 to Wellesley, June 29, July 2, 1811, FO 5/76. 

279 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

failed, as they were almost certain to do, the United States must 
rigorously enforce nonimportation or "substitute for it some meas- 
ure more consonant to the feelings of the nation." 35 This charac- 
teristically opaque language at least showed a determination not 
to abandon the ground to Britain. Apparently with little protest, 
James Monroe fell in with this line. To have done otherwise would 
have been politically ruinous, for Monroe had burned his bridges 
with Federalists and Republican dissidents. 

Although Foster believed Monroe's attitude milder than Madi- 
son's, their conversations do not bear him out. Monroe made 
suggestions which he said were his own, but on no occasion did these 
compromise basic American positions. Bait dangled by the Secre- 
tary on his own responsibility left the United States free to try 
a more attractive fly or even a naked hook later on. On most sub- 
jects the Secretary was certainly firm enough. He rejected the 
British protest against threats to West Florida, observing casually 
that the province must sooner or later fall into American hands. 
He adopted an increasingly rigid line on the Little Belt affair. 
He insisted that his government would never admit that Cadore's 
letter had not resulted in repeal of the decrees. "I know of no 
arguments, no mode of reasoning, which can avail in a discussion 
with such tempers," Foster complained with some asperity. Only 
increased French action against commerce, the minister believed, 
would shake Madison and Monroe from their position. 36 

Two items indicated that the administration still hoped for set- 
tlement with Britain, even if it meant offending France. Monroe 
told Foster that the President considered the British position on 
Fox's Blockade satisfactory. America welcomed the assurance that 
future blockades would be effectively maintained, and would not 
join France in demanding formal revocation of the blockade of 
i8o6. 37 Monroe put forward an important hint concerning the 
Orders in Council. "He assured me," Foster reported, "that if 
Great Britain would issue such a conditional and ambiguous prom- 

35 National Intelligencer > April 16, 1811. 

36 Foster #3, #5, #6, #7, #8 to Wellesley, July 5, 7, it, 18, 18, 1811, 
FO 5/76. 

37 Foster #5, #6 to Wellesley, July 7, 12, 1811, ibid. 

280 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

ise of a revocation of Her Orders as France did of the decrees last 
August, that it will be considered enough to authorize the cessation 
of the operation of the Non-importation act against her Com- 
merce." 38 Two fake repeals would be considered to cancel each 
other out. Foster felt unable to meet this tremendous leap toward 
common ground with even a genteel step forward. When the Brit- 
ish Cabinet finally tiptoed in this direction months later, America 
had clambered back to higher terrain. 

Far from urging his government to pick up Monroe's hint, 
which might have cut the ground from under future War Hawks, 
Foster advised firmness and adopted it himself. 39 In formal notes, 
he demanded America's proof of French repeal and threatened 
retaliation if nonimportation continued. After reading one of these 
notes Madison wrote: "Foster seems more disposed to play the 
diplomatist, than the conciliatory negotiator. His letter though 
not very skillfully made up, is evidently calculated for the public 
here, as well as for his own Govt. In this view his evasion & sophis- 
tical efforts may deserve attention." Attention they got, in two 
assaults upon the British position prepared jointly by Madison 
and Monroe. These notes, somewhat defensive in discussing French 
repeal and the American interpretation of "municipal regulations," 
were devastating when they ripped into Foster's statement that the 
orders would be maintained until Napoleon permitted British 
goods to enter the Continent. 40 When the notes became public 
through transmission to Congress iq. tlie autumn, England's audac- 
ity astounded even the Federalists., TSjhis demand apparently made 
the administration, or at least Monroe, realize the barrenness of 
all hopes for an immediate accommodation. "A demand so entirely 
inconsistent with the rights of the U States, and degrading to them 
as an independent nation," Monroe wrote an English correspond- 
ent, "has been viewed in no other light than that of evidence ofsa 
determined hostility in your government against this country/ 

38 Foster #8 to Wellesley, July 18, 1811, ibid. 

39 Foster $6 to Wellesley, July 12, 1811, ibid. 

40 Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), pp. 340-343; 
Madison to Monroe, July 2, 1811, Monroe MSS. Madison's letter, certainly misdated, 
should probably read August 2, 1811. 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Threateningly, perhaps with emphasis for political effect in Brit- 
ain, the Secretary added: "War, dreadful as the alternative is, 
could not do us more injury than the present state of things, and it 
would certainly be more honorable to the nation, and gratifying to 
the publick feelings." 41 

By the end of July, 1811, deadlock clearly had been reached. 
The President and the Secretary withdrew to Virginia, carrying 
on correspondence by courier. Monroe suffered a painful injury 
when brushed from his horse, but he was able to take whatever 
action was required by notes that flowed southward from the de- 
partmental clerk left in charge at Washington. Meanwhile, Foster 
wended his way northward to Philadelphia, a favorite summer 
mecca of diplomats. In Chester he dined at a tavern owned by a 
member of Congress. Neither there nor anywhere else did he pick 
up information that caused him to warn his government that the 
American temper might be changing. The country's alarm over 
reports that Britain would declare war as retaliation for nonimpor- 
tation or the attack on the Little Belt, Foster reported, "proves 
pretty forcibly how very little is to be dreaded that this Country 
will originate measures of hostility against us." 42 

While Foster, Madison, and Monroe vacationed, news of an 
impending Indian war flowed through the Appalachians. In Octo- 
ber, 1809, Governor William Henry Harrison of the Indiana 
Territory inveigled Indians assembled at Fort Wayne into a ces- 
sion of nearly 3 million acres. The Madison administration, while 
ratifying this treaty, directed Harrison not to occupy the ceded 
territory immediately. The weak warnings of Secretary of War 
Eustis, however, deterred the governor far less than threats de- 
livered to him in the summer of 1 8 10 and again in 1 8 1 1 by Tecum- 
seh, speaking for a new Indian league organized by Tecumseh 
himself and his brother, the Prophet. Harrison's provocative state- 
ments to the legislature, accounts of increased subsidies to tribes 

41 Monroe to [Holland?], n.d., Monroe MSS, fol. 3145. This letter, written in 
reply to one of July 15, was probably sent in late September or early October. Hamil- 
ton, op. cit t> V, 191, suggests that it was addressed to Auckland, but references to 
Fox, Holland's relative, make Holland the more likely addressee. 

42 Foster #16 to Wellesley, Sept. 17, 1811, FO 5/76. 

282 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

that visited Canada, and, in 1 8 1 1 , news that Tecumseh had gone 
southward to attempt to add other tribes to his confederacy ignited 
a real fear of Indian hostilities all along the Western frontier. 
Foster, who made passing reference to propaganda connecting 
Britain with the Indians, did not consider it particularly important. 

The crisis did not come until after Foster's return to Washing- 
ton. In July, 181 1, responding to Harrison's reports of approach- 
ing war, Secretary Eustis ordered a detachment of regulars to the 
governor's aid. Three days later the Secretary wrote that Madison 
still hoped for peace and trusted that Harrison would follow a 
pacific policy. As Madison and Eustis should have known, per- 
emptory orders alone could restrain the aggressive governor. Har- 
rison gathered together an expedition of regulars and volunteers, 
construed in his own fashion directives from Eustis, and plunged 
northward to break up the Indian forces and establish white pos- 
session of the Fort Wayne cession. At dawn on November 7, 181 1, 
Indians from the Prophet's Town attacked Harrison's army. At 
the cost of about 200 men, Harrison narrowly held his position, 
then burned the Indian settlement and retired precipitately to the 
Ohio. News of this encounter, called the battle of Tippecanoe, ran 
swiftly across the nation. 43 

Americans blamed the British for the Indian troubles. During 
the crisis preceding the Jay treaty and again after the Chesapeake 
affair, friction with the Western tribes had accompanied difficulties 
with England. Few Americans accepted^as coincidental a recur- 
rence of this friction in 1810 and i8n/As early as 1810, calling 
for the conquest of Canada, Henry Claf demanded: "Is it nothing 
to us to extinguish the torch that lights up savage warfare?" News- 
papers in Clay's part of the country took up the cry. One called 
for decisive action to wipe out the threat of "the tomahawk and 
scalping knife, which for many years past, and at this very mo- 
ment the inhuman blood-thirsty cabinet of St. James had inces- 
santly endeavored to bring on the women and children of our west- 

43 For the chain of events leading to the battle of Tippecanoe, see Freeman Cleaves, 
Old Tfy'pecanoe: William Henry Harrison and His Time (New York, 1939), pp. 
63 ff.j Dorothy B. Goebel, William Henry Harrison, A Political Biography, Indiana 
Historical Collections, Vol. XIV (Indianapolis, 1926), pp. 115 ff. 

283 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

ern frontiers." Another sanctimoniously bewailed the fact that 
"British intrigue and British gold . . . has greater influence with 
them [the Indians] of late than American justice and benevo- 
lence." 4 * 

After Tippecanoe such complaints multiplied. Andrew Jackson 
denounced "Secrete agents of Great Britain" as catalysts of the 
attack. The Lexington Reporter asked if Congress intended to 
"treat the citizens of the Western country as they have treated the 
[impressed] seamen" for eighteen years, then added, "The whole 
body of Western citizens call for the probing of this British villiny 
to the bottom." Back East, Duane's Aurora proclaimed that "war 
has been begun with British arms and by the Indians instigated 
by British emissaries. The blood of American citizens have already 
been shed in actual war, begun undeclared." 45 Denunciations con- 
tinued throughout the winter, until even Foster recognized their 
importance. 

The easiest way to end the Indian threat, many agreed, was to 
drive the British from Canada. Jefferson considered the conquest 
of Canada, at least as far as the walls of Quebec, an almost costless 
corollary of war with England. During the war scare of 1 807 one of 
his young supporters even argued for enlistment for the duration 
rather than for a twelve-month period, on the ground the former 
would actually be shorter. Five years later Andrew Jackson ap- 
pealed to the youth of Tennessee to seize the opportunity of "per- 
forming a military ^promenade" by joining him in a visit to Niagara 
Falls and Quebec. "That which pleases me most in these people, 
Monseigneur," the French minister reported to his chief, "is the 
tranquil confidence they have in their means of aggression and 
of resistance." 48 Serurier intended no sarcasm. 

44 Annah , nth Cong-., ist and zd sess., p. 5805 Reporter, Nov. 24, 18105 Kentucky 
Gazette, Aug. 27, 1811, quoted in Julius W. Pratt, Expansionists of 1812 (New 
York, 1925), p. 45. 

45 Jackson to Harrison, Nov. 30, 1811, John S. Bassett, ed., Correspondence of 
Andrew Jackson (7 vols.j Washington, 1926-1933), I, 2105 Reporter, Dec. 7, iSiij 
Aurora (Philadelphia) , Dec, i o, 1 8 1 1 . 

46 Wirt to Dabney Carr, Aug. 12, 1807, John P. Kennedy, Memoirs of the Life 
of William Wirt (2 vols.j Philadelphia, 1850), I, 2025 Jackson, divisional orders, 
March 7, 1812, Bassett, op. cit., I, 2225 Serurier #26 to Minister of Foreign Rela- 
tions, Aug. 31, 1811, Archives des Affaires 6trangeres, Correspondance Politique, 
tats-Unis (photostats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXVI. 

284 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

In 1 8 1 1 and 1812 few Americans stopped to ask for a real "prob- 
ing of ... British villiny to the bottom." After all, the Inde- 
pendent Chronicle argued, "it is not rational to conclude that the 
Indians would have taken up arms against us, had they not been 
instigated by British mercenaries." Time did not provide evidence 
to back up this logic. In his war message the President merely 
stated that it would be difficult to account for Indian hostilities un- 
less they had been inspired by the British. A House committee 
report on the message, presented by John C. Calhoun, admitted 
the evidence was uncertain but added, "your committee are not 
disposed to occupy much time in investigating." 47 

British policy was not what most Americans assumed it to be. 
Canadian agents maintained close connections with Indians living 
in American territory and sometimes encouraged the Indians to 
think Britain would support an offensive war against the United 
States. At the top level, however, British policy was essentially 
precautionary, based, as Castlereagh put it, on the principle that 
"we are to consider not so milch their Use as Allies, as their De- 
structiveness if Enemies.' 5 Indian neutrality in an Anglo-American 
war, although desired by Bathurst even after hostilities began in 
1 8 1 2, was felt to be unattainably Utopian. 48 Britain therefore tried 
to make sure that if war came the Indians would side with her. 
Both to husband Indian strength and to avoid a flare-up against 
Britain precisely like that which arose in 1811, the Cabinet tried 
to prevent war between Indians and frontiersmen. ; 

Sir James Craig and Isaac Brock, the principal Canadian execu- 
tors of this policy, loyally attempted to implement it. Craig once 
even informed Washington of Indian plans he was attempting to 
check, and in 1811 Brock specifically stated to the Indians that 
British supplies would cease if they fought the United States. 
Brock warned his superiors that the distinction between encourag- 
ing Indians and simply preserving their friendship was a difficult 
one, and after Tippecanoe he added that the existing policy would 

47 Independent Chronicle (Boston), Dec. 5, 18115 James D. Richardson, ed., 
A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents (Washing-ton, 1897), 
I, 503-504$ Annals, izth Cong., id sess., p. 1551. 

48 Castlereagh #19 to Craig, April 8, 1809, Colonial Office Records, Public 
Record Office, CO 43/225 Bathurst #6 to Prevost, Aug. 10, 1812, CO 43/*3- 

285 



WAR HAWKS ARE PLEDGED 

eventually destroy British influence among the tribes. However, 
only a month before the American declaration of war he wrote, 
"The utmost attention is continued to be paid that no just cause 
of umbrage is given, in our intercourse with the western tribes, 
to the United States Government." 49 Policy was one thing, execu- 
tion another 5 from time to time subordinate officials and Brock 
himself stepped over the line sketched by London. But no respon- 
sible Englishman desired the clash of arms which began along 
Harrison's perimeter, knowing full well that this could only 
strengthen America's sense of grievance. 

History is often influenced as much by erroneous conviction as 
by truth. Believing that the tendrils of Indian war wound back 
to Canada, many Westerners desired to apply their axes to the 
root. In addition, some Americans doubtless wanted to conquer 
Canada to gain for their country a monopoly of the fur trade. John 
Randolph, who ascribed every conceivable evil motive to the War 
Hawks, alleged that the Western farmer and his spokesmen 
wanted to plunder the British Empire of fertile agricultural land 
in Upper Canada. But millions of acres of desirable land were 
still available south of the border, p.nd on the other hand British 
possession of Canada did not prevent frontiersmen from settling 
there. Four of every five settlers in Upf)er Canada were American 
by either birth or descent, only a small proportion of them Loyal- 
ist refugees. Any Westerner troubled by a land shortage could 
follow a well-worn path to Canada. National loyalties did not 
yet have binding force, at least among impoverished or marginal 
farmers. 50 

49 Brock to Craig, Feb. 27, 1811, Ferdinand B. Tupper, The Life and Corre- 
spondence of Major-General Sir Isaac Brock (zd ed.j London, 1847), P- 95 J Craig 
#37 to Liverpool, March 29, 1811, FO 5/92 (filed at Feb. 7, 1812)5 Brock to 
- , Dec. 2, i8n, Michigan Pioneer and Historical Society, Historical Collections, 
XV (1889), 575 Brock to Liverpool, May 25, 1812, Francis Bickley, ed., Report on 
the Manuscripts of Earl Bathurst (London: Historical Manuscripts Commission, 



50 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 533. The land hunger argument was put forward 
in Louis M. Hacker, "Western Land Hunger and the War of 1812: a Conjecture," 
Mississippi Valley Historical Review, X (1923-1924), 365-395. Almost immediately, 
this theory was demolished, primarily on agriculture-economic grounds, in Julius 
W. Pratt, "Western Aims in the War of 1812," Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 

286 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

A more convincing economic explanation of rising Western dis- 
content emphasizes fluctuations in the price level. The West, par- 
ticularly the southerly cotton and tobacco areas, overexpanded 
production after 1 805. For a short period farmers got extraordinary 
profits, but low quality, high costs, and feeble marketing and credit 
structures made the West really "a sort of marginal area in rela- 
tion to world markets." When prices collapsed in 1808, Western- 
ers blamed foreign restrictions on trade, ultimately concentrating 
on the Orders in Council. The West supported commercial warfare 
until it was proved ineffective, then demanded more vigorous 
measures. In the summer of 1811, when the price level of goods 
exported from New Orleans stood 30 per cent below the peak 
of 1807, many thought war might reopen foreign markets and 
restore prosperity. 51 

Such reasoning owed more to emotion than to rational thought, 
for a war with the mistress of the seas was certainly unlikely to 
bring an immediate increase in foreign commerce. Nevertheless, 
perhaps from frustration, many Westerners adopted it. Andrew 
Jackson asked volunteers to join him in a fight to secure, among 
other things, a a market for the productions of our soil, now perish- 
ing on our hands because the mistress of the ocean has forbid us 
to carry them to any foreign nation." Some Westerners found 
such naked self-interest embarrassing or perhaps doubted that war 
would open blocked channels of trade. Although strongly for war, 
the Lexington Reporter at first regretted that it was to be fought 
for a market rather than to free impressed seamen. Later, attack- 
ing Congress for delay, the Reporter combined the Indian and 
economic arguments for war: "The SCALPING KNIFE and 

XII (19251926), 3650, and no scholar has seriously endorsed Hacker's thesis since 
that time. However, neither Pratt nor those who think like him have, it would seem, 
sufficiently emphasized the feebleness of international boundaries as a barrier to settle- 
ment. In this connection see Marcus L. Hansen and John B. Brebner, The Mingling of 
the Canadian and American Peoples (New Haven, 1940), pp. 66114, esp. p. 90. 
61 This argument has been very convincingly brought forward by George R. Taylor 
in two articles, "Agrarian Discontent in the Mississippi Valley Preceding the War of 
1812," Journal of Political Economy, XXXIX (1931), 471-505, and "Prices in the 
Mississippi Valley Preceding the War of 1812," Journal of Economic and Business 
History, III (19301931), 148163. Taylor is particularly careful to emphasize that 
these factors are only one cause, although an important one, of the War of 1812. 

287 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

TOMAHAWK of British savages, is now again devastating our 
frontiers, Hemp at three dolars. Cotton at twelve dollars. Tobacco 
at nine shillings. Thus will our farmers, and wives and children, 
continue to be ruined and murdered, whilst those half-way, qwd, 
execrable measures and delays preponderate." 52 The Reporter's 
columns probably fairly accurately reflected Western feelings, 
placing on an almost equal level of importance the rights of seamen 
(and through them the nation), Indian warfare, and economic 
depression. 

An emphasis on Western war spirit can distort the national pic- 
ture. The frontiersman certainly was more volatile, more directly 
subject to pressure, and perhaps also more sensitive to the impera- 
tives of honor. However, at least during the summer and fall of 
1811, well after the congressional elections, feelings of frustra- 
tion and even bellicosity temporarily influenced the entire nation, 
not merely the sparsely populated West/ The Little Belt affair 
aroused all sections. Economic pressure fell upon the nation fairly 
generally, although not so heavily on food growers in the Middle 
States. South Carolina, for example, suffered seriously when the 
price of cotton fell by two-thirds from 1808 to 1811. During the 
war session her congressmen served in the front ranks of the war 
men, often frankly admitting that commercial motives placed them 
there. 53 At Boston prices fell substantially, although not so sharply 
as at New Orleans, and, according to Senator Smith, Baltimore's 
commerce was in "a deplorable situation." 54 Port towns, even in 
New England, became increasingly bellicose. Huge segments of 
Northern opinion steadily resisted the ultimate remedy, partly 
because they saw that war with England would not cure commercial 
ills, but the greatest opposition to war developed only after hostili- 
ties proved to be neither a certain nor a quick solution. In 1811 

52 Jackson, divisional orders, March 7, 1812, Bassett, of. cit., I, 222; Reporter , 
Dec. 10, iSiij March 14, 1812. 

53 Margaret K, Latimer, "South Carolina a Protagonist of the War of 1812," 
American Historical Review, LXI (19551956), 9*4"~929 

54 Taylor, "Prices in the Mississippi Valley," p. 155$ Samuel Smith to John S. 
Smith, June 13, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS. 

288 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

1 8 12, unlike 1808-18095 most New England Republicans stayed 
loyal. Finally, while the outbreak of hostilities on the Wabash 
most directly threatened transappalachia, virtually the entire 
country believed that the conflict had revealed Britain as an in- 
veterate, jealous, intriguing enemy. The anti-British trend did not 
unite the East or even the South, nor was it long-lived. Tem- 
porarily, it affected the entire nation. 

Thus the cry for Canada. Doubtless there were sectional reasons 
for urging its conquest: Westerners sought to end the Indian men- 
ace, Southerners conceivably hoped to purchase support for their 
Florida aims by backing war against Canada, some Northerners 
believed annexation would shift the center of power within the 
Union to the free states. 55 The central, universal theme was far 
simpler: strike at Canada, the most vulnerable British target, the 
easiest way to inflict punishment and extort concession. ^The great 
advantage to be derived from the acquisition of these possessions," 
a Richmond paper declared, "will not accrue so much from the 
tenure of them as a conquest, . . . but from the very important 
consequences which their loss will occasion to the British." In Cin- 
cinnati the Liberty Hall warned Britain that unless she rescinded 
the Orders in Council and abandoned impressment (Indian in- 
trigues were not mentioned), "the most valuable of all her colo- 
nies, will be torn from her grasp, & thus she will accelerate her 
own destruction." This view found steady expression in newspa- 
pers and in the halls of Congress. "What," asked a leading War 
Hawk in January, 1812, ". . . is the object of all our military 
preparations? The object has been repeatedly avowed to be to re- 
taliate on Great Britain the injuries which she has inflicted upon 

55 On the alliance of South and West see Pratt, Expansionists of 1812. Pratt states 
but hardly emphasizes his view that the Indian menace and the South-West alliance 
were only a part of the entire picture, but even so the latter argument does not seem 
convincing, although an informal logrolling understanding may have existed. The 
nearest expression of a real understanding is to be found in the speech by Felix Grundy, 
Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 426-427. For Northern desires for Canada, see 
Connecticut C our ant (Hartford), which opposed war, Jan. 15, 18125 John A. Harper 
(a War Hawk) to Plumer, May 13, 1812, quoted in Pratt, Expansionists of 1812, 
p. 149. 

289 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

our maritime rights, by an invasion of her provinces, as the only 
quarter in which she is vulnerable." 56 On such a program alone 
could supporters of war from all parts of the nation unite. 

During these months Canada and the Orders in Council re- 
ceived far more emphasis than impressment. Every day of the 
year, two or three men fell into the clutches of press gangs, 57 and 
yet America showed little concern. In February, 1811, Congress- 
man Wright proposed that the United States make an end to 
impressment as well as to the Orders in Council a prerequisite to 
renewed commercial intercourse witja? -England. Only twenty rep- 
resentatives supported the proposal?. The Madison administration 
virtually ignored impressment in negotiations with Foster. The 
President's annual message in November, 1811, wherein there 
appeared a catalogue of British crimes, remained silent on the kid- 
naping of seamen. Niks' Register^ one of the few to place impress- 
ment at the head of the list of American grievances, complained in 
the autumn of 1811 that the practice had gone on so long "the 
acuteness of feeling so natural on account of it, has become blunted, 
and our sailors have begun to make a kind of calculation upon it. 
How base and degrading! How inconsistent with our pretensions 
to sovereignty and independence!" Even John Quincy Adams, 
who believed America ultimately must fight on this issue, advised 
a cabinet member that "it seems clearly better to wait the effect 
of our increasing strength and of our adversary's more mature de- 
cay, before we undertake to abolisFvt by War." 58 Not until later 
did war men emphasize impressment^. 

British insults and ship seizures/even in coastal waters of the 

56 Virginia, Argus (Richmond), Nov. n, 18115 Liberty Hall (Cincinnati), Jan. i, 
1812 j Annals, i2th Cong-., ist sess., p. 793 (Porter). 

67 The rate of impressment is very difficult to establish. James F. Zimmerman, 
Impressment of American Seamen, Columbia University Studies in History, Economics 
and Public Law, Vol. CXVIII, no. i (New York, 1925), p. 256, estimates that from 
750 to 1,000 seamen a year were impressed in this period. Rufus King, however, 
believed that "perhaps at no former period have the impressments been less numerous." 

King* to , private, Dec. 10, 1811, King 1 MSS, Vol. XIII. For a contrary view, 

claiming that "the barbarous Thefts of American Citizens . . . have of late increased 
to an astonishing degree," see Independent Chronicle, May 27, 1811. 

58 Wiles' Register, Nov. 2, i8nj Adams to Eustis, Oct. 26, 1811, Adams Family 
MSS (microfilm), Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 

29O 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

United States, roused far more feeling. In August, 1811, ELM.S. 
Tartarus seized two merchantmen off Norfolk. When she boldly 
followed this action by a visit to the American port, the British 
consul warned the captain, "For God-sake if you are not already 
gone get to sea as fast as you can." The Tartarus cut her cable 
and scuttled out of the harbor just ahead of mob action. Later in 
1 8 1 1 British squadrons established virtual blockades of Chesapeake 
Bay and New York harbor. Rumor suggested that Admiral Yorke's 
squadron, reportedly dispatched to America after the Little Belt 
affair, would enforce by arms a demand for satisfaction. The few 
available American naval vessels put to sea to show the flag and 
perhaps resist British aggressions by force. 59 Although in 1 8 1 1 the 
British seized fewer ships than in other years, captures aroused 
strenuous American criticism. 

All these things war on the Wabash, Foster's demands, naval 
arrogance, and even the temporarily overlooked continuation of 
impressment seemed to show mounting British scorn for the 
United States. Thomas Jefferson might argue, as he did in Sep- 
tember, that America's reputation would rise if she showed her 
wisdom by remaining immune from Europe's madness. 60 But more 
and more of his countrymen felt that only direct action could 
vindicate the nation's character. Of course, to disentangle honor 
and self-interest is often difficult, and editors and congressmen 
frequently cloaked material appeals in the rhetoric of honor, sov- 
ereignty, and independence. Still, materially the United States 
was little if any worse off than in previous years. It seems reason- 
able to believe that the psychological consequences of British 
assaults, and the accumulating embarrassment over the cowardly 
policy followed since 1806, were the chief influences stirring the 
American people in 1 8 1 1 . 

References to national honor foreshadowed later congressional 
emphasis upon this valuable but intangible feeling. To a British 

59 Hamilton to Capt. John Pasco, Aug. 29, 1811, and Pasco to Admiral Sawyer, 
Jan. 19, 1812, both enclosed in Sawyer to Croker, Feb. 29, 1812, Admiralty Papers, 
Public Record Office, Adm 1/5025 Graham to Monroe, Sept. 6, 1811, Monroe 
MSSj Paul Hamilton to Madison, Sept 9, 17, 1811, Madison MSS. 

60 Jefferson to Eppes, Sept. 6, 1811, Jefferson MSS. 

291 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

correspondent Monroe wrote, "Instead of the insults & injuries 
which are so constantly offered to the U States, & to their govern- 
ment, . . . treat us as a nation having rights, possessing passions, 
and much sensibility to national honor, & the result would not 
fail to be satisfactory." Newspapers echoed the cry. The New- 
Hampshire Patriot, for example, argued: "Things have now ar- 
rived at that crisis, that something spirited must be done, or the 
United States will become proverbial for servility and debasement. 
. . . At present we feel all the evils, without reaping any of the ad- 
vantages of a war. . . . Let us at once . . . declare to the world, 
in the language of our fathers, that c the States are, and of right 
ought to be, FREE, SOVEREIGN, and INDEPENDENT. 3 
At least philosophically, many Federalists agreed that independ- 
ence and honor must be defended. "The Honor of a Nation is the 
only legitimate cause of war," declared Rufus King, but he and 
many other Federalists insisted that Napoleon had challenged 
American honor as much as Britain had. 61 

Certainly the great Corsican continued to show little respect for 
the United States. His policy was confusing, complex, and con- 
tradictory, partly because he wished to sow discord between Britain 
and America. Napoleon no longer subjected to automatic con- 
demnation ships visited at sea by the Royal Navy. He did seize 
those that touched at British ports, although formal condemnation 
was delayed. Furthermore, as the Czar drifted toward ultimate 
war with Napoleon, American trade with Russia suffered as a 
symbol of the break between the two emperors. As soon as the 
ice broke up in 1811, American ships entered the Baltic to take 
advantage of Russia's break with the Continental System. Na- 
poleon replied by ordering the confiscation of all American ships 
bound for Russia. 62 Although his Danish satellites often executed 
Napoleon's policy, Americans knew who deserved the blame. 

Napoleon treated American trade with France almost equally 

61 Monroe to [Holland?], n.d., Monroe MSS, fol. 31455 Ne<w-Ham<p$hire Patriot 

(Concord), Oct. 29, iSiij King to , private, Dec. 10, 1811, King- MSS, Vol. 

XIII. 

62 Napoleon, Note dictated in the councils of Administration and of Commerce, 
April 29, 1811, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII; Cadore #8 to S^rurier, May 16, 
1811, ibid., Vol. LXIV; Napoleon to Duke of Massa, Sept. 6, i8n, Le'on Lecestre, 
ed., Lettres Inedites de Napoleon i^ (2 vols.5 Paris, 1897), II, 159. 

292 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

harshly, and his announcement that ships arriving after Novem- 
ber, 1810, might sell their cargoes had little practical effect. The 
Trianon tariff and the requirement of certificates of origin signed 
by French consuls impaired trade. Fearing clandestine importa- 
tions of British goods. Napoleon prohibited the introduction of 
sugar, coffee, and tobacco, with or without certificates of origin. 
He insisted that the Americans carry away only goods of which 
he had a surplus, notably silks and wines. Like the British, Na- 
poleon issued licenses authorizing departures from his regulations. 
American merchants did not snap them up as he had anticipated, 
and the United States government complained that the licenses 
were an unfair condition of trade. All told, only forty-nine cargoes 
were admitted to French ports in the year after repeal allegedly 
went into effect. "It is hardly worthwhile to go to war with Eng- 
land for such an object," wrote Jonathan Russell. 63 

Louis Serurier, the bland, experienced diplomat who arrived at 
Washington in February, 1811, to replace the vesuvian amateur. 
Turreau, found it impossible to soothe American sensibilities, 
Serurier believed that Madison was basically pro-French, and 
unlike most observers he considered the President strong enough 
to dominate American policy. Nevertheless, first in the spring, 
again before Madison and Monroe left on vacation, and once more 
in the fall, the Frenchman received strenuous complaints from 
them. Without compensation for seizures prior to November, 18 10, 
and increased freedom for trade, they told Serurier, they could 
not lead the American people into more vigorous anti-British ac- 
tion. So strong was feeling against France that when Congress 
opened Augustus Foster thought his own country had a golden 
opportunity, by only minor concessions, to "render the whole Coun- 
try cordially united with Us." 64 

63 Napoleon, Note dictated in the councils of Administration and of Commerce, 
April 29, 1 8 1 1, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII; Cadore #8 to Serurier, May 16, 
1811, ibid,. Vol. LXIV; Montalivet, Report to the Council of Commerce, Nov. 25, 
1 8 1 1, quoted in Frank E, Melvin, Napoleon's Navigation System (Menasha, Wise., 
1919), p. 2905 memorandum enclosed in Bassano #17 to Serurier, Dec. 30, 1811, 
AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV 5 Russell to Samuel Smith, private and confidential, June 
29, 1 811, Samuel Smith MSS. 

64 Foster $"20 to Wellesley, Nov. 5, x8xx, FO 5/77. For Se*rurier j s opinions see his 
dispatches $-9, $*n, #14, $ 18-^23, #31 to Bassano, April lo-Oct. 23, 1811, 
AAE, CP, E-U, Vols. LXV-LXVI. 

293 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

To seek amelioration of French policy and also to demonstrate 
to the American people his hopes for warmer relations, Madison 
dispatched a new minister to Paris in July, 1811. Russell had al- 
ready been in charge of the legation nearly a year, and further 
delay in sending a minister would be harmful both with Napoleon 
and the American public. As early as February, 1811, Madison 
had chosen Joel Barlow for the post at Paris. The barrenness 
of Serurier's communications delayed the envoy's departure and 
made Barlow himself wonder if the trip would be worthwhile. 
When mildly favorable news arrived from Paris, however, the 
President ordered Barlow to sail. His instructions recapitulated 
American complaints against France and warned that "much is 
yet to be done by her, to satisfy the just claims of this Country. 
To revoke blockades of boundless extent, in the present state of 
her marine, was making no sacrifice. She must indemnify us for 
past injuries and open her ports to our commerce on a fair and 
liberal scale." Madison and Monroe had no illusions about Na- 
poleon's basic attitude. The man whom Barlow replaced had at 
least as few. He declared that ships touching at British ports con- 
tinued to be excluded from the Napoleonic empire and stated also 
that he had no good proof the French decrees had been repealed. 65 

Gallic policy embarrassed newspapers supporting the adminis- 
tration. The National Intelligencer admitted that Napoleon con- 
tinued to mistreat American commerce "in a most vexatious and 
unprincipled manner," but went on to argue, "still he has complied 
with the letter of our law" His municipal regulations, said editor 
Gales, did not affect the justice of America's claims against Britain 
or the propriety of nonintercourse. The Independent Chronicle^ 
New England Republicanism's most effective voice, took the same 
position. Its editor, Benjamin Russell, admitted that Napoleon 
had treated the United States badly but added, pointing particu- 
larly to impressment, "the question is not which nation alone is 
culpable, as they are both so: The only question is, which is the 

65 Bar low to Jefferson, May 2, 1811, Jefferson MSSj Monroe to Barlow, July 
26, 1811, Department of State Archives, National Archives, Instructions, All Coun- 
tries, Vol. VII 5 Russell to John S. Smith, private and confidential, Aug. 2, 1811, 
Samuel Smith MSS. 

294 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

greatest and most iniquitous aggressor?" 66 To Republicans, there 
could be but one answer. 

The quarrel with France partially offset growing anger against 
England. On the other hand, for a people increasingly conscious 
of their honor, the very fact of Britain's insistence that President 
Madison had been duped provided a reason for not letting Franco- 
American relations deteriorate to the breaking point. Total paral- 
ysis and complete humiliation must be avoided. Paradoxically, the 
very incompleteness of Napoleonic repeal made some Americans 
even more insistent that the country resist British demands. 

Americans of all parties shared the feeling of malaise. Was it not 
time, Benjamin Rush asked one of the two ex-presidents with whom 
he corresponded, for a third declaration of independence, to com- 
plete those of 1776 and 1800? "Lighthorse Harry" Lee, a Revo- 
lutionary hero of undoubted Federalism, wrote to Madison in 
August that, while he still hoped for peace between the "only two 
nations ... in the world who understand the meaning of lib- 
erty," he believed that a "continuance in the present state of half 
war, is of all others the most debasing to the national character 
& nearly as injurious as war itself to individual prosperity. Take us 
out of the odious condition," the general pleaded, "by restoration 
of amity, or by drawing the sword." From London Senator Smith's 
son wrote that, if the United States hoped to have its rights re- 
spected, it must show a willingness to fight for them. "If we have 
no respect for ourselves, others will have none for us," said John 
Spear Smith. "We shall never write ourselves into the character 
and reputation our temporizing & cringing policy has lost us." 6T 
The charge shared the anti-Madison bias of his father, but his com- 
ments on the policies of the President reflected a spirit that was 
national and even stirred James Madison himself. 
/ Before leaving for Montpelier in July, Madison had issued a 

^National Intelligencer ', June 15, 18115 Independent Chronicle, May 27, 1811. 
Later news, showing that Napoleon had decided to admit ships arriving after Novem- 
ber, affected the attitude of administration newspapers remarkably little. 

67 Rush to Jefferson, Aug. 26, 1811, Jefferson MSSj Lee to Madison, Aug. 19, 
1811, Madison MSSj John S. Smith to Samuel Smith, Oct. 20, 1811, Samuel Smith 
MSS. 

295 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

proclamation calling Congress into session a month before the 
usual date, Foster expected the new Congress to have a more re- 
spectful view of British power than its predecessors, and Serurier 
had recently reported with disgust that America's spirit had evap- 
orated when London news made it clear that Admiral Yorke had 
not been directed to attack the United States. 68 The last autumn 
of peace was a golden one, and dry roads and eager anticipation 
carried the new congressmen to Washington more rapidly than 
usual. Even John Randolph, whose attendance was as erratic as 
his personality, was present when Congress opened on November 
4, and of all the major leaders only John C. Calhoun, whose bride 
expected a child, arrived after the session got under way., Of 144 
members, 1 20, an unusually large proportion, sat in the representa- 
tives' chamber on November 5, 1 8 1 1, to hear the President's third 
annual message. All wondered if James Madison would make his 
wishes known. Far to the west the Lexington Reporter waited with 
unconcealed suspicion for the message: "If a president stands as a 
mere stock, or block, or statue, and barely . . . refers to the docu- 
ments with which he furnishes congress . . . , it is perfectly in- 
different whether we have a British agent, a monarchist , or federal- 
ist for president. But we are assured . . . that the president's 
message will be decisive this year. If so, we will be decisive also/' 69 
Although Madison's message satisfied the Reporter and was 
generally interpreted as a call to action, the national climate really 
made it so. In Britain, where the text preceded accounts of its re- 
ception, newspapers almost unanimously agreed that the Presi- 
dent's message, while unfriendly, did not differ substantially from 
earlier ones. As a matter of fact, Madison himself seems to have 
planned to send in a more vigorous statement. His secretary of 
the treasury, called upon as always to comment on the draft, this 
time urged moderation. Gallatin's arguments mingled Republican 
constitutional theory, a pessimistic assessment of America's eco- 
nomic resources, and fear that a clear warning of war might tempt 

68 Foster #22 to Wellesley, Nov. 9, 1811, FO 5/775 Serurier #28 to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, Sept. 18, 1811, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVL 

69 Nov. 2, 1811. 

296 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Britain to strike first. 70 Since Madison still hoped Britain would 
come to her senses and offer honorable terms, and probably also 
because he did not want or expect war before spring, he adopted 
many of Gallatin's suggestions without accepting his subordinate's 
central thesis, that nonimportation was preferable to war. 

The first half of the message 71 recounted the events of the past 
year: Foster's demand that "commerce should be restored to a 
footing that would admit the productions and manufactures of 
Great Britain, when owned by neutrals, into markets shut against 
them by her enemy" j his threats of retaliation for nonimportation ; 
the British protest on Florida; the Little Belt affair. The Presi- 
dent passed over impressment in silence, a course perfectly natural 
if he still hoped for a negotiated settlement but inconsistent with 
a determination to lead the people to high moral ground. Nor did 
Madison even suggest British responsibility for the Indian diffi- 
culties soon to blaze into conflict at Tippecanoej these he blamed 
only on "a fanatic of the Shawanese tribe." Finally, adapting a 
paragraph provided by Gallatin, Madison sharply criticized French 
policy. This he had to do to anticipate and blunt charges of par- 
tiality, but again the effect was to dampen American ardor. Over 
all, the roster of insults differed very little from those provided 
for Congress every fall since 1805. 

Nevertheless, the President recommended military prepara- 
tions. England, he said, persevered in her unjust course. "With this 
evidence of hostile inflexibility in trampling on rights which no 
independent nation can relinquish, Congress will feel the duty of 
putting the United States into an armor and an attitude demanded 
by the crisis, and corresponding with the national spirit and ex- 
pectations." Madison spoke equivocally of naval increases, and his 
suggested strengthening of commercial restriction left the way 
open for a lengthy dependence upon it before putting the new mili- 
tary machine into motion. Since military improvements had been 
proposed before, and since Madison carefully avoided any clear 
indication that he would subsequently ask for a declaration of war, 

70 Gallatin memorandum, n.d., William C. Rives Collection, Library of Congress. 

71 Richardson, 0$. */., I, 4.91-496. 

297 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

the annual message o 1 8 1 1 can only be considered a modest step 
forward. Still, the message did mark an advance. Without abandon- 
ing the opaque prose, the multifarious conditional clauses, or the 
wearisome commas of his earlier presidential papers, Madison had 
sidled in the direction of greater vigor. 

Copies of the address sped to all parts of the nation within 
ten hours to Philadelphia, two and a half days to Boston and 
citizens set to work to parse it. Federalists and some extreme War 
Hawks criticized it. In perhaps the most vicious attack, the Vir- 
ginia Patriot pronounced it an "imbecile prelude to an imbecile 
course . . . inadequate to bring us back to that honourable sta- 
tion . . . from which the head of the democratic party . . . has 
precipitated the nation." The Columbian Centinel found the 
message both "threatening" and "not unlike many of its predeces- 
sors," but even the Centinel had to admit that "if the facts re- 
specting Mr. Foster's mission-are as stated, there can hardly exist 
a chance for an accommodation." 72 

Although Josiah Quincy said the message disappointed congres- 
sional War Hawks, most Americans believed that it presaged a 
forceful, honorable policy. Even William Duane, whose Aurora 
spearheaded the anti-Madison cabal in Pennsylvania, praised it. 
In Boston even the Federalist prints were said to "fall four tones 
below their usual sound," and at Quincy old John Adams labori- 
ously scratched out a letter to James Monroe thanking him for 
sending a copy of the message. Sometimes, as in the Virginia Argus, 
plaudits appeared in company with embarrassed explanations of 
past weakness or suggestions that a mere show of determination 
would cause Britain t<> back down. Others announced willingness 
to go the whole way.. "In '76," declared editor Ritchie of the al- 
ways bellicose Richmond Enquirer, "we strove for our existence, 
as a nationj and now we must strive for our rights, as one." The 
National Intelligencer also considered Madison's message a call 
for a new American jehad. No earlier message, it said, had "kindled 

72 Virginia Patriot (Richmond), Nov. 12, i8nj Columbian Centmel^ Nov. 9, 
1811. 

298 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

a holier and brighter flame." The President had done his duty ; the 
rest lay with Congress and the nation. 73 

Metaphorically, it would be far more apt to say that Madison's 
message fell upon the surface of a rising tide and was borne with 
it. Since the spring of 1811, after the selection of the Twelfth 
Congress, the American people had increasingly begun to grope 
for some means of redemption. It remained to be seen whether 
the desire for vindication would last any longer or receive more 
presidential encouragement than that which followed the assault 
upon U.S.S. Chesapeake four years earlier. .Cynics believed not, 
believed that the cries of the War Hawks \tfere insincere, that the 
presidential message would not lead (and was not designed to 
lead) to effective action. The message, one Connecticut congress- 
man wrote a fortnight after its delivery, "sleeps' .quietly in the 
Arms of the Committees to whom it has been sent." T f 

/ 

73 Quincy to Otis, Nov. 8, 1811, Harrison Gray Otis MSS, Massachusetts Historical 
Society} Aurora, Nov. 7, 1811 j Levi Bartlett to Josiah Bartlett, Dec. 16, 1811, Josiah 
Bartlett MSS, Library of Congress; John Adams to Monroe, Dec. 19, 1811, Monroe 
MSSj Virginia Argus, Nov. n, 18115 Enquirer (Richmond), Nov. 8, 1811; National 
Intelligencer, Nov. 7, 1811. 

74 Tallmadge to Frederick Wolcott, Nov. 18, 1811, Charles S. Hall, "Benjamin 
Tallmadge (New York, 194.3), p. 207. 



299 



CHAPTER 



IX 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 



In a more leisurely fashion than the War Hawk Congress two 
months before. Parliament convened at Westminster after the 
Christmas holidays of 1811. Almost immediately the Orders in 
Council came under heavy attack. Had this attack succeeded 
quickly, the fillip to America's commerce and particularly to her 
self-respect would have prevented a declaration of war. Ironically, 
Britain surrendered just a few weeks too late to preserve peace, 
while America, so accustomed to English obduracy that she ignored 
omens of concession, embarked upon war just too soon to enjoy 
the fruits of Britain's surrender. 1 

1 The repeal of the orders is a very neglected subject. Henry Adams, History of 
the United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison (9 vols, ; New 
York, 18891891), VI, 267288, discusses it, but his account is somewhat colored 
and he did not and could not examine a number o important sources. Very helpful 
recent studies, based on a wider sampling of British materials, are Reginald Horstnan, 
"British Opinion and the United States of America, 18061812" (unpublished M.A. 
thesis, University of Birmingham, 1955), and Francois Crouzet, UEconomie Bri- 
tannique et le Blocus Continental (2 vols.j Paris, 1958), II, 809-829 and 'passim. 
Few other students have made a real attempt to understand English developments 
culminating in repeal of the Orders in Council, 

30O 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

The movement for repeal contains other ironies. For one thing, 
the assassination of Spencer Perceval delayed rather than speeded 
repeal. For another, defense of the orders collapsed after two years 
during which, having ridden out heavy criticism, they seemed be- 
yond successful attack. The depression which felled them began, 
not while British trade was under pressure from American restric- 
tions, but when that trade was freest. Contemptuous scorn for 
American threats encouraged Englishmen to believe the danger 
of war fading, and a leisurely course consequently possible, at the 
precise moment when a last-ditch War Hawk drive carried America 
into war. 

In 1 808 and again in 1809, the Opposition had attacked the Or- 
ders in Council. In 1 808 they forced Parliament to hear witnesses, 
and Henry Brougham and Samuel Whitbread effectively exam- 
ined them. Most independent members either accepted James 
Stephen's argument that the trade recession had preceded rather 
than followed the orders, or felt that the new system should be 
given a more lengthy trial. In some embarrassment the Opposi- 
tion dropped the issue rather than force it to a division. 2 

The next year the Opposition coupled the general issue with 
complaints against Canning's cavalier rejection of the American 
offer to suspend the Embargo. In the Lords one session lasted 
until three in the morning, primarily because Grenville spoke at 
great length about the importance of the American market and 
the danger of provoking the United States to war. The comments 
of Melville and, to an even greater degree, of Sidmouth showed 
that doubts about the orders had spread to uncommitted peers. 
When the Lords voted (proxies being counted, as they so often 
were in that chamber), 70 ballots were cast in favor of Grenville's 
motion, only 115 against. In a report to the King, Lord Liverpool 
professed to be satisfied. Actually, considering the ministry's usual 
strength, the size of the opposition vote was an astonishing shock. 
Lord Auckland half expected it to be followed by repeal, and 

2 Journals of the House of Commons, LXIII, 163-417 passim; Journals of the 
House of Lords, XL VI, 493-524. fassim; Morning Chronicle (London), Feb. 22, 
1808; Hansard > X, 11821183, 1 3 041 3 05 j Horsman, op. cit., pp. 140145. 

301 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

William Pinkney stayed away from the House of Commons' sub- 
sequent debate so that he would not seem to be gloating over 
ministers' discomfiture. But it was not to be. Whitbread's vitriolic 
opening speech, in which he accused Perceval and company of ruin- 
ing British trade and seeking a war with America, probably alien- 
ated more men than it convinced. Baring, Grattan, and Lord Henry 
Petty spoke more moderately, and Stephen and Canning, for the 
government, said almost nothing that had not been said a score 
of times, but again the independent members hung back. After a 
debate lasting until breakfast time, the government won by a 
vote of 83 to I45. 3 

In two successive sessions the Opposition had made the Orders 
in Council a major item of complaint. They came close to success 
in 18095 Stephen even told Brougham he thought the end near 
for the system over which they had fought. 4 Yet final success 
eluded Grenville, Whitbread, and Brougham. Many M.P.'s who 
might otherwise have been tempted to join the Opposition felt 
that surrender either to Napoleon's decrees or Jefferson's Em- 
bargo would probably simply encourage further demands. Time 
and again ministerial speakers accused their enemies of truckling 
to France or to America. At a time of national crisis this was an 
effective debating tactic. 

Primarily, parliamentary attacks failed because they did not 
strike fire in the country. No major London newspaper except the 
Morning Chronicle, and few outside the capital, had criticized 
Perceval's system. Few of Brougham's witnesses before the House 
of Commons in 1808 were leading businessmen, many could be 
accused of self-interest, and they obviously represented only a frac- 
tion of the commercial world. In London the Committee of Amer- 
ican Merchants defeated a proposal to petition for repeal of the 
orders, forcing Alexander Baring to circulate one on his own. A 



3 Hansard, XII, 771-803; Liverpool to George III, Feb. 17 [iS], 18095 
Archives, Windsor Castle; Auckland to Grey, March 6, 1809, Charles Grey, Second 
Earl Grey, MSS, The Prior's Kitchen, Durham University; Pinkney to Richard 
Sharp, March 5, 1809, Samuel Whitbread MSS, Southill Park, Biggleswade, 
Bedfordshire; Hansard, XII, 11591210. 

4 Smith to John Allen, Feb. 21, 1809, No well C. Smith, ed., The Letters of Sidney 
Smith (2 vols.; Oxford, 1953)5 Ij 155. 

302 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Liverpool meeting chaired by a government MJP. and unfairly 
packed, the Morning Chronicle charged endorsed the orders. 
Colonial interests and shipowners supported the government, as 
the pamphleteering efforts o Nathaniel Atcheson (secretary of 
the Society of Shipowners), Joseph Marryat, and Lord Sheffield 
demonstrated. Most important of all, the great bulk of the com- 
mercial world hung back, refusing to support either side. Three 
years later, when businessmen at last spoke up against the orders, 
an early critic wrote: "I have never ceased to regret that they did 
not afford us their aid when we would have arrested the Evil in 
its Origin! Their Efforts now I fear will be too late!" 5 The com- 
ment was apt. 

To stir the public both Brougham and Baring composed 
pamphlets attacking the Orders in Council. Baring argued that 
mistaken jealousy of America's prosperity, which really rewarded 
Britain by swelling her export market, lay behind the orders. He 
predicted that they would lead to a declaration of war or to 
commercial retaliation almost as harmful. Baring's Inquiry into 
the Orders in Council came under attack, most strenuously from 
Cobbett, who argued that it was not only "long and most soporific" 
but also a reflection of Baring's personal interest in American 
trade. Brougham's study, less open to these charges, was also far 
broader than Baring's pamphlet, for, as the subtitle declared, it 
was An Examination of the Justice, Legality > and Policy of the 
New System of Commercial Regulations. Both essays alarmed 
James Stephen, 6 and Baring's work provided the minutiae while 

5 Times (London), March 9, 10, 18, 18085 Morning Chronicle, March 18, iSoSj 
Crouzet, of. cit. 3 I, 34.53485 Nathaniel Atcheson, American Encroachments on Brit- 
ish Rights (London, 1808) j Joseph Marryat, Hints to Both Parties; or Observations 
on the Proceedings in Parliament ufon the Petitions against the Orders in Council 
(London, 1808) 5 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, The Orders in Council and the 
American Embargo Beneficial to the Political and Commercial Interests of Great 
Britain (London, 1809) $ Mullett to Whitbread, May 4, 1812, Whitbread MSS. 

6 Alexander Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders 
in Council; and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neu- 
tral Commerce of America (London, 1808), passim; CobbetPs Political Register 
(London), XIII (1808), 273-274$ Henry Brougham, Orders in Council} Or, An 
Examination of the Justice, Legality, and Policy of the New System of Commercial 
Regulations (2d ed.j London, 1808) 5 Stephen to Perceval, n.d., Spencer Perceval 

303 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Brougham suggested the outline for future efforts, but neither 
seems to have convinced many people at the time. 

For the next two years the Orders in Council encountered no 
challenge so serious as that of 1809. The Opposition became con- 
vinced that the country could not be aroused, and, encouraged by 
the Embargo's collapse, the British government adopted a more 
flexible line toward the United States. As James Stephen put it, 
after repeal of the Embargo it could no longer be said that a we 
had a threat hanging over our heads to frighten us into the conces- 
sion j the experiment had been tried, it was put in force against 
us, and completely failed. 3 ' 7 The government felt free to issue, 
at the behest of Bathurst and Canning, the Order in Council of 
April, 1809, which most Englishmen considered a more than fair 
offer to the United States. Canning also opened negotiations 
through Erskine which resulted in an exposure of Madisonian de- 
mands so sweeping that even the Opposition did not defend them. 
The Orders in Council pretty much disappeared from the political 
scene, to be replaced by such items as the Walcheren expedition, 
scandal at the Horse Guards, war in the Peninsula, and, later on, 
the political consequences of George IIPs new attack of insanity. 

Had the general blockade proclaimed by the order of 1 809 been 
fully enforced, the Percevellian system would probably have es- 
caped serious attack even longer than it did. The order professed 
to be cc a blockade, peculiar, indeed, in its nature, but strict and 
rigorous in its operation, and unparalleled in its extent." 8 In its 
original form the new regulation met the demands of those who 
hoped to cripple Napoleon by cutting off vital imports. It also 
ended the complaints of men who argued that the complicated sys- 
tem, established by the orders of 1 807, of licenses and fees designed 
to introduce British goods into the Continent was bad policy, un- 
fair to neutrals, and illegal to boot. 

The difficulty was that Perceval, Stephen, and Rose did not 

MSS (examined while temporarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, 
London), 33/445 Stephen to Perceval, May 23, 1808, ibid., 33/16. 

7 Hansard, XII, 1183. 

8 Joseph Phillimore, Reflections on the Nature and Extent of the Licence Trade 
(2d ed.j London, 1811), p. 46. 

304 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

wish to deprive Napoleon of all sources of supply. They merely 
wished to make sure that those sources should be British, or at least 
that the English should profit from all European importations. 
After learning that the new order had not mollified the United 
States, the British government began once again to issue special 
licenses. Upon application to the Board of Trade, ships and car- 
goes received exemption from the blockade of Europe. Theo- 
retically, American ships were not discriminated against in the 
issue of licenses. In actual practice the Board of Trade found Eu- 
ropean flags far more useful and more amenable to control. Since 
no trade to the French Empire could be safely carried on without 
them, licenses were extremely valuable, worth sometimes as much 
as 15,000 on the open market, where they were freely traded. 
Disappointed merchants accused members of the Board of Trade 
of corruption, and in 1810 the board sought prosecution of the 
Morning Chronicle for allegedly slanderous hints that George 
Rose had profited from the sale of licenses. 9 The entire system 
combined, or seemed to combine, selfishness, discrimination, fraud, 
corruption, and even collusion with France. 

Although others had issued licenses, the Perceval ministry was 
the first to make exemption from the law the rule rather than the 
exception. In 1808, doubling the number issued the preceding 
year, it authorized nearly 5,000. In 1809, despite the pause to 
await America's reaction to the new order, more than 15,000 li- 
censes were issued. For the next three years, the number ranged 
between 15,000 and 2O,ooo. 10 Far from being a general blockade, 
the new Order in Council became a screen behind which the min- 
istry attempted to manipulate trade for its own mercantilist ends. 
Joseph Phillimore, a bitter enemy of the practice, summed it up 
when he wrote that scarcely had the orders of 1807 and 1809 
been issued, 

when, to their ostensible object was super-added another, utterly irrecon- 
cilable with the idea of blockade, namely, that of forcing British manufac- 

9 Board of Trade minutes, Public Record Office, Feb. 16, 1810, BT 5/21. 

10 Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals . . . of the United States of America (Phila- 
delphia, 1818), p. 70115 Frank E. Melvin, Napoleon's Navigation System (Menasha, 
Wise., 1919), pp. 33o-33i> 33"i. 

305 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

tures and British colonial produce into the ports of the Continent. . . . 
Thus, while, with one hand, we hermetically sealed the ports of France and 
Holland, against neutral commerce with the other, we opened the same 
ports, by means of Licenses, to the shipping and mariners of our enemies 
while we closed one door upon America, we opened another, and a 
wider, to Denmark, Prussia, Holland, and, even France herself. 11 

Friends of the Orders in Council joined Phillimore in criticism 
of the license system. As early as 1808, in a pamphlet written to 
defend the November orders, Joseph Marryat attacked licenses 
on the twin grounds that they relaxed pressure upon Napoleon and 
exposed merchants to "the arbitrary and variable will" of members 
of the Board of Trade. The Quarterly Review objected that li- 
censes were dishonorable, since they granted to British traders 
privileges denied to Americans and other neutrals. In 1 8 1 1 Philli- 
more devoted an entire pamphlet to the evils of this traffic, 12 and 
Lord Sidmouth and George Canning, opponents on virtually 
every other issue, both objected to it in 1812. 

The license trade also strengthened American complaints against 
the entire British system. Because the Emperor's policy was fully 
as selfish and discriminatory as that of England, he too at first 
roused the anger of the United States. "The collusive scheme 
which has been hatched on the banks of the Seine and reared to 
maturity in the purlieus of the British Exchange . . . ," the Na- 
tional Intelligencer declared, "is a coalition for the prostration of 
neutral commerce." After France announced repeal of her de- 
crees, American complaints concentrated against British licenses. 
In April, 1812, in an effort to stave off war, the ministry offered 
to abandon them. It was too late. The President's war message ac- 
cused Britain of seeking "a monopoly . . . for her own com- 
merce and navigation. She carries on a war against the lawful 
commerce of a friend that she may the better carry on a commerce 

11 Joseph Phillimore, A Letter Addressed to a Member of the House of Commons, 
on the Subject of the Notice Given by Mr. Brougham, for a Motion Respecting the 
Orders in Council and the Licence Trade (zd ed.j London, 1812), pp. 2223. 

12 Marryat, op. cit., pp. 38 fLj Quarterly Review (London), V (1811), 461-462$ 
Phillimorej Reflections on the Licence Trade. 

306 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

with an enemy." la In effect, the license trade revived the hated 
Orders in Council of November, 1807, under another name. 

Until the summer of 1810 the United States found it difficult 
to protest effectively. Napoleon's brutal treatment of American 
commerce, the Nonintercourse Act and Macon's Bill #2, the 
dreadful impression of lack of will produced by flight from the 
Embargo all these virtually precluded a vigorous campaign. 
With a dilatoriness that irritated William Pinkney, Lord Welles- 
ley vaguely turned aside American complaints. In August, 1810, 
Pinkney concluded that argument was useless in the face of "the 
obvious Unwillingness of this Government to touch ... on any 
thing connected with . . . the System of the Orders in Council." 14 

One week later Pinkney received news of the Cadore letter 
from John Armstrong. On August 25, 1810, the American min- 
ister requested His Majesty's government to execute its pledge 
to withdraw the orders when French regulations were repealed. 
Hastening back from Dorking, where he had been idling on the 
plea of illness, Wellesley immediately entertained Pinkney at 
dinner. Apparently fearing that America would join the French 
camp, he promised prompt cabinet discussion of French repeal, 
nomination of a new minister within a fortnight, and settlement 
of the Chesapeake affair. Wellesley's panic if that is what it was 
failed to affect his colleagues, for none of the promises was exe- 
cuted. Wellesley even coolly informed Pinkney that England 
could not act until "the repeal of the French Decrees shall have 
actually taken place," or, in other words, until November i, at 
which date Cadore's pledge came into operation. Although Welles- 
ley's shift angered Pinkney, he recognized the plausibility of this 
argument and decided to permit the summer to pass without fur- 
ther protest. 15 

^National Intelligencer (Washington), Sept. 24, 18105 Castlereagh #9 to 
Foster, April 10, 1812, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to the 
United States, 1791-1^12, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1936, 
III (Washington, 1941), 364-3675 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of 
the Messages and Papers of the Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 502. 

14 Pinkney to Smith, Aug. 14, 1810, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume. 

15 Pinkney to Wellesley, Aug. 25, 1810, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 

307 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

On November 3, as soon as he received a Moniteur announcing 
the restoration of American commerce, Pinkney again demanded 
British repeal. A month of inconclusive jousting followed until, 
early in December,, the Foreign Secretary asked Pinkney to present 
his full arguments in writing. Pinkney's long note, dated Decem- 
ber i o, summarized the American position. Arguing that the French 
decision was not conditional but "absolute, precise and unequivo- 
cal/ 7 he called upon Britain to execute her promise of reciprocal 
repeal. Pinkney's elaborate exegesis on the Cadore letter, designed 
to show that French repeal did not depend on American or British 
action, was more ingenious than convincing 5 it justified Perceval's 
endorsement, "Surely this is sophistical or rather trifling." More 
forcefully, Pinkney argued that in any event the Orders in Council 
monstrously violated American rights, particularly since they re- 
warded British trade at the expense of neutrals. 16 As Wellesley 
no doubt intended, the note of December 10 forced the British 
Cabinet to make a decision. The delay since August, partly the 
fruit of the Foreign Secretary's own sloth, also reflected honest 
doubt in the Cabinet; now, the Cabinet had to make up its mind. 

In the discussions, Spencer Perceval argued that French repeal 
was not bona fide a contention that became the heart of Britain's 
position but merely "a Notification of a Conditional Decree at 
a -future date" which Napoleon might well refuse to implement. 
Several of Perceval's colleagues nevertheless felt that Britain 
should at least lessen her pressure upon neutral commerce. "How 
can the question of interpretation be decided," asked the Earl of 

Office, FO 5/725 Pinkney to Smith, Aug. 29, 1810, Despatches, Great Britain, un- 
numbered volume j Wellesley to Pinkney, Aug. 31, 1810, enclosed in Pinkney to 
Smith, Sept. 3, 1810, ibid.; Pinkney to Smith, Sept. 24, 1810, ibid. In accordance 
with instructions from Smith, however, Pinkney presented a long 1 note assailing Fox*s 
Blockade and coupling it with the Orders in Council as a violation of American 
rights. Pinkney to Wellesley, Sept. 21, 1810, FO 5/72. Tactically, this may have 
been unwise, for it discouraged repeal of the orders j on the other hand, it put the 
American position on the record and made clear that any British repeal that omitted 
this blockade would leave an important issue between the two countries. 

16 Pinkney to Wellesley, Nov. 3, 1810, FO 5/72$ Wellesley to Pinkney, Dec. 4, 
1 8 10, enclosed in Pinkney to Smith, Dec. 14, 1810, Despatches, Great Britain, un- 
numbered volume 5 Pinkney to Smith, Dec. 14, 1810, ibid.; Pinkney to Wellesley, Dec. 
10, 1810, FO 5/72. 

308 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Harrowby, "but by allowing the trial to be made: i.e. by suspend- 
ing the execution of our orders? ... I am ... at a loss to find 
stateable grounds on which we can refuse to repeal at least our 
orders of Nov 1 807 & April 1 809. They profess'd to be retaliatory. 
That which oblig'd us to retaliate is done away." Lord Bathurst, 
too, felt that good faith as well as wise tactics required England 
to rescind the orders issued since November, iSoy. 17 

Several ministers raised the specter of war with America. The 
First Lord of the Admiralty warned, "We have full employment 
at present for all our money y Ships, & Troops." He wished to sus- 
pend the blockade of Europe long enough for France's real pur- 
pose to become clear to the Americans. Another colleague won- 
dered "how far we could carry the opinion of ye People . . . with 
us to support an American difference upon the nice reasoning 
whether France has repealed her decrees or not, when to a com- 
mon observer she seems to have done so & to have satisfied the 
American Government." Earl Bathurst warned that a "war with 
America will not readily be supported upon so cold & disputable 
a point." He added that "our orders, as at present executed, are 
. . . difficult to defend, and their effect [is] not thought to be 
very advantageous." Both those who wished more trade with 
France and those who desired none, the Earl stated, would op- 
pose the government if it stood on the existing system. 18 

The premier warned his compromise-minded colleagues that 
appeasement would probably only increase American demands. 
Perceval said that, while he would reluctantly consent to rescind 
all the orders if the Berlin and Milan decrees had really been 
repealed, he would not support half measures: "If we do not re- 
peal them in toto, we do not keep our word and I think we may 
depend upon it, we shall not gain our object, if that object be to 
avoid the Consequences from America, which we may apprehend 
from not respecting them. . . . America would be much less 

17 Perceval memorandum, Dec. 19, 1810, Wellesley MSS, Series II (Add. MSS 
37274-37318), Add. MSS 37292; Harrowby-Bathurst memorandum, [Dec. 15, 
1810?], ibid. 

18 Yorke memorandum, Dec. 22, 1810, ibid.; "W" [Westmorland?] memoran- 
dum, n.d., ibid., fol. 2365 Harrowby-Bathurst memorandum, [Dec. 15, 1810?], ibid. 

309 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

likely to go to war with us, if we appeared fearlessly & decidedly 
to uphold our System, than if we seemed to shrink from it in part, 
keeping it alive as to the remainder." Specifically, Perceval warned 
that Fox's Blockade and the order of January, 1807, which Bath- 
urst hoped to use to break up intra-European trade, were integral 
parts of the American demands upon Britain. 19 

The Chancellor of the Exchequer had his way, and it can be 
argued that his success set in train the events culminating in war 
a year and a half later. At least four members of the Cabinet, how- 
ever, supported concessions, and even Perceval admitted that it 
might be necessary, later on, to alter Britain's course. A full year 
before the Opposition's last, successful attack upon the Orders in 
Council and before American nonimportation began, the Cabinet's 
determination had weakened. Unfortunately, no hints of minis- 
terial doubts reached the Americans. Just after Christmas Welles- 
ley wrote Pinkney that Britain demanded less equivocal proof of 
French repeal. In Pinkney's opinion, the firm British note proved 
"what scarcely requires proof, that, if the present Government 
continues, we cannot be friends with England." 20 

The American therefore decided to return home, leaving the 
legation in the hands of a charge. Although first conceived of and 
nominally explained as retaliation for Britain's failure to send a 
replacement for Francis J. Jackson, Pinkney's withdrawal re- 
flected his conviction that he could serve no further useful purpose 
at London. Nagged by illness and prodded by anger, he sent a 
sputtering reply to Wellesley's declaration and requested an audi- 
ence of leave. The Foreign Secretary attempted to prevent Pink- 
ney's departure by belatedly appointing Foster, but Pinkney merely 
replied sarcastically, "I presume that, for the Restoration of Har- 
mony between the two Countries, the Orders in Council will be 
relinquished without Delay, that the Blockade of May 1 806 will be 
annulled, that the Case of the Chesapeake will be arranged . , . , 
and, in general, that all such just and reasonable acts will be done 

19 Perceval memorandum, Dec. 19, 1810, ibid. 

20 Wellesley to Pinkney, Dec. 29, 1810, FO 5/725 Pinkney to Smith, Jan. 17, 
1 8 1 1, Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume. 

310 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

as are necessary to make us Friends." When Wellesley coldly 
replied that Foster's appointment was "not in consequence of any 
Change of System," Pinkney went ahead with his plans. 21 On 
the last day of February, 1 8 1 1, he took his leave of the Prince Re- 
gent and ended his mission. 

The government attempted to minimize Pinkney's withdrawal. 
Friendly newspapers, which ascribed it to American petulance 
over the vacancy in Britain's legation at Washington, argued that 
the appointment of Foster showed that negotiations would con- 
tinue. On the day of Pinkney's audience with the Regent, Spencer 
Perceval told the House of Commons that "nothing in the man- 
ner in which the American minister, now about leaving this coun- 
try, took his departure, . . . could give reason to any one to sup- 
pose that ... an interruption [in negotiations] had occurred." 22 
Insofar as Foster's later disputations with Monroe could be de- 
scribed as negotiations, this was true, but no serious discussions took 
place at London after Pinkney's departure. 

For nearly five years, since he had first arrived to join Monroe, 
Pinkney had served at London. Representing feeble administra- 
tions, confronted by the granite stubbornness of a ministry that 
considered this quality a virtue, he could hardly be expected to 
argue Perceval, Canning, or Wellesley into submission. He more 
than held his own in disputes with them, and his notes and dis- 
patches, when later published, helped to mobilize opinion in the 
United States. He seldom made a misstep, his reports were far 
more accurate than those of his American contemporaries at other 
capitals or of the British representatives at Washington, and his 
close association with Opposition leaders helped to inspire their 
campaign against the Orders in Council. During most of his stay 
Anglophobes attacked Pinkney for his alleged subserviency to 
England j at the end of his mission Federalists attacked him one 

21 Pinkney to Wellesley, Jan. 14, x8n, FO 5/795 Wellesley to Pinkney, Feb. 15, 
i Six, #&.; Wellesley to Pinkney, private, Feb, 15, iSn, ibid.; Pinkney to Wellesley, 
Feb. 17, x8xx, ibid.$ Wellesley to Pinkney, private, Feb. 23, 1811, ibid.; Pinkney to 
Wellesley, Feb. 5&3> 1811, ibid. 

** Morning Post (London), March i, i8nj Sun (London), March i, 1811$ 
Hansard, XIX, 113. 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

called him "our metaphysical mechanic ... at St. James" as 
a crafty intriguer, malevolently determined to bring about war 
with Great Britain. In actual fact, to quote a tribute by Samuel 
Whitbread, he was "a man of sound sense and strict integrity, and 
had uniformly appeared to be actuated by a sincere desire to con- 
ciliate the government of this country." 23 His conversion into a 
War Hawk, the product of his conviction that ordinary diplomacy 
could no longer hope to succeed, illuminated the ominous drift in 
Anglo-American relations. 

Pinkney's departure failed to shock the Cabinet into any action 
except Foster's appointment. Those ministers who had favored 
compromise at the end of 1810 made no further efforts during 
most of 1811. The Cabinet saw that the French decrees had not 
really been repealed. They believed neither that Britain was obli- 
gated to repeal the Orders in Council nor that her trade with the 
Continent would benefit if she did so. They expected the Americans 
to become disgusted with Napoleon, and in any event the angry 
American disunity so evident to all convinced them that the United 
States would not act forcefully against Great Britain. Finally, Brit- 
ain did not feel the impact of America's commercial restrictions 
until late in the spring, after Parliament adjourned, and then the 
ministers hoped that economic warfare would boomerang, as they 
thought it had done in the days of the Embargo and Noninter- 
course acts. 

The government therefore brushed aside parliamentary com- 
plaints. The exchange of notes between Wellesley and Pinkney, 
and the American's departure, failed to bring on an important de- 
bate in either chamber. In June an attack by Samuel Whitbread 
misfired, Perceval arguing that debate would prejudice Foster's 
negotiations. When the Commons discussed distresses in the manu- 
facturing towns, only Baring stressed the importance of the lost 
American market. The ministry fairly easily convinced the House 
to let the economic cycle run its natural course. 24 

The Cabinet also permitted the condemnation of the Fox and 

23 AnnaU -, nth Cong., sd sess., p. 1017 (Quincy) 5 Hansard, XXI, 765. 
^Hansard, XIX, 111-113 5 XX, 339-34-3) 43i~437, 609-610. 

312 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

other American vessels that had sailed for France in the autumn 
of 1810, expecting the Cadore letter to bring withdrawal of the 
Orders in Council. In May, upon learning that Congress had 
voted nonintercourse with England, Wellesley withdrew the ob- 
jection to court proceedings which he had expressed in January. 
Sir William Scott, who heard the case, granted the Fosfs advocate 
a delay to produce further evidence rumored to have arrived from 
Paris. The justice's final decision, shot through with distrust of 
France and criticism of Madison, at the same time showed great 
reluctance to strike at American commerce. Scott declared that, 
while the Orders in Council could not outlive the decrees, in the 
absence of official notification that these had been repealed, "I 
think I am bound to pronounce that no such revocation has taken 
place, and therefore that the Orders in Council subsist in perfect 
justice as well as in complete authority." 25 Wellesley's original 
intervention, Scott's delay and then his cautious language can now 
be seen to indicate official misgivings. At the time, particularly 
when coupled with Foster's demands, the Fox decision appeared 
to close the door on American hopes opened by the Cadore letter. 
Opponents of the Orders in Council refused to admit that they 
"subsist [ed] in perfect justice." Joseph Phillimore argued that 
the "Orders in Council proclaim a blockade by notification j that it 
is a fundamental principle of the Law of Nations that a blockade 
by notification alone, is irregular and null." Only the stationing 
of ships off blockaded ports legalized a blockade, but under the 
orders Britain prosecuted one not so much offshore as upon the 
open seas. 26 Defenders of the orders answered, as had Scott, that 
France had first violated the law of nations 5 Britain simply exer- 
cised the right of retaliation which was universally admitted to 
govern such situations. This right, Perceval's supporters never 
tired of repeating, had been most eloquently stated in the preamble 
to the order of January, 1807, issued by the Ministry of All the 
Talents. 

25 Christopher Robinson to Wellesley, Jan. 29, 1811, FO 83/22055 Wellesley to 
Robinson, May 18, 1811, ibid.; Thomas Edwards, ed., Reports of Cases Argued and 
Determined in the High Court of Admiralty (London, 1812), pp. 311-326. 

26 A Letter to a Member of the House, p. 13. 

313 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

To this the Opposition had ready replies. They insisted that the 
doctrine of retaliation no longer applied, since Napoleon had re- 
pealed his Continental System. At the very least a decent respect 
for international law required Britain to test his good faith. To 
maintain that he had in effect reimposed his system by domestic 
regulations, rather than international acts, was no answer, since 
this was outside the law of nations. 27 It was dangerous to push too 
far the assertion that French repeal made obligatory the rescind- 
ing of the orders, for by the end of 1 8 1 1 the incompleteness of 
Napoleon's repeal was fairly obvious. Thus Alexander Baring, 
who had previously put the issue in its simplest form, argued at 
the end only that "at the time America declared that France had 
revoked her decrees, she had fair ground for saying so, and there- 
fore just reasons for expecting us to follow up the commencement 
of conciliation on the part of France." 28 

More effectively, legal critics pointed out that the orders aimed 
at "profit and monopoly, and not retaliation or self-defence." The 
Orders in Council and the ancillary license trade really closed the 
Continent only to Britain's commercial rivals. As William Cobbett 
put it, referring to two famous prize fighters whose battles titillated 
England, "If Belcher were to beat Mr. Perceval and Lord Liver- 
pool in the street, Crib would not, for that reason, be justified in 
beating them too." America, not France, suffered most from the 
British system. Surely, then it was absurd to assert that the Orders 
in Council were justified by the right of retaliation. 29 

27 The same argument occurred to one member of the Cabinet In the discussions 
of December, 1810: "I must confess, I do not see, what right, we have to complain 
of these severe Custom House regulations What right America has to complain of 
these Custom House Regulations as any Invasion of Neutral Rights much less that 
we have any reason to complain of America trading to France under these regula- 
tions, or not quarreling with France on account of this Municipal Code." "W" [West- 
morland?] memorandum, n.d., Wellesley MSS, Add. MSS 37292, fol. 233, 

** Hansard, XXII, 1106. 

^Edinburgh Review, XIX (1812), 307$ Cobbett's Register, XX (iSn), 262. 
The licensing system made it even more difficult to sustain the retaliation argument. 
The ministry and its supporters usually evaded discussion of this flagrantly unfair and 
discriminatory device, but, toward the end, perhaps out of desperation, they became 
more frank. On March 5, 1812, the London Courier defiantly declared that the li- 
cense trade <c is an attempt, under the pressure of a war carried on by the enemy upon 
new, extraordinary, and extravagant principles, to prevent trade from passing out 

314 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Perceval's enemies relied most heavily upon the argument that 
the orders had undermined Britain's economy. Down to the sum- 
mer of 1 8 10, because England enjoyed comparative prosperity, this 
argument was ineffective. The best the Opposition could do was to 
suggest that this prosperity sprang, not from the Orders in Council, 
but from "the extended commercial genius of the country, from the 
benignant influence of our happy constitution, and the unexampled 
industry of our population." 30 In 1810, by sheer coincidence, at 
the same time that the Cadore letter opened the orders to a differ- 
ent sort of attack, the most painful depression since 1797 struck 
England. The strains of rapid industrialization and a series of bad 
harvests no doubt played a part in the crash, but wartime de- 
velopments were more immediate causes: overspeculation in Latin 
American trade, the multiplication of paper money to finance the 
war, a great glut in warehouses and factories brought on by reduced 
trade with Europe. The license trade failed to relieve the pressure 
of oversupply, particularly after the Trianon tariff made it far 
less profitable, and the American consul at Liverpool accurately 
stated that the "distresses are more to be attributed to the difficulty 
of introducing goods from this Country into the ports of the Con- 
tinent than to any other Cause. 55 31 In the precipitation of this de- 
pression, Madison's policy played no part. The crash followed the 
ineffective restraints of the Nonintercourse Act and coincided with 
the entire removal of restrictions under Macon's Bill. 32 



of our hands into those of other powersto prevent America from engrossing the 
whole trade of Europe, while we are excluded from it. This may be called sordid and 
pitiful and pedlar-like. . . . But we trust we shall always have Ministers sufficiently 
sordid and pedlar-like to think the commerce of this country worth preserving at any 
rate and at any risk." 

30 Hansard^ XV, 345348. The quoted phrase is Grenville's. 

81 Maury to Madison, April u, 1811, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress. 

32 This statement differs somewhat from the general theme of Frank O. Darvall, 
Popular Disturbances and Public Order in Regency England (London, 1934), which 
gives greatest emphasis to the lost American trade as a cause of depression and dis- 
tress. As far as the initiation of the crash is concerned, timing alone seems to demon- 
strate that this is not so, although it is incontrovertible that American commercial 
pressure deepened and lengthened the depression and above all that, as in 1808 and 
1809, many people considered renewed American intercourse a panacea for economic 
ills. For a general discussion of the factors causing depression see Crouzet, of. cit. y II, 
615640. 

315 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Depression gripped England for two years. Trade fell off ap- 
proximately one-fourth, although the government attempted to 
demonstrate, by juggling already questionable customs figures, 
that the drop was inconsequential. To see the fallacy of this asser- 
tion, Brougham replied, "we have only to turn our eyes towards 
our gaols filled with debtors, our poor houses crowded with the 
objects of mendicity, and our midland counties, where so great is 
the distress, that the people are driven even to insurrection." Al- 
though food prices rose, the general price level declined sharply, as 
did wages. Seven thousand business firms failed, Lancashire pro- 
duction dropped more than 40 per cent, and at the height of the 
crisis more than 15,000 paupers received relief in Liverpool alone. 
In March and November, 1 8 1 1, there were scattered popular dis- 
turbances. Then, after a brief period of calm, a whole series of 
riots swept the Midlands in the spring of 1812. The riots formed 
an effective backdrop to the more respectable protests of factory 
owners, who blamed the Orders in Council for the depression. 33 

American policy, which did not precipitate the depression, cer- 
tainly worsened it. Since return cargoes were illegal and Britain 
in any event faced oversupply rather than shortage, imports from 
the United States declined sharply in 1811. Far more serious was 
the end of American purchases. In 1810 more than one-sixth of 
all British exports went to the United States $ in 1 8 1 1 America took 
less than 5 per cent of England's exports, all of them illegally 
after February. The loss represented one-half of the total decline. 34 
William Cobbett declared, "The system of the Emperor Napoleon 
has completely succeeded. . . . [We are] completely cut of 
from the continent of Europe and the United States of America" 35 

Amazingly, the government escaped serious attack during most 
of 1811. The Caledonian Mercury argued that, "if it appears that 
our trade and our maritime rights cannot exist together, a doubt 
must actually strike every person of reflection as to the utility of 

33 Hansard , XXI, noij Thomas Tooke, A History of Prices, and of the State of 
the Circulation, from 1703 to 1837 (z vols.j London, 1838), I, 33011, 357 j William 
Smart, Economic Annals of the Nineteenth Century (London, 1910), I, 265, 

34 Commons Journals, LXVIII, 763. 

35 Cobletfs Register, XIX (1811), 458-459, 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

these maritime rights, an adherence to which necessarily leads to 
the ruin of our trade." No politician went that far, although in 
June Samuel Whitbread ascribed the depression exclusively to 
the Orders in Council, declaring that a all this distress was the effect 
of the ruinous commercial policy which had been pursued by min- 
isters." 3e Neither the Mercury nor Whitbread created a stir at 
the time. 

Until the end of the year the British position remained essen- 
tially unchanged. Jonathan Russell, who arrived from Paris in 
November to replace the temporary charge left by Pinkney, recog- 
nized that any new demand for repeal would simply invite a re- 
buff, so he confined himself to routine business. The American 
consul at London reported that only a few manufacturers and the 
merchants trading to the United States opposed the orders, and a 
visiting Yankee wrote home that "little or no interest is taken in 
our affairs, & even the suspension of exports to our country excites 
very little conversation." The government, hoping for improved 
trade, particularly in the Baltic, and immunized to the danger of 
controversy with America by events of the past, preferred to wait 
for developments. In January, 1812, Jonathan Russell hazarded 
the opinion that there would be no "relaxation in the present sys- 
tem until some great national disaster shall drive the present min- 
istry from power." 3T 

Russell underestimated the effect of the depression, which 
showed no signs of abating. In the fall of 1 8 1 1 and the first months 
of 1812, claims multiplied that the orders had caused the depres- 
sion or prevented recovery through exploitation of the American 
market. The Times printed a long letter from "Philo-Pacificus" 
on the distresses caused by the orders, although editor Walter did 
not yet accept his correspondent's reasoning. A fortnight later Lord 
Lansdowne opened an attack in the House of Lords by asserting 

36 Caledonian Mercury (Edinburgh), March 2, iSnj Hansard, XX, 716. 

37 Russell to Monroe, private, Nov. 22, 1811, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. 
XVIII j Reuben G. Beasley to Monroe, private, Sept. 27, 1811, Consular Letters, 
London, Vol. IX 5 Henry Lee to Peter Remsen, Nov. 24, 1811, Kenneth W. Porter, 
ed., The Jacksons and- the Lees y Harvard Studies in Business History, Vol. II (Cam- 
bridge, 1937)) p. loooj Russell to Barlow, Jan. 14, 1812, Jonathan Russell MSS, 
Brown University Library. 

317 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

that the Orders in Council had ruined the export trade, sacrificed 
an annual market of 12 million to cut off a paltry trade between 
America and France, and stimulated the permanently harmful 
growth of American manufacturing. The first of Brougham's 
massive assaults upon the ministry, ably backed by Baring, soon 
developed the same points in the House of Commons. Manufac- 
turers' petitions, far more numerous than those presented in 1 808, 
descended upon Parliament. A young American visitor, writing 
home to unconvinced, stanchly anti-Madisonian parents, reported 
that "it is the opinion of some of the best politicians in this country 
that, should the United States either persist in the Non-Inter- 
course Law or declare war, this country would be reduced to the 
lowest extremity." 38 

To meet their critics, government supporters put forward several 
arguments. There was the familiar assertion that repeal of the or- 
ders would cripple the already depressed shipping interest. 39 There 
was the announced belief that America was utterly dependent 
upon British manufactures. One member of Parliament scornfully 
proclaimed: "As for America, she could not do without Birming- 
ham she could not even shave herself, or catch her mice without 
their aid." The Board of Trade officially reported that stories of 
increasing American manufactures were probably propaganda to 
frighten England into concession. 40 

Taking full advantage of incomplete and often contradictory 
statistics, governmentalists also argued that the recession was at 
worst a very mild one, that it had no connection with the American 
market, or that commercial famine hurt America far more than 
Britain. "If the measures which she had thought proper to adopt 

58 Times, Feb. 13, 18125 Hansard, XXI, 104.31045, 1092-1116, 1126-1131 > 
Morse to Jedediah Morse, March 25, 1812, Edward L, Morse, ed,, Samuel F. B, 
Morse , His Letters and Journals (2 vols.j Cambridge, 1914), I, 67. 

39 John W. Croker, A Key to the Orders in Council (London, 1812), p. 17: < The 
British shipping 1 interest would be annihilated, and that of America would rise up 
in its stead. M 

40 Hansard, XXII, 431; Board of Trade minutes, Jan, 16, 1812, BT 5/21. To the 
taunt a Boston paper replied: "If America cannot shave herself, she can shave old 
England, as the battles of Bunker-Hill, Saratoga, c. plainly evince: And as to 
mousing, we ask, who manufactured the mouse-tra^s in which BURGOYNE and 
CORNWALLIS were 'taken? '" Independent Chronicle (Boston), May 25, 1812. 

318 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

were injurious to us," declaimed George Rose, "what were they 
less than ruinous to her? . . . America . . . must be suffering 
in her resources in every direction. 3 ' As late as April, 1812, 
Lord Liverpool asserted, "The Distress in the Commercial Dis- 
tricts of this Country . . . arises from temporary and incidental 
Causes." 41 Mounting attacks and continued depression ultimately 
made a mockery of these defenses of government policy. 

Early in 1 8 1 2 news of the War Hawk Congress began to arrive 
in England. Since as early as 1808 the Opposition had warned 
against "add [ing] America to the long and formidable catalogue 
of our enemies." Few took this danger seriously until 1812. Amer- 
ican news, particularly the Foreign Affairs Committee's report, 
allowed the Opposition to emphasize this fear. In the Lords Auck- 
land declared that, even if his other arguments could be ignored, 
the danger of war made repeal imperative, for "as to the horrible 
idea of going to war . . . , he could not for one moment enter- 
tain it, or suppose that their lordships would consent to continue 
the Orders in Council, if they should be proved to lead to that 
unfortunate consequence." In the other house Whitbread raised 
the question in even more forceful language: 

War with America . . . would be a great evil : and war once commenced, 
no man could tell what might follow. It was an easy thing to talk and write 
of putting down America, of inflicting chastisement, &c. as if it was in the 
power of England to annihilate her: we might talk this well, but we could 
not put America down. She was there where we had placed her; it was not 
in the power of England to annihilate her, and it was therefore the interest 
of England to be her friend. 42 

In January, 1812, the Morning Chronicle warned that, by di- 
verting the Royal Navy, an American war would give Napoleon 
a chance to rebuild his naval power, while the dispatch of British 
troops to Canada would weaken efforts in Spain and elsewhere. 
The Times, whose shift from support of the orders to a middle 

41 Hansard, XXII, 1102; Liverpool to Wellington, private, April 28, 1812, MSS 
of the first and second Earls of Liverpool, British Museum (Add. MSS 38190-38489, 
38564-38581), Add. MSS 38236. 

^Hansard, X, 312; XXI, 1066, 770. 

319 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

position hinted at a drift among political independents, declared 
at the same time: "The aspect is, in truth, most threatening , as 
every measure tending to war has been carried by a large maj ority ." 
The paper went on to report Congressman Porter's call for an 
invasion of Canada, commenting, "We are far from making mock- 
ery of these efforts." 43 

James Stephen declared that if war came it would be the fault 
of America and not of Britain. One backbencher argued that the 
only honorable way to meet the war threat was to issue a declara- 
tion in advance of an American one. More effectively, defenders 
of the orders asserted that the United States was, as usual, merely 
bluffing. The American consul at London, looking back some 
months later, observed that "there existed among the people two 
opinions . . . , the one, that we never intended to go to war, and 
the other, that our Government, if so inclined, would not hazard 
it on account of the opposition it would meet with from the East- 
ern States." Many maintained this position until the very end. 
Even as Congress debated Madison's war message, a die-hard 
newspaper scoffed, "We have so often been threatened and then 
forgiven ... by the American democratics, that we have our 
doubts whether they are really in earnest even on the present occa- 
sion." Wiser heads shared the feelings of William Wilberforce, 
a wavering supporter of the government, who pointed out the 
dangers of acting on this hypothesis: "It may be soj but nine times 
out of ten it is a game of brag, wherein each party depends upon 
the giving way of the other, or would not himself push on so 
warmly." 44 

The fear of war fluctuated rather than accumulated. It was very 
pronounced in January and early February, and this perhaps ex- 
plains the comparative moderation of the speech from the throne 
as well as the strong Opposition emphasis at that time. On the 
other hand, some members of Parliament felt obligated to sup- 
port the government at a moment of crisis. When Samuel Whit- 

43 Morning Chronicle, Jan. 27, 18125 Times, Jan. 28, 1812. 

44 Hansard, XXI, 773, 7825 Beasley to Monroe, June 15, 1812, Consular Letters, 
London, Vol. IX j Star (London), June 5, 18125 Robert I. Wilberforce and Samuel 
Wilberforce, The Life of William Wilberforce, IV ( 2 d ed.j London, 1839), 5- 

320 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

bread sought a full-dress debate on British policy on February 13, 
the government replied that this would only encourage American 
bellicosity. Spencer Perceval declared that the government, while 
"alive to all the advantages of reconciliation with America," could 
not allow Britain's essential maritime rights to be called into ques- 
tion. Whitbread secured only twenty-three votes. 45 

From February until May, war fears diminished as a result 
of contradictory news from America. Success of the call for a com- 
mittee to examine the effect of the Orders in Council owed very 
little to a war scare, being based almost solely on the hardships 
of depression. As a matter of prudence the government ordered 
three regiments to Canada, but the War Office directed its Canadian 
commander to return two of them for more urgent service else- 
where if, as expected, the war threat evaporated. Late in February 
an American representative at London wrote that "the general 
opinion [is] that we do not mean to go to war, notwithstanding 
all our preparationj and the idea of our taking Canada is laughed 
at." Another reported, "I cannot perceive the slightest indication 
of an apprehension of a rupture. 53 46 

Toward the end, after the fate of the orders had really been 
settled, reports of renewed American activity stirred England 
once again. On May 9 the Foreign Office sent a tentative war warn- 
ing to the Admiralty. In June ominous reports from Foster helped 
to precipitate a hasty notification of repeal. Still, the danger of 
permanent loss of the American market, far more than any fear 
of the military and naval consequences of a war, brought this about. 
Although Henry Adams declared that "the danger ... of an 
American war caused the sudden . . . surrender," 4T it is as cer- 
tain as such things can be that the British feared war only insofar 
as it threatened to extend and perhaps make stronger the com- 
mercial pressure that had already deepened the depression. In a 
direct sense, the antics of the War Hawk Congress did little more 

45 Hansard, XXI, 762-801. 

46 Liverpool #10 to Prevost, April 2, 1812, Colonial Office Records, Public Record 
Office, CO 43/23 $ Beasley to Monroe, Feb. 28, 1812, Consular Letters, London, Vol. 
IX} Russell to Monroe, private, March 20, 1812, Russell MSS. 

47 O$. cit., VI, 286. 

321 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

than help to inspire the beginning, in January, o the final attack 
upon the orders. 

The new Parliament opened with political developments that 
first threatened and then seemed to strengthen the position of the 
orders. In January Lord Wellesley, who really hoped either to 
be given a stronger position by Perceval or to form a new min- 
istry around his own person, offered his resignation. The Prince 
of Wales, regent since 181 1 but only just invested with full pow- 
ers, opened negotiations with Grenville and Grey, and it appeared 
that the entire Percevellian structure would collapse. The Op- 
position leaders declined the Regent's offers, however, and no 
parliamentary combination emerged. After a good deal of vacil- 
lation the Prince came to the aid of ministers with whom he had 
quarreled for years. "The Prince Regent," he sanctimoniously 
declared, "is the last person in the Kingdom to whom it can be 
permitted to dispair of his Royal father's recovery," and it ill be- 
hooved a loyal son to create a situation in which, upon regaining 
health, George III would discover the government in the hands 
of men he detested. 48 The Prince Regent's declaration astounded 
political observers, since his filial piety had been far less notable 
than his hatred of Perceval. It nevertheless encouraged the min- 
istry to attempt to carry on with the aid of royal support. 

In the shuffling of offices that ensued, Viscount Castlereagh re- 
ceived the Foreign Office. Although a notable failure at the War 
Office from 1807 to 1809, Castlereagh wanted to return to it. But 
for Liverpool's unwillingness to change offices, the opening of the 
greatest foreign-secretaryship in British history would at least 
have been delayed. In 1812 Castlereagh seemed at best an assidu- 
ous, unemotional, loyal politician 5 he had shown no signs of imag- 
ination, and the Times noted that "his name, above all others, is 
noted for mischance: he has been the very darling of misfortune." 
Castlereagh's appointment was soon followed by greater attention 
to American affairs, more mildness in language and even in policy, 
but no evidence that he had a liberal concept of Anglo-American 

48 Prince Regent to Ministers, [Feb. 13, 1812], Arthur Aspinall, ed, The Letters 
of King George IV, I (Cambridge, Eng., 1938), 5-6. 

322 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

relations. Castlereagh's colorless mien and PercevaPs continua- 
tion in power led Jonathan Russell to conclude: "The successor 
of Lord Wellesley will follow whithersoever Mr. Perceval may 
lead. . . . Whatever uncertainty might have hitherto enveloped 
the designs of this government ... no longer exists its course 
is now distinctly marked out nor," added Russell, now as angry 
as Pinkney had been, "can ours well remain doubtful." 49 

The state of the Opposition also discouraged hope. Except for 
Henry Brougham, the attacking forces were almost an army with- 
out generals. Lord Grenville, pessimistic about the prospects of 
success, enjoyed retirement at Boconnoc too much to stir from 
Cornwall. Illness often prevented Lord Auckland, probably the 
best informed on Anglo-American trade, from contributing more 
than his proxy in the House of Lords. Grey and Erskine gave 
scarcely more help. In the Commons, although Stephen Ponsonby 
nominally led the Opposition, Brougham depended chiefly upon 
the support of Alexander Baring and Samuel Whitbread, one a 
young banker married to an American and the other a parvenu 
brewer. Neither was the sort of person likely to influence the House 
of that day, and even members of the Opposition distrusted Whit- 
bread. When, in February, 1 8 1 2, he moved for papers on Ameri- 
can relations, the Speaker privately noted with satisfaction that 
"neither Ponsonby, Tierney, nor any of the Grenvilles attended 
to support Whitbread." 50 Opposition rivalries forced Brougham 
to carry the parliamentary load almost alone. 51 

49 Ibid., I, 19115 Charles K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1815-1822 
(London, 1925), Introduction passim; Times, May 19, 18125 Russell to Monroe, 
private, Feb. 19, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII. 

Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester, ed., The Diary and Correspondence of Charles 
Abbot, Lord Colchester (3 vols.j London, 1861), II, 369. Ponsonby warned Whit- 
bread in advance that he would not be present. Ponsonby to Whitbread, Feb. 13, 
1812, Whitbread MSS. Wellesley, on the other hand, believed that Foster's corre- 
spondence should be presented to Parliament in order to unite the country and thus 
discourage an American declaration of war. Perceval defied the recommendation of 
his outgoing 1 foreign secretary. Wellesley to Perceval, private, Feb. 6, 1812, Perceval 
MSS, 1/58. 

51 Had he so desired, the Prince Regent could have made Brougham's task much 
easier. There is some reason to believe that the Regent favored a conciliatory policy 
toward America. At an unusual private reception of the newly arrived charg6, the 
Prince listened carefully to an explanation of American policy and commented to 
Wellesley, who was present, in a fashion that implied at least partial acceptance of 

323 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Fortunately, Brougham received great support outside the 
House, particularly from businessmen whose voices commanded 
the respect of independent members. Earlier, Baring had correctly 
observed that "the great interest in American intercourse is with 
manufacturers scattered over the whole country, . . . who are 
never able to act as a body with a weight corresponding to their 
importance." 52 In 1812 the intensity of the depression and the 
alluring nostrum of an American market for once united business- 
men. They swamped Parliament with petitions signed by thou- 
sands although some of them, including Josiah Wedgwood, in- 
sisted that laborers not be allowed to join the protests. From the 
Midlands, the North, from ports trading with America, petitions 
descended upon London, overwhelming less broadly supported 
counterpetitions from rival groups at Glasgow and Liverpool. 
When the House of Commons held hearings on these representa- 
tions, 150 witnesses appeared, almost all of them businessmen. 
Twenty-two Birmingham men testified, principally metal goods 
manufacturers. Three Sheffield steel and cutlery makers, leading 
potters (including Wedgwood), cotton and woolen magnates, and 
commission merchants all appeared before the House. Of the 
major business areas only London was sparsely represented (by 
two merchants, an insurance man, and three silkmakers) j neither 
Baring nor Thomas Mullett, a regular correspondent of Whit- 
bread's and a steady advocate of repeal, testified. They were scarcely 
missed. The witnesses that did appear made an impressive case. 
The testimony is full of such passages as, "Has had nine ships 
... at one time. Now has not one, but is satisfied, that if the Or- 
ders in Council were repealed, he should have a great many," or, 
"Has Orders from America for the whole of his goods, provided 
the Orders in Council were rescinded." 53 

Russell's argument that the French had really repealed the Berlin and Milan decrees. 
In March a close friend of the Prince reportedly told Lord Grey that His Royal 
Highness favored concession. But there is no evidence, in his own papers or those of 
his ministers, that the Regent ever intervened to support the movement for repeal. 
Russell to Monroe, private, Jan. 25, March 20, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. 
XVIII. 

62 0#. cit., pp. 4~5- 

d, XXII, i, 245-24,6, 424-427, 500-501, 1059-10625 XXIII, 164-165, 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

From the press, too. Brougham gathered support. In 1812 only 
one pamphlet (and that by an Admiralty official) appeared in de- 
fense of the orders. Opponents published at least six. One, by Philli- 
more, argued that Britain should encourage American trade with 
the Continent as a means of introducing her own manufactures. 
Two lengthy efforts by George Joy, the son of a Tory emigre from 
Boston, endorsed American claims unreservedly, vindicated Jeffer- 
son and Madison from charges of sympathy for France, and warned 
Britons against a vain hope that the Federalists would gain power 
and alter major outlines of American policy. A fourth pamphlet 
closed with the eloquent plea, "Sirs ye are brethren: why do ye 
wrong one to another?" 54 

Magazines and newspapers added their voices. The Edinburgh 
Review of course remained a sturdy opponent of the orders. The 
Monthly Review, albeit not until May, came to support repeal. 
The A nnual Register, in a volume appearing early in 1 8 1 2, warned 
that the United States "already exert a powerful influence upon 
our commercial prosperity" and argued that fair treatment of 
America by one belligerent would focus hostility upon the other. 
Newspapers in port towns trading with America, notably the Cale- 
donian Mercury and the Liverpool Mercury, urged repeal. The 
London Globe steadily attacked Perceval's "ruinous policy," but 
as early as January it gloomed, "The best friends of both countries 
consider the die as cast, and that sufficient time would not be al- 
lowed to avert the blow." Almost every issue of the Morning 



220-221, 232-2365 Journals of the House of Commons, LXVII, 34.8-34.9, 372, 390, 
4,12, 4275 Minutes of Evidence Taken before the Committee of the Whole House, to 
Whom It Was Referred to Consider of the Several Petitions Which Have Been Pre- 
sented to the House, in this Session of Parliament, Relating to the Orders in Council 
(London, 1812), passim; An Abstract of the Evidence Lately Taken in the House 
of Commons, Against the Orders in Council (London, 1812), passim. Quotations are 
from the Abstract, pp. 43, 15. 

54 Croker, o$. dt.; Phillimore, A Letter to a Member of the House; Georg-e Joy, 
The American Question (London, 1812) 5 George Joy, Dispute with America; War 
without Disguise; Or, Brief Considerations on the Political and Commercial Relations 
of Great Britain and Ireland, with the United States of America (Liverpool, 1812). 
See also reviews of The Crisis of the Dispute with America and Conciliation with 
America the True Policy of Great Britain in Edinburgh Review, XIX, 290-317, and 
Monthly Review; or Literary Journal (London), LVIII (1812), 59-74* 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Chronicle, the most influential newspaper urging abandonment of 
the orders, carried an article upon relations with America, and the 
Chronicle had a large circulation, much of it outside London. 

So too did Cobbetfs Political Register, and unlike the Chronicle 
Cobbett could not be accused of merely accepting the Opposition's 
lead. Until the end of 1810 Cobbett vehemently attacked the 
United States. He then reversed himself and began an equally 
violent attack upon the British government and its commercial 
system. In February, 1812, he demanded not only repeal of the 
orders but also an end to impressment. When the orders were with- 
drawn, Cobbett concentrated his fire on impressment, and after war 
began he wrote, a The grievance ... is certainly very great, and 
cannot be expected to be borne by any nation capable of resist- 
ance." 55 Cobbett was almost always long-winded and sometimes 
viciously unfair. However, his wide circulation, like that of the 
Chronicle, ensured diffusion of the arguments against the orders 
throughout the British Isles. 

An overwhelming majority of businessmen, a representative 
portion of the press, and a solid Opposition bloc thus opposed the 
Orders in Council. This did not reflect any particular love of Amer- 
ica, although Russell exaggerated when he wrote, "We are really 
unpopular in this country & in case of a rupture shall have much 
fewer friends than in '75." Cobbett came nearer to the truth when 
he declared, "Nothing, I am convinced, will ever make an Ameri- 
can war popular in England.' 3 56 While a feeling of kinship and 
memory of the costs of the American Revolution doubtless im- 
pressed many Britons, the central concern of all those who took 
America's part was the loss of the export trade. 

Perceval's enemies faced formidable obstacles. Conciliation 
could be pictured as abject surrender to an upstart republic and 
the betrayal of cherished maritime principles, and defenders of the 
orders made the most of these arguments. The London Courier 

65 Annual Register ', 1811 (London, 1812), p. 49$ Globe (London), Jan. 27, 1812$ 
Cobbett's Register > XXI (1812), 65-77. 

66 Russell to Barlow, Feb. 26, 1812, War of 1812 Papers, William L. Clements 
Library, Ann Arbor 5 Cobbett's Register, XXII (1812), 107. 

326 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

regularly scoffed at the chances of an American war "we hardly 
think she will be mad enough to risk it" and defended the orders 
even after the government had given them up, deprecating this 
"sacrifice of a great national right" on the ground that a "yielding 
policy is never wise, no, not even, with a mere view to commercial 
gain, a profitable policy." 5T The Sun y another leading metropoli- 
tan paper, the Quarterly Review, and the Gentleman's Magazine 
spoke much the same language. Two other important organs, usu- 
ally on the side of the government, were somewhat less bellicose. 
The Star exhibited doubts from the beginning, and, when the 
Americans presented new evidence in May, 1812, that Napoleon 
had given up his decrees, the paper became an advocate of appease- 
ment. The Times, which generally backed the ministry, increas- 
ingly criticized the license trade and particularly the government's 
claim that the orders could not be lifted, even for American com- 
merce alone, until Napoleon freely admitted British commerce. 
Thus there were serious differences of opinion even among those 
who usually supported the administration. As early as January, 
1812, Cobbett thought he saw evidence that the Courier and the 
Times were preparing the way for flight from the Orders in Coun- 
cil. 58 

The ministry received firmer support from the shipping and 
West India interests, inveterate enemies of a liberal policy toward 
America, and from traders with the Peninsula and some other parts 
of Europe. Four large groups of shipowners, one from London, 
petitioned Parliament, and four owners appeared as witnesses in 
favor of the orders. Among them was John Gladstone (father of 
William), soon Canning's sponsor in a successful challenge for 
Brougham's seat in Liverpool. Another witness was Joseph Mar- 
ryat, the pamphleteering defender of the orders, who spoke at this 
time for the West India traders. For the parliamentary hearings, 
however, the ministry could find, aside from a small group of 
Londoners, only four Liverpudlians and one Glaswegian to sup- 



67 March 5, June 17, 1812. 
Cobbett>s Register, XXII, 107. 



327 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

port its cause. Not a single manufacturer testified in favor of the 
orders. 59 Although Parliament had a habitual sympathy for colo- 
nialists and especially the merchant marine, successful defense of 
the orders required far broader support among the nation's busi- 
ness leaders. 

If the parliamentary Opposition suffered from internal weak- 
nesses, so too did the government. Bathurst, like some of his col- 
leagues, had secret doubts about the wisdom of maintaining the 
orders. In the House of Commons PercevaPs chief support came 
from James Stephen, George Rose, and, after Wellesley resigned, 
Lord Castlereagh. Stephen, spiritual father of the orders he de- 
fended "with a firmness that amounted to obstinacy," 60 was a 
choleric, rambling, ineffective debater. Rose aroused mistrust as 
one of the most notorious place- and profit-hunters in England, 
and Castlereagh as yet had no important parliamentary following. 
In addition, two important figures, Wilberforce and Canning, 
veered toward the Opposition camp in the early months of 1812. 
Although outright defeat was unlikely, Perceval occupied an un- 
happy position. 

The session's only pitched battle on the Orders in Council (and 
the first on this subject since 1809) took place on March 3, 1812. 
Henry Brougham had given notice that he intended to move, that 
day, for an investigation of the Orders in Council and the license 
trade. The whole parliamentary world recognized the importance 
of the occasion, and absent members flocked to Westminster; Coke 
of Norfolk traveled up from Holkham and another M.P. aban- 
doned the pleasures of Shropshire hunting for the combat at St. 
Stephen's. Actually, aside from "a long declamatory speech of 
very loud tone" by Brougham and another by Canning, eagerly 
awaited since he had helped frame the orders, the speeches were 
not particularly interesting, although more than 350 M.P.'s sat 
through the night to hear them. 

Brougham alluded briefly to a war with America, "the last of 

59 Hansard, XXIII, 202-205, 238-2395 Minutes of Evidence, passim. 
60 Henry Brougham, The Life and Times of Henry Lord Brougham (2 vols.j 
Edinburgh, 1871), II, 5. 

328 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

disasters," toward which the Cabinet's "mean and profligate policy" 
was propelling the country. In general, he and Baring, his principal 
supporter, preferred to emphasize the depressed state of trade. 
They blamed this on the Orders in Council and the license trade, 
and they attacked the shift from commercial retaliation against 
France to an attempt to secure European trade at the expense of 
America as unwise, economically harmful, and unjust. Perceval, 
Stephen, and Rose replied that the depression could not be blamed 
on the orders, since these had first been followed by three years 
of economic improvement. They also defended their system as 
a legitimate and proper effective exercise of the right of retaliation, 
but at the same time they were drawn into a perhaps too-frank 
exposition of their attempts to favor British commerce at America's 
expense. Both sides quoted freely from customs reports and ton- 
nage figures, which hardly enlivened the debate. Attempting to 
revitalize the Opposition, Samuel Whitbread closed the debate 
with an emotional harangue, but his jaw ached and the speech 
lacked his usual force. 

Midway through the night George Canning gave the debate 
its moment of drama. He assailed the government for transform- 
ing the Orders in Council from a blockade into "a measure of com- 
mercial rivalry." The former Foreign Secretary declared a he was 
for giving the Orders in Council a full, unlimited, unmitigated 
vigor of operation, restoring them to their first spirit. . . . They 
were most perfect as they approached towards a belligerent meas- 
ure, and receded from a commercial one." Supporters of the minis- 
try considered this a disingenuous excuse for opposition actually 
inspired by pique at Castlereagh's advance. Still, the speech was 
in character, for in 1809 Canning had urged a rigorous general 
blockade and had played no part in its later relaxation through 
licenses. Some ministerial backbenchers growled "hear! hear!" 
at Canning's calls for vigor and directness, but few joined their 
former colleague in supporting Brougham's motion. 61 

01 Hansard, XXI, 1092-1164$ diary entry, March 3, 1812, Edmund Phipps, 
Memoirs of the Political and Literary Life of Robert Plumer Ward, Esq. (2 vols.j 
London, 1850), I, 445-450. Brougham considered American military strength so 

329 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

At half past four in the morning the legislators wearily filed 
past the Speaker's chair into the division lobbies. One hundred 
and forty- four members supported Brougham, 216 opposed 
him. Although some considered the result a government victory. 
Brougham himself was encouraged by his showing. He urged 
businessmen to redouble their pressure upon Parliament, confident 
a majority could be brought to demand repeal and prevent "a 
rupture with our best customers and most natural, the free and 
English people of America." Brougham's vision was sure. The 
ministry won this battle primarily by mobilizing country members 
who would not stay throughout the session. Many supporters, par- 
ticularly merchants sitting in the House, could not be counted 
upon to remain loyal much longer. Canning's defection cost the 
Cabinet only about a dozen votes, and the Prince Regent's friends 
(except Sheridan, who ostentatiously absented himself) backed 
the administration. But the Melville and Sidmouth factions joined 
with the Opposition, and Wilberf orce and his coterie deserted their 
fellow Saints, Perceval and Stephen. A small group headed by 
General Gascoyne, Brougham's colleague from Liverpool, for- 
merly an earnest defender of the orders, showed the effect of com- 
mercial pressure by voting for the motion. 62 For the first time the 
Orders in Council aroused deep concern among floating members 
of the House of Commons. 

To strengthen his parliamentary defenses Perceval brought 
Viscount Sidmouth into his Cabinet. Sidmouth, who made agree- 
ment on maritime policy a condition of union with the government, 
insisted upon termination of the license trade. Perceval agreed, 
both to silence parliamentary enemies and to conciliate America. 

unimportant that he even argued that a Franco-American war would not serve 
British interests. He believed that the opportunities for evasion of the Continental 
System through use of American ships were far more important than any military con- 
tribution the United States could make. 

62 George Eden to Auckland, March 4, 1812, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, 
British Museum (Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 344585 Russell 
to Monroe, private, March 4, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII 5 diary 
entries, March 3, 4, 1812, Phipps, op. cit. y I, 4494515 Brougham to J. Walker, 
March 6, 1812, Brougham, Life and Times of Henry Brougham^ II, 8-1 1 j Brougham 
t Thorneley, March 4, 1812, ibid.) II, 12-13; Hansard) XXI, 11631164. 

330 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

If we "offer to America the renunciation of our Licenses/' he 
wrote, "undoubtedly we shall appear to be making, as we shall 
undoubtedly be making a greater sacrifice for accommodation, than 
if these Licenses had never been granted." Sidmouth did not reply 
to the suggestion that the more violent the crime, the more credit 
one would get when ceasing it, but he and his friend Vansittart 
agreed to join the government. On April 10 Castlereagh sent new 
instructions to Foster. After lamely defending the use of licenses 
in the past, these instructions offered to abandon them if the 
United States would reopen trade with Great Britain. 63 Consider- 
ing the strength of PercevaPs desire to monopolize European 
trade, he had made a significant surrender, although far too late 
to assuage the Americans. 

A week later the Cabinet made another gesture that misfired. 
On April 2 1 the ministers issued a formal statement of policy. This 
declaration reviewed events since the Cadore letter, argued that 
France sought simply to trick the United States, and stated that 
the orders would continue until Britain received an unambiguous 
statement of French repeal. In London and in America people 
assumed the ministry had decided to stand on the Orders in Coun- 
cil, and this declaration played a decisive part in the American 
decision for war. PercevaPs reputation for inflexibility had served 
his country ill. The declaration really sought to convince domestic 
opponents and Americans, if they remained reasonable, that refusal 
to repeal the orders had been forced upon Britain by French 
policy. The whole paper was shot through with virtual pleas to 
France to provide a plausible excuse for withdrawal of the orders. 64 

The camouflage soon fell away from the government's retreat. 

63 Perceval to Sidmouth, March 15, 1812, First Viscount Sidmouth MSS, County 
Record Office, Exeter, Devon 5 Sidmouth to Perceval, March 15, 1812, ibid.; Castle- 
reagh #9 to Foster, April 10, 1812, Mayo, o<p. cit., pp. 363-367. Perceval had 
little hope that this step would conciliate the Americans, although he considered it 
worth trying and, from a domestic point of view, necessary. Perceval memorandum, 
n.d., Perceval MSS, A/I3- Sidmouth, on the other hand, expected the United States 
to be assuaged, and he was one of the few prominent politicians in England (Willber- 
force was sometimes another) who took the war threat seriously. 

64 Enclosure in Castlereagh to Foster, April 21, 1812, Mayo, of. tit., p. 37211. 
Hansard) XXII, 853-856, prints the wrong proclamation at this point 

331 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

The Cabinet postponed a debate on the orders in the House of 
Lords, and Grenville heard rumors o angry disputes among 
ministers and between the Cabinet and the Regent. 65 Then, on 
April 28, the government, which had so ferociously resisted the 
same suggestion in March, declined to oppose a new call for a 
committee. George Rose, who announced the decision, and James 
Stephen declared that they expected the committee to find no evi- 
dence against the orders. Stephen caustically stated that "if the 
yellow fever raged in the country, and it was the belief of many 
persons that it proceeded from the Orders in Council, he would 
consent that the subject should be examined, merely for the sake 
of removing the false impression." Perceval half admitted that 
there might be substance in his opponents' arguments: "Supposing 
. . . that it were proved that the distresses complained of were 
in some degree, or altogether, occasioned by the Orders in Council, 
it would still remain a question for parliament to decide, whether, 
weighing the disadvantages against the benefits, they should be 
abandoned." The premier added, in a show of strength, that ac- 
ceptance of a committee by no means meant he was committed 
to repeal. Nevertheless, the government could not conceal that 
it had been forced to give way, and it had no answer to the taunts 
with which Tierney greeted the announcement. 66 

In both houses of Parliament witnesses appeared before com- 
mittees of the whole. In the Commons, working in relays for as 
many as eight hours at a time, Brougham and Baring examined 
friendly witnesses j James Stephen cross-examined them and pre- 
sented a few shipowners and colonialists in rebuttal. Although it 
lasted for weeks, the testimony added little that was new, serving 
chiefly to emphasize the business community's conviction that only 
repeal of the orders and recovery of the American market would 
end the depression. For the first time, as a result of the impression 
the hearings conveyed, Jonathan Russell allowed himself to be 
hopeful. "In my intercourse with men both in & out of power since 

65 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, April 22, 1812, Thomas Grenville MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 41851-41859), Add. MSS 41853. 

66 Hansard, XXII, 1092-1 1 12. 

33* 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

my arrival here/' he wrote, "I think I have witnessed a gradual 
softening of temper towards us and a less & less disposition to 
proceed to extremities. It is the increasing want of our intercourse, 
however, more than an apprehension of our aims, that leads to this 
conciliatory spirit." Russell did not yet risk a direct prediction 
that the orders would be repealed, at least so long as Perceval re- 
mained in power. 67 

On May 1 1 administrative business kept Spencer Perceval away 
from Commons until late in the day. Shortly after five, hurrying 
to hearings already well under way, he entered the lobby of the 
House alone. James Bellingham, who conceived himself to have 
been mistreated by the ministry, stepped forward and fired a pistol 
at point-blank range. Perceval died instantly. Chaos ensued as 
lords and commoners, in scenes reminiscent of the Gunpowder 
Plot, raced through corridors, examined closets, and seized arms 
to defend themselves against further attack. Not for some time 
did it become apparent that Perceval's murder was the solitary act 
of a man with a deranged mind. 

The drama of PercevaPs death and his extreme "Englishness" 
provoked lachrymose sentiments among his peers, although in 
some cities the lower classes cheered his demise. Parliament voted 
pensions to his widow and his covey of children, and even Samuel 
Whitbread stepped out of character to deliver a graceful eulogy. 
"I confess," Lord Grenville dourly wrote, "I am a little sick of 
the Apotheosis of a man whom I believe to have been a very good, 
moral, & charitable man in private life, but as factious a partisan 
in opposition, & as bad a Minister in Government as the Country 
ever saw." 08 Strongly partisan Perceval certainly was, an able, 
determined, indefatigable, dedicated politician of narrow views. 
He had held the Cabinet together through the war's gloomiest 
years despite failures, the opposition of distinguished men, and 
internecine quarrels which would have led a more pessimistic, less 
tenacious man (like Grenville himself) to despair. Perceval died 

67 Russell to Monroe, private and confidential, May 9, 1812, Despatches, Great 
Britain, Vol. XVIII. 

e8 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, May 15, 1812, Thomas Grenville MSS, Add. 
MSS 41852, 

333 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

just as the success of Wellington and the prospect of Franco- 
Russian conflict lightened the English skies. Unfortunately, con- 
firmed in his prejudices by his friend Stephen, he followed a 
disdainful policy toward America for too long, and war quickly 
followed his death. 

Bellingham's pistol shot caused a ministerial crisis that lasted 
for a month. Offices, Catholic policy, and military strategy formed 
far more important items of discussion than the Orders in Council 
and American affairs only because all apparently recognized the 
inevitability of repeal. Intensive negotiations between PercevaPs 
survivors on the one hand and Wellesley and Canning on the 
other revealed no disagreements on American policy. Grenville 
and Grey, who virtually threw away a chance to return to power 
because of their own lassitude, pessimism, and desire for revenge 
on their former friend, the Regent, had long planned to make 
repeal one of their first acts. Lord Moira, a personal friend of the 
Prince who received a commission to form a government, counted 
withdrawal of the Orders in Council among the chief items in his 
proposed program. Neither Wellesley, the Opposition, nor Moira 
found it possible to patch together a parliamentary majority, and 
on June 8 the Prince Regent formally reinstalled the remnants 
of PercevaPs ministry under the leadership of the Earl of Liver- 
pool. This result, the least expected of all (except by Lord Grey, 
who steadily forecast it), aroused derision. Even Liverpool had 
scant hope that the Cabinet would be able to maintain itself. Actu- 
ally, he was beginning the longest uninterrupted premiership in 
British history since Walpole. Although Canning rejected ex- 
tremely generous offers made him in the summer of 1812, the 
government's parliamentary position steadily improved. Even 
before a successful election in the fall, it had a majority in the 
House of Commons of approximately seventy. 

The new government groped toward repeal of the Orders in 
Council. Quite obviously the threat of an American war did not 
trouble the ministers, and neither they nor the Opposition under- 
stood the importance of rapid action. (In the interregnum follow- 
ing PercevaPs death, Brougham insisted that the hearings continue, 

334 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

but nobody suggested that repeal must be settled immediately,) 
The Cabinet sought some arrangement that would permit them 
to abandon an untenable position without admitting defeat at the 
hands of parliamentary enemies and mercantile opinion. In the 
days immediately following their confirmation in power, Liver- 
pool and Castlereagh received delegations of merchant complain- 
ants. Liverpool urged them to tolerate the system just a little 
longer on the grounds that the Americans would soon give way, 
permitting a graceful withdrawal which would not encourage them 
to raise their demands. 69 As it turned out, it was already too late 
to prevent an American declaration of war, but the activities of 
these last weeks show clearly that domestic political and economic 
considerations, not American maneuverings, brought about repeal. 
On May 20, while the ministers still held office ad interim, 
Jonathan Russell presented to Castlereagh a French decree he had 
just received from Joel Barlow. This decree, dated April, 1811, 
unequivocally repealed the pronouncements of Berlin and Milan 
for the Americans, and the American charge professed to believe 
it the formal instrument Britain demanded. The new paper was 
rightly suspected to be a French forgery, predated for effect but 
actually recently concocted in reply to the English declaration of 
policy, to bring about repeal of the orders or further embroil Brit- 
ain and the United States. Russell found it embarrassingly trans- 
parent, Castlereagh told the House of Commons it was "so pal- 
pable a juggle" the government intended to ignore it, and the 
Morning Chronicle joined ministerial prints in challenging its 
authenticity. 70 The false decree did not give formal approval to 

69 Star, June 13, 15, 1812. 

70 Russell to Castlereagh, May 20, 1812, and enclosure, FO 5/90 j Russell to 
Monroe, private, June 30, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII; Hansard, 
XXIII, 287288; Morning Chronicle, May 23, 1812. Irving Brant, "Joel Barlow, 
Madison's Stubborn Minister," William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XV (1958), 
442443, clearly shows that Barlow considered the decree a forgery but potentially 
useful to the interests of the United States. See especially Barlow to Madison, May 12, 
1812, William C, Rives Collection, Library of Congress, where the American min- 
ister expresses a strong suspicion that the decree "was created last week ... & in 
consequence of my note of the i st of May" asking proof of French repeal. "I know not 
in State-ethics by what name such management is called," Barlow wrote. Three days 
after denouncing the decree Castlereagh sent it to the law officers for comment. Crouzet, 
of. dt., II, $24n. 

335 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

trade in British goods, a requirement Foster had been instructed 
to insist upon. Nevertheless, after some delay the Liverpool minis- 
try made this obviously fraudulent document the sole excuse for 
withdrawal of the orders, primarily as a device, none too successful, 
to conceal its own weakness. 

Brougham finally got around to a formal motion against the 
Orders in Council on June 16. Save for the absence of James 
Stephen, who usually intervened in any debate upon them, there 
was no indication that the government intended to give way. 
Brougham opened the proceedings with an extremely lengthy 
speech, chiefly a summary of the testimony taken during the pre- 
ceding six weeks. As in March, Rose and Baring followed him, 
repeating the usual arguments, Rose's speech in favor of the orders 
supports the hypothesis, put forward at the time, that the Cabinet 
intended to hold firm yet a little longer if the temper of the House 
permitted. Apparently it did not, for when Baring sat down Castle- 
reagh rose from the front bench and, after denying that the French 
decree recently received really met the requirements laid down 
by Britain, declared: 

Nevertheless, it might not be unwise to put the country in a situation to 
receive explanations upon it. If the American government should be found 
disposed to make representations to France, to induce her to satisfy the 
just expectations contained in his royal highness the Prince Regent's declara- 
tion [of April 21], Great Britain would be disposed to consent to the sus- 
pension, for a limited period, of the restrictive system of both countries ; or, 
in other words, she would consent to suspend the Orders in Council, if 
America would consent to suspend her Non-Importation act. 

A brief baffled silence, then a confused hubbub followed these 
opaque words. Whitbread bobbed to his feet to say that he was, 
"as on most occasions, completely unable to understand the mean- 
ing of the noble lord. He begged the noble lord would say what 
it was he meant." Clarity was undoubtedly not exactly what Castle- 
reagh desired. Under harassment he ultimately agreed that the 
government intended to suspend the orders without even waiting 
to see if the United States would at the same time renew inter- 
course with Britain. Ponsonby, titular leader of the Opposition, 

336 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

pronounced the whole proceeding "a confession both to France 
and America, that the English government had resorted to meas- 
ures which bore so hard on herself, that she could not persevere 
in them." Brougham, who exulted almost childishly at a victory 
for which he could claim chief credit, agreed to withdraw his 
motion until the government announced its full intentions. 71 

The Cabinet debated its next move for just a week, a delay 
strengthening the feeling that Castlereagh's announcement had 
been a tactical step, not the result of a fixed decision. Some minis- 
ters desired to stop at a temporary suspension of the British system. 
If the United States raised its price, the orders could easily be 
restored 3 if, on the other hand, America reacted favorably, the 
disgrace of surrender would be lessened by a parallel relaxation 
across the Atlantic. Other cabinet members, perhaps a narrow 
majority, argued for going the whole way. They pointed out that 
American law provided for the abandonment of nonimportation 
after the cessation, not merely the suspension, of English edicts. 
The Opposition, its blood up, now insisted on outright repeal, and 
in the long run there was little practical difference between the 
two courses, since the orders could be reproclaimed if the United 
States refused to open trade with Britain. 72 

On June 23, prodded by Brougham's call for a new debate, 
Castlereagh made it known that the government had revoked the 
Orders in Council. Significantly, he met with a group of "Mem- 
bers from the Manufacturing Counties" before the House con- 
vened. The revocation, which actually took the form of a new 
Order in Council, was then communicated to Parliament. The 
government insisted that the repeal was voluntary, a gesture of 

71 Hansard, XXIII, 486-5485 Crouzet, of. cit., II, 826. Instructions sent to Foster 
the next day outlined the government's Intentions at this point. Britain planned to 
suspend the orders as of August i, with suspension to last until May, 1813, unless 
French conduct permitted an extension beyond that date. Suspension was conditional 
upon the removal of American restraints on British trade and the use of her ports 
by the Royal Navy. Castlereagh $20 to Foster, June 17, 1812, and enclosure. Mayo, 
o#, cit., pp. 381-385. 

72 Russell to Monroe, private, June 30, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. 
XVIII} Joy to Madison, June 20, 1812, Rives Collection j Hansard, XXIII, 587592, 
719. 

337 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

conciliation inspired but not required by the French decree. It 
insisted that new measures against American trade would follow 
if nonimportation continued. These qualifications were largely 
bravado 3 the Percevellian system followed its creator into the 
grave. 73 

Revocation provoked general celebration, particularly in the 
Midlands, and Brougham and the other heroes of the battle were 
tendered testimonial dinners. Workers found employment once 
again, and factories put on extra shifts to produce goods for the 
American market. Fifty ships sailed from Liverpool for the United 
States within two weeks, bearing, it was reported, more than 2 
million yards of calico cloth as well as a supply of good English 
cheese for the White House. 

The resumption of trade, coinciding with news of the outbreak 
of war between France and Russia, created unusual optimism in 
England. Cobbett, it is true, warned his countrymen that America 
would not be satisfied until impressment ceased, and the Courier 
gloomily predicted that America, "seeing us yield one point, will 
press the others." The great majority of the press congratulated 
the country on its good fortune. In Parliament, the happy climax 
of an arduous campaign intoxicated the Opposition. Brougham 
praised the ministry's "frank and manly conduct," and he and Lord 
Lansdowne pledged their supporters to rally around the govern- 
ment if America challenged any of Britain's undoubted maritime 
rights. Grenville and Grey agreed with Auckland that the tardy 
repeal of the orders should "have been follow'd rather by an 
impeachment than by a compliment," and Sydney Smith wrote, 
"I am very much affronted with Brougham's panegyric upon the 
Ministry. It was injudicious and savoring of pomp. Their late 
measures were surely not conceded, but extorted. Their jaws were 
forcibly distended, and an emetic thrust down their throats. Are 
they to be praised for rendering what they could not retain, and 
to be told that their compulsory sickness does them the highest 
honor?" The flood of congratulation buried these complaints. 

78 Castlereagh to Prince Regent, June 23, 1812, Royal Archives j Hansard, XXIII, 

715-721, 7i6n~7i8n. 

338 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Repeal of the Orders in Council gave popularity to a ministry 
whose hold had been tenuous and established the government in 
a position vis-a-vis America which the nation was prepared to 
endorse. 74 

Henry Brougham later declared, "The repeal of the Orders 
in Council was my greatest achievement." 75 As leader of a cam- 
paign in which too many prominent Opposition figures had lost 
hope, Brougham could legitimately claim great credit. He de- 
served testimonial dinners, although he might have accepted more 
modestly the plaudits that came his way. For Brougham could 
not have succeeded without the well-nigh unanimous support of 
the business community. Abandonment of the orders is one of the 
first examples in British history of a government's surrender to 
outside, nonpolitical opinion. The defection of men like Gascoyne 
and Wilberforce, who sat for commercial areas in the Midlands, 
warned the government that it could not count upon its followers. 
The cessation of licenses, though it might rekindle the enthusiasm 
of those who favored commercial war a outrance y could not assuage 
the business community. Long before PercevaPs death, after the 
March debate or at least by early April, swelling industrial protest 
doomed the orders. When Midland representatives met with Lord 
Castlereagh on the day repeal was announced, some objected to 
the casuistry of basing it upon the new French revelation. "Aye," 
said the Foreign Secretary, "but one does not like to own that we 
are forced to give way to our manufacturers." 7e 

The depression of 1810, totally unconnected with events in 
America, secured for the United States what Jefferson's Embargo 
had been unable to obtain. The British business community reacted 
hesitantly to the depression at first, for many of its members nor- 

74 Cobbett's Register, XXII, 10275 Courier, June 17, 18125 Hansard, XXIII, 715- 
7195 Auckland to Grey, June 29, 1812, Grey MSS, from ist Ld. Auckland? Smith 
to Lady Holland, June 7, 1812 [?], Smith, op. cit., I, 222. Cobbett later declared that 
the Opposition's fatuous pledges on this occasion encouraged the ministers to refuse 
further compromise and thus became responsible for the continuation of the War 
of 1812, Cobbett's Register, XXIII (1813), 687. 

70 Life and Times of Henry Brougham, II, i. 

76 Diary, June 24, 1812, Robert I. Wilberforce and Samuel Wilberforce, The Life 
of William Wilberforce (2d ed.j 5 vols.j London, 1839), IV, 35. 

339 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

mally counted themselves supporters of Perceval and anyway dis- 
liked the very idea of outside pressure upon Parliament. America's 
resumption of nonimportation in 1811, the result of Napoleonic 
caprice rather than of acute Madisonian analysis, deepened the 
depression in England. Manufacturers and merchants became con- 
vinced that only reopened sales to America could restore pros- 
perity, and they undertook the campaign of protest which finally 
forced the government to give way. The final result did not vindi- 
cate the Jefferson-Madison theory of the invincibility of American 
commercial pressure. The Republican leaders had always assumed 
that this pressure alone would cripple European nations, whereas 
success actually depended upon the coincidence of American pres- 
sure with depression in Europe. In prosperous times, as in 1807 
and 1808, Great Britain could have ridden out the storm. 

Nor did revocation show that Britain took very seriously the 
threat of an American war. Hostilities were feared, if at all, not 
for themselves, but because they threatened to close still more 
firmly the door to the American customer. The embargo of March, 
1812, passed largely as a prelude to war, troubled England chiefly 
for economic reasons. Even Henry Brougham argued that the 
United States was too weak to pose an important military threat 
or to arouse jealousy: 

Jealousy of America! I should as soon think of being jealous of the trades- 
men who supply me with necessaries, or the clients who entrust their suits 
to my patronage. Jealousy of America ! whose armies are yet at the low . . . 
whose assembled navies could not lay siege to an English sloop of war: 
jealousy of a power which is necessarily peaceful as well as weak . . . 
[and] is placed at so vast a distance as to be perfectly harmless! 77 

Great Britain clung to this view even after the United States de- 
clared war. The Cabinet believed American strength and will so 
contemptible that it expected Madison to revoke the declaration 
af tep learning that the Orders in Council had disappeared. 

While news of repeal was still on its way to him by ship through 
Baltic, John Quincy Adams expressed a hope that, "with 

77 Hansard, XXIII, 504-505. 

340 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

a little more Patience and Forbearance, we shall see the downfall 
of that infamous compound of Robbery, Perjury, and Fraud by 
the weight of its mischief recoiling upon its authors, without being 
obliged on our part to resort to force for its destruction." Adams' 
hope was fulfilled 5 so too was his gloomy expectation that Perce- 
vaPs death would delay the denouement too long to prevent an 
American declaration of war. When news of repeal reached the 
United States, the Aurora crowed that "the Leviathan of the sea 
has floundered and crouched to the terrapn! The sovereign 
pedlar of the seas has lowered topsails to the Yankee cockboat" 
In the same article, however, William Duane called for a vigorous 
campaign to take Montreal before winter. Like many of his coun- 
trymen, Duane considered the Cabinet's tardy concession too little 
to stop a war that it might have prevented. The Raleigh Star de- 
clared: "Their wit has come too late." 78 

78 Adams to John Adams, June 29, 1812, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), Massa- 
chusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXIXj Aurora (Philadelphia), July 30, 18125 
Raleigh Star, Aug. 7, 1812. 



341 



CHAPTER 



X 



"THE ASSEMBLED WISDOM 
OF THE COUNTRY" 



John Spear Smith, the young charge d'affaires selected by Wil- 
liam Pinkney, had previously visited St. Petersburg and Paris. At 
neither capital did the youth show more than a passive interest in 
politics. Six months' exposure to British frigidity (and particularly 
to Lord Wellesley) changed all that. Like Pinkney before him 
and Jonathan Russell afterwards, young Smith concluded that 
the traditional policy of protests, pinpricks, and commercial war- 
fare imperiled America's interests and reputation. Two weeks 
before Congress gathered, Smith wrote to his father, the Senator 
from Maryland: 

This will no doubt nd you at Washington, where the assembled wisdom 
of the Country is to decide upon its fate. It is rny sincere prayer that all 
may come armed with the courage & energy so necessary in these times, 
and determined to set out on a new system for obtaining redress. Without 
this, we may rest ad infinitum in the mean and degrading position we have 
so long had. If we have no respect for ourselves, others will have none for 

34* 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

us, resistance is the only means of meeting oppression, for tyrants are rarely 
merciful, and Power in the hands of Nations is used only for their own in- 
terest. We shall never write ourselves into the character and reputation our 
temporizing & cringing policy has lost us. 1 

As John Spear Smith argued, America could regain European 
consideration and self-respect as well only by breaking loose 
from past policy. "Courage & energy," so long lacking, were now 
required in even greater measure. The session saw a struggle be- 
tween Republicans possessed of these qualities and others who, for 
one reason or another, wished to temporize. Since the Federalists 
avoided alliance with any Republican group, while the administra- 
tion did not throw its full weight into the struggle, the battle lasted 
for more than seven months. In June, 1812, a burst of desperate 
energy carried the declaration of war against England. 

At the outset, vigor triumphed in Henry Clay's selection as 
speaker of the House, James Varnum now sat in the Senate as the 
replacement for Pickering. Ex-Speaker Macon was tinged with 
Quiddism. William Bi]bb of Georgia, another front-runner, was 
an administration hack. On the Sunday before Congress met, a 
group of Republicans caucused'to seek"a*"more satisfactory nominee. 
They settled upon Henry Clay. Jrlaving greater determination 
and numbers than other factions, this group fixed its choice upon 
the party, and Clay easily secured election. So unknown was he 
that Augustus Foster almost ignored his selection, while the Co- 
lumbian C&^Unel confused him with his cousin, Matthew Clay 
of Virginia. V 

^IthpH^h backed by both young and old men, the Kentucky 
gamecock epitomized the new generation of Republicans. An un- 
restrained nationalist, a supporter of manufacturing as well as of 
agriculture, a rip-roaring orator, a debonair favorite of the ladies, 
a bold gambler at cards and politics how different from the 
generation of Jefferson, Madison, and Macon! Clay did not have 

1 John S. Smith to Samuel Smith, Oct. 20, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

2 Bernard Mayo, ed., Henry Clay f Spokesman of the New West (Boston, 1937), 
p. 403 and n.j Foster #24. to Wellesley, Nov. 12, 1811, Foreign Office Archives, 
Public Record Office, FO 5/77$ Columbian Centinel (Boston), Nov. 9, 1811. 

343 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE 



the intellectual powers of the two presidents (a friendly critic, 
William Plumer, observed, "He declaims more than he reasons")? 
but he had more force. During two part terms in the Senate he had 
opposed half measures, and in the summer of 181 1 he wrote ahead 
to Washington that if Britain "persists in them [the Orders in 
Council] , and France is honest and sincere in her recent measures, 
I look upon a War with G. Britain [as] inevitable." 3 Clay desired 
to embrace, not to evade the inevitable. 

The new speaker quickly showed that he did not intend to be a 
mere figurehead. Down to his time the speakership had been pri- 
marily an honorific office, with the holder expected to respond 
to the directions of more powerful leaders. As internal feuds and 
presidential caution weakened administration control, a great 
vacuum opened. Henry Clay stepped in to fill it, making policy 
decisions himself, treating the other leaders of the House as his 
lieutenants, often descending frdin the rostrum to speak in im- 
portant debates, and effectively wielding hitherto almost unused 
powers to check the obstructiveness of the Federalists and their 
passing ally, John Randolph. The expulsion of Randolph's favor- 
ite bitch, a massive hound who had accompanied her master to 
the House in the days of other speakers, symbolized the new 
regime. 

In appointing standing committees, Clay made no pretense of 
seeking balance. He packed them, almost ignoring the Federalists 
and making sure that War Hawks outnumbered moderate Repub- 
licans. All the chairmen had had some previous experience in the 
House, and the Speaker did not push them forward more rapidly 
than was then normal. Ezekiel Bacon, who headed the Ways and 
Means Committee, had already served four years $ David R. Wil- 
liams of North Carolina, chairman of the Military Affairs Com- 
mittee, was returning for a third term after a two-year absence $ 
and Peter B. Porter, who received the most important assignment 
of all, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, had been a 

3 Entry of Feb. 13, 1807, Everett S. Brown, ed., William Plumer's Memorandum 
of Proceedings in the United, States Senate, 1803 iS 07 (New York, 1923), p. 60 8 j 
Clay to Rodney, Aug. 17, 1811, Rodney Family MSS, Library of Congress, This and 
subsequent paragraphs draw heavily upon Mayo, op. cit^ pp, 40 1 ff . 

344 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 7 ' 

member of the Eleventh Congress. Only the Naval Affairs Com- 
mittee's Langdon Cheves could be considered a newcomer, and 
even he had served during one previous session. The chairmen, 
except for Cheves, disappointed Clay and perhaps made him wish 
that he had totally ignored the qualification of prior service. Wil- 
liams proved eccentric, opposing several important measures of 
preparedness} Bacon was a loyal party man rather than a War 
Hawk, and he deserted in the battle over naval building; Porter 
wavered during the winter and resigned before the job had been 
finished. Fortunately for Clay, other committee members served 
his purpose better than the chairmen. On the Foreign Affairs 
Committee he placed three War Hawks cut from the classic pat- 
tern youthful, newly elected, vigorous Calhoun, Grundy, and 
John Adams Harper, a thirty-two-year-old from New Hampshire 
subsequently denied reelection by more pacific constituents. Joseph 
Desha shared all the attributes of these men except inexperience, 
and the two moderate Republican members usually went along 
with the majority. John Randolph, whose membership was almost 
traditional, and the sole Federalist member, Philip Barton Key, 
who fought for the British during the Revolution, found them- 
selves swamped. So did minority members on other committees. 
Whether the Congress contained, as John Spear Smith thought, 
"the assembled wisdom of the Country," is a moot point. The 
British minister, whose praise came hard, reported that the "present 
Congress has certainly brought with it a considerable accession to 
both Houses of men of talents and respectability, although there 
still continue in it too many low and uneducated Individuals who 
are too ignorant to have any opinion of their own." 4 Others pre- 
ferred to emphasize the debilitating effect of Republican factional- 
ism. With a presidential election in the offing, many Clintonians 
opposed anything that might benefit Madison. Reapportionment 
made necessary by the census of 1810 became the first order of 
business, emphasizing the conflicting interests of North and South 
and opening differences never completely forgotten in debates over 
national issues. 

4 Foster #35 to Wellesley, Dec. 21, i8ji, FO 5/77. 

345 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 3 ' 

On foreign policy, congressmen divided into a kaleidoscope of 
shifting factions so intricate and febrile that classification baffled 
even the members. Nathaniel Macon discerned at least six factions 
in the House, none large enough to work its will unaided. Samuel 
Taggart, a rancidly bitter Federalist but also an indefatigable 
analyst, divided the Republicans into four groups. The first of 
these, the War Hawks, was largely counterbalanced by a second 
clique composed of Republicans determined to preserve peace even 
if it meant continuing economic warfare. In the middle lay what 
Taggart called the "scarecrow" party, "those who vote for war 
without any sincere intention to go to war, but in hopes that Great 
Britain may be intimidated by the din of our preparations to relax 
her system so that they will eventually come off with flying colors." 
A fourth group, usually voting for measures of preparedness, did 
so to embarrass Madison rather than to bring on hostilities or run 
a bluff against Britain. 5 Taggart admitted that many representa- 
tives did not fall neatly into any group, and he perhaps overem- 
phasized the importance, if not the intensity, of anti-Madisonian 
feeling. Otherwise the Massachusetts congressman's description 
suggests the divisions that actually existed. 

The true War Hawks, the Montagnards of the Twelfth Con- 
gress, had the cohesive vigor that had bestowed success upon Maxi- 
milien Robespierre and an earlier minority. Clay, Cheves, and 
Lowndes shared with an equally bellicose senator, George Bibb 
of Kentucky, a boardinghouse proudly described by Lowndes as 
"certainly the strongest war mess in Congress." A Massachusetts 
Federalist considered these men and a tardy arrival, John C. Cal- 
houn, the strongest men in the Republican party, and added that 
they, "although deluded by the false glare of Democracy, are 
gentlemanly & apparently at least candid men." 6 This foursome 
shared the lead with Felix Grundy, who was perhaps even more 

5 Macon to Nicholson, Nov. 21, 1811, Joseph JL Nicholson MSS, Library of 
Congress} Taggart to Rev, John Taylor, Jan. 20, 1812, George H. Haynes, ecL, 
"Letters of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American 
Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 376-377. 

Lowndes to Elizabeth Lowndes, Feb. 9, 1812, Harriott H. Ravenel, Life and 
Times of William Lowndes (Cambridge, 1901), p. 100$ William Reed to Pickering, 
Feb. 1 8, 1812, Timothy Pickering MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. XXX. 

346 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

eager for war than his coadjutors but sometimes harmed the cause 
by his lack of discretion. Some War Hawks questioned the purity 
and even the legality of the reexport trade and detested the men 
who carried it on, they repeatedly declared they did not wish the 
United States to fight for it. Others were prepared to expand the > 
navy to defend all commerce and, equally important, to increase 
the weight of the nation in international affairs. All had in common 
a deep belief that "we have suffered national degradation too long, 
and endured insult and injury with too much patience." The 
senator who wrote these words added, toward the end of February, 
that the government "must vindicate the rights & honor of the 
nation. There appears at present no honorable ground upon which, 
war can be avoided a change in the measures of G. Britain . . . 
could alone preserve peace and there is not any . . . reason to 
calculate on such an event." 7 National honor was the War Hawks 5 
central concern. 

s Like Senator Campbell, almost all the War Hawks would have 
considered American honor satisfied by repeal of the Orders in 
Council, and all would have been satisfied if impressment also 
ceased. If, as they expected, Britain made no concessions, Camp- 
bell, Clay, and Calhoun, as well as followers like William R. King 
and John A. Harper, were lightheartedly prepared to go to war. 
After all, war did not seem so serious in those days. The easy 
conquest of Canada and the speedy starvation Q the British West 
Indies were articles of faith among Americans! David Rogerson 
Williams, speaking for the entire faction, said, that it "appeared 
to him much easier to settle the terms of a new peace, than to patch 
up the old quarrel. When he considered the limited extent of our 
demands, and the nature of the pressure on the enemy, he could 
not but believe our objects would be attained."; 8 

7 Campbell to Blount, Nov. 29, 1811, Weymouth T. Jordan, George Washington 
Campbell of Tennessee: Western Statesman, Florida State University Studies, Vol. 
XVII (Tallahassee, 1955), pp. 95-96$ Campbell to Blount, Feb. 24, 1812, George 
W. Campbell MSS, Library of Congress. To warnings of the cost of war, another 
War Hawk, William Widgery, replied: "What is all our property, compared with 
our honor and our liberty. It is not commerce only for which we are about to fight, 
but for our freedom also." Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 658, 

8 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 689-690. 

347 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

Some Republicans who took war more seriously nevertheless 
voted with the War Hawks. They favored what Taggart called 
the "scarecrow" policy, arms bills and noisy oratory to frighten 
England into surrender. Within this group could be found Clin- 
tonians, who seized the preparedness issue as a stick to belabor the 
administration, but also many old-line Republicans, who were not 
yet ready for war but recognized that self-immolating policies 
would no longer serve. For some the policy was sheer bluff 3 for 
others it was a temporary expedient, with no future course charted 
out y still a third group recognized that war might possibly follow 
but considered the risk worth taking. Naturally, the success of this 
policy depended upon the impression of sincerity conveyed by 
Congress, and scarecrow men often spoke almost like War Hawks 
in public. William Findley, an exhausted radical, declared in 
December that "the time was fast approaching when we must 
repel national insults or surrender our independence," but in al- 
most the next sentence he made the elliptic statement that prepara- 
tion was the best way to avoid war. Toward the end, in an obvious 
effort at escape, some thirty of these men joined with Federalists 
to support a proposal for adjournment which would probably have 
prevented a declaration of war. 9 

Until Christmas time the administration's position fell short 
of the War Hawks but still beyond the bluffers. The President 
and the Secretary of State considered it possible that Britain could 
be frightened into surrender. On the other hand, the government 
(or at least Monroe) saw that, as the Secretary put it, "we have 
been so long dealing in the small way, of embargoes, non-inter- 
course, and non-importation, with menaces of War &c that the 
British Government has not believed us." If Britain remained 
firm, the administration was prepared to fight in the spring. Mean- 
while, they would try to inveigle Foster and his superiors by a 
judicious combination of threats and enticements. The President 
repeatedly told Foster that the United States asked no sacrifice 
of principle on Britain's part, that America would not insist on 
England's admitting that she had wrongly questioned the Cadore 

.j pp. 501, 1315-1316. 

348 



<C ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

letter, and even that he personally "would be satisfied provided 
their [the orders 5 ] practical effect was to cease without any public 
abandonment of them. 55 On the other hand, in comments too often 
minimized by Foster, the President and the Secretary repeatedly 
refused to bring into question the validity of French repeal, warned 
that the use of force would eventually come, and delayed publica- 
tion of correspondence that might lessen anti-British feeling. As 
time passed the administration's line gradually tautened, but on 
the whole it clung to the hope, as described by Serurier, that decla- 
rations and military preparations would "suffice to convince the 
English Ministry of the strong intention here to resist, and to 
determine it not to add another powerful enemy to the terrible 
enemy it confronts. 55 10 With far less enthusiasm than the War 
Hawks, the President faced a war he still hoped to avoid. 

The administration kept its own counsel, except for one meeting 
between Monroe and the Foreign Affairs Committee. Many con- 
gressmen thought the executive shared the opinions of scarecrow 
men or possibly even of the peace faction. Hugh Nelson, a neigh- 
bor of Madison's, believed he expressed the President's feelings 
when he challenged War Hawk declarations that the United States 
was pledged to war, 11 and many War Hawks harbored doubts of 
the administration. Those determined to avoid war hoped for 
presidential support when the crisis came. 

This last Republican group, described by Henry Adams as 
"honest and perhaps shrewd men . . . , who saw more clearly the 
evils that war must bring than the good it might cause, 55 considered 
war a quixotic exercise. Many, like former Attorney-General Rod- 
ney, still thought 9tasi,t commercial pressure alone would bring 
England to her knees. Others, sharing the feelings of a Republican 
newspaper in Trenton, believed that the true policy of the United 
States was "$eace y while peace is either practicable or tolerable. 

10 Monroe to Taylor, June 13, 1812, James Monroe MSS, Library of Congress* 
Foster #29 to Wellesley, Nov. 29, 1811, FO 5/775 Foster #7 to Wellesley, secret, 
Jan. 31, 1812, FO 5/84 j S&rurier #4,2 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 12, 
1812, Archives des Affaires 6trangeres, Correspondance Politique, tats-TJnis (photo- 
stats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXVII. 

11 Nelson to Charles Everett, Dec. 16, 1811, Hugh Nelson MSS, Library of Con- 
gress. 

349 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

Notwithstanding the embarrassments o our trade . . . , the na- 
tion was probably never so prosperous as at the present moment. 
. . . And shall we jeopardize or sacrifice this prosperity by war, 
if war is avoidable?" The Trenton True American endorsed pre- 
paredness but added, "Peace is a gem which ought not to be rashly 
flung away it may cost much toil, and blood and treasure to re- 
cover it." Many New England Republicans, Adam Boyd of New 
Jersey, Nathaniel Macon, and others took this position until Fed- 
eralist taunts and the logic of the situation created by War Hawks 
and their disingenuous allies caused them, like the True American, 
to support the war declaration, although with great reluctance. 
Others, most notably Senator Worthington of Ohio, opposed war 
on the issue of timing until the very end. 12 

At the extremity of the Republican party, so far from the War 
Hawks that they entered into virtual alliance with the Federalists, 
stood John Randolph and a handful of Quids. Weakened as usual 
by illness and hypochondria, Randolph nevertheless delivered 
more major orations than any other opponent of war, and as always 
his lashing tongue raised the hackles of his enemies. The North 
Carolina schoolteacher, Richard Stanford, used more restrained 
language. He opposed the conquest of Canada on the ground, 
borne out by later history, that in British hands it served as a 
"pledge for her better behaviour." Stanford scoffed at the easy 
way congressmen compared individual and national duels for 
honor. "The truth is," he said, a we cannot liken, nor will the simili- 
tude hold good between an individual's honor, or his sensibility to 
it, and that of a nation." 13 At least until the spring, few Federalists 

12 Henry Adams, History of the United States during the Administrations of Jeffer- 
son and Madison (9 vpls.j New York, 1889-1891), VI, 170-171 j Rodney to Gallatin, 
Oct. 20, 1811, Albert Gallatin MSS, New- York Historical Society} True American 
(Trenton), Nov. 18, 1811$ May 18, 18125 journal entry, June 14, 1812, Thomas 
Worthing! on MSS, Library of Congress. 

^Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp, 673, 511513, A similar complaint, made to 
Monroe by an outside observer, declared that congressmen "never touch the subject, 
but ... blare out in Emotions. . . . among these Gentlemen, eternal changes are 
rung upon 'public feelings^ national sensibilities , national Honor, & even the peculiarly 
royal & military phrase of National Glory. The small voice of reason . , , is seldom 
heard." Walter Jones to Monroe, Dec. 8, 1811, Monroe MSS. 

350 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY*' 

spoke as frankly as Stanford and Randolph in opposing the estab- 
lishment of national honor as a mainspring of policy. 

Even this description makes Republican factions seem more 
tidy, more cohesive than they were. Actually, members floated 
from camp to camp or concealed their true views behind the glare 
of oratorical fireworks. Many simply drifted with the wind, con- 
founding all attempts to place them. The Quids never numbered 
more than six or eight, but the other three groups probably divided 
fairly evenly the Republican membership of the House. The War 
Hawks and the scarecrow men, if aided by their share of the 
drifters, usually found it possible to get their way, although in 
several instances success came by a very narrow margin. 

In the Senate an even more complicated situation prevailed. 
The Republican membership spread from George Washington 
Campbell, still the advocate of positive action as he had been earlier 
as a congressman, to Richard Brent, an alcoholic Virginian still 
clinging to the essentially Anglophile position that he had shared 
with his friend, James Monroe, a year earlier. Brent opposed 
measures looking to war, although at the last moment he tottered 
into the chamber to vote for the declaration. Somewhere between 
the extremes represented by Campbell and Brent lay Samuel 
Smith, William B. Giles, Michael Leib of Pennsylvania, and New 
Hampshire's Nicholas Gilman, all primarily individualists moved 
chiefly by a desire to crimp James Madison's political future. Al- 
though the major debates took place in the lower house, on two 
occasions passage of the army bill and the declaration of war 
the Senate played an important part. 

The thirty-seven Federalist congressmen (there were also seven 
senators) were too few to be able to afford factionalism. Nine lived 
together at Birch's, 70 rods south of the Capitol, and five more at 
Coyle's boardinghouse, a traditional Federalist hostelry, arrange- 
ments that also facilitated a united front. Aided by Harmanus 
Bleecker of Albany, an energetic and personable young man, Josiah 
Quincy commanded the Federalists. Their ranks included able 
men, as strong in debate as the War Hawk leaders, but the tactical 

351 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

design adopted after vigorous dispute required them to curb their 
appetites for opposition. 

The plan was Quincy's. Rufus King, who feared the scheme 
would misfire, and Timothy Pickering, always the advocate of 
blunt attack, warned against it, and unsophisticated constituents 
often complained, but the congressional delegation accepted it. 
Quincy's scheme was based upon a conviction that "Federalists, 
in abandoning the doctrines of Washington, of efficient protection, 
have lost their discriminative character, and, in their fears about 
the event of the European contests, their national character. In- 
stead of a patriotic opposition to an oppressive government, they 
are in great danger of degenerating into a mere faction" without 
political appeal. He proposed to support military legislation, to 
avoid being provoked into defense of England, and to keep gener- 
ally silent in debate, letting the Republicans expose their own 
internal disagreements. Quincy, who of course did not want war, 
argued, perhaps not entirely sincerely, that the "present situation 
of the commercial parts of the country is worse than any war> even 
a British one" u Destruction of Republican rule by exposing the 
incapacity of that party seemed the only way to restore prosperity. 

Almost all Federalists believed the Republicans did not mean 
what they said when they talked of war. "It has been," wrote 
Quincy, "the burden of their successive songs, every session, for 
six years past." Two Federalists visited Foster to urge England to 
maintain the Orders in Council so that the Republicans would be 
forced to the wall. Another wrote to Francis J. Jackson in the 
same sense: 

The only way to dislodge the prevailing party from the post of power, is by 
saddling them with a war which they have neither the means [nor] the 
ability to conduct, or by allowing them to place themselves in a situation 
. . . which would expose their weakness and pusillanimity, and render 
them contemptible ... in the eyes of all mankind. The first situation, I 
believe, . . . they could not be kicked into, while we enjoy the delightful 

14 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, n.d. [Dec., i8n], Edmund Quincy, Life of Josiah 
Quincy (Boston, 1867), p. 2415 Quincy to Otis, Nov. S, 1811, Harrison Gray Otis 

MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society. 

352 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

spectacle of seeing them decoyed or turned into the other, like a flock of 
geese into a pen. We have them snug enough, and if they make their 
escape the British government will have to answer for the crime of res- 
cuing them. 

The Alexandria Gazette reminded fellow Federalists of the fable 
of the boy who cried "Wolf," but Federalist congressmen pre- 
ferred their own legends, among them a belief that the Republicans 
were too weak to go to war. 15 

The state of the nation made Federalist blindness understand- 
able. As Henry Adams put it, "A passion that needed to be nursed 
for five years before it acquired strength to break into act, could 
not seem genuine to men who did not share it." Of course, fourteen 
of the seventeen state legislatures passed resolutions favoring an 
end of pacifism j this was but a normal and indeed habitual occupa- 
tion of legislators. Of course, War Hawks talked as though war 
was inevitable 5 Federalists knew they were not so confident as 
they seemed. The public seemed resigned rather than bellicose. 
The anger roused by the Little Belt affair, Foster's demands, and 
even Indian warfare (although climaxed by news of Tippecanoe 
shortly after Congress met) soon subsided into sullen dislike of 
Britain. Early in 1812 Serurier reported that the people, although 
ready to face war, did so unenthusiastically. Two months later 
Taylor of Carolina warned Monroe that the country wanted war 
no more than it had wanted to fight France in I798. 16 Federalists 
concluded that the danger of war did not exist, for at times of equal 
or even (in 1807) greater public excitement members of Congress 
had shown no inclination to abandon peace. 

For the first months of the session Augustus Foster viewed the 
situation almost as complacently as the Federalists. Foster lived 
at the center of town, whereas his rival, Serurier, had rented Bar- 
low's house three miles away. The Britisher met everybody, at 

15 Quincy to Otis, Nov. 25, 1811, Otis MSSj Hanson to Jackson, March 7, 1812, 
Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/61; 
Alexandria Gazette , Jan* 22, 1812. 

16 Adams, op. /., VI, 1135 Se'rurier $"42 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 
12, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII; Taylor to Monroe, Jan. 2, 1812, Monroe 
MSS. 

353 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

official occasions, on visits to Federalist and even War Hawk hos- 
telries, and particularly at his own entertainments. Foster kept 
what Serurier described as "une forte bonne maison," and he some- 
times dined as many as 200 guests at a time, a practice which ex- 
hausted his expense account by mid-December. Federalists and 
all sorts of Republicans attended his parties. Amidst all these 
sources of information, the British minister failed to see any clear 
indication that war impended. In his November reports he sur- 
rounded very qualified hints of possible war with contrary evi- 
dence. Thereafter, even in describing difficult conversations with 
the President, Foster emphasized the ease with which American 
resentment could be turned aside. Almost any offer would draw 
the final sting, he reported in the last dispatch of the year, "pro- 
vided an appearance of conciliation is exhibited." 17 

The young envoy might have learned something from the re- 
ception of his offer to settle the Chesapeake issue. As early as June, 
1810, Lord Wellesley told William Pinkney that England would 
drop the demand, made through Rose, Erskine, and Jackson, that 
America rescind the proclamation banning British ships from Amer- 
ican waters. The eclat of making a settlement was reserved for the 
new minister to America, and formal instructions were not issued 
until April, 1811. Even then Foster dawdled. At last, just before 
Congress met, he presented the British offer. Madison ignored it 
in the message that greeted the legislature and, after accepting it, 
passed the correspondence on to Congress without a single sign 
of gratification. The National Intelligencer commented in the 
coldest possible fashion, and less official Republican journals sug- 
gested that the British action was "merely an attempt to paralize 
the proceedings of Congress." Foster fatuously reported that the 
settlement was "regarded by NT. Monroe and myself as a kind of 
stepping stone to a general arrangement." 18 He failed to discern 

17 Serurier #4.3 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan, 21, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVIIj Foster to Wellesley, most secret, Dec. 28, 1811, FO 5/77* See also 
Foster $2 0^35 to Wellesley, Nov. 5~Dec. 21, x8ix, ibid. 

18 Pinkney to Smith, private, June 13, 1810, Department of State Archives, Na- 
tional Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume 5 Wellesley $ra to 
Foster, April 10, 1811, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to th& 

354 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 * 

that, while the administration had to accept an offer that met Amer- 
ican demands, Madison and Monroe had no desire to use it to 
dampen what they considered a useful spirit o antagonism toward 
Britain. 

Although failure of the Chesapeake settlement demonstrated 
that American love could not be purchased with tardy tinsel, dur- 
ing the first three weeks of the session Foster and the Federalists 
seemed correct in minimizing the chances of war. Congress did 
absolutely nothing, the administration failed to stir, and war men 
and bellicose editors became restive. After all, Congress had come 
together with a great bustle in 1807, and the next year the House 
whooped through the noble resolutions presented by George W. 
Campbell. "Strike but the chord that sounds of war, 35 a correspond- 
ent wrote to William Duane's Aurora in 1810, "and we fly as 
regularly to proclamations as Quixotte to arms." 19 Republican 
factionalism, Madison's reputation for hesitation, failure to credit 
the sincerity of men who said they would vote for war when the 
time came all these gave plausibility to the thesis that war was 
very unlikely. 

Nor did the Foreign Affairs Committee's report on Madison's 
message provide clear evidence that Congress desired war. Joseph 
Desha urged the committee to recommend convoys to protect 
American trade with Europe, 20 a step that would certainly have 

United States, 1791- 1812, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1936, 
III (Washington, 1941), 318319$ James D. Richardson, ecL, A Compilation of the 
Messages and Papers of the Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 4965 National In- 
telligencer (Washington), Nov. 14, iSiij Enquirer (Richmond), Nov. 19, iSiij 
Foster #23 to Wellesley, Nov., 12, 1811, FO 5/77. The United States declined to 
accept reparation for the lives lost in the attack, on the theory that no payment 
could compensate for them. The two surviving men from the Chesapeake two had 
died were returned to the deck of the ship from which they had been taken. The 
Admiralty moved very slowly, however, and the seamen were not delivered to the 
Chesapeake, then in Boston harbor, until July n, 1812, a month after the American 
declaration of war. Anthony St. J, Baker 9f n to Castlereagh, July 23, 1812, FO 
5/8*. 

* Aurora (Philadelphia), Feb. 5, 1810. 

20 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 483-484. Augustus Foster reported that in 
a preliminary vote the committee had determined upon convoys, only to be forced 
by John Randolph to reverse this decison. The make-up of the committee, however, 
makes War Hawk defections the critical factor. Foster 9^31 to Wellesley, Dec. 18, 
i8n,FO 5/77. 

355 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

led to an early clash with the Royal Navy, but a majority, includ- 
ing several War Hawks, was unready to go that far. They had 
no desire to open themselves to ridicule by bringing in bellicose 
resolutions and then finding themselves deserted by their own 
party leaders. Finally, at a long committee meeting that lasted 
well into the night, the Secretary of State pledged the administra- 
tion to support a declaration of war in the spring, if measures of 
preparedness did not bring about a British surrender in the mean- 
time. Only after this promise did the committee decide to recom- 
mend military legislation to the House. The news soon spread, 
but many emphasized that the redemption of Monroe's pledge 
was not only conditional but also months away. That the war men 
feared the government would renege is obvious from Grundy's 
account of the meeting with Monroe, in which he said: "Rely, on 
one thing, we have War or Honorable peace before we adjourn or 
certain great personages have produced a state of things which will 
bring them down from their high places, If there be honest men 
enough to tell the truth loudly." 21 Suspicions did not evaporate 
until Madison finally presented a war message to Congress six 
months later. 

The committee report, which bore the name of chairman Peter 
B. Porter, reached the House on November 2,9. Emphasizing the 
threat posed by the Orders in Council, but also dilating on impress- 
ment, the report declared that "the period has arrived, when, in 
the opinion of your committee, it is the sacred duty of Congress to 
call forth the patriotism and resources of the country." The com- 
mittee recommended legislation to bring the regular army up 
to statutory strength, the enlistment of three-year men and other 
volunteers, the approval of drafts of state militia, outfitting of the 
navy, and authorization for merchant ships to arm. 22 Porter's Re- 
port encouraged congressional neophytes like Jonathan Roberts 
and prowar journals like the Richmond Enquirer, frightened 

21 Grundy to Jackson, Nov. 28, 1811, Andrew Jackson MSS, Library of Congress, 
See also Lowndes to Elizabeth L. Lowndes, Dec* 7, 1 8x i, Ravenel, of. dt,, pp. 89-905 
Richard M. Johnson to Barbour, Dec. 9, 18 u, James Barbour MSS, New York Public 
Library, 

22 Annals^ izth Cong*., ist sess., pp. 373-377. 

356 



^'ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY*' 

various commercial houses and some Federalist congressmen like 
Samuel Taggart. The National Intelligencer, however, declined 
to throw the administration's weight behind it, and Federalist 
journals, noting that the report committed America to nothing for 
months to come, considered it a bluff. Some bellicose newspaper- 
men criticized it as too mild, among them Hezekiah Niles, who 
declared that Porter's Report fell far short of the people's de- 
mands. 23 

Congress, in its characteristically leisurely fashion, waited a week 
before beginning the debate. Chairman Porter led off with a call 
for war if Britain did not repeal the orders and make some "ar- 
rangements" on impressment, but at the close he weakened the 
effect of his speech by warning his colleagues not to proceed to 
war too rapidly. 24 Felix Grundy, attempting to regain the lost 
ground with a violent oration, fell into indiscreet admissions. He 
acknowledged what Federalists had long charged, that economic 
warfare was very painful to the nation that prosecuted it. "This, 
and our plighted faith to the French government," he said, "have 
tied the gordian knot; we cannot untie itj we can cut it with the 
sword." ^ 5 The other War Hawk speeches contained strong appeals 
to honor as well as repeated assurances that the Canadian plum 
lay waiting to fall into the lap of American invaders.; Some speakers, 
notably Desha and Calhoun, spoke without reserve. Others, in- 
cluding Porter himself, Roberts, and William R. King, admitted 
that they did not want to go to war for the reexport trade. These 
War Hawks apparently considered American honor a graduated 

23 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, Nov. 30, 1811, Jonathan Roberts MSS, Historical 
Society of Pennsylvania $ Enquirer ', Dec. 3, 18115 Gordon, Trokes, Leitch and Co. to 
Ellis and Allan, Dec. 4, 1811, Ellis- Allan MSS, Library of Congress; Taggart to 
Rev. John Taylor, Nov. 30, i8n, Haynes, of. cit., p. 3645 National Intelligencer, 
Nov. 30, 1811 $ New-York Evening Po$t> Dec. 2, 18115 Niles* Weekly Register (Balti- 
more), Dec. 7, 1812. 

24 In London the Courier (Jan. 24, 1812) commented harshly on Porter's speech: 
"A more noisy, silly, blustering speech a speech more unstatesman-like we never 
read. But perhaps the American Committee meant little more than to bully. Mr. 
PORTER is against entering the war prematurely. Aye, take Counsel again 5 second 
thoughts may be best. If America spread the cloth, we may furnish some dishes to 
the feast which her guests may not relish." 

25 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 426. For the entire debate see pp. 414547. 

357 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY** 

commodity, far more seriously challenged by impressment and a 
check on exports than by other British measures. 

Scarecrow men and moderates destroyed any chance that Con- 
gress would appear determined to vindicate American rights. Not 
one true Republican opposed the resolutions it took a bold man 
to confess he considered the United States too weak to resist ag- 
gression but several declared that a vote for Porter's resolutions 
did not commit them to support specific legislation recommended 
by the committee, to say nothing of a declaration of war later on. 
Macon talked this way, and Adam Boyd and Hugh Nelson. Speak- 
ing, as he thought, for the administration against enemies who 
desired to maneuver it into early war, Nelson descanted at length 
on the dangers of armed conflict, the questionable wisdom of per- 
mitting America to become an adjunct of Napoleon, and the neces- 
sity of preserving freedom of action. According to Samuel Taggart, 
Nelson's speech "carried terror and dismay into the ranks of the 
war party." 26 By expressing doubts shared by many silent Repub- 
licans, the Virginian threatened the War Hawk program of steady 
preparation culminating in war, and at the same time gravely re- 
duced the possibility that the strategy of bluff would succeed. His 
was the most important speech of the debate. 

In oratorical fireworks John Randolph's two major orations 
carried the palm. Since Quincy's Federalists left the debate to 
their opponents, Randolph bore almost the entire burden of chal- 
lenging the report. The master of Bizarre was ill and tired. His 
speeches suffered through disorganization, but individual passages 
had his trade-mark. He accused Republicans of apostasy to their 
own creed, referring to the conflict between Macon and Grundy 
by saying, "If we must have an exposition of the doctrines of Re- 
publicanism, he should receive it from the fathers of the church, 
and not from junior apprentices of the law." He twitted Grundy 
for his "gordian knot" statement and emphasized the folly of 
tilting the balance of power in favor of Napoleon, "him who had 
effaced the title of Attila to the 'Scourge of God!' " In his most 

26 Nelson to Charles Everett, Dec. 16, 1811, Nelson MSSj Taggurt to Rev. John 
Taylor, Dec. 14, 1811, Haynes, of. cit^ p. 369. 

358 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

famous passage Randolph declared, "Agrarian cupidity, not mari- 
time right, urges the war. Ever since the report . . . came into 
the House, we have heard but one word like the whip-poor-will, 
but one eternal monotonous tone Canada! Canada! Can- 
ada! " If war came, he said, it would not be "a war for our homes 
and fire-sides a war that might generate . . . manly sentiments 
but, a war of rapine, of privateering, a scuffle and scramble for 
plunder." 27 This accusation, later taken up by historians, over- 
looked the fact that most references to Canada simply pointed to 
it as the easiest target for American military power. 

In the most reasonable War Hawk speech, his maiden effort, 
Calhoun replied to two of Randolph's central arguments. While 
admitting that the European blockade kept agricultural prices 
down, he denied that a desire to force open the transatlantic market 
was more than a subsidiary motive for war; patriotism and honor 
were the chief factors, he said. Calhoun also rebutted Randolph's 
argument that Napoleon posed a greater threat than England. 
Since America could not fight both at once, prudence required her 
to select the more vulnerable. "It is absurd," said Calhoun, "for 
us to talk of the balance of power, while they by their conduct smile 
with contempt at our simple, good-natured policy." 28 Calhoun's 
speech was the sole reply to Randolph. Other Republicans passed 
their time affirming that cause for war existed, while disagreeing 
whether it should be declared, even at some distant date in the 
future, 

Nearly three weeks after Porter's Report the House concluded 
debate. The resolutions sailed through easily, not more than 
twenty-two votes being cast against any of them, although Quincy 
failed to prevent a handful of Federalists from breaking away to 
join Randolph, Stanford, and other Quids in opposition. Louis 
Serurier thought the President's message and the report had 
"placed Congress, like the administration, in one of those positions 
from which it is no longer possible to retreat." On the other hand, 
Federalists scoffed at the slow pace. In two days, said the Baltimore 



Sy lath Cong-., ist sess., pp. 441455, 525546. 
28 Ibid., pp. 482-483. 

359 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE 



Federal Re-publican, the huge Republican majority could pass 
legislation to implement the sentiments in Porter's resolutions. 
"They do not choose, they prefer to bluster and bully, and talk big, 
and take the chance of frightening the Prince Regent into a repeal 
of edicts, to which they have submitted for four years." Congress 
passed no legislation before the Christmas recess, and Senator 
Campbell feared none would be passed. 29 

After the holidays, action on army and navy bills demonstrated 
Congress' weakness. A new law authorized short-term volunteers 
without settling their purpose, and the conditions of enlistment 
made it practically useless. Congress also emasculated the admin- 
istration's plan for an additional army of 10,000 men to serve for 
three years. This army, although theoretically tailored to the re- 
quirements of a campaign against Canada, was actually planned 
to be just large enough to impress Britain and just small enough 
to require no impossibly burdensome additional taxation. In the 
Senate, to embarrass Madison, GiJ.es presented an amendment ex- 
panding the army to 25,000 men. This forced the administration, 
as well as those who favored a sedate pace toward a war they still 
hoped to avoid, either to oppose a larger and presumably more 
effective army or to accept a measure that cast doubt on their own 
original purpose and would require extensive new taxes. Faced 
with this dilemma, the Madison men and the moderates first stood 
firm behind the original plan. War Hawks, on the other hand, 
were perfectly willing to move more rapidly if they could find 
the votes. Led by Henry Clay, who intervened in debate for the 
first time/they abandoned the plan arranged at the Foreign Affairs 
Committee's session with Monroe and accepted Giles's proposal. 
Eventually, faced by Senate firmness and the difficulty of seeming 
to support half measures, opposition collapsed. With only minor 
changes, Giles's bill became law. 30 

The additional army bill could not be taken seriously. It estab- 
lished a target figure beyond America's reach although no more 

29 Ibid., pp. 54.6-548, 564-566; S6rurier #39 to Minister of Foreign Relations, 
Dec. 9, 1 81 1, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVI 5 Federal Republican (Baltimore), Jan. 2, 
18125 Campbell to Jackson, Bee, 24, 1811, Andrew Jackson MSS. 

80 Annals, i2th Cong:., *st sess., pp. 35-97, 596-691, passim. 

360 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

than adequate to the requirements of effective war. 31 Frequent 
congressional references to the psychological effect upon Britain 
lessened the law's effectiveness as an instrument of bluff. A realistic 
program, instantaneously executed, would have served this end far 
better. Foster declared the bill "more an electioneering than a war 
measure," 32 and he was right. Giles aimed to hurt Madison. The 
small group of Federalists who joined Quincy to support the larger 
force acted with Machiavellian motives. Moderates gave in to 
avoid ridicule and to mask the nakedness of the strategy of bluff 
far more than because they were convinced by arguments for 
25,000 as opposed to 10,000 men. The administration detested 
the end product, which reflected upon its own original plans and 
saddled it with a politically harmful burden, 

In a different fashion, the fate of a bill to expand the navy 
showed Congress' divided mind. As soon as the army legislation 
passed, Langdon Cheves brought in his committee's recommen- 
dation for the construction of a dozen ships of the line and twenty 
frigates. This proposal quickly ran into determined opposition. 
Many Republicans, even sincere War Hawks, opposed expan- 
sion of a service they considered a heritage from Federalism. 
Others objected to the expense or argued that a building program 
could not be completed in time to frighten England. Defeatists 
repeatedly declared that the United States could never hope to 
challenge the Royal Navy with success. In vain did Cheves argue 
that national unity required action to defend commerce, "the sec- 
ond great interest of the country." In vain did Henry Clay, de- 
scending again to the floor, attempt to rally inland votes by point- 
ing out the need for sea defense of the great outlet of Western 
produce at New Orleans. Despite almost unanimous Federalist 
support, despite paring down of the original plan, the House re- 
jected naval building on January 27 by a vote of sixty-two to fifty- 
nine. Calhoun, Cheves, Lowndes, and two dozen other Republi- 

31 In an account written some time later, Lowndes declared that Secretary of War 
Eustis, who drafted the bill, sabotaged the 25,000 figure. William L. Lowndes, 
Historical Anecdotes, and Observations, MSS, Library of Congress. In any event, few 
more than 1,000 men were enlisted in the army between January and May. 

32 Foster #3 to Wellesley, Jan. 16, i8iz, FO 5/84-. 

361 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'* 

cans, mostly from states north of the Delaware, voted for the 
proposal. Fifty congressmen who later voted for war, the entire 
Pennsylvania delegation as well as Westerners and Southerners 
including David R. Williams and Felix Grundy, killed the frigate 
bill. 33 With it died the chance of strengthening the war spirit in 
coastal areas. 

Having ensured unpreparedness on land and sea, "the assembled 
wisdom of the Country" turned to financial requirements. Only a 
few carefree congressmen, like William Widgery of Maine, con- 
sidered taxation an easy problem: "We are told, a war will be very 
expensive. Granted. What is money? What is all our property, 
compared with our honor and our liberty?" For most congressmen 
the cost cast a shadow over the army and navy bills. On January 
10 Albert Gallatin sent fiscal proposals to Ezekiel Bacon, chairman 
of the Committee on Ways and Means. Scarcely one remunerative 
area escaped the eye of the Secretary of the Treasury, who pro- 
posed to double import duties, tax salt, levy excises, and institute 
a stamp tax like that which had aroused a furor against Britain in 
1765. Unlike most Yankee Republicans, Bacon opposed naval 
building. When he released Gallatin's letter at the height of the 
battle over frigates, suspicious War Hawks thought he did so to 
kill the naval program. 34 

Bacon's revelations cast a cold douche upon the war spirit. The 
National Intelligencer came to Gallatin's support 5 the Richmond 
Enquirer, although critical of details, suggested that determined 
Virginians would not let a few taxes cool their ardor 5 and some 
reasonable Republicans observed that the unpleasant dose must 
be swallowed to ensure national strength. 85 Otherwise, at least 
until Henry Clay accepted the inevitability of taxation and exerted 
his influence, Republicans almost unanimously denounced Gal- 

3 Annals^ i2th Cong., ist sess.j pp. 8o3~ioo5 fassim, 

34 Ibid., p. 658; Gallatin to Bacon, Jan. 10, 1812, Henry Adams, ed,, The Writ- 
ings of Albert Gallatin (3 vols. 5 Philadelphia, 1879), I, 5015175 Grundy to Jack- 
son, Feb. 12, 1812, Andrew Jackson MSSj Harper to Plumer, Feb. 17, 1812, William 
Plumer MSS, Library of Congress. 

^National Intelligencer, Jan. 28, 18125 Enquirer, Jan. 25, Feb. 8, 14, 1812$ 
Troup to Governor D. B. Mitchell, March 17, 1812, Edmund J. Harden, The Life 
of George M. Troup (Savanah, 1859), p. 107. 

362 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

latin. William Plumer, Jonathan Roberts, and Felix Grundy 
wanted to postpone taxes until the declaration of war, which alone 
could make them necessary. The Secretary of the Treasury re- 
ceived a letter from a former colleague, Henry Dearborn, report- 
ing that New Englanders ask a why is it necessary to check the 
ardour of the people at so critical a moment, why not postpone 
. . . [most of the] taxes . . . until war shall have actually com- 
menced, then the people will expect to bear such taxes as circum- 
stances shall require. 35 Less restrained critics added charges of 
"Apo staoy and TREACHERY" to attacks upon Gallatin's wis- 
dom - y indeed, many believed the recommendations showed that 
he and his administration desired to avoid war. Young John A. 
Harper swallowed reports that the letter to Bacon had been pre- 
pared in arrangement with Foster, adding, "If reports are true, 
Foster's carriage is frequently seen at Gallatin's house at such hours 
of the night as honest men are asleep." Even a Republican who 
believed that Congress would ultimately vote taxes and then war 
admitted that this "does not seem as palpably true now as a few 
weeks ago. To say that the retrograde step is commenced . . . 
would be saying too much 5 but that the war mercury has sunk a 
little, nobody here can doubt. The letter of the Secretary of the 
Treasury has done this." 30 

The panic owed more to congressmen than to the man upon 
whom they wished to shift the blame. A war movement cast into 
such despond by a statement of costs necessarily appeared a feeble 
thing, and the war men's desire for delay showed that they had 
no faith in the people's firmness or else still hoped to escape with- 
out proceeding to open war. Gallatin's letter to Bacon was a private 
one, not intended for immediate publication, as he later convinced 
reasonable men like Clay. Although neither the Secretary nor 
Madison left any record of their intentions, as prudent adminis- 
trators they must have felt that Congress should consider the costs 
of war when gaily legislating preparation for it. The tax proposals 

86 Plumer to Harper, Jan. 28, 1812, Plumer MSS$ Roberts to Matthew Roberts, 
Feb, 3, 1812, Roberts MSSj Grundy to Jackson, Feb. 12, 1812, Andrew Jackson MSS$ 
Dearborn to Gallatin, March 29, 1812, Gallatin MSSj National Intelligencer, Jan. 
28, 1812$ Aurora, Jan. 25, 18125 Harper to Plumer, Feb. 17, 1812, Plumer MSS. 

363 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

were too detailed to be communicated orally, like Monroe's prom- 
ise to the Foreign Affairs Committee. Sometime the question of 
money had to be faced, however, and Gallatin asked for no more 
revenue than seemed absolutely necessary. It was not his fault that 
congressmen found the bill of particulars an unpleasant sight. 

For four weeks gloomy Republicans tried to screw their courage 
to the sticking point. In an air of forced humor, the members con- 
sidered a proposal to tax marriage licenses in the District of Colum- 
bia, Clay observing that "marriage ought not to be taxed, but 
promoted," while Smilie facetiously proposed a bounty instead of 
a tax. Finally, on February 17, Bacon reported for the committee. 
In addition to loans to carry the main burden, he proposed doubled 
import duties } a direct tax of $3 million levied on the states j an 
impost of 20 cents a bushel on salt; a stamp act j taxes on distillers, 
tavernkeepers, wine sellers, and vendors of foreign merchandise 5 
and excises on sugar and carriages. 37 The outline generally fol- 
lowed Gallatin's suggestions. The most interesting thing about 
Bacon's report was that it proposed to impose the new taxes only 
when war actually began. While this gesture might somewhat 
lessen voter resentment, it confessed that many members still 
hoped to avoid war, created a good reason for opposing a declara- 
tion, and destroyed the opportunity for financial preparedness, all 
without materially easing the path of the tax program. 

The House accepted increased import charges after only one 
day of debate. Internal taxes encountered serious difficulty. James 
Fisk, a Vermonter usually allied with the war men, proposed to 
set these taxes aside, saying that "as all were agreed these taxes 
were war taxes, he thought it time enough to agree upon them 
when war became certain j . . . there was no doubt the resources 
of the country were amply sufficient whenever Congress deter- 
mined to call them forth, but he saw no necessity for alarming 
the people with odious taxes beforehand." Peter B. Porter seconded 
Fisk's motion. Although easily beaten, this proposal drew the 
ominous support of Fisk, Porter, and other Republicans. 38 

37 Annals , i2th Cong-., ist sess., pp. 10411042, 1050-1056. For the entire de- 
bate, incompletely reported, see pp. 1092-1155. 
pp. 1 1 091 no. 

364 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE C O U N T R Y ? * 

The next day a far more serious blow fell. The salt tax, a major 
source of revenue and linchpin of the entire group of internal taxes, 
suffered defeat by a vote of fifty-seven to sixty. In general the 
vote followed sectional rather than factional lines, although the 
leading War Hawks and sternest Federalists supported the levy 
for quite opposite reasons. Congressmen from the West, where free 
salt licks abounded, voted for it. Agrarians from the coastal states, 
which purchased large amounts of salt, opposed it. In alliance with 
those who opposed any new taxes, in principle or to slow war prepa- 
rations, they had their way. The National Intelligencer com- 
plained that Congress had moved hastily without considering the 
implications of its action. After having decided "the greater ques- 
tion" by authorizing military increases, the paper argued, it was 
silly to balk at "the comparatively unimportant question of taxa- 
tion," particularly since the main costs of war would be met 
through loans. 39 Still, ruin once again threatened the war move- 
ment. 

After a week end of troubled thought and conversation, Thomas 
Gholson of Virginia came to the rescue. He announced that he had 
changed his mind, now supported the salt tax, and moved recon- 
sideration. Gholson did not pretend to be enthusiastic, but, said 
he, "I ... would vote two dollars a bushel on salt, rather than 
see the present course of policy frustrated. Mr. Speaker, we who 
form the majority have all the same end in view: the maintenance 
of the rights, honor, and independence of the country against the 
lawless aggressions of our enemy." Ten Republicans, all but two 
from coastal states south of the Hudson, rallied to this call and 
changed their votes. The salt tax was restored by a vote of sixty- 
six to fifty- four. 40 Bitter personal attacks on Gallatin and a venge- 
ful proposal to place heavy taxes on Western distillers failed to 
shake the newly constructed majority. 

On March 4, exactly four months after the opening of Congress, 
the tax bill passed the House of Representatives. Almost no Re- 
publicans opposed it on the final roll call, although forty, includ- 
ing Peter B. Porter and David R. Williams, absented themselves. 

39 Jbid.y pp. 111411155 National Intelligencer, Feb. 29, i8ia. 

40 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 11181127. 

365 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

Federalists voted in the negative to concentrate the blame for 
higher taxes upon their opponents. 

When this long battle opened. Senator Bayard wrote, "I shall 
consider the taxes as the test, and when a majority agree to the 
proposed taxes, I shall believe them in earnest and determined 
upon war." At the end of the fight James Madison wrote to Mon- 
ticello that, having "got down the dose of taxes," Congress could 
be expected to proceed to war in the spring. 41 Without doubt the 
war men had achieved an important victory j had they lost the 
fight for tax resolutions, the game would have been up. But it 
was essentially a defensive victory. Scarecrow men still had an 
avenue of escape, and Federalists would certainly abandon their 
passive tactics when the final crisis came. Furthermore, Bacon's 
resolutions were only resolutions, not law. Final action did not 
come until after the declaration of war, and even then the op- 
pressive internal taxes were left for consideration the next fall. 
Apparently the War Hawks dared not risk failure by pressing for 
legislation, while moderate Republicans, who feared their con- 
stituents or still hoped for peace, preferred silence to action. 

Throughout the debates the specter of Franco-American rela- 
tions continually appeared. Honest men found it difficult to sup- 
port an active policy toward Britain while ignoring Napoleonic 
insults. They knew that the country's unity would be incomplete 
while France's crimes counterbalanced England's. Men deter- 
mined upon peace, whatever the price, exploited the obvious argu- 
ment that both European powers treated American commerce so 
badly that a contest with one alone was unjustifiable. "Shall we 
confine our indignation to injuries received from one quarter," 
the Alexandria Gazette asked, "and be totally insensible to the 
deadly blows received from another?" By the beginning of 1812 
few could maintain that the Berlin and Milan decrees had been 
repealed in more than the most technical sense, ^nd most Ameri- 
cans believed they had not been repealed at afl. In July, 1811, 

41 Bayard to Andrew Bayard, Jan. 25, 1812, Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of 
James A. Bayard, 1796181$, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1913, 
II (Washington, 1915), 1905 Madison to Jefferson, March 6, 1812, Gaillard Hunt, 
ed., The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1900-1910), VIII, 182. 

366 



OF THE COUNTRY'' 

watching events from St. Petersburg, John Quincy Adams wrote 
that "France had already violated her own engagements in a 
manner which absolved us from all obligation." 42 For tactical rea- 
sons most War Hawks denied that French repeal fell short of 
America's legitimate demands. In their hearts they had to agree 
with Adams. 

President Madison also concealed his misgivings. Naturally, 
the President had reasons of pride for refusing to confess that he 
had been tricked by the Duke of Cadore's imperial master, even 
the admission that he had taken an unsuccessful long-shot gamble 
would be uncomfortable. Moreover, the United States govern- 
ment had made the alleged French repeal the most important 
basis for its demand that Britain withdraw the Orders in Council, 
and it could not abandon one without abandoning the other. Not 
realizing that the policies of Jefferson and himself had convinced 
England that she need not fear war, Madison hoped that visible 
American determination would drive Great Britain into surrender. 
A retrograde step in French relations would lessen this already 
feeble hope. At Paris and Washington American diplomacy there- 
fore combined private complaints with an absolute unwillingness 
to admit, either in public or in conversations with British repre- 
sentatives, that French repeal was questionable. Secretary Monroe 
had to argue, in successive interviews with Foster and Serurier, 
first that the decrees were and then that they were not repealed. 
Still, this ludicrous policy was almost the only one open to Madi- 
son, caged in as he was. 

Joel Barlow, who arrived at Paris in September, 1811, utterly 
failed in his mission. Not for two months did Napoleon condescend 
to receive him. Even then the Emperor replied to Barlow's felicita- 
tions with remarks that contained, as the American put it, "some 
symptoms of the same obliquity which has been so long continued," 
This, as well as the very belated negative reply to his protest against 
past and current treatment of American commerce, should have 
shown Barlow that the situation called for direct action. Instead, 

42 Alexandria Gazette, Nov. 7, 18115 Adams to Thomas B. Adams, July 31, 1811, 
Adams Family MSS (microfilm) , Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 

367 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

the poet-diplomat allowed himself to be diverted when the French, 
seizing upon an isolated passage in his communication, offered to 
negotiate a new commercial treaty. Barlow failed to see that, at 
best, this injected new, confusing issues into Franco- American 
discussions, and that, at worst, the French offer was a smoke screen 
(as it actually was) to hide unwillingness to settle larger problems. 
From December onward the American talked of little but a com- 
mercial treaty. Madison warned him that, until France made com- 
pensation for past seizures, "there can be neither cordiality nor 
confidence here 5 nor any restraint from self redress in any justi- 
fiable mode of effecting it; nor any formal Treaty on the subject." 
In the search for his will-o'-the-wisp, however, Joel Barlow con- 
tinued to turn away from America's deepest concerns. 43 

At home, Madison and Monroe had no more success. Both 
officials warned Serurier time and again that effective action 
against England depended upon satisfactory relations with the 
French Empire. The climax of these conversations came on New 
Year's Day, when Napoleon's envoy paid a formal call at the 
White House. Bitterly criticizing continued French seizures, the 
President angrily declared that "such proceedings were in his 
eyes just as definite acts of hostility as were those of England, 
against which the Republic was taking up arms." Fortunately for 
Serurier, the swirling crowd separated them before he had to ab- 
sorb any more presidential ire. In an equally spirited conversation 
at the State Department, Monroe threatened to call off the cam- 
paign against England. On French repeal, he said, "all the present 
system of the administration is based, and ... if it were not 
really unconditional, . . . war . . . with England [would be- 
come] very imprudent, and without purpose." 4 * Serurier advised 
his superiors to make some gesture to inspirit the Americans, and 
Bassano so urged Napoleon, but the Emperor valued the United 

43 Barlow #3 to Monroe, Nov. 21, 1811, Despatches, France, Vol. XIII ; Barlow 
to Bassano, Nov. 10, i8n AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV 5 Bassano to Barlow, Dec. 27, 
1811, ibid.; Madison to Barlow, Feb. 24, 1812, Hunt, of. cit. y VIII, 177-182. 

44 Serurier #41 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Tan. 2, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVII. 

368 




Courtesy, National Portrait Gallery, London 

CHARLES JAMES FOX ALEXANDER BARING 

Portrait by Karl A. Hickel Portrait by Thomas Lawrence 



SAMUEL WHITBREAD 
Portrait by John H of pier 



HENRY BROUGHAM 

Portrait by James Lonsdale 
Courtesy, National Portrait Gallery, London 




JAMES MADISON 
Portrait by John Vanderlyti 



JOHN C. CALHOUN 

Portrait by 
Charles B. King 




HENRY CLAY 

Portrait by an unknown artist 




JOHN RANDOLPH 
Portrait by John W. Jarvis 




Courtesy, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 
JOSIAH QUINCY 
Portrait by Gilbert Stuart 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

States as lightly as ever. French corsairs and douaniers the length 
of the Empire continued to harass American commerce. 

Publication o the Henry letters, produced by the administra- 
tion to reveal an intrigue between Federalists and British agents, 
promised at first to provide a psychological equivalent for the 
settlement with France which eluded Madison and Monroe. John 
Henry, an Irishman who became a secret agent for Canadian 
authorities after living for some time in the United States and even 
serving in the United States Army, journeyed to Boston during 
the Embargo to investigate the extent of disaffection there and 
perhaps open regular communication with dissidents. Henry, ac- 
companied by his wife and two young children, was received in 
friendly fashion by leaders of the town, for he had obtained im- 
pressive letters of introduction, had married into a prominent 
Philadelphia family, and was known to some from the days of his 
army service in Boston. The British agent learned that New Eng- 
land detested Jefferson and the Embargo information that he 
could have found in the newspapers but he heard so little re- 
liable secessionist talk that he never dared open himself to any 
Americans. Paid only 200 by Governor-General Craig, rebuffed 
when he sought appointment as spy-cum-consul in Vermont, re- 
fused additional payment when he traveled to London, John 
Henry set out for America to gain revenge upon an ungrateful 
ministry. He planned to sell to the United States government 
his old reports to his British employers. This scheme appears to 
have been suggested by a personable young Frenchman who called 
himself Count Edouard de Crillon (but was actually an experi- 
enced rogue named Soubiron), with whom Henry became friendly 
during his trip to London. Crillon offered to manage negotiations 
with the American authorities. 

Stopping in Boston only long enough to procure letters of in- 
troduction from Governor Gerry, Henry and Crillon proceeded 
to Washington. Crillon introduced himself to the French minis- 
ter and offered to serve his country by securing publication of the 
incriminating documents. Serurier was too fastidious to enjoy in- 

369 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'* 

trigue, and he was Intelligent enough to doubt Crillon's identity. 
(The count later sought money from Foster to keep the docu- 
ments secret. Foster, recognizing him as an impostor, exposed 
inaccuracies in Crillon's story at a dinner to which prominent War 
Hawks were invited.) Still, the French envoy felt he could not 
cast aside an opportunity to forward the war movement. He gave 
his blessing to the conversations Crillon opened with the Secretary 
of State. Serurier's recommendations, Gerry's letters, and reiter- 
ated assurances from the sottish Senator Brent, who became an 
intimate of Crillon's, caused Monroe and Madison to accept the 
man doubted by almost everyone else in town. Early in February 
Monroe agreed to pay $50,000 for copies of reports to Craig which 
supposedly incriminated Great Britain and the Federalists. This 
sum, subsequently transferred to Crillon by Henry for a non- 
existent chateau in France, represented the entire available secret 
service fund, and it was paid for letters Monroe had never once 
been allowed to see. When Monroe received the copies, he dis- 
covered that they were filled with emendations, omissions, and 
rows of asterisks designed to hint that incriminating passages had 
been removed. The Secretary asked Henry to name Federalists 
who had engaged in treasonable conversations with him. The 
traitor demurred, self -righteously declaring that while he sought 
revenge upon ingrates in London he would not compromise Amer- 
ican friends who had confided in him. Presumably Madison and 
Monroe realized that their eagerness had betrayed themj there 
was no proof of a conspiracy. Perhaps they might better have given 
up the game at this point. But at least the letters showed that a 
British spy had visited America. Therefore, on March 9, just after 
the House endorsed Bacon's tax proposals, the President sent the 
Henry papers to Congress, accompanied by a letter solicited from 
Henry to suggest that no money had been paid for them. 45 

45 A masterpiece of narrative history, untangling this complicated affair, is Samuel 
E. Morison, "The Henry-Crillon Affair of 1812," By Land and By Sea (New York, 
*953)> PP 265-286. Ernest A. Cruikshank, The Political Adventures of John Henry 
(Toronto, 1936), deals with the careers of Henry and Crillon in exhaustive detail. 
Manuscript references to the adventurers are too numerous to cite. Richard B. Davis, 
ed.> Jeffersoman America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by Sir Augus- 
tus John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), pp. 70 ff., and Georges de Caraman, "Les 

370 



^'ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

At first Federalists suffered while their opponents exulted. 
Young Harper saw, or thought that he saw, Pitkin begin "to kick 
and squirm. . . . Quincy looked pale . . . and was much agi- 
tated as was Tallmadge, Champion and finally there was little 
difference between them, except in Deacon Davenport, on whose 
face I actually saw, not only great drops of sweat, but it really ran 
down copiously on his face." The National Intelligencer burst 
forth with an exultant editorial. Foster flew into a panic, listened 
glumly to Federalist complaints that England had compromised 
them on the eve of success, and endorsed Serurier's reported com- 
ment that "if this event does not produce a war nothing will do 
so." 46 

The tide quickly turned. Even in the debate that followed the 
President's message, Thomas Gholson and William R. Troup con- 
gratulated the Federalists on Henry's inability to produce evidence 
that any of them were disloyal. Led by Quincy, Federalists forced 
Monroe to admit that the Department of State could not tie in- 
dividual Americans to Henry's disclosures. They soon tracked 
down the payments to Henry, and some Republicans joined them 
in protesting the expenditure of $50,000 for his empty reports. 47 
Recovering his sang-froid, Foster visited the White House, where 
he was the center of attention but received no insults from the 
crowd and only courtesy from the President. Ezekiel Bacon urged 
the government to abandon an affair that threatened to backfire. 
Federalist newspapers took the offensive, alleging a trick to in- 
fluence the impending Massachusetts election, charging that noth- 
ing Henry had revealed compared with the activities of Madi- 
son's agents in Spanish Florida, and particularly emphasizing that 
Henry's failure to find Federalists whom he dared trust vindi- 

6tats-Unis II Y a Quarante Ans," Revue Contemforaine, ist Series, III (1852), 
229 if., give the accounts of the British minister and a French attache. 

46 Harper to Plumer, March n, 1812, Plumer MSS; National Intelligencer, March 
10, 1812; Foster $14 to Wellesley, secret, March 12, 1812, FO 5/84. 

^Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 11621196$ Quincy to Otis, March 19, 1812, 
and enclosure, Otis MSS; N ties' Register y March 21, 1812; Sentinel of Freedom 
(Newark, N.J.), March 24, 1812. The second volume of the Annals for this session 
bears the misleading subtitle, "i2th Congress, 2nd Session," but this obvious error has 
been corrected here and below. 

371 



^'ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

cated the party from the stale charge of treason. 48 Aside from 
causing a Federalist boycott of the White House which reduced 
grocery and liquor bills, the President benefited in no way from 
the disclosures. He had made the most stupid if not the most im- 
portant misstep of his presidential career. 

As a result of the Henry fiasco, Foster returned with renewed 
confidence to his original diagnosis, that the Republicans were 
bluffing and had no intention of going to war. Firmness on Brit- 
ain's part, he reported, "appears likely to be attended with the 
very best effects." The war threat did not trouble the commercial 
world. Long past the turn of the year, ships regularly departed 
for Europe and insurance rates remained steady. This, said Foster, 
showed "how little in earnest the Government are supposed to be 
by the mercantile part of the Community." Over and over again, 
Federalists congratulated themselves on the perspicuity of their 
initial analysis. From the first, Federalists had argued that war 
talk was "rather manufactured for exportation than home con- 
sumption being destined to go to Europe ... to flatter France 
and terrify Britain." Now they asked, "What reason have we to 
conclude that they are more serious now than they were several 
years ago? . . . We have heard the same sort of gasconade in 
Congress more than three thousand times." 49 

In Congress, War Hawks angrily denied the bluff charge. Out- 
side it, their allies' comments showed that they really feared it 
might be true. "You went to the house-tops, and proclaimed re- 
sistance," a bellicose editor, Thomas Ritchie, reminded congress- 
men. "You talked big $ you deprecated submission and threatened 
war." Ritchie warned that those who deserted now would be held 
responsible* by their constituents for the destruction of the country's 
reputation j Jonathan Russell, who knew he would have to endure 

48 Journal entry, March n, 1812, Foster journal, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library 
of Congress 5 Bacon to Gallatin, March 15, 1812, Gallatin MSS 5 Columbian Centinel, 
March 18, 21, 1812$ Alexandria Gazette, March 13, 18125 Federal Republican, 
March n, 12, 18125 Rhode Island American and General Advertiser (Providence), 
March 17, 1812; Connecticut Courant (Hartford), April i, 1812; Foster to Wellesley, 
separate and secret, March 24, 1812, FO 5/85. 

4& Foster #7 to Wellesley, secret, Jan. 31, 1812, FO 5/845 Taggart to Rev. John 
Taylor, Dec. 2, 1811, Haynes, o^>. cit., p. 3655 Alexandria Gazette, April 14, 1812. 

372 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

the taunts of all London i America backed down, wrote, "I hope 
it will not prove to be merely a show. I should indeed hang my 
head if there were any retrog[r] ade movement after so much blus- 
tering." 50 The War Hawks were not certain of their fair-weather 
friends. 

The aura of insincerity sapped the effectiveness of the threat to 
England. Senator Giles had less attractive reasons for insisting 
that the new army be expanded from 10,000 to 25,000 men, but a 
good one was his assertion that the impression of weakness, "the 
necessary result of our former measures, has become so general, 
both at home and abroad, that we have much to do to retrieve our 
lost reputation." Dr. Stevenson Archer, a young War Hawk from 
Maryland, warned members of the House that Britain was un- 
likely to be impressed by anything short of force. "She knows too 
well," he said, "your conduct heretofore, to believe you are in 
earnest." 51 The campaign of intimidation failed in 1807; there 
was no reason to believe it would succeed in 1 8 12. 

Nevertheless, in ways that few foresaw, the events from No- 
Vember to March contributed to the coming of war. They convinced 
Britain that the United States was merely repeating a stale and 
rather ineffective drama, and discussion of the orders proceeded 
under the assumption that neither a new nor a speedy denouement 
need be anticipated. On the other hand, the legislation passed by 
Congress created a sort of momentum which eventually imprisoned 
many who believed that they had preserved their freedom of 
action. In March a Federalist, Abijah Bigelow, exulted that "the 
poor souls have got themselves into a sad dilemma, they know not 
how to go forward, or how to retreat, and what is still more dis- 
graceful they have no settled plan whfcfo they mean to pursue, they 
depend upon the chapter of accidents.^ jtJnfortunately for Bigelow 
and his friends, "the chapter of accidents" pushed moderate Re- 
publicans and bluffers toward the War Hawks. When congres- 
sional posturing failed to bring about British concessions, when 

50 Enquirer , March 27, 18125 Russell to John S. Smith, Feb. n> 1812, Samuel 
Smith MSS. 

51 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 4.1, 561. 

373 



CC ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 55 

the country rang with charges that Congress had never intended 
to go to war, when humiliating surrender stared the scarecrow men 
in the face, a reluctant vote for war became the only palatable 
alternative. After all the oratory, Jonathan Russell observed, 
Congress must go on or "the notoriety we shall have given to our 
cowardice by our blustering will expose us to the injustice & con- 
tumely & the contempt of every nation which will condescend to 
take the trouble to spurn or plunder us." 52 Preparedness agitation 
worked in a way certainly not anticipated by Federalists and mod- 
erate Republicans who abetted it. Probably not even the War 
Hawks understood the long-range implications of the campaign 
they spearheaded. 

In the first months of 1812 the odds on war baffled everyone, 
both because of evidences of bluffing and because, as Taggart noted, 
"the war fever ... has its hot and cold fits." "The War Chariot 
drags on heavily," the Columbian Centinel noted toward the end 
of January, and George Poindexter, the delegate from the Missis- 
sippi Territory, was almost alone in predicting eventual war. Felix 
Grundy feared betrayal. So did George M. Troup of Georgia, 
although he noted that "nothing short of war or free commerce 
. . . can satisfy the expectations of the Southern people, who have 
been bearing the brunt of the restrictive system from the begin- 
ning." At the beginning of February Federalists Taggart and Reed 
became blindly enthusiastic and estimated that not more than half 
a dozen representatives were ready to vote for war. Randolph was 
more doubtful. James A. Bayard, a cautious Federalist who feared 
that the doldrums might merely presage a new storm, neverthe- 
less concluded: "One can discover very little war spirit in either 
House of Congress. And yet the members will tell you very coldly, 
that war is inevitable. But I have found no one willing to declare 
war and very few to adopt any measure of hostile character." 53 
War prospects appeared very slim. 

52 Bigelow to Hannah G. Bigelow, March 22, 1812, Clarence S. Brigham, ed., 
"Letters of Abijah Bigelow, Member of Congress, to His Wife, 18101815," Ameri- 
can Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., XL (1931), 332; Russell to Adams, March 
9, 1812, Jonathan Russell MSS, Brown University Library. 

53 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, Jan. 20, 1812, Haynes, of. cit. y p. 3775 Colum- 

374 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

The next few weeks brought some indications of renewed 
progress. Peter B. Porter, whose own legislative record was spotted 
with hesitation, delivered a fiery philippic on the necessity for 
speed. "And if we continued to go on preparing for war in the 
good-natured, desultory way we had hitherto pursued," Porter 
warned, Britain might undertake an anticipatory attack, "for which, 
if justly imputable to our tardiness and indecision, we could never 
be forgiven." Congress must set in motion the attack upon Canada. 
Except for the occupation of Halifax and the siege of Quebec, to 
which the army might "proceed at their leisure," this could be 
completed "in a few weeks." This vision of easy conquest inspirited 
many congressmen, and two days later Foster reported home that, 
barring British concessions, war might follow within a fortnight. 54 
On March 10, after Congress "got down the dose of taxes," Gal- 
latin informed his political mentor at Monticello that a declaration 
of war was inevitable, and Jefferson believed Virginia awaited it 
with calm expectancy. 55 

As March wore on, other observers thought the National In- 
t&lligencer was whistling in the dark when it announced that Coil- 
gress proceeded toward war with cc a deliberate but firm step." 
Pouncing upon another metaphor much in vogue among War 
Hawks, the Aurora scoffed, "As to the fever heat created at Wash- 
ington, it must be a species of intermittent, what is vulgarly 
called the shaking ague.^lW^r journals challenged the sincerity 
of those who professed to be ready to make war but argued that a 
declaration must await hardening of the roads to Canada or the 
return of U.S.S. Hornet y sent in December to carry accounts of 
Porter's Report to Europe and to bring home news of European 

bian C entirely Jan. 22, 18125 Grundy to Jackson, Feb. 12, 1812, Andrew Jackson 
MSS $ Troup to Mitchell, Feb. 12, 1812, Harden, of. cit., p. 107$ Tag-gart to Rev. 
John Taylor, Feb. 6, 1812, Haynes, op. cit. y p. 382$ Reed to Pickering", Feb. 6, 1812, 
Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX; Randolph to James M. Garnett, Feb. 5, 1812, John 
Randolph MSS, Library of Congress j Bayard to Andrew Bayard 3 Feb. 13, 1812, 
Donnan, op. cit., p. 193. 

^Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 10591063$ Foster $10 to Wellesley, secret, 
Feb. 26, 1812, FO 5/84. But see Foster's quite contrary recollection in Davis, op. cit., 
pp. 90-91. 

55 Monroe to Jefferson, March 10, 1812, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library of Con- 
gress j Jefferson to Madison, March 26, 1812, 

375 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY" 

politics. One paper pointed out that the spring sun had already 
dried the roads, and it asked why troops had not been raised and 
directed northward to take advantage of the perfect campaigning 
weather. Steadfast as ever for war, the Lexington Re-porter noted 
with disapproval, "Ever since her sailing the cant word has been, 
the Hornet, the Hornet what a sting she will bring on her re- 
turn! !" The Reporter wryly repeated a Federalist jibe that the 
Hornet would never return, giving the Republicans an excuse for 
permanent inactivity. 56 

When Washington's most beautiful season arrived, the only 
storms to be seen lay on the brows of troubled congressmen. The 
autumn had been pleasant, with good pheasant shooting enjoyed 
by James A. Bayard and Augustus Foster, who exchanged political 
information as they hunted 5 the winter had been brief but cold, 
permitting sleighing in the usually snow-free District. By the mid- 
dle of March frogs were piping in the little creek that crossed 
Pennsylvania Avenue below the Capitol, and with the change of 
seasons Foster expanded his entertainments, which no longer 
needed to be entirely indoors. Now he reported dinners of up to 
500 persons, and it seemed that he meant to feed the entire pop- 
ulation of Washington if that would lessen the chances of war. 
Four months had passed since Congress met, and yet no one could 
argue that the nation was prepared for war, psychologically or 
materially. Impractical army legislation, a refusal to expand the 
navy, grudging approval of the principle of new taxes these were 
almost as useless as no preparation at al|. In March the nation was 
as far from war as it had been at the beginning of November. Or 
so at least it seemed. 

56 National Intelligencer, March 19, 18125 Aurora, March n, 18125 Sentinel of 
Freedom, March 10, 18125 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.)> March 21, 1812. 



376 



CHAPTER 



XI 



WAR AT LAST 



"What a Ridiculous Farce has been played off in the Face of the 
Nation," a former congressman expostulated as March ended. 
". . . why Sir, Congress have made themselves so Ridiculous and 
insignificant that all their War Measures are regarded . . . just 
as men would Regard Boys cracking Nuts at [a] Distance." 1 
March saw the nadir. From then on, prodded by the threat of dis~ 
grade. Congress moved slowly and sometimes erratically toward 
wat% The declaration passed by a narrow margin, and many of the 
majority went along with deep misgivings. .The people obviously 
did not want war, and if further delay had been permitted their 
voice would have prevented it. Still, war came, bringing the trials 
and the glory (here, infrequent glory) which follow in the train 
of Mars. America embarked upon a second war for independence, 
a war to recover the nation's honor and affirm her claim to act as 
an independent power. 

In midafternoon on March 20, 1812, Lieutenant Green, borne 

1 James Kelly to Pickering, March 30, 1812, Timothy Pickering- MSS, Massa- 
chusetts Historical Society, Vol. XXX. 

377 



WAR AT LAST 

across the Atlantic by the Gleaner, chartered at a cost o 5,000, 
arrived at Washington with instructions from Wellesley to Foster. 
Unless Wellesley, who had already offered his resignation, de- 
sired to embarrass his successor, expensive haste had no purpose. 
The instructions repeated the old, old declaration that, French 
repeal being fraudulent, Britain would continue the Orders in 
Council. They rebuked Foster for entertaining ideas of compro- 
mise. 2 The strategy of bluff appeared to have failed. War talk 
recommenced. "There is," Hezekiah Niles declared, a no middle 
course left for the United States to pursue. The embargo system, 
at once the safest and best, has been disgraced by the time-serving 
conduct of its friends war or submission present themselves 3 and 
all that sophistry can devise, the fear of [un] popularity invent, 
or personal pusillanimity dictate, cannot offer another alternative." 
William Duane, visiting Washington to sell a house to his rival 
editor, Joseph Gales, thought the future far less clear. And, al- 
though Madison recommended and Congress passed a general em- 
bargo within a fortnight of the Hornet's arrival, Louis Serurier 
doubted the Republicans 3 sticking power. With some relief but 
not complete conviction, he soon reported that Madison's journal, 
the National Intelligencer, had adopted a bellicose line. 3 

The President's embargo message, as the full story will show, 
gave an illusory appearance of decisive leadership. Still, after a 
winter during which the White House had. most closely resem- 
bled the oracle at Delphi, any appearance of forthrightness took on 
significance. Since his November message the President had pretty 
much kept his own counsel. In January, to expose England's rigid- 
ity, he submitted to Congress correspondence between Monroe and 

2 Journal entry, March 20, 1812, Foster journal, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library 
of Congressj Wellesley $i to Foster, Jan. 28, 1812, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions 
to the British Ministers to the United States, 1701-2812, American Historical 
Association, Annual Report, 1936, III (Washington, 1941), 34.03445 Wellesley 
#2 to Foster, secret, Jan. 28, 1812, ibid., pp. 344-346. 

3 Harper to Bartlett, March 22, 1812, Josiah Bartlett MSS, Library of Congress; 
Niles 3 Weekly Register (Baltimore), April 4, 1812$ Duane to Jefferson, July 17, 
1812, Worthington C. Ford, ed., "Letters of William Duane," Massachusetts Historical 
Society, Proceedings^ 2d Series, XX (1907), 3505 Serurier #52, #53 to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, April 9, 19, 1812, Archives des Affaires trangeres, Corre- 
spondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXVII. 

378 



WAR AT LAST 

Foster 5 in March he made public the Henry letters, with conse- 
quences that reflected upon his good sense and harmed the war 
movement. Otherwise the President acted more like William Mc- 
Kinley in 1898 than James Knox Polk in 1846, and War Hawks 
and peace men both claimed him. Republicans pleaded for a clear 
lead, and late in March several imploring letters reached the 
White House within a few days. 4 The embargo message, an ap- 
parent answer to this prayer, did not convince suspicious men. In 
March John C. Calhoun temporarily abandoned his doubts of the 
administration., writing, "Their Zeal and intelligence can not now 
be doubted. 55 Shortly after the message his doubts returned, and 
he commented, "Our President tho a man of amiable manners 
and great talents, has not I fear those commanding talents, which 
are necessary to controul those about him. . . . He reluctantly 
gives up the system of peace. It is to be hoped, that as war is now 
seriously determined on, the Executive department will move with 
much more vigour. Without it it is impossible for Congress to pro- 
ceed." 5 A single message extorted by demanding legislators could 
not destroy Madison's reputation for weakness. 

Party doctrine and personal preference caused President Madi- 
son to follow a silent course. Republican constitutional theory 
glorified the legislature at the expense of the executive, providing 
an excuse for presidential silence on the question of war. This 
silence angered, among others, Speaker Clay, who bluntly told 
the administration: "Altho' the power of declaring War belongs 
to the Congress, I do not see that it falls less within the scope of 
the President's constitutional duty to recommend . . . measures 
. . . than any other which, being suggested by him, they alone 
can adopt." In dealing with legislative problems Madison showed 
none of the boldness, even rashness, that led him to accept the as- 
surances of Erskine and Cadore. In the war session he did nothing 
to prevent preparedness legislation, but he also did far less than 

4 William Crawford to Madison, March 28, 1812, James Madison MSS, Library 
of Congress; Thomas Lehre to Madison, March 30, 1812, ibid.; James Barbour to 
Madison, March 30, 1812, ibid. 

5 Calhoun to Macbride, March 22, April 18, 1812, Robert L. Meriwether, ed., 
The Papers of John C. Calhoun, I (Columbia, S.C., 1959), 955 99100. 

379 



WAR AT LAST 

he might have done to encourage it. In pacific times this intelli- 
gent man might have been a successful president. But he was not 
cut in the heroic mold. "Madison may be good," an editorialist 
commented, "but in a national view, there is a great distinction be- 
tween Good, and GOOD ENOUGH." 6 Left to himself, with a 
Congress like the Tenth, James Madison would have been a com- 
plete failure in 1812. 

This is not to say that because he lacked determination when 
dealing with his Cabinet, his party, and the legislature the Presi- 
dent took a cowardly, indecisive view of America's position. His 
enemies accused him of attempting to preserve the support of 
both War Hawks and peace men for the election of 1 8 12 or, later, 
suggested that he supported war only after War Hawks threat- 
ened to prevent his reelection. 7 This was nonsense. Since the very 
beginning of the session Madison's analysis had been based upon 
more honorable grounds. It combined simplicity and complexity, 
optimism and pessimism in baffling degrees, but it was consistently 
maintained. 

Toward the end of November Madison told Foster that for 
America "anything was better than remaining in such a state" as 
the existing one. (Madison naturally failed to add that the state 
of the nation owed much to his own activities as secretary of state 
and president.) If war became the only alternative, the President 
would face it. Summarizing his position, although characteris- 
tically bestowing the power of choice upon Congress and directing 
his musings to an American safely distant at St. Petersburg, the 
President wrote that the question "simply is, whether all the 
trade to which the orders [in Council] are . . . applied, is to be 
abandoned, or the hostile operation of them, be hostilely resisted. 
The apparent disposition is certainly not in favor of the first 

6 Clay endorsement on Clay to Monroe, March 15, 1812, James F. Hopkins, ed., 
The Papers of Henry Clay, I (Lexington, Ky., 1959), 637; Virginia Patriot (Rich- 
mond), May 12, 1812. For this and the subsequent paragraphs I am indebted to Theo- 
dore C. Smith, "War Guilt in 1812," Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, 
LXIV (1932), 319345) and Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (In- 
dianapolis, 1956), passim, though my interpretation of Madison's position differs 
sharply from their interpretations. 

7 Brant, op. cit., pp. 452 if., convincingly demolishes this old canard. 

380 



WAR AT LAST 

alternative, though it is more than probable, that if the second 
should be adopted, the execution o it will be put off till the close 
o the Session approaches." Not a single piece of reputable evi- 
dence suggests that the President abandoned this conviction at 
any time, although he reserved the right to decide later whether 
hostility should be shown with a fly whisk, a club, or a sword. 
When Foster described Monroe as a a mild moderate man, . . . 
with whom I am happy to say it has been my good fortune to be 
on the best terms," he really was indirectly comparing the Secre- 
tary and the less complaisant President. On April I, just at the time 
here being discussed, Foster scribbled in his diary, "go to the Presi- 
dent's He very warlike, calls our orders tantamount to Letters 
of marque." 8 But if he spoke freely to Foster, Madison never 
made his position clear enough to give direction to Congress, and 
throughout the winter, while resignedly prepared to go to war, 
the President hoped for some acceptable solution to the nation's 
problems which would make war unnecessary. 

As Bernard Mayo has observed, the President "seemed less in- 
tent upon harnessing the chariot of war than upon driving the old 
coach of diplomacy." He combined warnings and invitations in 
his conversations with Foster. So frequent were his suggestions that 
Britain, without doing serious damage to herself, might modify 
her restrictions upon commerce in a way palatable to the United 
States, that Foster finally reported: "The name of the Orders in 
Council has become more objectionable to him than the sub- 
stance." Undoubtedly the British envoy misunderstood Madison, 
who surely required benefits of substance as well as of form. On 
the other hand the Chief Executive would almost certainly have 
accepted an accommodation that did not concede all that some 
Americans desired. Even when he recommended an embargo to 
Congress, a step the political world interpreted as a harbinger of 
war, the President went out of his way to inform Foster that timely 

8 Foster #25 to Wellesley, Nov. 21, 1811, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 
Office, FO 5/775 Madison to Adams, private, Nov. 15, 1811, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The 
Writings of James Madison (9 vols.$ New York, 19001910), VIII, 1675 Foster 
#14. to Wellesley, secret, March 12, 1812, FO 5/845 journal entry, April i, 1812, 
Foster MSS. 

381 



WAR AT LAST 

British concessions could prevent a declaration. 9 Down to the very 
end, albeit with increasing pessimism, James Madison clung to a 
hope that commercial pressure and American war preparations 
would bring England to terms. 

The President overlooked one obvious opportunity to demon- 
strate American determination and simultaneously to strike at the 
Achilles 3 heel of Britain. From 1 809 onward, the English Achilles, 
Viscount Wellington, engaged in a desperate struggle with Na- 
poleonic marshals in Spain. To supply his army and the people in 
his rear, Wellington depended largely upon American grain. Ship- 
ments to the Peninsula, which totaled less than 80,000 bushels in 
1807, leaped to more than 230,000 in 1810, 835,000 in 1811, 
and more than 900,000 bushels in 1812. In April, 1812, a British 
observer at Lisbon wrote that "provisions [are] plenty, but princi- 
pally from America ... 5 and if it was not for the supplies from 
America, the army here could not be maintained." 10 Here was a 
perfect opportunity to apply the cherished Republican policy of 
economic warfare, particularly after the European harvest of 1 8 1 1 
proved disappointing. 

Many Americans saw the opportunity. In January, 1812, Jona- 
than Russell urged Monroe to end Peninsular shipments, and on 
the same day he wrote Joel Barlow that "this very war which 
preserves the existence of the present ministry so hostile to us 
is fed & pampered by our supplies and without us must be aban- 
doned." Monroe's son-in-law told him that this was "the most 
effectual weapon that can be wielded against G Britain." Madison 
himself felt that Peninsular starvation would be the most im- 
portant consequence of a general embargo. Incredibly, Madison 
and Congress permitted this opportunity to escape, fatuously pre- 

9 Bernard Mayo, ed., Henry Clay, Spokesman of the New West (Boston, 1937), p. 
4395 Foster #23 to Wellesley, April 3, 1812, FO 5/855 Richard B. Davis, ed., Jeffer- 
sonian America: Notes on the United States of America.. . . by Sir Augustus John 
Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), pp. 91-925 journal entry) April 2, 1812, Foster 
MSS. 

10 Robert G. Albion and Jennie B. Pope, Sea Lanes in Wartime (New York, 1942), 
p. 1085 Milne to George Hume, April 9, 1812, Edgar E. Hume, ed., "Letters Written 
during the War of 1812 by the British Naval Commander in American Waters 
(Admiral Sir David Milne) ," William and Mary Quarterly, 2d Series, X (1930) , 286. 

382 



WAR AT LAST 

f erring nonimportation to a ban on exports until the spring of 1 8 1 2. 
Perhaps the President feared an outcry from grain producers in the 
Middle States 5 perhaps, like Jefferson, he considered a "vent 
for our produce" ai necessary. In any event the chance was missed. 

Instead, the administration tardily and reluctantly accepted a 
congressional proposal for a general embargo on American ships 
"and exports. In the middle of March, first in conversation with 
Monroe and then formally in writing, Speaker Clay suggested a 
thirty-day embargo, to be followed by war. No other measure, he 
thought, could so clearly show that Congress and the administra- 
tion were in earnest. The administration hesitated. Ten days later, 
speaking for the Foreign Affairs Committee, Peter B. Porter, John 
Smilie, and John C. Calhoun prodded the executive. Still a week 
later Chairman Porter virtually demanded that Monroe inform 
the committee when the administration would be ready to proceed 
to "ulterior measures." 12 

The Secretary of State journeyed to Capitol Hill for a con- 
ference with the committee on the afternoon of March 30. The 
administration, he said, believed that Congress ought to declare 
war before adjourning if Britain did not abandon her hostile pol- 
icy, a course that Foster's recent declarations made unlikely. The 
Secretary indirectly suggested an embargo of sixty days to allow 
time for the Hornet to return with news from Europe. Monroe 
reported that the nation was inadequately prepared for war 5 he 
admitted that he considered preparedness legislation valuable 
largely as "an appeal to the feelings of the foreign Govt."5 and 
he did not pledge the administration to ask for a declaration of 
war when the Hornet returned. This negativism communicated 

11 Russell to Monroe, private, Jan. 14., iSiz, Department of State Archives, Na- 
tional Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII 5 Russell to Barlow, Jan. 14, 
1812, Jonathan Russell MSS, Brown University Library 5 Hay to Monroe, Jan. 23, 
1812, James Monroe MSS, New York Public Library 5 Madison to Jefferson, April 3, 

1812, Hunt, o/. tit., VIII, 1865 Jefferson to Gibson, April 12, 1812, Thomas 

Jefferson MSS, Library of Congress. On this entire subject see W. Freeman Galpin, 
"The American Grain Trade to the Spanish Peninsula, 1800-1814," American His- 
torical Review, XXVIII (19221923), 2444. 

12 Clay to Monroe, March 15, 1812, Hopkins, of. cit., I, 6375 Porter, Smilie, and 
Calhoun to Monroe, March 24, 1812, Monroe MSS, NYPLj Porter to Monroe, 
March 30, 1812, ibid. 

383 



WAR AT LAST 

itself to Chairman Porter, who suggested that Congress postpone 
an embargo until after a short recess and even push back a declara- 
tion of war until September. Calhoun brusquely replied, "Some 
decisive measure is required that would give a tone to our legisla- 
tion which has not been hitherto perceived," and John A. Harper 
bluntly asked the Secretary if the administration would recom- 
mend an embargo. Monroe answered, "If you give me the necessary 
assurance that it will be acceptable to the House the Executive 
will recommend it." He declined to promise a manifesto rallying 
the country for war, saying, "The Executive will not take upon 
itself the responsibility for declaring that we are prepared for 
war. 53 13 This qualified courage, this caution, this desire to thrust 
responsibility upon Congress was the best that the committee 
could extort from Monroe or from the President, whose reaction 
Monroe reported to the congressmen the next day. 

On April I the President recommended a general embargo in 
a cryptic one-sentence message submitted to a secret session. Porter 
quickly presented a bill for a sixty-day embargo, but his remarks 
showed that he had no enthusiasm either for an embargo or for 
war. Nathaniel Macon attempted to postpone a decision, and with 
support from Quincy and the Federalists he came within three 
votes of attaining his objective. Randolph denounced the project 
as a fake, since the nation could not be ready for war in two months 5 
time, and he objected that it was "too high a price to pay for the 
consistency of gentlemen who think they have gone too far to 
recede. 55 Grundy, Clay, Smilie, and Adam Seybert, on the other 
hand, declared that this was a real step toward war and that the 
President so considered it. The war men drove the House forward, 
and at an early hour in the evening the House of Representatives 
passed the bill reluctantly fathered by Porter by a vote of seventy 
to forty-one. Only a handful of congressmen who later voted for 
war opposed the embargo, but ten failed to vote at all, and the 
seventy favorable votes fell short of a majority of the whole 

13 Unsigned [Randolph?] memorandum, March 30-31, 1812, Samuel Smith MSS, 
Library of Congress. 

384 



WA R AT LAST 

House. 14 This vote, like the even more discouraging one on the 
tax resolutions, left it very uncertain that a majority for war could 
be attained. 

The House bill sought, belatedly, to cut off the flow of Ameri- 
can supplies to Spain and Portugal, as several legislators stated 
in the debates. The bill also aimed to clear American ships from 
the ocean where they would be easy prey for British cruisers when 
war came, and this purpose too was openly avowed. Finally, the 
embargo aimed to convince the American and perhaps the British 
people that Congress was in earnest. Not one of these purposes 
was completely achieved. The Senate weakened the embargo 5 it 
was almost everywhere evaded 5 and, at least in the days just after 
Madison signed the bill, the administration weakened its impact 
by playing a mixed game. 

The Senate passed the embargo by a vote of twenty to thirteen, 
with Giles and Samuel Smith, two leading Republican dissidents, 
joining Federalists in opposition, A Federalist senator privately 
claimed that many more Republicans who disliked it submitted to 
the demands of party solidarity. Even this grudging approval 
came only after the Senate had completely transformed the mean- 
ing of the bill. On the motion of Michael Leib, another vin- 
dictively anti-Madisonian Republican, the embargo was extended 
from sixty to ninety days. 15 Everyone understood that the Senate 
wished to give time for further negotiations and at worst to put 
off the evil day of war as long as possible. From a vigorous meas- 
ure, the embargo bill had been transformed into a temporizing one. 
When the revised version was returned to the House of Repre- 
sentatives, Josiah Quincy taunted the Republicans for insincerity, 
declaring that the embargo was not a step forward, as the war 
men claimed, but rather "a substitute for the question of war." The 
Federalist's taunts decided War Hawks to accept the Senate bill 
rather than risk another quarrel with the Senate like that which 
had paralyzed the government before the passage of Macon's Bill 

14 Annals, zath Cong., ist sess., pp. 15871598. 

15 Ibid., pp. 187-189. 

385 



WAR AT LAST 

in 1810. On April 4 Madison's signature made the ninety-day 
embargo bill a law. 16 

Just as senatorial action robbed the bill of its appearance of 
vigor, so the flight of ships from American ports deprived it of 
its coercive and precautionary effect. Even before the President 
sent his message to Congress, rumors of an impending embargo 
had spread as far as Baltimore. With the approval of John C. Cal- 
houn, who did not desire insiders alone to benefit, Quincy, James 
Emott of New York, Senator Lloyd of Massachusetts, and others 
immediately sent word northward. Their warning reached port 
cities ahead of official announcements of the act. 17 The deputy col- 
lector of customs at Boston kept his office open until nine in the 
evening so that all who desired could secure papers for their ships, 
and, despite a fog that delayed some departures, more than eighty 
ships escaped. Revenue cutters caught only three or four. At New 
York four were arrested of a total of a hundred or more. Foster 
reported officially that the embargo had misfired j less seriously, 
he wrote to his mother, "The Embargo has put us all in a fuss. 
Great Quantities of corn & flour have gone off so I hope Spain 
& Portugal will not suffer. Theres hardly enough left at New York 
for the bakers." 18 Grain shipments to Lisbon and Cadiz post- 
poned to a distant day the impact of shortages. Anticipation of the 
embargo cast onto the seas and even into British ports hundreds 
of merchant vessels which risked capture when war came. The 
massive exodus, largest since Erskine's agreement three years be- 
fore, destroyed the intentions of the embargo's authors. 

In the secret debates on the embargo, its supporters repeatedly 
declared it an administration measure aiming at war. Had this 
position been taken publicly, the nation might have believed it. 



id.j pp. 16011614. Philip B. Key told Foster he regretted Quincy's intemperate 
language, without which the House would probably have rejected extension of the 
embargo to ninety days. Journal entry, April 8, 1812, Foster MSS. 

17 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 126312655 Quincy memo, n.d., Edmund 
Quincy, Life of Josiah Quincy (Boston, 1867), pp. 2562575 New-York Evening 
Po$t y April 2, 1812. 

18 John Borland to Lloyd, April 25, 1812, James Lloyd MSS, Houghton Library, 
Harvard University} Columbian Centinel (Boston), April 8, n, 18125 New-York 
Evening Post, April 6, 18125 Foster #28 to Castlereagh, April 23, 1812, FO 5/85$ 
Foster to Duchess of Devonshire, April 5, 1812, Foster MSS. 

386 



WAR AT LAST 

Had Monroe and Madison impressed it upon Foster, the English- 
man might conceivably have warned his government that Britain 
faced a choice between concession and war. The President, how- 
ever, never explained his motives to the country, and the declara- 
tions of known War Hawks could be discounted. Many Republi- 
cans, both the orthodox and the independents like Samuel Smith, 
visited Foster to tell him they did not consider the embargo a 
war measure. Both the President and the Secretary of State de- 
liberately informed Foster that they felt the same way, and in his 
diary the British envoy recorded Madison as saying, "One Em- 
bargo might be inoculated on another." 19 

At first the National Intelligencer called the embargo a measure 
of precaution rather than of war preparation, and Monroe praised 
Joseph Gales for this emphasis. "The great object," said Monroe, 
a is to suggest nothing at the present moment that may . . . com- 
promit the govt, as to the future with either power, or on the other 
hand check the ardour of the nation." Copying many of Monroe's 
phrases, Gales then declared that "the spirit of the nation is up," 
that war with one or both belligerents must follow unless speedy 
arrangements were made, but that the embargo "is not war, nor 
does it inevitably lead to war." Only on April 14, ten days after 
passage of the embargo, did the Intelligencer abandon this cau- 
tious line, saying, "Let war ... be forthwith proclaimed against 
England." 20 Although the administration appeared to have joined 
the War Hawks, Madison's hesitations were not forgotten. Alert 
eyes watched for signs of a changed course. 

For the next six weeks, while Congress dawdled, ostensibly to 
permit recruiting and to await the Hornet y Federalists sought des- 
perately for some clear indication of what the future held in store. 
"Never did a set of rulers in any country so completely succeed 
as ours have done," the United States Gazette complained, "in 
setting at defiance all the calculations of friends and foes, as to the 

19 Campbell to Jackson, April 10, 1812, Andrew Jackson MSS, Library of Con- 
gress 5 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.)> April n, 18125 Davis, 0$. cit., p. 935 journal 
entries, April 2, 3, 1812, Foster MSS. 

20 Monroe to Gales, [April 3, 1812?], Monroe MSS, NYPL; National Intelli- 
gencer (Washington), April 7, 9, 14, 18125 Mayo, Henry Clay, p. 506. 

387 



WAR AT LAST 

course of policy intended to be pursued." Federalist analysts di- 
vided into three groups. Some believed that, the plan of bluff 
having failed, a our Government has no choice left but either to 
recede from the ground they have taken or proceed to the last 
resort. . . . The high sense of honour which the advocates of the 
present measures profess forbid a retreat [ 5 ] there is therefore no 
alternative only to fight." Others simply confessed themselves 
baffled. An important part of the party, including the two leaders, 
Quincy and Bleecker, still refused to believe the Republicans were 
in earnest. "The levies do not progress, no important strength is 
proposed to the fortification of our seaboard, no addition to our 
navy, no plan for arming our merchantmen is ... suggested," 
Quincy wrote. "Can any man believe ... an Embargo, accom- 
panied by such a state of things is preparatory to war?" On the 
floor of the House, a month after the embargo, Bleecker declared, 
"No, sir, rely upon it there will be, there can be, no war . . . 
within sixty days. Whatever may be thought of it here, the peo- 
ple know that we cannot go to war, at the expiration of the em- 
bargo. . . . They think . . . that for the Government to go to 
war in our present unprepared state, would be little short of an 
act of treason." 21 

The Federalists had no cohesive policy of their own. Senator 
Chauncey Goodrich wanted the party to announce its own plan 
for protecting commerce. Others accepted the prospect of war, cer- 
tain that it would ruin Republicanism and at least bring to an end 
the detested policy of commercial restrictions. Quincy convinced 
himself that the administration had, all along, simply sought to 
smuggle a permanent embargo in through the back door, and he 
abandoned the policy of self-restraint for open opposition. "I 
think," he wrote, "the present state of things, which administra- 
tion will continue, if they can, worse, both to morals, & to liberty 
than war with any nation." Still others, most notably Philip B. 



States Gazette (Philadelphia), April 15, 18125 Taggart to Pickering, 
April 3, 1812, Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX 5 Quincy to Wolcott, April 15, 1812, Wol- 
cott Family MSS, Connecticut Historical Society, Vol. XXIV $ Annals, i2th Cong., 
ist sess., pp. 13801381. 

388 



WAR AT LAST 

Key, thought a quiet course least likely to provoke the Republi- 
cans into war. Federalists agreed only to refuse to subscribe to the 
loans Gallatin sought. Wealthy Bostonians, the Columbian Cen- 
tinel explained, "lend no money to the ruling faction, for the same 
reason that they would not lend swords to the tenants of a lunatic 
hospital." 22 This decision apart. Federalists milled in confusion 
as deep as that within Republican ranks. 

Augustus John Foster listened to Federalists of all opinions, 
continued to entertain even the most determined War Hawks, and 
frequently visited Madison and Monroe. The embargo did not 
trouble him, and at the end of April he reported, "My hopes of 
a favourable issue . . . continue to increase." (In this same dis- 
patch he even went so far as to ask for a six-month leave of ab- 
sence, since business was at a stand! ) Not until May 3 did he sug- 
gest that Madison might support the use of force. Almost imme- 
diately afterward he hazarded a guess that "the Bubble will soon 
burst. I am assailed on every side with tremendous Stories but the 
ruling party seems to be in a State of Desperation & if we refuse 
them pabulum to their rage they must burst with the Violence of 



it." 



Until the very end Foster stuck to a belief that even minor 
changes in British policy would end all chances of war. He repeat- 
edly wrote that Madison and Monroe, particularly the latter, had 
pleaded for some gesture that would permit them to turn back. 
"Mr. Monroe in a conversation which I lately had with him," 
Foster reported in May, "expressed his wish that we would ex- 
change our orders for blockades which might answer the same 
purpose." One week before Madison finally completed his war 
message, the Englishman advised his government that even the 
most nominal change in the Orders in Council would have a 
striking effect. Foster correctly divined the administration's hope 

22 Goodrich to Roger Griswold [?], April 7, 1812, William G. Lane Collection, 
Yale University Library} Tallmadge to McHenry, April n, 1812, Bernard C. Steiner, 
The Life and Correspondence of James McHenry (Cleveland, 1907), p. 576$ Quincy 
to Wolcott, April 15, 1812, Wolcott MSS, Vol. XXIV 5 Columbian Centinel, May 6, 
1812. 

389 



WAR AT LAST 

for peace, but woefully underestimated the price it would ask. Like 
the Federalists, he found it hard to believe that a new day had 
dawned. 23 

Foster's hope for peace was badly served by America's interpre- 
tation of parliamentary news that arrived during these critical 
months, for the United States clung as stubbornly to a dated in- 
terpretation as he did. At London, Jonathan Russell completely 
ignored hints that the orders would fall. He steadily reported 
that they would last as long as the Perceval ministry, and he in- 
terpreted the declaration of April, 1812, as a sign of firmness. In 
a letter received by Monroe shortly before the final crisis Russell 
wrote: "Indeed I am convinced that whoever wishes for the respect 
of this highminded people must occasionally fight them." Ameri- 
can papers considered the initial defeat of Brougham's motion for 
an investigation the death knell of American hopes, totally over- 
looking the uncertainty of government speakers and the strength 
of the Opposition tally. In March the Columbian Centinel, Bos- 
ton's Federalist bellwether, expected the orders to collapse within 
three months, but in April and May it declared that no chance of 
repeal existed. On May 5, learning that Perceval's tenure had 
been confirmed, Monroe directed Russell to warn American mer- 
chants in London that a rupture impended 3 ominously, he also 
asked Russell to stay in Britain as an agent for prisoners when war 
broke out. 24 Neither the President nor Congress saw an easy exit 
from the position in which preparedness legislation and the em- 
bargo had placed them. 

Late in March, as the first, discouraging parliamentary reports 
arrived from England, news of renewed French outrages reached 
Washington. This pillaging of American commerce, primarily grain 
ships bound for the Peninsula, became more dramatic when an in- 
discreet French commander explained apologetically, after putting 

23 These paragraphs rest upon Foster #17-$ 2 3 to Wellesley, March 22-April 3, 
1812, and Foster #24-$ 3 8 to Castlereagh, April 20-May 23, 1812, FO 5/85-86. 
The quotations are from #"30, secret, April 24, 18125 unnumbered, private, May 5, 
1812 } #31, most secret, May 3, 1812 j 9^37, May 22, 1812. 

24 Russell to Monroe, April 22, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII; 
Russell to Monroe, private, March 28, 1812, ibid.; Columbian Centinel, March 7, 
April 4, May 16, 1812 j Monroe to Russell, May 5, 1812, Instructions, Vol. VII. 

390 



WAR AT LAST 

a merchantman to the torch, that "he had orders from the Govern- 
ment to burn all American vessels sailing to or from an enemy's 
port." Georges de Caraman, an attache at the imperial legation, 
thought this news prevented a declaration of war almost imme- 
diately after the embargo. Certainly it checked ardent congress- 
men. Nathaniel Macon declared, "The Devil himself could not 
tell, which Govt England or France is the most wicked," and Con- 
gress rang with what Serurier described as "the most lively speeches 
against France." Monroe raised the specter of a declaration of war 
against both major belligerents, and the President led Serurier 
from one of Dolley's receptions to his private office to hear a long 
diatribe against the "numberless vexations" America suffered. 
Complaints continued until and beyond the declaration of war 
against England, and in August Madison warned France, through 
Barlow, that Congress might declare war against France in the 
fall whether or not the conflict with England continued. 25 Violent 
feeling against Napoleon made many congressmen doubt the wis- 
dom of war with Britain. 

War's perils might seem an inconsequential thing, a trifle com- 
pared to the nation's honor, to insouciant congressmen who en- 
joyed Foster's libations, his chess set and playing cards, and then 
rode off to the Capitol to support war measures. For the nation 
at large, particularly after Napoleon's fiery torch had revealed 

25 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 12355 Georges de Caraman, "Les fitats-Unis 
II Y a Quarante Ans," Revue Contemporaine, ist Series, III (1852), 2335 Macon 
to Nicholson, March 23, 1812, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress j 
S&rurier $52, 9^54, $61 to Minister of Foreign Relations, April 9, 24, July 12, 
1812, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII. Although urged by Bassano, Napoleon did not 
even condescend to appoint a plenipotentiary to negotiate with Barlow until the end 
of April, and a month later this worthy reported that "in conformity with the spirit 
of my Instructions, the work is not much advanced." Bassano to Napoleon, April 17, 
1812, ibid., Vol. LXIXj Bassano to Barlow, April 20, 1812, ibid.; Due Dalberg to 
Bassano, May 28, 1812, ibid. 

Just before the American declaration of war, too late to affect happenings at 
Washington, Bassano presented Barlow with the spurious decree of April 28, 1811. 
Designed primarily to inveigle England into repeal of the Orders in Council, this 
document, as has been noted, did not fool Barlow and certainly could not be expected 
to mislead the American government. Barlow $12 to Monroe, May 12, 1812, and 
enclosures, Despatches, France, Vol XIII. Napoleon was fortunate that this trans- 
parent trick did not become known in the American capital soon enough to increase 
the hatred of France which delayed the declaration of war. 

39 1 



WAR AT LAST 

the emptiness of hopes for French sympathy during a war with 
Britain, the hazards seemed far more important. Late in the spring 
the first election returns began to come in. Ultimately, although 
Madison won reelection and some antiwar congressmen were re- 
tired, only the feebleness and the lack of cohesion of the Federalist- 
Clintonian opposition prevented a Republican disaster. Such War 
Hawks as William Widgery, John Adams Harper, and Burwell 
Bassett went down to defeat. Of course, most elections took place 
after the incapacity of Madison's war leadership had become patent, 
and after, too, it could be seen that the nation had been thrust un- 
prepared into a war. Certainly, however, the people of the United 
States did not share the gay bellicosity of leaders who by guile, 
threats, patriotic appeals, and the favor of fortune managed to 
carry the nation into war in June, 1812. The War Hawks were 
not borne forward by a rising tide of public sentiment. Rather did 
they seize the last possible moment before an ebb should leave 
them exposed on the beach. 

At no time, even when war sentiment was at its peak, did en- 
thusiasm sweep the nation. In January Louis Serurier wrote: "This 
war promises well ; it is not made with enthusiasm; it is coldly 
undertaken. Honor may decide the Chiefs of the Nation ; but the 
Citizens make up their minds according to their interest. . . . 
They regretfully take up arms; they take them up sluggishly; but 
they will not easily put them down and not without being satis- 
fied on points which England may find it difficult to abandon," A 
foreigner might be able to afford such a cool view, but the lack 
of enthusiasm did not please War Hawks. Some hoped that Eng- 
land could be provoked into an attack which would inflame the 
country. For the most part, war men hoped their own perfervid 
speeches would raise "the (too sluggish) people to their own stand- 
ard of Insanity," as an acid Federalist put it. They hoped that 
patriotic emotions would rally Americans behind them, once armed 
conflict had actually begun. 26 

26 Serurier #42 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 12, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVIIj Reed to Pickering, April 25, 1812, Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX. In one 
of his many brilliant passages, Henry Adams (History of the United States during the 
Administrations of Jefferson and Madison [9 vols.j New York, 1889-1891], VI, 

39 2 



WAR AT LAST 

Some war sentiment existed. Congressmen were not so foolish 
as to proceed without any public support at all. Nearly a dozen 
state legislatures passed resolutions for the defense of American 
rights, and mass meetings endorsed equally bellicose sentiments. 
Circumstances sometimes vitiated their impact, as the Virginia ex- 
ample shows. In January the House of Delegates resolved that 
"the period has now arrived when feace, as we now have it, is 
disgraceful, and war is honorable." But Taylor of Caroline said 
none of his neighbors desired war, and the best Jefferson could 
report was that "all regret that there is cause for war, but all con- 
sider it as now necessary." The Valley, stronghold of anti-Republi- 
canism, opposed war. In April Norfolk's congressman, a frequent 
truant from Washington, found his home town hoping for peace. 
In June Senator Giles brought forward Richmond and Man- 
chester petitions declaring that, if unfortunately the nation's honor 
made war imperative, it should be declared against France as well 
as England. 27 

Sentiment for a double war (or "triangular war," as it came to 
be called) was widespread. The Kentucky legislature specifically 
attacked both major belligerents, and four other legislatures re- 
ferred to France by implication. A mass meeting at Charleston, 
South Carolina, attended by Federalists (with Charles Cotes- 
worth Pinkney in the van) and Republicans, declared that both 
Britain and France had given adequate cause for war. 28 Almost 

210211) observes: "The experiment of thrusting- the country into war to inflame 
it, as crude ore might be thrown into a furnace, was avowed by the party leaders, 
from President Madison downward, and was in truth the only excuse for a course 
otherwise resembling an attempt at suicide. Many nations have gone to war in pure 
gayety of heart} but perhaps the United States were first to force themselves into a 
war they dreaded, in the hope that the war itself might create the spirit they lacked." 

27 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 112114; Taylor to Monroe, Jan. 2, March 
12, May 10, 1812, William E. Dodd, ed., "Letters of John Taylor, of Caroline 
County, Virginia," John P. Branch Papers, II (Richmond, 1908), 3^7^339 5 Jefferson 
to Nelson, April 2, 1812, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, eds,, The 
Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.; 20 vols. ; Washington, 19031904), 
XIII, 1385 Charles H. Ambler, Sectionalism in Virginia from 1776 to 1861 (Chicago, 
1910), pp. 9293; Davis, o$. cit., p. 945 Dice R. Anderson, William B. Giles 
(Menasha, Wise., 1914), pp. 181-182. 

28 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 10205 John H. Wolfe, Jeffersonian Democracy 
in South Carolina, James Sprunt Studies in History and Political Science, Vol. XXIV, 
no. i (Chapel Hill, 1940), p. 247. 

393 



WAR AT LAST 

every set of resolutions emphasized American honor. "We are a 
Humbled & degraded Nation," a Baltimorean wrote Henry Clay, 
"and If the Stand that is now Taken is departed from, Without 
bringing England to Justice, we may as well give up our Republi- 
can Government & have a Despot to rule over us. 53 29 The Speaker 
doubtless agreed, but he and his colleagues knew that many of 
their supporters found it difficult to understand why British in- 
sults, but not French, required war. 

The opponents of war outnumbered its supporters, whether 
troubled or untroubled. Lowndes, former Congressman Jackson, 
old John Adams (now Republican in his sympathies), and many 
other backers of war admitted this. Joseph Nicholson warned his 
brother-in-law, Albert Gallatin, that the "apathy of the Nation 
is not yet thrown off and never will be," and Jefferson's former 
minister to Paris, Robert R. Livingston, became nearly apoplectic 
in describing the crisis into which Congress had thrust the Re- 
publican party by insisting upon war. 30 There were stirrings in 
North Carolina, Maryland, and other Republican states. Josiah 
Bartlett, who approved of war in principle, found his New Hamp- 
shire constituents hopeful that a declaration could be postponed 
until fall, and he came to share their sentiments. In Pennsylvania, 
whose congressional delegation provided the largest group of war 
men, public opinion turned sharply. Petitions flooded Congress, 
and just before the declaration of war Dr. Benjamin Rush pre- 
dicted that the state would go Federalist in the fall elections. Aside 
from the West (and even here Ohio was a notable exception) and 
perhaps Georgia, not a single state, even the traditionally Re- 
publican ones, failed to provide evidence of antiwar feeling. 31 

29 Thomas McKim, Jr., to Clay, May 13, 1812, Henry Clay MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

30 Lowndes to Elizabeth Lowndes, March 23, 1812, Harriott H. Ravenel, Life and 
Times of William Lowndes (Cambridge, 1901), pp. 1021035 Jackson to Madison, 
April 13, 1812, Madison MSS$ John Adams to Jefferson, May 3, 1812, Jefferson 
MSS } Nicholson to Gallatin, May 7, 1812, Albert Gallatin MSS, New- York Historical 
Society 5 Robert R. Livingston to Edward Livingston, May 26, 1812, Robert R. 
Livingston MSS, New- York Historical Society. 

^Wilmington Gazette (Wilmington, N.C.), May 12, 18125 journal entry, May 
14, 1812, Foster MSS 5 Bartlett to Ezra Bartlett, May 30, 1812, Bartlett MSS 5 Rush 
to John Adams, May 19, 1812, Lyman H. Butterfield, ed., Letters of Benjamin Rush, 

394 



WAR AT LAST 

The most serious defections from the Republican cause came 
in Massachusetts and New York, where the party suffered crip- 
pling losses in state elections because their opponents exploited the 
war issue. Elbridge Gerry., the old friend of Adams and Jefferson, 
was thrust from the gubernatorial chair at Boston in April, and in 
May the Federalists recaptured the legislature. By a majority of 
1 66, 58 more than the Federalists could command by their own 
votes, the new legislature passed a resolution opposing "offensive 
war." 32 In New York opinion flowed steadily against the admin- 
istration after the turn of the year. "Old [Thomas] Sammons," 
as Randolph called his colleague although Sammons was only 
fifty, "returned from the Mohawk river [and his constituents] as 
decided an advocate for peace as he was a partizan of war at the 
commencement of the Session." In May, in the usual tangled 
contest with Clintonians and orthodox Republicans, the Federalists 
made a gain of nineteen seats and secured a clear majority in the 
assembly. 33 The Republicans had lost their major strongholds in 
the North, the Pennsylvania bridgehead seemed to be tottering, 
and they appeared about to be driven to their old citadels south 
of the Potomac. 

In May, somewhat overoptimistically, Samuel Taggart esti- 
mated that a majority in every state opposed war. The New-York 
Herald declared that "nothing was ever so universally execrated 
as is the projected war," although the paper felt forced to add, in 
good Federalist style, "by every man . . . who possesses the 
means of earning a decent subsistence." Randolph taunted the 
Republicans for risking a contest the people did not want, and 
Harmanus Bleecker predicted that war would bring to an end "the 
reign of theory, sophistry, and false philosophy." At the time of 
the declaration of war, the Herald estimated that 90 per cent of 

II, American Philosophical Society, Memoirs, Vol. XXX (1951),?. H345 Alfred B. 
Sears, Thomas Worthington: Father of Ohio Statehood (Columbus, 1958), pp. 
174-177. 

32 Gerry to Madison, private, May 19, 20, 1812, Madison MSS$ Henry D. Sedg- 
wick to Bleecker, June 6, 1812, Sedgwick MSS, Part II, Massachusetts Historical 
Society j Annals, i2th Congf., ist sess., pp. 259261. 

33 Randolph to Garnett, April 21, 1812, John Randolph MSS, Library of Con- 
gress 5 New-York Herald, May 23, 1812. 

395 



WAR AT LAST 

the American people opposed it ; Foster more cautiously settled 
on 80 per cent. 34 Doubtless Foster and the Federalists exaggerated. 
During the spring, however, and particularly after the Massa- 
chusetts election, no Republican 'had the temerity to claim that the 
American people demanded war. 

Unfortunately for the irenic, most protests against war did not 
come until the die had in effect been cast. Until the embargo, op- 
ponents of war did not feel it worth the energy to protest against 
a course expected to be abandoned in the end. "We are told," Hugh 
Nelson complained to Jefferson, "the people do not believe we 
mean war. Is this possible. If our countrymen do not believe us, 
how can we expect that foreign govts will." The country showed 
comparatively little alarm, John Randolph stated in the war de- 
bates, only "because the public are totally unaware of the high 
price at which this House holds its own consistency that the ruin 
of the nation weighs nothing in the scale against it." James A. 
Bayard sought to delay the Senate's vote on war because "the gen- 
eral opinion abroad was, that there would be no war." 35 Had Con- 
gress convinced the people of its determination, had not the Re- 
publican past created an indelible impression of weakness, by an 
ironic turn of chance the War Hawks would have been deluged 
with such forceful expressions of public anger that they probably 
could not have carried a declaration of war. Unwittingly Madison 
had served the cause better than he knew. 

Congress did consider the embargo a major step toward war. 
The War Hawks spent the ensuing six weeks defending their 
position against the attacks of Federalists and wavering Republi- 
cans rather than in active legislation. Some were tempted to sup- 
port a proposal to suspend nonimportation, a plan perhaps put 
forward as a move toward escape but attractive to Clay, Lowndes, 
Cheves, and Calhoun since it would permit prewar stockpiling. 

34 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, May 13, 1812, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters of 
Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 3995 New-York Herald, May 19, xSizj 
Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 1388-1389, 1405-1406; New-York Herald, June 
17, 1812; Foster #48 to Castlereagh, secret, June 21, 1812, FO 5/86. 
^ 3{ > Nelson to Jefferson, April 27, 1812, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge Collec- 
tion), Massachusetts Historical Society j Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 288, 1388. 

396 



WAR AT LAST 

Wiser men pointed out that the proposal would encourage Eng- 
land to believe that America was totally dependent upon her, and 
Monroe, "tremblingly alive to any a^earance o relaxation/ 5 
strenuously opposed it. 36 The plan died. 

Toward the end of March congressmen began to talk of ad- 
journment. This talk became widespread after the embargo, when 
war men thought legislative preparation complete. Some realized 
that the country would interpret a recess as further evidence that 
Congress desired to escape a crisis, and John A. Harper threatened 
to present a war manifesto to the House of Representatives and 
dare members to go home without debating it. 3T Other War Hawks 
expected citizens to urge their congressmen to war, while the Fed- 
eralists, wiser than their enemies, supported an adjournment for 
precisely the opposite reason. Republican waverers wanted to take 
the temperature of their constituents and delay the final vote on 
war. 

On April 10 the House of Representatives approved a recess 
in principle by a vote of seventy-two to forty. Thirty-one who 
later voted for war, including such stanch War Hawks as Calhcfcgnj' 
Williams, Johnson, and Widgery, voted for the resolution 7 /A 
joint committee of both chambers agreed to adjourn until May 
1 8, and this proposal would almost certainly have gone through 
had not the Senate voted to extend the date to June 8. This smacked 
too much of evasion, and War Hawks rallied to oppose it. Jonathan 
Roberts cleverly proposed that the members of Congress give up 
pay and travel money during the recess, thus saving the Treasury 
$40,000. Rather than accept Roberts' proposal, many of the ma- 
jority that sought a recess joined with W^r Hawks to shelve the 
subject by a vote of sixty-two to fifty-five. /Thus, Foster observed, 

the advocates for Peace tho' a Majority, in all Probability, were defeated 
... by the address of the more decided advocates for war, who shewed 
the others that although they might have an adjournment, yet it should be 
to their Cost. . . . To the Faction who were swayed by such motives we 

36 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 237-239, 1288-1290$ Randolph to Garnett, 
April 14, 1812, Randolph MSS. 

37 Harper to Plumer, April 29, 1812, William Plumer MSS, Library of Congress. 

397 



WAR AT LAST 

perhaps may have to attribute more importance than they deserve: for they 
were taken off their Guard and being confident of adjournment voted 
against the Resolution as amended thinking they should be able subsequently 
to regain the lost Ground. 

This confidence proved ill advised. Although the Senate agreed to 
a shorter period, the House now rejected by eight votes a proposal 
it would have whooped through a week earlier. By this extremely 
narrow margin, a margin that could have been reversed had not 
a number of antiwar men gone home without waiting for a recess, 
the war movement avoided a fatal check. Jonathan Roberts had a 
right to be proud of what he described in his memoirs as "an art- 
ful stroke." 38 

The desire for a recess was often coupled with a scheme to send 
a special mission to Europe. By clearing the air in France a mission 
might conceivably have broadened support for war against Eng- 
land if it did not arrive in London (as the event proved would 
have happened) in time to receive repeal of the Orders in Council. 
On the other hand, like an adjournment, the appointment of a 
mission would have discouraged the war spirit that did exist, and 
all Washington believed the chances of a settlement slim indeed. 
Nevertheless, the mission was widely discussed and was thought 
to have the President's blessing. The details of this affair are ob- 
scure, and Senator Worthington's story that Grundy and Clay 
threatened to oppose Madison's reelection if he persisted in this 
plan cannot be accepted. There is no reason to doubt that congres- 
sional leaders reminded Madison that a special mission would, 
by demolishing the government's already scanty reputation for 
determination, jeopardize Republican electoral prospects. 39 

Fully as challenging to the war spirit and even more fantastic 
was the suggestion, much bruited about in Washington, that the 
United States should mete the same measure to France as to Brit- 

38 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 13 14-1316, 1334-13425 journal entry, April 
26, 1812, Foster MS$$ memoirs (photostat), II, 19-21, Jonathan Roberts MSS, 
Historical Society of Pennsylvania. 

39 Courier (London), May 14, 1812$ Abraham Shepherd to Pickering, Feb. 20, 
1814, Henry Adams, The Life of Albert Gallatm (Philadelphia, 1879), pp. 457-4-58 > 
Mayo, Henry Clay^ pp. 509513. 

398 



WAR AT LAST 

ain. Some ardent War Hawks wanted to fight both nations. These 
men approached war in a cavalier spirit, detested Napoleonic 
perfidy, and hoped to destroy their own reputation for Franco- 
philia. Opponents of war hoped to turn the entire project into a 
reductio ad absurdum. Madison found it difficult to make a clear 
decision, although on balance he inclined to believe a double decla- 
ration unwise. He wrote to Jefferson, "To go to war with Eng d 
and not with France arms the federalists with new matter, and 
divides the Republicans some of whom with the Quids make a 
display of impartiality. To go to war ag et both, presents a thou- 
sand difficulties." Jefferson replied that triangular war was absurd, 
and Jonathan Roberts talked of it as the joint product of "the weak 
and the mad." Serurier jestingly remarked that if it really came 
about he would have to solicit an interview with Foster to concert 
measures of resistance. Nonetheless, in April and May there was 
a great deal of talk about triangular war, and this undermined 
the drive toward a declaration of war against England. 40 

Had any one of these projects adjournment, a new mission, 
resistance to both powers received the open endorsement of the 
administration, which was tempted by each of them, war would 
have been delayed. Delay almost certainly would have meant 
peace. From early April until the end of May the War Hawks 
fought a defensive battle against fear, second thoughts, weak- 
ness, and the pressure of public opinion. They argued that only 
firm consistency could regain the nation's honor. But no one could 
be sure that Porter's Report, preparedness legislation, and the 
embargo would not go the way of past Republican manifestoes. 
No one could be sure that the War Hawks would be able to work 
their will before Congress got totally out of hand. 

By common consent, answers awaited the return of the Hornet, 
which had sailed for Europe in December laden with "paper bul- 
lets, bloody messages, war resolutions and frightful speeches." On 

40 Madison to Jefferson, May 25, 1812, Hunt, of. cit., VIII, 191; Jefferson to 
Madison, May 30, 1812, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit. y XIII, 153-154.5 Roberts to 
Matthew Roberts, May 23, 1812, Roberts MSSj journal entry, April n, 1812, Foster 
MSSj Serurier #57 to Minister of Foreign Relations, May 27, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVII. 

399 



WAR AT LAST 

May 22, weeks after she was expected and after, too, false reports 
of her arrival had thrown sessions of Congress into confusion, the 
Hornet arrived. Monroe's office became suffocatingly crowded as 
officials and citizens sought to learn if she brought any news that 
would enable America to escape gracefully from a war. The dis- 
patches disappointed everyone. As Minister Serurier received no 
instructions to guide him, and Joel Barlow's reports made it clear 
that Napoleon continued irascible, hope had to be abandoned for 
a settlement with France which would ease the path to war with 
Britain. Although unofficial accounts aplenty showed that the Or- 
ders in Council were being heavily attacked, Russell's reports 
held out no prospect of repeal. Anger, confusion, and gloom spread 
through Washington. Serurier had an uncomfortable conversation 
with Monroe when they met at Speaker Clay's, the Secretary com- 
plaining that the administration had been betrayed by France. 
There were reports that the Cabinet, which met on two consecutive 
days to discuss future policy, contained almost as many opinions 
as members. The National Intelligencer, however, insisted that 
England was the chief enemy "let it not be said that the mis- 
conduct of France neutralizes in the least that of Great Britain" 
and Monroe's conversations with Foster made it seem that there 
was nothing to hope from England. 41 

Although not hostile in tone, Castlereagh's instructions to Fos- 
ter, which formed the most important part of the Hornefs budget 
of information, showed how little Britain understood America. Bas- 
ing his argument largely on a recent report by the Duke of Bassano, 
the Foreign Secretary declared it was now obvious, as England had 
maintained all along, that France had not repealed her decrees. 
America had been tricked. 

It is impossible America should not feel under these Circumstances that 
She has not only an Act of Justice to perform by Great Britain, but that 
France has deliberately attached Conditions to the Repeal of Her Decrees 
which she knew Great Britain could never accept, hoping thereby to fo- 

41 Federal Republican (Baltimore), March 13, 18125 S&rurier #57 to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, May 27, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVIIj Foster #38 to 
Castlereag-h, May 23, 1812, FO 5/8 6 j National Intelligencer, May 30, 1812. 

400 



WAR AT LAST 

ment Disunion between Great Britain and America. America can never 
be justified in continuing to resent against Us that failure of Relief, which 
is alone attributable to the insidious Policy of the Enemy. ... we are 
entitled to claim at Her Hands, as an act not less of Policy, than Justice, 
. . . that She should cease to treat Great Britain as an Enemy. 

The truth of this analysis of French policy seemed so obvious to 
Castlereagh that he expected the Americans to share it. He hoped 
the evidence of imperial perfidy would provide the United States 
with "an opportunity of receding without disgrace from the preci- 
pice of War. . . . To rescue America from the influence of France, 
is of more importance, than committing Her to War with that 
Power." To sweeten the pill for America, Castlereagh offered to 
regulate licenses so that the two countries might share European 
trade, or even to abandon them entirely. 42 "At any other time," 
as Theodore C. Smith has observed, "this would have at least 
opened the way for renewed negotiations, but not in i8i2." 43 
Castlereagh and his colleagues totally misread the situation in 
America. The instructions, far more pleading than threatening, 
actually determined Madison to abandon his hedging for peace. 
On May 27 and 28 Foster discussed the British argument and 
proposed concession with Monroe and Madison. The Americans 
ignored the proposal on licenses, to which they had formerly at- 
tached so much importance. They stubbornly reiterated that the 
Berlin and Milan decrees had been repealed. Seizing upon Castle- 
reagh's declaration that England would insist upon complete, un- 
conditional French repeal and abandonment of the municipal 
regulations shutting off British commerce with Europe, they de- 
clared this an extension of England's demands. "With this formal 
notice," Madison recalled fifteen years later, "no choice remained 
but between war and degradation, a degradation inviting fresh 
provocation & rendering war sooner or later inevitable." The 
foreign Secretary's instructions, Madison told Jared Sparks in 
1 830, were "intended to show an utter disregard of the complaints 

42 Castlereagh #8, #9 to Foster, April 10, 1812, Mayo, ed., Instructions, pp. 
353367. Foster was authorized to read to Monroe the first of these instructions, con- 
taining* Castlereagh's arguments on French repeal, and he did so. 

4*0?. C&, p. 338. 

401 



WAR AT LAST 

of the United States. This letter seemed to shut out the prospects 
of conciliation, & the president considered war as the next necessary 
step to vindicate the rights and honor of the nation. 35 M The failure 
of understanding was reciprocal. 

For more than a month eager members of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee had been drafting a manifesto for use as a reply to the 
presidential war message, and Monroe also prepared one for 
friendly congressmen. 45 On May 13, when nearly a sixth of the 
membership was absent, the House of Representatives voted to re- 
call absentees. On May 18 eighty Republicans caucused to ar- 
range their plans, and three days later the President was reported 
at work on his war message. Apparently a congressional delegation 
headed by Clay visited the White House to assure Madison that 
Congress awaited his message, and later, on a morning ride to 
Georgetown, the Speaker told a colleague that the war message 
could be expected on June i . On May 29 John Randolph delivered 
a bitter attack on the project. After he had accused the Republican 
leaders of seeking to make Americans "the tools, the minions, 
sycophants, parasites of France," he was silenced by the Speaker 
and Calhoun. Visitors began to examine Foster's livestock and 
even the marquee under which he held his famous parties, with 
an eye to purchasing them when he departed. Congress adjourned 
for the week end, knowing that on Monday the long-awaited cli- 
max of the battle between honor and interest would begin. 46 

During these hectic days, last-minute misgivings plagued the 

44 Foster #41 to Castlereagh, June 6, 1812, FO 5/865 Foster to Castlereagh, 
private and secret, June 6, 1812, ibid.; Madison to Henry Wheaton, Feb. 26-27, 
1827, Hunt, o$. cit., IX, 272-2733 journal entry, April i8[~23], 1830, Jared Sparks 
MSS, Houghton Library, Harvard University. 

45 Harper to Plumer, April 29, 1812, Plumer MSS; journal entry, May 27, 1812, 
Foster MSS; Charles M. Wiltse, "The Authorship of the War Report of 1812," 
American Historical Review, XLIX (194.3-1944), 253-259. While hazarding a guess 
that John C. Calhoun may have been the author of this paper, Wiltse declares that 
the authorship cannot be safely ascribed to any individual. Harper's letter makes it 
likely that the final version combined passages prepared by a number of men. 

4Q Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 1424-14275 journal entry, May 19, 1812, 
Foster MSS; George M. Bibb to John J. Crittenden, May 21, 1812, Wiltse, of. cit., 
p. 256; Smith, o$. cit.) pp. 340-344; Annals^ i2th Cong., ist sess.., p, 1477115 journal 
entries, May 31, June 3, 1812, Foster MSS. 

4O2 



WAR AT LAS T 

administration. The President, who knew that he must go ahead 
and was prepared to do his duty, faced it without enthusiasm. On 
May 25 he sent Congress the discouraging correspondence from 
Barlow, and on the same day he considered the possibility of a 
triangular war. On Monday morning Monroe, who said he was 
too busy to undertake the task himself, asked Gallatin to inform 
Senator Crawford of the two secretaries 7 wish for a limited war. 
"I am convinc'd," Monroe wrote, "that it is very important to at- 
tempt, at present, the maritime war only. I fear however that 
difficulty will be experienced in the committee, which may extend 
itself to the gentlemen, or some of them, at least, at Mrs. Daw- 
sons." 47 The President kept his own counsel. 

James Madison did not feel that the times called for any un- 
usual departure from Republican forms, and his deference to Con- 
gress was fitting since the war impulse had come from its members 
rather than the White House. As always, the President left the 
reading of his message to a clerk who droned it out for almost half 
an hour. Nor did Madison directly endorse any particular course. 
The decision between peace and war, a war "avoiding all connec- 
tions which might entangle . . . [the United States] in the con- 
test or view of other powers" and prosecuted only until an op- 
portunity for peace occurred, "is a solemn question which the 
Constitution wisely confides to the legislative department of the 

4 ' 7 James D. Richardson, ed. 5 A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 4995 Madison to Jefferson, May 25, 1812, Hunt, 
o$. cit.) VIII, 1911925 Monroe to Gallatin, June i, 1812, Gallatin MSS. Lowndes, 
years after the event, put some scattered memories onto paper. "One of the most curious 
anecdotes" he recalled was "the effort of the Executive to prevent a declaration of 
war. . . . after the Presidents message was sent in ... considerable effort was made 
to substitute something & less letters of marque &c. . . . as far as I know none of 
the Cabinet unless it were Hamilton were adverse. Grundy was brought over. I re- 
member being one of a good many Sen 8 . & Rep 8 , at this time (Crawford was one) 
talking it over. We determined to adjourn & go home doing nothing, or have a War 
in common form." William L. Lowndes, Historical Anecdotes, and Observations, 
MSS, Library of Congress. Assuming that Lowndes could not have made up this 
story out of whole cloth, it appears to intimate that Gallatin carried out Monroe's 
suggestion. It will be noted, however, that the President's name is not specifically 
mentioned by Monroe or Lowndes. Two possible conclusions are that the President 
prudently concealed his attitude or that his secretaries felt it possible to ignore his 
wishes. 

403 



WAR AT LAST 

Government." The President unnecessarily asked "early delibera- 
tions" on the question. 48 All he professed to do was to recapitulate 
the evidence and, in his final paragraph, to suggest that a decision 
on French relations be postponed until further word came from 
Barlow. Sometimes Madison was eloquent, sometimes labored and 
intricate, as when he declared that by impressment "a self -redress 
is assumed which, if British subjects were wrongfully detained and 
alone concerned, is that substitution of force for a resort to the 
responsible sovereign which falls within the definition of war." On 
the whole, the message compared unfavorably with the annual 
message presented seven months before. 

The President attempted to show that Great Britain was already 
prosecuting an undeclared war against the United States: "We 
behold . . . on the side of Great Britain a state of war against the 
United States, and on the side of the United States a state of peace 
toward Great Britain." Impressment, particularly of native Ameri- 
cans, was an act of war that neither "remonstrances and expostula- 
tions" nor friendly offers to regulate the employment of seamen 
had been able to bring to an end. Indian warriors attacked the 
West, presumably at Britain's behest. English warships violated 
American territorial waters. "Pretended blockades," particularly 
Fox's of i8o6, 49 permitted American commerce to be "plun- 
dered in every sea." Most important of all, the British Cabinet, 
"not content with these occasional expedients for laying waste our 
neutral trade, . . . resorted ... to a sweeping system of block- 
ades, under the name of orders in council, which has been molded 
and managed as might best suit its political views, its commercial 
jealousies, or the avidity of British cruisers." Justified as retalia- 
tion, although long since "deprived of this flimsy veil" by French 
repeal, the Orders in Council and the ancillary license trade were 
really a war upon American commerce. Economic pressure on the 

48 See Richardson, o$. cit., I, 499-505, for the entire message. 

49 The President's argument that the British showed their inveterate hostility by 
declaring Fox's Blockade to be "comprehended" in the orders, and by refusing to 
encourage Napoleonic repeal o the allegedly retaliatory Berlin Decree by repealing 
the blockade, was a particularly weak passage in the address. The President well 
knew, from Monroe's conversations with Foster, what the British position really 
meant. 

404 



WAR AT LAST 

one hand, and, on the other, offers to join Britain if she withdrew 
her regulations while France remained stubborn, had failed to 
bring the Cabinet to its senses. "Such," said the President, "is the 
spectacle of injuries and indignities which have been heaped on 
our country, and such the crisis which its unexampled forbearance 
and conciliatory efforts have not been able to avert." 

The use of hyperbole did not destroy the essential truth of Madi- 
son's indictments of England. In Henry Adams 5 words, "For five 
years, the task of finding excuses for peace had been more dif- 
ficult than that of proving a casus belli." 50 That impressment and 
hovering off American shores had scarcely been mentioned in 
recent diplomatic correspondence, until the former was pushed 
to the fore at the very end, proved only that the American gov- 
ernment had lost hope of peaceful arrangements, not that the acts 
were less criminal. The British restrictive system was, as Madison 
stated, heavily tinctured with selfishness. Had Madison em- 
phasized the harmfulness of the orders, he would have been on 
more solid ground. To connect their justice with French repeal, 
and to assert in the face of the evidence that French repeal was a 
fact, simply invited criticism, although the administration's policy 
since 1810 made emphasis on this theme almost inevitable. 

In later years Madison came fairly close to apologizing for his 
decision to present a war message in June, 1812. "The circum- 
stances under which the war commenced on our part," he wrote in 
1813, "require that it should be reviewed with a liberality above 
the ordinary rules and dispositions indulged in such cases. It had 
become impossible to avoid or even delay war, at a moment when 
we were not prepared for it, and when it was certain that effective 
preparations would not take place, whilst the question of war was 
undecided." The moment, Madison observed in retrospect, ap- 
peared propitious. Napoleon's Grand Army lay poised for an at- 
tack on Russia. "Had the French Emperor not been broken down 
as he was, to a degree at variance with all human probability, and 
which no human sagacity could anticipate, can it be doubted," the 
President asked, "that G.B. would have been constrained by her 

50 History, VI, 221. 

405 



WA R AT LAST 

own situation and the demands of her allies^ to listen to our rea- 
sonable terms of reconciliation." 51 In this spirit James Madison 
joined the War Hawks. 

Both House and Senate considered Madison's message behind 
closed doors. Although common in the upper house, executive ses- 
sions were rare in the House, and three times the opponents of war 
sought to lift the injunction of secrecy. Thrice beaten, Federalists 
declined to debate the question and began to prepare an appeal to 
the nation stating their reasons for opposing war. 52 Theoretically, 
secrecy speeded legislative action and concealed American inten- 
tions from the enemy. Actually, it took Congress more than two 
weeks to pass a declaration of war, and nobody certainly not 
Foster failed to learn that war was being discussed. Secrecy did 
deprive Federalists of the opportunity to assail Republican in- 
consistencies before a public audience and delayed exposure of the 
majority's misgivings. 

Most observers expected the House to follow the War Hawks' 
lead without difficulty, although Macon wrote, the day after the 
message, "It is doubtful this morning . . . whether Congress 
are as firm, for war as they have been thought." 53 The Republicans 
had an overwhelming majority, and in a presidential year con- 
siderations of party unity bulked larger than normally. Many 
felt that after the bellicose speeches of the past seven months it 
would be an open confession of weakness to reject the war bill. 
The arrival, on June 3, of the Prince Regent's declaration, mis- 
takenly interpreted as a sign of stubborn devotion to the orders, 
aided the War Hawks. Still, a large number of Republicans did 
not want war and knew their constituents opposed it. A visit home 
noticeably cooled David R. Williams. Samuel Ringgold of Mary- 
land, previously the object of Federalist mirth for allegedly "hav- 

51 Madison to John Nicholas, April 2, 1813, Hunt, o$. cit iy VIII, 242; Madison to 
Wheaton, Feb. 26-27, 1827, ibid., IX, 273-274.. The President emphasized that 
by mere coincidence, and not because the United States wanted to aid Napoleon, the 
climax with England came at the same time that the invasion of Russia began. 

52 Bleecker to Theodore Sedgwick, Sr., June 27, 1812, Sedgwick MSSj Taggart 
to Rev. John Taylor, June 23, 1812, Haynes, op. cit., p. 405. dnnals, i2th Cong., ist 
sess., pp. 1629-1637, covers the House proceedings at this time. 

53 Macon to Nicholson, June 2, 1812, Nicholson MSS. 

406 



WAR AT LAST 

ing had a project of the declaration of war so long in his pocket 
that it was at length worn out," lost his enthusiasm and report- 
edly told Monroe that war would ruin his political future. Wil- 
liam Richardson, who held Varnum's old seat, returned from a 
six weeks 5 visit to the Bay State opposed to war. All these men 
ultimately voted for the declaration, but they supported it reluc- 
tantly. Many hoped the Senate would save the nation from the 
consequences of their own votes in the House. "I think the business 
was too hasty," Dr. Josiah Bartlett wrote, "& did not give the Bill 
my assent in first stage [but] after it had passed with no material 
alteration I was against its postponement as it would look like re- 
tracing the steps & shew a vacillating disposition which the times 
totally forbid but I did hope the Senate would have so altered the 
Bill at their house as to give it the character of Reprisals by grant- 
ing restrictive letters of Marque but they did not see fit." 54 Had 
the members of Congress voted as they wished in their hearts, the 
bill would not have passed. 

Nevertheless, the declaration of war moved rapidly through the 
House of Representatives. On June 3 John C. Calhoun, who re- 
placed Porter at the head of the Foreign Affairs Committee when 
the New Yorker scampered off to the easier and more lucrative 
task of selling supplies to the army, presented the committee's 
manifesto and a bill declaring war on England. The Federalists, 
deprived of the opportunity to debate publicly, remained silent, 
and the House adjourned at an unexpectedly early hour. On June 
4 the representatives met at eleven o'clock. Information that Madi- 
son wished them to delay until he could send a new message threw 
them temporarily into consternation, raising fears that the Presi- 
dent intended to recede from the ground he had taken. When the 
message arrived it proved to contain only an exchange of corre- 
spondence between Foster and Monroe. After beating back three 
attempts at delay, the House passed the war bill by a vote of 
seventy-nine to forty-nine. One of the majority had been sworn 

54 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, May 9, 1812, Haynes, 0$. cit., p. 399; Davis, 
o$. cit.y pp. 9 5-9 6 j journal entry, May 29, 1812, Foster MSSj Taggart to Pickering, 
May n, 1812, Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX $ Bartlett to Ezra Bartlett, June 18, 1812, 
Bartlett MSS. 

407 



WAR AT LAST 

in only the day before, and another, who had taken an extended 
French leave, returned to the Capitol one hour before the vote. 
In the next few days seven other absentees arrived, among them 
Ezekiel Bacon, Richard Cutts, and Abijah Bigelow, who had been 
delayed together on the packet between Rhode Island and New 
York. The votes of the returnees would not have altered signifi- 
cantly the margin by which the declaration of war passed. 55 

The sectional aspect of the vote is often overstressed. Except 
for three North Carolinians Quid Stanford, Federalists Joseph 
Pearson and Archibald McBryde congressmen from the states 
south of Virginia voted as a bloc. The nine members from beyond 
the mountains all voted for war, and Henry Clay of course would 
have done so had he not been in the chair. Although solid, the real 
South and the West provided slightly less than one-third of the 
affirmative votes. A few members from upstate New York, Ver- 
mont, New Hampshire, and the Maine district may possibly be 
considered frontiersmen, but they scarcely affect the generaliza- 
tion. The core of the war coalition, thirty-five in all, came from 
Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, squarely in the middle 
of the nation. In each state there had been grumblings. Neverthe- 
less, all but one Pennsylvania Republican and the six from Mary- 
land (out of a state delegation of nine) remained firm. In Virginia, 
Randolph and the Valley Federalists opposed the declaration, but 
four Republicans who had been rumored ready to do so 56 rallied 
behind their party's cause, and the state delegation split thirteen 
to five in favor of war. Although in most ways a Southern state, 
the Old Dominion had little direct interest in the conquest of 
Florida or Canada and in Indian warfare, and party loyalty and 
the need for an export market explain the support given to the bill. 
Finally, it must be noted that congressmen from north of the Dela- 



^Annals, izth Cong., ist sess., pp. 1546-1554? Charles M. Wiltse, John C. Cal- 
houn, Nationalist, 1782-1828 (Indianapolis, 1944), pp. 64-655 Annals, i2th Cong., 
ist sess., p. i6 3 7j Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, June 5, 1812, Haynes, op. cit., pp. 
01- 



401-403 



. 

56 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, May 9, 1812, Haynes, o$. <&., p. 39 8, listed five 
Republican deserters who were expected to join the seven Federalists and Quids. They 
were Taliaferro, Burwell, Smith, Nelson, and Matthew Clay, but the latter was absent 
on the final roll call. 

408 



WAR AT LAST 



ware River provided the war resolution with its majority. Their 
seventeen votes,, cast in opposition to majority sentiment in the 
area, could not have been spared, and the six Massachusetts votes 
for war were outnumbered by those from only three other states. 
Although it is difficult to cast the prowar Northerners in any par- 
ticular pattern (is William Widgery, of Portland, Maine, to be 

CONGRESSIONAL ACTION ON THE DECLARATION OF WAR, 1812 



A Residence of congressmen voting for war i 

* Residence of congressmen voting against war 
(Congressmen absent and not voting are omitted.) . 




409 



WAR AT LAST 

considered a frontiersman or the representative of a seaport?), a 
preponderance of them came from areas interested in overseas com- 
merce. Since many of these places had been centers of disaffection 
under the Embargo, it is possible that, like some Federalists, their 
congressmen considered any alternative better than commercial 
self-restriction. Since the representatives of other port towns from 
Philadelphia and Baltimore to Charleston and Savannah also 
voted for war, one might only half-f acetiously declare that hostili- 
ties commanded the support of a great crescent along the seaboard. 
In any event, the sectional pattern will not do as an explanation 
of the vote for war. 

Far more important was party regularity. The Republicans had 
a tradition of incredible factionalism, but June, 1812, obviously 
was a special occasion. Although the dangers of going to war against 
the country's wishes were obvious, to back down at this late date 
would expose the Republicans to ridicule almost certain to cost 
them their political hold. Even if the declaration passed by a nar- 
row margin over substantial Republican defections, the political 
consequences might be unfortunate. Far better to vote for war and 
trust the country to rally behind its leadership. Hezekiah Niles 
gave Republican strength in the House of Representatives as io6. 57 
Ten were absent on June 4.5 a few, like Randolph and Stanford, 
had long since been Republicans in name only; and most of the 
six New York Republicans who voted against war were Clintonians 
hopeful of unseating James Madison in the election of 1812. 
Ninety per cent of the real, available Republican membership 
backed the bill. Some twenty were veterans who had supported 
the Embargo four and a half years before, and a few, including 
Macon's nephew, Willis Alston ; Jefferson's old secretary, Wil- 
liam A. Burwellj Ohio's lone congressman, Jeremiah Morrow ; 
and the antique Pennsylvania duo, John Smilie and William Find- 
ley, had voted steadily for every Republican measure since that 
time. Others, the timid, the disputatious, and the wavering, were 
mobilized for the last trial. 

As everyone knew, the Senate would dispose of what the House 

57 Niles 9 Register, Dec. 5, 1812. 

4IO 



WAR AT LAST 

proposed, and the margin promised to be extremely narrow. On 
June 4, when the representatives passed the war bill, six senators 
Giles, Lloyd, Hunter of Rhode Island, Franklin of North Caro- 
lina, Bradley of Vermont, and Alexander Campbell of Ohio 
were away from Washington. All were expected to oppose the 
bill passed by the House. 58 The failure of a committee, named on 
June i and composed in equal parts of war men, waverers, and 
Federalists, to report a bill speedily seemed a good omen for peace. 
Not until June 8, when all the absentees except Bradley and 
Alexander Campbell had returned, raising attendance to thirty- 
two, did the committee report out the war bill. 59 

Its opponents could count on twelve votes, including all the 
Federalists and Nicholas Oilman, a maverick Republican now 
virtually a Federalist, reflected from Vermont in 1810 over the 
opposition of William Plumer and orthodox Republicans. Two 
Republicans, Worthington of Ohio and Pope of Kentucky, were 
firmly in their camp. As early as April, on the strength of news 
from France, Pope, who had formerly supported the administra- 
tion, told Foster that "the dispute between our two Countries was 
now only one upon paper. The Trade to France was null, and 
besides our Situation was to be considered as well as the State of 
the whole World." Pope opposed war knowing that it would cost 
him his political future in bellicose Kentucky. Worthington, who 
had been impressed briefly while a young man, nevertheless 
thought it "folly and madness to get into the war for abstract 
principles when we have not the power to enforce them." He hated 
France and knew the Ohio frontier was nearly defenseless. 60 If 

58 Bayard to Andrew Bayard, June 4, 1812, Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of James 
A. "BayarcLy 17961815, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1913, II 
(Washington, 1915), 198. Bayard himself had only just returned to Washington. 
Campbell, kept in Ohio by illness in his family, would have voted against war. Sears, 
op. cit. y p. 177. 

59 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 265-298, follows the Senate proceedings. Only 
two speeches are reported in detail. 

60 Journal entry, April 9, 1812, Foster MSS; journal entry, May [12 or 13], 1812, 
Thomas Worthington MSS, Library of Congress. Foster praised Worthington as "a 
very worthy man" and went on: ". , . although he had once been impressed himself 
. . . and was consequently against our doctrine on the subject of impressment, saying 
he would rather live on a crust than be so disgraced, yet it was without the smallest 

411 



WAR AT LAST 

Stephen Bradley, who explained in interviews as he posted south- 
ward that opinion in New England had convinced him to oppose 
war, arrived in time, the opponents would number thirteen. They 
had good reason to hope for the support of Joseph Howell of 
Rhode Island, a weak man (as even his father admitted) under 
heavy pressure from his constituents. 61 Those who wished to ratify 
the House decision could count on only ten votes, even assuming 
that Senator Brent, to whom Foster had assigned an aide to keep 
him drunk or convert him with alcohol, did his duty. 

No fewer than eight senators, Republicans all, were thought to 
entertain doubts in varying degrees. Anderson of Tennessee had 
been a sturdy War Hawk and in the end voted like one. In May 
his comments at a dinner given by Foster led the Englishman to 
write in his journal that Anderson "is much softened down, speaks 
of young Men having wished to go into violent Measures & thinks 
the news being bad from France, favorable, & that an Union of 
Interests between England & America would be a good Thing. 55 
Franklin of North Carolina also surprised Foster by voting steadily 
for war. John Smith of New York and John Condit were consid- 
ered at least partially committed to the antiwar cause. Alexander 
Gregg, a professional Pennsylvania politician for whom, appar- 
ently, nobody had much respect, had lost the bellicosity shown 
when he introduced Gregg 5 s Resolutions in 1806. As a published 
letter of his stated, he wanted the Senate to substitute letters of 
marque, possibly against both belligerents, for a declaration of 
war, leaving the ultimate decision until fall when the nation would 
be better prepared and the foreign situation clearer. 62 

Even if these five of the eight waverers voted with their Repub- 

rancour that he gave his opinion, and he voted against the declaration of war . . . 
from pure conviction that there was not sufficient ground for it, as well as the persua- 
sion that we were really fighting for our existence and at the same time for the cause 
of liberty and independence all over the world against military despotism and irreli- 
gion." Davis, o$. cit., pp. 192-194. 

^Poulsotfs American Daily Advertiser (Philadelphia), June 19, 18125 David 
Howell to Gallatin, Oct. 20, 1811, Gallatin MSS. 

62 Journal entry, May 23, 1812, Foster MSSj Gregg to , June 4, 1812, True 

American and Commercial Advertiser (Philadelphia), June 16, 1812. 

412 



WAR AT LAST 

lican colleagues, the decision still rested with the three great schis- 
matics, William Branch Giles, Samuel Smith, and Michael Leib. 
Jonathan Roberts detested Leib so much that he threatened to 
kick him where it would do the most good. Giles had always advo- 
cated vigor, at least in theory. Sounding him out, John A. Harper 
hoped for the best, but he admitted that Giles "is however deadly 
hostile to Mr. Munroe, and not much in love with Mr. Madison." 
Nobody dared guess how Samuel Smith would finally vote. After 
talking both ways, on June 2 he refused to reveal his intentions to 
Augustus Foster. None of these men cared a snap for party sup- 
port, Republican success, and particularly Madison's reputation. 
No wonder Monroe complained, during the Senate's debates, that 
nominal Republicans were a much greater problem than avowed 
Federalists! 63 

On June 10 Gregg moved to substitute naval reprisal and letters 
of marque for full war. The motion passed by seventeen to thirteen, 
with all the doubters except Samuel Smith and Franklin voting 
for it. Even if Bradley did not arrive in time, the opponents of war 
appeared to have a safe majority. On June 12, however, they failed 
by fifteen to seventeen to carry a resolution placing England and 
France upon the same footing, gaining the votes of Pope, its au- 
thor, and Samuel Smith, but losing those of four timid men who 
thought that one enemy at a time even if only a half enemy was 
enough. Gregg's resolution, called up again, lost on a tie vote. 
Senator Giles's vote was the key 5 for reasons that can only be 
explained as the fruit of his own eccentricity, he abandoned the 
position he had taken a couple of days before. With these two nar- 
row defeats, the peace movement passed the peak, although the 
antiwar men still had the support of exactly half the Senate and 
could pray for the speedy arrival of Bradley's coach. "I know you 
are anxious to be informed what we are doing, or what we will do," 
Macon wrote to his friend, Judge Nicholson, "to tell this would 

63 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, June 17, 1812, Roberts MSS$ Harper to Plumer, 
June 14., 1812, Plumer MSSj journal entry, June 2, 1812, Foster MSS$ Monroe to 
Taylor, June 13, 1812, James Monroe MSS, Library of Congress. 

413 



WAR AT LAST 

require a greater man, than I ever saw, and though this is telling 
nothing, yet it is telling all, it is telling what is literally true." 
Hunter told Foster that "they were all in the wind again." w 

Although rain fell in torrents on the fifteenth, all the senators 
in town attended the session at the Capitol. They voted down two 
attempts at delay and, by the narrow margin of two votes, defeated 
Michael Leib's proposal to issue letters of marque and reprisal, 
the same to take effect against France as well as England if positive 
proof of repeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees was not forthcom- 
ing. Then, by a vote of nineteen to thirteen, the Senate passed the 
war bill to a third reading. All the waverers, disappointed in their 
hopes for a limited war, swung over to join the majority. The next 
day Bayard could mobilize only eleven votes behind his proposal 
to delay a final decision until November, and only nine for a delay 
until July. Pope and Worthington informed Foster that the game 
was up, but outside observers were tortured by doubt. Roberts 
wrote that "all that is diabolical is is at work in the Senate. . . . 
It is shrewdly suspected some of Fosters bills of exchange has 
dropped in the Senate. . . . the suspense we are in is worse 
than hell!!!!" 65 

After beating aside a last attempt to limit the war to the ocean, 
proposed this time by the unpredictable Giles, the Senate finally 
approved a declaration of war on June 17. Since Pope, although 
opposed, declined to vote against a great national decision, the 
tally was nineteen to thirteen. According to Jonathan Roberts, 
Gregg voted for war only to assure War Hawk support for his 
gubernatorial candidacy, and certainly neither Gregg nor his col- 
league, Leib, wanted war. Foster said that two or three senators 
shifted only when they saw that their negative votes would not 
prevent a declaration of war, 66 and, as the votes on letters of marque 

64 Macon to Nicholson, June 12, 1812, Nicholson MSSj journal entry, June 14, 
1812, Foster MSS. 

65 Journal entry, June 17, 1812, Foster MSS 5 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, June 
17, 1812, Roberts MSS. 

66 Annalsy i2th Cong 1 ., ist sess., p. 2975 Davis, o$. cit., p. 100. Timothy Pickering 
composed two memoranda, dated 1822 and 1828 (Pickering 1 MSS, Vol. LII, fol. 775 
Vol. XL VII, fol. 84) , in which he stated that Madison, who did not want war, counted 
on Samuel Smith, John Smith of New York, Leib, and Gregg to oppose it. According 

414 



WAR AT LAST 

showed, a majority obviously would have preferred to avoid one. 
If Giles had remained firm, or if Bradley had arrived earlier he 
first appeared in the Senate two days after the declaration the 
majority might have held together. In the pinch, with letters of 
marque defeated on a tie vote, Republican waverers preferred a 
declaration of war to postponement or surrender, for either of these 
courses would expose the hollowness of the vigor which so many 
of them professed to support. Doubtless Giles, Smith, and Leib 
(who, with Leib's friend, William Duane, had ostensibly sup- 
ported positive action for some years) consoled themselves, too, 
with the thought that if the war went badly the accounting could 
be laid at Madison's door, not theirs. 

Thus, after a struggle of seven and a half months, the War 
Hawks worked their will. Epithets aside, the Federal Re-publican 
spoke accurately in saying that the country had been dragged a by 
the blind and senseless animousity of a few 'new-hatched unfledged 
comrades,' who are but boys in public affairs, and who, in fact, have 
not been seen before by the American people on the public stage." 
The true War Hawks were a minority, even of the Republican 
party. The mistakes of their opponents and the apparent stubborn- 
ness of Great Britain had created a situation in which Congress was 
at last "driven, goaded, dragged, forced, kicked" into war, as the 
always impatient Lexington Reporter put it. "I have to remark on 
this extraordinary measure," wrote Foster, "that it seems to have 
been unexpected by nearly the whole Nation ; & to have been car- 
ried in opposition to the declared sentiments of many of those who 
voted for it, in the House of Representatives, as well as in the 
Senate, in which latter body there was known to have been at one 
time, a decided Majority against it." 67 

At three in the afternoon on June 18, Monroe called Foster to 



to Pickering 1 , Smith told a friend that the President even called him in to urge him to 
vote against war, only to be scornfully rejected. Such a story, filtered through at least 
two bitter enemies of Madison, must be entirely discredited, but, allowing for extreme 
distortion, it perhaps gives a shred of presidential support to Monroe's scheme for 
limited war, mentioned above in note 47. 

67 Federal Republican, June 18, 18125 Reporter, June 27, 18125 Foster #47 to 
Castlereagh, June 20, 1812, FO 5/86. 

415 



WAR AT LAST 

the State Department to inform him officially of the declaration 
of war. Foster understood Monroe to suggest that compromise 
might still be possible. Two days later they met again and "en- 
deavoured to frighten one another for a whole Hour by descanting 
on the Consequences of War." Then Monroe asked Foster and 
his secretary to take tea with him. Since bad weather delayed the 
departure of Madison, who at this moment of climax had decided 
on a vacation at Montpelier, Foster was able to pay a final call 
at the White House on June 23. The two men exchanged regrets 
that war had come. Hinting that he hoped for a limited war, Madi- 
son stated that he opposed "pushing matters to extremes." In in- 
structions sent to Russell three days later, however, the American 
government made it virtually certain that this would be neither 
a limited nor a short war. Impressment as well as the Orders in 
Council had to cease if the war were to come to a speedy end, 
Monroe declared. Speed was imperative, for if much time passed 
the invasion of Canada might force the United States into "com- 
promitment" with its inhabitants and "the effect, which success, 
(which could not fail to attend it) might have on the public mind 
here 55 would make it "difficult to relinquish Territory which had 
been conquered." The administration had convinced itself that 
Canada was a simple matter of marching, that a mere declaration 
of war might well bring down the British government. "My candid 
opinion is," Monroe had recently written to his old friend, Taylor 
of Caroline, "that we shall succeed in obtaining what it is important 
to obtain, and that we shall experience little annoyance or embar- 
rassment in the effort." 68 

At noon on June 25, having shaken the last friendly congres- 
sional hand, Augustus Foster rode out of the capital in which he 
had served gaily but without success. After a leisurely and un- 
molested journey overland, he sailed from New York on July 12. 
Already General Hull had set in motion the army that was ex- 
pected to sweep through Canada, and Commodore Rodgers in the 

68 Foster minute of June 23, 1812, enclosed in Foster #49 to Castlereagh, June 
24, 1812, FO 5/8 6 j Monroe to Russell, June 26, 1812, Instructions, Vol. Ij Monroe 
to Taylor, June 13, 1812, Monroe MSS. 



WAR AT LAST 

Constellation had sought to bring to battle H.M.S. Belvidera, a 
British warship sighted off New York. Scores of vessels now near- 
ing the American coast with word that the Orders in Council had 
been repealed were to become the first important prizes of the war. 
For a second and last time, through mutual misunderstanding, 
America and Britain had failed to find the road to peace. 



417 



CHAPTER 



XII 



"THIS UNNATURAL WAR" 



Although America's declaration of war came only after seven 
years of controversy and as many months of noisy congressional 
action, it surprised Great Britain and the United States. The Eng- 
lish, who did not want war, were serenely confident of the result. 
"We cannot fear a war with any power in the world," the Times 
commented, " . . . but it is not unmanly to say, that we regret 
the sad necessity ... of carrying the flame and devastation of 
war to a part of the world which has not seen a hostile foot for 
thirty years." 1 After repeal of the Orders in Council, Britain dis- 
counted all bad news from the United States, sure that America 
would abandon notions of a quixotic struggle when she learned of 
her great victory over the chief symbol of discord. 

Even news of the declaration of war caused only muted debate 
in Britain. Henry Brougham expected a speedy armistice, and 
Alexander Baring advised him to support the government on 
existing issues, confident that Madison could not continue the war 
for two weeks after news of repeal arrived. The Sun unreasonably 

1 Times (London), June 5, i8iz. 

418 



UNNATURAL WAR >> 



complained that, in his war message, "Mr. MADDISON reca- 
pitulates all the subjects of complaint against this country, . . . 
but he cautiously avoids answering any of the charges that have 
been preferred against the American Government." In an editorial 
lacking its usual splenetic fire, the Courier answered Madison point 
by point and warned that war might continue despite England's 
surrender of the orders. The Morning Chronicle, while complain- 
ing that the Americans had acted precipitately and objecting that 
"there is, in Mr. MADISONPs paper, a querulous spirit, which 
betrays more of the littleness of the lawyer than the enlarged and 
national indignation of a Statesman," let its chief criticism fall 
upon the ministry. The Chronicle asserted "that our mode of pro- 
ceeding towards America has been most irritating to her, as well 
as most injurious to ourselves that the charge against us, of obsti- 
nate perseverance in error, from pride rather than conviction, is 
just ... and that we have, in truth, more reason to impute 
to our own imbecile Councils, all the calamities that may spring 
from this unnatural war, than to the influence of the French on 
the councils of America." The Caledonian Mercury and the Times 
agreed that, with the orders repealed, impressment was too "paltry 
an affair for two great nations to go to war about." Madison's mes- 
sage, the Times stated, "sums up all her grievances against us 5 
and to speak candidly, she makes a fair shew." 2 Only later did 
humiliating naval defeats, the threat to Canada, and America's 
refusal to make peace after learning of the revocation of the orders 
ignite British anger against President Madison. 

No such mildness characterized the American reaction to the 
declaration of war. Many moderates, whatever their desires prior 
to June 1 8, quietly supported the war once it had come. The joyful 
celebration of war men and the strident complaint of Federalists 
made up for their silence. A drunken celebrant, driving Winfield 
Scott's gig, twice tipped the young officer into the ditch. Republican 

2 Brougham to Grey, Aug. 2, 1812, Henry Brougham, The Life and Times of 
Henry Lord Brougham (2 vols.j Edinburgh, 1871), II, 27-285 Baring to Brougham, 
Aug. i, 18125 ibid., II, 36-395 Sun (London), July 31, 18125 Courier (London), 
July 31, 18125 Morning Chronicle (London), July 31, 18125 Caledonian Mercury 
(Edinburgh), Aug. 3, 18125 Times, July 31, 1812. 

419 



<C THIS UNNATURAL WAR** 

centers like Richmond congratulated themselves on the impending 
"new harvest of political advantage and national glory." A Vir- 
ginian, assigning too much personal credit to the President, wrote 
him: "You have politically regenerated the nation, and washed 
out the stain in their national character, inflicted on it by England." 
A mass meeting at Germantown resolved to support the war, since 
"it hath pleased the Almighty Ruler of the universe to suffer the 
perfidious outrages of the British government to render it neces- 
sary, once more, for the American people to struggle for their 
'sovereignty and independence.' " In many New England sea- 
ports church bells tolled a dirge, shops closed, and ships' flags flew 
at half-mast. Bostonians hissed two prowar congressmen, and an- 
other was mobbed at Plymouth. The Connecticut Courant summed 
up the Federalist reaction, saying the war "was commenced in 
folly, it is proposed to be carried on with madness, and (unless 
speedily terminated) will end in ruin." 3 Many found consolation 
only in the conviction that it made Republican defeat certain. 

The mixed reaction in New York perhaps best characterized the 
national mood. The Evening Post bitterly criticized the adminis- 
tration, and Moses Austin's wife wrote him that war "has come 
like an Electrick shock upon the great part of the people who have 
been two sanguine, in regard to peace Measures." Mrs. Austin 
added that most people were prepared to unite behind the govern- 
ment, and another observer, after noting that the city overwhelm- 
ingly opposed war, added, "but there are not wanting those who 
rejoice." "Pepal here are more reasonable about the war measure 
than what I esspected," John Jacob Astor wrote to his friend Gal- 
latin, "& alltho many disapprove of the manner and time it was 
declared all agree that we have plenty cause." 4 The silent, nega- 

3 Wirt to Monroe, June 21, 1812, James Monroe MSS, Library of Congress j William 
Pope to Madison, July 10, 1812, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress j Aurora 
(Philadelphia), Aug. 12, 18125 Connecticut Courant (Hartford), June 30, 1812. 

4 New-York Evening Post, June 20, 1812; Maria A. Austin to Moses Austin, June 
23, 1812, Eugene C. Barker, ed., The Austin Papers, I, American Historical Associa- 
tion, Annual Report, zozo, Vol. II (Washing-ton, 1924), p. 2145 Arthur E. Roorbach 
to Livingston, June 24, 1812, Robert R. Livingston MSS, New- York Historical 
Society j Astor to Gallatin, June 27, 1812, Albert Gallatin MSS, New- York Historical 
Society. 

42O 



C *THIS UNNATURAL 



tive support extended to the government spoke volumes for the 
ineptitude of Congress and the President during the winter. 

Five weeks after the declaration of war America learned that 
the Orders in Council had been repealed. Noting particularly that 
Castlereagh had reserved the right to restore the system in May, 
1813, if French or American conduct so required, Madison inter- 
preted the development as a trick to turn America from war. War 
Hawk journals quickly shifted to impressment and indemnities 
for past seizures. Attacking Alexander Baring, one of America's 
best English friends, for saying the orders were America's only 
major complaint, the Lexington Reporter wrote that "we will take 
the liberty to inform him that whenever peace is made, he will find 
that the SCALPS and lives of the FARME[R]S in the western 
world will not again be abandoned to British savages, and that 
the liberty of our seamen will have some weight in the scale." The 
National Intelligencer soon quieted the Reporter's fears that the 
administration would be "deceived by this trap of our eternal 
enemies." On August 25 it contrasted conditional British repeal 
with the absolute revocation of the French edicts and added, "A 
public act of one belligerent, so deliberately framed, so worded, 
is in derogation from and violation of our standing neutral rights. 
A war against such inadmissible pretensions ... is a war for the 
freedom, sovereignty and independence of ... the American 
Union." "It should take more to make peace than to prevent war," 
Jefferson declared. "The sword once drawn, full justice must be 
done." 5 A concession which, if known in time, would have pre- 
vented war, utterly failed to move the two nations toward peace. 
The Americans raised their terms, and England angrily rejected 
what seemed an attempt at extortion. 

The war continued for two and a half years, and for nearly 150 
years it has challenged those who seek to explain its coming. Con- 
temporary Federalists found a simple explanation in alleged Re- 

5 Madison to Gallatin, Aug. 8, 1812, Henry Adams, ed., The Writings of Albert 
Gallatin (3 vols.j Philadelphia, 1879), I, 523-, Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), Aug. 23, 
i8i2j National Intelligencer (Washington), Aug. 25, 18125 Jefferson to Robert 
Wright, Aug. 8, 1812, Andrew A, Lipscomb and Albeit E. Bergh, eds., The Writings 
of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols.j Washington, 19031904), XIII, 184. 

421 



CC THIS UNNATURAL 



publican subserviency to France. A New York dominie declared 
God had brought on war so that the young republic might chastise 
the British government, "a despotic usurpation A superstitious 
combination of civil and ecclesiastic power A branch of the 
grand antichristian a^ostacy Erastian in its constitution and ad- 
ministration and Cruel in its policy." 6 Actually, neither God nor 
Napoleon seems an adequate explanation for the war, and historians 
have sought to establish the importance of more mundane influ- 
ences. 

Most nineteenth-century historians emphasized British outrages 
against American commerce. Admiral Mahan said that the orders 
"by their enormity dwarfed all previous causes of complaint, and 
with the question of impressment constituted a vital and irrecon- 
cilable body of dissent which dragged the two states into armed 
collision." Henry Adams apparently considered this maritime em- 
phasis inadequate, but, as Warren Goodman suggests in an able 
historiographical article, he modified rather than abandoned the 
traditional view, although he did hint that Canadian-directed im- 
perialism played a part. 7 Despite a dislike of Jefferson and Madi- 
son so bitter that he sometimes doctored the evidence, Adams' 
volumes remain the most complete, often the best written, and, 
when used with proper caution, the most useful survey of the entire 
period. After a lapse of some years, A. L. Burt reemphasized mari- 
time causes in a graceful summary of the era. 

For two decades before the appearance of Burt's work in 1 940, 
scholars sought to explain the motives of the West, the section 
that most unanimously supported war. Louis M. Hacker, then in 
a Marxist phase, suggested that a greedy desire for fertile Canadian 
farm land lay behind the fagade of arguments for national honor. 
Julius W. Pratt contradicted Hacker's position, largely by disprov- 
ing the central hypothesis, that there was no longer good agricul- 

e Alexander McLeod, A Scriptural View of the Character ', Causes and Ends of the 
Present War (New York, 1815), p. 97. 

7 Alfred T. Mahan, Sea Power in Its Relation to the War of x8 12 (2 vols. j Boston, 
1905), I, 2j Warren H. Goodman, "The Origins of the War of 1812: a Survey of 
Changing Interpretations," Mississippi Valley Historical Review, XXVIII (194.1 
1942), 173. Including texts and general histories, Goodman examined forty-three 
treatments of the subject. 

422 



CC THIS UNNATURAL W A R ' > 

tural land on the American side of the frontier. 8 Then, following 
a line already sketched by Dice R. Anderson, Pratt in his turn 
suggested a bargain between frontiersmen and Republicans of 
the North, who desired Canada, and Southerners, who wanted to 
absorb Florida. Sectional jealousies, Pratt concluded, broke down 
this alliance only after it had brought on war. Pratt found it diffi- 
cult to demonstrate a real bargain, and there is reason to believe 
that the South did not almost universally desire the acquisition 
of Florida, as he maintained. But not without merit is Pratt's thesis 
that Western Anglophobia was stirred by the menace of Indian 
warfare believed to be inspired by Canadian authorities. 9 Finally, 
George R. Taylor put forward the argument that the West, eco- 
nomically overextended and suffering from depression from 1808 
onward, blamed its troubles on the restrictive edicts of Europe and 
advocated war to break down this barrier to prosperity. In April, 
1812, Augustus J. Foster anticipated this interpretation: "The 
Western States having nothing to lose by war, . . . [are] clamor- 
ous for it, ... being likely even to gain in the Exports of their 
produce while the exportation of that of the Atlantic shall be im- 
peded." 10 Moreover, there was always the chance that war, or even 
the threat of war, would drive England to surrender the orders. 

Hacker billed his suggestion a a conjecture," and Pratt and 
Taylor specifically noted that they were dealing, in the former's 
words, "with one set of causes only." Still, despite Pratt's coordinate 
interest in Southern ambitions for Florida, the researches of these 
scholars concentrated attention upon the West. The war came to 
bear the mark of the West, although only nine congressmen 
a mere one of each nine voting for war came from Western states. 
Taylor's suggestion that the West sought war to regain an export 

8 Louis M. Hacker, "Western Land Hunger and the War of 1812: a Conjecture," 
Mississippi Valley Historical Review, X (1923-1924), 365-395 passim; Julius W. 
Pratt, "Western Aims in the War of 1812," ibid., XII (1925-1926), 45-50 an d passim. 

9 Dice R. Anderson, "The Insurgents of 1811," American Historical Association, 
Annual Report, iprx, I (Washington, 1913), 167-1765 Julius W. Pratt, Expansionists 
of 1812 (New York, 1925), pp. 12-14 and passim. 

10 George R. Taylor, "Agrarian Discontent in the Mississippi Valley Preceding 
the War of 1812," Journal of Political Economy, XXXIX (1931), 471-505 passim; 
Foster #28 to Castlereagh, April 23, 1812, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 
Office, FO 5/85. 



C< THIS UNNATURAL W A R > * 

market might just as legitimately have been applied to other agri- 
cultural areas of the country, particularly the South, as Goodman, 
Burt, and Margaret K. Latimer have recently noted. 11 Studies 
of Western motivation, despite the caveats of their authors, have 
distorted the image of events leading to the War of 1812. 

In his biography of the President, Irving Brant attempts to 
refurbish Madison's reputation. Attention is so narrowly concen- 
trated on the President and on events with which he dealt that 
many important developments in Europe and America are slighted. 
Brant clearly shows the President's technical diplomatic ability. 
He does not equally clearly disprove Henry Adams' contention 
that, by emphasizing America's right to demand repeal of the 
orders as a consequence of alleged French repeal, 

Madison had been so unfortunate in making the issue that on his own 
showing no sufficient cause of war seemed to exist. . . . Great Britain 
was able to pose before the world in the attitude of victim to a conspiracy 
between Napoleon and the United States to destroy the liberties of Europe. 
Such inversion of the truth passed ordinary bounds, and so real was Madi- 
son's diplomatic mismanagement that it paralyzed one-half the energies 
of the American people. 12 

As Brant claims, Madison recognized that peace might become 
impossibly costly, but in 1 8 1 2 he abandoned with great reluctance 
what Samuel Flagg Bemis has perceptively called his "strategy of 
auctioning the great belligerents out of their respective systems 
of retaliation." 13 Perhaps Napoleon and Perceval acted foolishly 
in rejecting the bids Madison put forward during the auction 5 
perhaps the President calculated more accurately the mutual bene- 
fits of accommodation. Still, it is one of the supreme functions of 

11 Goodman, o. cit., p. 1 84 j Alfred L. Burt, The United, States, Great Britain, 
and British North America from the Revolution to the Establishment of Peace after 
the War of 1812 (New Haven, 1940), pp. 306-307$ Margaret K. Latimer, "South 
Carolina a Protagonist of the War of 1812," American Historical Review, LXI 
(i955-*95 6 )> 9 I 4-9*9 -passim. 

12 Henry Adams, History of the United States during the Administrations of Jeffer- 
son and Madison (9 vols.j New York, 18891891), VI, 398-^399. 

13 Samuel F. Bemis, John Quincy Adams and the Foundations of American Foreign 
Policy (New York, 1949), p. 181. 

424 



* C THIS UNNATURAL WAR >> 

the statesman to weigh the intangibles as well as the tangibles, to 
expect illogical and prejudiced reactions along with coolly calcu- 
lated ones. When Irving Brant declares that "President Madison 
to be successful . . . needed to deal with men whose understand- 
ing matched his own," 14 he really confesses the political failure of 
his hero. 

Madison never firmly controlled the Congress 5 he often lost 
command of his own Cabinet; frequently he seemed to drift rather 
than to direct policy. John Adams, fiercely challenged during the 
disintegration of Federalism, at least remained firm. In the spring 
of 1812 the congressional delegate from Mississippi Territory 
wrote that "the Executive is much censured by all parties for the 
tardiness of its advances to meet the tug of war, and the tenure of 
Mr. Madison's continuance in the presidential chair, in my opinion, 
depends upon the success of our hostile preparations." Yet the 
President did not forcefully support the cause of those whose loy- 
alty had to be preserved for the impending election, nor did he 
speak out in favor of a course that might have maintained the peace 
he cherished. He reigned but he did not rule. After the declaration 
of war Jonathan Roberts wrote: "The world are pleased to sup- 
pose I am on good terms at the White House which by the way is 
no advantage for the cry of mad dog is not more fatal to its victim 
than the cry of executive connexion here." lo Madison won reelec- 
tion, but he was the least respected victor the country had yet 
known. 

The war came, not because of the President, but despite him. 
The war came, not for any single reason, but from the interplay 
of many. The nation did not want war, and surely it did not embark 
gleefully on a great crusade. Tired of the self-flagellation and the 
disgrace that had marked the years since 1805, propelled by the 
fear of ridicule for inconsistency and by an honest interest in the 
nation's honor, a sufficient number of congressmen allowed them- 
selves to support war. Justification for a declaration of war was 

14 Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), p. 483. 

15 George Poindexter to William C. Mead, April 10, 1812, Bernard Mayo, ed., 
Henry Clay, Spokesman of the New West (Boston, 1937) , p. 5125 Roberts to Matthew 
Roberts, July i, 1812, Jonathan Roberts MSS, Historical Society of Pennsylvania. 

425 



THIS UNNATURAL W A R * ' 

not wanting, and the long-term results were probably beneficial. 
Still, the war came just when the United States might have en- 
joyed without a struggle the immense benefits of the neutrality 
in which so much Christian forbearance (or cowardice) had been 
invested. Neither side sought the War of 1 8 1 2, and in the short 
run it was tragically unnecessary. 

The United States did not go to war to add new states to the 
Union. A very few ebullient men from the North may have desired 
this. For sectional reasons the South and the West opposed it. A 
few advance agents of manifest destiny believed, as the Reverend 
McLeod put it in 1815, that the war was "a contest, not only to 
prevent the recolonization of these states, but also in the Providence 
of God for extending the principles of representative democracy 
the blessings of liberty, and the rights of self-government, among 
the colonies of Europe." Even McLeod counted more on the im- 
perialism of ideas than on military conquest. For most Americans 
Canada was but a means to an end, "a blow that might have given 
a speedier termination to the controversy," as Niles put it. At 
most, the occupation of the British provinces seemed the best means 
to reduce the enemy's power. A loyal Republican paper in Virginia 
commented: 

The great advantages to be derived from the acquisition of those possessions 
will not accrue so much from the tenure of them as a conquest, . . . but 
from the very important consequences which their loss will occasion to Brit- 
ain; and among these consequences we may reckon the suppression of a 
great deal of smuggling, the curtailment ... of the British fur trade and 
the disseverance of the West India Islands from Great Britain. 16 

So feeble was the desire for permanent incorporation of Canada 
within the Union that within six weeks after the destruction of 
British power in Upper Canada at the battle of the Thames in 1 8 13, 
the Western militia had returned to their homes. 

From the opening o,f the war session, both supporters and ene- 
mies of war proclaimed that an attack upon Canada would be the 

^McLeod, op. a/., p. 2205 Nile? Weekly Register (Baltimore), March 28, 1812$ 
Virginia Argus (Richmond), Nov. n, 1811. 

426 



* C THIS UNNATURAL 



principal American offensive. Congress ostensibly tailored the new 
army to the requirements of this campaign. All the Republicans., 
at least, believed that even the slightest effort would result in 
victory. "In four weeks from the time that a declaration of war is 
heard on our frontier/ 3 John C. Calhoun declared, a the whole of 
Upper and a part of Lower Canada will be in our possession." 
When Federalists complained that their opponents sought to es- 
tablish a standing army that might menace American liberties^ 
Trenton's True American replied, a lt will be a moving, fighting^ 
conquering) army and as soon as its duty is done, it will be dis- 
banded." 1T Had Bermuda or Jamaica been vulnerable to attack 
by a flotilla of Jefferson's gunboats, the War Hawks would have 
been equally satisfied to invade them. 

Even Indian warfare did not inspire important demands for 
Canadian conquest in the winter of 1811-12. "Much of that re- 
sentment against the British, which prevailed so strongly in the 
western states," a Kentucky historian of the war stated, ". . . may 
fairly be attributed to this source." Even this Western chronicler, 
however, declared that the Orders in Council became more intoler- 
able than any other source of complaint against England. 18 After 
Tippecanoe desultory warfare took place along the frontier, but 
most Indian tribes remained at peace until General Hull surren- 
dered his army to Isaac Brock in the summer of 1812. Although 
Grundy and the Lexington Reporter remained irate, the Indian 
menace played a comparatively minor part in congressional debates 
until the very end of the session, when all complaints against 
Britain were being brought together to support a declaration of 
war. At that time congressmen emphasized Britain's interference 
in American affairs rather than the material consequences to one 
section. 

The most important, most justified American complaints against 
England sprang from Britain's exercise of her maritime power. 

17 Annals, iath Cong., ist sess., p. 13975 True American (Trenton), May iS, 
1812. Later in the war, however, many Americans, including Madison and Monroe, 
were tempted by the dream of incorporating Canada into the United States. 

18 Robert McAfee, History of the Late War in the Western Country (Lexington, 
Ky., 1816), pp. 2, 7. 

427 



f< THIS UNNATURAL 



Substantively, through the loss of seamen, ships, and cargoes, 
America suffered greatly from impressment, blockades, and the 
Orders in Council. The sovereign spirit and the self-respect of the 
American nation suffered perhaps even more every time a seaman 
was removed from beneath the Stars and Stripes or a merchant 
vessel was haled to trial before an admiralty court that paid scant 
heed to international law. The penalties of neutrality are often 
dear, and perhaps only the weak, the phlegmatic, or the noble are 
capable of enduring them. Jefferson and Madison might fit into 
one or the other of these categories. Ultimately the nation felt 
taxed beyond endurance. However necessary to British prosecution 
of the contest with Napoleon impressment and attacks upon neutral 
commerce might be, they finally brought war with America. For- 
tune rather than justice postponed the outbreak of war beyond the 
gloomiest days of Britain's struggle, when American entry might 
well have played an important part. 

Impressment, Frank A. Updyke has observed, was "the most 
aggravating and the most persistent" American grievance. By 
1812 the press gangs had been at work for twenty years. In many 
instances probably even the majority the British forcibly re- 
called a king's subject to his allegiance rather than kidnapped an 
American. More often than was generally admitted, the Admiralty 
released mariners mistakenly seized. Still, impressment formed an 
ultimately intolerable insult to national sovereignty; When, during 
the war, the Federalist legislature of Massachusetts undertook an 
investigation to show that very few seamen had been impressed, 
John Quincy Adams angrily and accurately declared the question 
irrelevant: 

No Nation can be Independent which suffers her Citizens to be stolen from 
her at the discretion of the Naval or military Officers of another. . . . The 
State, by the social compact is bound to protect every one of its Citizens, and 
the enquiry how many of them a foreign Nation may be allowed to rob 
with impunity is itself a humiliation to which I blush to see that the Legis- 
lature of my native state could defend. . . . The principle for which we 
are now struggling is of a higher and more sacred nature than any ques- 

428 



< THIS UNNATURAL 



tion about taxation can involve. It is the principle of personal liberty, and 
of every social right. 19 

Failures of American arms and a European peace that halted im- 
pressment caused Adams, along with Madison and Monroe, to 
accept a peace silent on impressment. In principle, however, he was 
correct. America might well have gone to war on this issue, perhaps 
at the time of the Chesapeake affair. 

Although officially the American government made very little 
of impressment from 1 808 onward, the people could not forget it. 
During the war session, and particularly in the spring, impressment 
aroused more and more heat. Niles* Register, which began publi- 
cation in 1811, rallied opinion on this issue. "Accursed be the 
American government, and every individual in it," an imprecation 
ran, "who . . . shall agree to make peace with Great Britain, 
until ample provision shall be made for our impressed seamen, and 
security shall be given for the prevention of such abominable out- 
rages in the future."! A Quid and a Republican who hoped to avoid 
war told Foster this was the most ticklish problem to explain to 
their constituents, and even the stanchly antiwar senator, Thomas, 
Worthington, found impressment almost impossible to tolerate. 
"He says, 15 Foster wrote in his diary, "he would rather live on a 
Crust in the Interior than live degraded." Foster, who repeatedly 
suggested that modification of the orders would prevent a declara- 
tion of war, nevertheless recognized the renewed importance ac- 
corded to impressment*; On April 23 he wrote, "Very inflammatory 
paragraphs and letters on the subject . . . have lately been circu- 
lated in the American papers, and as the causes of war become more 
closely canvassed, that arising out of the practice of impl^anent 
seems to be dwelt upon with considerable vehemence." 2 f When 
war approached, the War Hawks had a singularly effective propa- 

19 Frank A. Updyke, The Diplomacy of the War of 1812 (Baltimore, 1915), p. 3, 
Adams to Plumer, Aug. 13, 1813, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), Massachusetts 
Historical Society, Vol. CXXXIX. 

20 Ntles* Register, April 18, 1812 (italics omitted) 5 journal entries, April 19, 22, 
May 24, 1812, Foster journal, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library of Congress 5 Foster 
#28 to Castlereagh, April 23, 1812, FO 5/86. 

429 



C< THIS UNNATURAL 



ganda point in this violation o the rights of individual Americans 
who deserved better of their country. ; 

Both the British government anc}/the Federalists later com- 
plained that the President only resuscitated the impressment issue 
after the Orders in Council had disappeared. They pointed out 
that, particularly in the Erskine negotiations, the administration 
had allowed impressment to pass in silence. In 1813 Lord Castle- 
reagh described it as "a cause of war, now brought forward as such 
for the first time." 21 These criticisms showed only that the admin- 
istration had been backward in defending the rights of citizens, or 
that the President and Congress had been willing for a time to 
exchange the kidnaping of Americans for the benefits of neutrality. 
Neither Lord Castlereagh nor Timothy Pickering, who as secretary 
of state had himself vehemently protested the practice, should have 
been surprised that the American people considered impressment 
an insult. 

Even more than impressment, with which congressmen and 
newspaper editors often coupled them, the Orders in Council 
showed Britain's contemptuous disdain for American protests 
against her use of sea power. The forcible enlistment of seamen 
could be expressed in dramatic human terms. The Orders in Coun- 
cil more massively and more selfishly assaulted the United States. 
Their material cost was impressive. Although the number of 
seizures actually fell after 1808, the year beginning in October, 
1811, saw an increase of nearly 50 per cent. The orders and the 
Essex case had long since reduced the reexport trade to a shadow 
of its former size. After a spurt stimulated by Macon's Bill #2 
and the Cadore letter, the export of native American produce fell 
drastically after the spring of 181 1. By far the greatest proportion 
of this decline came in exports to Britain, particularly because re- 
turn cargoes were forbidden and the United Kingdom suffered 
from glut. 22 Agriculturists and plantation owners, some shipowners, 
and the average congressman ascribed the decline to Britain's 

21 Hansard, XXIV, 371. 

22 Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals . . . of the United States of America (Phila- 
delphia, 1818), pp. 79-80, 93, 112-113. 

430 



**THIS UNNATURAL WAR >J 

Orders in Council, which prevented Americans, from developing 
the presumably lucrative Continental market. At the same time, 
particularly because the British permitted their own subjects to 
trade with Europe under license, the Orders in Council seemed 
humiliating. Since at least November, 1807, the English had 
presumed to legislate not only for their own people but also for 
the commercial world. Economic necessity and national right alike 
cried out against the Orders in Council. 

Everyone in Washington during the months from November 
to June placed the Orders in Council at the head of the list of 
American grievances. Louis Serurier and Augustus Foster, Feder- 
alists and Republicans were in agreement. When the British minis- 
ter asked Chauncey Goodrich, a Federalist senator, "what was re- 
quired of us by Men of fair Views, he replied, take off the Orders 
in Council and come to some Arrangement about Impressment." 
In November President Madison considered British maritime 
policy the transcendent issue between the two countries. Porter's 
report declared that the orders "went to the subversion of our 
national independence" and were "sapping the foundation of our 
prosperity." 23 Throughout the winter congressmen assailed the 
orders, drowning out the "whip-poor-will cry" for Canada of 
which John Randolph spoke. Repeal, Madison noted years later, 
would have postponed war and led to renewed negotiations on 
impressment "with fresh vigor & hopes, under the auspices of suc- 
cess in the case of the orders in council." The orders, he told Jared 
Sparks in 1 830, were the only issue sturdy enough to bear a decla- 
ration of war. 24 

The strength of this issue depended in part upon the reinforce- 
ment provided by impressment and other grievances, the flying 
buttresses of the central structure. Had the orders stood alone as 
a British challenge, war would probably not have come in 1812. 
But they became the key to the drive for war. No other factor, 

28 Journal entry, May 18, 1812, Foster MSSj Madison to Adams, private, Nov. 15, 
* 8 1 1, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 
19001910), VIII, 166167. 

24 Madison to Wheaton, Feb. 26-27, 1827, Hunt, o<p. cit. y IX, 2735 journal entry, 
April 1 8 [-2 3], 1830, Jared Sparks MSS, Houghton Library, Harvard University. 

431 



"THIS UNNATURAL 



not even impressment, which most directly affected Northeast- 
erners, struck all sections so impartially. Not even impressment 
exceeded the orders as a threat to America's position as a sovereign 
power. The Orders in Council were four years old when the 
Twelfth Congress met, going on five when America declared war. 
Why this delay? A natural desire to escape war partly explains 
it. Unreal faith in the power of trade boycotts, more justified ex- 
pectations from the Erskine agreement, optimism engendered by 
the Cadore letter, hope that the Prince of Wales would replace 
his insane father's ministers with more friendly men, the antici- 
pated impact of American measures of preparedness in Great Brit- 
ain all these counseled delay- When war ultimately came in 
June, 1812, the Orders in Council were the central issue. The 
requirements of consistency and a growing realization that Ameri- 
can honor had been nearly exhausted were the immediate precipi- 
tants. 

Since at least 1806 the United States government, and more 
particularly Republican congressmen, had proclaimed that Amer- 
ica would not settle for whatever neutral trade the belligerents 
chose to let her enj oy. Profitable as such trade might be (and it 
often was extremely rewarding), the United States would demand 
its rights. Of course Jefferson, and especially Madison, did not 
demand utter surrender from their opponents, and they did not 
press certain claims they considered comparatively insignificant. 
In principle, however, they insisted that Britain and France recog- 
nize American rights and tailor their policies to them. Commercial 
pressure failed, political bargaining did not succeed, pleas for 
justice rebounded hollowly across the Atlantic. Still America main- 
tained her claims, aiid the only remaining, weapon to secure them 
was military power. The War Hawk Congress initiated prepared- 
ness, and the administration discreetly encouraged it, in the hope 
that England would surrender to this weapon what she had denied 
to Boycotts, bargaining, and complaint. 

Once efkbarked upon this course it became almost impossible to 
turn back. jMtany who voted for military measures without wantiaag 
war found it difficult to recede from the ground they had taken. 

432 



CC THIS UNNATURAL 



The iOjOOO-man army proposed by the House of Representatives 
had an ostensible military purpose, but its supporters valued it 
chiefly as a demonstration of American determination. "We are 
not at war yet tho j David R. Williams hopes in god we soon shall 
be. Till we are at war I shall not go above 10,000 additional 
troops/ 7 Jonathan Roberts wrote in December. As time passed, 
Roberts became more and more bellicose. In February he wrote, 
"There seems to be no disposition to relax our war measures but I 
believe every body would be exceeding glad to remain at peace." 
A month later he stated, "I am well convinced we have no hope 
of peace but by vigorous preparations for War," but he added 
that he was ready to vote for war. 25 As the spring passed, Roberts 
found his Quaker principles weakening, and he attended meetings 
very infrequently. In May and June this man, who had come to 
Washington determined that affairs should be forced to a solution 
and yet still hopeful war could be avoided, found himself more 
and more firmly committed to the cause of the War Hawks. The 
logic of the situation carried the Pennsylvanian and many of his 
colleagues forward. 

In May John Randolph declared that, although many members 
of the majority would not follow the same course if they had it to 
do over again, "they have advanced to the brink of a precipice, and 
not left themselves room to turn." John Smilie admitted as much, 
arguing that while he would have preferred a further attempt at 
commercial coercion he now felt it necessary to go on toward war, 
since "if we now recede we shall be a reproach among nations." 
Willis Alston of North Carolina told Foster in March that Con- 
gress "should have originally taken another Course, now too late, 
it would have been better to protest against the belligerents & let 
Qommerce thrive, this should have been done from the Beginning." 
Alston voted with the War Hawks on every important roll call. 
Speaker Clay and his supporters counted on and made frequent, 
effective reference to consistency in the closing months of the 
session. ^After the pledges we have made, and the stand we have 

25 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, Dec. 20, 1811, Feb. 3, March 2, 1812, Roberts 
MSS. 

433 



''THIS UNNATURAL 



taken/' Clay asked his colleagues, a are we now to cover ourselves 
with shame and indelible disgrace by retreating from the measures 
and ground we have taken?" Remembering the reputation of the 
Tenth Congress, many representatives felt that the answer was 
as obvious as Clay pictured it. Thus legislators who were really 
"scarecrow men" came to support a declaration of war. James A. 
Bayard, one Federalist who had foreseen this danger from the 
beginning, chided a friend for his shortsightedness, saying, "You 
have thought the thing all along a jest & I have no doubt in the 
commencement it was so, but jests sometimes become serious & end 
in earnest." 26 So it was in 1 8 1 2. 

Consistency in congressmen, in a party, or in an administration 
became national honor when applied to the country as a whole. 
Since the acquisition of Louisiana in 1803, America had endured 
a steady diet of diplomatic humiliation. Jefferson, Madison, and 
the Congresses of their time attempted to reverse European policy 
by applying economic pressure. This tactic failed because Congress 
lacked staying power and Republican leaders underestimated the 
strength of emotions abroad. Defeats continued. Napoleon's an- 
nouncement of repeal merely worsened the situation, for his cynical 
contempt and the gullibility of the American administration soon 
became apparent. Republicans had jeopardized the national char- 
acter and the reputation of the United States j they had created 
a situation from which war was almost the only honorable escape 5 
they had encouraged England, where unfortunately such encour- 
agement was too little needed, to act almost as though Lord Corn- 
wallis had won the battle of Yorktown. a We have suffered and 
suffered until our forbearance has been pronounced cowardice and 
want of energy," a friend wrote Jonathan Roberts. Although talk 
of honor perhaps came too easily to the lips of some patriotic orators, 
the danger was real. When John C. Calhoun asserted that "if we 
submit to the prentensions of England, now openly avowed, the 
independence of this nation is lost. . . . This is the second strug- 

26 Annals y i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 1403, 1592* journal entry, March 18, 1812, 
Foster MSS 5 Calhoun to Virgil Maxcy, May 2, 1812, Robert L. Meriwether, ed., 
The Papers of John C. Calhoun, 1 (Columbia, S.C., 1959), 1015 Annals, i2th Cong., 
ist sess., p. 15885 Bayard to Rodney, June u, 1812, James A. Bayard Letterbook of 
Letters to Caesar A. Rodney, New York Public Library. 

434 



<C THIS UNNATURAL W A R * > 

gle for our liberty," he scarcely exaggerated. When a Republican 
Fourth of July meeting at Boston toasted "The War The second 
and last struggle for national freedom A final effort to rescue 
from the deep the drowning honor of our country/ 3 the sentiment 
was apt. 27 

In his first annual message after the outbreak of war, President 
Madison declared: 

To have shrunk tinder such circumstances from manly resistance would 
have been a degradation blasting our best and proudest hopes; it would 
have struck us from the high rank where the virtuous struggle of our fa- 
thers had placed us, and have betrayed the magnificent legacy which we 
hold in trust for future generations. It would have acknowledged that on 
the element which forms three-fourths of the globe we inhabit, and where 
all independent nations have equal and common rights, the Americans 
were not an independent people, but colonists and vassals. 

A year after the war ended, Henry Clay similarly stressed the 
theme of national honor and self-respect. "We had become the 
scorn of foreign Powers, and the contempt of our own citizens," 
he said. " . . . Let any man look at the degraded condition of this 
country before the war; the scorn of the universe, the contempt 
of ourselves. . . . What is our present situation? Respectability 
and character abroad security and confidence at home. . . . our 
character an$ Constitutions are placed on a solid basis, never to 
be shaken. "(Tears later, Augustus J. Foster philosophically wrote: 
"This war.^us certainly productive of much ill-blood between 
England and America, but in the opinion of the Speaker, Mr. Clay, 
and his friends it was as necessary to America as a duel is to a youiig 
naval officer to prevent his being bullied and elbowed in society;. 
. . . JBaleful as the war has been, I must confes^vthat I think in 
this rfespect something has been gained by it." T/The President, 
the Speaker, and the envoy, who stood at the cenfehof affairs dur- 
ing the war session, effectively summarized the one unanswerable 

2T Thomas J. Rogers to Roberts, March 22, 1812, Roberts MSS; Annals, i2th 
Cong., ist sess., p. 13995 Independent Chronicle (Boston), July 6, 1812. 

28 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 5205 Annals, *4th Cong., ist sess., pp. 777, 7835 
Richard B. Davis, ed., Jeffersonian America: Notes on the United States of America 
. . , by Sir Augustus John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954)^ PP- 4-5- 

435 



"THIS UNNATURAL WAR** 

argument for war. All the insults suffered by the United States, 
even the most important o them all, the Orders in Council, posed 
a greater threat in the realm of the spirit than in the world of tlie 
acp6\intant and the merchant, the seaman and the frontiersman. 
(That war became imperative in June, 1812, does not mean that 
the American people desired it or that it could not have been 
avoided by greater wisdom in earlier years. Castlereagh's state- 
ment, in 1813, that "Great Britain has throughout acted towards 
the United States of America, with a spirit of amity, forbearance, 
and conciliation," 29 was simply preposterous. While the policy of 
England was far less rigid than Americans often suggested, the 
self-righteous spirit of messianism engendered by the Napoleonic 
wars and a woeful underestimation of the price of American good 
will combined to prevent a reconciliation Jefferson and Madison 
eagerly desired. In America, most of the Federalists served their 
country ill, for, blinded by their own hatred of Napoleon and 
their inveterate contempt for the politicians who had displaced 
them, they sabotaged peaceful American resistance to British out- 
rages and repeatedly declared that the Republicans lacked the 
fortitude to go to wai^. Roberts wrote in his memoirs, "There had 
all along been an idea' cherished by the opposition, that the majority 
would not have nerve enough to meet war. This I believe, mainly 
induced Britain to persist in her aggressions. If she could have been 
made to believe . . . that we were a'united people, & would act 
as such, war might have been avoided. 55 ; The Independent Chron- 
icle complained with a good deal of justice, "In every measure of 
government, the federal faction have rallied in opposition, and 
urged the Ministry to persist in their Orders. They forced the 
United States to the alternative, either to surrender their inde- 
pendence , or maintain It by War." (3 American disunion was clear 
enough, the desire to avoid war quite obvious. Despite the tempo- 
rary and transparent policy advocated by Quincy, the Federalists 
contributed to that disunion and to British stubbornness. 

29 Hansard, XXIV, 364. 

30 Memoirs (photostat), II, 14, Roberts MSSj Independent Chronicle, July 16, 
1812. 

436 



C< THIS UNNATURAL 



Still, the Republican chieftains must bear primary responsibility 
for the war and the factionalism that made it an almost fatal test 
of the sturdiness of the nation they themselves had done so much 
to build. Whereas Washington and Adams kept objectives and 
means in harmony with one another, their successors often com- 
mitted the United States to seek absolute right with inadequate 
weapons. Compromise, when sought, was usually offered at an 
impossible time. The justice of American demands is nearly un- 
deniable, but the two Virginians, who prided themselves on the 
coolness of their logic, failed to perceive that justice was not a 
weapon in itself. They provided it with insufficient support, and 
they expected warring powers to view collateral problems with 
the same coolness that America exhibited. Economic warfare rested 
upon a rigid, mechanical conception of international trade. Al- 
though it was, of course, felt by the belligerents, it proved far more 
harmful to America, economically and morally, and served chiefly 
to convince Europe of the cowardice of the United States. 

t The two presidents secured not one important diplomatic objec- 
tive after 1803. They scarcely challenged the development of 
factionalism within the Republican party, factionalism that de- 
prived Congress of any real sense of direction. They provided 
public opinion with far too little leadership. They |il*d their fol- 
lowers often spoke loudly and carried no stick at all.; When at last 
a small group of congressmen declared that the time for half meas- 
ures had ended and carried a majority with them down the road 
toward war, neither Great Britain nor th^xAmerican people be- 
lieved the destination would be reached., 1 Thus British concession 
was discouraged and national union miae impossible. In a state 
of military and psychological unpreparedness, the United States 
of America embarked upon a, war to recover the self-respect de- 
stroyed by Republican leaders. Old John Taylor of Caroline wrote 
to the Secretary of State on the'&ay of the declaration of war, "May 
God send you a safe deliverance." 31 

81 Taylor to Monroe, June 18, 1812, William E. Dodd, ed., "Letters of John 
Taylor, of Caroline County, Virginia," Jo An P. Branch Papers, II (Richmond, 1908), 
34*- 

437 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

This work examines a controversial period in American history as well as 
aspects of the major European war of the nineteenth century. Available 
materials are so multitudinous that a mere listing might conceal the most 
important. American and British manuscripts and contemporary publica- 
tions are the principal foundations of this work, and the most important 
new contributions have come from these primary sources. Finally, the 
student of Anglo-American relations in this period is particularly fortunate 
in the bibliographical aids available to him. The excellent basic guide edited 
by Samuel F. Bemis and Grace G. GrifHn (Guide to the Diplomatic History 
of the United States [Washington, 1935]) has been supplemented and 
in a sense brought up to date, at least so far as secondary materials are con- 
cerned, by the masterful bibliographical article of Warren H. Goodman 
("The Origins of the War of 1812: a Survey of Changing Interpreta- 
tions," Mississippi Valley Historical Review y XXVIII [1941-1942], 1 71- 
186) and the more recent Harvard Guide (Oscar Handlin et aL y eds., 
Harvard, Guide to American History [Cambridge, 1954]). Consequently 
this note attempts no historiographical essay and singles out only those ma- 
terials, principally contemporary, which have been especially useful. The 
footnotes indicate books and articles helpful at particular points, either for 
fact or interpretation. 

The three most important studies of the entire period from 1805 to 
1812 are those of Henry Adams, Alfred L. Burt, and Irving Brant. No 
student of these years can fail to owe a great debt to Henry Adams, History 
of the United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison 
(9 vols.; New York, 18891891), especially Vols. Ill VI. Adams is 
almost unreservedly hostile toward the Republican leaders and, as Irving 
Brant has shown, is not above shading the evidence in a fashion modern 
historians would consider improper. Although Adams worked more deeply 
among British manuscripts than any who have followed after him, his 
attitude toward England is colored with the nationalism of the period in 
which he wrote. Nevertheless, in the vigor of his judgments, in his capacity 
for magnificent prose (amidst, may it be said, extremely lengthy quotations 
and paraphrases), and in the breadth of his vision, Henry Adams still chal- 
lenges those who follow him. Alfred L. Burt, The United States y Great 
Britain, and British North America from the Revolution to the Establish- 

439 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

-jnent of Peace ajter the War of 1812 (New Haven, 1940), covers a longer 
period in far less space than Adams. Burt's work, with a few exceptions 
on the British side, rests primarily upon printed materials, both primary 
and secondary. His judgments are judicious, but Burt perhaps fails to cap- 
ture the emotional fire of the period. The same criticism cannot be made 
of Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953) 
and James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), for Brant is 
a strong partisan of the Republicans and particularly of Madison himself. 
Like those of Adams, Brant's verdicts are provocative, and many of them 
are particularly useful in forcing a reconsideration of the usual assumption 
that Madison was a weak or even incompetent secretary and president. 
Based as they are upon an intensive study of primary materials available 
in the United States, including copies of British diplomatic correspondence, 
Brant's volumes provide a great deal of information available nowhere 
else; on the British side, because of the intensive focus upon Madison, they 
are less satisfactory. I frequently disagree with Brant, but his viewpoint, 
like that of Adams, cannot be ignored by anyone attempting to untangle 
the threads of this period. 

Because of serious errors and omissions in American State Papers > Foreign 
Relations, Vols. II-III (Washington, 1832-1833), the Department of 
State's official correspondence must be consulted in the original or on micro- 
film available from the National Archives. The following departmental 
files have been used: Diplomatic Instructions, All Countries, Vols. VI- 
VIII; Despatches, Great Britain, Vols. XII-XVIII (including one un- 
numbered volume); Despatches, France, Vols. X-XIII; and Consular 
Letters, London, Vol. IX. The latter contains much information on im- 
pressment and the campaign against the Orders in Council. Annals of Con- 
gress, 9th Congress-I2th Congress (Washington, 1852-1853), do not 
fully reflect congressional sentiment because they were pasted together years 
later from newspaper accounts, Senate debates often went unreported, and 
the Federalists too often fluctuated between extravagant criticism and tacti- 
cal silence. Nevertheless, they are an invaluable source. 

Fortunately, the papers of the leading Republicans Jefferson, Madi- 
son, Monroe, and Gallatin are all readily available. The chief collections 
of the correspondence of the first three are at the Library of Congress, 
much Madison material being in the William C. Rives Collection. In 
addition there is Jefferson correspondence in the Massachusetts Historical 
Society (Coolidge Collection), extremely valuable Monroe manuscripts 
(particularly for the negotiation of 1806) in the New York Public Library, 

440 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

and a small and unimportant Madison collection at the same place. Gal- 
latin's papers are in the New- York Historical Society. These collections 
displace the printed selections, particularly because the incoming corre- 
spondence is often especially useful. No major collection of Robert Smith's 
papers is available or has been published, although the Maryland His- 
torical Society has a small Robert and William Smith collection. 

Although William Pinkney's papers have disappeared, the other Ameri- 
can representatives at London left valuable collections. In addition to the 
Monroe MSS, there is an important series of John Spear Smith letters in 
the Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress, and useful material in the 
Jonathan Russell MSS, Brown University Library. 

The Library of Congress has the manuscripts of at least a score of 
Republican figures. Some, notably the papers of Joseph H. Nicholson, Wil- 
son C. Nicholas, and William Plumer, are extremely helpful. Unfortu- 
nately, other collections (for example, those of Henry Clay, George W. 
Campbell, and Thomas Worthington) are extremely small. Two recent 
publications, Robert L. Meriwether, ed., The Papers of John C+ Calhoun, 
Vol. I (Columbia, S.C., 1959), and James F. Hopkins, ed.. The Papers of 
Henry Clay, Vol. I (Lexington, Ky., 1959), bring together the very 
limited political correspondence of these two men. The DeWitt Clinton 
MSS at Columbia University and the Thomas McKean Papers at the His- 
torical Society of Pennsylvania help explain local Republican politics, and 
the memoirs (photostats) and especially the correspondence of Jonathan 
Roberts in the latter repository reveal as well as any single collection the 
ebbs and flows in the War Hawk Congress. The Adams Family MSS, 
Massachusetts Historical Society, now available on microfilm, help to show 
the drift of John and John Quincy Adams toward Republicanism. The 
younger Adams' particularly trenchant comments have been printed in 
Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings of John Quincy Adams, Vols. 
III-IV (New York, 1914), and Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John 
Quincy Adams, Vols. I-II (Philadelphia, 1874). 

Federalists left even more plentiful manuscript materials than their po- 
litical opponents. Comparatively moderate, loyal Federalism may be fol- 
lowed in James A. Bayard, Letterbook of Letters to Caesar A. Rodney, 
New York Public Library; in Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of James A. 
Bayard, 1796-1815, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 
*9*3> Vol. II (Washington, 1915); and in the Rufus King MSS, New- 
York Historical Society, although King's correspondents were usually more 
immoderate than he was. The Wolcott Family Papers, Connecticut His- 

441 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

torical Society, reveal the attitude of Oliver Wolcott, not yet a convert to 
Republicanism. For more strident Federalist criticism of the Republican 
regime and its policies, one should see the Harrison Gray Otis MSS (the 
most valuable portions are printed in Samuel E. Morison, The Life and 
Letters of Harrison Gray Otis [2 vols.; Boston, 1913]) and the ex- 
tremely voluminous papers of Timothy Pickering, both in the Massachu- 
setts Historical Society. Many high Federalists corresponded with Francis 
James Jackson, whose papers are in the Public Record Office, FO 3S3/ 
5861. The Catalogue of James McRenry Papers for Auction by Parke- 
Bernet Galleries (New York, 1944) makes one regret that the small Mary- 
land Historical Society and Library of Congress collections are, aside from 
an equally tiny Alexander C. Hanson collection at the former place, the 
only readily available sources for Federalism south of Delaware. Helpful 
Federalist commentaries on particular sessions of Congress may be found 
in the Hillhouse Family MSS and, for Senator Chauncey Goodrich, the 
William G. Lane Collection, both in the Yale University Library; the 
Abijah Bigelow MSS, American Antiquarian Society (published in Clar- 
ence S. Brigham, ed., "Letters of Abijah Bigelow, Member of Congress, 
to His Wife, 18101815," American Antiquarian Society, Proceedings) 
n.s., XL [1931], 305-406); and George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters of 
Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American 
Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 113-226, 197- 
438. Several extremely important letters are printed in Edmund Quincy, 
Life of Josiah Quincy (Boston, 1867). 

Historians of Anglo-American relations have far less frequently ex- 
ploited British manuscripts. For their use, an indispensable preliminary is 
Charles O. Paullin and Frederick L. Paxson, Guide to the Materials in 
London Archives for the History of the United States since 1783 (Wash- 
ington, 1914). It is now possible, particularly with the aid of the National 
Register of Archives, to discover many manuscript collections unavailable 
at the time Paullin and Paxson appeared. 

Official British records are at the Public Record Office. There will be 
found the FO 5 series, the Foreign Office file on American affairs, as well 
as FO 95, the archives of the legation at Washington. (The instructions 
have been published in Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Min- 
isters to the United States, 1791 i#i2, American Historical Association, 
Annual Refort, ig$6 y Vol. Ill [Washington, 1941].) In addition, there 
are various Foreign Office records that bear upon American relations, nota- 
bly FO 95/515, entitled Treaty and Papers Relating There to, Signed at 

442 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

London Decem r . 31 1806, and FO 83/22042205, Law Officers Reports. 
The papers of the Admiralty have been searched with the aid of the Ind 
series; they are extremely cumbersome but often very important. Green- 
wich Hospital Miscellanea, Adm 80/116-1 17, contains important material 
on trade and the negotiations of 1806. The minutes of the Board of Trade 
(BT 5/1521) throw some light on British policy toward the United 
States, as do the records of the Colonial Office, particularly CO 43/22-23, 
Secretary of State's Despatches. The position taken by admiralty courts is 
indicated in Christopher Robinson, ed., Reports of Cases Argued and De- 
termined in the High Court of Admiralty, Vols. V VI (London, 1806 
1808) ; Thomas Edwards, ed., Reports of Cases Argued and Determined 
in the High Court of Admiralty (London, 1812) ; and John Dodson, ed., 
Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the High Court of Admiralty, 
Vol. I (London, 1815). Hansard, though more satisfactory than the An- 
nals, still must be supplemented by the Journals of the House of Com- 
mons, Journals of the House of Lords, and Parliamentary Papers. The 
Royal Archives, Windsor Castle, have been particularly useful for politi- 
cal background and for specific references to American affairs. The cor- 
respondence of George III for this period has not been published, and 
that of his son (Arthur Aspinall, ed., The Letters of King George IV, Vol. 
I [Cambridge, 1938]) is not particularly helpful, but the manuscripts in 
the Royal Archives contain evidence previously ignored. 

Of the British ministers to the United States, Anthony Merry and David 
M. Erskine left no known manuscripts, and George H. Rose's papers, re- 
cently acquired by the British Museum, were not available for this study. 
Francis James Jackson's papers are in the Public Record Office, FO 353/ 
5861. Those of Augustus John Foster are in the Library of Congress. 
Selections from Foster's writings are in Vere Foster, ed., The Two 
Duchesses (London, 1898), and Richard B. Davis, ed., Jeffersonian 
America: Notes on the United States of Amenca . . . by Sir Augustus 
John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954). For the correspondence of a 
perceptive British representative in the United States, see George L. Rives, 
ed., Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas Barclay (New York, 

1894). 

The position of those generally known in Britain as "the Opposition," 
although they controlled the government in 18061807, is perhaps best 
seen in the papers of William Wyndham Grenvflle, Baron Grenville, now 
in the possession of George Grenville Fortescue, Boconnoc, Lostwithiel, 
Cornwall; William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British Museum, Add. 

443 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730; and the papers of Charles Grey, Sec- 
ond Earl Grey, The Prior's Kitchen, Durham University. The Charles 
James Fox MSS, British Museum, Add. MSS 47559-47601, are disap- 
pointing, as are the papers of Henry Brougham, now at University College, 
London. The Samuel Whitbread MSS, owned by Major Simon Whitbread, 
Southill Park, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, contain important letters to 
Whitbread but little of his own writings. Thomas Grenville's papers, British 
Museum, Add. MSS 41851-41859, include scattered important letters. 

The two foreign secretaries forced from the Cabinet were Marquis 
Wellesley and George Canning. The Wellesley MSS, Series II, British 
Museum, Add. MSS 37274-37318, have material on negotiations with 
William Pinkney. Canning's papers, now in the possession of H.R.H. the 
Princess Royal, have not yet been opened to scholars, but I have been as- 
sured that they do not contain substantial material for this period. Another 
independent, Viscount Sidmouth, left an extensive collection now on de- 
posit at the County Record Office, The Castle, Exeter, Devon. The pa- 
pers of his lieutenant, Nicholas Vansittart, are in the British Museum, Add. 
MSS 31229-31237. 

The position of Spencer Perceval and his allies has recently become much 
more understandable with the gathering of the premier's papers. The Dud- 
ley Perceval Papers and the Holland Perceval Papers, examined while tem- 
porarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, will soon be 
available at the British Museum. The Liverpool Papers, British Museum, 
Add. MSS 38190-38489, 38564-38581, containing the manuscripts of 
the first and second Earls of Liverpool, are frequently helpful. So too are 
the manuscripts of the Earl of Sheffield, Earl Melville, and John W. Croker, 
William L. Clements Library, Ann Arbor; of the first Earl of Harrowby, 
now in the possession of the Earl of Harrowby, Sandon Hall, Stafford- 
shire; and of Viscount Castlereagh, now in the possession of the Marchioness 
Dowager of Londonderry, Mount Stewart, Newtownards, County Down, 
Northern Ireland. Francis Bickley, ed., Report on the Manuscripts of Earl 
Bathurst (London: Historical Manuscripts Commission, 1923), contains 
valuable material on the Order in Council of 1809. 

Although I do not presume to deal exhaustively with Franco-American 
relations, French sources have aided development of the central theme. 
Most notable are the Archives des Affaires trangeres, available in photo- 
stat form at the Library of Congress. Other useful materials include Corre- 
sfondancedeNa'polonI er ,Vol$.XI~-XX'VII (Paris, 1862-1869); Leon 
Lecestre, ed., Lettres Inedltes de Napoleon I er (2 vols.; Paris, 1897) ; and 

444 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

Louis M. Turreau de Garambouville, A^ergu sur la Situation Politique de$ 
tats-Unis d'Amerique (Paris, 1815). 

Forty American newspapers and an equal number of pamphlets have 
been used in the research for this study, all of them available in the ex- 
tremely broad collection of the American Antiquarian Society. Although all 
have been valuable in fixing the temperature of American politics from time 
to time, attention need here be called to only a few of the most representa- 
tive newspapers. The National Intelligencer (Washington) spoke clearly 
for the administration. More bellicose were the Aurora (Philadelphia), the 
Independent Chronicle (Boston), the Enquirer (Richmond), and, for the 
West, the Reporter (Lexington, Ky.^.Niles* Weekly Register (Baltimore), 
first published in 1811, supported the War Hawks. The Columbian (New 
York), founded in 1809, P ut forward the Clintonian position. The Fed- 
eralist position was stated in the various pamphlets of John Lowell, the 
Columbian Centinel (Boston), the New-York Evening Post, and, so 
stridently that it later provoked mob action, by Alexander C. Hanson's 
Federal Republican (Baltimore), founded in 1 808. An impressive con- 
temporary summary of the positions of both parties, combined with an 
appeal for unity in the face of Britain, is Matthew Carey, The Olive Branch^ 
or Faults on Both Sides y Federal and Democratic (3d ed.; Boston, 1815). 

British periodicals similarly cover the political spectrum. The arguments 
against restricting American trade were most strenuously put by the Edin- 
burgh Review y the Morning Chronicle (London), and various provincial 
journals. Representing two quite distinct portions of the middle ground, 
and particularly useful because they reveal a shift among the uncom- 
mitted, are Cobbett's Political Register (London) and the Times (London). 
The defense of the Orders in Council was most energetically prosecuted 
by the semiofficial Courier (London) and, from its founding in 1809, 
the Quarterly Review (London). James Stephen, War m Disguise; Or, 
the Frauds of the Neutral Flags (London, 1805), and Alexander Baring, 
An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders in Council; 
and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral 
Commerce of America (London, 1808), clearly set forth the rival positions. 
The Goldsmiths' Collection (University College, London), the British 
Museum and its newspaper branch at Colindale contain all the above ma- 
terial and much more which is cited only in the footnotes. For a discussion 
of British opinion based upon some of these materials, see Reginald Hors- 
man, "British Opinion and the United States of America, 1806-1812," 
unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Birmingham, 1955. 

445 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

Although this note has attempted to minimize references to readily avail- 
able or obvious printed materials, a few new studies must be mentioned. 
Herbert Heaton, "Non-Importation, 1806-1812," Journal of Economic 
History, I (1941), 178-198, is one of the few articles to suggest the 
important legal loopholes in Jeffersonian commercial legislation. Francois 
Crouzet, IS Economic Brltannlque et le B locus Continental (2 vols. ; Paris, 
1958), adds greatly to information previously elucidated by Heckscher, 
Melvin, and Cunningham. As for the central theme of this volume the 
coming of the War of 1812 little need be added to the able comments 
in Goodman, "Origins of the War of 1812," for Irving Brant's volumes 
are the only full-scale treatment to appear since 1941. George Dangerfield, 
The Era of Good Feelings (New York, 1952), pp. 15-41, is a strongly 
written synthesis of existing scholarship. Harry C. Allen, Great Britain and 
the United States (New York, 1955), contains a number of judicious and 
penetrating comments, and Samuel F. Bemis, John Qulncy Adams and 
the Foundations of American Foreign Policy (New York, 1949), has many 
helpful suggestions. Margaret K. Latimer, "South Carolina a Protagonist 
of the War of 1812," American Historical Review, LXI (1955-1956), 
914929, convincingly extends to South Carolina and, by implication, to 
the entire South the thesis first put forward in George R Taylor, "Agrarian 
Discontent in the Mississippi Valley Preceding the War of 1812," Journal 
oj Political Economy > XXXIX (1931), 471-505. Reginald Horsman, in 
various articles, most notably "Western War Aims, l8ll 1812," Indiana 
Magazine oj History, LIII (1957), I 1 8, and Patrick C. T. White, 
"Anglo-American Relations from 1803 to 1815," unpublished Ph.D. dis- 
sertation, University of Minnesota, 1954, have dealt with the general 
topic of this volume. The important political study by Roger H. Brown, 
"A Republic in Peril; the Crisis of 1812," unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Har- 
vard University, 1960, was completed too late to be used in this volume, 
as was the forthcoming article in the William and Mary Quarterly, Norman 
K. Risjord's "1812: Conservatives, Warhawks, and the Nation's Honor," 
which shares some of the conclusions I have reached. But in the past 
twenty years no one has published either an extensive synthesis or a com- 
plete restudy of the coming of the War of 1812. 



44-6 



INDEX 



Adams, Henry: on war threat, 321, 
353$ on Madison's war message, 
405; on causes of war, 4225 criti- 
cizes Madison, 424 

Adams, John, 33, 45, 64-65, 197 

Adams, John Q.: critical of United 
States, 9, 173; assesses Jefferson, 385 
on Continental System, 6970, 3675 
on Orders in Council, 77, 149, 340 
3415 on impressment, 84, 290, 428- 
4295 favors Non-Importation Act, 
ii3j and Embargo, 149, 151, 153 
*54? 1795 retires from Senate, 158- 
1595 approves Macon's Bill 9^2, 242 

Adjournment of Congress, proposed 
(1812)^, 397-398 

Alexandria Gaz,ette } 60, 353 

Alston, Willis, 433 

American Intercourse Act, British, 104 

Ames, Fisher, 57, 77 

Anderson, Dice R., on causes o war, 

423 

Anderson, Joseph, 4125 bill to suspend 
Embargo, 174-175 

Annual Register (London), 325 

Archer, Stevenson, 373 

Argus (Richmond), 150 

Armed forces, American: Republican 
policy toward, 5052, 1745 Madison 
asks increase, 2972985 Porter report 
urges increase, 356. See also Army, 
United States j Navy, United States 

Armstrong, John, mission to France, 68, 
215, 237-238, 244-245, 248. See 
also Cadore, Duke of 

Army, United States: legislation on, 
360-361 

Astor, John J., 421 

Atcheson, Nathaniel: defends Orders in 
Council, 29, 303 

Auckland, William, Lord: on ignorance 
of British opinion, 6, 205$ favors 
lenience toward American trade, 16- 
17 j regrets William decision, 84$ 
introduces American Intercourse Bill, 
1045 and Fox's Blockade, 105-1065 
scoffs at Non-Importation Act, 1135 
defends Monroe-Pinkney treaty, 1345 



explains pledge on impressment, 189; 
warns of American war, 319. See also 
Monroe-Pinkney treaty 

Aurora (Philadelphia) : opposes Jef- 
ferson, 36; and balance of power, 
56; anti-British, 55, 65, 284; pro- 
French, 63, 248} urges war, 107 j 
defends Embargo, 157; praises Mad- 
ison message, 2985 hails repeal of 
Orders in Council, 341$ on American 
cowardice, 3555 fears congressional 
weakness, 375, 378 

Austin, Maria A., 420 



Bacon, Ezekiel: and Embargo repeal 
and Non-Intercourse Act, 179180, 
182, 227229, 2315 on administra- 
tion policy, 23 9 j in War Hawk Con- 
gress, 344-345, 362, 362-364, 37 J- 

Balance of power, American interest in, 

54-58 

Barclay, Thomas, 107, 143 

Baring, Alexander, 2829, 324, 421; 
analyzes Anglo-American trade, 18 
205 criticizes admiralty courts, 765 
on War in Disguise, 79$ approves 
impressment, 87; opposes Orders in 
Council, 202, 302, 323, 3325 praises 
Order in Council of 1809, 2095 An 
Inquiry into the Orders in Council, 
3033045 defends America, 3145 
supports Liverpool ministry, 418 

Barlow, Joel, 685 and search for cul- 
tural independence, 97-985 mission 
to France, 294, 335, 367-368, 400, 
403 j answers Robert Smith, 269 

Barron, James. See Chesa^eake^ U.S.S. 

Bartlett, Josiah, 394, 407 

Bassano, Hugues-Bernard, Duke of, 
254. See also France 

Bassett, Bur well, 392 

Bathurst, Henry, Earl, 125 and Em- 
bargo, 1775 and Chesapeake, 191, 
1935 and Orders in Council, 200, 
205-207, 309, 328 

Bayard, James A. : favors Non-Importa- 
tion Act, 112-1135 criticizes Monroe- 



447 



INDEX 



Bayard, James A. {continued) 

Pinkney instructions, 121 ; in war ses- 
sion, 366, 374, 396, 414, 434 

Beasley, Reuben G., 93, 317 

Bemis, Samuel F., 424 

Berkeley, Sir George C, and Chesa- 
peake, 140-142, 190, 193 

Berlin Decree. See France 

Bibb, George, 346 

Bid well, Barnabas, 47 

Bigelow, Abijah, 373 

Bleecker, Harmanus, 351, 388, 395 

Bradley, Stephen R., 411412 

Brazil, 26 

Brent, Richard, 351; acts for Madison, 
2705 befriends Crillon, 370$ in war 
session, 412 

British West Indies: trade with United 
States, 22-24, I0 4? l6 9> 1 9 S J m 
Monroe- Pinkney negotiations, n8n, 
1245 support Orders in Council, 327 

Brock, Isaac, 285-286 
Brougham, Henry, 18; on American 
trade, 20; opposes Orders in Council, 



339; Orders in Council; Or, An Ex- 
amination, 3033045 on depression, 
316$ supports Liverpool ministry, 
338} minimizes war danger, 340, 418 

Buckingham, George, Marquis of, 167 

Buckinghamshire, Robert, Earl of, 194 

Burt, Alfred L., 422, 424 

Burwell, William A., 238 



Cabot, George, 57 

Cadore, Jean, Duke of, 148, 1735 on 
American policy, 232, 238, 2455 let- 
ter, announcing repeal of French de- 
crees, 246, 248-252, 280, 308 j and 
Orders in Council, 257258, 276, 
307-308 

Caledonian Mercury (Edinburgh) , 
1915 opposes clash with America, 
316-317, 325, 419 

Calhoun, John C., 296, 386; on Re- 
publican leaders, 99-100, 3795 
elected to Congress, 2675 War Hawk 
leader, 345, 346, 359$ prods admin- 
istration, 383, 3845 presents war bill, 
4075 on Canada, 4275 on national 
honor, 434-435 



Campbell, George W.: isolationist, 54, 
1115 duel, 1575 for war, 226, 351 

Campbell's Report, 181, 227 

Canada: target of American attack, 
145, 283, 284, 286, 289-290, 358- 
359) 375j 4*6> trade with, under 
Embargo, 160, 163, reinforcements 
to, 3215 in coming of war, 422423, 
426-427 

Canning, George, 3345 views toward 
America, 1415, 2212225 un- 
troubled by Embargo, 169170, 175- 
177, 2042055 political position of, 
185-186; and Monroe-Pinkney 
treaty, 188-1905 and Chesapeake, 
190-1975 and Orders in Council, 
197198, 200-203, 205207, 329, 
3305 and Erskine, 211213; appoints 
Jackson, 2205 leaves office, 221, 235 

Caraman, Georges de, 391 

Carey, Matthew, 160 

Castlereagh, Robert, Viscount: on im- 
pressment, 87, 92, 4305 criticizes 
Ministry of All the Talents, 147; 
pleased by Embargo, 169170; urges 
restrictions on trade, 199, 2025 leaves 
office, 235; orders Indians restrained, 
2855 receives Foreign Office, 322 
3235 offers to end licenses, 3315 and 
repeal of Orders in Council, 335- 
3395 last instructions to Foster, 400 
4015 defends British policy, 436 

Champagny, Jean. See Cadore, Jean, 
Duke of 

Chesapeake, U.S.S., attack on: and im- 
pressment, 955 described, 140142; 
American reaction to, 142144; 
American demands of satisfaction 
for, 145146; British reaction and 
policy toward, 190197; in Erskine 
negotiations, 2112125 settlement of, 
275-276, 354-355 

Cheves, Langdon, 345, 346, 361 

Clay, Henry: on balance of power, 57; 
urges war, 24 1 ; elected to Congress, 
266-267; on Indians, 283; chosen 
speaker, 3435 boldness of, 343344; 
selects House committees, 344345 5 
War Hawk leader, 346, 402; sup- 
ports army bill, 360; supports navy 
bill, 361 5 supports tax increase, 363 j 
criticizes administration, 379; urges 



448 



INDEX 



embargo, 383384$ on causes of war, 

433-434) 435 

Clay, Matthew, 34.3 

Clinton, George, 223 

Clintonians. See Republicans 

Cobbett, Williams. See Cobbetfs Politi- 
cal Register 

Cobbers Political 'Register (London), 
17$ for vigorous policy, 9, 187, 192; 
warns Federalists, 10; on pamphlet- 
eers, 73 5 opposes Pitt, 79 ; regrets lost 
American market, 96, 3165 on sea- 
men, 197, 3285 on Non-Intercourse 
Act, 2335 attacks Baring, 303$ and 
Orders in Council, 314, 326, 327 

Coleridge, Samuel T., 3 

Columbian (New York), 36 

Columbian Centinel (Boston), 36, 343, 
on impressment, 88, 2725 on Madi- 
son message, 2985 on chances of war, 
374; on loan boycott, 3895 doubts 
repeal of Orders in Council, 390 

Connecticut, 33, 179 

Connecticut Courant (Hartford), 365 
opposes war, 420 

Constellation, U.S.S., 51, 417 

Continental System. See France, Amer- 
ican policy of 

Cook, Orchard, 229 

Cotton, American: export of, 25-26, 
30, 168, 257$ and Orders in Council, 
2025 falling price of, 287-288 

Courier (London) : on British power, 
5, 7; for vigor toward America, 
132, 192, 273 j scoffs at Embargo, 
1775 and Orders in Council, 201, 
2585 defends license trade, 3i4n- 
3i5nj on coming 1 of war, 326327, 
419$ predicts American demands, 
338 

Craig, Sir James, 285, 369 

Crawford, William H., 154, 230 

Crillon, Count Edouard de. See Henry 
letters 

Crowninshield, Benjamin, 155, 161 

Crowninshleld, Jacob, 47 

Dearborn, Henry, 363 

Desha, Joseph, 345 

Duane, William. See Aurora 

Edinburgh Review: on Anglo-American 



relations, 7, 8, 98 99 j on Anglo- 
American trade, 205 on War in Dis- 
guise, 785 on seamen and impress- 
ment, 85, 87, 1915 on Orders in 
Council, 325 

Elections, American, i59> 223224, 
39*~39 2 > 39^. See also War Hawk 
Congress 

Embargo, 26, 715 aims of, 1501525 
legislation, 153156, 163165; pub- 
lic reception of, 156-158; enforce- 
ment, 160161, 179; loopholes, 162 
163; failures of, 165173, 1821835 
negotiations on, 174177; repeal, 
179182, 226-228; British recep- 
tion of, 204205 

Embargo of 1812, 383387 

Enquirer (Richmond) : criticizes Non- 
Intercourse Act, 232; favors strong 
action, 298, 362, 372 

Eppes, John W.: bill to close British 
trade, 255257; loses to Randolph, 
266 

Erskine, David M.: criticizes Royal 
Navy, 75~76; appointed minister to 
United States, 103104; minimizes 
American action, 166167, 169, 204, 
226, 233; and American opposition 
to Orders in Council, 203-204; Jack- 
son on, 220-221. See also Erskine 
agreement 

Erskine, Thomas, Lord, 215, 217 

Erskine agreement: negotiations, 209 
212; repudiated, 213-217, 219, 234; 
assessed, 217218; Amercian reac- 
tion to, 218219; and American 
legislation, 234; commerce under, 

234 

Essex decision: described, 79-81; im- 
plications, 8182; seizures caused by, 
8 1, 118; elucidated in William de- 
cision, 8384 

Eustis, William, 282-283 

Federalists: political strength, 33, 158- 
159, 395; attitude toward England, 
35, 58-61, 775 attitude toward 
France, 57-58, 60, 61, 421-422; on 
impressment, 88, 925 and Chesa- 
peake, 143-144; oppose Embargo, 
156-157; on Erskine agreement, 219; 
welcome Jackson, 221; oppose Non- 



449 



INDEX 



Federalists {continued) 

Intercourse Act, 230-2315 oppose 
Macon's Bill #i, 2405 denounce 
Cadore letter, 2485 in War Hawk 
Congress, 35i~35^> 359-361, 3 66 > 
384-385, 3^8-389? 406-4075 4" 5 
and Henry letters, 3703725 oppose 
government loans, 3895 and declara- 
tion of war, 420, 436 

Federal Republican (Baltimore), 36, 
359-360, 415 

Findley, William, 348 

Fisk, James, 364 

Florida, 68-69, 275, 280, 371 

Foster, Augustus J. 5 412, 4335 on 
American greed, 285 minimizes 
American Anglophobia, 655 on crisis 
of 1806, 73; fears Fox concessions, 
103; minister to United States, 274- 
275, 2795 entertainments, 275, 3765 
negotiations with Madison and Mon- 
roe, 275-282, 348-349, 380-382, 
401; fluctuating fear of war, 282, 

296, 353-354 5> 37*> 37 S\ 3*9-395 
believes America pro-British, 2935 
and War Hawk Congress, 345, 361, 
386-387, 3 9 7398 ; and Chesapeake 
settlement, 3 5 4-3 55 ; and Henry, 
370-3725 rebuked for weakness, 
378; believes American people op- 
pose war, 3963 on reasons for war, 
414, 415, 423, 431, 4355 receives 
declaration of war, 415416; on im- 
pressment, 429 

Fox, Charles J.: pessimism, 4; attitude 
toward United States, 1718, 120; 
recalls Merry, 103; and Monroe, 
1035 and Essex, 105; and Leander, 
107108; and Non-Importation Act, 
113114; illness and death, 122. See 
also Fox's Blockade; Ministry of All 
the Talents 

Fox, merchantman, condemned, 277- 
278, 31^-313 

Fox's Blockade: framed, 104-106; ne- 
gotiations on, 276-277, 280 

France: grain sales to Britain, 255 
American attitudes toward, 53, 60- 
64; American policy of, 68-69, 72, 
237238; Continental System, 69 
70; and Berlin Decree, 69, 71, 132 
133, 148, 198; and Milan Decree, 



^9> 7ij 173; repeal of decrees, 244 
248, 250-251, 255, 335-336> Ram- 
bouillet Decree, 244245 ; continued 
friction with United States, 252255, 
292-295, 366-369, 39 ~39i5 and 
American decision for war, 405406, 
413-414 
Fulton, Robert, 98 

Gallatin, Albert, 29, 37, 42; outlook, 
4445; and national debt, 50; on 
seamen and impressment, 90; warns 
nation opposes war, 147; and Em- 
bargo, 153, 158, 160161, 163164, 
178; conversations with Erskine, 
210; on American weakness, 2195 
in Madison's Cabinet, 224, 225, 255, 
268, 296297; favors stronger action, 
226227, 239; castigates Napoleon, 
247; tax proposals, 362364; War 
Hawk distrust of, 362363; expects 
war, 375 

Gardenier, Barent, 34, 157, 163, 181, 
240, 256 

Garnett, James M., 269 

Gascoyne, Isaac, 330, 339 

Gentleman's Magazine (London), 327 

George III, 6; parliamentary influence, 
11-12; and Ministry of All the Tal- 
ents, i o i 102; and Erskine agree- 
ment, 213; dislikes Wellesley, 236 

Gerry, Elbridge, 36n, 143, 150, 395 

Gholson, Thomas, 365 

Giles, William B.: Republican schis- 
matic, 49; for war, 5556, 226; on 
Canning, 186; opposes Gallatin, 
225; and Non-Intercourse Act, 229 
230; army bill of, 360-361, 3735 
opposes embargo of 1812, 3855 pre- 
sents antiwar petitions, 393; role in 
war vote, 413415 

Gilman, Nicholas, 230, 411 

Gladstone, John, 327 

Globe (London), 325 

Goodman, Warren H., on war causes, 
422, 424 

Goodrich, Chancey, 388, 431 

Grain, American exports of, 2425, 30, 
167168, 382383 

Grant, Sir William: Essex decision, 80 
815 William decision, 8384; op- 
poses American Intercourse Act, 104 



450 



INDEX 



Gray, William, 159, 171 

Great Britain: military position, 345 
savior complex, 45, 2785 attitude 
toward America, 5-9, 11-18, 27- 
28, 1875 and neutral rights, 5-6, 81- 
825 trade with United States, 19-31; 
monopolistic spirit in, 2122, 74, 
304305, 3155 Federalist view of, 
57-58} Republican view of, 655 de- 
clining* trade with Europe, 70$ at- 
tack of, upon American rights, 73 
77; Indian policy, 9596, 283-2865 
and Embargo, 1661705 and Non- 
Intercourse Act, 232-233; depression 
in, 315-3185 learns of declaration of 
war, 418419. See also Trade, 
Anglo-American 

Gregg, William: resolutions on trade, 
1091125 reluctant vote for war, 
412-414 

Grenville, William, Lord: on American 
bias for France, 105 as political 
leader, 1617, 3 2 35 on British rights, 
745 defines Fox's Blockade, 106; 
troubled by Non-Importation Act, 
1135 and Orders in Council, 147, 
208, 3015 criticizes Canning, 1765 
on Chesapeake, 191$ on Perceval, 
333. See also Ministry of All the 
Talents 5 Opposition, British 

Grey, Charles, Earl: attitude toward 
America, 185 in Cabinet, 102, 1235 
defends impressment, 1275 and Or- 
der in Council of January, 1807, 147 

Grundy, Felix: elected to Congress, 
265-2665 War Hawk leader, 345- 
3475 suspicions of administration, 
356, 3745 indiscretions, 3575 opposes 
navy bill, 3625 opposes taxes, 3635 
on Indians, 427 

Hacker, Louis M., on war causes, 286n- 

287^ 422 

Hammond, George, 82 
Harper, John A., 345> 363* 37*> 3^4, 

392, 413 
Harrison, William H., and Indians, 

282-283 

Harrowby, Dudley, Earl of, 308-309 
Hawkesbury, Lord. See Liverpool, Earl 

of 
Henry letters, 369372 



Holland, Henry, Lord : favorable to 
America, 17185 on War in Dis- 
guise, 795 complains against Non- 
Importation Act, 114. See also Mon- 
roe-Pinkney treaty 

Horizon, merchantman, condemned, 71 

Hornet, U.S.S., arrival with dispatches, 
375-376> 399-400 

Howell, Joseph, 412 

Ho wick, Lord. See Grey, Earl 

Hull, William, 416, 427 

Humphreys, Salusbury P., 141142 

Impressment: as international issue, 84 
955 amount of, 90935 in Monroe- 
Pinkney negotiations, 118119, 125 
130, 136137, 1885 and Chesapeake, 
146, 174, 1951965 angers America, 
2712725 unnoticed, 2905 Madison 
silent on, 2975 Porter's Report on, 
3565 in war message, 404-4055 as 
cause of war, 416, 421, 422, 428 

43 

Independent Chronicle (Boston) : anti- 
British, 36, 65, 2855 attacks Na- 
poleon, 294-2955 attacks Federal- 
ists, 436 

Indians, North American: British policy 
toward, 95-96, 2832865 in war 
message, 4045 Pratt on, 4235 as 
cause of war, 427 

Isolationism, American, 5354 

Jackson, Andrew, 284, 287 

Jackson, Francis J., 240, 2755 mission 
to United States, 220-221, 2345 re- 
called, 236-2375 condemned by 
Congress, 239 

Jackson, James G., 181, 230, 266 

Jefferson, Thomas, 27, 28, 475 concept 
of diplomacy and war, 3, 39 42, 
119-1205 weak policy of, 8-95 on 
Parliament, 11$ idolized, 37-38* ap- 
pearance, 37-385 thought, 38-425 
relations with colleagues, 42, 224, 
2692705 presidential leadership of, 
45-47, 109, ni, i49> J 5 6 5 177-1795 
on manufactures, 49~50j *7 2 5 on na ~ 
tional debt, 505 on armed forces, 50- 
51, 1745 on isolationism, 535 and 
balance of power, 55 5 dislike of Na- 
poleon, 625 bias for Britain, 645 on 



451 



INDEX 



Jefferson, Thomas (continued) 

impressment, 88-89, 94-95$ on 
Leander, 1075 and Monroe-Pinkney 
treaty, 115116, 120121, 1341375 
reaction to Chesapeake, 143-148; 
hopes for Non-Importation Act, 120; 
and Embargo, 150-151, 156, 157- 
158, 162-163, 170171, 182-183; 
on Portland ministry, 187; on War 
Hawk Congress, 262; on Canada, 
284; on prospects and desirability 
of war, 291, 375, 393, 399, 4215 
failure of, 437 

Joy, George, 10, 325 

Kentucky, 266, 393 
Key, Philip B., 240, 345, 388-389 
King, Rufus, 352; political attitudes, 
3435, 58; critical of English policy, 
58, 82, 2ii 212; on naturalization, 
89; offered mission to England, 115; 
on Erskine agreement, 218219; on 
national honor, 292 

Lansdowne, Henry, Marquis. See Petty, 
Lord Henry 

Latimer, Margaret K., on causes of 
war, 424 

Leander, H.M.S., kills Pierce, 106108 

Lee, Henry, 59, 295 

Lee, William, 269 

Leib, Michael: and embargo of 1812, 
385; and vote for war, 414415 

Leopard, H.M.S. See Chesapeake, 
U.S.S., attack on 

Lewis, Morgan, 159 

Liberty Hall (Cincinnati), 289 

License trade, British, 278, 304-307, 
3i4n~3i5n, 330-331, 401. See also 
Orders in Council system 

Little Belt, H.M.S., attack on, 272- 
273, 280 

Liverpool, Robert, Earl of: attitude 
toward America, 5, 13-14, 177; re- 
action to Chesapeake, 194; on de- 
pression, 319; urges delaying repeal 
of Orders in Council, 335. See also 
Liverpool ministry 

Liverpool Mercury, 325 

Liverpool ministry: formed, 334$ re- 
peals Orders in Council, 334338 



Livingston, Robert R., 50, 143, 150, 

394 

Logan, George, 88 
Lowell, John, 58 
Lowndes, William L., 346, 40 3 n 
Lyman, William, 93, 166 
Lyon, Matthew, 263 

Maclay, William, 154 

McLeod, Alexander, 426 

Macon, Nathaniel, 154, 413-414; po- 
litical views, 48, 51; for peace, 143; 
favors Embargo, 156, 181; criticizes 
England and France, 391. See also 
Macon's Bill #i 

Macon's Bill #t, defeated, 239241 

Macon's Bill ^2: framing and passage, 
239242; weaknesses of, 242243; 
British reaction, 243244; reinforc- 
ing legislation, 255 

Madison, James, 51, 151, 226, 366; 
personality of, 4244; An Examina- 
tion of the British Doctrine, 43, 117; 
succeeds Jefferson, 48, 49, 223224; 
attitude toward England and France, 
6263, 64, 259, 270, 293; and im- 
pressment, 88-89, 9495, 430; hopes 
for Non-Importation Act, 120; and 
Embargo, 150, i5in, 153, 175, 178; 
on British ministry, 187188, 236; 
conversations with Erskine, 210; 
worsts Jackson, 221; presidential 
leadership of, 224225, 231, 238 
*39> *55> 259-260, 348-349, 378- 
380, 424425; and Non-Intercourse 
Act, 229; on Rambouillet Decree, 
245; and Cadore letter, 248252; 
names Monroe secretary of state, 
267-270; negotiations with Foster, 
281, 410, 416; Indian policy of, 
282-283, 285; dispatches Barlow, 
294; recalls Congress, 295-296; an- 
nual message (1811), 296-299; 
Chesapeake settlement, 3 5 43 5 5 ; 
continued friction with France, 367 
3^9) 39*5 and Henry letters, 370, 
372; and America's situation, 380- 
382; permits grain exports to Spain, 
383; and embargo (1812), 384, 
386, 3875 reflected, 392; and pro- 
posed special mission, 398; on tri- 
angular war, 399; decision for war, 



452 



INDEX 



401-403; war message, 403-405; 
on causes of war, 405-406, 431, 435 ; 
on terms of peace, 416; British criti- 
cism of, 418-419; on repeal of 
Orders in Council, 421; failure of, 
437. See also Erskine agreement; 
Monroe-Pinkney treaty 

Mahan, Alfred T. : on Orders in Coun- 
cil, 204; on causes of war, 422 

Manufacturing, American, 49, 9697, 
172 

Marryat, Joseph, 29; supports trade re- 
strictions, 198, 303, 327; attacks 
license trade, 206 

Martin, Luther, 59-60, 88 

Massachusetts, 33, 92, 158-159, 179, 
265, 395, 409 

Mayo, Bernard, 381 

Melish, John, 62 

Melville, Henry, Earl, 20, 301 

Merry, Anthony, 103 

Milan Decree. See France 

Ministry of All the Talents, 11-12, 21, 
130; and impressment, 86, 9293; 
formed, 101102; fall, 184. See also 
Fox, Charles J. ; Monroe-Pinkney 
treaty; Opposition, British 

Moira, Francis, Earl of, 334 

Monroe, James, 51, 282; political posi- 
tion, 48, 223, 269270; attitude 
toward England and France, 64, 
270271; and Essex, 7174, 72n, 
8183; on impressment, 91; protests 
Fox's Blockade, 106; resents Pink- 
ney appointment, 120; and Berlin 
Decree, 133; defends Monroe-Pink- 
ney treaty, 138; and Chesapeake, 
192195; leaves London, 195; ap- 
pointed secretary of state, 269-271; 
and Foster, 279282, 389, 415416; 
on national honor, 291292; and 
war, 348349; meets with Foreign 
Affairs Committee, 356, 383384; 
and Se"rurier, 368; and Henry letters, 
370-371; on embargo, 387; warns 
rupture near, 390; opposes opening 
trade, 397; drafts war manifesto, 
402; on limited war, 403 and n. ; 
complains of Senate, 413. See also 
Monroe-Pinkney treaty 

Monroe-Pinkney treaty: Jefferson re- 
jects, 46, 134-137; and impressment, 



94, 125130; negotiation of, 114 
133; and reexport trade, 125126, 
130132; criticized in Britain, 133 
134; implications of, 138-139; ef- 
fort to revive negotiations, 187- 
190 

Monthly Review (London), 325 

Moore, Thomas, 8 

Morier, John P., 271, 274 

Morning Chronicle (London) : pro- 
American, 17; on Chesapeake, 191; 
opposes Orders in Council, 202, 208, 
325-326; on Perceval ministry, 235; 
on Little Belt, 272-273; on licenses, 
305; warns of war, 319; on French 
forgery, 335; on Madison's war mes- 
sage, 419 

Morning Post (London), 192, 208, 
224 

Morris, Gouverneur, 53 

Morse, Samuel F. B., 97 

Mulgrave, Henry, Lord, 21 ; on Essex, 
82-83 

Mullett, Thomas, 324 



Napoleon I: successes of, 4, 173, Amer- 
ican attitudes toward, 6064; and 
Embargo, 166; and Order in Coun- 
cil of 1809, 2095 and Madison, 224. 
See also France 

National honor, American: challenged 
by England, 23 ; and impressment, 
85, 428429; threatened, 99-100, 
291292, 342-3435 hurt by Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty, 136; and quarrel 
with France, 295; and War Hawks, 
347; as cause of war, 393-394? 4*5> 
433436; and Orders in Council, 
430-432 

National Intelligencer (Washington) : 
administration spokesman, 36; and 
Embargo, 147, 152, 157; opposes 
Macon's Bill $"2, 242-243; on 
French repeal, 2485 criticizes both 
France and England, 257, 306; criti- 
cizes England, 272, 375, 387, 400, 
421; criticizes Napoleon, 294; 
praises annual message (1811), 298- 
299; cool on Chesapeake settlement, 
354; on Porter's Report, 357; ap- 
proves taxes, 362 



453 



INDEX 



Navy, United States, strengthening de- 
feated, 51, 361362. See also Armed 
forces, American 

Nelson, Hugh, 349, 358, 396 

New Hampshire, 394 

New-Hampshire Patriot (Concord), 
292 

New York, 265, 420 

New-York Evening Post) 420 

New-York Herald, 395396 

Nicholas, Wilson C.: and Embargo, 
156, 1815 and Gallatin, 225; for use 
of force, 2285 and Non-Intercourse 
Act, 229 

Nicholl, Sir John: on Essex , 835 on re- 
export trade, 105, 130-1313 defends 
impressment and search, 127, 1935 
urges restrictions on trade, 198-199 

Nicholson, Joseph H., 144, 394. See 
also Non-Importation Act 

Niles, Hezekiah. See Niles 3 Weekly 
Register 

Niles' Weekly Register (Baltimore) : 
on impressment, 142, 290, 4295 on 
illegal trade, 257; bellicosity of, 357, 

378, 4*6 

Non-Importation Act: Jefferson and, 
45465 genesis and passage, 108- 
1135 suspension, 1355 in effect, 1485 
impact, 162; repeal proposed, 396- 

397 

Non-Intercourse Act, 2175 and Eng- 
land, 113114, 232-2345 genesis and 
passage, 182, 226232 

Opposition, British, 3235 attitude 
toward America, 16-18; opposes 
Orders in Council, 203, 205, 257 
258, 301302, 3385 defends Erskine 
agreement, 213214; refuses office, 
2 35? 3 22 ? 3345 warns of American 
war, 319$ supports ministry, 338. 
See also Ministry of All the Talents 

Order in Council of May, 1806. See 
Fox's Blockade 

Order in Council of January, 1807, 
147-148, i75> 313 

Order in Council of April, 1809, 217, 
3045 framed, 205-2075 English re- 
ception, 207 20 8j modified, by li- 
censes, 304307 

Orders in Council of November, 1807, 



135 inspire Embargo, 1481495 
framed, 1972015 legislation con- 
firms, 203 5 Erskine announces repeal, 

212 

Orders in Council system, n, 15, 18, 
77) 38*5 pressure for repeal, 257 
258, 287, 3oi~3o*> 313-315? 3177 
318, 324326, 3295 and the Cabi- 
net's position, 275279, 308310, 
3 I 3> 33?> 401$ American complaints 
against, 280-282, 3073085 British 
commercial classes oppose, 302-303, 
318, 324, 337-3405 defenders of, 
3263275 parliamentary debates on 
(1812), 328-330; hearings on, 332- 
333; repeal of, 336-338, 341, 4215 
and War Hawk Congress, 347, 356, 
4065 in war message, 404-4055 as 
cause of war, 422, 427, 430-432 

Pennsylvania, 265, 394, 408 

Pennsylvania Republican (Harrisburg) , 
61 

Perceval, Spencer, 1475 attitudes, 12 
13? 1*5, 333-3345 and Embargo, 
1691705 and Chesa^eake^ 193; and 
framing of Orders in Council, 198 
202, 2062075 and defense of Orders 
in Council, 203, 276277, 308310, 
321, 3325 minimizes Pinkney's de- 
parture, 3115 negotiations with Sid- 
mouth, 3 3 03 3 1 5 death, 333. See 
also Perceval ministry 

Perceval ministry, 125 formed, 2355 re- 
constituted, 322-3235 less obdurate 
on Orders in Council, 332333 

Perry, James. See Morning Chronicle 

Petty, Lord Henry, 18, 186, 203, 317 

? 18 
Phillimore, Joseph, 305-306, 313, 325 

Pickering, Timothy, 10, 34, 57-58, 
155, 240, 265, 352 

Pierce, John. See Leander, H.M.S. 

Pinkney, William: attitudes, 115116$ 
appointment criticized, 1 1 6 i 1 7 j and 
Berlin Decree, 1335 and Embargo, 
1 60, 1751765 succeeds Monroe, 
1955 and Orders in Council, 201, 
208209, 302, 3073085 conversa- 
tions with Canning, 2115 attitude 
toward Britain, 235236, 307, 3105 
and recall of Jackson, 236-2375 mis- 



454 



INDEX 



sion ends, 279, 310312. See also 

Monroe-Pinkney treaty 
Pitt, William, 1112, 101. See also Pitt 

ministry 
Pittites, 1214 
Pitt ministry : and War in Disguise, 7 8 5 

American policy, 79 
Plumer, William, 113, 242, 344 
Polly decision, 77, 79 
Ponsonby, Stephen, 18, 336-337 
Pope, John, 411, 414 
Porter, Peter B.: chairman of Foreign 

Affairs Committee, 344-3455 report 

on Madison's message, 355-360, 

4315 urges strong action, 375, 3835 

urges delay, 384; proposes embargo, 

3845 leaves Congress, 407 
Portfolio (Philadelphia), 97 
Portland, William, Duke of, 184, 200. 

See also Portland ministry 
Portland ministry: formed, 184-186; 

breaks up, 235 
Pratt, Julius W., on causes of war, 

286n 287n, 289^ 422423 
President, U.S.S. See Little Belt, H.M.S. 
Prince of Wales, Regent, n, 12, 322 

Quarterly Review (London), 87, 306, 
321 

Quids. See Republicans 

Quincy, Josiah: leads Federalists, 34- 
35) 351-353) 3595 ^egrets Federal- 
ist bias, 6i} and Macon's Bill #2, 
242$ on Se*rurier, 2565 backs army 
bill, 361 5 exposes payments to Henry, 
3715 and War Hawks, 385, 3885 
shifts to open opposition, 388 

Raleigh Star, 341 
Rarnbouillet Decree, 244-245 
Randolph, John, 43) 34-55 character 
and outlook, 47-48, 63 j opposes 
Non-Importation Act, 109, 111-1125 
on Pinkney, 1175 opposes Embargo, 
I55~*56 1^3) 165-1665 scoffs at 
Non-Intercourse Act, 2325 opposes 
closing trade with England, 255- 
2565 reflected, 2665 breaks with 
Monroe, 2705 on desire for Canada, 
286, 358-3595 and War Hawk Con- 
gress, 350-351* 358-359 384> 395) 
396, 402, 4085 on causes of war, 433 



Ratford, Jenkin, 141-142, 190 

Rea, John, 263 

Re-porter (Lexington, Ky.) : hails 
French repeal, 2485 on Indians and 
England, 284, 4275 for war, 287- 
2885 fears Madison and Congress, 
296, 376, 415 

Republicans: attitude toward France, 
910, 61-645 congressional strength 
of, 33, 263, 265, 3925 legislative 
methods, 45-475 factions and dissi- 
dents, 46-49, 265, 348, 35~35 I 5 at> 
titude toward England, 58-59, 655 
anti-commercial feelings 1101115 
defections on Embargo, 155-1565 
solid vote for war, 4105 on declara- 
tion of war, 4194205 criticized, 

4-34 

Richardson, William, 407 
Ridgely, Henry M., 264-265 
Ringgold, Samuel, 406-407 
Ritchie, Thomas, 142-143. See also 

Enquirer 
Roberts, Jonathan, 363, 397"~399> 4*4) 

4*5) 433) 43^ , 

Rodgers, John, 416-417. See also Little 
Belt, H.M.S. 

Rodney, Caesar A., 349 

Rose, George: defends Orders in Coun- 
cil, 13, 318-319) 328-3295 opposes 
American Intercourse Act, 1045 ac- 
cused of corruption, 305 

Rose, George H.: on Jefferson, 9-105 
on Embargo, 166, 2045 mission to 
United States, 1965 report on West 
Indies trade, 198 

Royal Navy: excesses, 74~7 6 5 * m Amer- 
ican waters, 75, 2915 need for sea- 
men, 85-875 Jefferson expels, 144. 
See also Chesapeake, U.S.S. 5 Impress- 
ment 5 Orders in Council system 

Rule of the War of 1756, 78, 80, 83, 
202, 211-212, 214-215 

Rush, Benjamin, 48n, 65 

Rush, Richard, i, i5n ^ 

Russell, Jonathan: mission to France, 
252255, 2935 mission to England, 
3i7> 3*3) 3^6, 33^-333) 335) 39> 
4005 urges vigor, 372-374) 3 8z 



"Saints," British faction, 15 
Sammons, Thomas, 395 



455 



INDEX 



Sansom, George, 192 
Scott, Sir William: admiralty judge, 
76 and n.; on War in Disguise, 78; 
and Essex, 8 in 5 defends impressment, 
86875 F x decision, 313 

Scott, Winfield, 143, 4.19 

Seamen: Embargo returns, to England, 
1725 British proclamation recalls, 
1975 proposed law against enlist- 
ment of foreign, 210. See also Im- 
pressment 

Seizures of American ships, numbers of, 
7174. See also France; Orders in 
Council 5 Royal Navy 

Selkirk, Thomas, Earl of, 5 

Serurier, Louis G., 72-73, 252, 256, 
*93> 296, 34.9, 353, 368-370, 378, 
391-392, 399-400, 43 * 

Sheffield, John, Earl of, 8, 22, 26, 167- 
168, 303 

Sidmouth, Henry, Viscount, 15-16, 
^ 101, 102, 199, 235, 301, 33Q-33 1 

Silliman, Benjamin, 7 

Srnilie, John, 383, 433 

Smith, Abbot E,, 120 

Smith, John S., 215, 295, 34*~343 

Smith, Robert: and Embargo, 1605 con- 
versations with Erskine, 210, 2125 
on Rule of the War of 1756, 214 
2155 named secretary of state, 2255 
on Non-Intercourse Act, 2335 and 
French repeal, 249, 255; discharged 
by Madison, 267-2685 Address to 
the People of the United States, 268- 
269. See also Erskine agreement 

Smith, Samuel: Republican schismatic, 
49 ; urges special mission to Eng- 
land, 114; on Monroe-Pinkney 
treaty, 136; introduces Embargo, 
153-154; and Gallatin, 225; and 
Macon's bills, 240241; and im- 
pressment, 271-272; and embargo 
(1812), 385, 387; and declaration 
of war, 413, 415 

Smith, Samuel H., 36, 156. See also 
National Intelligencer 

Smith, Sydney, 338 

Smith, Theodore C., 401 

South Carolina, 267, 288, 393 

Southey, Robert, 4, 10 

Spain, 168-169, 382-383 

Special mission, proposed (1812), 398 



Stanford, Richard, 350-351 

Star (London), 357 

Stephen, James, 5; outlook of, 15; 
urges Royal Navy be restrained, 74 
755 War in Disguise, 77-79; on 
American defeats, 167, 304; on sea- 
men, 197; urges trade restrictions, 
199; defends Orders in Council, 301, 
302, 328-329, 332, 336; on war 
with America, 320 

Story, Joseph, 116, 159; and repeal of 
Embargo, 179-180 

Stuart, Daniel. See Courier 

Sullivan, James, 158, 159, 161 

Sun (London), 244, 327, 419 

Taggart, Samuel, no, 260, 346, 358, 

374> 395 

Tartarus, H.M.S., 290-291 
Tax legislation (1812), 362-366 
Taylor, George R. 3 on causes of war, __ 

287n, 423 

Taylor, John, 241, 263 
Taylor, John, of Caroline, 63-64, 353, 

437 

Tecumseh, 282-283. See also Indians 

Tierney, George, 176-177 

Times (London), 6, 123, 176, 191, 
235, 322; on British isolation, 4; on 
American weakness, 5; on war with 
America, 9 3 319-320, 419; on War 
in Disguise, 7879; on trade restric- 
tions and Orders in Council, 199, 
202, 214, 258, 327 

Tippecanoe, battle of, 283 

Tobacco, American exports of, 30, 257 

Trade, American: and effect on Great 
Britain, 5-6, 19-31; exports, 29-30, 
430; and France, 70-72, 254, 292 
293. See also France; Orders in 
Council system; Trade, American re- 
export; Trade, Anglo-American 

Trade, American reexport: growth, 23- 
2 4> 3> 77-80; Republican doubts 
about, in, 357-358; and Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty, 119} 125126, 130 
132, 138; and Orders in Council of 
November, 1870, 202. See also Essex 
decision / 

Trade, Anglo-American : described, 
2230; and British West Indies, 22 
24, 169; and India, 24n; under Em- 



456 



INDEX 



bargo, 162, 166-1695 and Erskine 
agreement, 2195 and Macon's Bill 
#2.) 2445 closed after French repeal, 
249250, 256257, 3165 continued 
French attacks on, 254. See also 
Monroe-Pinkney treaty 5 Non-Impor- 
tation Act 
Triangular war, proposed (1812), 

393-394-> 398~399 
Trianon Decree, 247 
Trianon tariff, 247248 
Troup, George, 181, 374 
True American (Trenton), 349350, 

427 

Trumbull, John, 172, 209 
Turreau, Louis M., 52-53, 56, 72, 135, 

i73-i74-> *33> 2 34> 240, 255 
Tyler, John, 94, 242 

United States Gazette (Philadelphia), 

387-388 
Updyke, Frank A., 428 

Vansittart, Nicholas, 196, 197 
Varnum, Joseph B., 47, 154-1553 *8* 

230, 261, 2.65 

Virginia, 159, 266, 3935 408 
Virginia Patriot (Richmond), 298 

Walter, John. See Times 

War, declaration of: sentiment for, 
392-396; congressional action on, 
4064155 distribution of votes on, 
407-4105 British reaction to, 418- 
4195 American reaction to, 419- 
4215 causes of, 421437 

War Hawk Congress: election of, 261- 



2675 factions in, 346-3525 intentions 
doubted, 374-376, 3965 desertion of 
war men in, 406407. See also War, 
declaration of 

War in Disguise. See Stephen, James 

Webster, Noah, 35, 52, 97-98 

Wedgwood, Josiah, 324 

Wellesley, Richard, Marquis, 16; be- 
comes foreign secretary, 2365 lazi- 
ness, 236-237, 3075 and Orders in 
Council, 258, 275-279, 307, 310, 
3785 and Pinkney's departure, 3115 
and Fox decision, 3135 resigns, 3225 
seeks office, 3345 and Chesapeake set- 
tlement, 354 

West, American, 286-288, 408, 422 
424 

Wheat. See Grain 

Whitbread, Samuel: pro-American, 18 
195 opposes Orders in Council, 301, 
302, 312, 317, 320-321, 323, 3295 
praises Pinkney, 3125 warns of war, 
3195 and repeal of Orders in Coun- 
cil, 33^ 

Whitby, Henry. See Leander ) H.M.S. 

Widgery, William, 362, 372 

Wilberforce, William, 15, 320, 330, 

339 

William decision, 83-84 
Williams, David R., 344-345, 347, 

362,406,433 

Wiltse, Charles M., 38, 261-262 
Wirt, William, 143 
Worthington, Thomas, 350, 398, 411, 

429 
Wright, Robert, 94, 261,290 

Yorke, Charles, 309 



457 




122479 



