For Maxwell, the project of a federative empire was to find in Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho its most complete formulator: “this collaboration between Brazilian intellectuals and enlightened ministers produced an imperial idea, Luso-Brazilian in inspiration, which moved beyond nationalism to a broader imperial solution, and sought to diffuse metropolitan-colonial tensions,” configuring itself in the end as an element of cooptation and accommodation among elites. Fernando Novais, on the other hand, focused his analysis on the disconnections between the theory and practice of enlightened reformism due to the structural contradictions and tensions provoked by the impossibility of promoting metropolitan and colonial development in a single system. He stresses the argument on theories of capitalist development in the peripheries, pointing out the fragility of the compromise proposed by the Generation of the 1790s on both sides of the Atlantic. In contrast to what happened in Spanish America, where Carlos III’s reformism accentuated the polarization between American and Peninsular subjects, Fernando Novais argues that the repercussions of enlightened reformism in Portuguese America facilitated the accommodation of interests reached between the provincial elites and the ruling classes, thereby avoiding political radicalization during the crisis of mercantile colonialism (Novais, 1979: 213-297). Both Maxwell and Novais based their arguments on the assumption that reformism resulted in the politicization of the local elites, who began to reclaim and reaffirm their provincial identities with greater intensity.
If we look at Maria Odila Leite da Silva Dias’ pioneering essay from 1968, we can see that she studied the cultural attitudes of the Portuguese American elites, and, unlike Maxwell and Novais, argued that they did not expect independence. In this study, she described the affinities between the scientific background and state policies, focusing on the development of the empire. Silva Dias identified close ties between the political behavior and the cultural styles of this generation that was involved in the making of the independent state (Dias, 2005: 94).
However, these three authors center their analysis only on the links between Portuguese America and the metropolis, excluding the other parts of the Portuguese Empire from their interpretation. This aspect may be considered as the main shift in perspective to have occurred in recent years, with contemporary historiography now being more concerned with the transnational or interconnected study of the independence processes, whether in the political, diplomatic, social or economic field. The effects that the Independence of Brazil had on the other parts of the empire still need to be studied in greater depth, however. Researchers have recently shown the impact of independence on the Atlantic Slave Trade that supplied the ports of Brazil. Portuguese and Brazilian merchants maintained their partnership in the slave trade until almost the end of the 1840s as current historiography has pointed out (Alencastro,1986 and 2004; Alexandre, 1998:61-86); however, less attention has been given to the Asian colonies, which are a territory that still remains to be investigated.
Over the past fifteen years, there has been a major shift in the historiography of the empire as numerous historians have begun to examine the transcontinental itineraries and careers of the members of this elite, whose role in the search for natural wealth (and not only in Portuguese America) guided the economic development of the empire. This is perhaps the most relevant contemporary historiographical trend, namely the tendency to study more closely the role of the Generation of the 1790s in widening the geographical scope of the elite’s circulation and operation (which was no longer limited to the South American continent), while also taking into account the experiences acquired in other parts of the Portuguese Empire (Curto, 1999; Kury, 2004; Raminelli, 2008 and Domingues, 2012). In this sense, military institutions and academies, along with Masonic networks and the press, constituted spaces for socialization and politicization that escaped local logic and shaped new spheres of public opinion among the various elites in the different corners of the Portuguese Empire (Morel, 2005; Barata, 2006). Historians currently emphasize the cosmopolitan culture of the so-called Generation of the 1790s, whose experience, whether through administrative positions or through scientific missions, facilitated the development of a pragmatic view of how to deal with the imperial dilemmas.
In recent years, however, Brazilian, Portuguese and Anglo-American historians have debated the repercussions of the establishment of the Portuguese court in Rio de Janeiro, which promoted new political practices and enlarged the public sphere. The Crown in Rio de Janeiro changed the balance of power at the regional level and transformed the dynamics of the imperial trade; the reinforcement of fiscal control over the provincial elites of Northern Brazil (Bahia, Pernambuco, and Pará) is one of the main causes of the emergence of a regional resentment against the elites from Rio de Janeiro, Minas Gerais and São Paulo. These internal tensions produced a civil war on both sides of the Atlantic, so that the elites in Rio de Janeiro disputed with Lisbon their right to be at the center of the political decision-making; the sovereignty of Rio was conquered with concessions and privileges, and by force as well. The annexation of the*Banda Oriental*(Cisplatina) in 1817 was an important chapter in this expansion of the borders of the Portuguese American Empire. I mentioned earlier how Maria Odila L. Silva Dias emphasized the need to abolish the long-lasting image of a colony fighting against a metropolis. Until the middle of the century, she argued, political actions were not framed within a nationalist discourse. Only after the 1830s or 1840s do we notice the emergence of a national consciousness.
So, the explanation for the political unity and territorial integrity of the new state after independence is based on two major approaches: one underlines the homogeneity and common legal background of the elites formed by the magistrates who had graduated from Coimbra University (Carvalho, 1982: 378-398); the second emphasizes the pact between the ruling elites, the slave traders and the slave owners (Alencastro, 1979:395-419). According to this latter view, one of the key factors in the cohesion of the upper classes was the threat of a slave uprising. Moreover, racial tensions and the fear of Haitianism were crucial to the formation of the identity of elites. However, the importance of the fear of an uprising of slaves as a factor determining national unity has been questioned, in view of the assimilationist aspect of the Portuguese constitutional law regarding the integration of freed slaves (Marquese; Berbel; Parron, 2010: 150-220).
Another way of thinking about the alliances between the ruling classes and ruling is offered by the works of Antonio Carlos Robert Moraes and Ilmar R. Mattos, both of whom pointed out the strategies of regional elites in aiming to expand their control of the land and the indigenous labor force, both before and after 1822. These historians sought to link the process of expansion into the hinterlands and the conquest of internal borders to the consolidation of the external sovereignty (Mattos, 2005: 271-300; Moraes, 2007: 497-505).
But the question of territorial integrity still remains to be examined. Why the new Brazilian state did not split into pieces after independence (as happened in Spanish America in the third decade of the nineteenth century) is one of the most intriguing questions yet to be explored. In the case of the Northeastern region of Brazil, Evaldo Cabral pointed out that none of the local republican parties, not even the radical federalists, questioned the territorial unity of Brazil. Despite the vast territorial dimensions and the real danger of fragmentation before and after independence, he argued that colonization succeeded in shaping a global consciousness of the Brazilian space as a single body (Mello, 2001: 69-115).5
The idea that Portuguese America had natural boundaries formed by two river basins—the Amazon and the River Plate—representing Brazil as an island was well described by the diplomats of the nineteenth century, who insisted on the geographical explanation for the formation of territorial boundaries, according to the geopolitical thinking of that time (Magnolli, 1997). This pre-existing and consolidated image was, to some extent, a geographical ideology that had been disseminated by Portuguese diplomats since the Treaty of Utrecht, mainly in the international public and diplomatic sphere (Kantor, 2010). In Alencastro’s view the fact that Portuguese America maintained its unity improve many historiographical bias, mainly centered in a territorial narrative of the State Building (Alencastro, 2015: 26)
Although Brazil was presented abroad as political unity; domestically, from at least the mid-eighteenth century onward, a genuine effort was made to reorganize and reorder the civil and ecclesiastical administration of the territory. In this respect, the itineraries and careers of military and naval engineers—besides the activity of lawyers and interests associated with the maintenance of the slave trade—also established an important support for the territorial unity of the future independent state.
Historians such as Varnhagem and Capistrano de Abreu tended to reinforce the idea that the external borders and territorial unity constituted the new nation’s legacy from Portugal. In their view, the real challenge faced by the new State was the establishment of the territory’s internal borders. The most dramatic threat of all was the danger of territorial fragmentation. Nevertheless, unlike the westward expansion of the USA, the conquest of the Brazilian hinterland was never completed. As far as we know, the effective occupation of the land took place in ebbs and flows of population and depopulation, discontinuity and dispersion in time and space. There is however a general consensus that Brazil was formed along the edge, or from the outside in. In other words, external sovereignty was achieved before the internal process of integrating the different parts of Portuguese America had been completed.
The reality created by successive treaties from the mid-eighteenth century onward enabled the symbolic and material presence of Portuguese administration in the most remote areas. The expeditions for the demarcation of the territory and the construction of fortresses had a huge impact on the Indians and the Maroon communities living in border regions. From the second half of the eighteenth century onward, the Platine, Andean and Amazonian borders progressively gained centrality in diplomatic offices, exemplified, in concrete terms, by Dom Rodrigo de Souza Coutinho’s creation of the Maritime Royal Society (Kantor, 2010a).
