lonists. Former Turkish subjects—both Christian and Muslim—made up the larger part of the foreign immigrants in Novorossiia. But Alex­ ander, like Catherine before him, actively recruited western Europe­ ans as well. They would, he hoped, not only colonize the steppe, but provide examples of good husbandry to the native settlers. Germans and Swiss By far the most numerous of these immigrants from the west were Germans.39 Not only the lure of fertile soil, but also the hope of religious freedom, brought them to Russia. The social and politi­ cal disruptions of the Napoleonic period, the frequent'wars, taxes, and conscriptions worked to loosen their bonds to their native soil. The Russian government, for its part, was particularly eager to attract Germans. The duc de Richelieu, for example, hoped to recruit substantial numbers to the vicinity of Odessa. With the tsar’s permission, he purchased more than eighteen thousand desiatinas of land from such great landlords as Count Potocki and General Kislinskii.40 German colonists settled on this land would, he expected, 30 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 assure the city an abundant supply of fruits, vegetables, butter, and other comestibles. The government was therefore willing to offer the Germans exceptionally generous terms.41 The colonists who responded came as communities rather than as individual settlers—a reflection of the strength of the religious factor in promoting immigration. In 1803 alone, nearly three thousand Mennonites left Ulm for the promised land of the steppe, and their experiences were similar to those of many other immigrants. The Russian officials did not provide them suitable quarters for the winter. As a French resident of Katerynoslav reported to Paris, the colonists who arrived before October had a comparatively easy time, as they could prepare for winter. On the other hand, those who did not arrive until November or December often fell ill and died.42 After the bitter winter some Germans returned to their homeland; others, like a group at Ovidiopil, lodged complaints against the Russian officials, who had allegedly packed them into crumbling buildings “ like herring.” 43 Even worse, when some of the leaders tried to make their protests heard, they were physically beaten. As with the Jewish colonists, officials were slow to deliver the promised subsidies. The colonists were supposed to receive a daily allotment of forty kopecks per person, but were lucky to receive ten. Mysterious diseases ravaged the settlements. In one small colony, 150 persons died in a single day in February 1805. The duc de Richelieu personally visited the devastated town and suc­ cessfully restored the morale of the settlers. The colonists, we are told, came to revere him “ as a father.” 44 The loneliness of the steppe was itself a danger. Mennonites, for example, settled on the virgin soil along the Molochna River; they were on an exposed plain, and during the harsh winter were without neighbors to aid them. Many perished. Still, persistency and indus­ try eventually paid rewards. By 1818, there were 958 Mennonite families in Novorossiia with more coming annually. In 1820, another 179 families sought a new home on the plains. The Men­ nonites not only produced wheat, but grew fruits and vegetables, raised cattle, and engaged in small manufacture such as cloth­ making. Their neat cottages, trim fences, and bursting granaries so impressed the government that it attempted to settle other German émigrés, less experienced in agriculture, near them. Political exiles in particular were settled on adjacent lands, in hopes that they would emulate their industrious neighbors. Catholic Germans also responded to the invitation to take up farming on the steppe, albeit in smaller numbers. Thus, Roman The Regime o f Richelieu 31 Catholics made up the entire population of Kleinliebenthal and Josephsthal—two colonies established in 1804.4S Located about twelve versts from Odessa, Kleinliebensthal was founded by Johann Snoger and Anton Schliech, but named by the due himself. The set­ tlement grew slowly—forty-eight families arrived in the first year, and only thirty-one over the following three. A hundred years later, the population of the colony, still Catholic, was 2,397 persons. Josephsthal was likewise founded on empty lands inhabited only by wild animals. The immigrants—116 strong—passed their first Russian winter (1803-1804) in Odessa; the due gave them employ­ ment and sent for a German-speaking pastor, since all the Catholic priests in the city were Italian and knew no German. The pastor who came to serve them, Joseph Korizky, has left a description of the settlement’s difficult early days. The air, he believed, was harm­ ful, especially to newcomers unaccustomed to stiff winds from the sea. The lack of forests meant a shortage of firewood, and this com­ pounded the rigor of the winter. The Germans burned seaweed to warm themselves and cook their food. Snakes and rats infested their huts and fields. In early October 1815, more than one thousand German colonists were reported ill, most from unknown diseases. Some colonists used up their allotted funds but failed to make their farms productive. In 1811, fifty German families fled from a colony near Odessa, but were caught and returned. One of the leaders among the Germans, Pastor Schabel, reported in 1815, “ I found the poor colonists in total desperation. Hundreds of them were dying of hunger and cold.” 46 And yet the colonies survived. Swiss immigrants came from both the German-speaking and (in smaller numbers) the French-speaking cantons. Many were artisans skilled in the manufacture of silk, paper, and muslin. The economic disruptions of the Napoleonic wars prompted them to seek a new home in which to ply their trades. One group from Zürich founded a village in the Crimea about sixteen kilometers from Teodosiia and named it Zürichsthal, for their homeland. In 1805, no fewer than forty-nine Swiss families found their way to the Crimea. With its stately mountains and forests, it must have reminded them of their homeland. They also faced formidable difficulties in building a new life. They lived in flimsy Tatar huts until they could build sturdy houses. There was no market for their manufactures, and they depended chiefly upon farming, fishing, and forestry. But the site was a good one, and Zürichsthal soon attracted colonists from Ger­ many as well as Switzerland. By 1820, it included 145 households. 32 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 French-speaking Swiss settled on the right bank of the Dniester River in Budiak.47 A noted botanist, Louis-Vincent Tardan, had pre­ viously reconnoitered the region and recommended settlement on a strip of land along the river near Akkerman. The land, he affirmed, was excellently suited for vineyards. The French Swiss called their settlement Chabeau, from the Turkish ashaba, meaning “ lower gar­ dens.“ Each family received sixty desiatinas, and the community was given common lands to the extent of seven hundred desiatinas. The settlement was one of the smallest in the southern Ukraine, but its economy seems to have flourished. Even in the 1960s, descendants of the Swiss settlers were still to be found in the region; they retained French names and spoke the French language. They also spoke Russian, Ukrainian, Moldavian, and German—an indication that they maintained close relations with their neighbors on the steppe. Did this policy of recruiting foreign settlers to farm the steppe make a substantial contribution to the development of Novorossiia? Both contemporaries and modern historians have voiced differing opinions. According to Mary Holdemess, an Englishwoman who visited the region about 1820, many Bulgarian and German colonies had clearly failed, despite the privileges they had received.48 Although land was abundant, their houses were packed together; plague and other diseases easily spread among them. Excessive drink and poor preparation for the winter took heavy tolls. Skilled artisans—carpenters, shoemakers, cabinet makers, blacksmiths, and tailors—were allowed to settle in cities to the deprivation of the rural villages. On the other hand, some colonies flourished. The Mennonites seem by all accounts to have been the most suc­ cessful. Still according to Mrs. Holdemess, the Mennonites residing near Perekop in the Crimea were wealthy, knowledgeable in business affairs, sober, and industrious. They built large farmhouses, planted extensive orchards, laid out great gardens, and bred the finest cows in the country; they also produced a great abundance of wheat. In her words, “ They are a most industrious and religious class of peo­ ple, deservedly held in high estimation.“ 49 According to an article in the Journal d ’Odessa, dated January 1828, there were then 11,714 Mennonites settled in sixty-five colonies; they were celebrated for their well-built houses, cleanliness, beautiful gardens, prosperity, and hospitality.50 About a decade later, Anatole Demidov painted a bright picture of Mennonite life: well-cultivated fields, well-maintained houses, immense stocks of com, blooming acacias.51 The Mennon­ ites deserved commendation for transforming the desert into a land The Regime o f Richelieu 33 overflowing with milk, vegetables, fruits, and fine wheat flour. Did the colonists serve as models of good husbandry for the indi­ genous peasants? This too was a principal goal of the settlement pol­ icy, but here the results were meager. Both administratively and cul­ turally, the colonies remained isolated from the general population. They were initially placed directly under the minister of internal aflairs, who governed them through a central authority (located first in Katerynoslav and then in Odessa) and through a system of resident inspectors. Later the colonial administration was placed under the minister of crown domains. But consistently, they escaped the jurisdiction of the normal administrative apparatus; even the governor general of Novorossiia had no direct authority over them. He could not therefore develop a fully integrated policy of settlement within the region, which might have encouraged cultural exchanges. As E. I. Druzhinina points out: “ Although the settlers assumed Russian citizenship, the largest number of them bore the name ‘foreign colonists’; they were separated from the surrounding popula­ tion by language, religion, habits, and especially by their distinctive juridical status.” 52 Another twentieth-century historian, K. Waliszewski, gives an even more negative assessment: The colonies thus founded formed so many little islands cleanly separated from the surrounding environment, with which the presumed Kulturtraeger has only the most indispensable contacts. . . . they strove to keep themselves as close as possible to their country of origin. . . .53 J. Kohl, a German doctor, was more optimistic: It is a common thing to hear the Russians in the vicinity of a German colony say . . . ‘that’s the way the Germans do,’ and this alone would be enough to convince me that the example of my countrymen has not been altogether thrown away.54 Novorossiia was nearly unique in allowing pockets of foreign set­ tlements to be excluded from the general administration of the area. In the United States and Canada, ethnic and religious groups clustered in certain regions, but as quickly as they settled, their lives were subsumed under the general laws for administering the popula­ tions at large. Juridical distinctiveness in Novorossiia helped preserve cultural diversity; the colonies long preserved their own languages, religion, and customs and successfully resisted assimila­ tion. 34 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 While its cultural repercussions may have been slight, the policy of recruiting and assisting colonists—both native and foreign—did succeed in filling up the land. Richelieu left one. million more souls in Novorossiia than he f