of prime importance at Odessa was wind. The uninterrupted flatlands to the north made the region a wind channel between two weather systems, the Mediterranean and the continental.37 The promontory upon which the city was set held it high into the course of these shifting currents. The lively air usually quickly dissipated spells of dead heat or dead cold, which were the bane of lowland towns. But they also, quite literally, stirred up an acute problem for the populace. That problem was dust. The limestone soil—formed by layers of cockleshells and the porous debris of other shellfish—was easily friable, and the winds of the summer distributed a suffocating dust through the town.38 Beginnings, 1794-1803 11 Windows or doors, even when tightly fitted, offered scant protection. The rains of winter cleared the air but transformed the dust into ubiquitous mud, nearly as obnoxious. Still, these annoyances did not constitute major hazards to health, and Odessa's turbulent air was, on balance, a benefit.39 In an area nearly devoid of trees, the Pontine limestone, which largely formed the seaside bluffs, offered a satisfactory building material. The stone was soft enough for a hachet to cut, and, as one traveler noted, it was “ very favourable for the more showy purposes of the architect.” 40 The limestone hardened under weathering and its light color set the hues of the new and growing city. Imbedded in the limestone were so many cockleshells that many of the houses had “ the rough appearance of an artificial grotto.” 41 The promontory was itself mined in building the city, resulting in “ catacombs” underlying its surface. The limestone was also easily penetrated by wells reaching down to the water table, set upon impervious clays. The ravines, cutting into the limestone, uncovered natural springs, and in 1792 the well water available on Odessa’s future site was described as “ fresh and good.” 42 But already in 1805 an Italian merchant found that the water was bad and very scarce in summer.43 The limestone cliffs gave Odessa its beauty, but the narrow stretch of coastal plain between the cliffs and the sea made its fortune. The same Italian merchant who complained about the drinking water in the city praised the waters of its harbor. “ Its port has one of the easiest approaches and furnishes excellent anchorage of a depth of 11 meters.” 44 The harbors of the Sea of Azov were all shallow, as were those of the Black Sea located on or close to river deltas. In Odessa’s deep harbor, large ships could load and unload their cargoes without the use of lighters. Tides were insignificant; changes in depth responded to variations in river flow (and sometimes to winds) but were never substantial. Comparatively mild temperatures kept the harbor free from ice for most of the year. Typically, ice formed in the harbor about January 4, and its closing could be expected between January 27 and February 19. But the spring thaw came early, and usually the port was open once more in early March. In about one out of three years, the harbor did not close at all. To be sure, the weather was erratic, and a sharp cold wave could unexpectedly close the port. In 1803, the waters froze within twenty-four hours—a remarkably brief period. Ice held sixty ships laden with grain destined for western Europe in its unyielding grasp.4S 12 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The Black Sea remained, of course, a challenge to sailors. According to an observer writing before 1819, November was the most dangerous month for ships, with violent storms and dense fogs to harass navigators.46 But Odessa shared these difficulties with every other Black Sea port. Given the risks of the open water, mariners no doubt found her excellent harbor all the more welcome. Planning As a new foundation, Odessa was from its origin a planned city; its early history reflects not only military and commercial needs, but the esthetic sense of the epoch. The two chief architects of the town were de Ribas, the Spanish-Irish soldier of fortune; and de Voland, the Dutch engineer. The honor for drawing the city’s design has traditionally been awarded to de Ribas, whose name still today decorates one of Odessa’s principal thoroughfares. Catherine gave him chief responsibility for the town administration, and he success­ fully presided over the city’s early growth. But by de Ribas’s own testimony, de Voland built the port “ according to his own projects and plans,” which received the approval of Prince Platon Zubov, commander of the Black Sea fleet.47 The terrain imposed many constraints upon the builders. The coastal plain became perforce the port district of the city—destined to contain wharves, the quarantine, customs house, and warehouses—but it was too small to include a large residential area. The city was chiefly laid out atop the high promontory, which gently sloped to the southeast. Two ravines cut into the surface, and the uneven terrain prevented the implementation of a rigorously sym­ metrical layout. De Voland’s plan for Odessa was “ in keeping with other western ideas of the time.”48 Because of the ravines, de Voland laid out two gridirons intersecting at a forty-seven degree angle. To preserve uni­ form rectangularly in the city blocks, the principal gridiron had to be set at an angle to the shore. This grid pattern was a popular contem­ porary form, chiefly because it rendered the tasks of surveying and subdividing relatively straightforward. It often appears, for example, in the new towns of the American West. De Voland’s design envisioned spacious streets one hundred feet wide; an esplanade was to separate the old Turkish fort from the residential area. Soldiers from the local garrison began constructing the city and port on August 22, 1794, a date traditionally celebrated as Odessa’s official birthday.49 At the request of Platon Zubov, the imperial Beginnings, 1 7 9 4 -1 8 0 3 * 13 government provided the substantial sum of a little less than 2 mil­ lion rubles, to be spent over a five-year period. These funds were to be used for the construction of the port, the admiralty, barracks, and warehouses. The Platon Mole commemorated the name of the city’s benefactor. In 1796, the city received an additional 312,135 rubles to pay for the construction of a hospital, cathedral, and administra­ tive offices.50 The young city was divided into two sections, the Military and the Greek. The Military section occupied fifty-two blocks with 560 lots. The Greek section included sixty-five blocks with 720 lots. De Ribas was given authority to assign the lots. He took two for himself and built a house, and other lots were given to various Russian nobles, military personnel and merchants.51 In providing port facilities, state buildings, private homes, churches, gardens, and markets, de Voland and de Ribas faced constant frustrations. Shortages of building materials, difficulties in transporting needed supplies, faulty plans, hasty construction, and misappropriation of funds obstructed their work. Still, at the age of one year, Odessa boasted a customhouse, a quarantine station, police offices, and other administrative bureaus. The foundations were laid for St. Catherine’s Orthodox Church in 1794; in the following year, construction began on the Greek church of the Trinity. De Voland’s reputation grew with the city. In 1795, an English woman who visited the new town expressed the sanguine opinion that, as it was de Voland’s work, the city was destined for greatness.52 By 1796, Odessa had a stock exchange and an office of censorship—both indicators of a lively commercial and cultural life. Empress Catherine had favored both Odessa and its architects, and her death in 1796 introduced a dark interlude in its young history. Her son and successor Emperor Paul hated his mother and all her works. He purged her chief administrators in Novorossiia, including de Ribas, and forced the resignation of de Voland. The two went on to active, even turbulent, careers; de Ribas was implicated in a plot to assassinate the emperor in 1799. But neither one is subsequently involved in the history of Odessa.53 The city’s growth did not rigorously conform to de Voland’s origi­ nal plan, but Odessa continued to reflect in its wide streets and regu­ lar grid his basic conceptions.54 Perhaps not surprisingly, a visitor from the New World, Mark Twain, detected in the 1860s resem­ blances to midwestern America: I have not felt so much at home for a long time as I did when I “ raised the hill” and stood in Odessa for the first time. It looked just like an American city; fine, broad streets, and straight as well; a 14 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 stirring, business-look about the streets and the stores; fast walkers; a familiar new look about the houses and everything; yes, and a driving and smothering cloud of dust that was so like a message from our own dear native land that we could hardly refrain from shedding a few grateful tears and execrations in the old time-honored American way. Look up the street or down the street, this way or that way, we saw only America.55 An earlier visitor, a German doctor, also noted Odessa's broad streets and its position between two solitudes: The streets are, like all new Russian streets, immensely broad, and so completely open that one can often see the sea at one end and the steppe at the other, and look from the middle of the city at once into the waste of waters and the waste of grass.56 Odessa, with its long and wide streets and distant vistas, was designed for expansion. The city, in a way, looked outward. This characteristic may have handicapped the coalescence of an integrated urban community. Later observers noted, as we shall see, that Odessa's society was highly segmented. On the other hand, the same characteristic easily tolerated the existence of differing ethnic and cultural groups within the city; the forces of assimilation worked feebly. Its physical layout thus may have reinforced one of the chief features of the new town—a cosmopolitan society and culture. It is a commonplace of urban history that the government dom­ inated urban development in the Russian Empire, whereas western European and American towns grew spontaneously.57 Catherine did indeed decree that a town should rise on the site of Khadzhibei, but the central government in St. Petersburg had difficulty retaining tight control over its distant creation. Catherine’s charter of towns, issued in 1785, provided for the election of city councils through complex procedures, but they exercised little power. At Odessa too, the par­ ticipation of the citizenry in government remained very limited.58 In Novorossiia, chief authority rested with an appointed official, the governor general, whose office was created in 1775. In 1802, Tsar Alexander I established the administrative mechanism under which the city would be governed for the next eighty years. The head of the urban government was called “ city c h ie f (gradonachaïnifà, and the area under his jurisdiction was the gradonachal’stvo.59 He was appointed by the tsar—an indication of his importance—but answered to the governor general of Novorossiia and through him to the minister of internal affairs. The chief, or mayor, supervised the Beginnings, 1 7 9 4 -1 8 0 1 15 work of urban officials, although these too were largely selected by the central government. Characteristically, however, these officials enjoyed greater auton­ omy than their commissions might suggest. The officials located on this distant frontier did not follow the strict bureaucratic routines required of their counterparts in the central provinces.60 They could consult with St. Petersburg only on the most pressing matters, and sometimes had to act before an answer was received. The system remained authoritarian in theory, but under a capable and energetic administrator, it could be liberal in practice. Moreover, with only trivial exceptions, the imperia