ound there in 1803.55 Land values in the province increased ten times, from about one ruble per desiatina to ten or more. By 1817, no more uncultivated land was available for free distribution to colonists. The due had carried out his mandate to settle the steppes. The words he addressed to Alexander I expressed satisfaction with the results: Never, Sire, in any part of the world, have there been nations so different in manners, language, customs, and dress living within so restricted a space. The Nogais occupy the left bank of the Molochna; families from Great Russia, the right bank; then, higher up, are the Mennonites, facing the Germans, who are half Lutheran, half Catholic; higher up again at Tolmak, the Little Russians [Ukrainians], members of the Greek religion; then a Russian sect, the Dukhobors.56 The City When the new administrator arrived at Odessa in 1803, needs were pressing. The due himself had difficulty finding lodgings among the earthen huts, in which many citizens still resided. He finally located in a single-story house, but had to wait patiently for six weeks until furnishings—including chairs—could be found for him at Kherson.57 His friend Sicard, who arrived in Odessa soon after (in 1804), paints a dismal picture. No land was cultivated for forty leagues around it. There were almost no wells, and water was insufficient; wood, whether for fire or construction, was in short supply.58 Mrs. Guthrie, who visited the city about the same time, comments that its houses were “ poorly built.” 59 According to Pingaud, in 1803 only about “ 4500 souls vegetated in Odessa,” and the city revenues did not meet expenses.60 A Russian historian has called Odessa in the days before Richelieu “ more like a pirate colony than a well-built city.” 61 The government buildings, erected only a few years before, were falling apart, the cathedral unfinished, port facilities inadequate, and the houses sunk in mud. The Regime o f Richelieu 35 Planning and Building Richelieu built and encouraged building, and his policies inspired a veritable boom in construction. Keeping alive the traditions of de Voland and de Ribas, he laid out a symmetrical city and favored the clean and elegant neo-classical style; his work gave Odessa the har­ monious aspect it has in part since retained. Much of his success was due to his abilities at raising money. In 1812, Baron Stieglitz donated 100,000 rubles to the city to meet the costs of construc­ tion.62 To supervise public constructions, the due hired the noted Rus­ sian architect A. I. Mel’nikov.63 His best-known works are the two charming, semicircular buildings that still stand above the monumen­ tal stairway leading down to the shore. Later, the statue of Richelieu was appropriately set between them. The entire complex today forms the city’s aesthetic heart. The source of almost equal pride was the municipal theater, built by a local architect, Frappoli, according to the design of the noted architect of St. Petersburg, Toma de Tomon.64 Begun in 1803, it was finished in 1809. Consisting of three rows of loges, a stage similar to that of the Opera House in Paris, and a ground floor, the theater could seat eight hundred persons with more room for standees. The building was, to be sure, without heat, and the lighting system—oil lamps and candles—proved to be a fire hazard and ultimately the ruin of the structure. In 1873, the edifice burned down; on its site stands the present Opera House. The grand opening of the original theater was celebrated with the performance of the twenty-first symphony of the Ukrainian com­ poser M. D. Ovsianiko-Kulikovs’kyi, who conducted his own serf orchestra. The early plays were put on by Polish actors. Subse­ quently, Italian companies and ballet groups came to the theater. Soon amateur companies were formed; one performed in French and one in Italian. The leading French amateur actress was the proprietress of a French boutique in Odessa; she had the further dis­ tinction of being the daughter of Leonard, the hairdresser of Queen Marie-Antoinette.65 In order to make the downtown area more attractive, in 1811 the due arranged for its illumination by two hun­ dred street lights. Richelieu was not unmindful that the theater attracted rich Polish landlords into the city.66 Those who came to play might stay to trade. Richelieu also laid out the wide boulevard at the very edge of the promontory overlooking the sea. The great merchants allegedly 36 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 raised loud protests, as their houses now had to be built far back from the promontory’s edge; they could no longer view with satisfac­ tion their ships coming into port.67 But the citizenry as a whole was given ready access to a splendid prospect over sea and harbor. To private builders, the governor offered free home sites, laid out along straight and wide streets, on condition that they build upon them within two years. If they did not do so, then the sites reverted to the government. A “ Committee of Administration,” funded by tax revenues, was authorized to give loans to builders at the rate of 6 percent per annum.68 Richelieu placed great store upon the planting of trees, both in the city and in its immediate environs. Trees would offer protection against sun and wind, reduce dust, and give the city something of the qualities of an oasis, arising out of the treeless steppe. A Frenchman, the Chevalier de Rosset, is supposed to have planted Odessa’s first tree, a poplar near the quarantine.69 The due himself imported acacias from Vienna at his own expense, and gave them free to all who promised to plant and care for them.70 Should a citizen fail to water the trees in front of his house, the watchful due would call upon him to remind him of this civic duty. Colonists who received twenty-five desiatinas of land near Odessa had to plant three hundred trees within two years. To this day, Odessa is known as the city of the white acacias. The due also encouraged the planting of private gardens, for a dis­ tance of thirty to forty leagues around the city.71 The first public gar­ den was donated to Odessa by Felix de Ribas, brother of the city’s founder. However, the best-known urban park was the “ Due’s Gar­ den,” where Richelieu collected samples of various flowers and plants, both native and foreign.72 Even after his own departure from Odessa, he continued to ship slips of various plants to enhance the garden’s beauty and interest. Visitors to Odessa waxed lyrical about the city’s rapid progress. After only five years of the due’s rule, reported Mrs. Guthrie, the city was unrecognizable. The air, she claimed—perhaps too sanguinely—was good, the streets were wide and straight, and lined by two-storied houses built of stone.73 Storage facilities, also built of stone and as elegant as houses, could hold three thousand chetverts of wheat. The population had grown to between eighteen and twenty thousand. Another visitor to the city, the Frenchman de Lagarde, praised giant melons, grown in the Crimea, that he had eaten at the due’s table. He too waxed lyrical over the city’s progress: The Regime o f Richelieu 37 This city is a marvel when one thinks of the rapidity with which it has grown; all the houses are built in stone, most of them with two stories; the streets are wide and straight.74 Difficulty in obtaining stone, he admitted, had delayed the paving of the streets, but sidewalks, lined by rows of trees, had been con­ structed. Among the city’s principal edifices were Russian churches and a Catholic church. (The Orthodox cathedral, designed by Frappoli in the classical style, was completed in 1809.) There was a gym­ nasium (high school) harboring one hundred boarders, an institute for young ladies, and a hospital. De Lagarde admired the botanic gardens and the well-equipped port, and described the barracks. He set the population at twenty-five thousand, and, like most other visi­ tors, wondered at its polyglot character. One routinely encountered on the streets of Odessa, Russians, Ukrainians, Jews, Greeks, Armenians, Turks, Tatars, Poles, French, Germans, Italians, and Englishmen. Some wore their native costumes, and this added to t|ie color of the passing parade. Richelieu himself, in his memoirs, drew up a balance of his own achievements.75 When he arrived at Odessa in 1803, the population numbered between seven thousand and eight thousand (Pingaud, it should be remembered, thought it was more nearly forty-five hun­ dred), settled in some four hundred houses. When he left eleven years later, the city contained thirty-five thousand persons; the number of houses had grown remarkably, to twenty-six hundred. He further located the basis of this substantial progress: overseas trade, the city’s chief source of wealth, had continued to grow, and his own government had used its incremented resources wisely and well. Commerce Richelieu gave much attention to the construction of good port facilities. The imperial government granted a loan of 200,000 rubles for harbor improvements; a large mole was built extending into the harbor, dividing the port into two parts—one for ships coming down the Dnieper River and plying the coastal waters; and the other for larger ships coming through the Straits and subject to quarantine. The quarantine facilities were modelled after those of Marseilles. To ease conditions for foreign sailors and travelers, he converted the old Turkish fortress into quarantine quarters, where the new arrivals could wait out their period of confinement in reasonable comfort. Storage facilities were also greatly enlarged. 38 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Still in the interest of promoting commerce, Richelieu sought to establish a supporting infrastructure of credit and insurance institu­ tions. In 1804, a commercial bank with a capital of 750,000 rubles was founded under his auspices, although financed through private subscription. A merchant could bring to the bank bills of exchange or promissory notes endorsed by two other merchants. The bank would discount the bills for a term of nine months at a charge of 6 percent per annum. Merchants could borrow cash against stocks of goods, which had to be sealed in warehouses. The money granted represented no less than one-third nor more than three-quarters of the fair market value of the merchandise.76 Insurance too was a needed service for a commercial city, and in 1806, again under Richelieu’s prompting, a joint-stock company called the Imperial Chamber of Insurance was formed. Capital was sought from private persons—chiefly local landlords. Navigating in unknown waters, the company soon was paying out more in settlements than it collected in premiums and was forced to close down.77 It retained the distinc­ tion of having been the first maritime insurance company founded in Russia.78 Of more lasting service was Richelieu’s establishment of a com­ mercial court, which offered quick and reasoned settlement of com­ mercial disputes. Its first director, Armand Emmanuel Saint-Priest, was the second son of François Saint-Priest, a prominent statesman of monarchical France. Richelieu actively cultivated the nobles of Poland, and through his persuasion, “ they soon commenced the erection of a number of houses and granaries. . . .” 79 His name alone attracted merchants from the west, especially from France. He advertised the advantages of Odessa among poten­ tial men of commerce—both in the Russian Empire and abroad. One of them, Charles Sicard, wrote that in 1804: . . . I was in Marseilles. They scarcely spoke of Odessa, having no idea of the city nor of the country, and consequently, knew nothing of its commerce. I saw three or four expeditions directed to Odessa on the basis that the then young duc de Richelieu was governor there. It was for this same reason that I myself decided to go there for several months, but then I settled there. That is, in a word, the history of nearly all the foreigners 