nd (on the Sea of Azov) Mariiupil (now Zhdanov). The treaty also delivered the Crimea to the feeble rule of a Tatar principality. Catherine claimed full sovereignty over the peninsula in 1783. The Russian Empire absorbed the entire Azov coastline, including the strategic Straits of Kerch, which open onto the Black Sea. And Cath­ erine, unlike Peter, kept what she had conquered.8 Catherine actively sought to promote commerce within the newly acquired lands. In 1778, only four years after the Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainaiji, she founded the city of Kherson at the mouth of the Dnieper River, ninety miles east of the future Odessa.9 In her Beginnings, 1794-1803 5 design, the new town would become the chief port of the region and the “ St. Petersburg of the South.” Set upon a marshy delta, ringed and divided by canals and ditches, it looked to some visitors more like a southern Amsterdam. The principal architect of the city was I. A. Hannibal, the black great-uncle of Alexander Pushkin.10 The toponym, Kherson, evoked the name of the ancient Greek town of Chersonesus, which the scholarship of the time erroneously placed in the vicinity of the new city.11 The name also bore strong Christian overtones. In pious belief. Prince Volodimer, who first led ancient Rus’ into the Christian faith, was baptized at Korsun, medieval Chersonesus. Intent on establishing her control over the new regions with for­ tresses and ports, Catherine built Mariiupil on the Sea of Azov in 1779.12 In 1788, she founded Mykolaiv, at the mouth of the South Boh River, 15 versts north of the site of the ancient Greek colony of Ol’bia.13 The success of these new foundations was critically dependent on the resources and resolution of their Russian rulers. But it depended no less critically on another factor: commercial links to the world beyond the seas, which would bring life to the harbors and send demand for produce rippling back into the hinterland. The tsarist generals, garrisons, administrators, and clerks who came into the new towns met almost at once arrivals from another direction, from Mediterranean communities. They were chiefly merchants, and in the earliest years they were for the most part Ottoman subjects (who were thus able to ship through the Straits with relative ease). Most of them were Greeks. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Greeks from the Aegean Islands, and especially Chios, had woven a tight commercial network stretching across the Mediterranean, much as the Italians had done in the twelfth century. Along the northern littoral of the Black Sea, a strong political regime once again came into contact with a vital commercial empire. Two years after the foundation of Kherson, Greek merchants were already actively trading there. They did not, however, long remain alone. Five non-Greek, foreign companies and twelve “ branches” (kontoras) were active at Kherson between 1781 and 1788. Austrians and French were especially prominent. Two of their number, Johann Weber and Anthoine de Saint-Joseph, have left us glowing reports of the town and its prospects.14 The French in particular saw in the opening of the Black Sea an opportunity to outflank the trade routes through the Baltic and White Seas, which England dominated.15 In the first six months of 1787, nineteen ships Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 6 left Kherson for Marseilles.16 As a mark of his special interest, Emperor Joseph II of Austria accepted the invitation of Catherine to visit Kherson in 1787.17 The chief produce these merchants sought from the hinterland was wheat. The long-term population growth in western Europe and the short-term impact of wars (those of the French Revolution and those of Napoleon) drove up the price of wheat in western markets, and also kindled the ambitions of merchants, who sought it in ever more distant regions. Table 1.1 gives the volume of wheat exports through the principal Black Sea ports of the Russian Empire from 1792 to 1794. Exports tripled between 1792 and 1793, but fell in 1794, cut by crop failures, by a plague of locusts, and at one point by a government prohibition against the export of grain. Table 1.1 The Export of Wheat Through Black Sea Ports, 1792-1794 (In Chetverts) Ochakiv Kherson Mykolaiv Taganrog Totals 1792 1793 1794 8,875 14,812 15,682 5,326 44,695 46,615 29,399 26,010 32,328 134,352 33,390 2,758 6,511 20,483 63,142 Source: Vol’skii, 1854, p. 61. But these early foundations were also handicapped in serving as entrepôts between the hinterland and the hungry western markets. The Sea of Azov was shallow and difficult to navigate. Its ports (Taganrog, Mariiupil, Azov) attracted only the most skilled and confident—and venturesome—captains. Kherson and Mykolaiv, both Black Sea ports of great potential, were founded upon lowlands; the proximity and extent of marshes worsened conditions of hygiene and obstructed land traffic with the hinterland. By 1794, the newly resuscitated trade with the West had not found a satisfactory port to link sea and steppes. Novorossiia and Its Capital In 1764 Catherine formed the territories newly acquired in the southwest of her empire into a province, which she called Novoros­ siia.18 In the course of the war waged between 1787 and 1791, Don Beginnings, 1 7 9 4 -1 8 0 3 7 Joseph de Ribas, a soldier of fortune born in Naples of Spanish and Irish stock and one of many adventurers in Catherine’s service, stormed the fortress of Yeni-Dunai at Khadzhibei.19 The date was September 17, 1789, and the newly conquered territory was added to the province of Novorossiia. TTie Treaty of Jassy (1792, new style), which ended the war, also profoundly reshaped the political geography of the Black Sea littoral. Russia was conceded full sovereignty over the Crimea, which she had claimed since 1783. Moreover, the Porte recognized her rule over the section of coast between the South Boh and the Dniester, including the site of Khadzhibei. Catherine apparently considered making the port of Ochakiv, near the mouth of the Boh River, the effective capital of Novorossiia.20 But Ochakiv lacked a good natural harbor. On the other hand, de Ribas and a close collaborator, a Dutch engineer named Franz de Voland, recommended Khadzhibei as the site of the region’s princi­ pal port. Its harbor Was deep and nearly ice-free. Breakwaters, on the model of those found at Naples, Livorno, and Ancona, could be cheaply constructed and would render the harbor safe even for large fleets. The governor general of Novorossiia, Prince Platon Zubov— one of Catherine’s favorites—lent crucial support to this latter pro­ posal. On May 27, 1794, Catherine gave it her approval.21 She immediately sent twenty-six thousand rubles to de Ribas and de Voland to build a harbor. This new settlement was given the name Odessa. The reasons for this choice are obscure. According to one report, the august Academy at St. Petersburg first proposed it.22 Catherine doubtless consulted with many advisers, but there seems no reason to doubt the old tradition that the final choice was her own, as was confirmed by an Italian merchant resident in Odessa only a few years after its founding.23 Significantly, the name of Odessa, like that of Kherson, has strong Greek connotations. It was named after the ancient Greek settlement Odessos built almost forty-five versts to the east of Khadzhibei on the left bank of the Tylihul’s’kyi Lyman. According to A. Orlov, an early historian of Odessa, Catherine ordered that the name be written not Odessos, but Odessa, “ in the feminine gender.’’24 She reportedly made the state­ ment at a court ball on January 6, 1795.25 Perhaps too, as other his­ torians have surmised, she hoped that a Greek name would attract Greek merchants and settlers to the new foundation, for their pres­ ence would be critical to its prosperity.26 And the new town did prosper. It provided the required entrepôt, where merchants from abroad could bid for products brought in from Odessa: A History, 1794-1914 Novorossiia Beginnings, 1794-1803 9 a politically stable and economically productive hinterland. In fact, Odessa proved to be the most successful of Catherine’s many foun­ dations; in its rapid growth it much resembles what Gunther Barth has called an “ instant city.” 27 In the metaphor of one Russian his­ torian, Odessa “ rose like a mushroom after a heavy rain” ; in the view of another, this was a city that “ had no infancy.” 28 In 1889, a German engineer claimed that such rapid growth was “ unheard of in Europe.” 29 The advantages that gave it this remarkable growth were several—an excellent location, intelligent planning, the favor of the imperial government, the appeal of the city to settlers of many nationalities, and, above all, the continuing expansion of foreign trade. Site Not the least of the new town’s advantages were aesthetic. The city was founded upon an outcropped promontory, rising to a height of almost two hundred feet above the Pontine plain. Nearly every traveler who approached the city by water commented upon its strik­ ing location. An English visitor wrote in the 1840s: A view of Odessa from the sea is very commanding. A majestic line of stone houses of Grecian architecture, forming a handsome “ boulevard” built on the edge of a cliff about 200 feet high, the abrupt termination of the steppe,.. .30 In 1862, Timothy Smith of Vermont, appointed to serve as United States consul in the city, wrote enthusiastically of his first view of Odessa: It stands upon a bluff or ridge of soft stone, of a yellow color, which rises almost abruptly about one hundred fifty feet from the shore, leaving a margin below available for storehouses, dock yards and heavy trade.31 The approach from the hinterland also possessed dramatic quali­ ties. Travelers had to traverse the wide, monotonously flat and nearly deserted Ukrainian steppes: Our approach to Odessa [wrote a visitor in the 1820’s] had a wild and dreary aspect. Oceans of steppe appeared everywhere, without a ves­ tige of cultivation or wood.32 10 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Inevitably, the similarity of steppe and sea suggested itself to these early travelers. The steppe was itself an “ ocean” and the canvas-covered wagon that navigated across it “ looked like a ship with sails.” 33 Odessa was a port twice-over, looking out to the empty sea, looking inward to the seemingly empty land. It was also a center of movement, of bustle and of life, which contrasted with the solitude and the stillness of both steppe and sea. Arriving at Odessa from the steppe [a German visitor observed], as in our case, it is scarcely possible to trust the senses, when the rows of splendid houses, whose outline becomes constantly more distinct, gradually rise to view, and after having seen nothing for a length of time but sky and steppe, we suddenly behold the busy scene in all its magnificence.34 The bustling city presented itself in a riot of color. The plains, in contrast, were monochromatic—brown in spring, green in summer, gold in autumn, and white in winter. Odessa’s site, set between soli­ tudes, no doubt influenced even its cultural life. Both to immigrants and to distant observers, it seemed a point of concentrated action, of vital movement, surrounded by inert steppe and empty sea. Things were done at Odessa, and life was lived intensively. As the poet Vla­ dimir Mayakovsky once exclaimed: “ It happened/ In Odessa, it hap­ pened. . . .” 35 Among the further advantages of the city was a comparatively mild climate and a good natural harbor. Its mean annual tempera­ ture is 50.4° F. (10.2° C.). January, the coldest month, averages 27.3° F. (-2.6° C ). July, the hottest month, has a mean tempera­ ture of 73.4° F. (23° C ). The site is, however, exposed to shifting winds and to spells of unusual heat and cold.36 Average annual rain­ fall is slight (431.3 mm. or 17 inches) and also erratic. Some years it is only 200 milimeters, or less than 9 inches. A climatological factor 