 Charges in America and the Southern Ukraine Means of Transporting Grain to Odessa, 1883-1888 Black Sea Cereal Exports in U. S. Tons Average Yearly Export of Cereals in Thousands of Francs Population of Odessa, 1861-1914 The Ten Largest Groups by Native Language in the City of Odessa, 1897 Women and Children in the City of Odessa, 1897 Percentage of Jews in Odessa’s Total Population, 1794-1912 9.2: 9.3: 9.4: 10.1: 10.2: 10.3: 10.4: 219 220 228 230 234 242 247 251 Table o f M aps I . 1: 3.1: 9.1: I I . 1: Novorossiia Fairs and Chumak Trails Railroads in the South Ukraine, ca. 1907 The City of Odessa, ca. 1895 8 67 218 275 Maps 1.1 and 3.1 are based on maps prepared by Geoffrey J. Matthews in Paul R. Magocsi, Ukraine: A Historical Atlas (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985). Table o f Figures 2.1: 4.1: 10.1: Odessa’s Exports, 1804-1813 The Count of Male “ Souls” in New Russia, 1782-1857 Percentage of Jews in Odessa’s Population 40 74 252 A Note on Transcription In transcribing Ukrainian and Russian terms a modified Library of Congress System was used. Soft signs were dropped when they occured at the end of words but retained when they appeared within words. A Note on Geographic Terms The term, Novorossiia (New Russia), is here utilized in its official administrative sense. In 1804, it designated the three gubernias of Kherson, Taurida, and Katerynoslav; in 1812, it came to include Bessarabia as well. In 1874, it ceased to represent an administrative unit, but the name was still used informally to identify this region. The name, South Ukraine, is exclusively a geographic term, includ­ ing approximately the same area but not Bessarabia. Many foreigners in the nineteenth century used the term South Russia, but the meaning is essentially that of the South Ukraine. Ukrainian placenames are used for all geographical references in the Ukraine (see sample list below), except when standard English forms exist, such as Kiev, Odessa, Dnieper and Dniester. Ukrainian Russian Boh River Chernihiv Ielysavethrad Ievpatoriia Inhulets River Katerynoslav Mariiupil Molochna River Mykolaiv Ochakiv Podillia Tyraspil Bug River Chernigov Elizavetgrad Evpatoriia Ingulets River Ekaterinoslav Mariupol Molochnaia River Nikolaev Ochakov Podoliia Tiraspol Street and district names in Odessa will be transliterated from Rus­ sian, the official language of city administration in the tsarist period. A Note on Weights and M easures The metric and United States equivalents of the Russian weights and measures used in the sources quoted here are as follows: Russian 1 chetvert 1 pud 1 verst 1 desiatina 1 sazhen Metric 2.099 16.38 1.065 1.09 2.13 kilograms kilograms kilometers hectares meters United States 5.7719 36 0.663 2.7 7 bushels pounds miles acres feet CHAPTER ONE ' Beginnings, 1 7 9 4 -1 8 0 3 The resumption of this ancient navigation [on the Black Sea] is a not­ able event in modem history; in commerce it has effected a great revolution. —Anthoine de Saint-Joseph, French merchant in the Black Sea, 1805 Of the major cities of contemporary Europe, Odessa, officially founded in 1794, is among the youngest, and no other European city can match its rate of growth in the nineteenth century. But it also developed in an area of the continent that possessed an ancient tradi­ tion of trade and a long if discontinuous history of urban settlement. Geography favored this region. The depression to the north of the Black Sea offers an easy, indeed the widest, path through the moun­ tain chains that divide Europe north from south. Moreover, the Black Sea itself, linked through the Straits with the Mediterranean, offers a convenient maritime route to western lands. The northern littoral of the Black Sea is thus superbly placed to serve as a line of contact and exchange, between south and north, west and east. Patterns, Ancient and Medieval The conditions for commercial prosperity in the region were preeminently two: the presence of a stable political regime in the hinterland, protecting the overland routes from producers to ports; and access to a network of overseas trade, maintained by merchants who knew both distant markets and where the characteristic products of the steppe and forest economy could be sold. In the ancient world, the establishment of steppe empires—those, for example, of the Cimmerians and the Scythians—and the penetration into the Black Sea of Mediterranean, preeminently Greek, merchants fulfilled these conditions. Greeks founded colonies along the northern lit­ toral of what they called the Euxine (“ Hospitable” ) Sea.1 Among them were Olbia (Ol’biia) on the right bank of the South Boh River, 2 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 near present-day Mykolaiv and Tiras on the shore of the Dnistrovyi Lyman (estuary). The hay of present day Odessa is almost a half­ way stop between the sites of these two Greek settlements. The Greek colonists sought the characteristic products of the northern forests and steppes—honey, wax, amber, furs, skins, slaves, and, perhaps most important of all, wheat. They offered in exchange the oil, wine, and luxury products of the Mediterranean world. But the same easy avenues over land and sea that served merchants and travelers could also, in the absence of stable political regimes, invite pillagers and pirates. The agony of the ancient world and the disappearance of stable government disrupted peaceful, pro­ ductive exchanges through the Black Sea ports. From the third cen­ tury after Christ, a stream of invaders—Goths, Huns, Avars, Magyars, and others—fought for possession of the steppes, and the violence undermined the security of the overland routes. The conditions of trade grew favorable again in the period from the ninth to the twelfth centuries. The unification of Kiev and Novgorod into the principality of Kievan Rus’ lent vitality to the trade route that “ connected the Varangians [i.e. Vikings] with the Greeks.” 2 But in this commercial exchange the steppes were more a zone of transit than of production. Kiev and other towns on the fringes of the steppe were the chief staging points, where the com­ mercial expeditions were organized and directed to the south. And the route itself, down the Dnieper River to the Black Sea, remained vulnerable to the incursions of the steppe nomads. In the early twelfth century, the Cumans (Polovtsi) successfully wrested the steppes from the control of Kievan Rus’ and permanently divided Greeks from Varangians. The full revival of Black Sea commerce awaited the thirteenth century, when again a stable empire ruling the steppe came into con­ tact with Mediterranean traders. These traders were in the main Italian merchants, from the booming ports of Amalfi, Venice, Pisa, and Genoa, who established permanent commercial colonies in the Black Sea. The Venetians placed their first such settlement on the Crimean peninsula near the ancient Greek colony of Tanais; it was called Tana, and later Azov. The Pisans chose their first commercial base near present day Taganrog. Most active of all Italians were the Genoese, who, in 1282, built the capital of their Black Sea commer­ cial empire, Caffa in the Crimea, on the site of the ancient city of Teodosiia.3 In these same years, the Mongol prince Ghenghiz Khan brought under his sole authority a huge stretch of the Eurasian continent, 3 Beginnings, 1 7 9 4 -1 8 0 J from China to Eastern Europe. Under Mongol auspices, western missionaries and merchants (among them, Marco Polo) could travel in safety all across Asia, even to fabled Cathay. Along the northern shores of the Black Sea, the political empire of the Mongols met the commercial empire of the Italians. Once again, the steppe yielded to Mediterranean countries its characteristic products—wheat, salt, hides. Still more distinctive was the active export of slaves—Circassians, Slavs, even Tatars. Some—chiefly young girls—were shipped to western Europe for employment as household servants. But most were carried to Mameluke Egypt, where they filled the ranks of the slave army and administration, the twin supports of the Mameluke regime. Cereals too regained their ancient prominence as an article of export; grain from the steppes helped feed Constantinople and even the cities of distant Italy. In the early fourteenth century, a Florentine named Francesco Pegolotti advised his fellow merchants on the qualities of wheat to be found in the regions of the Black Sea.4 In the fifteenth century, even grain from the far-off Kingdom of Poland, carried over the rivers of the Ukraine, was reaching the Black Sea and the Mediterranean beyond.5 The Italians called the future site of Odessa “ Ginestra,” for the colorful broom that grew along the coast. We first hear of the Tatar name of the location, Khadzhibei, in 1415. But by then the struc­ tures sustaining trade were disintegrating. The break-up of the Mongol Empire in the fourteenth century into several rival and war­ ring hordes undermined the security of the overland routes into the continent. Plagues, wars, and economic depression in western Europe reduced the attention and resources that the Italian mer­ chants could invest in this distant trade. The fall of Constantinople jeopardized commerce through the Straits, and the tiny Italian colonies were in no position to resist the overwhelming power of the expanding Ottoman state. Caffa clung to independence until 1475, but its inevitable surrender marks the end of the medieval period of Euxine commercial history—a period remarkable both for the bril­ liance achieved and the promise left unfulfilled. The Modern Revival During the early modern period the currents of long distance trade largely bypassed the Black Sea. The Ottoman Porte, controlling the Straits, was capricious in its policies and wary of foreigners, and it favored its indigenous merchants—predominantly Greeks, Armeni­ ans, Jews, and Arabs. Perhaps an even greater brake on commercial 4 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 development was the disturbed political status of the Ukrainian steppes. Numerous peoples contended for supremacy over them — Tatars, Poles, Lithuanians, Ukrainians, Cossacks, and Russians, as well as the Turks themselves. The Ottomans recognized the need to fortify their exposed northern borders. In 1764, they built a line of fortresses along the northwest coast of the Black Sea. One they erected on a promontory overlooking its waters, at Khadzhibei, about halfway between the mouths of the Dniester and Boh Rivers; they named the fort Yeni-Dunai, “ New World.” 6 The Turkish forts primarily defended against Russian expansion, which had been gaining momentum since the seventeenth century. As early as 1687, Empress Sophia, the clear-eyed, ill-fated elder half-sister of Peter the Great, tried to gain control of the entire course of the Don River to its opening on the Sea of Azov. Peter eventually replaced his sister but kept her policy, and in 1696 wrested from the Ottomans a small area on the Sea of Azov, includ­ ing the like-named town. He celebrated his triumph by founding a city, Taganrog, which he intended to make into a naval base, the promise of Russian supremacy on these southern waters. But the Ottomans were not yet beaten, and by the peace settlement of 1711, Peter grudgingly surrendered the port. A subsequent ruler, the Empress Anne, took the town but agreed not to fortify it and not to launch armed Russian ships on Azov’s waters. The town was soon lost again, and not until 1769 were Azov and Taganrog finally recon­ quered. Empress Catherine II (1762-1796) made the wide and lasting breakthrough onto the waters of the Black Sea. She waged several successful wars against the Ottomans. In 1774, the Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainarji granted to the Russian Empire a stretch of coast properly on the Black Sea, between the South Boh and Dnieper Rivers.7 Russia also gained two other sections of coast along the Sea of Azov. The littoral included the future sites of Mykolaiv, Kher­ son, a