 value of 1.9 million rubles—a mere 2.5 percent of the total.84 But if the volume appears small, there is no mistaking its movement. By 1802, the Black Sea trade 20 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 had come to account for some 4 to 5 percent of the total. By then 16.3 percent of all the wheat exported from the Russian Empire was moving through these southern outlets.85 With growing trade came a growing population. In 1795, accord­ ing to a survey taken by de Ribas, 2,349 persons were settled on the 30,700 desiatinas of land which made up the original circumscription of the town.86 This census did not include nobles, civil servants, the garrison, or a special contingent of Greek and Albanian soldiers. There were registered some 1,679 petty tradesmen (meshchane) , 146 merchants, 240 Jews, 224 Greeks, and 60 Bulgars. Of the 1,845 Russians, fully one-third were runaway serfs. Two years later, the population was officially recorded as 3,153. The figure, however, included 337 Greek and Albanian soldiers and 404 Cossacks. The true increase in population over two years was thus 269. We know further that in 1797 there were approximately 800 Italians residing in Odessa, then forming about 25 percent of the population.87 The city was also growing in a physical sense. Accord­ ing to a survey dated 1799, it contained 60 state buildings (22 of stone), 353 private houses, 234 earthen huts, 416 shops (174 of stone) and 101 magazines.88 These and other surveys give some sense of the society of the new town and also of its economy. The great merchant families inhabited the stone houses. Twelve of these families accounted for a trade in goods worth 300,000 rubles annu­ ally. At the other end of the social scale, port and construction workers, “ those who supported themselves in labor,” inhabited the earthen houses.89 Apart from work in the port itself, construction was the chief sup­ port of the laboring population. The survey of 1799 records the presence of three brick yards, employing eighty workers and four limestone works, employing twenty-four. Among other visible industries there was one macaroni factory and one powder (cosmetic) manufactory.90 Odessa had enjoyed remarkable growth in the first decade of its life. But not all the visitors to the town in 1803 or 1804 expressed optimism for its future. Some pointed to looming problems of hous­ ing, water, public services, and civic culture. Odessa had lacked con­ sistent, central direction—a leader who could channel its surging energies and give its physical structures harmonious shape as a city. These were the accomplishments of the remarkable man who in 1803 came to preside over Odessa’s destinies—the duc de Richelieu. CHAPTER TWO- The Regime o f Richelieu: Enlightenment and Growth in Novorossiia, 1 8 0 3 -1 8 1 4 [The] Duke de Richelieu . . . the founder and benefactor of Odessa, his name can never cease to be regarded with reverence. —George Gordon Lord Byron, 1822 In 1803, Tsar Alexander I named as gradonachaVnik or “ city ch ief’ of Odessa a young French émigré, then thirty-six years old, the duc de Richelieu. Eighteen months later, in 1805, the tsar enlarged his authority by appointing him to serve simultaneously as governor general of the then three provinces of Novorossiia. In the eleven years of his administration, the duc de Richelieu acquired an extraordinary reputation for statesmanship and sense, both abroad and in Russia. To the English writer, Lord Byron, he was a figure of high romance, in part a model for his fictional hero, Don Juan.1 In Russia his reputation has remained bright and untarnished through changing times and regimes. Tsar Alexander I allegedly remarked that the French Revolution could not have been all bad, as it bestowed on Russia the services of Richelieu.2 Soon after the due’s return to France, the grateful citizens of Odessa commissioned the sculptor Ivan Petrovich Martos (1754-1835) to execute a bronze statue of the governor. Finished in 1826, it was placed (and still stands) at the top of the majestic sweep of stairs—now called the Potemkin steps—that lead to the coastal plain below.3 Clothed inex­ plicably in a toga, the statue points to the sea, presumably to indicate the source of Odessa’s riches. 22 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The M aking o f an Administrator The duc de Richelieu was bom in 1766 near Bordeaux, France, a scion of a distinguished noble lineage.4 The famed Cardinal Riche­ lieu, chief minister of Louis XIII in the seventeenth century, was his great-uncle. He was educated at the College du Plessis, which his great-uncle had founded, and did brilliantly. His family betrothed the fifteen-year-old lad to the daughter of Count Louis de Rochechouart, Rosalie, age twelve. He set forth soon after for a tour of Italy, Switzerland, Germany and Austria (1783-1784). Upon his return to France, he discovered that his fiancée was deformed (a hunchback). But still he married her and departed once again for Austria and Russia. His wife never joined him in his long and lengthy peregrinations abroad.5 Like many young and ambitious officers from the West, he was drawn to the service of Empress Catherine in 1789 and fought against the Turks under the command of Suvorov. He joined in the successful assault on the Turkish for­ tress at Ismail in 1790 and suffered a slight wound. For this display of courage, Catherine decorated him with the Cross of St. George, and he earned a reputation at the imperial court. He returned briefly to France in 1801 and 1802. When Napoleon insisted that he serve France exclusively, he once more went abroad. In part his dislike of the upstart Corsican, in part his friendship for the new tsar, Alex­ ander, brought him back to Russia. Although Byron viewed him as a romantic figure, the duc de Richelieu was very much a child of the Enlightenment. He was cool and calculating and brave in battle, but he avoided all acts of per­ sonal flamboyance. As chief of Odessa and governor of Novorossiia, he resided in a modest five-room house with simple furnishings, always living within his means.6 To contemporaries and later histori­ ans, he has had the appearance more of a commoner (raznochinets) than the highborn noble he was. Druzhinina attributes his austere regimen to a “ Puritan” upbringing.7 He rose early in the morning to get a quick start on the day’s business. His cousin and aide has left us this description of the gradonachal’niks daily schedule: . . . he rose at six, summer and winter, and took a cup of café au lait at 8 o’clock. Then, except on Sundays and festivals, he gave audience for an hour to anyone who wished to see him; after this, he would work with his three civil secretaries until 12:30. At one he dined, then worked or went out until evening; he had supper at nine and went to bed at 11:00.8 The Regime o f Richelieu 23 Thanks partially to his early travels, he was fluent in numerous foreign languages—Russian, German, English and Italian as well as his native French. He listened attentively to the petitions and com­ plaints of citizens and liked to wander through the city on foot, mak­ ing observations, inviting conversation, sensing moods. In his personal relations, the due was friendly and approachable, but avoided passionate attachments or aversions to favorites or foes. No shadow of scandal touches his life. A contemporary described him as tall and lean, with fine curly hair; he had “ dark, kind eyes, and a very pleasant white face without a beard, like a woman.” 9 He seems to have been near-sighted. According to his friend Sicard, the due would always ask a companion if he should greet an oncoming woman on the street, as he could not tell whether he knew her or not.10 This sociable, gentle, and modest man was apparently as much appreciated by foreign citizens of his city as by Russians themselves. The Nogai Tatars were said to have “ loved and respected him as a father.” 11 He was solicitous in settling them into permanent com­ munities. To this end he “ had a mosque and a house for the mullah and his family built in each of their camps.” He was aided in his work by the comte de Maisons, formerly president of the Parlement of Rouen, who devoted thirty years without pay to caring for the Tatars.12 The Jews also revered his person and his memory. The elders of the community recounted with wonder his goodness and tolerance, blessing his name.13 One French historian characterizes his rule as one of “ enlightened despotism,” or the “ dictatorship of honesty.” 14 Like many men of the Enlightenment, he had abounding faith that reason, founded upon close observation, could resolve even the most truculent human problems. No detail of administration—or corner of social life—was so menial as to escape his direct attention. He gave seem­ ingly equivalent energies to every aspect of government, the grand and the trivial. He envisioned a countryside filled with free and prosperous farmers, exporting their surpluses through a city filled with free and prosperous merchants and artisans. The Peopling o f Novorossiia From his integrated perspective, Richelieu recognized that the growth of Odessa depended upon a growing hinterland—upon a sup­ portive regional structure of farms, local markets, roads, and thoroughfares pumping the blood of commerce to and through the 24 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 port.15 Critical in the development of Novorossiia was the establish­ ment of a stable administration over its region. Acquisitions of extensive territories along the Turkish frontier, changes in rulers and changes in the whims of rulers were breeding administrative confu­ sion. Through an ukaz promulgated on October 8, 1802, Tsar Alex­ ander I brought comparative stability into this regional government. He permanently divided Novorossiia into three guberniias. Two of them took their names from cities: Katerynoslav, “ the glory of Cath­ erine,” founded in 1786 by her favorite Potemkin; and the port Mykolaiv, later replaced by Kherson. This latter guberniia included Odessa. The third division of Novorossiia was called Taurida, from the ancient Greek name for the Crimea.16 The administration of these three provinces was originally confided to a single governor general. The duc de Richelieu, who accepted the commission in 1805, was the second governor general, and the first to combine that post with appointment as chief of Odessa.17 Richelieu's chief task as governor was spelled out in the emperor’s mandate. He was “ to seek to increase the population by extending all encouragements and privileges to foreigners. . . . ” With the indispensable support of Emperor Alexander, Richelieu offered immigrants the inducements of fertile and nearly free land, grants and loans, tax exemptions, and religious toleration. The resultant flow of immigrants moving into Novorossiia can be divided into two principal currents: “ internal” migrants, that is, those com­ ing from areas already forming part of the empire; and foreigners, those attracted from beyond its borders. Both groups helped to give the region that extraordinary mixture of nationalities, languages, and religions that thereafter marked its history.18 Internal Migration Among Russians and Ukrainians, the great spur to migration south was continuing population growth and land crowding in the central provinces of the empire. The Russian government possessed the authority to move peasants—technically, serfs—settled upon state lands into the new regions. Thus, between 1807 and 1812 the government transferred 3,002 peasants from the overcrowded prov­ ince of Smolensk into the Crimea.19 But Richelieu opposed forcible transfers of laborers as he recognized that only willing workers could subdue the challenging steppe.20 The voluntary flow of state peasants grew slowly. They came, for example, in family groups of five, ten, or fifteen from the province of Chernihiv—another crowded area—to The Regime o f Richelieu 25 settle in the Crime