a.21 Between the years 1806 and 1809, over one thousand state peasants sought permission to migrate to Novorossiia. In June 1812, at the recommendation of Richelieu, Alexander exempted all state peasants who settled in Novorossiia from taxes for a period of five years. They were also eligible for cash subsidies and loans. After 1812, the movement of peasants from the crowded center—especially Smolensk—swelled; many contemporary steppe villages—BePmanka, Haichul, Temriuk—owe their origin to this influx. By 1860, at least 4,115 state peasant farmsteads had been transferred to the South Ukraine.22 The frontier, with its aura of freedom, was especially attractive to religious dissenters. Among them were the Dukhobors, a sect characterized by pacifism, by a communal way of life, and by their energetic and productive husbandry. On governmental invitation, Dukhobors, who were technically state peasants, settled along the Molochna River in 1802.23 The privileges accorded to them were exceptionally generous. Each “ soul” (in the definition of the census taker) was given fifteen desiatinas of land and a loan of one hundred rubles, to be repaid over twenty years, beginning in 1812. They were also excused from taxes for the usual five-year period. Like the Mennonites and the Old Believers, who had settled the region in Catherine’s time, they were also exempt from military service. These state peasants—both Orthodox and dissenters—did well in Novorossiia. Exemption from military service (though only for a time) and from onerous state taxes conferred upon them a status nearly equivalent to that of free colonists. Many became substantial farmers. Contemporaries compared their prosperity with that of they German settlers—high praise indeed, as the Germans were supposed to serve as models of good husbandry on the steppe.24 -Cossacks also moved south; they had long been settled along the Russo-Ukrainian frontier facing the Tatars and Turks. From 1806 to 1809, 7,165 Cossacks from the provinces of Chemihiv, Poltava, and elsewhere migrated to Novorossiia.25 The benefits given them under the ukaz of 1812, however, were fewer than those received by the state peasants; their exemption from taxes, for example, lasted for only one and one-half years. And the allotments of land accorded them were also smaller. Richelieu himself invited a group of Ukrainian Cossacks to settle in the military area east of the Sea of Azov, although their new home lay beyond the borders of Novoros­ siia.26 An even more exotic group of settlers were the former slaves, called iasyrs, who once belonged to Tatars.27 Alexander I emanci­ pated them in 1808 and provided them with loans and land in the Crimea. 26 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Jewish Colonies Jews formed a special group within the category of “ intim a]” migran te Jews~had fivêcTIn the region of Odessa even before the founding of the city. Their settlements were scattered among the small villages nearThe fort of Khadzhibei. Jews were also numerous in the large cities of the Ottoman Empire, where they earned their living primarily as artisans and retail merchants. Odessa possessed a Jewish cemetery soon after 1794. The first synagogue was built in 1798. Skal’kovskii gives the Jewish population as 240 out of a total population of 2,349 in 1795, although Smol’ianinov gives a lower figure of 135 Jews for 1797.28 When Richelieu assumed the gover­ norship, he made special efforts to attract Jewish immigrants, not only to the cities, but also to the countryside of Novorossiia. By far the largest single source of early Jewish immigration was the region of Belorussia (White Russia).29 The Russian Empire obtained sovereignty over the area through the successive partitions of Poland in 1772, 1793, and 1795. The Jewish inhabitants num­ bered more than sixty thousand, and they worked chiefly as artisans, petty merchants, or tavern keepers (Polish law had forbidden them to engage in agriculture). Russian policy imposed further restrictions upon them. According to a Polozhenie or Ordinance of December 9, 1804, Jews could not live in villages outside a prescribed area or “ pale.” They also were no longer allowed to own or operate taverns. These were severe blows to their economic fortunes and came at a time when their own numbers were increasing. Recognizing their plight, a Latvian administrator, I. G. Frizel, devised a plan to move a certain number of Jews out of their over­ crowded villages to the empty steppes of Novorossiia. Like other colonists, these Jews would receive land, enjoy various exemptions, and in turn would establish farms and villages. Richelieu endorsed the idea, and from 1806 jwarmlv received jewisfi^emigrants nUo. Novur5sSila.^The^state-centributed the sunL^ C S ^ fiQ Q assignat rubles to meet the costs of relocation. Each family wgs-to-regeive 125 rubles tor the construction^of a farmT^ng^T'anH a daily foot aîïowanc5~of 5 kopecksrûntiTthe lanri pr^ductive»By 1809, eight Jewish colonies were established, most of them distributed along the Inhulets River in the Kherson guberniia. By 1810, according to a survey made that year, 1,691 Jewish colonial families, containing 9,757 individuals, were working the soil. In spite of these auspicious beginnings, this experiment in Jewish agrarian settlement ended in failure. Ten years later, the number of The Regime o f Richelieu 27 colonial families had declined to only 417. The Jews abandoned the land, not because they were unaccustomed to agricultural pursuits, but because so little of the promised subsidies ever reached their hands. As S. Ia. Borovoi has shown, chicanery and peculation marked this project more than most.30 Many Jews faced starvation, and many more decided to seek employment in villages and cities where their special skills were readily marketable. In particular, Odessa and other port cities easily absorbed Jewish artisans and traders Foreign Colonists Even more than his grandmother Catherine, Tsar Alexander (and his chief lieutenant in the south, the duc de Richelieu), wished to attract settlers from abroad onto the steppes.31 Alexander eagerly recruited new colonists from a remarkable variety of peoples. The neighboring Ottoman Empire contained numerous Christian peoples—Bulgarians, Gaguazy, Moldavians, Serbs, Greeks, Armeni­ ans and others—who had reason for disgruntlement with Turkish rule.32 From all these communities, some migrants enlisted in the Russian army and fought in special national battalions. Others set­ tled in the cities as merchants and tradesmen, and still others joined agricultural communities. Many sought a home in Bessarabia (incor­ porated into the Russian Empire in 1812), traditionally a haven for fugitives. One Bessarabian village in Alexander’s time counted among its residents, Ukrainians, Moldavians, Russians, Bulgarians, Jews, French, Greeks, Armenians, Poles, Gypsies, Serbs, Albanians, Germans, Hungarians, Turks, and others.33 Bulgarians first appeared in the South Ukraine as early as the 1760s, but the largest influx came between 1801 and 1812. The French consul at Odessa has left an apt description of the movement: . . . in this same period [1802-1819] the Bulgarian colonists likewise came. These were inhabitants of Rumelia [European Turkey along the shores of the Black Sea] of Greek religion and origin. Their com­ patriots and some Greek merchants of Constantinople, through emis­ saries who were also their compatriots and who had been for many years settled in Odessa, came to persuade them to come as colonists to Russia. The bonds of religion, the hope for a better future, the assurance to a jealous folk that their wives and daughters would be protected, the exemption from conscription and the promises of subsi­ dies made to them, did not fail to persuade these Christians, who were as slaves in Turkey, to flee their oppressors and to escape their 28 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 yoke. Thousands of these Bulgare moved away; they were taken on board ships along the coasts and brought to Odessa. Here, they have colonized the environs and the interior of the steppes to a distance of 15, 20 and 50 leagues. Among all the colonists of different races and nations, they farm the most diligently and gather in better wheat than the Russians, the Poles and the Germans.34 The immigration of these Ottoman subjects to the Russian Empire strained its relationship with the Porte. In 1801, clearly in response to Ottoman pressure, Alexander issued the curious command that Russia would no longer receive immigrants who crossed the Danube River, which marked the inland frontier with Turkey. If the émigrés arrived in Odessa by ship, however, they would be granted Russian citizenship, assistance, temporary residence in Odessa, and land to farm.35 Serbs were also settling in the region from the middle eighteenth century, but their numbers also swelled in the first decade of the nineteenth century.36 In 1804, twenty-two families arrived at the port of Odessa. They eventually settled along the river Balaichuk; each family received the generous allotment of 150 to 500 desiatinas of land. In 1815, another group of sixteen Serbian families arrived; they received only 65 desiatinas of land per family—a reduction which no doubt reflected the diminishing extent of uncultivated soil. Among those fleeing the domination of the Turks were Greeks and Armenians.37 In the eighteenth century, many “ Greeks” from the Crimea settled in the Azov region, especially around Mariiupil. In the early nineteenth century, new waves of Greek immigrants arrived from the Balkans and the Archipelago. They had difficulty communicating with the Mariiupil Greeks, who had long since adopted the Tatar language and dress. The Greek farmers learned from their neighbors on the steppes how to raise livestock and plant orchards and vegetable gardens. A flourishing Armenian colony also grew up at Hryhoriopil on the Dniester. Eager to develop as many specialized industries as possible, the duc de Richelieu invited Moldavians to settle in a region near Tyraspil on the left bank of the Dniester. He had discovered that the mulberry tree flourished there and somehow learned that Mol­ davians were skilled in the art of raising silkworms. Agents were dispatched to buy up the land from its private owners for redistribu­ tion to the Moldavian colonists. At first only twenty-four families responded to his invitation, but by 1808, fifty-nine families were industriously engaged in the production of silk. The Regime o f Richelieu 29 Even some Muslim subjects of the Ottoman Porte sought out homes in Novorossiia. Here the most important group was the Nogai Tatars, who are often mistakenly confused with the Crimean Tatars.38 As early as the 1770s they were settling on the land between the Don and the Kuban Rivers. By the end of the century colonies of Nogais were established along the left bank of the Molochna up to the Tokmak River on a stretch of land some 353,000 desiatinas in extent. They then numbered about 5,000 souls. The traveler and naturalist P. S. Pallas encountered these peo­ ple on his trip through southern Ukraine in 1793 and has left a detailed description of their culture. Catherine II granted them vir­ tually the same benefits she extended to other foreign colonists, but Paul enrolled them as state peasants. He also attempted to enlist them into the Cossacks, but the effort proved unsuccessful. At one time nomads, the Nogais developed an economy of settled agricul­ ture, fishing, viticulture, and sheep-raising. Their relative freedom and considerable prosperity attracted additional immigrants from Turkish territory. By 1805, about seventeen thousand Nogais from the frontier region of Budiak—many of whom had fought on the Russian side in recent wars—moved northward. By 1806, they num­ bered over twenty-one thousand. Although they were technically state peasants, they enjoyed many of the privileges extended to foreign co