ague strides in the late 1820s and 1830s.37 In 1834, the United States consul at Odessa reported that the prospects for linseed production seemed so bright that “ landlords and peasants [were] cultivating it as more profitable than corn [wheat].” 38 Over the years from 1831 to 1845, Russia supplied about 80 percent of the oil imported into England.39 Americans also pur­ chased from Russia small, but stable, quantities.40 In spite of auspicious beginnings, the production and overseas sale of Russian linseed encountered early limits. Costs of transporting the seeds from hinterland to port remained high. In 1844, the French consul in Odessa noted that the price of linseed depended less on the abundance of the harvest than the going costs of trans­ port. Cart costs, he noted, varied widely and unpredictably.41 By the 1840s, oil from India was claiming a large share of the world market. And Russia itself was absorbing more and more of its own produc­ tion, leaving correspondingly less seed and oil to be offered for sale on foreign markets. Sunflower seeds and oil were produced on a large scale after 1845, but most of the output was consumed locally.42 56 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Another agricultural product that attracted considerable interest but achieved only limited development was wine. The Russian government actively promoted viticulture in the south, in the hopes of restricting an expensive import, and perhaps even of earning currency abroad. In the 1840s the minister of the domains of the empire, P. D. Kiselev, invited Odessa’s Agricultural Society to pro­ pose means of encouraging the planting of vineyards. The minister suggested that the German colonists be required to put aside a cer­ tain portion of their land for the cultivation of the grape. Capital would also have to be supplied to the entrepreneurs, as the slips would not produce useful grapes until six years after planting. Cel­ lars would also have to be built to age the wine. And tariffs on Greek and Romanian wines would have to be raised.43 A decade later, to stimulate local production, tariffs on all foreign wines con­ sumed in Odessa were raised from one-fifth to three-fifths of the rate imposed on wines shipped into the interior.44 With characteristic detail Skal’kovskii wrote of the situation in 1846: Viniculture and the cultivation of grapevines constitute one of the favorite occupations of the inhabitants of Odessa. There are almost no gardens or country houses (khutors) where vines have not been planted. Wine-making constitutes an important branch of suburban industry. Within the environs of the city in 1843 there were six mil­ lion vines, for the most part French or Spanish, producing each year (since 1837) from 30 to 32 thousand vedros (from 78,750 to 84,000 gallons) of white and red wine, with a quality similar to Moldavian wine, but sometimes stronger and better. A thousand silver rubles of the product is sold each year. Wine made from berries sells for 200 to 300 silver rubles per year. From the founding of the city up until 1815, factories produced spirits made from wine and liqueurs similar to the Italian rossoglio and maraschino, but with the establishment of licensing, they ceased to exist.45 Grapes did particularly well on the sunny hills of the southern Crimea. With characteristic enterprise, Count Mikhail Vorontsov planted vines on a large scale on his Crimean estates. In 1838, his income from wine sales was already eighty thousand rubles.46 But the undertaking remained hostage to the climate. The frosts of one bad winter destroyed forty thousand out of sixty thousand vines.47 An English visitor has left a vivid description of Vorontsov’s vineyards in 1839. French and German vintners worked them. The count acquired some prized French slips in Vienna, originally ordered by an American who failed to claim them. To the Englishman’s taste, The Development o f the Hinterland 57 the Vorontsov champagne surpassed the vintages of all lands saving France itself. Could it but travel, the wine, in his estimation, would find an enthusiastic reception in England. Vorontsov himself, still according to our reporter, showed little confidence in his product; he allegedly labelled his bottles so that they would pass as French. And he allegedly sold them in Moscow at inflated prices as authentic imports.48 On the other hand, the French consul conceded in 1843 that, while some Russian vintners pasted false French labels on their bottles, Vorontsov had the good grace to put “ Crimean” on his.49 This interest in viticulture, warmed by the government’s mild pro­ tectionist policies, induced some notable results. As early as the 1830s, an English visitor observed: Some traffic also now takes place in the wines of the Crimea, which are fast rising into repute, though we cannot agree with the Russians in thinking that they will supplant the wines of Oporto. The annual sales of the Crimea, including those of the Kokour wine, now gen­ erally average 12 million bottles.50 In the sixteen years before 1848, the extent of grapevines in the Crimea had allegedly multiplied six times.51 The French understand­ ably grew concerned both for their own exports to Russia, and at the prospect of confronting a new rival in the world market. In about 1850, they noted that the Crimea produced 83,798 hectoliters of wine—only 1/250 of the French production, but likely to grow.52 In 1854, another study of the Crimean wine production appeared in the French press. The author expressed confidence that the quality of the Russian product would never duplicate that of the French.53 All these products so far considered—wool, tallow, linseed, wine—had considerable commercial importance. In 1838, they together constituted slightly over half of the region’s total export. A report written in 1835 speculated that the shipments abroad of “ wool, wax, hempen cordage, flax, linseed, hempseed and other oil seeds” had so increased in quantity that one day they might surpass grain as the king of the export market.54 The prediction proved wrong. Even though the late 1830s were not favorable to interna­ tional cereal sales, wheat retained its preeminence. Cereals The fertility of the black soil of the Ukraine and southern Russia is proverbial. As early as 1573, a French traveler, Blaise de 58 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Vigenère, remarked on their extraordinary qualities: They say that the land of the country [Podillia] is so good and fertile that if one leaves his plow in the field, the grass grows so fast around it that after two or three days the plow can hardly be found.55 Moreover, the black soil was deep. A. Shmidt, in his survey of the province of Kherson, calculated that the soil averaged fourteen inches in depth.56 An official report made to Tsar Nicholas I in 1835 stated that cereal crops “ often yield to the grower a produce of twenty-fold upon the quantity of seed sown.” 57 Skal’kovskii’s records for the years 1845 through 1851, however, reveal that such abundant yields were not as frequent as the report implied. During that period, the worst year, 1845, gave only 1 3/4 as much as sown, and the yield for the best year, 1851, was only a bit more than thrice. Earlier, again according to Skal’kovskii, for the period 1832 through 1836, the worst year, 1833, failed to render the quantity sown, while the best year, 1836, gave 4 1/2 times the seed.58 Just as important as the natural fertility of the soil of Novorossiia was its vast extent. The more northerly black-soil provinces were, to be sure, among the most thickly populated areas of the empire. In 1856, Podillia, with a density of 47.68 persons per square verst, ranked only behind the guberniia of Moscow.59 Poltava with 41.32 persons and Kiev with 40.25 persons to the square verst ranked fifth and sixth in population density among the provinces within the empire. As late as 1856, the territory of Novorossiia had less than half the population density of the more northern, black-soil region. Taurida (the Crimea) ranked fiftieth among the provinces with only 12.31 persons to the square verst; Kherson, thirty-sixth with 17.83 persons; Katerynoslav, thirty-fifth with 18.02. Bessarabia, the most densely settled of the lands of Novorossiia, counted only 29.23 persons per square verst The easterly regions of the steppes in 1856 were com­ paratively deserted. The Territory of the Don Cossacks had only 6.25 person to the square verst, and the land of the Black Sea Cos­ sacks only 5.51. Haxthausen reported that in 1841 only one-third of the Kateryno­ slav and Kherson guberniias was cultivated. He attributed the slow development to three obstacles: “ the unfavorable nature of the cli­ mate, the want of springs and fresh water, and the scarcity of wood.” 60 As the demand abroad for wheat grew, however, more and more land was put under the plow. From 1881 to 1886, the area The Development o f thé Hinterland 59 of sown land in the Crimea grew 16.2 percent, reaching two million desiatinas. In the Kherson guberniia the area of sown land reached 3 million desiatinas.61 As late as 1862, the United States consul, Timothy Smith, was surprised to find so much uncultivated land in the vicinity of Odessa: The surrounding country, unfortunately to the distance of two to five hundred miles, is for the most part uncultivated steppe or prairie. . .. Within a circuit of fifty miles from Odessa are several German colonies which have succeeded in cultivating the steppe and have prospered very well. Beyond that distance, however, it is for the most part an uncultivated waste.62 The kinds of wheat that flourished on these black soils were of excellent quality.63 The wheat was either hard (tverdaia pshenitsa) or soft (miagkaia pshenitsa). The soft wheat found its best market in England, France, Spain, and the north of Europe, as consumers there favored it for their bread and biscuits. In the Mediterranean markets (including Constantinople, Greece, and the Ionian Islands), and notably in Italy, hard wheat was preferred, as it is particularly suitable for pasta. Moreover, of the hard wheats available to the Mediterranean consumer, Russia’s was recognized as among the best. Its glutinous content was particularly high; an expert who com­ pared the hard wheat of the Azov region with that produced in France found that it contained 40 percent gluten, while the French wheat contained only 30 percent.64 To be sure, the dark color of hard wheat put off some customers—the Spanish, for example—but others bought it expressly for its resistence to moisture. Not only did it produce a long-lasting pasta, but also bread and biscuits that kept over long sea voyages. It grew with particular abundance near Taganrog. So too did the popu­ lar winter red wheat; Dearborn described it in 1817: “ It is esteemed the best wheat in the world, being very large, heavy and clean.” 65 Dearborn claimed that the yield at that time was forty times the seed. Of the hard wheat cultivated, the most important was arnaut (arnautka), a spring wheat distinguished by its exceptionally long grains. Arnaut in Russian sources is also called by a number of other names: turka, beloturka, kubanka, krasno-turkaia pshenitsa, or simply russkaia pshenitsa. Most of the soft wheat cultivated was of the winter variety {ozimaia pshenitsa) and was both red and white. The white seems to have been the more widespread, as it was considered less sensitive to the cold. With the extension of cultivation to the east and north into 60 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 the steppes, spring wheat assumed greater importance, as it did not have to pass the harsh winter in the ground and was ready for export in late summer or in the autumn. A milestone in grain cultivation in Novorossiia was the introduction in the 1840s of soft red girka wheat. Both winter and spring varieties existed, but the spring was by far the more important. The dark red girka produced a fine flour.66 Ano