ney. .. . This is what hinders them carrying their com to Constantinople.95 The Development o f the'H interland 65 In 1780, an engineer by the name of Faleev tried unsuccessfully to dig a canal around the rapids.96 In 1801, Tsar Paul I attempted to blow up some of the cataracts, and in 1828 another futile attempt was made to clear them.97 All to no avail; the course of the Dnieper ran vexed to the sea. To the west, the Dniester was a convenient waterway for carrying grain from Podillia to the Black Sea, but it was not until 1812 that both banks were included within the Russian Empire. The largest and most important of all Russian rivers, the Volga, had little significance for the grain trade. The steppe regions it traversed remained for long undeveloped, and it flowed into the land-locked Caspian. Then, too, river transport in the south was affected by the sea­ sons. When swollen with waters from the spring thaw, the rivers easily carried the largest barges. By early fall, when most grain had to be moved, many of the rivers, in many points in their courses, were dangerously shallow. Silting near the mouth was another com­ mon problem for the southern river ports. Dredging the channels might have greatly facilitated navigation, but this required capital, and of capital Russia had little to spare. In 1845, a statistician calcu­ lated that in bringing grain to Odessa, river transport accounted for only about 25 percent of the volume—no more than half a million out of two million chetverts.9* The bulk of the grain had to be carried overland—in the great, ox-drawn carts driven by Ukrainian chumaks, that had long served as the basic means of transport on the steppe. They were pulled by two oxen in a wooden yoke.99 The chassis of the cart was made of bark upon which a rough cloth was spread. Five to seven sacks filled with wheat were placed on the cloth and covered with a dried cow skin. The covering did not entirely prevent moisture from seeping into the sacks, but the grain could be dried later. A cart could carry five to six chetverts of hard wheat, six to eight chetverts of soft wheat, eight of rye, or ten or eleven of oats— reflecting primarily the respective weights of the cereals. An English traveler calculated that each cart carried eight sacks of wheat, or about three quarters and two bushels.100 The carts travelled, accord­ ing to one French source, five to six leagues (about 12.5 to 15 miles) per day, “ including nights.” 101 Other reporters set their speed at 10, 12, or 15 miles per day.102 The abundance of fodder growing along the routes provided feed for the beasts. Water was less easily obtained and frequently had to be purchased. This was expensive. As early as 1805, well water was inadequate for the people of 66 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Odessa, and water for the beasts had to be obtained from afar.103 The French consul estimated that in 1832 it cost 4.5 paper rubles per chetvert to deliver wheat to Odessa. About a decade later, Hommaire de Hell stated that it cost 4.6 rubles a chetvert104 The terrain was fairly passable only at certain times of the y e a ronly seven months, in fact, according to Hommaire de Hell.105 The carts started out in late spring or early summer, after the roads had dried and hardened.106 Much of the traveling was done at night.107 During high summer, carters were often occupied in the fields and unavailable to serve in carting. Then again in early autumn (after September 1) more caravans of carts would set forth when the roads were reputedly in the best shape of the year. This apparently primi­ tive method could deliver astonishing quantities of grain. In the first decade of the nineteenth century, according to an Italian merchant, from five hundred to a thousand carts arrived in Odessa within a sin­ gle day.108 Some years later, in the 1830s, a French traveler counted six hundred carts arriving daily.109 In 1843, 200,000 carts rolled across the Ukraine, moving in all one million chetverts of wheat and * 200,000 chetverts of linseed.110 Some of the carters at the terminus broke up their wagons and sold them for firewood. Some sold their oxen for slaughter as well.111 In 1862, the United States consul described the great caravans approaching Odessa with wheat from the hinterland: This produce for the most part has been brought into Odessa from three to five hundred miles, over the steppe, in carts or waggons [sic] drawn by horses and oxen, by roads either very dusty or very muddy. One pair of horses or oxen can take from twenty to ninety bushels of wheat to a load; and one man can generally manage three or four teams which move in caravans or lines from twenty to a hundred in number.112 Although the carts, carters, and oxen of the South Ukraine were able to move impressive quantities of wheat, this method of trans­ port had clearly become inadequate even before the 1840s. The deterioration of roads in bad weather meant difficult journeys and high grain prices. The oxen were vulnerable to a number of ail­ ments as well. Around 1845, a serious epidemic broke out among the oxen in Novorossiia.113 Skal’kovskii asserted that 75 percent of all cattle of Novorossiia died in that year.114 On one of Voronstov’s estates alone some four thousand head of cattle perished.115 In Janu­ ary 1845, the French consul stated that nearly one-half of the area’s cattle had died and the disease was still then raging.116 Called the The Development o f the'Hinterland as Fairs and Chumak Trails 68 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 plague of Siberia, it appeared to strike chiefly oxen, although horses were also affected. Sheep remained immune. Three years later, because of an extraordinarily cold winter, the supply of fodder fell to a dangerous low, and this reduced the numbers and sapped the strength of oxen.117 Under such catastrophes, the cost of carting soared to levels that rendered uneconomical the transport of grain from areas of any distance. In October 1851, the United States con­ sul at Odessa, noting the limited arrivals of grain, attributed it to “ the deficiency of draught cattle to convey it to market.” 118 Like drought and disease, the government could reduce the numbers of available oxen. In Polish lands, after the failed uprising in 1830, the government freely requisitioned beasts, carts, and peasant carters into state service. In 1843, the French consul wrote: . . . today one pays about twice the amount as formerly in order to transport wheat from the Polish provinces to Odessa.119 In 1849 too, when Nicholas I determined to repress the Hungarian revolution, the United States consul at Odessa noted a scarcity of carts: “ . . . the government being in immediate want of carts and draught cattle to transport the ammunition and stores of the troops now in motion.” 120 Finally, even under the best of conditions, the carts could serve only a limited region. Dearborn, to be sure, claimed in 1819 that hard wheat arrived in Taganrog from as far as fifteen hundred or 1,800 versts (about 1,000 miles), but part of this long journey was made by river barge.121 Sauron, the French consul, affirmed that the carts rumbled 560 versts (about 400 miles) on their way to port, while the English traveler Jesse claimed that some had covered 700 miles.122 Still, the average distance travelled by the carts seems to have been from 150 to 300 versts, or about 90 to 180 miles.123 When cereal prices at the ports were buoyant, the high costs of transport were partially absorbed. But when prices were low, profit margins in wheat sales collapsed; producers and purchasers wrangled, but often could not come to terms. Even in boom years, the high costs discouraged distant producers from sending grain to the ports; the crude system of transport showed its inadequacies. Moreover, this expensive transport required a shift in the use of resources from grain production to grain carting. The cultivators of wheat were, in the main, also the carters, and the job might easily claim some forty days of a peasant’s time.124 Initially, this employ­ ment meshed rather smoothly into the normal seasonal cycle of peasant labor. But as the trips grew longer in distance and time, they The Development o f the Hinterland 69 interfered with properly agricultural duties. Then too, the extension of grain cultivation reduced the open meadows rich in fodder upon which the draft animals fed. By 1859, the French commercial consul at St. Petersburg, Vallat, affirmed that the increase of settled popula­ tion on the steppes made carting less and less feasible. Moreover, as the distances traversed grew larger, the bad state of Russian roads and bridges imposed even bigger handicaps. For example, the river Boh, which flowed through one of the most productive regions of the southern Ukraine, had only one bridge in 200 versts (120 miles) of its course.125 By the 1840s the manifest deficiencies of carting evoked pointed complaints, both from Russians and from foreigners engaged in the grain commerce. The French civil engineer Hommaire de Hell reported in 1841: Unfortunately, the means of communication have been totally neglected, and the government has taken no steps to facilitate trans­ port; in consequence of this, the price of grain instead of falling, is constantly increasing, and merchants are no longer willing to purchase except in seasons of scarcity.126 The Journal d ’Odessa was both indignant and sanguine in 1847: The difficulty which is sometimes encountered with the means of transporting agricultural products from contiguous provinces is the sole reason for which various other areas can easily compete with us in their prices, and for some time, we have tried to draw the attention of the government to this point of major importance. It is incon­ testable that improvements of communication by water and land, the construction of good roads, and the perfection of river navigation are essentially indispensable for our trade. And these innovations, which under the paternal care of our government are going forward with great strides in our vast country and are growing on all sides, will establish the wealth of Odessa and the prosperity of the South of Rus­ sia on a solid basis for a long time.127 The great strides noted by the Journal were in large measure imag­ inary. A traveler to Odessa in 1852 marvelled at the absence of a single macadamized road leading forth from the city in any single direction.128 In 1858, another visitor claimed that despite the huge production of grain in the Russian Empire, through defective trans­ port “ enough wheat to feed the rest of Europe was lost to the market.” 129 For this reason, he labelled as illusory the fear that 70 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Russia might some day flood Western Europe with cheap grain, to the ruin of its agriculture. He thus explained: There will always remain the difficulty of internal transportation, reduced perhaps, but always calculable in its effects, which will reduce considerably the quantity of exportable cereals. And this difficulty in internal transportation will become more evident to those who con­ sider that the Russian railways pass through long stretches of unin­ habited land, and the stations cannot be so close to each other as the Piedmontese and French lines, so that the cultivator must still cover large areas of bad roads just in order to transport his wheat from the field to those places where he might load them on the railroad.130 In 1862, the United States consul agreed that more efficient trans­ port to the hinterland was Odessa's great need: At present the great want of Odessa, then, is the means of communi­ cation with the far interior, the country which really sustains and sup­ ports it, by means of railroads and canals.131 The effort to solve this problem of inland transport inspired countless pamphlets and many imaginative projects. Early efforts were made to construct macadam roads, but progress was glacial