pecially developed in the last years of the existence of serfdom, was already a harbinger [predvestnità of the downfall of the old regime.” 29 Marxist historians such as P. I. Liashchenko and, more recently, P. A. Zionchkovskii, have consistently associated the development of capitalism in Russian agriculture with the breakdown of the serf system.30 Non-Marxist scholars such as Jerome Blum, on the other hand, have expressed skepticism con­ cerning the supposed linkages between growing commercialization and the emancipation of the serfs in 1861.31 To these scholars, the Producers, Middlemen, and Merchants 83 purported causal link from increased market demand to commercial­ ized agriculture, to the disintegration of “ feudalism,” to legal eman­ cipation, form a defective explanatory model, too simple, too mechanical. Then too, there is the paradox we have already dis­ cussed: one social effect of the increased production for market was a return, even if temporary, to barshchina obligations. Still, the great growth in cereal export necessarily affected the organization of agriculture in the empire and the social and juridical status of the peasants. To reach a balanced analysis, historians must consider not only the economic, but also the legal and institutional, factors that pushed the State toward eventual emancipation. Here, we offer only a few comments. From the late eighteenth century, the population of Novorossiia was already, in its larger part, juridically free, and the degree of freedom grew more pronounced as one approached the imperial frontiers, in Bessarabia and the Crimea. But tensions inevitably developed between traditional bondage in the old-settled areas and freedom on the periphery. The government itself, as we have seen, was willing to tolerate illegal immigration into Novorossiia—violations of its own laws, in sum—in order to populate the new lands. The dichotomy between interior serfdom and peripheral freedom raised many anomalies. What exactly was the status of an illegally resettled serf? What was the status of a serf from the central provinces, who worked as a hired hand in Novorossiia, and still paid obrok to his distant master? By the mid­ dle nineteenth century, the government was under strong pressures to emancipate the serfs—in effect to bring the vast numbers of its subjects under a uniform and consistent juridical regimen. The alter­ native was rapidly becoming anomaly, confusion, chaos. This then, on the most fundamental level, was the contribution that the settlement of Novorossiia made to the eventual emancipa­ tion of serfs in the empire: the new regions offered a model of a productive economic system based largely on freedom. The settlers in the south first enjoyed that kind of status that the imperial government would extend to all serfs in the Russian Empire in 1861. Marketing Between the producers and the consumers, the wheat of the South Ukraine passed through many hands: harvesters, chumaks with their carts and oxen, stevedores and sailors, bakers and shopkeepers; on a different level, the ownership of the wheat also passed by purchase and repurchase among many dealers. Here we examine the move- 84 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 ment of cereals at this latter level: who purchased them, and who organized their delivery to market. The simplest, and always the most attractive.strategy of market­ ing, was for the producer to bring his wheat to port, to sell it directly to the foreign purchasers. The strategy was pursued, but it had its drawbacks. The foreign colonists, because of their proximity to Odessa, their knowledge of business procedures, and their generally high level of cultural and material resources, usually brought their produce directly to port.32 Many large-scale producers, whether Rus­ sian, Ukrainian, or Polish, also dealt directly with foreign purchasers or their agents in Odessa. A German traveler reports in 1838: Many of the Polish nobility have counting houses and warehouses in Odessa, and the produce of their lands passes immediately out of their hands into those of the captains of vessels, without any intervention of the merchants.33 These large-scale producers, for the most part Polish, took advan­ tage of their selling expeditions to enjoy the amenities of the city. They visited the spas, the seaside, the fancy shops and restaurants, and at times the gaming tables as well. One English traveler com­ mented in 1839 that some two hundred “ invalids” were in Odessa taking the baths. They were mostly landlords from Podillia who, “ having disposed of the produce of their estates, carry off as many foreign luxuries as they can either smuggle or afford.” On this gold coast, many gambled away their newly won profits. Even lady proprietors came to sell grain, and to buy millinery and the latest Parisian fashions.34 But not all these great proprietors were wastrels. Some of them built warehouses at Odessa, many of which were designed to look as decorative as the palaces they adjoined. A contemporary describes their elegance: . . . but what struck me as especially pleasing were the corn maga­ zines, through whose handsome airy windows the golden blessings of the fields might be seen heaped up in rich masses. These magazines are built with the same elegance as the dwelling-houses, and indeed are frequently metamorphosed into them. Some are really magnificent; in particular, those of Count Potocki, and those which, before the Polish insurrection, belonged to the count Sabanski.35 Count Sabanski—eventually exiled from Odessa, we might mention, because of his sympathies for Polish liberty—could place in his warehouses thirty-six thousand chetverts of wheat. Other store- Producers, Middlemen, and M erchants 85 houses could hold from fifteen to twenty thousand chetverts.36 The number of these graceful magazines grew even as Odessa’s trade; 345 in 1827, they were 448 in 1846 and 720 in 1857.37 For their part, the captains of the foreign vessels were authorized to offer cash for cereals. In 1832, the French consul at Odessa described how cargoes were obtained; already the figure of the mid­ dleman was looming large: There arrive Greek and Genoese and sometimes Austrian ships which carry funds of cash or letters of credit. If it is in cash, then it consists of strong Spanish piasters. They don’t have cargo agents; the captains themselves simply own, or have equipped, or have a share in the ship. They remain in quarantine, give the purchase orders to the merchant to procure for them a sample of wheat before they make a purchase.38 The foreign purchasers soon learned the advantage of offering advances on the purchase of wheat yet to be harvested; they thus paid but a low price for assured supplies. In 1855, an English pris­ oner of war in Russia noted that the flow of cash made June a busy and festive season in Odessa: All the rich land proprietors come from the interior to make the best bargain they can for the produce of their land. At these seasons they receive immense sums in anticipation of their next harvest.. . .39 Still, only a few privileged producers—those close to the ports, those familiar with complex commercial practices, those with vast estates and means—could bargain directly with the foreign pur­ chasers. In spite of the importance of foreign colonists and great landlords, the southern Ukraine in particular remained an area of small estates and farms, of producers who could not deliver their produce directly to purchasers at the ports. In consequence, the growing demand for wheat was a bounty for middlemen, for persons who could talk with both the local producers and the foreign pur­ chasers, who could link, as it were, two worlds. In those parts of the Ukraine where they were numerous, Jews were exceptionally well suited to take advantage of this growing com­ mercial opportunity. Many were literate, with some experience in petty trade. Jewish peddlers had long sold Levantine goods on the Polish-Ukrainian markets. They were helped by a supporting net­ work of co-religionists (and sometimes relatives), which overlay a large part of the grain-producing region and extended into the ports. Indeed, the absence of a Jewish population in some areas seems to have been a handicap to marketing. 86 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 In 1832, Sauron, the French consul at Odessa, prepared a particu­ larly thorough description of the methods by which exporters at the ports ordered, paid for, and secured the delivery of wheat from the hinterland. Specifically, he distinguished five common means by which the grain was ordered and delivered:40 1. Importing firms abroad place orders for wheat with exporting companies at the ports. They in turn contract with middlemen (usu­ ally Jews) in the countryside for deliveries of wheat to Odessa in the months of May, June, or July. The middlemen are paid one-half the value of the order in advance, at the time of the contract. 2. Export firms retain their own agents in the countryside to buy wheat in advance. These agents usually hire local Jews to inspect the wheat “ on the stalk” (at harvest) and seldom “ in the blade” (before harvest). These Jews also are responsible for sewing up the sacks of grain and for engaging carts for transporting the produce. The agents /also receive an advance of one-half the total purchase price. y fj 3. Exporters go directly to the countryside to buy grain from the ^ peasants or from petty buyers who already possess grain in storage. Brokers then draw up contracts calling for future delivery. Buyers advance from one to five rubles per chetvert (the amount is based on estimated future price). Full payment is made upon delivery. In these cases the purchaser arranges and pays for transporting the grain to port. 4. Exporters buy and pick up the grain in the countryside as in retail sales. 5. Exporting firms establish permanent branches in the grainproducing regions, such as Kherson and Mykolaiv, and their own employees make the purchases. In 1832, according to the consul, Jews were still not numerous in the eastern steppes. For this reason, the great mercantile houses in the ports had to establish their own branches in the new regions—to erect, so to speak, their own infra­ structure supporting wheat exports. It should be noted that only the fourth method made use of fairs; these were largely concentrated in the North Ukraine and were not of major importance in cereal exports. Much grain was of course sold at the fairs, but most of it was purchased for local consumption; speculators also claimed a share of it, in expectation of profitable resale. But the conclusion of M. K. Rozhkovoi, that the bulk of the Ukrainian grain trade for export moved outside the fair network, seems right, as against the opinion of E. I. Druzhinina.41 A principal reason for this is that as exports grew, most grain was sold and par­ tially paid for in advance of the harvest. The harvest was already \ Producers, Middlemen, and Merchants 87 committed before the fairs were held. To pay for the wheat, the merchants of Odessa sent large sums of money by insured mail to their correspondents and agents. They paid the postal authority one percent of the value of such remit­ tances. Bank notes sufficed for payment made in Odessa, but silver rubles were required in the hinterland. The costs of transporting the wheat to port and of incidental expenses were generally the same as in the Polish provinces.42 One means of marking the evolution in marketing arrangements within Novorossiia is to note the movements of the place of delivery, the point where the primary producer gave up ownership of the wheat. In 1832, the French consul observed that in former years the proprietors had delivered the grain to Odessa. Recently, this had changed. Now the merchants assumed the “ expense, perils and risk” of transport. In other words, with the development of Novorossiia, the loci of primary deliveries tended to mov