established in Odessa.80 The Napoleonic conquests also helped to direct the eyes of mer­ chants eastward. The Genoese merchants Gattomo, Andriccia, Franchi, and Bellari relocated their firms in Odessa, allegedly to escape the French hegemony over their native city. By 1809 there 39 The Regime o f Richelieu were at least ten Italian firms exporting grain.81 Richelieu knew most of the foreign merchants personally. He visited them, kept abreast of their business, and listened to their complaints and suggestions. He also encouraged the establishment of permanent foreign consulates in the city. At least seven of them were founded during his tenure in office, representing, respectively, France, Austria, Spain, Naples, England, the Republic of Ragusa, and the Seven Ionian Islands. Important too for a growing commerce were favorable tariffs. By an ordinance of March 5, 1808, Odessa’s merchants obtained the right to store goods in warehouses for up to twelve months without paying duties. Richelieu’s greatest—and parting—gift to the city was status as a free port. He had always been sympathetic to Adam Smith’s arguments in favor of free trade, and a plague at Odessa in 1812 showed another advantage. As long as duties were high, con­ traband would be substantial. Smuggled goods escaped the quaran­ tine regulations and rendered the city more vulnerable to contagion. In 1814, the governor petitioned Alexander to make Odessa a free port. In 1817, the tsar granted his request, but by then Richelieu had returned to France.82 Trade through Odessa boomed. In 1803, about 550 ships came to its port. They carried off some 600,000 chetverts of grain, valued at five silver rubles per chetvertP European capital also drifted eastward to the Black Sea regions, since war in the West was limiting oppor­ tunities for investment.84 Table 2.1 shows the value of exports from Odessa over the years 1804 to 1813. Table 2.1 Odessa’s Exports by Sea, 1804-1813 Year Rubles Year Rubles 1804 1805 1806 1807 1808 2,339,509 3,399,291 822,927 336,022 1,975,013 1809 1810 1811 1812 1813 1,776,290 3,146,994 7,747,544 5,855,045 8,861,956 Source: Morton, 1830, p. 257. Morton learned this information from Prince Trubetskoi, th^en Director of Customs at Odessa. 40 Figure 2.1: Odessa’s Exports, 1804-1813 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The Regime o f Richelieu 41 The wide swings in exports evident in Table 2.1 reflect the con­ stant disturbances in international politics. War, to be sure, some­ times stimulated, sometimes repressed, and nearly always redirected trade. Napoleon’s “ Continental System,” for example, proved an unexpected benefit to Odessa. It severely restricted commerce through the Mediterranean ports of the French Empire and diverted some of it to overland routes. Odessa was well placed to capture much of this redirected flow. It was connected by land routes through Brody on the frontier of the Austrian Empire to Austria, Prussia, and France itself; its port gave maritime contact with Tur­ key, Persia, Egypt, and the Middle East. Cotton fabrics shipped through Odessa alone reached the value of about 11 million rubles per year.85 The ever-alert Richelieu worked mightily to take advan­ tage of this unexpected boon. In 1808, he reduced the quarantine period, enlarged the storage facilities, and otherwise promoted Odessa’s role as entrepôt between East and West. Eventual peace in Europe reduced this transit trade, but compensated for it through reopening Mediterranean ports. On the other hand, Russia and Turkey were at war between 1806 and 1807, and again between 1809 and 1812. Trade, to be sure, did not altogether cease, even with the Ottomans. According to Sicard, who writes about the first of these conflicts: . . . while Russian and Turkish soldiers were battling along the Danube, Russian and Turkish businessmen were peacefully trading in all the ports of the Black Sea.86 But trade clearly suffered. Only 279 ships arrived at Odessa in 1806, down from 643 in the previous year, and the price of wheat fell to a quarter of its former level.87 In the subsequent Turkish war, the imperial government ill-advisedly prohibited the export of cereals to and through Constan­ tinople, in hopes of starving the Turks into submission. But Con­ stantinople found new suppliers in Egypt, Cyprus, Sicily, and else­ where, and Odessa itself faced depression. Journeying to St. Peters­ burg in 1811, Richelieu pleaded with the tsar to rescind the prohibi­ tion. He gained what he sought; characteristically, he carried the good news back to Odessa in secret, lest its premature diffusion create disordered conditions in the city’s commodity markets. In spite of revolutions and wars, Richelieu carefully built up at Odessa the material and social supports needed for a vigorous com­ merce. In 1804, commerce brought in about 2 1/4 million rubles. When he left in 1814, the total was 25 million.88 Aided by this 42 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 expanding economic base, he was also able to give the city liberal and enlightened government. Schools and Culture The due also played a significant role in promoting schools and cultural activities within the new city.89 Before 1804, there were no public schools at Odessa; each national or religious community trained its own children. Thus, Jewish schools existed virtually from the foundation of the toWtc R ^ heltëlTfiîmself founded "a schooLiff Thus, called the Institute for Nobles, intended tor tne education of upper-class children, who could afford the high tuition; and then a second school, called a gymnasium, supported exclusively by private donations and open to everyone. Sons of merchants, soldiers, officials, meshchane, and the like were instructed in philosophy, law, commerce, and military science. Alexander was favorably impressed by the training it imparted; by an ukaz issued in March 1808, he allowed its graduates to enter the Cadet Corps at St. Petersburg. By 1811, in accordance with the due’s wishes, the gymnasium became a government school. In reforming its curriculum, he enlisted the aid of a French émigré named Jeudy-Dugour, who had settled in Russia and adopted the name Dugurov. He was also a former professor at Kharkiv University and rector of St. Petersburg University. In spite of his foreign origins, Dugurov was convinced that Odessa’s children should receive a common education, in which the Russian language would predominate. Richelieu took a personal interest in the school; he quizzed those students who aspired to a military career and often conducted exami­ nations himself. The due also drafted notices in French to be sent out to the hinterland of Novorossiia. The school, these advertise­ ments stated, offered excellent preparations for military or civil ser­ vice, for trade, or for any other occupation that appealed to the stu­ dent. By 1814, however, instruction was no longer gratuitous; the student was charged 750 rubles per year for tuition and 200 rubles for books—fairly substantial costs. Although the institute was successful, Richelieu sensed the need for a school which would directly serve the commercial community of Odessa. Commercial gymnasia of this sort already existed in Taganrog and Katerynoslav. He chose as head of the gymnasium a French Dominican, Abbé Nicolle. Richelieu prescribed not only the study of the ancient languages, but of modern Greek and Italian. He deemed the mastery of these languages invaluable in Novorossiia, The Regime o f Richelieu 43 “ where all trade is found in the hands of Italian and Greek mer­ chants having a close connection with the southern cities of Europe.” 90 The new school also offered training in statistics and bookkeeping—valuable mercantile skills. No tuition was charged, and poor as well as rich students who wished to prepare for a busi­ ness career could apply for admission. For young ladies, the Italian de Pozzis and his Russian wife directed an institute. The feminine counterpart of the male gym­ nasium, the school was expensive and clearly designed to serve the upper classes. The girls were instructed in the Ten Commandments, languages, geography, history, art, music, dance, painting, sewing, and household economy. Later, after the due’s departure, a rich merchant, Iakov Protasov, grew dissatisfied with the education avail­ able to girls and founded a new school for young ladies. While supervised by the government, the school was largely supported by the substantial merchants of the city. In June 1816, the future tsar, Nicholas, paid a visit to Odessa and inspected the schools. Students at the gymnasium addressed him in Russian, French, Latin, and Italian. He was much impressed. In the following year, the gymnasium and the Institute for Nobles, founded by Richelieu, were superseded by a lycée, to which, appropriately, the name of Richelieu was given. In 1818, the famous poet K. N. Batiushkov wrote to his friend, A. I. Turgenev, the director of spiri­ tual affairs in the ministry of spiritual affairs and public education, about the school: I tell you honestly speaking, the lycée is the best ornament of Odessa, just as Odessa is the best city after the capital.91 Richelieu’s work for education was thus acknowledged. According to a contemporary, Odessa’s schoolchildren loved him as their patron.92 The Richelieu Lycée attracted children of the aristocracy even from the capitals. Books abounded in early Odessa, perhaps because the national communities were intent on preserving knowledge of their particular languages and cultures. In 1810, a visitor to Odessa remarked on the number of Russian and French bookstores and on the volume of Jewish literature, shipped there from Poland.93 Richelieu’s lycée also contained the first library in Odessa. Richelieu himself, by then in France, donated his personal library as well as thirteen thousand francs to maintain it.94 The collection eventually formed part of the library of Novorossiia University, which was founded in 1865. 44 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The first printer’s shop in the city opened in 1814. As a pros­ perous commercial port set on the borders of Europe, Odessa, in Richelieu’s view, offered great promise as a center of the book trade. Even after his departure, he recommended to Alexander I in 1818 that he establish a large press in Odessa. This would satisfy not only the local demand for books, but could sell volumes in Greek and Armenian through the Balkans and Asia Minor. His suggestion seems to have borne no fruit, but he was right in his assessment that Odessa was well located to serve cultural as well as commercial exchange.95 The common commercial language, and very nearly the lingua franca of the city, was Italian, as it was in many port cities of the eastern Mediterranean basin. At Odessa, the earliest street signs— and also those of many shops—were in both Italian and Russian. Notarial documents were redacted in Italian, as were passports, bills, receipts, commercial correspondence and books, price lists, and even theater notices. The first publication by a local press was a sonnet in Italian.96 Because nearly everyone attended the Italian opera and because of the many Italians on the docks, even common people sprinkled their speech with Italian words. Cab drivers offered rides to “ Signori.” Stevedores asked for “ quaranti” kopecks, and clerks in shops spoke to their customers in Italian.97 Under Richelieu and his successor, Langeron, French understandably grew in importance; the Jews preferred German; and Greek was second only to Italian as a language of commerce. But in this polyglot community, Italian long retained a certain preeminence. In 1811, an Italian opera com­ pany, directed by the famous musician Montovani, visited Odessa to play in the new theater.98 In 1818, the poet K. N. Batiushkov, a guest of Saint-Priest, wrote to his aunt how much he loved the Italian opera, and indeed, he exclaimed, “ Odessa is a wonderful city, made up of all