ther soft, spring wheat was sandormirka. Of Polish ori­ gin, this strain was widely cultivated in the northwestern parts of Podillia, Volhynia, and Kiev. Of these types, the red wheat was of better quality than the white and sold at the same price as winter wheat. These were hardy strains, able to survive in years of low rainfall. In 1856, the French consul at Odessa reported that twothirds of the soft wheat exported came from Voronezh, Saratov, the Caucasus, and even from the banks of the Volga; this last source had only been recently developed.67 Travelers in the steppe regions noted the occasional practice of the three-field system (trekhpoVnoe khoziaistvo) of crop rotation, which was commonly followed in other Russian regions.68 According to this regimen, a given field supported in turn a winter crop, then a spring crop, and then lay fallow. The Mennonite colony on the Molochna used a four-year crop rotation system. First year: barley, hemp, mil­ let, or potatoes; second year: wheat; third year: barley or oats; fourth year: fallow.69 To produce crops in two out of three or three out of four years, however, the land required manuring, and this called for a system of mixed farming with fairly large animal herds and consid­ erable capital investment in houses, barns, and the like. A shortage of capital limited the application of such systems in Novorossiia. By far the most common method in the open steppes was the varied field system (pestropoVnoe or raznoklinnoe khoziaistvo). SkaPkovskii called it “ the many-field system,” which was hardly a system at all. Many of the fields received no artificial fertilization. As the United States consul, Smith, noted: The soil is rich, black and deep, requiring no manure and yields in very wet seasons a most luxuriant vegetation and generally in the spring of the year presents a beautifully green and flowery aspect.70 If manure was used at all, it was placed on the field only in the first year of cultivation, after which crops would be sown for an extended period. Manure was scarce, as dry dung mixed with straw was also used as fuel, even by the nobles.71 According to Shmidt, when the steppes of the Kherson province had first been cultivated, the practice was to sow the land for four or five years on end, then The Development o f the Hinterland 61 to leave it fallow for ten years.72 The demand for wheat, he noted, had resulted in scaling down the period of fallow and increasing the time that the land bore cereals. P. Koppen observed that the steppes in the Don River basin were cultivated nine to twelve years on end, then rested for a decade.73 Haxthausen once visited Count Lambert’s estate near Mykolaiv, which spread over thirty thousand acres of good soil. There, the peasants planted virgin land in the spring with millet; in the second and third years, they planted spring wheat. After the harvest and autumn plowing, they sowed winter wheat. The following autumn, however, they planted rye or barley. No manure was ever applied, but after repeated croppings, the land was allowed to lie fallow for an extended period.74 This loose system of crop rotation required little start-up capital; indeed, the cultivator, with abundant land at his disposal, invested in hardly more than the cost of seed and a few simple tools. The ease of wheat cultivation on the steppes and the small capital needed to produce it made the supply of grain highly elastic. Ultimately, of course, these primitive modes of cultivation stagnated Russian agri­ cultural techniques on deplorably low levels. But for a country chronically short of capital, the cheaply produced grain earned abun­ dant returns on foreign markets. In feeding western Europe, exported wheat fed Russia with hard currency. Fertile and accessible, the southern regions of the Russian Empire seemed destined to become the granary of Western Europe. But there were also obstacles to expanded cereal production. Foremost among them was the climate. The southern regions of the empire are dry. Precipitation averages about one-half meter a year, and falls off rapidly in the direction of the east. This is close to the minimum needed for wheat (ca. 42.5 centimeters), but fortunately, the rain chiefly falls when the growing plant most needs it—in the spring.75 Observers, including the Tuscan, French, English, and United States consuls in Odessa, reported often on the weather; they scanned it carefully from month to month, in order to estimate the abundance of the coming harvest.76 Their words could launch or redirect a thousand ships. In the areas of winter wheat, the most favorable conditions included snow in the late autumn, and, in winter, cold temperatures that conserved it. The snow blanket protected the seedlings from the ravages of deep frost and kept moisture in the ground. In Janu­ ary 1835, the United States consul, John Ralli, reported the presence of such an auspicious blanket: 62 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The experience of years has proved that when snow falls in abundance in this country during the winter and remains a sufficient time on the surface of the earth, as is the case here at present, a good crop seldom or never fails to follow.77 The lack of snow, or a mild winter including a “ false spring,” often proved disastrous to the plant, which flourishes best when tem­ peratures in the critical spring months increase evenly and smoothly. If the snow remained on the ground long into the spring, it could prevent the sowing of spring wheat. Then too, rains had to be plen­ tiful in the autumn and again in the spring (March and April) to water the rapidly growing plants. According to the French consul, harvests were always aleatory; in his estimation the cultivator could count on only one good year in six.78 Too many things could go wrong. For example, heavy rain storms late in the season might rot the ripened grain before it could be harvested. Hail storms in July menaced the standing plants. The hailstones were allegedly large enough to smite men and beasts.79 At Tulchyn in 1824 there sup­ posedly rained hail “ the size of bantams’ eggs.” 80 Excessive heat threatened the flocks and herds with drought. Haxthausen was impressed by the extremes of heat and cold, drought and precipitation, on the steppes. For twenty months in the Crimea in 1832-1833, so much rain fell that the grain rotted and grass could not be made into hay. Usually, however, winds quickly dried the bare steppes. Few lakes, ponds, or woods trapped the pre­ cious moisture.81 The winter of 1862, lacking snow and rain, was again disastrous. According to George Hume, an expert in the agri­ culture of Novorossiia, one good crop came every three years and one bumper crop in seven.82 Locusts joined the weather in threatening the crops. Many witnesses have left us descriptions of the terrifying black clouds of insects that swooped down on the grain and hungrily devoured it. One traveler wrote: The neighborhood of Odessa is very bleak and much infested by locusts which come in immense bodies, covering entire acres and in an hour after they have alighted, every vestige of verdure is effaced.83 A long-time resident of the Ukraine claimed that once the locusts were so thick that they stopped a train. A certain kind of fly was reputed to be the natural enemy of the locust, but apparently the numbers of these allies were insufficient. The chief method for combating locusts was to make as much noise as possible. Several The Development o f theH interland 63 travelers described the din and the weapons: shouts, cries, the ring­ ing of bells, the banging of drums, shovels, pots, pans, the firing of guns—anything to chase them away.84 “ It was a real battle,” said the Countess Rzewuska.85 The German colonists established a “ locust policeman” to give the alarm at an approaching swarm. They too used noise as a weapon and also invented a machine drawn by horses that dragged a bar with fingers designed to grind up the insects.86 Another method of extermination was to drive the locusts into ditches and then set them afire. Crude instruments were devised to roll along the ground, crushing the eggs.87 Still another strategy was to drive the locusts into the sea, where their bodies formed floating islands.88 In 1828, a Mr. Blonskii wrote to the Journal d'Odessa and advised farm­ ers to have little boys, too small to work in the fields, dig up the eggs and expose them to the air to kill them.89 Whatever the method adopted, the locusts remained a periodic plague. Certain years were noted for the advent of the locust: 1824, 1825, 1828, 1829, and 1862. The famed poet Alexander Pushkin was once sent on an official assignment to investigate locusts. Governor General Vorontsov suspected that the bored exile had been courting his wife; he chose the advent of the locusts as an excuse to send him the following order on May 22, 1824: I make you responsible for visiting the districts of Kherson, Ielysavethrad, and Oleksandriia. Upon your arrival in those towns, you must obtain the following information: in what places have the locusts been killed, how many were there, what were the orders for their extermination, and the means used to obtain their elimination. Once you have learned that, then you are to inspect the places where the locusts were the most numerous in order to evaluate the efficacy of the present methods for clearing them out. You are to study if the measures taken by the provincial committees are sufficient. All that you observe is to be reported to me personally.90 Pushkin strenuously solicited an excuse (he claimed a terminal aneurism) from higher authorities, but was constrained to go and inspect the locust situation. His official report, if indeed he made one, is not extant, but tradition has it that he composed the follow­ ing verses in summary of his observations: 64 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The locusts flew, flew Then they alighted Crept along, devouring all And once again, flew away.91 His observations on the locusts were thus accurate, if not especially profound. The problem persisted. At the end of the 1850s Count Tolstoi, vice chairman of the South Russian Agricultural Society, headed a “ committee for the battle against locusts.’’92 Although the locusts were by far the most pesty menace on the steppe, man had to fight the Hessian fly, the Hungarian or Austrian beetle, the marmot, the jerboa, snakes, spiders and tarantulas as well. Mice and other rodents also scoured the land. In 1830, the French consul at Odessa was astonished that a group of men sur­ rounding the wheat stack were able to flush out and kill four thousand mice!93 Mice infested the grain carts, in which they nibbled their way to port. As the Countess Rzewuska reported in 1836, the fondest hope of the inhabitants of Odessa was that the grain be sold before the rats consumed it.94 Inland Transport Besides offering soil of exceptional fertility and wide expanse, geography also favored Novorossiia by affording fairly good access to distant markets. Geographers routinely praise the great rivers of Russia for their commercial functions. Large and slow-flowing, they radiate from Moscow and the central Russian provinces and form the oldest strands—still important strands—in the commercial web bind­ ing together the Russian Empire. Curiously, however, the new lands to the south were not well served by the river system. As early as the middle seventeenth century, a French traveler commented upon the inadequacy of river transport in the Ukraine and its unfortunate economic repercussions: The land is so fruitful, it often produces such a plenty of corn that they do not know what to do with it, because they have no navigable rivers that fall into the sea, except the Borystenes [Dnieperl, which is not navigable fifty leagues below Kiow or Kovia [Kiev], by reason of thirteen falls on it, the last of which is seven leagues distant from the first, which makes a good day’s jour