e out from the ports, toward the centers of production. There were several reasons for this. As settlements extended, dis­ tances to the ports also grew, and transport became more expensive. Small producers in particular, who loomed ever more important as the market expanded, did not have the capital and the means to transport their own produce to the ports. Institutional reasons also counted. The merchants of Odessa generally insisted that all disputes regarding the transaction be litigated before the Commercial Court at Odessa, and that its judgments be binding. But the produc­ ers feared that the ruling would seldom be in their favor. Conse­ quently, whenever possible, the proprietors contracted to deliver the grain no farther than their own domains. If a dispute should arise, the case would then be heard before their own local (and presumably more sympathetic) commercial courts. Another recourse was to have local Jews act as the primary purchasers (standing in for the Odessa merchant); then too, in case of dispute, the local court, not the Commercial Court of Odessa, would have jurisdiction. The producers who sought to market the grain at Odessa itself encountered many difficulties, which the French consul again describes in detail. They had to bring their grain to Odessa in May, June or July. The more needy owners sold their harvest immedi­ ately for cash; those who could afford to wait stored the cereals for a period ranging from one to three months. This sometimes meant that they did not sell the wheat before the last convoy of ships had departed, as it usually did in November. Some owners mortgaged their wheat until April and May, with the hope of selling it more 88 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 advantageously early in the new season. They mortgaged only as much as was absolutely necessary, to pay their taxes and their more pressing debts. Still others were forced to sell their wheat by December, in order to pay off debts contracted at the summer fair of Kiev. These were involved procedures, and cultivators of an even moderate importance could hardly supervise both their fields and the complex operations of the Odessa market. Producers were conse­ quently reluctant to take their own produce directly to exporters, to negotiate for themselves its terms of sale. The result was a gradual retreat of the primary sellers back from the ports. The dispersion of these loci of primary delivery into the countryside heightened the need for competent middlemen; Jewish traders in particular responded with alacrity to this golden opportunity. This process of diffusion also implied that commercial relations were penetrating deep into the hinterland. Many cultivators of the southern Ukraine remained steeped in poverty, but nearly all of them were gaining some familiarity with commercial markets. Merchants The opening of the Black Sea brought the lands of the southern Ukraine into direct contact with a trading network, knitting together the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. While the Russian government welcomed exports from the South (and the hard currency those exports earned), still it viewed with misgivings the intrusion of foreign merchants into its national territory. To counter their pres­ ence, it sought to assure that Russian nationals would also participate in and perhaps take the leadership of the booming Black Sea trade. Imperial commercial policy amply documents this official ambi­ guity toward the foreign businessman. In 1807, the government for­ bade foreign firms from purchasing directly from the inland produc­ ers.43 The foreigners responded by making their purchases through local brokers and effectively circumvented the purposes of the law. In 1842, in desultory pursuit of this exclusionist policy, the govern­ ment again required that only Russian citizens could accept commis­ sions to make purchases, but again it retreated before a sea of pro­ tests, rising particularly from the English and the Dutch. Finally, on December 17, 1845, even as cereal exports were booming, foreign merchants were allowed to buy grain under the same conditions as Russian nationals.44 The volume of trade, the government evidently concluded, was more important than the nationality of the traders. Producers, Middlemen, and M erchants 89 Who were the merchants who forged the links between the Black Sea ports and the world beyond? The question has been much examined, both by contemporaries and by modern historians. Among the latter, E. I. Druzhinina has studied the issue with charac­ teristic thoroughness for the years of Novorossiia’s settlement to 1860. She cites several surviving official lists of Odessa’s merchants, and comments: The almost complete absence of Ukrainian and Jewish names from these lists strikes one’s eye; Russian names are also very rare. Does that mean that representatives of those peoples did not play an essen­ tial role in the Black Sea Trade? 45 No, she responds. Native-born middlemen in the hinterland, chumaks or carters, were essential to the trade. And Jewish dealers too, most of them Russian subjects, played a vital if still restricted role. Still, for these early years, Druzhinina is at a loss to show a significant Russian (or even Jewish) presence among the greatest merchants. They were, for the most part, foreigners. Their external origins, their capital, their familiarity with distant markets and foreign languages gave them critical advantages in leading Odessa’s early commercial development: The diverse national composition of the merchants guaranteed the success of trade relations of Russia with various countries. All of this contributed to the primitive accumulation of capital in Russia.46 When the emperor Nicholas I visited Odessa in 1829, he asked the mayor, I. V. Avchinnikov, why Russians were not occupied with Odessa’s foreign trade. The response from the mayor was to the point: “ Sire, if we use our capital for [foreign] affairs, what would remain here for internal trade?” 47 Most contemporary visitors to Odessa affirmed that Russian mer­ chants were rarae aves in the early nineteenth century. François Sauron, French consul in the city, surveyed the export firms in 1832: There are forty foreign firms, established by Greeks, Italians, Slavoni­ ans, Triestians, Genoese, French, German, English, Swiss and Span­ ish. These enterprises are all regular and permanent. . . . The Greeks are the most numerous and the richest.48 The report presented by Julius de Hagemeister to the tsar in 1835 makes these observations: 90 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The foreign trade is almost exclusively in the hands of persons of foreign origin, the greater part of whom are Greeks and Italians. The merchants of Russian origin are comparatively few in number, and are chiefly employed in the sale of the different manufactures of the country, such as cordage, glass and iron and copper articles. . . .49 Russian observers also noted the scant participation of their own nationals in the booming overseas trade. A statistician named Protopopov, who amassed a huge amount of statistics on Russian trade in the period, concluded that not a single “ authentic” (korennyi) Rus­ sian commercial house was engaged in the export trade from Odessa.50 He strongly deplored the failure of Russians to take a more active role in the lucrative business. In his view, a program of mer­ cantile education ought to be instituted, to create an indigenous class of overseas merchants. Not all contemporaries accepted these observations, however. In particular, citizens of Odessa seem to have feared that animosity toward “ foreigners” might provoke restrictive government policies and injure the commercial prosperity of their city. One of the most learned and energetic advocates of the Russian character of Odessa’s trade was A. A. Skal’kovskii, historian of Odessa, editor-in-chief of the Central Statistical Committee of Novorossiia, and secretary of the city’s Chamber of Commerce.51 In 1844, this “ Herodotus of Novorossiia” published a pamphlet in Russian, entitled “ The Com­ mercial Population of Odessa.” In the following year, the Journal d'Odessa published a French translation in its pages. His statistics on the composition of the commercial classes of Odessa are the best available even today, and the conclusions he draws from them are worth regarding. Skal’kovskii investigates the commercial classes primarily on the basis of guild records. By law, all merchants trading at Odessa had to inscribe in one of three guilds.52 Those in the first guild were permit­ ted to trade with unlimited capital in both the interior and foreign lands. In 1856, the members paid a steep yearly fee of 979 rubles 15 kopecks (then worth about $736.20).53 Members of the second guild could also transact business both in the interior and abroad, but the value of their foreign transactions could not exceed 90,000 rubles ($67,669.17). The yearly fee collected from members was 401 rubles 97 kopecks ($302.23). The third guild included the small merchants, who were restricted to trade within the empire; they paid 108 rubles 50 kopecks ($81.58) yearly. Up to 1859, foreigners resident in Russia had to join the first guild. 91 Producers, Middlemen, and Merchants On the basis of guild membership, Skal’kovskii counted the total commercial population of the city, and arrived at the figures given in Table 4.6. Table 4.6 The Commercial Population of Odessa, 1840-51 Year Total Population Commercial Population 1840 1841 1842 1851 68,765 73,888 77,778 96,443 3,199 3,163 3,041 5,676 Source: A. A. Skal’kovskii, 1845, for the first three years, and Odessa, 1895, for 1851. Making up only 4 to 6 percent of the total population, the com­ mercial classes at Odessa at first appear surprisingly small.54 Accord­ ing to Skal’kovskii, however, the figures do not include approxi­ mately two thousand small shopkeepers and porters. On the assump­ tion that each merchant supported a family of five, he calculated that some twenty-five thousand persons, or roughly a third of the popula­ tion of Odessa, lived directly from commercial enterprises. How many of these businessmen were “ authentic” Russians? Judging on the basis of citizenship, Skal’kovskii affirmed that the great majority of Odessa’s merchants were Russian, loyal and pro­ ductive subjects of the tsar. Table 4.7 recapitulates his figures. Table 4.7 Russian Citizens and Foreigners (Gosti) in Odessa’s Guilds Year 1837 1838 1839 1840 1841 1842 1843 1844 Merchants in the guilds 765 765 738 Classification according to citizenship: Russian 598 602 589 Foreign 167 163 139 Classification according to religion: Christians 586 584 550 Jews 160 168 177 Karaite Jews 19 13 11 Source: Skal’kovskii, 1845, p. 3. 693 719 702 704 700 578 115 582 127 584 118 589 115 588 112 499 183 9 518 190 11 480 215 7 482 214 8 468 221 11 92 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Skal’kovskii concluded on the basis of his data that foreign houses were yearly diminishing in number in comparison to those owned by Russian subjects. He drives this point home, against unnamed skep­ tics: And now we may demand . . . on what are founded the phrases of certain so-called patriots, who complain and state that Odessa is entirely a foreign town, outside of the great Russian Empire? Perhaps they take the boundary of the free port for a line of separation between the city and the Empire.55 By 1844, only a sixth of the commercial houses in Odessa techni­ cally belonged to foreigners; Skal’kovskii’s arguments from citizen­ ship are irrefutable. But a survey on the basis of national origins or culture, as we have seen, gives a much différent picture. According to a series of articles in the Odesskii vestnik in 1845, there were sixty-six to seventy-seven merchants dealing in overseas trade; apart from Novikov, all were of foreign origins. The author urged Rus­ sians to awake from their lethargic dreams, to acquire education, to study foreign languag