 the nations of the world, and flooded by Italians.” 99 Plague and war ended the performances and closed the theater between 1812 and 1814. When it reopened, Ukrainian and Russian plays were performed regularly, but Italian opera retained a special appeal. An Italian, F. Fiorini, was the maestro. So pleased was Alexander I at one of the productions that he personally congratu­ lated the impressario. Thereafter, Montovani and another Italian conductor, Zamboni, brought over the best Italian companies annu­ ally. The Régime o f Richelieu . 45 Civic Affairs Not the least of Richelieu’s achievements was fiscal reform. Before his arrival, municipal finances had been in chronic deficit, and profiteers had looted public monies with apparent immunity. Richelieu took direct charge of finances, which he supervised with the aid of a financial board. The revenues that accrued to the city came from three principal sources: its control over the distillation of vodka, its claim to one-tenth of the customs, and a charge of 2.5 kopecks (raised to 5 in 1813) on every chetvert of exported wheat. These incomes grew with population and with trade. In 1808 alone, the city gathered in 130,000 rubles from the consumption of spir­ its.100 A constant, critical problem faced by the governor was the health of the citizens; as a port, Odessa was more exposed than most towns to infections of every sort. With characteristic diligence, Richelieu established a hospital and formed a Committee for the Prevention of Smallpox. But the greatest test his government faced was plague. In August 1812, a plague epidemic struck the city, and the battle against it constitutes a dramatic episode in Richelieu’s crowded career.101 As soon as the dimensions of the epidemic became known, the due divided the city into five districts, each with an inspector and a doctor, to monitor the course of the malady and to impose quaran­ tine. Four of the five doctors died of the disease. Cossacks were used to seal off infected areas. For about one hundred versts around the city, from the Boh to the Dniester Rivers, the government estab­ lished a cordon sanitaire. Provisions could enter the city only along one, well-supervised route. Stores, shops, the theater, the stock exchange, inns, schools, and churches were all closed. Normal life in the city ceased. I. A. Stemkovskii, an aide to the due, likened the city to “ an enormous tomb—a sorrowful silence reigns over the empty squares and streets of the city which only a short while ago were lively and noisy.” 102 Once the due himself, collapsing upon a rock in his own courtyard, reportedly proclaimed: “ I can no longer stand. My heart is melting to have to use all my authority to make these streets deserted when I have spent ten years populating and bringing them to life.” 103 William Wilkinson, the British consul general at Bucharest, who happened to to be in Odessa at the time, spent his period of confinement writing his valuable book on Moldavia and Wallachia.104 He also studied Greek. Two colleagues, similarly detained, learned 46 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Arabic and Russian, respectively. The Austrian consul allegedly resisted the enforced confinement, saying he would rather “ die of infection than of boredom. ’’105 The panicked populace did what little it could to ward off the con­ tagion. Some tarred their clothes—especially those who carried pro­ visions into and through the city. Many took baths in the sea and washed not only their clothing, but also goods that came into their possession. Money in changing hands was soaked in bowls of vine­ gar. Bonfires were built to cleanse the city's air! And still the deaths increased over the winter and spring. The inhabitants viewed with dread and grief the many carriages rolling by their houses with a black flag signifying death, or a red one, warning of a diseased passenger. After six months the toll reached 2,632; at its height in the spring of 1813, the plague carried off several dozens of persons per day. A huge sepulchral mound containing the victims gave solemn reminder of the tragedy.106 Under conditions of panic, Richelieu struggled to maintain both discipline and morale and to reduce contagion among the citizens. One section of the city, nearest to the dock (the suspected source of the infection), was burned down in a futile effort to limit its spread. The houses of plague victims were marked with red crosses. Con­ victs dressed in black leather suits soaked in oil, and still wearing chains, were sent into the contaminated houses to clean them out twenty days after the dead were removed. By November, all citizens were confined to their homes, unless they had special authorization to depart. Over the winter of 1813, the plague lost its virulence; in February 1814, the city was declared “ plague-free,” although sporadic cases continued to appear until August. This was the last crisis the due had to face in Odessa. Richelieu's Departure Inspired by enlightened principles, confident in the value of clear thought, eager to experiment and reform, Richelieu thus helped impart both physical and cultural form to the new city of Odessa. Under his guidance, the city passed through a period of nearly con­ tinuous international tumult and of strong local growth. But the character of the times was changing, even as Richelieu himself gave up the governance of the city. The due left Odessa on September 26, 1814, to return to France. A sorrowing group of two hundred people or more saw him off at the first post station. Every vehicle in the city had been pressed into The Regime o f Richelieu 47 service to convey the ruler’s friends and well-wishers to the depar­ ture point.107 They expressed grief over the loss of a man most of them knew personally and all respected. As the authors of a guide­ book to the city later commented: With every opportunity of enriching himself, the duke is said to have left Odessa with a small portmanteau containing his uniform and two shirts, the greater part of his income having been disbursed in reliev­ ing the distresses of immigrants who generally arrived in a great state of destitution. His amiable and charitable qualities endeared him to all classes, and his departure was greatly regretted.108 Even after Richelieu returned to France to serve as prime minister under the restored monarchy, he retained cordial ties with the imperial Russian court and with its ambassador in France, Pozzo di Borgo. Indeed, he has been regarded as a puppet of the tsar, a “ western minister for. Russia,” as hostile contemporaries called him.109 His archrival, Talleyrand, who referred to him sarcastically as “ the man in France who knew the most about the Crimea,” fully shared this opinion.110 In the assessment of a modern historian, through Richelieu, “ . . . the influence of Alexander on the internal affairs of France remained constant, ever present, and powerful.” 111 Still, a defeated France had to act deferentially toward her con­ querors, and Richelieu won concessions too. In 1818 at Aix-laChapelle, Alexander agreed to reduce both the number of occupation troops in France and the indemnities imposed by the Treaty of Paris. A grateful Chamber of Deputies awarded the due fifty thousand francs for this diplomatic achievement. Uninterested as always in riches, the due donated the sum to found a hospital in his native city of Bordeaux. In 1816, confronting a poor harvest, France was forced to import substantial quantities of grain from the southern Ukraine. Here again, the due’s enemies questioned his motives in apparently pro­ moting trade with a region he once governed. Yet in a memoran­ dum written in 1820, the due rather showed concern for the French peasants in the face of growing competition from foreign foodstuffs. He recommended that France’s own exports of cereals be restricted, to assure an abundance of local grain and to reduce the need of imports.112 The interests of France and not of Russia were clearly directing his thoughts. Richelieu died in 1822, at the age of fifty-six, after several years in the service of the restored Bourbon monarchy. He retained his superb administrative abilities, but the true measure of his talents, 48 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 and the true monument to his life, was the city on the Black Sea, whose early growth he stimulated, directed, and decorated. He called Odessa “ the best pearl in the Russian crown.” If such it was, the credit for it in large part goes to him, not ônly for his achieve­ ments but also for the policies he initiated. These included the vigorous promotion of agriculture and of trade, the embellishment of the city, and the effort to maintain in Odessa a political and cultural milieu tolerant of diversity. He pointed out the path to Odessa’s continuing development. CHAPTER THREE The Development o f the Hinterland The land which has merely been tickled with the plough will laugh with a copious harvest. —George Hume, 1857 The nineteenth century was an age of frontiers, a period during which peoples of largely European extraction pushed into vast new areas of the world—western America and Canada, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand, and South America. Novorossia and the eastern steppes were another such frontier. This expansion of settle­ ment is a central development in the social history of the nineteenth century, and it led to profound changes in the Russian Empire as in many other regions of the world. Animal Husbandry In nearly all these frontier lands, the raising of animals dominated the early stages of their economic development.1 Animal husbandry demanded little capital investment (apart from the costs of the animals themselves) and required little labor, characteristically expensive in the new regions. Few houses, barns, fences, folds, pens, or even roads, had to be constructed, and the herds could graze freely over vast and open lands. So too, in the southern regions of the Russian Empire, the first large grants of land usually went to those who planned to raise livestock upon them. Sheep The great steppes stretching to the north and east of the provinces of Novorossiia had long been renowned as pastures. The black soils produced a luxuriant covering of grass, and even the hard continen­ tal winter stimulated the growth of thick fleece on the animals, which lived for the most part under the open sky. The introduction of 50 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 merino sheep in the first decade of the nineteenth century marked a milestone. In the shrewd assessment of a foreign colonist, a German named G. Müller, this famous breed was well suited for the steppe.2 In 1805 the government granted him twelve thousand desiatinas of land near Odessa, a loan of twenty thousand rubles payable in ten years, and the old customs house, which he turned into a wool­ washing station. He agreed to bring to Novorossiia thirty thousand head of sheep within three years, one-third of them to be pure meri­ nos.3 Müller and others systematically interbred the merinos with local breeds, in hopes of acclimating offspring of these animals to their new home. Many settlers recognized the promise of seemingly limitless pasture on the steppes. In 1828, Count Vorontsov brought to his Crimean estates Leicestershire sheep and crossed them with Wallachian and Moldavian breeds.4 Hommaire de Hell, a French engineer who visited Novorossiia in 1841, gave credit for introducing the merino sheep to a French émigré named Rouvier. In his account, it was Tsar Alexander I who provided the Frenchman with 100,000 assignat rubles and five thousand desiatinas of land in the hilly parts of the Crimea as well as twenty five thousand desiatinas of land on the steppes. He even placed at his disposal a man-of-war to fetch the sheep from Spain. Rouvier quickly made a fortune. Hommaire de Hell visited his sonin-law, Poitier, who claimed to count more than twenty thousand merino sheep on his lands. Ano