 including those who work in the rope works and the tallow houses.71 In the early 1860s Skal’kovskii, the observant statistician, reported to the authorities that the city’s total production, valued at about 5 million rubles, came from a steam flour mill, bakeries (the city con­ sumed some twenty-five puds of bread a year), tobacco factories, Stearine candles, tallow melting works, rope and vodka factories, manufactories of macaroni and sea biscuits, and wool-washing estab­ lishments. If this list is compared with Table 5.2, it can be seen that virtually no progress had been made in a decade.72 How can we explain the failure of Odessa to develop a large industrial base, particularly substitution industries, to match its com­ mercial vitality? Problems dogged its industrial development in three principal sectors: labor, energy sources, and capital. All were problems dating from Odessa’s origins; all grew with the city’s expansion; and all became especially pressing in the latter half of the nineteenth century, when Odessa and its region undertook a major push towards industrialization. We shall look at them in detail in Chapter 8. Here, we shall mention only two structural obstacles which hampered the early implantation of industries in the city: Odessa’s status as a free port and the structure of the internal com­ mercial economy of the Russian Empire. The free admission of foreign goods into Odessa no doubt contrib­ uted to its commercial prosperity, but there was a penalty. Its own manufactures were treated as foreign goods and were subject to heavy tariffs once they passed beyond the limits of the free port. To be sure, the smuggling of goods into the hinterland was a major business at Odessa. The chief of customs of the city once explained: A large part of the pomeshchiks of the neighboring guberniias come expressly to the city of Odessa in order to stock up on clothing, shoes, linens for themselves and linens for the table, and above all, for vari­ ous small articles of luxury which they carry into the empire.73 K. A. Skal’kovskii also recollected in his memoirs how gentry car­ riages, piled high with contraband, departed for the hinterland.74 In Trade and Industry, 1814-1861 113 the view of the Soviet historian Zolotov, the business of smuggling huge quantities of goods into the region, was the chief reason for the slow development of local industries. But smuggling, almost by definition, is difficult to measure, and its ultimate results are hard to evaluate. Smuggling certainly encour­ aged the importation of foreign luxuries, but it could not have significantly enlarged the market for local manufactures. No entre­ preneur would have started a factory in hopes of selling its produc­ tion illegally. The status as a free port thus created a trade-off: it stimulated Odessa’s foreign trade, but it severely restricted its access to the huge market that the empire represented. Even after Odessa lost its status as a free port, structural difficulties remained. The old-settled regions of the empire, particu­ larly the central Russian and the Polish guberniias, had big popula­ tions and were the oldest centers of manufacture. They could take advantage of economies of scale, and the network of fairs distributed their products with considerable efficiency across the Ukraine. Their competition hampered Odessa’s own industrial development, as it did that of other Ukrainian regions. Odessa could not take advantage of the big internal market to which it had apparent access. The failure of Odessa to develop a large industrial base in the early nineteenth century invites comparisons with the histories of other great port cities of a distinctive type, such as Naples, New Orleans, Buenos Aires, and Baltimore.75 All were large and active ports, and all were the sites of large mercantile houses, banks, and pools of capital. All had access to abundant raw materials. But all lagged in the course of industrialization. The reasons for this were several. The natural resources they commanded were often poorly balanced; Odessa, as we shall further discuss, was critically lacking in wood, fossil fuels, and even fresh water. The activities of the port competed for labor with the young manufactures and drove up its costs. And the wealthy merchants were more inclined to place their monies in commercial enterprises or in land—which they knew well—than in the seemingly more risky factories. And government policy, if it did not assure balanced economic development, had at least promoted the efficient use of the city’s chief resource, the port itself. This in turn produced and maintained acceptable levels of prosperity. CHAPTER S IX The City Grows, 1 8 1 5 -1 8 6 1 Odessa [is] a most extraordinary place and seemed as if created by a magical wand. —Ribeaupierre, 1838 The nineteenth century witnessed a revolution in urban life. People were gathering in cities in unprecedented numbers, and these numbers raised unprecedented demands for housing, services, and space. The experience of Odessa differed from that of other great cities only because its growth was so fast. From a tiny village in 1794, it was, by 1861, a commercial metropolis. Organizing Growth The duc de Richelieu’s departure for France in 1814 left the city he had governed for eleven years in panic. Without his leadership, without his weighty influence with the tsar, what would befall the still young city? As if to confirm the worst apprehensions, the tsar, preoccupied with the last phases of the war against Napoleon, appointed Major General Koble, the military commandant of the city, as the temporary city chief. There was a sense of drift during this interregnum. But optimism was soon restored; a friend of the due, a fellow Frenchman, Count Alexander F. Langeron, took office as governor general of Novorossiia and as city chief of Odessa on January 1, 1816. In 1790, this young French officer had volunteered his services to the Russian army. Like his companion Richelieu, he fought hero­ ically on the battlefield; Paul I rewarded him in 1799 with the title of count. After the death of his first wife, he courted several Russian noble ladies, and he married a Trubetskaia. According to K. A. Skal’kovskii, however, he never learned to speak Russian.1 As a young man, he wrote verse and dramas in French. One of his tragedies, five acts in verse, was published. Supposedly he gave The City Grom, 1815-1861 115 some of his manuscripts to Pushkin to read when he was in Odessa, but the famous poet never deigned to look at them.2 Unlike his friend and predecessor, Langeron was little suited to be sole administrator of the huge domain of Novorossiia. Within three years, he petitioned the tsar to reduce his duties. In 1819, the count wrote an interesting document, preserved at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Paris and entitled “ Reflections on the Necessity of Con­ centrating and of Reducing the Immense Administrations Given to the Governors General in Russia:’’ I am the governor general of three enormous guberniias, those of Kherson, of the Crimea, and of Katerynoslav. In addition, I have under my orders the very extensive lands of the Cossacks of the Black Sea, and those of the Circassians—difficult to subdue and always rest­ less. ll have command of] a fleet to transport food to the fortresses of Mingreliia and of commissions for food supplies for the provision­ ing of troops placed in New Russia, Bessarabia, and in Poland, etc., of the infantry regiments, of the artillery, of the Cossacks for the cus­ toms service and of the quarantines, of veterans, of battalions, of garrisons. [I administer] more than one hundred colonies of various nationalities. Finally, I am the head of the city of Odessa which is a separate administration and which gives me as much work as all the other duties. All the territory entrusted to me is as large as all of France and is populated by ten different nationalities and by many foreigners. There are to be found also ten different religions and all ten are practiced freely. One can judge the work which burdens me and the absolute impossibility of my doing it all.3 In 1820, he was relieved of his position as city chief. It was given to a member of the Commercial Court, N. Ia. Tregubov, who retained the post for two years.4 The two positions of governor gen­ eral and city chief were never again entrusted to the same person. Langeron did not develop a close, personal relationship with Alex­ ander I, although he won some favors. The tsar visited Odessa for the first time (in 1818) when Langeron was governor general.5 (Richelieu had always discouraged an imperial visit for fear that the young city might disappoint the tsar.) But Alexander was charmed by the city his grandmother had called to life on the Black Sea shore. As a token of his satisfaction he gave the city forty thousand rubles for the improvement of the quarantine and for the construction of an aqueduct (over fifty years were required to finish it!). He ordered the Black Sea fleet to carry paving stone from the Crimea to Odessa.6 116 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Langeron, much as Richelieu before him, saw as his principal task the colonization of Novorossiia, and he sought a change in its char­ acter. In 1818, he complained that Odessa was filled with vagrants, fugitives, and pirates rather than with men with capital, which the city badly needed.7 But Odessa remained a haven for fugitives. Langeron himself proposed that a two-year limit be placed on the right to reclaim serfs. If, at the end of that time, masters found their serfs, they could not remove them but could ask for compensation from the owners of the land upon which they had settled. If the runaways eluded their own­ ers, however, then they would simply be declared residents of wher­ ever they had settled. Langeron (like his successor, M. S. Vorontsov) feared that unrestricted rights to reclaim serfs would drive needed settlers into Turkish territory, to the detriment of Novorossiia.8 Langeron was not happy in his office. His expenses were double his salary. Apart from the financial drain of the office, many other burdens weighed upon him. He had to travel through Novorossiia twice a year to inspect his territory; the plague visited the port twice during his regime; and he quarreled continuously with the bureau­ cracy in St. Petersburg. Locally, he had constant difficulties with the dissident religious sect, the Dukhobors. They blamed him for the capricious State laws that oppressed them.9 During the six and a half years of his administration, Langeron presided over the city’s continued growth, but seems to have bobbed with the currents and did not dominate or divert them. The great boom years of exports (1816 and 1817) and the great ensuing sag (1820-1822) occurred during his tenure. To do him justice, it should be noted that Langeron proposed that the ports on the Sea of Azov be closed in order to draw more trade to Odessa.10 In the judg­ ment of Grand Duke Nicholas, he was “just as zealous as his prede­ cessor, [but] he was not as talented.’’11 The Russian literary critic Alekseev pronounced that he was “ a valorous general, a good and just man, but absent-minded, a droll fellow, and not at all an administrator.’’12 His papers convey the impression that he was inherently a military man. Often weighing resignation, he at last gave up the office in 1822. After retirement, he returned briefly to France and then was called back by Nicholas I to sit on the high court that tried the Decem­ brists. He died of cholera in 1831 at age sixty-eight in St. Peters­ burg. His remains were returned to Odessa and laid to rest in the Catholic church. The City Grows, 1815-1861 117 Langeron’s immediate successor was Lieutenant General Ivan N. Inzov. He held command over Novorossiia for nearly a year—from July 1822 to May 23, 1823.13 He had been an exceptionally humane supervisor of foreign colonists (Germans, Bulgarians