 in many European countries dampened demand. But a corner was turned in 1852, to the surprise of many observers. A writer for the Journal d'Odessa rejoiced: Odessa’s commerce has again in 1852 resumed the progress which after 1847 (a truly exceptional year and almost unique in its annals) it seemed to have abandoned decisively. . . . Odessa’s commerce might have its time of stoppages and even its setbacks, but it cannot be denied that its progress is upward.30 In 1853, the last year before the Crimean War (1853-1856) cut off grain exports altogether, the volumes shipped from Odessa sur­ passed even those of the annus mirabilis of 1847, which nearly every commentator had called “ exceptional,” not likely to be equalled again within a lifetime. Harvests in the South Ukraine were good, and speculative purchases played an important role. Rumors of impending war between Russia and Turkey reverberated through western markets, and speculators scrambled to place orders for wheat, wool, and other regional produce. They hastened to move their purchases through the Straits before a war should close them. Allegedly, there were not enough ships to deliver the wheat, to satisfy orders emanating “ from Leghorn, Marseilles, Trieste and Genoa and also from Holland, Belgium, and England.” 31 Several developments were of particular importance in exciting this demand. The great consuming countries were abrogating “ corn laws” restricting the importation of foreign wheat. Moreover, the newly invented telegraph made possible the wide and rapid dissemi­ nation of market information, and the newly developed steamship permitted a rapid response, on the part of producers, to favorable, though distant, markets. The market for cereals was becoming integrated on a worldwide basis. Consumers no longer relied Trade and Industry, 1814-1861 103 primarily on local producers for their needs. The peasant of the South Ukraine was entering into direct competition for the same markets as the farmer of Iowa. Initially at least, proximity and cheap production gave the South Ukraine a prominent place in the newly fused international cereal market. England best illustrates the tergiversations in official policy regard­ ing grain imports. In 1773, 1791, and 1793, Parliament passed the first comprehensive Corn Laws. To assure stable home supplies and prices, the law allowed exports of wheat only when the price dropped below a certain threshold (forty-four shillings per quarter), and imports when the price moved above forty-eight shillings. Still, home producers complained about foreign competition, and the Com Law of 1804 set the tariff on imported wheat at so high a level (twenty-four shillings two pence per quarter) as virtually to exclude foreign importation altogether, save during years of famine.32 In a new Corn Law of 1816, the government forbade importation com­ pletely when the home price was under eighty shillings per quarter, and lifted all restrictions on imports when the home price surpassed that figure. The ultimate refinement in the Com Laws was the “ sliding scale,” implemented in England in 1828 and soon widely imitated on the continent. The scale of import fees was designed to attract enough foreign grain, but only just enough, to keep local prices from varying beyond certain limits. As local prices rose in response to shortages, the tariff fell. Foreign grain was then admitted in sufficient quantities to stabilize the price. As the local price dropped, the tariff was gradually raised, importation slowed, and home prices returned to the chosen equilibrium. The sliding scale was thus ingeniously contrived to assure consumers reasonable and stable prices for wheat and to protect the cultivators from ruinous competi­ tion. Continental states quickly followed the English example; Sweden in 1830, France in 1832, Belgium in 1834, Holland in 1835, and Portugal in 1837 all adopted the strategy of variable tariffs.33 Prussia and the other states of the German Zollverein retained the older system of fixed tariffs, perhaps in deference to their own, polit­ ically powerful grain producers. The sliding scale represented, after all, a step toward liberalized grain trade. But the ingeniously contrived system of the sliding scale did not work as expected, and it produced some unwanted results. In Eng­ land in the 1830s, to everyone’s surprise, grain prices continued to fluctuate erratically, from thirty-six to ninety shillings per quarter. Lured by the promise of protected markets for wheat, capital flowed 104 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 into marginal land, cereals were produced in excess, home prices sank, and the surplus grain had to be exported. Moreover, the sys­ tem promoted widespread speculation.34 Importers often held grain back from the market, storing it within or outside. England, in expec­ tation of a rise in prices. When prices reached an attractive level, they dumped massive quantities on the market. They even resorted to market manipulations, arranging to buy small quantities of grain at exaggerated prices at the local markets, thus affecting the official price indices. The tariff would be lowered, and again massive quanti­ ties of wheat would flood the market. The international trade in cereals under the system of the sliding scale thus retained a highly speculative cast. This had two results. The possibilities it offered of huge (if occasional) sales and great profits invited investments in ships, port and storage facilities, and the whole organizational infrastructure required in long-distance trade. At the same time, the lion’s share of profits fell to the specu­ lating importers, not to the primary producers. The cultivators of the southern Ukraine were in no position to claim a principal share of the profits from the delivered grain. The producers were thus not rewarded with the share of the profit that might have been expected from their labors. The organization of this commerce in cereals I call “ the deposit trade.” 35 Grain exported from Odessa in the early nineteenth century moved slowly. From Odessa, sailing ships required as many as five or six days to reach Constantinople; twenty to twenty-five days to Messina; twenty-five to thirty days to Naples; thirty-five to forty days to Trieste, and thirty-five to fifty days to Marseilles, Genoa, or Livorno. A direct shipment to England from Odessa required fifty to seventy days. Grain was therefore usually not delivered directly to its ultimate purchasers and consumers. In the 1840s, it appears that of the grain from Odessa ultimately destined for England, only 2 per­ cent was shipped directly there.36 Most of the grain was taken to intermediately placed ports, where it might be stored for lengthy periods, until its owners learned through slow communications where it could most profitably be sold.37 Odessa maintained close contact with the chief deposit ports of the Mediterranean region. Hagemeister names them in 1835: Trieste, Leghorn, Genova and Marseilles are the great marts of Southern Europe, and corn is brought there from all quarters, the shipowners being content with almost any rate of freight that will afford them common interest for their capital.38 105 Trade-and Industry, 1814-1861 The destination of wheat exported from Odessa in 1838 is shown in Table 5.1. Table 5.1 Destinations of Wheat Exported from Odessa, 1838 (in Chetverts) Livorno Genoa Marseilles England Trieste Malta Constantinople 446,842 177,099 93,758 82,453 58,326 44,486 30,455 Holland Belgium Gibralter Ionian Islands Greece Austria 28,914 16,909 4,348 3,829 2,215 1,230 Source: ASF, Affari Esteri, Filza 2528, 29 February 1839 According to another source, the five chief recipients of grain from the Black Sea region in the early nineteenth century were, in order of importance: Marseilles, Trieste, Constantinople, Genoa, and Livorno.39 Certain of these cities (Marseilles and Livorno) eiyoyed the status of free ports, and this was highly advantageous in their function as intermediate places of storage. Lists of ships, by number and by flag, calling at Odessa have sur­ vived sporadically, up to 1839 and nearly continuously thereafter.40 The lists are, to be sure, usually misleading. Captains were willing to raise almost any flag or declare any nationality, if it meant quicker passage or lower fees. Yet the distributions by flag do tell us some­ thing of these ships and of the nature of Odessa’s commerce. Consistently the largest number of ships calling at Odessa were of Austrian registry. To say “ Austrian” is to mean ships owned and manned by two groups of Austrian subjects: South Slavs and, above all, Italians from Trieste. Sardinian ships, sailing out of Genoa, were usually second or third in the list of flags; they give further indica­ tion of the large Italian participation in the Black Sea trade. The Corriere mercantile of Genoa boasted on November 3, 1829: All the Russian ports of the Black Sea are in debt to the Italians for their prosperity; since of the thousand ships which go to export their products, about 800 are captained by Italians. This Black Sea, marvel of Europe, was rendered hospitable by Italians and above all, by sailors from the Adriatic gulf, who, twenty years ago, navigated the Black Sea in all kinds of weather under the French flag. And from what nation are indeed the captains and crews of the larger part of the 106 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 ships which with the Russian flag navigate the Black Sea, if not Italian? The pilots who take them to Constantinople, from what nation, if not from the Italian? The Ottoman Empire was notable for its slight representation within the Black Sea commercial fleets; in fact, the modest merchant marine Turkey possessed was staffed largely by Greeks, and Greek firms—the Ralli and Rodocannachi, for example—dominated the Porte’s large export trade, even with England.41 Ships of Russian registry present a particular problem. They visited the Black Sea ports by the hundreds every year, but it remains difficult to judge how many were authentically Russian. The imperial government itself pursued ambivalent policies toward its merchant marine. Peter the Great loved ships and tried to inculcate in his people maritime skills and traditions. On the other hand, in the view of a visitor writing in 1829, the authorities “ were apprehen­ sive that they [the sailors] may, if in the habit of visiting foreign ports, imbibe strange ideas about the rights of man and so forth, and perhaps may not be inclined to return home.” 42 In 1834, the gover­ nor general of Novorossiia, Count Vorontsov, created a “ Society of Voluntary Sailors” (Obshchestvo voVnykh matrosov) at Nykopil and Aleskhi. State serfs who enlisted were freed of taxes and military service.43 But in the 1850s, the “ voluntary sailors” numbered only 1,842; spending most of their time farming, they had yet to acquire much maritime experience. The government further sought to assure that at least 50 percent of the crews of all ships sailing under the Russian flag be native Russians. But the regulation proved unworkable. Serfs reluctantly took to the sea, even with the promise of freedom. They believed, it seems, that they would sail for life, and serfdom at home seemed preferable to serfdom on distant waters. As late as 1856, an observer noted that the “ great number of ships which sail into the Black Sea under the Russian flag belong to Greeks or to Slavs from the Adriatic.” 44 In 1853, at the outbreak of the Crimean War, eight owners of “ Russian” ships sold their crafts to Tuscans, lest they be confiscated as prizes of war. Their names were Wukland, Sandborg, Castrem, Gralmi, Giovanni, Instrom, Lindblom, and Candellino. Some of these owners might have been Russian subjects, but not one seems to have been a Russian native. The captains (three are named) were Tuscans and the crews either Finnish, Swedish, or “ Austrian.” 45 In sum, the ships of Russian registry