 lung. People took to wearing white and yellow clothes to disguise, or cloaks to deflect, the dust. Hommaire de Hell reported in 1835 that a French engineer was going to pave the streets with wood.87 According to a later report (1843), a Frenchman by the name of Barberot had persuaded Vorontsov to allow him to apply his invention of paving in wood. He claimed to have already had success with his process on the road from Paris to Versailles and in parts of St. Petersburg. By the end of the summer of 1842, about 150 meters of Richelieu Street were paved in wood.88 But wood was expensive, and the central govern­ ment at St. Petersburg ordered Odessa to cease and desist from lay­ ing its wooden streets. Instead, some of the main streets were paved with flagstones from Trieste and Italy or stones from Malta. 132 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Dust and mud continued to plague the people of Odessa, how­ ever.89 In 1861, the French consul sent to Paris a report on the most recent project and observed that the city remained only partially paved. He attributed the lack of progress to the excitement raised over the emancipation of the serfs, which had diverted the govern­ ment’s attention.90 By the 1830s, an even more serious deficiency than street paving loomed before the city government. Supplies of potable water were proving insufficient, and even nonpotable water, needed to flush the city’s primitive sewer system, flowed in inadequate quantities.91 Writ­ ing at the end of June 1831, the French consul reported that cholera had broken out in the city, and he blamed “ poor well water.” 92 Short supplies of water seem to have aggravated morbidity and mor­ tality in the city. July, the hottest and driest month in Odessa, also witnessed the highest death rate.93 Carters and importers of grain had to cope with scant supplies to water the cattle that brought grain to port. The abundant irrigation necessary for vegetable gardens in the city and environs further depleted supplies. Lack of water also raised the risks of conflagration. Although few of Odessa’s houses were constructed of wood (given its scarcity), the porous limestone was inflammable as well. In 1839, an English traveler described the watch towers in each of the quarters of the city. They were equipped with fire engines and manned by firemen, but water was lacking.94 The shortage had been worsening for some time. In the 1820s, a traveler stated, “ There is a great scarcity of fresh water.” 95 In 1819, a missionary complained that the water in the deep wells was “ hard and brackish.” 96 Most of the city’s waters came from two springs: one was seven versts distant and the other twelve. By the end of the 1820s, an English engineer was commissioned to build a canal, in order to bring water to the city. But this project, like many others, led to nothing. A few years later, another English traveler attributed the lack of water to “ the grossest mismanagement in the local government.” 97 He commented further that the cost of water was rising and that the need to dampen down dust in the streets con­ sumed the precious liquid. Vorontsov licensed a joint-stock company, organized by a Swede named Hartbal, to bottle mineral water. Formed in 1828, the com­ pany had a capital of ninety-five thousand rubles.98 Although it helped to provide good drinking water, it did not solve the problem. The Countess Rzewuska noted the lack of good water and attributed The City Grows, 1815-1861 133 the stunted trees of the city to salty water.99 A British traveler was no less critical: The artesian wells have failed here, and only a few of the best houses have reservoirs in their court yards, which are supplied by the rain, led in by pipes from the roof; but many of these fail entirely in the dry season. The general supply for the inhabitants is brought into the town in large barrels, placed on a cart, and drawn by a wretched horse. The vodovozy, or water carriers, fetch it from springs at a distance of from three to six versts’, these sometimes fail, and the large stagnant ponds near the suburbs are then put in request. The vodovoz goes from house to house and the price of a vedro, a small stable pail, is two copecks, but they generally supply persons by the month, the expense of a family of four being about five rubles; in the winter, six or seven, but for washing, or baths, the charges are extra.100 These water carriers, mostly Russians, were at times undependable in their deliveries. Sometimes it would take an hour or more to seek out a water carrier. Moreover, the water carriers sometimes cheated their customers. Instead of fetching pure water from the Fountains (Large, Middle, or Small), they substituted more available water of dubious quality. The expression, “ Not Fountain,” referring to the impure water, arose among housewives. In the city to this day the phrase. Ne Fontan, is used to denote any article not thought to be genuine. Water shortages persisted into the 1860s. A German explained in 1860 that the cistern system was inadequate. Wells had to be dug at least 180 feet deep. Yet the water drawn from them was so hard and calcified that it was barely potable. Finally, construction began on an aqueduct. Steam pumps were to move water from several subterranean sources through iron pipes extending for more than a mile; the pipes would discharge the water into reservoirs, from which it would be distributed throughout the city. In September 1861, the emperor had just approved the forma­ tion of a company to bring water from the Dniester to Odessa. It would still be some time, however, before a satisfactory water system was completed. City Buildings, City Life Within Odessa, Vorontsov built another palace, almost as magnificent as his villa at Alupka, previously discussed. The Sardin­ ian architect Boffo completed it in 1830. Placed to great advantage at 134 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 the northern end of the boulevard overlooking the sea, it was visible to those approaching the city by water. In the opinion of several travelers, its Ionic columns and classical style gave it the appearance of an ancient Roman temple. Italian artists had adorned the walls with frescoes and the floors with intricate parquet. An American arriving in 1848 was impressed: The palace is a magnificent building, and the interior exhibits a combi­ nation of wealth and taste. The walls are hung with Italian paintings and for interior ornaments and finish, the palace is far superior to those of Italy; the knobs of the doors are amber, and the doors of the dining room are from the old imperial palace of St. Petersburg.101 The Countess Rzewuska also described the elegant palace and its furnishings. The magnificent ballroom possessed trellises climbing to an upper story. At one great fête, the countess felt drops of liquid falling upon her. Given the sumptuous surroundings, she wondered whether the mysterious liquid might not be eau de cologne. But Madame Vorontsov soon diabused her of that happy surmise. The palace, it seems, had a leaky roof! 102 Wickoff, an American traveler, regarded it as the equal of the imperial palaces of St. Petersburg.103 According to an English visitor in 1838, the count entertained frequently in this palace during the winter season. Twice a week, balls were held for noblemen and for civil and military officers. These occasions brought forth an extrava­ gant display of dress, cosmetics, and jewelry. The guests heard music, danced, and played at card games, especially whist; the stakes were high, and fortunes were made and lost. Our source expressed amazement at the sums expended: “ The fancy ball given at the Count’s after Easter, was very splendid; the milliners’ bills were said to have amounted to 50,000 rubles, and the tailors’ to half as much.’’104 In addition to the sumptuous palaces, Odessa was graced by many humble, but attractive, homes. Lord de Ros wrote in 1835: Odessa is a rather handsome town, with some large churches and buildings; most of the houses have light green roofs which look gay and pretty.105 A German observer agreed: [Odessa] has a pretty aspect, both in the interior as well as from the outside. In the direction of the sea, it is particularly ornamented by a row of splendid houses and palaces, which would do honor to the The City Grows, 1815-1861 135 finest city. Prince Woronzoff, and the principal government officers and wealthy merchants, reside in this part of the town. A handsome walk, planted with trees in the form of an avenue, occupies a consid­ erable space between this row of houses and the ridge of the hill, where it descends somewhat precipitously; so that, especially on beau­ tiful autumnal evenings, hundreds of pedestrians enjoy the pleasant and refreshing sea air, and the prospect of the wide sea, that faithful image of eternity.106 Vorontsov’s palace was at one end of the Primorskii Boulevard, which a French engineer, Poitier, had begun constructing in the 1820s. A handsome avenue running along Odessa’s cliff top, it won admiring approval from travelers then as now.107 At the other end of the boulevard was the stock exchange, a large classical building with an exterior frieze depicting ships’ prows and bales of goods—the symbols of Odessa’s prosperity. Inside, painted ceilings graced the large mercantile chambers. Stephens admitted that, “ Even in Italy or Greece I have seldom seen a finer moonlight scene than the columns of the Exchange through the vista of trees lining the build­ ings.” 108 This entire street evoked high praise from an American in 1838: The city is situated on an elevation of about 100 feet [actually, closer to 200] above the sea; a promenade three quarters of a mile long, ter­ minated at one end by the exchange, and at the other by the palace of the governors, is laid out in front along the margin of the sea, bounded on one side by an abrupt precipice, and adorned with trees, shrubs, flowers, statues, and busts, like the garden of the Tuilleries, the Borghese Villa or the Villa Recali at Naples. On the other side is a long range of hotels built of stone, running the whole length of the boulevard, some of them with facades after the best models of Italy. A broad street runs through the center of the city, terminating with a semicircular enlargement at the boulevards and in the center of this stands a large equestrian statue [the due was not on horseback!] erected to the Duke de Richelieu; and parallel and at right angles are wide streets lined with large buildings, according to the most approved plans of modern architecture. The custom which the people have of taking apartments in hotels causes the erections of large buildings, which add much to the general appearance of the city.109 The semicircular buildings marked the beginning of Catherine Street (now Marx). In one of the fine buildings was housed the Hotel St. Petersburg; in the other, the chancellery of the military government, the museum, and the public library. The museum con­ tained antiquities dug up at the ancient Greek colony of Ol’biia. The 136 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 library founded in 1830, was the first local public library in the Rus­ sian Empire. Its librarian, according to an Englishman, was “ a little octogenarian, more celebrated from philandering than his learn­ ing.” ^ The city boasted large churches as well. The French engineer Hommaire de Hell found attractive “ the churches with the green roofs and the gilded domes, the theatre. Count de Witt’s pretty Gothic house, and some large barracks, which from the Grecian architecture, one would be disposed to take for ancient monu­ ments.” 111 In 1824, Boffo built the Lutheran church. The Italian architect Toricelli built the Church of the Purification in Russian-Byzantine style (1842-1847). He also designed the Sabaneev Bridge, a hand­ some Roman-style arch over the Military Slope in the city. Still more ambitious was his “ Palais Royal,” a huge U-sha