tions, they also served as benevolent aid societies. Like the Jews, Greeks participated in the civic life of the city. Some obtained offices in municipal government (one of the early mayors was a Greek), others served as consuls for foreign states, and nearly all of them participated in some measure or other in the economic development of their adopted city. Italians continued to come to the city as merchants and traders. They were also numerous in professions such as hairdressing, music, banking, medicine, and as we shall see, architecture. Like the Greeks, they were prominent in the management of hotels and res­ taurants. In 1836, the French consul noted in his report to Paris that there was a small French colony at Odessa of about 350 to 400 men, women, and children. Primarily doctors, merchants, watchmakers, and booksellers, they lived in easy circumstances. Some returned to The City Grows, 1815-1861 Ml France as rich men.68 An English traveler noted, “ the least numerous, but not the least important, part of the foreign population is composed of English merchants . . .’’69 Foreigners clearly appreci­ ated the commercial opportunities and liberal atmosphere of this easy-going southern town. Rich and Poor Recently, the Soviet historian Zagoruiko asserted that there were two Odessas—one a golden city and the other a vast slum: In Odessa, as in no other city in the country, in its architectural aspect, in its organization of public services, in its living conditions and all its mode of life, did luxury and misery combine in so great a contrast.70 Economic contrasts are found in all large cities, but Odessa in the first half of the nineteenth century, riding a heady wave of expan­ sion, was bound to attract the poor and hopeful, if for no other rea­ son than that rich merchants resided there and the idle rich came to vacation there. The lucrative grain trade was a magnet drawing stevedores, cabdrivers, builders, bartenders, prostitutes, vagabonds, runaway serfs, marginal traders, thieves. All hoped to find a place in the city’s bustling economy. The hasty construction of the boom town, the proliferation of taverns to accommodate well-paid laborers, sailors in port, vacationing rich—the influx of rich and poor in large numbers, in sum, gave rise to starkly different neighborhoods. A German visitor remarked that the city was one of palaces and huts. He noted that many houses were half ruined already, or half finished or collapsing. Some shingle-roofed huts had fallen-in windows and broken doors and shutters. He surmised that some had been thrown up in haste, others never finished.71 The construction material itself, the local limestone, contributed to early deterioration. An English traveler brings this to our atten­ tion: The principal houses are built of a stone so soft as to be easily shaped with a hachet and are therefore soon run up; the roofs are of iron and zinc, and being painted green, have a cheerful appearance. They are much in the Italian style, and though showy when new, soon become shabby, and have a very cheerless appearance from the stucco falling off after hard rains and frost.72 128 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The large number of bars—by 1850 there were 554 wineshops, 174 pubs, 102 taverns—gave the city a vulgar appearance, especially near the docks: 4 Odessa might be thought uninhabited at night, but for the drunken roars from low wine shops, called caves and under ground. Wine is cheap and com brandy even cheaper.73 One of the shabbier quarters was the Moldavanka, first a suburb, and then, as the city expanded, a district on the outskirts of the city. This area and some of its shady characters have been made famous by Jewish writers, especially Isaac Babel, who wrote about the city a century later. It was dirty, poor, noisy, overcrowded, and dangerous. It came to be thickly settled with poor Jews. Hommaire de Hell described the miserable houses there. He noted that the palaces were lined up fronting along the shore, thus putting the city’s best face forward to the sea; poverty was carefully hidden in the rear of the town. Of the fringes of the Moldavanka, Hommaire de Hell wrote: Could we even grace with the name of town the place where we then were and the streets we behold? It was a great open space without houses filled with carts, and oxen rolling in the dust in company with a mob of Russian and Polish peasants, all sleeping together in the sun in a temperature of more than 98.74 Community The motley character of the population put a strain on social rela­ tionships. Contemporaries noted that people did not mingle easily at Odessa. Its citizens formed their sets of social relationships within their own ethnic groups. In an article entitled “ Two More Words About Odessa,” which appeared in an almanac for 1839, M. Marke­ vich offered a perceptive picture of the city’s social life. Society in Odessa was formed of overlapping circles, and no single circle con­ tained the entire citizenry. Even though the city was new, its citizens, in the author’s estimation, did not manifest the open hospi­ tality for which, he claimed, old-fashioned Moscovites were famous. The aristocratic circle included the Vorontsovs and other Russian, Polish, and foreign nobility. Few others were admitted into their company. Whoever comes to Odessa, he warned, had better find a hobby, or he will become rather quickly bored. Merchants, he explained, especially foreign ones, were often clever, enlightened. The City Grows, 1815-1861 129 kind, and, if not formally educated, at least possessed of outward marks of education. Yet even they were not at all welcomed into the higher echelons of society. Consequently, many merchants gravi­ tated toward their ethnic communities. Within them, they founded their own clubs, churches, and benevolent societies. Even the winter charity balls held at the Stock Exchange were attended by one ethnic or social group at a time. However, the author continued, most people were absorbed in a life of domesticity; they limited their entertainment to the theater, or they sought pleasure in driving around the city and in picnicking or fishing in the environs. Mer­ chants who could afford the dues went to the English Club; there they chatted, played cards, and read magazines. Or they joined the Karuta casino, where they could rent a room, play cards or billiards, drink coffee, and read periodicals. The “ plain people,” he averred, kept altogether to themselves, while the affluent beau monde—noble families owning from three to four houses—who vacationed on the shores of the Crimea or in Constantinople, moved in a very narrow circle indeed.75 This -exclusiveness had several consequences, as Countess Rzewuska observed: Idleness and boredom have given the society of Odessa the habit of gossiping, of spiteful teasing, a malicious curiosity devoted to finding out family secrets. . . . Odessan society is composed of people who detest each other and betray each other. Interest in their pleasures was the sole tie which made them respect convention, and if they avoided quarrels, it was only so that they would not be excluded from a ball, or be given a less favorable reception by Vorontsov. . . . Such motives scarcely guaranteed a solid peace; thus hidden tiffs fed gossip and unfaithful relations inflamed them.76 A Russian émigré summed it up: I cannot say that the society of Odessa was the most agreeable. Through this mixture of nationalities, there were a great many closed circles and coteries, and no extensive society.77 All the ethnic communities resisted assimilation, but all were touched by the city’s cultural ferment. Odessa, for example, was an early home of reform movements within Judaism and of Zionism. The Greek society for national liberation, the Hetairia, also found a supportive atmosphere in the city. Nationalists—Bulgarians, Poles, Ukrainians—as well as Decembrists formed conspiratorial groups in the city. Italian stores exhibited signs such as “ Evviva Garibaldi,” or “ Evviva l’unità d’ltalia.” 78 When, for example, a Masonic lodge 130 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 was founded in Odessa in 1817, its membership included several government officials—even Längeren! A German doctor declared that Odessa was the freest city of all Russia. In St. Petersburg, he noticed, it was forbidden to smoke on the street, to go about with unbuttoned uniform jackets (no matter how lowly the office), or even to wear a flower in one’s buttonhole. To appear in public with glasses or a beard raised suspicions of radical sympathies. In Odessa, by contrast, even the cab drivers smoked; debonair youths strolled in the latest European fashions, flower in the buttonhole. The streets were noisy with gay chatter and impromptu musicals—such camara­ derie was unthinkable in the capital.79 In the view of Nicholas I, Odessa was a “ nest of conspirators.” But there were disadvantages in this cultural mix as well. The ethnic communities, looking inward, never formed a united and effective political front. As the German Dr. Kohl observed: The heterogeneous character of the population may perhaps account for its more than common deficiency in public spirit.80 The cosmopolitan composition of the city, which charmed so many visitors, hampered but did not halt the city’s physical and cul­ tural development. Public Improvements Commercial cities depend for their vitality on the quick move­ ment of goods, their safe and secure storage, and a healthy environ­ ment for their inhabitants. Young Odessa had to overcome serious difficulties in all of these areas. Nearly all travelers stressed the great deficiency of Odessa’s streets.81 In 1839, the Countess Rzewuska dwelt on an all too com­ mon theme: Upon our arrival in Odessa, we were enveloped by clouds of dust which scattered a hail, the granules of which were the size of pigeons’ eggs. Odessa is not yet paved nor sheltered either by mountains nor by any forest. The circulating air carries into the houses a fine and tiny sand which covers all the furniture and against which one takes care to hermetically seal doors and windows.82 In 1831, the city chief Levshin attempted to stem the dust by planting twenty thousand trees at the Peresyp, but this measure evi­ dently did not help the center of the city. Even Skal’kovskii, who The City Grows, 1815-1861 131 devoted much of his life to praising Odessa, recalled that he had difficulty in breathing when he first came to live there in June 1827.83 As early as April 1827, the Journal d ’Odessa carried advertise­ ments to the effect that if captains would bring in ballast stones suit­ able for paving streets, they would be paid fifteen rubles per square sazhen.M Vorontsov set up a committee to discuss how the streets might best be paved. According to a visiting Englishman, however: . . . as soon as the committee met, instead of directing their attention to the foregoing minutiae, upon which alone information was required, they began entering into discussions as to which would be the best species of road—one proposing Macadamization, another pav­ ing, and a third suggesting that the work should be performed with stone from Italy, while a fourth preferred materials to be found at some other place.85 This visitor made no effort to pave over the committee’s confu­ sion. Another visitor alluded darkly to the self-interest behind some strange decisions: Trieste stones! with so much granite on the banks of the Bug [Boh] and Dnieper! On inquiry, I found that this was to accommodate a gen­ tleman, one of the paving committee, who had furnished some of the other members with private loans, given good dinners, etc., and who carried on an extensive business with that town.86 The same observer felt that anything would be preferable to the local limestone material, which, because of its friable composition, changed into dust when ground by passing vehicles. Some claimed that the dust caused diseases of the eye and