es and commerce, and to put a commercial career over that of becoming government officials.56 These foreign merchants were recruited from an extraordinary range of peoples, most of them with an already established familiar­ ity with Mediterranean trade. They included Armenians, Moldavi­ ans, Slavs from Ragusa and Trieste, Italians, French, and some few Germans, Danes, and English. The largest group was the Greeks. As a modern historian, E. Druzhinina, observes: “ The role of the Greek merchants in the Black Sea trade was exceptionally great.” 57 Konstantin Skal’kovskii, a native of Odessa, wrote in his memoirs that from the 1820s, the Greeks in commerce ousted the Italians, and took the place of the French, who had been invited by the due de Richelieu.58 In 1817, a contemporary identified the ten richest Greek mer­ chants at Odessa and estimated their combined fortunes to be about 10 million rubles.59 Some ten years later, four Greek houses of Odessa—the Serafino, Iannopulo, Marazli, and Paleologos—were reckoned among the richest mercantile establishments in the entire Russian empire.60 Dimitrios Inglesi—scion of another, smaller but still prominent commercial house—served as mayor of Odessa from 1818 to 1821.61 In 1820, the famous Greek patriot Alexander Ipsilanti visited the city; among the rich merchants who gave him wel­ come and support were members of the Inglesi, Marazli, Mavros, and Khristodulo families.62 These names persisted in Odessa’s Producers, Middlemen, and Merchants 93 records across the decades of the nineteenth century, indicating a high degree of stability among the resident Greek merchants. In the middle years of the century, among the most prominent Greek commercial firms at Odessa were the Ralli brothers. In 1845, the Ralli firm was cited as the largest trader in Odessa combining imports and exports.63 In a ranking of Odessa’s merchants, prepared in 1847, fifth on the list according to wealth was the Greek merchant John Ralli.64 His colorful career is typical of the entrepreneurial Greek merchants, who were instrumental in building up Odessa’s international commerce. In his own words, written in 1854, Ralli was “ a Russian subject, born on the Island of Scio [Chios] in the Archipelago, and was by birth of Greek origin.” 65 He was born on November 3, 1785. His father, named Stephen, was also born at Chios thirty years earlier. He too was a merchant, and he died at Marseilles in 1827. John married an Italian girl, Lucia, who was born in Pisa in 1794. They were married in Odessa, but we do not know the year. Their only child, Stephen, was born in London in 1821. John as a young man was clearly accustomed to moving frequently! In 1838, an American visitor to Odessa wrote that Ralli had left his native island as a boy and had visited every European port as a merchant, before settling permanently in Odessa about 1830.66 In fact, John left London in 1827.67 It is likely that the death of his father at Marseilles in the same year called him, as the eldest son, back to the Mediterranean, the center of the family’s already farflung interests. John decided to settle in the booming city of Odessa. In 1826, before his own arrival there, the Ralli company at Odessa was already importing and exporting goods to the value of 290,524 rubles. In 1827, the amount fell to 149,342 rubles. Under John’s immediate supervision, however, by 1846, the company traded yearly in commodities, chiefly cereals, worth more than 1.5 million rubles. From 1832 until his death in 1859, John served as consul for the United States at Odessa, although he was never an American citizen.68 An American diplomat, Charles Rhind, who recommended him for the appointment without ever having met him, described him as “ rich and respectable.” 69 Some American travelers who met Ralli in 1835 praised him for his courtesy.70 They seem to have been the first “ authentic” Americans whom the American consul met in Odessa. In spite of the time he spent in England, Ralli still spoke English with difficulty. Ralli fulfilled the duties of consul with high competence, as his long tenure suggests. His dispatches to Washington were always 94 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 informed and written in faultless English (by a secretary). He alerted the government to commercial opportunities for American ships in the Black Sea and stressed the profits to be made by shipping colonial products directly to Russia. In his assessments, he had the advantage of information flowing to him from his offices in Rostov, Taganrog, and other Azov towns, as well as from his numerous con­ nections in the West. As an example of his good commercial sense, he advised the United States to increase grain shipments to Europe during the Crimean War, to take advantage of the prohibition against cereal exports which the Russian government had recently imposed.71 In 1857, the American government tried to prohibit its consuls abroad from engaging in private commercial ventures. Ralli appealed the decision to President Buchanan, and described his own career: I have been a merchant for a great number of years. . . . I have not only a commercial house at Odessa, and branch houses in other parts of Russia, but likewise houses in England, France, Turkey, Persia and also the East Indies.72 To retain his consular post, Ralli was willing to renounce his stipend, but he would not end his commercial career. He reminded the president of his father’s friendship with him, when both had been together at the Court of St. James’s. His petition was favorably received, but John died soon after, in 1859, while abroad in Paris. His widow went to Paris to live but died in 1873 in Livorno, in the country of her birth. The commercial firm of Ralli Brothers continued to play a prom­ inent role in international trade (the London office, founded by John and four younger brothers in 1818, survived until 1961).73 At vari­ ous times, the company maintained branches in the Danubian Pro­ vinces, Persia, the East Indies, and America, besides the Russian Empire. The vast trading network the partners erected has elicited the following comment from a recent historian, S. H. Chapman: In their migration westward the more successful Greek houses spawned new branches, and tracing these reveals the pattern of exten­ sion of their interests. Ralli Brothers, the Chian family in the van­ guard of the migration, opened branches at Odessa, Marseilles, Lon­ don and Manchester (1828), and were soon exporting cotton twist to Germany as well as the Levant. In 1865, at the summit of their mer­ cantile achievement, the Rallis were operating through interlocked partnerships in fifteen centres, spread across Europe and the Middle East.74 Producers, Middlemen, and M erchants 95 John Ralli and numerous other Greek merchants, such as Marazli, Rodocannachi, Papudov, Mavrokordato, and Zarifi, played a central role in the early growth of Odessa’s international commerce. After mid-century, the participation of Greeks in Odessa’s trade precipi­ tously declined. We shall subsequently investigate the reasons.75 The Greeks and most other foreign merchants were already actively involved in international commerce before settling in Odessa. Jewish merchants, on the other hand, had a much different origin. Important as middlemen in the hinterland, Jews were slow to penetrate the ranks of the great export merchants. Jewish commercial houses at Odessa were gaining importance by the decade of the 1830s. Between 1837 and 1844, as Table 4.7 shows, the number of Jewish commercial houses grew from 160 to 221, while Christian firms diminished in number. Skal’kovskii saw the opening of the Odessa Bourse in 1837 as a principal reason for this.76 Like St. Petersburg, Trieste, and other great commercial cities, Odessa now had its own money market. The opportunity to act as brokers attracted Jews. Because their operations ranged from small to middle scale, they clustered in the second and third guilds. Overwhelmingly, they were Russian subjects. “ And when have the Jews,” asked Skal’kovskii, “ not been humble, faithful and often useful subjects of the Russian state?” 77 Still, by 1848 Jews do not figure prominently among the largest firms. An article in the August 1848 issue of the Journal de la Haye listed them last after Greeks, Italians, French, English, and Germans active in Odessa’s commerce. Not until the 1850s did the favorable political climate attract wealthy Jews from Austria. By the 1850s, Jewish firms, such as Efrusi and Raffalavich, had more than one million rubles in total trade.78 Unlike the other merchant groups that tended to depart from Odessa after the initial boom in cereal exports had spent its course, the Jews remained. They were destined to play an ever larger com­ mercial role in the export trade over the second half of the century. To this theme we shall return. CHAPTER FIVE Foreign Trade and Domestic Industry, 1 8 1 4 -1 8 6 1 . . . the [Napoleonic] war removed thousands of hands from agricul­ ture, and famine years capped the misery of the land, at one time so rich and so flourishing. With these pressing needs, people thus had recourse to the southern provinces of Russia. —Thom, Austrian consul at Odessa, 1826 From the late eighteenth century, western Europe faced a grow­ ing scarcity of cereals and was forced to search for them in widening circles. The vagaries of weather, the altered use of land, the long­ term growth of population, the mobilization of millions in search of new jobs and new homes—all heightened the demand for cereals in western Europe without stimulating a proportionate increase in their local production. The western search for cereals was, in fact, creat­ ing an integrated, worldwide market in grain. In that market, Odessa was foreordained to become a principal participant. The Swell o f Cereal Exports The Euxine steppes were ideally placed to serve this mounting demand emanating from the West for cereals. They were close to the growing market; indeed, in the entire world, no other large and new agricultural area, capable of massive wheat production, was so near to western consumers. The steppes were, moreover, easily reached. Even slow sailing vessels could deliver the wheat with rela­ tive ease and expedition. In fact, the slowness of sailing ships long shielded the steppes from the competition of equally fertile, but much more distant areas—the United States and Canada, for exam­ ple, or Argentina. Trade and Industry, 1814-1861 97 With Richelieu’s departure from Odessa in 1814, the business community understandably feared for the future of its commerce. As it happened, the simultaneous movements of another Frenchman—Napoleon—had a larger effect upon the city’s economic fortunes. He was forced into exile to Elba in 1814, but slipped away from the tiny kingdom and returned to Paris, and for one hundred days Europe was in an uproar. The sudden, unexpected remobiliza­ tion of huge armies in the West shot the demand for Black Sea wheat skyward. Happily too, the political obstacles to the free flow of trade had also diminished; in particular, the Ottomans who con­ trolled the vital Straits, were becoming more accommodating to the passage of foreign vessels. The last years of the Napoleonic adven­ ture defined a pattern of commerce that persisted over nearly the entire course of the nineteenth century. To be sure, the course of international trade does not always run smooth. Napoleon’s violent and dramatic exit from politics was very soon followed by what one historian calls “ the last great subsistence crisis” of European history.1 Beginning in 1816, torrential rains swamped the grain fields of western Europe. Protracted belligerence had disrupted European production and had already exhausted local reserves. Europeans hungered. Speculators in the West hoarded supplies in expectation of still higher prices, and venturesome mer­ chants sought the treasured cereals in the Euxine r