, Serbs, and Gypsies), and showed much interest in agricultural development. Viticulture especially interested him.14 His close ties with Pushkin illuminate his career. The then banished poet lived with the governor’s family in Kishinev, and although Pushkin was a trouble­ some charge, Inzov loyally supported him.15 Finally, after numerous petitions from the young poet in exile, Inzov granted him permission to leave Kishinev. Pushkin was delighted to quit the dreary Mol­ davian outpost for Odessa, which he considered “ already Europe.” 16 It was also Inzov who initiated a fund-raising campaign to erect a bronze statue of Richelieu. In the estimation of several historians, Inzov was the last of the governors of Novorossiia to exercise great autonomy vis-à-vis the central government. After his regime, in the words of one of them (Pingaud), “ les Russes ont bel et bien reconquis la Nouvelle Rus­ sie.” 17 The writer Vigel quipped that with Vorontsov’s appointment, the authorities “ wanted New Russia at last to be Russianized.” 18 Vorontsov The succeeding governor general was Mikhail S. Vorontsov (1823-1845). He is the prime example of the successful entre­ preneur, a man who through land speculations on the frontier, through shrewd exploitation of its resources, parlayed a moderate fortune into one of the empire’s largest. To be sure, his family had achieved prominence since 1674. In the eighteenth century, the house had acquired extensive lands in the provinces of central and northern Russia. R. I. Vorontsov, Mikhail’s grandfather, owned, at his death in 1774, 4,500 serfs.19 Mikhail’s father, Semen, was the Russian ambassador to England from 1785 to 1806. The young Russian consequently grew up and studied in England. Vorontsov père seems to have absorbed some of the entrepreneurial drive and daring then flourishing in England in the early stages of the Industrial Revolution. In a letter addressed to Mikhail on his nineteenth birthday, his father directed him to study languages and to speak English whenever possible; he was already conversant with French and Russian. He pointedly reminded his son that Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, spoke English, Flemish, French, German, Spanish, and Italian.20 118 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 After taking his degree at Cambridge, Mikhail returned to Russia and accepted a commission in the army in the Caucasus. By the time he was thirty he was a major general and an active participant in the war against Napoleon. After the war he returned to England, but Alexander I summoned him home to help reorganize the administra­ tion of Bessarabia, acquired by Russia in 1812. He thus developed an intimate awareness of Novorossiia and praised its potential to his father. On December 17, 1819, the elder Vorontsov replied in French: I see from the little you told me about it, the importance of that new outlet of our southern provinces. . . . If they are complaining at Odessa about the stagnation of commerce this year despite the fact that they sold 700,000 chetverts of wheat, what will be the exportation in the years which will be called favorable to exportations? 21 Semen was obviously impressed by Odessa’s potential; with his support Vorontsov fils embarked on a program of massive land pur­ chases in the southern provinces, near Odessa and Taganrog and in the Crimea. In August 1822, Semen urged him to go to Odessa, and then to proceed to the Crimea where he could perhaps purchase the duc de Richelieu’s former estates and gardens.22 He did purchase the due’s house, set on a bluff overlooking the sea. This was the kernel of his magnificent villa at Alupka. Not surprisingly, given the family interest in the development of the region, Alexander I appointed Mikhail as governor general of Novorossiia and vicegerent of Bessarabia on May 7, 1823. Writing from England to congratulate his son on the appointment, Semen advised him to be wary of Bessarabia, a potential trouble spot because of its proximity to Turkey.23 The elder Vorontsov asked his son to consider how the Dnieper could be made navigable and how canals might join the Don and the Volga rivers so that the Black Sea and the Caspian might be linked as well. He was eager to learn whether the coal deposits near Katerynoslav might not be better exploited. This concern for the development of the region was not unrelated to the family’s increased holdings in Novorossiia. Indeed, Vorontsov actively used his official position to favor his economic position. As Indova noted: The activities of Vorontsov as a landlord are shot through with entrepreneurship. Acquiring lands and organizing their economy, from the very first steps he accomplished all that was necessary to assure the future realization of marketable products. Routes of The City Grows, 1815-1861 119 communication had a vital significance for his Crimean possessions. Using his position as governor general, in the first year after his nomi­ nation in that post, he began the construction of a road linking the southern shore with Symferopil: Symferopil-Alushta (1824-1826), Alushta-Simeiz-Baidary (1827 -1829) .24 His interest in communication also prompted him to plead as early as 1844 for a railroad to link Odessa with the interior.25 Unlike the kindly Richelieu, Vorontsov appeared haughty to many of his contemporaries. We have already noted the scornful verse dedicated to him by Pushkin, who further called him “ a scoundrel, a court boor, and a petty egoist.” 26 One merchant affirmed, ‘‘He spoke English as well as if he had studied it at Oxford.” 27 He seems not to have realized that Vorontsov had indeed studied, not at Oxford, but at Cambridge. One of the French consuls was annoyed that Vorontsov issued all his commercial instructions in English.28 An American presents this assessment in 1838: The count is a military looking man of about 50, six feet high, with a sallow complexion and gray hair. His father married an English lady of the Sidney family, and his sister married the Earl of Pembroke. He is a soldier in bearing and appearance, held a high rank during the French invasion of Russia, and distinguished himself particularly at Borodino; in rank and power he is the fourth military officer in the empire. He possesses immense wealth in all parts of Russia, particu­ larly in the Crimea; and his wife’s mother, after Demidoff and Scheremetieff, is the richest subject in the whole empire. He speaks English remarkably well.29 Much in contrast to Richelieu (an advocate of the simple life), Vorontsov chose to live in splendor. A French civil engineer reported: ‘‘Count Vorontzof is a veritable grand seigneur, and spends more than 6,000 pound a year in pomps and entertainments.” 30 One of the great surviving monuments to Vorontsov’s seigneurial style of life is his showcase villa of Alupka in the Crimea. Its splen­ dor testifies to his cosmopolitan culture, grandiose tastes, and huge personal fortune. When Tsar Nicholas I visited the villa in 1837, he is said to have remarked: “ He is competing with the tsars.” 31 The plans for the palace were drawn up by an Englishman, Edward Blair, and the building was carried out by Henry Hunt, another English architect. The marble, the masons, and the sculp­ tors came from Italy. The diorite walls have withstood many earth­ quakes. The palace itself follows in silhouette the pattern of the Cri­ mean peak, Ai-Petri, which stands behind it. The southern entrance 120 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 resembles the gate to the Great Mosque in Delhi; the northern facade, on the other hand, is in English Gothic. The decoration of the palace took nearly ten years to complete. Enchanted with the palace, gardens and surroundings, a Russian visitor exclaimed, “ This is paradise, this is Eden!” 32 Winston Churchill recalled the English background of Vorontsov and the British architects when the United Kingdom delegation stayed at Alupka during the Yalta Conference in 1945.33 Vorontsov’s father worried about his son’s expenditures. In 1824, he wrote to him that he feared that the family would soon be in debt and that they would be forced to sell some of their land. Should his position as governor general continue to run him into debt, he should resign.34 But Semen Vorontsov also raised his son’s allowance from 50,000 rubles to 160,000 rubles per year. His son’s health was also a matter of concern and he advised him to resign immediately as vice-gerent of Bessarabia. Vorontsov did not resign from his official duties in the South for another twenty years.35 Vorontsov occupied himself not only in opulent living, but also in constructing better roads and in exploiting the natural resources of the country. Following his father’s suggestion, he interested himself in the findings of the engineer Hommaire de Hell, who had been part of an expedition to search for coal and iron. Hommaire de Hell had found some iron deposits at the foot of the Dnieper cataracts. When he had finished his earlier commission, he was hired by Vorontsov to continue his explorations. He began in Bessarabia, but encountered only disappointment there. After finding mediocre deposits of coal in various places, he reported excitedly that some forty thousand square kilometers in the region of the Don and the Sea of Azov held good anthracite. He advised Vorontsov to invest heavily in developing the mines with modern methods of drainage and steam engines for extraction. With proper care, these deposits could liberate Novorossiia from dependence on English coal.36 Prompted no doubt by Hommaire de Hell’s reports, the govern­ ment built a road from Oleksandrivs’k to Berdians’k near the depo­ sits. And some sixty thouand serfs were liberated in exchange for their settling in the area and working the mines. They were also to raise cattle for transporting the coal from the mines to the Sea of Azov.37 How ought we then to assess Vorontsov’s administration? He was obviously not beloved by his subjects in the manner of Richelieu, but was not despised either. In a moving passage, Konstantin Skal’kovskii describes Vorontsov’s final departure from Odessa in The City Grows, 1815-1861 121 1845, to assume his new post as commander of Russian forces in the Caucasus. The boulevard overlooking the sea was lined with wellwishers; Jews turned out in great numbers, and hailed him as “ our father, our benefactor.” 38 Most contemporaries remembered his administration as a productive one. The French consul, who might not be expected to admire a quasi-Englishman, wrote in 1834: All the consuls and the foreigners who live in this city find much to praise in this man. He stands out by his extreme courtesy and the nicest manners and he smoothes away as much as he can the difficulties frequently raised by the Russian administration which is in general bothersome.39 No doubt Vorontsov applied to Odessa some of the examples of benevolent societies he had come to know in England. Under his administration such societies proliferated: the Women’s Society for the Needy; the Home for the Poor; the Orphanage; the School for Deaf-Mutes; the Charitable Religious Home for Women; the Ger­ man, Swiss, and French Charitable Societies; the Aleksandrovskii Orphanage Asylum; the Almshouse of the Compassionate Sisters, the Hospital for Outpatients; the Home for Aged and Infirm Women; and so forth.40 He encouraged the founding of the principal newspaper of the city, the Odesskii vestnik His vast collection of books even today forms an important part of the Odessa State University Library.41 One society, the Imperial Agricultural Society of South Russia, erected a statue of him in 1857 at the cost of three thousand rubles. It still stands on Soviet Army Square (once Cathedral Square).42 As private entrepreneur and as governor general, Vorontsov thus manifested conflicting, even contradictory, qualities. He possessed an eye for profit and high entrepreneurial energies, which perhaps he copied from English mod