ped complex with some forty-four stores facing on three streets. In the middle stood a garden with a fountain. The Orthodox Cathedral of the Assumption with its five domes was begun in 1855, but not completed until 1869. By 1850, there were twenty-three Orthodox churches in Odessa. Some observers felt that this was too few for a city of its size—a reflection of the mercantile and materialistic tenor of its life. The Italianate palaces and churches (including the synagogue) prompted one visitor to remark in 1835, “ I was almost tempted to believe that, by some hocus-pocus, we had tumbled on an Italian town. . . . There was little or nothing Russian about it.” 112 Odessa was one of those rare cities in the Russian Empire that could boast of its lodgings for visitors.113 Many travelers, upon arriv­ ing by sea at Odessa, were required to spend time at the quarantine, a kind of hotel or hospital where new arrivals by sea waited out the period before they could enter the city. Odessa’s quarantine was constructed at the foot of the town’s principal bluff. Some foreigners found the place obnoxious. An English visitor wrote: From Constantinople, I proceeded to Odessa and passed through the ordeal of a disgusting quarantine, and finding nothing sufficiently attractive to detain me in the city or neighbourhood, embarked on a British schooner to return to the southward.114 Not all travelers found so much fault. A Madame Craven wrote to her father in France that they were well treated in confinement. “ Quelle agréable quarantaine!” , she exclaimed, happy to see her mother-in-law, various friends, and even Count Vorontsov himself. The City Grom, 1815-1861 137 Although parts of her letters had been obliterated in the fumigation process, we are told by Mme Craven that the lazaretto was “ un lieu complètement magnifique.” 115 Even Governor Vorontsov himself kindly sent French newspapers to the detainees daily. A friend sent a cook who had to remain in quarantine with Mme Craven and her party, but he was deemed “ excellent.” An American traveler agreed that the quarantine station, sur­ rounded by acacias, offered lovely views. However, he considered it a bit unnerving to be greeted by soliders, armed with bayonets, who then took innocent travelers for their prescribed stay in quarantine. He noted that in the station with him were Turks, Jews, Christians, Russians, Poles, Germans, English, French, Italians, Austrians, Greeks, Ilyrians, Moldavians, Wallachians, Bulgarians, Sclavonians, Armenians, Georgians, and Africans. They were all stripped, and examined under the arms and at the groin for nodules symptomatic of the plague. They were given flannel gowns, drawers, stockings, and a woolen cap, which they wore until their own clothes were fumigated with sulfuric acid for twenty-four hours. Their outgoing letters were also “ purified.” 116 Although Hommaire de Hell also enjoyed the view and the aca­ cias, he said that he felt so grotesque in his borrowed garb that he laughed aloud. The quarantine at Odessa, he felt, was a model of its kind, however. Travelers were detained for a fortnight, merchandise was cleansed for forty-eight hours with chlorine. Compared with the old-fashioned lazaret of Marseilles, Odessa’s was most effective, he averred.117 One English inmate grumbled about the high rates charged for the quarters.118 Another found out that the Italian who managed the quarantine was also the manager of the Italian Opera House. The more rampant the diseases in the eastern Mediterranean, the more money was accumulated for the support of the opera and for the salaries of famous singers. “ It was rumored,” our source relates, “ that in the event of another unusually severe plague at Constan­ tinople, the manager had expressed his intention of engaging Rachel la popular diva of the day].” 119 Complaints in the 1830s centered on the high per diem rates for lodgings, the quaint garb, and the stripping procedure. K. A. Skal’kovskii observed that, aside from the red tape required to obtain permission to travel abroad, Russians thought twice about sailing from Odessa, knowing that they would have to spend from two to six weeks in quarantine upon their return.120 But conditions had vastly improved since 1819. In that year, the Reverend Pinkerton 138 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 described the quarantine as a damp and cold place with small stone cells only sixteen by thirteen feet; the ceiling was only ten feet high. There were two small windows measuring four by two feet. At that time, the detainees had to cook their own food. If they retained their own clothes and kept their luggage with them, they remained forty-two days. They could gain release in fourteen days if they surrendered their goods to criminals who handled the fumigation, and if they put on the borrowed clothes. Furthermore, they were locked up from sunset until nine in the morning and were allowed visits from no one.121 In the 1850s, an English visitor declared, “ The Quarantine at Odessa is one of the best.’’122 Clearly, with increasing traffic to Odessa, measures were taken to make quarantine a tolerable experience. Once released from quarantine, the traveler had a choice of luxury hotels. In the 1820s, the Hotel du Nord, established by the Genoese shipping magnate, Venzano, was the smartest inn. The famous Donati restaurant was part of this hotel. John Moore, an English traveler, recommended it in 1824; in 1828, the entourage of Tsar Nicholas I was lodged there.123 Another large hotel run by an Italian was the Hotel du Club; it featured a terrace overlooking a courtyard and offered hot baths.124 By the 1830s and at least through the 1860s, the most fashionable establishment was the St. Petersburg, which occupied the elegant semicircular building near the statue of Richelieu. One Englishman who lodged there for three months reported that the owner was a Greek who spoke French and Italian. He found some fault, how­ ever, with the small size of one apartment. Nonetheless, the hotel was a vast improvement over the Hotel de la Nouvelle Russie from which he had transferred, declaring the latter to be a “ terrible place.” Hommaire de Hell also found the Nouvelle Russie expensive at eight rubles a day with no linens or even a bed without extra pay­ ment. There were also no bells to summon servants, and no ser­ vants to respond! In fact, many visitors to Odessa’s hotels were amazed to find that a ruble extra was charged for sheets. An Ameri­ can traveler was baffled to find in his room a bedstead, but no bed. When he complained about the lack of a mattress, he was told that all “ seigneurs” brought their own. Apart from the sparse furnish­ ings, he found his hotel in size and appearance “ equal to the best in Paris.” 125 In summertime, the after-theater crowd savored ices at the Hotel St. Petersburg. Odessa’s western flavor astonished an Ameri­ can visitor: The City Grows, 1815-1861 139 . . . looking from the window of the café, furnished and filled up in a style superior to most in Paris, upon the crowd still thronging the boulevards, I could hardly believe that I was really on the borders of the Black Sea.126 Many in the crowds thronging the boulevards were shoppers. Hommaire de Hell explains why Odessa had great appeal to visitors in search of bargains: Odessa possesses one grand attraction for the Russian and Polish ladies in the freedom of its port, which enables them to indulge their taste for dress and other luxuries without the ruinous expense these entail on them in St. Petersburg. Odessa is their Paris.127 Among the attractive shops was the German firm of Stiffel Broth­ ers, which offered to its clients china, glass, paper, porter, tea, and drugs of English, French, and Swiss manufacture, but “ at fabulous prices.’’ 128 French shops such as those of Ventre Frères, Rueaud, Guérin, Neuman, Béranger, and Martin, similarly sold their sumptu­ ous goods to the wealthy. Hommaire de Hell felt that Odessa was a real Eldorado: Odessa is a town of pleasure and luxury, where the ladies, it is said, ruin their husbands by their profuse and extravagant love of dress.129 A Russian woman visited Odessa in 1832. She described in minute detail exactly what kind of good could be obtained where and who sold it. Thus we learn that Greek Street (where the merchants were mainly Jews) specialized in tea, sugar, coffee, cocoa, dried fruit, sail cloth, tents, lemons, limes, pomegranates, chestnuts, apples, grapes, and pears. Turkish and Persian wares were to be found on Catherine Street, including amber, silks, cotton goods, pipes, cigarettes, and so forth. Gold and silver objects, even custom made, could be purchased cheaply from the many Jewish artisans. From food to finery, all was of good quality and a bargain. She was enthusiastic: “ I do not know another place in all of Russia where it is possible to live cheaper, more comfortably, or more agreeably.’’130 An English prisoner of war describes Odessa in June: This was the gay season for Odessa. . . . The rich here, more than elsewhere, vie with each other in their extravagances; and I was often struck with the number of carriages, filled with ladies dressed in the first fashions of the day. Gentlemen in all kinds of costumes, not unlike those which are represented in the tailors’ books of fashion. 140 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 . . . All the ladies must have their carriages and attendants. Their lace and bonnets must come direct from Paris, and with the last fashions; and their dresses must be of the richest texture; and as to the trim­ mings, they must be of the most unquestionable gentility.131 * In addition to its palaces, churches, hotels, shops, museums, library, and schools, the city built a monument that has since become its best-known symbol: the giant stairway now known as the Potemkin steps. This city on a hill needed direct access to the har­ bor below it. Winding paths and rude wooden stairs served until the decision was made in 1837 to construct a “ monstrous staircase.” Using sandstone from Trieste, the Russian architects A. I. Mel’nikov and Pot’e laid 220 stairs.132 A man by the name of Upton executed the project. Gradually, the Trieste sandstone was replaced by granite from the Boh region.133 The number of stairs was reduced to 192, with ten landings. The staircase extended for 142 meters, and cost 800,000 rubles to build. The width of the stairs was so gauged that the staircase gives the illusion of even greater length. A person looking down the stairs sees only landings, while an observer looking up sees only steps. The top step is 12.5 meters wide, while the lowest is 21 meters wide. Through Eisenstein’s famous film of the 1920s, the “ Battleship Potemkin,” the stairs were made familiar to movie-goers all over the world. Koch commented: “ A flight of steps unequalled in magnificence, leads down the declivity to the shore and harbour.” 134 Inevitably, this bold and costly enterprise elicited criticisms. One detractor was an English visitor: From the centre of the Boulevard, a staircase called the “ escalier monstre” descends to the beach. The contractor for this work was ruined. It is an ill-conceived design if intended for ornament; its util­ ity is more than doubtful and its execution so defective, that its fall is already anticipated. An Odessa wag has prophesied that the Duc de Richelieu, whose statue is at the top, will be the first person to go down it.135 The French engineer Hommaire de Hell was similarly outspoken. He complained that workers had wasted two or three years in erect­ ing this gigantic staircase to the beach. “ This expensive and useless toy,” he concluded, “ is likely to cost nearly forty thousand pounds.” 136 Yet the staircase did not collapse, and it has remained a fixture of the city. 141 The City Grows, 1815-1861 Odessa attracted visitors and charmed most of them not only through its lovely or impressive buildings; it also beguiled citizens an