els. K. A. Skal’kovskii’s one criticism of him was that he was too partial to foreigners. Moreover, he retained the taste for extravagant, wasteful living that the old Russian gentry had long cultivated. For about a half century then, Odessa had been blessed with exceptional leadership and had enjoyed more autonomy than the two capitals of the empire. Perhaps the most significant tribute to Vorontsov’s stewardship is that, at his accession to office in 1823, Odessa had 30,000 inhabitants. When he resigned in 1844 (he lived until 1854), the population had more than doubled to 77,778 per­ sons. 122 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Vorontsov’s career raises the problem of the distinctive contribu­ tion of liberal regimes to Odessa’s development. In spite of his strong rule, contemporaries found the atmosphere in Odessa freer than elsewhere in the empire: Several families used to living in France and Italy preferred coming to live in Odessa rather than Moscow and St. Petersburg because there is more freedom here than in those two cities, and they find themselves here with a larger number of foreigners.43 An Englishman attributed this freedom directly to Vorontsov: There is perhaps more political freedom enjoyed in this town than in any other in the empire. This, probably, arises from the high and liberal character of Count Woronzov, the present Governor-General of New Russia.44 The leading Soviet historian on Odessa’s past, Saul Borovoi, made this judgment: Here one felt freer than in the rest of Russia—national oppression and the arbitrary rule of the police were felt less. Vorontsov was unques­ tionably one of the most liberal administrators of Nikolaevan Russia.45 K. A. Skal’kovskii comments: “ Under the influence of foreigners and such enlightened leaders as Richelieu, Langeron, Vorontsov, and Levshin [city chief, 1831-1837], life in Odessa was distinguished by such freedom, the like of which could not even be understood in the capitals.’’46 A Russian historian of Odessa, D. Atlas, affirms that “ in the early nineteenth century, the unbearable yoke of reaction in the capitals compelled Russian liberals to search for escape in Odessa.” 47 The administration of these early governors was indeed liberal. But their style was also a response to Odessa’s special needs. The city’s prosperity required the contributions of many communities, not all of them subjects of the empire. To attract foreign colonists and mer­ chants required a free and open social atmosphere. These early governors recognized the need and worked effectively to meet it. Population and Society Between 1811 and 1861, the population of the Kherson guberniia, of which Odessa was the principal city, grew by 259 percent. The The City Grows, 1815-1861 123 comparable population growth for all forty-nine guberniias of Euro­ pean Russia was 46.3 percent.48 Between 1815 and 1861, the size of the city more than tripled— from about 35,000 to nearly 116,000 inhabitants. The average annual growth rate of the city (compounded) between 1795, when its popu­ lation was 2,345, and 1815, when it claimed about 35,000 inhabi­ tants, had been 14.47 percent. But, of course, this high rate reflects Odessa’s status as a new town, its growth from nearly zero popula­ tion. The compound annual rate of growth dropped considerably in the period of this chapter, while remaining high by any absolute measure. To carry the population from 35,000 in 1815 to 116,000 in 1861 required an annual rate of 2.6 percent. (Between 1861 and 1914, the continual expansion of the city from 116,000 to 630,000 represented an average annual growth rate of 3.2 percent.) Immigra­ tion accounted for the greatest part of this increase. Who came to live in Odessa? There were a few prominent Rus­ sians. The mistress of Alexander I, Naryshkina, brought their daughter Sofia to Odessa for a cure; she took up residence in a lovely palace on the Primorskii Boulevard. The Rozumovs’kyi family and Countess Edling similarly made Odessa their home.49 But to most observers, Russians and Ukrainians seemed less visible than foreigners.50 The variegated garb and picturesque speech of these foreigners attracted the eye and ear. In 1839, an English visitor marveled at the colorful costumes of the Armenians; the blue breeches of the Greeks and Albanians; the fezzes and turbans of the Turks; the Cir­ cassians, Karaites, and other Jews; and the pink pelisses and white turbans of the Tatars; even the Russian muzhiks could be seen in pink shirts and blue pants.51 A Swiss, accustomed to multiple languages, remarked that in Odessa at least twenty languages were spoken as well as ten religions practiced. The passing parade captivated him: There [Odessa] the Russian jostles against a Turk, a German against a Greek, an Englishman against an Armenian, a Frenchman against an Arab, an Italian against a Persian or a Bucharestian. . . . Everything surges and mixes together: the dress coat, the swallow tail coat of the West European mixes together with the kaftan and robes of the orien­ tal. Here there is glimpsed within the colorful mass, the modern hat of a Frenchman, the high towering cap of a Persian and the turban of an Anatolian and the fez of a Morean and a Dutch sailor in a widebrimmed low hat.52 124 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 According to K. A. Skal’kovskii, the various nationalities concen­ trated in particular trades. Thus, Armenian Catholics were barbers; Bulgarians, gardeners; Moldavians, colliers; Greeks, bakers and fruit merchants; Karaite Jews, dealers in manufactured goods; and Jews, brokers, glaziers, and peddlers. Great Russians were carpenters, coopers, stove makers, plasterers, water carriers, and coach drivers; Italians, fishermen and stevedores. Ukrainian and Polish women worked as nursemaids.53 Jews This stream of immigration carried Jews in large numbers into the city. Eventually this would give Odessa one of the largest concentra­ tions of urban Jews to be found anywhere in the world. During the period from 1815 to 1861, the Jewish population rose from under four thousand to well over seventeen thousand individuals. In 1854, seven thousand Jews were citizens of Odessa, while six thousand other Jewish residents were officially considered to belong to other Russian towns.54 An English traveler observed: “ The Jews form the largest portion of the foreign population. . . . A few are very rich and engage in the banking business; many make large purchases of imported goods from the foreign merchants and sell them retail in their own shops.” 55 Many Jews came from other areas of Novorossiia (where they had been permitted to settle since 1791) and from Volhynia, Lithuania, and Belorussia. At the end of the eighteenth century, some three hundred Jewish families, mostly from Galicia, settled in Odessa.56 This was the start of a steady flow of emigrants from Galicia—Brody in particular. A leading Jewish scholar in Odessa in 1855, Joachim Tamopol, wrote that the Jews from Brody combined the virtues of industriousness with commercial skill. Many of them became bank­ ers, merchants, and brokers.57 In 1843, during one of its sporadic anti-Semitic campaigns, the Russian government sought to restrict the activities of foreign Jews in the empire. Vorontsov petitioned the authorities in St. Petersburg to exempt Novorossiia from the regulation. He argued that many of the bankers in Odessa were Austrian Jews, whose departure would disrupt the business of the city.58 As the Jewish community grew, so did its institutions. In 1826, a secular Jewish school, one of the first in the empire, was founded in Odessa.59 The curriculum included Hebrew, Talmudic studies, Rus­ sian, German, French, mathematics, physics, rhetoric, history. The City Grows, 1815-1861 125 geography, calligraphy, and civil law. In 1835, a similar school for Jewish girls was established. In addition to the subjects taught to the boys, they learned needlework. Soon there was a fashionable board­ ing school for the daughters of wealthy Jews. The founders were men like S. Pinsker, M. Finkel, and I. Hurowitz, members of the Haskalah, or “ Enlightenment,” who had to overcome the objections of more conservative Jews of the Hassidic community. In 1837, Tsar Nicholas I visited the Jewish schools and expressed his satisfac­ tion with them. At times Count Vorontsov himself went to examine the youngsters. In 1841, a large synagogue was founded, mostly by Jews from Brody. Like the progressive school, the synagogue became renowned for its liturgical and organizational innovations. About a decade later, Morandi the city architect, constructed a new building in the Florentine style for another synagogue (the Glavnaia)’, it soon came to be regarded as one of the most magnificent edifices in the city.60 In addition to founding synagogues and prayer houses, Jews organized medical services. A Jewish hospital of 75 beds cared for 450 patients each year. Indigent Jews could come into town from the villages to obtain free advice and medicine from one of the city’s dozen Jewish doctors. Various philanthropies served the community as well: a friendly society and institutions for educating orphans and indigent children, feeding transients, and clothing the poor. Each year the community collected thirty-seven thousand silver rubles to support these charities. Not only did Odessa offer Jews unprecedented economic oppor­ tunities and freedom to pursue their own cultural interests, but its liberal atmosphere allowed them some participation in political affairs—a rare prerogative in tsarist Russia. In the 1850s, eleven Jews served in city offices.61 Both Vorontsov and his successor Stroganov insisted that Jews participate fully in all aspects of the city’s life. This steady influx linked the urban population through familial and other networks with the Jewish settlements in the hinterland. This laid the basis for still more massive immigration after 1861. Greeks and West Europeans Only three years after the founding of Odessa, twenty-five Greek families settled in the town, and by 1798 there were at least twentyone more.62 One Greek resident explains Odessa’s attraction for his fellow nationals: 126 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 How is it possible to leave Odessa, a land where milk and honey flow, where trade flourishes, where the rule is mild, where there are the ful­ lest tranquility and freedom and where the plague does not bother us?63 As we have already noted, Greeks played the most important role in the grain export business of Odessa during the period prior to 1861. Greeks were also prominent in the hotel and restaurant busi­ ness. In 1822, an Italian merchant wrote that Greek was the tongue one heard most often in the streets of Odessa, “ because of the great number of Greeks who live there.” 64 Two years later, an English traveler also affirmed that among the city’s many foreigners, the Greeks were the most numerous.65 Greek merchants bought much property in the city. With obvious distaste, Shmidt, drawing up an official report for the Russian army, claimed that if one looked at the inscriptions over the gates of the best houses in Odessa, one chiefly saw names ending in “ afi,” “ aki,” “ pudo,” and “ pulo.” 66 Greek institutions came early. In 1814, a Greek theater was founded, and, from all accounts, it flourished.67 A Greek school was opened with great fanfare in 1817, with Governor General Langeron, the metropolitan, and all the Greek notables in attendance. The cur­ riculum included commercial subjects, the Russian language, ancient and modern Greek, religion, natural sciences, the humanities, and Italian. It soon enjoyed the reputation of being the second-best school in Odessa, after the Richelieu Lycée. Supported entirely by the local Greek community, it attracted students from other Greek colonies and from the homeland itself. Three Greek insurance com­ panies were established in Odessa; like the Jewish charitable institu­ 