t if the Russian yield is to be brought up to Western European standards, or indeed kept from shrinking away, greater use must be made of phosphorites, phos­ phates, kali salts, Thomas slag, saltpetre and sulphate of ammonia.48 Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 181 There was no lack of fertilizers in the vicinity. The city slaughter­ house dried the blood of butchered animals and exported the powder abroad for fertilizer.49 The problem lay in the conservative habits of the countryside. In 1914, when our survey ends, the agriculture of Novorossiia showed both great promise and great confusion. Emancipation, fol­ lowed by rapid population growth, brought about a proliferation of small, uneconomic holdings. Many Russian observers—and all the foreign consuls—recognized what had to be done: cultivators, aided by machines, should work larger fields by more intensive, modern means. But many estate owners were unwilling to take risks, and many peasants clung tenaciously to the old ways and were suspicious of change. The government was indecisive and vacillating. Time and stability might have brought a satisfactory resolution, but the year was 1914. Industry Odessa’s growth for its first seventy years was based on commer­ cial, not industrial, expansion. Once the serfs were emancipated in 1861, however, the new mobility of labor held out the hope that the city could expand its economic base through fostering industrial development. And a growing industrial base was needed to provide employment for the growing population of the countryside. But in its efforts to industrialize, Odessa had to face and overcome formid­ able obstacles. Fuel, Water, and Raw Materials A first great obstacle to Odessa’s industrial development was the scarcity of waterpower and of fuel. The flat steppes offered few sites for water-turned mills. And the nearly total dearth of forests deprived the community of wood to heat homes in winter, fire industrial furnaces, or generate steam to drive engines. Many trav­ elers comment on the odd materials the natives burned in their stoves: “ dung, stalks of vegetables and herbs.” 50 As early as 1840, a German claimed that only the rich could afford to burn wood; a pile six feet in height then cost one hundred rubles.51 And in times of war, wood could not be purchased at any price. Supplies of wood were floated down the Dnieper River or came by sea from the coast­ al forests of the Crimea. Kohl noted the considerable variety of fuels offered for sale at the city’s bazaars: 182 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Wood from Poland and Bessarabia, coals from England, charcoal from the country around Kisheneff, reeds from the Dnieper and Dniester, straw from the villages on the steppe, and dried dung and withered vine branches from the German colonies.52 Each of the various fuels had a special function: straw for ovens, coals and wood for kitchens of the wealthy. The poor made do with straw and dung. A mixture of straw and reeds heated the city’s bread ovens. The substances were combined with some care. Bricks of dung and straw, mixed with a touch of Bessarabian oak and dried in the sun, burned slowly and long. The natives knew how to cali­ brate the burning time of each of these mixtures, and changed the blend for different uses. And like blends of tobacco, the odor was in each case so distinctive that at night some peasants could identify which villages they were approaching from the smell of burning fuel. High fuel costs delayed the construction of steam-powered mills. Most of Odessa’s furnaces burned coal imported from England. In 1867, the cost of transport was a relatively high nineteen to twentyone kopecks per pud.53 Anthracite cost from twenty-five to twentyseven kopecks per pud in Odessa, while in English ports the same product cost only eleven to thirteen kopecks per pud. Tariffs added to the cost of this imported fuel. The British con­ suls at Odessa complained repeatedly about the high rates charged on coal and other commodities imported from England. In 1890, the consul affirmed that the heavy duties placed on English coal ob­ structed the development of local industries: Although the Russian Government derives a considerable revenue from the duty on coal, and has the further object in view of encourag­ ing an important native industry, its proximate result is so to raise the price of fuel as to inflict unnecessary hardship on the poor and to paralyze local industrial undertakings. Quite recently a flour mill near Odessa has stopped work owing to the dearness of coal, and it is expected that another will shortly follow suit, while a large glassbutton factory has also found it necessary to close its workshops.54 The consul added that Odessa factories preferred English coal despite its dearness, because of its excellent quality.55 Sometimes coal was so scarce and so expensive that many urban houses could not be adequately heated during the winter. In 1889, according to the British consul, the city chief of Odessa recom­ mended to the municipal authorities that they keep a reserve of 500,000 puds of coal in stock for winter emergencies. And this could Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 183 only be accomplished if a certain amount came duty free from Eng­ land.56 In 1900, the British consul again called the heavy duty levied on British coal over the previous ten years one of the greatest “ hin­ drances to the development of various industries.” The South Ukraine was slow to develop local supplies of coal. To be sure, it possessed rich deposits in the Donets basin. Peasants, utilizing primitive methods, had been extracting coal for some time. As early as 1829, Vorontsov brought coal from Bakhmut through Taganrog in the relatively small quantity of six thousand puds. But the mines were not intensively exploited for industrial purposes until well into the second half of the nineteenth century. Anatole Demi­ dov, an entrepreneurial aristocrat who had spent years abroad, undertook in about 1840 to investigate the nature and value of the coal deposits. The famous French engineer and economist, Frédéric Le Play, headed the expedition. But his report was so negative as to discourage systematic exploitation of this rich resource. An expert later commented: “ The consequence of Le Play’s mission was to delay the industrial development of South Russia for a quarter of a century.” 57 By 1880, in the Donets region, 197 mines produced 86.6 million puds of coal, but much was consumed as fuel by the new rail­ roads.58 Not only the poor quality of the coal, but also its high price, made it feasible to be used only for railroads, steamboats, and household consumption, not for ordinary factories. Even when Rus­ sian fuel was utilized, it could only be procured seasonally. In the fall, generally all available rolling stock was used to haul grain to Odessa.59 In 1909, the British consul provided a lengthy report on the mineral fuel of the Donets basin, which he declared to be plentiful. The principal kinds were hard anthracite and a soft coal. Some of the difficulties involved in the mining of coal were “ the dearness of capital and the want of uniformity of the mineral.” Another problem was that of spontaneous combustion. Most of the coal was taken by sea to Baltic ports for use by factories and steamers.60 Not much of it, apparently, reached the southern region for industrial purposes. Protection against imported English coal was, he believed, no longer needed. The development of the Donets coal basin (producing some 8 million tons in 1900) was still not adequate for local needs: “ all [the Donets coal] has found a ready sale, and in fact has been insufficient to meet the demand, persons requiring it having to wait for weeks or even months so that protection is no longer necessary.” 184 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 In addition to fuel, most manufactures required a good supply of water. As one local historian observed in 1875, Odessa would have produced many more consumer items if there had been “ ample water, cheap fuel and a comparatively cheap labçr force.“61 Indeed, he continued, “ Actually, only thanks to the [new] water supply in Odessa, there appeared such huge works as the brewery and winery of the Industrial and Trade Society, the starch and glue factory of Lekont and Co.“ 62 With the opening of the new pipelines from the Dniester, the price of forty buckets dropped from four to three kopecks. Nonetheless, the price was still too high for the profitable operation of many manufactures, such as paper making; the produc­ tion of fifty puds of paper required, for example, one thousand bar­ rels of water.63 A. A. SkaPkovskii was alert to these shortages of fuel and fresh water as he was to most other aspects of the economic life of his native region. His words show the situation in the 1860s: We repeat that the chief obstacles to the development of factory and manufacturing industry were the insufficient fuels for steam engines which had to be procured at high price from abroad, for example, from England and the absence of running water for hydraulic power. Sea water quickly corroded all steam boilers and equipment, especially pipes. . . .64 In 1905, according to the report of an Italian journalist, the prob­ lems of shortages still remained: The town is not well situated for industrial development as coal, iron and naphta can only be obtained from a great distance, either by a roundabout railway route or by a combination of railway and steam­ ship transport, which of course means heavy transshipment expenses.65 Labor Labor had traditionally been in short supply in Novorossiia, and emancipation did not immediately direct to it a stream of workers looking for employment to the city. One reason for this was the legislation itself; it set lengthy periods for negotiating the redemption fees. Then too, only those peasants who were willing to accept “ pauper plots” acquired full freedom of movement. Those who sought a larger share of the soil assumed heavy obligations to their rural communes in order to repay the compensation demanded of them. In effect, they could not depart without their neighbors’ Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 185 permission. Moreover, in Novorossiia, the great landowners, always short of workers, recruited peasants to work or lease their holdings. For most peasants there was work enough on the land. In fact, as Lenin himself noted, Odessa was a gathering place for workers, who offered their services for sale; landed proprietors went there to seek them.66 The demand for agricultural laborers thus worked against the growth of an urban and industrial labor force. To be sure, a heavy, seasonal movement of laborers continued. Men from the countryside found occasional employment as dockhands, cab drivers, or builders. In the 1870s, about three thousand masons, carpenters, and plasterers passed their summers in Odessa, working in the building trades. Some five thousand came to repair or load ships and still another twelve thousand came in search of odd jobs. As late as the 1890s, some five thousand casual laborers migrated to the city every year, and then moved out again.67 At the same time, only about one-third of the city’s workers were employed in factories. The others found jobs in services—maritime or land transport, small shops or businesses.68 As a historian of the city’s industries reported in 1875: Today, when the export of grain from our port reaches such a huge quantity, all the working hands concentrate on the docks and in the grain magazines. Pay is as high as five to six rubles per day. Conse­ quently, industrial affairs suffer from insufficient workers.69 When crops failed, even larger numbers of rural people were drawn into the city. This drifting population, which floated in and out like the tides, did not readily assure a large supply of cheap and stable labor. As the British consul observed apropos of peasants employed in factories: “ . . .