0, but without success. Unexpectedly, St. Petersburg announced that Novorossiia Univer­ sity would be located in Mykolaiv. That rival city had powerful friends at court, including Grand Prince Konstantin Nikolaevich; the minister of public education, Golovin; and the minister of the inte­ rior, Valuev. They claimed that Mykolaiv was more centrally located within the region than Odessa. They proposed that the Richelieu Lycée could be converted into a higher technical or agricultural col­ lege. Finally, they advanced a third argument, which was no doubt crucial in the decision. Universities located in large cities were hotbeds of disorder. Not only were such cities difficult to monitor, but students frequently fell under the influence of “'altogether undesirable elements of the population.” 60 Clearly, the highest levels Municipal Government and Finance 161 of the imperial government harbored much hostility and deep suspi­ cions toward Odessa. The then governor general of Odessa, Count Stroganov, fought back, however. He wrote to St. Petersburg that “ the opening of the university in Nikolaev [Mykolaiv] would be per­ nicious for Odessa, deplorable for the region and for the education of youth.” 61 He argued that the nobility of Kherson as well as the mer­ chant community of Odessa supported Odessa as the site. Further­ more, the nobles of Bessarabia regarded a university in distant Mykolaiv to be utterly useless to them. As for disturbances, when had there ever been any at the Richelieu Lycée? In the last analysis, it was probably the fact that Alexander II was Stroganov’s son’s brother-in-law that persuaded the tsar to grant on June 10, 1862, that the lycée would become Novorossiia University, a transforma­ tion which took three years to complete. Odessa had need for such champions of its causes. To begin with, it had no long line of ancient noble families, well established and with myriad connections as in Moscow. Even St. Petersburg was some seventy years older and there was no dearth of gentry or high officials. Odessa was a parvenu among large cities; in fact, it was the largest of the new late-nineteenth-century cities. It had the further disability that, because of its large foreign and Jewish population, it was the target of active opponents almost from its founding. The criticism usually took the form of attacks on its rapid growth and predicted collapse. Sometimes, however, its foes were more open in their hostility. Odessa was allegedly the place whence riches were leaching out to foreign soils and where foreigners were taking the lifeblood out of hardworking Slavs, deriving enormous profits there­ by. To these enemies of Odessa we shall return, but their vociferous and vituperative voices called for defense. We have seen some of the governors general who took up the challenge. What about the lesser ranks of appointed officials? From 1820 to 1894, some twenty-two men served as city chiefs of Odessa. In the history of 1894, some are remembered only by names and dates, others receive more detailed attention. One of the best remembered was A. I. Levshin, who served from 1831 to 1837, a period spanned by the governorship of M. S. Vorontsov. Unlike Vorontsov, however, he was neither a member of the military nor of the nobility. He is described by the city officials of 1894 as “ enlightened.” In their words: From the beginning of his activities in Odessa, Levshin was occupied with many useful projects and later on, he directed his unsparing energies towards increasing the welfare of Odessa and its inhabitants.62 162 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Indeed, his record looks good. He helped to found the Odesskii vestnik in the French and Russian versions. Like Richelieu, he was interested in afforestation; he planted large numbers of trees along the shores of the port and of Peresyp in a somewhat vain attempt to cut down on dust. The Peresyp groves are named for him. At his own expense, he took himself to Western Europe to study quaran­ tines, factories, and other modern constructions, which he hoped to introduce into Odessa. He applied his observations to the renovation of the quarantine. He attempted to better the water supply by hav­ ing artesian wells dug and by investigating how much it would cost to bring in water from the Boh or Dnieper. The young city’s resources did not match the required sum. He was also unsuccessful in build­ ing a sugar refinery, but he did establish a foundry. When the status of free port was threatened, he helped to convince the authorities that it should be retained. Even before he became city chief, he undertook to supervise a census of the population in 1828; at the same time, he drew up a report on the state of the city’s trade and industry. In every way possible, he used his position to promote the economic welfare of the city. In addition to his support of the city’s newspapers, he was also interested in educating the lower classes. He wrote to the emperor asking that free schools be established in the suburbs, particularly for the children of mechshane and of artisans. He also promoted in 1835 the Jewish schools for both boys and girls. In 1894, the city fathers concluded that the city “ retains a very good memory of his activi­ ties.” 63 For most of the other city chiefs we have only scattered refer­ ences.64 Of course, most of what was recorded was complimentary. D. D. Akhlestyshev (1840-1848) supported the founding of the Philanthropic Society and a second public gymnasium. N. I. Kruzenshtern (1854-1856) founded an orphanage for children of the victims of the Crimean War. F. D. Alopeus and his wife pro­ moted and supported the Alexander Orphanage. P. F. Mestmakher, as we have seen, helped the city to obtain a new city charter in 1863; he also contributed to the Alexander Orphanage. E. I. Velio (1863-1865) helped to establish a mental hospital in Odessa in 1892, many years after his term of office. Pavel P. Kossagovskii (1882-1885), who had asked the tsar to give the city funds for a mental hospital, is remembered for his aid in establishing a school for deaf children. Fortunately, there remains in the Odessa archives a lengthy report written to the tsar in 1883 by Kossagovskii.65 He began by describing Municipal Government and Finance 163 the rapid growth of the city. He emphasized the fact that the government of the city was too caught up in attempting to pay off interest on its debts to improve the harbor. He urged the govern­ ment to buy up as much waterfront property as possible to ensure control over the city’s commercial development. He also expressed concern for the 170 mental patients currently residing in the city hospital; they needed, in his opinion, specialized care. He further noted the overcrowding of the prison, where inmates had recently gone on a hunger strike for better conditions. But the most pressing issue was that of the city police. When he took office, the Odessa police, although better paid than their counterparts in other provin­ cial cities, had a long-standing tradition of disobeying orders. The lower ranks in particular were noted for succumbing to bribes from tavern owners in return for overlooking infractions of the law. But he had changed the staff of the police force. With no little pride, he told Alexander III that even the temporary Governor General Gurko before departing Odessa had praised Kossagovskii for his police reforms. At the writing of the 1894 commemorative volume, the city chief was P. A. Zelenoi. He is cited for his creation of a life-saving sta­ tion on the beach in 1885. Apparently Zelenoi was a genuine eccen­ tric. He tweaked the ears of dignified citizens; he insisted that Jews doff their hats at him, and that they give up their seats in the trams if high officials needed them. He addressed them with the familiar “ you” yet he was not unpopular within the Jewish community. He had declared publicly that he would never allow any harm to come to “ his little Jews.” 66 In the period following the fearful 1881 pogroms, this was no small promise. Leon Trotsky remembered him: “ He combined absolute power with an uncurbed temper.” 67 The best city chiefs were actively involved in promoting economic development, organizing charitable services, and controlling the po­ lice; they also helped win benefits for Odessa from the state treasury. They could, of course, hamper the functioning of the municipal self-government and act as petty tyrants within the city. We have no record of these negative actions, however. Between 1863 and 1893, the “ golden age” as it were of selfgovernment in Odessa, the office of mayor was filled by three incum­ bents. The first was Semen M. Vorontsov, son of the former gover­ nor general. His service to the city must have been satisfactory, for he was asked to run again, but declined. His four-year term seems less than brilliant, however, for the city fathers credit him with no significant accomplishments. 164 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The following two mayors were quite dissimilar. The first was a Russian entrepreneur, a self-made man; the second was an enor­ mously rich descendant of a Greek merchant family that came to Odessa early in the nineteenth century. Nikolai A. Novosel’skii began his business career in 1850, by founding .a joint stock com­ pany, the Caucasus and Mercury, a sailboat line linking the Caspian Sea to the Lower Volga.68 By 1853, he was managing director of the company. With the disruptions of the Crimean War, the business declined. After the war, he ventured into even more substantial enterprises. In 1856, he founded the Russian Steam Navigation and Trading Company (ROPiT). Initially, ships called at the ports of the Archipelago and the Mediterranean and even sailed as far away as England. Under various owners, the company endured until the revolution of 1917. He also developed telegraph links between Odessa, Rostov-on-Don, and other southern cities. Even earlier, the city had given him a monopoly on collecting salt from the city’s lymans. His contract stipulated that he must produce at least one and one-half million puds of salt per year and sell it at no more than fourteen kopecks per pud. With the aid of French machines, he was able to produce more than twice the volume, but he could not make a profit at the established price. Consequently, in 1866, he turned the operation over to the minister of finance, who, in turn, split up the property into seven sections, which were leased to private opera­ tors. In 1871, a joint stock company took over the Odessa salt works. At one time Novosel’skii was also part owner of a mineralwater factory. This was a man who knew the possibilities of exploit­ ing the resources of a frontier area. At times the local press was crit­ ical of this “ Chichikov” of Odessa (Chichikov was the entrepreneur in Gogol’s Dead Souls) because of his multiple enterprises.69 Precisely for his business acumen and managerial skills, he was elected mayor of Odessa in 1867. He came at a time of crisis and decline; the port was in disrepair, maritime traffic was congested. The countryside was adjusting to the liberation of the serfs. The city’s lack of pavement and good water had caused a crisis.70 As it was, his term of office partially coincided with that of Governor Gen­ eral Kotsebu. They made a good team. They obtained several mil­ lion rubles to improve the city and finally paved most of the streets, and built the modern sewer and water supply system. The railroad links were enlarged; gaslights were installed, and so forth. According to Konstantin Skal’kovskii, who knew Novosel’skii well, the credit for all of these improvements was to go to Novosel’skii and not the city duma, which fought him over many of these issues.71 He faced Municipal Government and Finance 165 not only their opposition, but also mounting criticism in the press. Allegedly, his ambitions for the city were too costly, his projects too risky. On