d strangers with rich cultural fare. Cultural Life The theater in Odessa was one of the early foci of its cultural life. Theater came to be housed in a building designed and erected by the architect Boffo in 1822. It was a small construction, but its style and interior appointments distinguished it from all other provincial build­ ings of comparable function. From Richelieu’s period, productions attracted large and enthusiastic audiences. Pushkin delighted in hearing Rossini’s latest operas. The poet Batiushkov considered the theater at Odessa to be better than that of Moscow, and almost better than the Petersburg theater.137 Adam Mickiewicz, the famous Polish poet, also frequented Odessa’s theater. The actor M. S. Shchepkin played on its stage. The noted literary critic V. G. Belin­ sky came to see him. The cosmopolitan public favored plays in Pol­ ish, vaudeville in French, and operas in Italian.138 Franz Liszt came in 1847 to play six piano concerts. In the early fifties N. V. Gogol lived in the city. While he was there, he super­ vised the performance of his comedy The Inspector General. 139 In 1842, when the population of the city was 76,862, it included fortyfive male and thirty-two female actors. These people earned sub­ stantial livings. One historian noted: “ The inhabitants divide their time between the office and the opera.” A contemporary confirms this impression. The public in Odessa loved opera so much, he said, “ that it would be entirely correct to call Odessa the musical city of Russia.” He claimed that common people sang Italian arias on the street. K. A. Skal’kovskii confirmed this impression. According to his memoirs, even the chumaks sang “ La donna è mobile.” 140 Another Russian remarked: The new city on the Black Sea contains many French and Italian residents, who are willing to give all that is not necessary for food and clothing for the opera; the Russians themselves are passionately fond of musical and theatrical entertainments, and the government makes up for deficits. All the decorations are in good taste, and the Corinthian columns, running from the foot to the top, are particularly beautiful.141 142 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Each spring, new Italian singers would arrive in Odessa and the music lovers would form factions supporting one diva rather than another. These factions would assume the last name of the singer. Thus there were bitter rifts among the “ Montechellisti,” the “ Tassistristi,” the “ Carraristi,” and so on. Usually^. Greeks and Italians supported one side and the Jews another. Sometimes these music lovers got out of hand; shouts turned to shoves and pinches and even to blows. The Italian theater was nearly the only arena where all national groups met, and there ethnic tensions were expressed.142 For a while it seemed that the famous composer Donizetti would come as conductor of the Italian Opera, but he sent a substitute instead. Italian divas received as much as 500 silver rubles per year; tenors commanded about 340 rubles; basses about 300; baritones about 250 rubles. The city itself contributed as much as 38,000 rubles to help support the Italian opera.143 For entertainment and instruction, the citizens of Odessa could look to an ever-growing stream of newspapers and books printed in the city. Despite the stagnation of commerce after 1817, the first commercial newspaper was issued as early as 1820. This was the Messager de Russie ou feuille commerciale, published biweekly in French by Devallon.144 Even earlier (1818) a group called the “ Bureau of Russian and Foreign Subjects” weighed the possibility of issuing commercial newspapers for the southern Ukraine.145 The plan was to issue papers in Russian, French, and Italian; Langeron him­ self supported the project. When the higher authorities delayed approval, Langeron took the risk of authorizing the publication of the Messager, and personally donated twenty-four hundred rubles to the venture. Although the paper was, as its title suggests, mostly filled with news of ship arrivals, commodity prices, and so forth; it also published verse and theatrical reviews and argued the merits of visiting singers. Provincial papers were strictly forbidden to publish political accounts or editorials; they could only reprint articles from the St. Petersburg and Moscow press.146 In 1822, the Messager rashly printed an article concerning the Greek Revolution (Odessa was the seat of the Greek secret society for liberation, the Hetairia). Another article reported on the meeting of the Holy Alliance in Laibach. These audacious essays proved to be the paper’s ruin. It was closed in November 1823. Another early periodical was the Troubadour d ’Odessa, founded in 1822. It was devoted to theatrical and musical events. It included scores for Italian operatic arias and music for piano, harp, and guitar. As early as 1821 and 1822, the city press issued almanacs and calen- The City Grows, 1815-1861 143 dars in French and Russian. A theater notice dated 1822, printed in Russian and Italian, is on display today in the city’s historical museum. After 1827, Greek grammars and literary texts were issued for the Greek School. Clubs with comfortable reading rooms served those interested in perusing foreign publications, including newspapers. For two hun­ dred rubles a year a citizen could retain membership in the Resursy Club, or for only fifty rubles a year could enjoy the privileges of the Khadzhibeiskii Club. In 1827, these two clubs merged to become the Commercial Club, a name befitting the port city. In 1824, the Journal d'Odessa first appeared. This Frenchlanguage biweekly continued publication until 1881.147 In 1827, the Odesskii vestnik commenced publication. For a year or so, the paper was published in both Russian and French, but thereafter in separate editions for the two languages. Appearing three times a week, the Vestnik survived until 1894. A. G. Troinitskii, a statistician, was its editor from 1834 to 1857. Both papers printed ukazts, economic news (such as exchange rates, ship rents, port traffic, customs infor­ mation, and so on), and foreign news reprinted from the censored newspapers of the capitals. They also ran features on archeology, history, literature, science, and geography.148 In the 1830s the Odesskii aTmanakh also appeared; it published not only local poets, but also noted Russian authors from all over the empire. The issue for 1840, for example, contained Lermontov’s poem, “ Angel.” An even more scholarly publication was the Novorossiisk» kalendar, first appearing in 1832. After 1839, the Richelieu Lycée was its publisher, and many professors were contributors. By 1850, Odessa could boast three printers, one lithographer, six bookstores, and forty-one institutions of learning. Odessa seems to have been more literate than most cities in the Russian Empire. It attracted educated, ambitious immigrants. Those aspiring to enter the merchant world had to learn and speak foreign languages and also acquire the rudiments of mathematics. Immigrants also desired to keep in touch with their homelands—and the best way was through correspondence and newspapers. By the 1860s, the Richelieu Lycée had become very nearly a university in terms of the quality of its faculty, students, and curricu­ lum. Even its facilities were expanded to include laboratories for zoology, chemistry, and physics. On commencement day its gradu­ ates gave speeches in ancient and modern Greek, Latin, French, 144 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 Italian, Russian, and Turkish.149 By 1848, the Lycée had a sevenyear gymnasium preparatory school attached to it. Besides the various ethnic schools (Greek, German, Jewish, and Armenian, among others), in 1845 the city district possessed 114 schools, 387 teachers, 3,764 male students and 1,080 female stu­ dents.150 In 1839, the Society of History and Antiquities was founded and given permission to make excavations throughout the south. Many of its findings (barbarian and Greek) are still on display today in the Archeological Museum. Private citizens also enlivened the cultural life of the city. Zolo­ tov and Totti opened the Library of Novorossiia, Odessa’s first public reading room. Gargarin built a theater bearing his name, which put on Russian plays and ballets.151 Odessa, as it grew, gradually acquired nicknames: Little Paris, the Southern Palmyra, the Second Petersburg, the Golden City, the Southern Beauty, the Capital of South Russia, Little Venice, Little Vienna, Naples, Florence, and the Queen of the Black Sea. These honoring titles give testimony not only to the city’s physical beauty but also to the vitality of its intellectual and cultural life. Odessa’s beginnings were very auspicious. Could it maintain its high level of achievements during the tumultuous years of the late nineteenth century? CHAPTER SEVEN Municipal Government and Finance in the Nineteenth Century The town was fostered in every way by the Imperial Government, enjoying many privileges and immunities . . . —British consul at Odessa, 1874 As a new city set in largely deserted territory, Odessa was criti­ cally dependent for its prosperity on the support of the imperial government. It also faced a critical problem in forming an integrated community out of its own rapidly growing but culturally disparate population. Politics were central to Odessa’s life, and yet at the same time strangely neglected by large numbers of its citizens. The Legacy o f Catherine In 1785, Catherine II had granted to the cities of the empire a Charter of Rights and Privileges; it had been in force for nine years at the time Odessa was founded.1 The new statute of municipal government for the first time recognized cities in the Russian Empire as legal corporations. For the first time too, city inhabitants were considered “ townsmen,” with civic rights and privileges. Prior to 1785, town inhabitants were registered according to the same occupa­ tional or estate categories applied in the countryside. According to its stipulations, citizens fell into six categories: [1] residents who pos­ sessed property in the city; [2] merchants of all three guilds; [3] arti­ sans; [4] foreigners from outside Russia and persons from other parts of Russia who were engaged in urban industries; [5] honorary citizens, professionals, artists, and capitalists with more than fiftythousand rubles in assets; and [6] posad people, literally those settled in the town who were engaged in industry, crafts, or manual labor.2 146 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 In keeping with her enlightened ideas, Catherine was determined that cities in the empire should become models of stability, order, and progress. To this end, townspeople were authorized to regulate their own affairs within one of the six “ corporations” ; they could also elect officials to do all that was “ necessary, profitable and use­ ful” for the commonweal.3 Every three years a general city council would be chosen, and each of the six groups would vote for representatives from its own ranks. The general council would then elect a single representative from each of the six groups; all six so elected would form an executive board. To qualify as a citizen and elector, one had to be male, be at least twenty-five years of age, and possess an income of at least fifty rubles per year.4 This symmetrical system looked attractive in theory, but proved difficult to implement. The gentry, the class in society with the greatest political weight, were not required to participate. Many citizens were indifferent, and nearly all of them inexperienced. The centuries-old tradition of central bureaucratic control over local administrations was not easily overcome.5 The records do not show that the six-man council ever met at Odessa before 1801. Indeed, even after 1801, for a couple of decades, the six-man council counted a membership of only four. In 1818, Governor General Langeron spoke of the “ vanishe