her to enlist a committee and to assume its chair. Seventeen citizens were entrusted with the task of designing an appropriate municipal charter for Odessa. Among the committee members were prominent Greek merchants such as Kon­ stantin F. Papudov and Theodore P. Rodocannachi; the future mayor of the city, N. A. Novosel’skii; and at least one Jew, Osip A. Rabi­ novich. After thirty-five meetings, the committee made its recom­ mendations on April 30, 1863. Their proposals went into effect exactly three years later. According to the city officials who recorded these events, the regulations were even more progressive than the St. Petersburg statute of 1846, which had served as their model. They also improved upon the Moscow city charter promulgated in 1862.25 To be eligible to vote, one had to be male, over twenty-one years of age, in possession of real estate or receiving a salary worth at least one hundred silver rubles, and a member of the merchant guilds or a member of the meshchantsvo. Out of a total population of 101,000 in 1863, only 2,657 persons, hardly more than 2.5 of the population, were eligible to vote. Those eligible voted within the three corpora­ tions named above. Each group elected members to the general council (obshchaia duma), which in turn elected three members from its ranks to sit on the administrative council; these nine members and the mayor constituted its membership. The mayor (gorodskoi 152 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 golova) was elected by the members of the general council; he had to be at least twenty-five years and the owner of real estate worth a minimum of fifteen thousand rubles.26 The general council super­ vised the day-to-day affairs of the city. It reported to the city chief, the governor general, and the minister of internal affairs. According to the city officials of 1894, this reform represented “ a step for­ ward.” With great fanfare on December 19, 1863, the general coun­ cil held its opening session in the great hall of the Stock Exchange. Even women were granted tickets to attend the gala affair.27 The former governor general, Count Stroganov, who had been instru­ mental in obtaining the new charter, was elected mayor. He declined the honor; in his stead Prince S. M. Vorontsov, son of the former governor general, was invited by telegram and accepted.28 The new regulation remained in effect for nearly a decade. Reportedly, citizens (at least that minute portion of them who were enfranchised) showed interest, involvement, and productivity. The new government launched many of the period’s successful projects—street pavement, piped water, gaslights, and others. The city government at Odessa seemed unusually successful; when the state contemplated a general reform throughout most of the empire in 1870, Odessa’s charter served as part of the model.29 The new statute, put into effect in Odessa in 1873, governed most of the cities of European Russia and Siberia. Its novelty consisted in a provision that made wealth, rather than class or occupation, the sole basis for judging eligibility to vote. There were still three groups of electors, but the division was based on the amount of taxes paid by the individual; the vote was weighted according to the amount. The new council was called the obshchaia gorodoskaia duma. No more than one-third of the members could be non-Christian; the mayor, whom the council elected, had to be a Christian. More than one-half of the former council members were reelected to the new offices, including the former mayor, Nikolai A. Novosel’skii. Famil­ iar names and faces cropped up among the office holders: Grigorii G. Marazli, the fabulously wealthy Greek property owner; Charles Sicard, descendant of the like-named nineteenth-century merchant from Marseilles; Avram Brodskii, the rich Jewish industrialist; and so on. During this reform period, the mayor presided over both the larger council and the smaller executive board. Serving a four-year term, the mayor appeared to have more power than before. In theory at least, the city chief reviewed the legislation passed by the council and judged its legality. But if he rejected an ordinance, the Municipal Government and Finance 153 council could now appeal the decision to a new intermediary body at the provincial level, presided over by the governor general.30 Between 1863 and 1893, the new urban government introduced ma­ jor city services and played a principal role in founding Novorossiia University, in building the new Opera House, and in enhancing the general comfort and beauty of the city. There were great changes in the judicial system as well. In 1874, trial by jury was introduced. Beginning the same year, fifteen jus­ tices of the peace heard the ordinary criminal and civil cases. The officials were elected and the city paid each of them a salary of forty-five hundred rubles. The central government appointed and paid the judges sitting in the higher courts.31 This regime survived twenty reasonably effective years until the counterreforms of Alex­ ander III transformed it in 1892.32 The major change in the legislation of that year was to reduce the number of those eligible to vote and hold office. The reform raised the property qualifications and restricted the number of seats that Jews could hold to one-fifth or fewer, although they constituted one-third of the population. The spirit of self-government was seri­ ously dampened; in 1894, the city officials commented: The mayor and his fellow members of the Municipal Council, as well as the city secretary were considered to be in state service. The city chief was charged with the duty to supervise, not only the legality (zakonnost), but also the correctness (pravil'nost) of the actions of the city administration.33 The first session of the municipal council, now much reduced in both numbers and power, took place in January 1893. From the terse description quoted above, written a year later, it is evident that the authors of the centenary book judged the change to be one for the worse. The thirty-year era of self-government had been, in the light of Russian history, but a brief interlude. Self-Government—An Assessment The correlation between municipal progress and the reform period of 1871-1892 is clear. The wealthy property owners worked hard to improve the quality of life at Odessa, from their introduction of paved streets to modern plumbing to horsedrawn trams. The “ Southern Palmyra” appeared to travelers, officials from St. Peters­ burg, and the boastful Odessans themselves to be the most European 154 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 of cities in the Russian Empire, the most beautiful, the healthiest, the most cosmopolitan and urbane.34 Quite naturally, the city officials of 1894 congratulated themselves and their predecessors for a job well done. And indeed they might—up to a point. Foreign visitors to Odessa were not so impressed with the efficiency of local government. A Belgian economist, Gustave Molinari, visited the city in 1860 and, in 1877, published letters relating his experiences. He particularly noted the absence of pavement, in a city of more than 100,000, with a revenue of over 800,000 rubles per year. He attributed the failures of local government to the heavy hand of the central administration: Whose fault is it? Should the responsibility for the evil be laid at the door of the of the governor general, the city chief, or the mayor? Not at all. The authorities are animated, in the highest degree, with the desire to do well, and the mayor in particular, M. J. [Iurkol, has one of the liveliest and most fertile intelligences that I have met in Russia. From whence the evil? The evil has several causes, but the chief one is the excess of administration. Russia suffers above all from a plethora of administrative and regulatory rules. . . . In Russia . . . all is forbidden except what the law permits. . . . ” 35 His comments raise a question as to the type of urban government that could function most efficiently in the Russian Empire of the tsars. F. Frederick Starr discerns in Russian provincial government three possible strategies, which he identifies as “ decentralization,” “ self-government,” and “ greater centralization.” Decentralization meant “ granting provincial bureaucrats more power and initiative.” Self-government relied on locally elected bodies that would be empowered to manage local affairs. Under the policy of centraliza­ tion, the imperial government tried to implement its policies with minimal local or provincial initiative. Starr himself seems to believe that under Russian conditions, decentralization, though it lacked a democratic basis, most effectively served local and regional interests.36 Molinari thought that centralization hampered the progressive governors of Odessa, but in fact, among major towns in the Russian Empire, Odessa had more successfully than others followed the model of decentralization. City government, to be sure, as Molinari noted, was still restricted by commands from the center, but it nonetheless enjoyed greater freedom than the regimens prevailing in the other principal cities. There were several reasons for this. The creation of the office of city chief relieved the governor general of Municipal Government and Finance 155 Novorossiia of a crippling load of routine administrative chores, which in other provinces resulted in what Starr calls “ undergovern­ ment.” 37 Richelieu, Vorontsov, and (as we shall see) Stroganov had stature at court, were enormously wealthy, and won the confidence of the reigning monarch; they enjoyed wide powers and financial sup­ port.38 They viewed the city and region as a whole from a disin­ terested vantage point. They understood the importance of good roads, railway lines, favorable tariffs, a modern port, and all the needed infrastructure of a healthy economy. And, for the most part, they could obtain favors, privileges, and money more swiftly than could a local group of municipal council members. For no matter what latitude these latter persons were given by the municipal char­ ter, in the last analysis their actions had to meet with state approval. A powerful governor general acted as a effective amicus curiae. The advantage of imperial favor was never more evident than during the rule of the last two governors general, that is, the last two of the old-style governors general, Stroganov and Kotsebu. Stroganov Born in 1795 of a prominent noble family, Aleksandr G. Stro­ ganov was trained as an engineer. He fought in the War of 1812, but he preferred civilian posts to a military career. From 1815 to 1823, still a very young man, he served as city chief of Odessa. He returned to military service in 1834, and from 1836 to 1839 was governor general of Chernihiv, Poltava, and Kharkiv. He married a daughter of Tsar Nicholas I; his son was to continue this attachment to the royal family by marrying the sister of Tsar Alexander II. In 1841-1842, he journeyed to Paris and took up the study of various scientific subjects, including anatomy. In France, and later in Belgium, he studied government administration, the organization of savings banks, and railroad management. He developed a keen interest in factory legislation and in the condition of the working class, which influenced his later policies. Upon returning to Russia, he became a member of the State Council. At the outbreak of the Crimean War, he was military governor of St. Petersburg. And from 1855 to 1863, he served as governor general of Novorossia and Bessarabia. In 1858, while holding that office, he petitioned the minister of internal affairs to guarantee to Jews “ all the rights of native inhabi­ tants” of the empire. He participated actively in the discussions preceding the emancipation of the serfs in 1861. In 1860, he invited 156 Odessa: A History, 1 794-1914 the Belgian economist Gustave Molinari, whom we have just quoted, to give a series of lectures in