 at the first good harvest, they would nearly all run away from their employ.” 70 Moscow was set within a densely settled region, which offered a large pool of labor. The region around St. Petersburg was thinly settled, but its poor soil did not compete for workers as did the black earth of the steppes. Odessa, in contrast, could not recruit from its countryside sufficient numbers of workers willing to settle permanently in the city. Rather paradoxically, these seasonal migrants depressed day wages, espe­ cially in periods when harvests failed in the countryside. They thus discouraged permanent settlement. In 1862, a year of dearth, the French consul recorded that unskilled labor received only fifty to eighty kopecks a day; in the year before, the workers had received 1.5 rubles a day for comparable services. As wages went down, 186 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 thefts and assaults went up, and both movements detracted from the city’s appeal.71 Since the Russian state had abandoned its former policy of invit­ ing foreign colonists, Odessa faced an aggravated problem of recruit­ ing labor. In a way, it competed with itself. The seaport, at the end of the nineteenth century, employed about three thousand men, who were not inclined to accept jobs in factories.72 The small artisans were also earning enough remuneration to resist pressures forcing them into factories. The number of master artisans grew from 1,662 in 1863 to 2,415 in 1877. The number of apprentices remained more constant, rising only from 2,245 to 2,824 in the same period. In 1872, a bad year, some 4,272 apprentices enrolled in the city’s crafts, but their numbers dropped when the economy failed to sus­ tain demand.73 Odessa, to be sure, continued to attract immigrants, often from great distances, in mounting numbers, as the census of 1892 makes clear. Reports of high wages, low living costs, and amenable sur­ roundings drew them to the city. Indeed, the majority of Odessa’s factory workers came from central Russia and were not local peo­ ple.74 But many of these had no skills, nor even much familiarity with urban life. They swelled the ranks of the destitute or the mar­ ginally employed, and Odessa faced a problem not unfamiliar in modern economies—a shortage of skilled, and a surplus of untrained, workers. A committee, investigating Odessa’s industries in 1875, con­ cluded: Special industrial education is a necessary condition for the develop­ ment of manufacturing industry in Odessa and its environs. A techni­ cal school should therefore be established at Odessa, and the mass of the people should also be taught the elements of handicraft. This was particularly required in “ South Russia, where industrial undertakings are quite a novelty, and where the population is sparse and unsettled.”75 As late as 1899, the total industrial labor force numbered only 20,859, or about 5 percent of the total population (see below, Table 8.6). Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 187 Capital Venture capital, like skilled workers, was slow to settle in Odessa. The prosperous landlords came to Odessa to sell their produce, hire workers, and buy their luxury goods. They left money behind, but not in industrial investments. They were themselves often in debt and uncomfortable with the ways of urban enterprise. Tradition and custom in Russia went against the entry of gentry into the world of industrial enterprise, unless, of course, on their own estates. Both before and after emancipation, manorial factories were not unknown in the South Ukraine. But in the environs of Odessa, there were few large estates and even fewer manorial industries. If the wealthy wheat-growers neglected to invest in industry and the serfs lacked the means, what happened to the mercantile for­ tunes that the flourishing export trade generated? Hagemeister comments on this problem of capital: The South of Europe, is much less rich in capital than the North; and the commerce of New Russia, which is entirely under the influence of the markets of the Archipelago and of the Mediterranean is deficient in this most important particular. The greater part of the merchants in our ports are Greeks and Italians; they have brought thither rather their industry and their connection, than any great amount of money. As long as the trade was confined to the exportation of corn, a small capital sufficed, because the purchases were made on the spot, or in the country, against advances of considerable amount.76 Those merchants who did not plow their profits back into com­ merce tended to choose land over industry: Many Odessa merchants have invested their capital in great estates, and like the Polish landowners, produce for themselves the [cereal] articles, which, as merchants, they afterwards export.77 Most of the foreign firms to which Haxthausen alludes were fam­ ily enterprises, with officers and partners (usually brothers and sons) distributed widely across the international commercial world. Profits were also widely distributed among scattered family members. The profits everywhere tended to flow into other commercial enterprises and rarely into large industrial undertakings. A. A. Skal’kovskii complained that the inhabitants of Odessa were insufficiently alert to industrial opportunities. Few in the city, he affirmed, were willing to invest in enterprises that demanded patience and time, or, as he termed it, “ affaires de longue haleine.” 78 In the view of those who 188 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 authored the centenary volume on Odessa, the merchants of the city had been attached to the grain trade for so long that they could not “ transfer to the new ways of trade-industrial activities.” 79 The French consul discerned lack of imagination on the part of the city’s commercial community at the time of Ferdinand de Lesseps’s visit. His talk on the commercial possibilities for the Black Sea region upon completion of the Suez Canal failed to stimulate wide interest: Odessa, despite its great reputation as a commercial and maritime city, has only its grain merchants who are au courant of the sigificant finan­ cial and industrial operations of the rest of Europe.80 Nor were the merchants much attracted to manufactures. There were, of course, some exceptions. The Rodocannachi invested in a jute factory, a steam mill, steamship lines, a metal plant, chinaware manufactures, and other industries.81 The Ralli family tried a hand at banking. But, for the most part, Greek firms such as these favored diversification in their commercial ventures rather than long-term capital commitments in industry.82 Even the biggest merchants tended to return their profits to commerce or to spend them in ostentatious living. Speculation Finally, the rapid growth of the city fueled speculation in real estate. In 1870, the American consul noted: Capitalists are everywhere investing in real estate, the universal belief being that Odessa and South Russia are destined before long to exer­ cise a much greater influence upon European commerce and indus­ try.83 The fever mounted in 1871: The exciting speculations in real estate, so well known in the Western cities of America, are now for the first time witnessed at Odessa. The same is true respecting the lands situated within a long radius from here. The richness of the soil and comparative mildness of the cli­ mate of South Russia, now that railway facilities for travel are afforded, are attracting a large emigration from the colder and less thrifty regions of the north. All real property has doubled in value within a very few years and the upward tendency is more rapid now than at any previous moment. Large fortunes are to be quickly made in this region of the world, by immediate investments in real estate.84 Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 189 The coming of the railroad was a principal cause of this specula­ tive fever: The railway connections with Central Europe and with the interior of Russia have largely added to the floating population of Odessa and increased the permanent population and business of the place.85 The railroad made it possible to reach Vienna in forty-eight hours. Mail from London came in five days and from New York in fourteen whereas ten years earlier, it had taken a month to communicate with the eastern shores of the United States. (It currently takes three weeks.) In the twelve years of his consulate, Timothy Smith had never seen such a boom: The great number of hotels and private residences needed to accom­ modate the increasing population has greatly stimulated activity in building and almost fabulously increased the prices of property and of rents. All is movement, commotion and go ahead86 Writing in 1874, the British consul observed: . . . housebuilding has throughout last year held a conspicuous place. The increasing wealth of the mercantile classes had led to a demand for houses of a superior description.87 Indeed, merchants not only embellished their houses, but some of them accumulated many. In 1873, the Greek merchant G. Marazli, known for his philanthropy, possessed at least eleven buildings worth nearly 300,000 rubles, or 0.7 percent of the value of all the private buildings in Odessa. Theodore Ralli owned fewer buildings, but the total value exceeded 900,000 rubles or 1.69 percent of the value of all private real estate in Odessa at the time.88 The consul further noted that, as rents went up, banks loaned mortgage money easily, and “ banks went on making advances on the security of new buildings and by the end of the year [1873], with the money thus obtained, 600 new blocks of first-class houses were erected.” 89 In 1870, the number of private buildings was 7,778, representing a 30 percent increase over the 5,303 privately owned buildings registered in 1869.90 Inevitably, heated speculation prepared the way for financial crises. Odessa was the more vulnerable, as its commerce linked it closely to western Europe, and its own economy was sensitive to international business cycles. A financial panic, beginning at Vienna in May 1873, and soon spreading to encompass the capitalistic world, 190 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 quickly reached Odessa. In October 1873, the French consul reported to his Foreign Ministry that “ There is not a day in which there is not registered a new [bankruptcy] victim.” These bank­ ruptcies, in his opinion, were caused by the easy credit handed out by new banks in Odessa; the situation was further aggravated by the poor harvest in Novorossiia. The facility with which the courts declared bankruptcies also inflated the number. Thanks to the lack of thoroughness in conducting investigations and to unscrupulous lawyers, firms heavily in debt quickly distributed their assets to fam­ ily and friends in order to be declared bankrupt and be absolved of their debts.91 Without credit or orders, commercial establishments either folded or faced near ruin. Without sufficient grain, peasants faced starva­ tion. The crisis, extending into the spring and summer of 1874, helped provoke the movement of liberal youth known as the “ going to the people.” Hundreds of well-meaning young people journeyed to the south of Russia, in order to help the peasants improve their lot. They hoped to instruct the disadvantaged and raise their political consciousness. Many of the peasants did not await these unexpected benefactors but instead fled to the cities. Those who came to Odessa could not have arrived at a more inopportune moment—business was bad, industry was slowing down. In October 1874, the American consul reported, “ There have been during the past quarter some heavy failures of merchants.” 92 Cul­ tivators, people in transportation, brokers, nearly all within reach of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov felt the hard times. The scarcity of money, interrupted trade, and languishing industry affected nearly all workers. Real estate banks, established during the recent boom years, folded, affecti