e of his chief critics was Mikhail P. Ozmidov, an architect and a member of the city council. Editor of the reactionary newspa­ per Novorossiiskii telegraf, Ozmidov attacked Novosel’skii’s water­ works project in print. Novosel’skii, not a rich man, was too contro­ versial a figure for the conservative property owners of the city coun­ cil to tolerate. After eleven years of service, he left the city for St. Petersburg. K. Skal’kovskii called him the “ Baron Haussman’’ of Odessa. In the capital, he became an important aide to Sergei Witte, a former Odessan himself, and then minister of finance. But the lure of enterprise continued to draw Novosel’skii. He returned to the Caucasus to develop oil and coal interests. He died in 1902. The new mayor elected in 1879 was Greek, not Russian, rich and conservative rather than risk-taking; a life-long resident of Odessa, he contrasted with the peripatetic Novosel’skii. Grigorii G. Marazli, a bachelor, had a long record of service to the community.72 Before becoming mayor, he had been a member of the city council for five years, and he was to serve the city as mayor for nearly a quarter of a century. While his family’s fortune initially derived from trade, he was typical of those Greeks who abandoned commerce after the Cri­ mean War and invested money in property and industry. On the tax register of 1873, Marazli owned more than a dozen pieces of choice real estate.73 In 1889, he and several others, including the engineer Edmund G. Harris, applied to set up a joint stock company in the construction business with offices in Odessa, Kherson, Bessarabia, Podillia, Katerynoslav, and Taurida.74 He also subsidized the publica­ tion of many books on Odessa’s history. Here was a man confident of the future of his city and region. As mayor, he attempted to introduce electric lights into the city.75 He built a chapel in the Christian cemetery. He gave the city a his­ toric palace, built in 1803 by Count Potocki. It became a museum, which it is to this day—the Museum of Arts on Korolenko Street. Another showplace, a mansion built in the 1850s, on Pushkin Street by the architect Otton, was also his gift to the city. In 1883, he engaged the architect Gonsiorovskii to build a huge public library on Stock Market Square. He built another enormous public reading room with two public schools attached, designed by Dmytrenko, also a gift to the city. He paid the architect Iatsenko from his own means to make an addition to the almshouse. He was particularly interested in gardens, so he gave one of his dachas, located four versts from the city, to the Odessa Branch of the Imperial Horticultural Society, 166 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 which was founded in 1884. In 1886 and 1889, he had the architects Klein and Tokhvinskii redesign this dacha to make a school for studying botany, gardening, farming, and so forth. One building housed the students,- teachers and dining hall. Another served as a workshop, and the third was a two-story church.' Not only did this extensive area (five desiatinas) house a boarding school, but also the three hundred or more members of the Horticultural Society met there regularly to present scientific papers. He showed his interest in science by equipping from his own pocketbook the bacteriological laboratory in the city. This was the first of its kind in the empire; there, the renowned scientist I. I. Mechnikov made his valuable experiments. Today Odessa Univer­ sity is named for Mechnikov. Marazli also initiated the publication of the Novorossiiskii kalendar in 1891, first edited by la. A. Iakovlev and then by A. S. Borinevich. To continue the list of his donations: he enlarged the public library to make room for its eighty thousand volumes. He built a children’s park in the Due’s Gardens for the poor children of Moldavanka and Sloboda-Romanovka. In 1885, at his own expense, he built an addition to the Sturdza Almshouse for children. In 1870, in memory of his mother, Zoe Theodorovna, he contributed five thousand rubles to support girls sent to the Maria Theodorovna Orphanage. In 1892, he financed a retirement home for veterans and gave as a donation to the city a large night lodgings establishment for vagrants. Among his many charities, he gave large subventions to the City Theater, especially to support the Italian opera.76 Clearly, this man loved his city and appreciated the oppor­ tunities it had opened for himself and his family. It was, in a way, fitting that at the hundredth anniversary of that commercial city, the descendant of a Greek merchant should have been its mayor. There is no doubt that while he was mayor, Odessa became more elegant and more comfortable, and even the poor were aided somewhat by philanthropy. But the poor were increasing in number. Despite the best intentions of the civic-minded, the clever, the enterprising, the generous, and the concerned citizens of Odessa, the fundamental economy of the city and environs was declining. The limited self-government allowed to Odessa in the late nineteenth century thus proved incapable of promoting—or maintaining—the city’s prosperity. Conservative office-holders were reluctant to invest in much needed, but expensive, enterprises such as dock improvements. Left to its own resources, the city could not marshal sufficient revenues. Under the old system, wealthy men holding the chief administrative posts were able to exert influence at Municipal Government and Finance 167 court, and thus attract the large investments in regional infrastruc­ tures that continued prosperity required. While the city was being decorated, the port was deteriorating. While education, arts, and entertainment enriched the lives of the middle class and the well-to-do, the severe problems of housing, sanitation, jobs, decent pay, and anti-Semitism were left ignored or unsolved. As Odessa established itself as a pleasant seaside resort, the railroads were passing it by. Simultaneously, rival cities in the Russian Empire and abroad gained ground on Odessa in terms of port facilities, railroads, favorable tariffs—all of which were reflected in volumes of trade. As we shall see, Odessa’s enemies were numerous and powerful and her protectors all but departed. Odessa, “ The Southern Beauty,’’ was a fading beauty—the more she deteriorated, the more she adorned and embellished herself. CHAPTER EIGHT Agriculture and Industry, 1 8 6 1 -1 9 1 4 It is well to remember that until the grain is in the barn there is always risk of drought, insect pests, parching winds during growth, and rains during harvest. Even though the grain as it stands in the fields be excellent, peasant troubles may render it impossible to gather or thresh it, rolling stock may make it impossible to place it on the market. —Britsh consul, 1907 With regard to manufacturing industry, Odessa is perhaps not so favourably situated by nature. There are no mineral treasures in its immediate neighbourhood or cheap motive power. There is an abun­ dance of capital, an intelligent population, and advantageous geo­ graphical position for the transport of raw materials and the sale of the manufactured articles. —Odessa Committee on Trade and Manufacturing, 1875 The volume of grain exported through the port of Odessa con­ tinued to rise at nearly spectacular rates in the three* decades follow­ ing 1861. But this apparent continuity with the past in fact masks steady deterioration in Odessa’s relative place among the ports pur­ veying grain to the world. Worsening commercial fortunes made it all the more imperative for the city to expand its industrial base, but old obstacles remained. Agriculture Peasant emancipation in 1861 affected the agrarian community in Novorossiia less than in the older regions, where serfs were much more numerous. Some 344,213 pomeshchik serfs were liberated in the Katerynoslav and Kherson guberniias in 1861. In these two provinces, private serfs equalled 31 percent of the population, while in the Crimea they made up only 6 percent. In contrast, at emanci­ pation private serfs constituted about 60 percent of the population of Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 169 the Smolensk and Tula guberniias, and a full 70 percent in those of Podillia and Kiev.1 Nonetheless, the new status of the country worker profoundly altered the shape of Novorossiia’s agrarian econ­ omy, in both the short term and the long. Unrest At emancipation, the former serfs of Novorossiia were given only a fraction of the land they had traditionally worked and were also saddled with high redemption payments. In the Kherson guberniia, landlords acquired one-third of the former peasants’ plots. In the region of Odessa, the size of these “ cut-offs” was about 4.7 desiatinas per “ revision soul.” The redemption payments for land were 29.22 rubles per desiatina. At such a price, 19.5 percent of the peasants near Odessa opted for the free “ pauper plots.” 2 Many peasants had expected to become at once full as well as free owners of the land. Their “ misunderstandings” of the reforms pro­ voked riots in the countryside. In a letter to the tsar, Governor General Stroganov reported: I do not hide from you, Sire, that a large part of the peasants at first were not in a position to comprehend your first law; for that reason, on some of the estates of Novorossiia there occurred misunderstand­ ings, giving rise even to disorders, for the suppression of which it was necessary to call in the local authorities and even the military. Such disorders took place for the most part primarily in the Odessa and Tiraspol uezds of the Kherson guberniia. In order to stop them it was insufficient to use the military for the pacification of the peasants; it was also necessary to give a reasoned elucidation of the new law to them. . . . Thus it was that almost all the disorders which occurred in the Novorossiia region had its roots in ignorance.3 Disillusionment with the reforms also provoked rioting among the serfs whom Prince Vorontsov had transferred to Novorossiia from his central Russian estates. In 1863, the British vice-consul at Kher­ son reported to his colleague at Odessa that about two hundred refractory peasants, formerly Vorontsov’s serfs, had been punished by whipping and hard labor because they had refused to pay ground rent for the land allotted to them at emancipation. Eight companies of troops had been dispatched to villages in the Kherson guberniia and in the Crimea. He concluded that “ disaffection among the emancipated serfs is likely to become general.” 4 170 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 If the former serfs were disgruntled with the reforms, in time they nonetheless came to accept them, probably because their new status did indeed mark a substantial improvement over their former condi­ tion. As early as 1863, the British consul reported that the provi­ sions of the law were being implemented smoothly and peacefully. Landlords were doing their duty without murmer, and the peasants received “ equitable and liberal arrangements.” 5 In 1865, the British vice-consul at Kherson also gave a favorable account of the condition of the former serfs: Most of the emancipated serfs are flourishing in the extreme and if any complaint is to be heard, it is from their former owners, who insist that the serf is far better off than they are, and in a fair way of accumulating wealth, which the landed proprietor can never hope to attain. The peasants naturally produce their crops at less expense and live on about a hundredth part of what the owner of the land is obli­ gated to spend; a crop, under even a middling average will leave them well off, while it brings ruin to the proprietors, all of whom, with few exceptions, are reduced to borrowing money at ruinous rates of interest, in many instances engaging to deliver their crops for several years to come.6 For the peasants of Novorossiia there was this further advantage: the communal system was rarely implemented, or exi