 which he presented the advantages of free over forced labor. Stroganov himself fought against the propos­ al that the serfs be liberated without land, and he publicly criticized the small allotments of land ultimately assigned them. He was singularly uncooperative with the imperial secret police in its efforts to track down alleged revolutionaries within his jurisdic­ tion. He did not arrest those accused of writing for or distributing Kolokol, Herzen’s illegal paper published abroad. His behavior was the more remarkable, as the journal was itself unrelenting in its criti­ cisms of him. Stroganov called for reforms that would increase municipal selfgovernment.39 Only the reform of 1863, however, gave substance to his urgings. His engineering interests are manifest in his sponsor­ ship, in 1856, of the Russian Steam Navigation and Trading Com­ pany. As early as 1861, he was pressing for a railroad line to Odessa that would serve commercial as well as military purposes. He allo­ cated 100,000 rubles to study the feasibility of building such a line. Alexander II appointed Stroganov to a committee to study plans for railroad building, but Odessa had to wait several years (until 1865) before the first railroad line was constructed. Even then, the line extended only as far as Balta. He worked to improve the city materially. In 1860, he levied a new tax of one-half kopeck per pud on exports to help defray the expense of building bridges and new waterworks, paving streets, and installing gaslights. He helped develop salt industries along the nearby lymans (estuaries). He was dismayed when Odessa lost its status as a free port in 1859. The city, he protested, which had once enjoyed a high standard of living through the reasonable prices at its marts, suddenly was saddled with the highest living costs in the empire. Well educated and cultured, Stroganov acquired a large personal library of fourteen thousand volumes, which he bequeathed to Novorossiia University; he was indeed one of its founders, as we will discuss later.40 He retired from service in 1862; just before his retire­ ment, the city conferred on him the honor of “ First Citizen of Odessa for Life.’’ He continued to reside in the city for more than thirty years, and died in 1891 at the age of ninety-five. Some of his descendants could be found among the city’s population in the 1970s. K. A. Skal’kovskii gives a shrewd assessment of Stroganov’s per­ sonality: Municipal Government and Finance 157 Count Stroganov'was an original character, a genuinely erudite, stub­ born aristocrat. Possessing wide knowledge, especially in mathe­ matics, he represented the combination of rare contradictions: on the one hand he was an enlightened administrator, on the other, rude.41 Kotsebu “ Adjutant General Pavel E. Kotsebu,” as the 1894 history stated, “ making use of the special confidence of the Emperor, benefited Odessa in no small measure.” 42 Ruling over Novorossiia from 1862 to 1874, he continued and in some instances completed the construc­ tive work of Stroganov. During his regime the paving of the streets in granite, the installation of gaslights, and the construction of the piped water system were completed. It was also under him that Odessa finally had a railway connection. He helped establish several new credit facilities and Novorossiia University.43 He planned a bridge across the Quarantine Ravine to Police Street. Costing seventy thousand rubles, it was not completed until 1892, but it bore his name. It was a handsome arched iron bridge fourteen sazhens, or ninety-eight feet, long.44 In 1870, he attempted to have the state build a new hospital. In this he was unsuccessful. More gratifying, however, was the completion of an eye clinic in 1876; this too was named for him. The Pavlov Eye Hospital was the forerunner to the noted Filatov Eye Hospital of today.45 Yet a third monument testified to his interest in the city—the Pavlov Asylum for the Care of Youths and Infants, founded in 1873. In 1878, he donated his own mansion on Staroportofrankaia Street to house the institution.46 The End o f the Office The office of governor general was abolished in 1874 as part of the sweeping imperial reforms of government. This loss, along with the abolition of the free port, removed the last privileges that had aided Odessa’s great commercial expansion in the early and middle nineteenth century. S. Bernshtein, then a resident of the city, made the following observation: It is true that Odessa was favored by privileges. Over the course of 80 years she benefited from the special graces of the Sovereign. She grew under the cover and protection of great and talented administra­ tors. The abolition of the porto-franco and of the governorship placed Odessa in the position of a youth finishing his education and left on his own.47 158 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 One might expect the English consul, familiar with Western demo­ cratic procedures, to applaud the abolition of this powerful office. Rather, he regrets its suppression: The post of governor general of New Russia of which Odessa is the chief town, has been abolished. This city has therefore lost the dis­ tinction of being the seat of a provincial government of the first class. Able men have always been selected for this post, and their names are dear to the memory of the community. The change which cuts off the succession of them is felt by many as a sort of social bereavement, for all confess that their presence in the place was a public benefit check­ ing abuse and encouraging progress both moral and material.48 It was precisely that material progress that concerned the city’s Committee on Trade and Manufacturing in 1875: The Committee think that the appointment not merely of a governor general, as formerly, but of one with the more exalted rank and powers of a Viceroy would be the best guarantee for the effectual car­ rying out of the measures they have suggested.49 In the same year, the British consul reiterated his doubts that the change was for the better: The town was fostered in every way by the Imperial Government, enjoying many privileges and immunities, and it remained a free port until 1854, when an annual subsidy was granted in lieu of this.50 With the abolition of the office of governor general, the former advantages of decentralization disappeared. In 1879, the new type of temporary governor general took office; he was now less a friend at court and more a force at home. These officials were primarily interested in maintaining law and order. The first to fill this post was Eduard Ivanovich Todtleben. He had constructed the fortifications at Sevastopol during the Crimean War, and his works helped the beleaguered city to hold out nearly a year.51 After the war, he strengthened the Kronstadt fort in St. Petersburg, Kievan fortifications, and Black Sea forts, especially those of Mykolaiv; there, he developed a design for the defense of railroad lines. He had learned this new technique by studying German and French sys­ tems. One Belgian engineer, Brialmont, pronounced Todtleben the most brilliant Russian engineer of the nineteenth century. At any rate, his skills at military engineering were not required at Odessa, a commercial, not a military port. It is true that he committed Municipal Government and Finance 159 1,017,211 rubles for the improvement of the harbor, but by then, as we shall see, Odessa needed substantially greater help to maintain its place among the Black Sea ports.52 The decade of the 1870s was very troubled at Odessa, with a financial crisis, a vicious pogrom, and the crushing of the first Russian industrial union. Todtleben had experi­ ence as a trouble-shooter; he had been sent to Kiev during the Pol­ ish uprising of 1863 and, after a year of service in Odessa, he served as military commander at Vilnius, another politically unsettled area. The suspicion hangs heavy that his repressions of social unrest were the chief qualifications earning him appointment as governor general of Odessa. The succeeding temporary governor general, Alexander R. Drentel’n, was a general in the infantry.53 Before being assigned to Odessa in 1880, he had been the commander of the Military District of Kiev. Since 1878, he had been the chief of the gendarmes in the Third Section of the Imperial Chancery. He remained in Odessa only one year, returning as Military Commander of Kiev; he died there in 1888. The official history of Odessa written in 1894 records nothing but his name and the dates he served.54 Alexander M. Dondukov-Korsakov, a general in the infantry, had once been an aide under Vorontsov and was a veteran in subduing the mountaineers of the Caucasus.55 Also a veteran of the Crimean War, wounded in the storming of Kars, he had once been the gover­ nor general of Kiev, Podillia, and Volhynia. His most notable contri­ bution to Odessa, recorded in the 1894 history, was his proposal that the Slavic Society be given a public reading room in the Stock Market. In April 1882, the reading room was opened. The Slavic Society flourished in Odessa. It held readings in its auditorium in the Slobodka-Romanovka district, a poor workers’ neighborhood. It also held musical and literary events in the city auditorium, orga­ nized a nursery and various charities for Slavs.56 After one year, Dondukov-Korsakov was also assigned to another military post. In 1882, Iosif V. Gurko, a general, took up the position of tem­ porary governor general of Odessa. A veteran of the Russo-Turkish war of 1877, he had been an outstanding officer in the cavalry. From Odessa, he went on to become the commander of the military district of Warsaw.57 General Kristofor K. Roop supervised the city for eight years— from 1882 to 1890. For the first three years, he bore the title of temporary governor general. For the last five, he claimed the old title of governor general; he was the last to bear it, as the office was abolished in 1890. The 1894 history credits him with confirming the 160 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 charter of the city hospital and with improving its facilities. He also had a children's park built in the Alexander Park.58 These five temporary governors general within a decade (four of them serving only one year each) did little or nothing to improve the city’s economy. They were not expected to do fiiuch more than to suppress revolutionary activity or any other unwelcome disturbances. Besides, it was precisely during these years, 1879-1890, that the Muncipal Duma was at the peak of its power. Richelieu, Langeron, Vorontsov, Stroganov, military figures as well, had as their prime objective and mandate the welfare of the region. Most of them remained for long periods in Odessa, putting down roots, and each of them was a man of learning and culture. The temporary governors general, on the other hand, were swiftly moved to other jobs; they could not become attached to the area. An incident associated with the founding of Novorossiia Univer­ sity is instructive. Already by 1837, the Richelieu Lycée was well qualified to be recognized as a university. In 1859, the great educa­ tor, writer, and physician N. I. Pirogov, as head of the Odessa educa­ tional region, wrote a report and petition to the minister of public education, requesting that the Richelieu Lycée be made into a university. The minister seemed sympathetic to the idea, but replied that the entire operation would be too costly. In an effort to cut the costs of the lycée, the medical faculty was dismissed. The nobility of Kherson guberniia and of Bessarabia pledged to support such a university. They maintained that even then the lycée was not a bur­ den to the state. It earned seventy-five thousand rubles yearly, and the state only spent sixteen thousand rubles in its support.59 The petition was pressed when the tsar visited the lycée, but to no avail. Pirogov’s successor, M. M. Mogilianskii, also attempted to win the favor in 186