niia of Novorossiia—Kherson: . . . in the province of Kherson 2,663,495 desiatinas, or about 7,990,000 acres belong to landed proprietors, and 30 per cent of these lands are sown with grain. About 26 per cent are devoted to the natural growth of grass for hay, and 44 per cent are waste lands attached to villages and hamlets. The proprietors, however, cultivate only one-tenth of the land themselves; the rest is let out to the farm­ ers and peasantry. The latter class numbers about 125,000 souls, in possession of 415,000 desiatinas of land, and farming about oneeighth of the land of the above-mentioned proprietors; thus they have on average something over 6 desiatinas, or 18 acres, to cultivate per head. Each desiatina costs about 15 rubles (21 pounds) in cultivation on the average, including labourers, seed, harvest, threshing, trans­ port, etc.26 Thus, even many big proprietors were cultivating their estates through small leaseholds, taking no advantage of possible economies of scale. As time went by, peasant and lord alike turned more and more to the production of cereals at the expense of stock or sheep raising or diversified crops. By 1881, grain cultivation in the south­ ern steppe region of the country occupied 92.8 percent of all sown land.27 Wheat represented 48.6 percent of all this grain, rye 19.2 per­ cent, and barley 14.8 percent. The southern farmer was putting all his eggs in one basket, or, more accurately, he was wagering on grain. Beginning in 1881, the Odessa Statistical Committee, evi­ dently interested in this trend, distributed forms to cultivators in the gradonachaVstvo to find out exactly how much land was sown with wheat and what the yield was.28 To be sure, domestic demand, especially for rye (the staple for domestic bread), increased with the advent of the railroads and the growth of urbanization and industrialization.29 Increased production of maize, especially in Bessarabia, was reflected in export figures from the Black Sea ports. An American agricultural expert from the University of Wisconsin was hired by the zemstvo in Kishinev in 1910 to help them raise Indian corn. A procedure had recently been developed in Iowa for testing seeds of corn for fertility before plant­ ing. The expert, Louis Michael, arrived with campaign-type buttons which depicted a ripe ear of corn with the slogan (in Russian) “ More Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 177 corn for Bessarabia” printed around it. The American enlisted local youth into hundreds of clubs to demonstrate the efficacy of his method for testing the seed.30 Demand for Ukrainian grain in the export market remained strong, but there was one significant change. The price at port no longer primarily reflected the abundance of the harvest in the empire. Before 1874, in periods of poor harvests the cultivator could count on elevated prices to compensate somewhat for the scarcity in quantity. After about 1875, however, the world market in wheat dominated price schedules. Other producing areas could make up for shortfalls in Novorossiia. Thereafter, it was possible for the south­ ern regions of the empire to produce a small harvest that would fetch a low price, thanks to competition abroad. In 1882, for example, the French consul at Odessa noted that when the price of wheat dropped in America, it went down two rubles per chetvert in Odessa.31 Crops failed in the area in 1875; shortages and famine came at the end of the 1870s; in 1885, there was a drought; in 1889 and 1890, poor crops; in 1891, a devastating famine; and in 1892, a new failure. According to one local expert, the increasing incidence of crop failures was no fluke of nature. Everyone recognized that increased settlement resulted in the destruction of woods with its resulting desiccation. But by planting wheat extensively, meadow grass and the moisture it retained were also eliminated. Rainfalls became scantier still and crops less abundant.32 From the 1870s until the end of the century, grain prices contin­ ued to fall. This depression of prices pushed some owners into ruin and others into modernization. The rate of land exchanges contin­ ued to increase. Rich German colonists, “ improving landlords,” and the richer peasants bought up property. Thus, while grain prices fell, land prices rose. In Novorossiia in the six-year period from 1883 to 1889, the price of a desiatina of land rose from fifty-five to eightytwo rubles.33 One reason for the high price of land was the availability of government loans to peasants to buy it.34 Other reasons were specu­ lation and land hunger. As the British consul stated in 1913: The price of land in South Russia has about quadrupled within the last generation, and often it has increased even more. . . . For this no sound financial reason can be found, since the price of labour on the one hand, and the price of grain on the other, do not leave in any ordinary year a sufficient margin of profit to justify it. Indeed, it will only be possible to justify the prices already reached by putting the land to more remunerative use than has been done hitherto.35 178 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Mechanization Since labor was so expensive, one way of attempting to compete with American, Indian, and Romanian grain was to adopt laborsaving devices. In this matter, however, as in so many others, the official governmental policy was ambivalent. It recognized the need for improved methods of agriculture, but its long-standing habits of protectionism—not to speak of simple revenue-gathering—stood in the way of duty-free imports. As late as 1898, high duties were placed on all kinds of imported agricultural machinery that competed with Russian manufactures. The tax policy wavered from year to year. The British consul was hopeful in 1899: . . . Agriculture remains in its initial state. The deplorable condition of the peasantry and the primitive methods of agriculture, to which the inadequate yield of the extensive grain areas of this country is commonly attributed, are evils against which the Government are endeavouring to provide remedies. Foremost among these may be mentioned the recent [1899] abrogation of customs duty on agricul­ tural machines and implements, fertilisers, and other agricultural requisites; the establishment of stores for their sale on a system of easy installments in the more important rural districts. . . .36 American firms were the major suppliers of binders, reapers, mowers, and horse rakes. American reapers, made of malleable steel, cost between fifteen and seventeen pounds, a few pounds higher than Russian-made reapers, but the English consul felt, “ the superior quality more than making up for the difference in price.” 37 While Germans were more liberal in extending long-term credit and demanded only a small down payment, the Americans had more aggressive marketing techniques. They established, for example, a showroom in Odessa for American-made products. Even in plows the Americans came to be very competitive; they made them espe­ cially light to suit the rather small and weak Russian horse.38 The disorders of 1905 and a regional economic slump dealt a hard blow to this merchandizing of agricultural machinery. First an obser­ vation of the British consul: The trade in agricultural machinery suffered severely from the war and disorders of 1905. The sale season, which begins in May, was cut short at the beginning of July on account of agrarian unrest. In some places disorders occurred, in others the extensive demands and threatening attitude of the peasants made landowners and farmers Agriculture and Industry, 1861-1914 179 uneasy for the safety of the machinery they already possessed and unwilling to risk further purchases. . . .39 Not only were there no new purchases, but defaults in payments for past purchases were common. One British firm “ which deals solely with buyers of first-class standing, was only paid 42 percent of the October-November installments. It would be difficult to estimate the losses suffered by the more venturesome American and German firms.” 40 The American consul made his report for the same year: In connection with the machinery trade, especially that of agricultural machinery, it must be remarked, that there is an agitation going on amongst the laboring classes aiming at inducing them to view such machinery with particular disfavor, as unpardonable contrivances intended to enable the large landowners to become less dependent upon the often very grudging services of the agricultural laborers. Cases of deliberate damage of such machines are becoming more and more frequent, and may become a consideration which can seriously and detrimentally affect the important trade in machinery.41 Still, as late as 1907, the French consul insisted that what the Russians needed was not more wheat, but better wheat. To produce higher quality, they had need of machinery—and as long as high tariffs were charged on foreign tools there would be “ a heavy obsta­ cle to rational cultivation and [this] favors the attachment of the cul­ tivator to his old tools.” 42 The next year, the British consul, in summarizing the trade in agricultural machinery over twenty years, remarked, “ the times are changed: formerly you sat in your office and buyers came to you; now they sit at home, and you have to go and look for them.” 43 Although the estates and farms of Novorossiia remained in need of workers in the early twentieth century, the sullen mood of the coun­ tryside threatened producers who adopted labor-saving devices. And peasants who were obtaining more and more land could not afford them. Even the great hopes placed in the zemstvos ended in disillusion­ ment. The government had subsidized many zemstvos to open stores with the latest models in agricultural machinery, fertilizers, and so forth. The peasants then could buy these aids to production at below-cost prices. As of 1906, however, throughout the South Ukraine the arrears of these stores to the manufacturers amounted to at least 4 million rubles.44 180 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 As the British consul commented: For the sale of agricultural machinery the year 1907 was bad. The year 1908 was worse. Some Odessa houses did not sell a single set. . . . Two of the oldest established British firms are closing their Odessa branch.45 By 1910 the resumption of imports was noted by the French con­ sul: American [agricultural] machinery is being imported more and more. At present a steamer is unloading numerous crates which came from Milwaukee.46 The good harvest of 1909 resulted in large orders of German, American, and English farm machinery. Farm machinery was one means for increasing yield. The use of fertilizers was another. Here again, the small farmer was at a disad­ vantage. In 1910, the French vice-consul expressed disdain for the Russian peasants, whose production was only one-fifth that of the French. He also complimented the region’s German colonists whose production was striking compared to that of the Russians: The Russian peasant, confident in the fertility of his black earth, refuses to use the slightest bit of fertilizer and lets the soil deteriorate little by little. Excessively addicted to routine, he never desires to use imported improvements and indolent by nature, he works only the minimum, happy to loaf during the numerous holidays which decorate the Orthodox calendar.47 Writing in 1913, the British consul warned: The population of Russia increases and eats more and more grain. The export trade also grows. The wonderful fertility of the black earth soil begins to show signs of deterioration. It is reckoned that for food and fodder about 600,000 tons of phosphoric acid are taken every year from the soil, but that not more than 165,000 tons are returned to it. On a yearly average each acre of cultivated land gets in manure one-sixth lb. of phosphoric acid. In Belgium the amount sup­ plied is about 21 lbs. per acre. It is clear tha