

-Finally, Turner believed in the enduring influence of the frontier on American life:

Long after the frontier period of a particular region…had passed away, the conception of society, the ideals and aspirations which it produced, persist in the minds of the people…(T)he inherited ways of looking at things, the fundamental assumptions of the American people, have all been shaped by this experience…This experience has been wrought into the very warp and woof of American thought. 22 clear caveat is essential, in this case, before any use might be made of Turner's thesis in a Napoleonic context. The Napoleonic imperial enterprise was elitist, if not quite in the sense that most readily springs to mind -that of an hierarchical, authoritarian regime imposing itself on society. Indeed, imperial expansion, both military and administrative, was far more socially inclusive than anything going on within France. The distinction between American and Napoleonic expansion is, rather, that in America, it encompassed large population movements and, especially, it marked the psyche of a whole people, for better or for worse, at least according to Turner. In the Napoleonic case, the imperial adventure probably meant little or nothing to the French masses, and did not exert an appreciable influence on the masses de granit. At least, not directly. The old nobility was largely absent from even local politics -and from the electoral lists -under the Empire; those among them who went to serve on the imperial frontiers were a minority within a minority. 23 For those who took part, however, the result was an intensified sense of French cultural superiority, and a marked commitment to the ambitions and the ideals of a period they saw as truly 'Revolutionary-Napoleonic'. Their best known voice was Henri Beyle, 'Stendhal', but their legacy was more pervasive. It was probably less the lust to resume imperial expansion they retained and passed on, than their keen sense of cultural superiority in a time of national humiliation, that gives the post-history of 'the Napoleonic frontier' its lasting impact. Nevertheless, the aggressive conquest of Algeria begun in 1829, was spearheaded by veterans of Napoleonic imperialism, who modelled the civil administration of the new colony directly on that of the Illyrian provinces.

That legacy was linked, increasingly, with the republican Left, and I do not in any way deny this.

Rather, I would add new, additional, grist to its mill. In the Restoration period, the 'Napoleonic legacy' is usually sought among military veterans and on the fringes of radical politics, while in the late July Monarchy and under the Second Empire, the desire for a lost gloire remains, all too often, vaguely defined. Sudhir Hazareesingh is correct, I feel, in his recent assertion that the Napoleonic legend after 1815 subsumed the revolutionary tradition into itself, and that the merging of the two ensured their survival and popularity. 24 It is arguable that the experience of the imperial frontier made this merger a reality avant la lettre for many within the educated classes -no longer a political elite -as well as in quarters more normally associated with the Left. It remains to be seen if this experience sharpened liberal sensibilities to the Carlist threat in Spain in the 1830s and 1840s, but the commitment of the 23 See the particularly perceptive essay by Geoffrey ELLIS, 'Rhine and Loire: Napoleonic elites and social order,' in Gwynne LEWIS, Colin Lucas (eds), Beyond the Terror. Essays in French Regional and Social History, 1794 -1815 , Cambridge: CUP, 1983, p. 232-267. 24 Sudhir HAZAREESINGH, The Legend of Napoleon, London: Granta, 2004.