

La Fondation Napoléon| Downloaded on 03/18/2026 from https://shs.cairn.info (IP: 154.16.8.176) impossible odds, even among rather unlikely candidates. The young, aristocratic auditeur, Viefville des Essars, was made prefect of the short-lived, makeshift department of the Serge, in the Catalan Pyrenees, in 1812. He could not even enter his chef lieu for eight months, because of the guerrillas. Once there, he suffered a nervous collapse, but refused leave, pulled himself together, and stayed at his post to the end.

In the meantime, he paved the streets, built sewers and a hospital, and led armed patrols himself, most nights. 15 The French nobility had come a long way from the gilded youth of Versailles. 'The frontier spirit' could galvanise across gender, as well as caste. As imperial rule in central Italy collapsed around the bourgeois wife of the Prefect of Umbria, in central Italy, although worried about her children, she wrote home: 'I have decided not to take advantage of the permission now granted, to return with them to France, because that would create a very bad impression here.' 16 The wives of many French officials in Tuscany told the Director-General of Police in Florence that they believed they, not their husbands, would be the first targets of any renewed counter-revolution late in 1813, and that, 'their throats… would be cut first.' Their reaction was to demand arms for themselves and their husbands, not to ask to be evacuated. There was little talk of surrender, and very few deserted their posts as the last storm gathered, whatever their political backgrounds.

-For Turner, the frontier also had a power to galvanise the heartland. As he put it, in the specific historical context of the antebellum period, 'The wind of democracy blew so strongly from the West, that even in the older states (of the eastern seaboard) conventions were called which liberalised their constitutions…' 17 In the Napoleonic case, the regime had to retain institutions and personnel it readily put behind it, within its more peaceful borders, where it sought a conservative social order. As it strove for an authoritarian, barely consultative monarchy in the inner empire, it still had to cultivate and tolerate revolutionary elements on its borders, and heed its revolutionary roots. During the Hundred Days, when those frontiers were those of 1790, it turned to those roots more emphatically than ever.

In such conditions, the Vendée, too, reasserted itself as a frontier, and its republican enclaves almost literally 'circled the wagons', as the work of Robert Alexander has shown. 18 urther, Turner argued that the experience of the frontier kept alive the original political culture and essential values of the colonial period, when they might have been lost in the decades of 15 Juan MERCADER, Puigcerdà, capital del departament del Serge, Barcelona: Rafael Dalmau, 1971, p. 18-19. 16 ANP 29-AP-15, Madame A. Roederer to P-L Roederer, 15 Nov. 1813. 17 TURNER, Frontier, p. 252. 18 R. S. ALEXANDER, Bonapartism & Revolutionary Tradition in France. The Fédérés of 1815, Cambridge: CUP, 1991, p. 107-154. continual change of the nineteenth century: 'The problem of the United States,' he argued 'is not to create democracy, but to conserve democratic institutions and ideas.' American democracy, he felt 'is fundamentally the outcome of the experiences of the American people in dealing with the West.' 19 The radicalism of the Revolution was forged anew on the frontiers, as a new generation -often not drawn from natural supporters of the Revolution -confronted its old enemies, on new ground. The regime might have outwardly courted the old nobility, and re-established religion, but its police was always staffed by men with distinctly Jacobin pasts, and when Napoleon had to turn on the Papacy -being excommunicated in the process -he was able to draw on the revolutionary tradition in the midst of the crisis. Crisis on the frontier had brought the old values to the surface in Paris. The Napoleonic frontier produced frontiersmen, and they were all of a type, following the Imperial frontier when the 'imperial heartland' became too tame. Unlike Turner's 'closed frontier' of 1893, however, there was never an opportunity for the Napoleonic regime to dispense with the services of its 'roughnecks' all together. None personified this better than Hugues Nardon, Napoleon's school friend and a man with a Terrorist past. He began his Napoleonic career as prefect of the Loire Atlantique, in the forefront of the pacification of the Vendée, and then in the tough Ligurian posting of Montenotte, where his superiors despaired of his hot headedness, and lack of attention to detail, but lauded his zeal. 20 When a serious illness ended his posting to Parma, he recuperated briefly and moved on to serve in Spain, where he was killed on duty, in 1812. 21 The frontier -and a certain kind of 'frontier spirit' that would not have been out of place in a classic western film -was an integral part of the Napoleonic empire and, in timehonoured fashion there was often little to distinguish the 'good, the bad and the ugly' among the police and the bandits they chased.