

His reply was the Valladolid Decrees which, although they did little to undermine the material well being of the north German aristocracy, still 'hurt the pride of the privileged classes', in the words of Beugnot, Napoleon's chief minister in Berg. 2 A few months later, Napoleon had rallied his new allies in southern and western Germany, together with his own troops, to confront the renewed hostilities of the Habsburgs. In a time of crisis, the boundaries of Napoleon's realm emerged very clearly, and they were clear for all to see.

It is, therefore, a fundamental point for this paper, that the Napoleonic empire had frontiers, that they were more complex and more marked than the international boundaries the French advance swept aside, and that contemporary French imperial administrators saw them as such. The frontiers discussed here are not the well defined, 'static' boundaries of the Hexagon. Although my definition of the Napoleonic imperial frontier subsumes, most obviously, the Pyrenean border between France and Spain -described by Peter Sahlins as one of the oldest, most stable borders in western Europe foot_3 -it does not correspond to stabile concepts of national borders. This is not the relevant context for imperial expansion, in almost any historical circumstances, and this is why, in the first instance, aspects of Turner's thesis have a certain attraction.

And the new regime had an in-built penchant for geographic certainty. In his study Frontières de France, Daniel Nordman has pointed to the penchant of Napoleonic officials 'to draw a demarcation line' when examining linguistic differences, to work in purely geographic terms, in contrast to the approach of the local notables they gleaned their information from, who thought in terms of hierarchies of language, and of gradations between local patois.

If not yet specifically nationalist in intent, the new state did assume clear regional divides, of marked frontiers. 4 ere was, I think, an 'outer' and an 'inner' empire, spheres defined less by the amount of time the French ruled them, than the degree to which they were pacified and, most importantly, than the degree to which their elites accepted French public institutions and acculturated to their public mores.

In common with the evolution of many other imperial frontiers, flux was present: Broadly, western Germany and northern Italy began as 'frontier' regions, but were eventually acculturated, and the frontier moved on, after the military conquests of 1805-1807. Contemporary Frenchmen obviously thought so. There were 'non-French' parts of Europe that were clearly 'of the Empire' -within the Ciceronean circle, as it were -even if they were not actually imperial territory. Hence, Norvins de Montbreton on Baden, as he recalled his time there as imperial chargé d'affaires: 'The Grand Duchy became a second Alsace, united, rather than separated, by the Rhine, to the point it was impossible to be more in France than in that German state.' foot_5 Such men judged by French standards and they were impervious to many complex realities in those judgements. Yet their belief that some parts of Europe were as French as France had the tangible effect of sharpening the borders of the true frontier for them.