

They knew where it began; its existence was a reality for them. There was a heartland; there was a frontier.

By 1808, it seems clear that for all Napoleon's military and diplomatic domination of Europe, his political system had reached the limits within which it would find societies amenable to acculturation. 6 deed, the process of demarcation could sometimes work in reverse. In 1808, the French entered Tuscany filled with great hopes they would find common ground with a state renowned for its enlightened, reforming traditions; within months, however, they came to believe these reforms had been only skin deep. Tuscany soon became 'Indian country' in their eyes. 7 When it advanced further east and south, it was on alien ground, and that was where and when the influence of the frontier on the heartland became most intense. Thus, what concerns me most here, is the impact of administering and attempting to acculturate the frontier on those despatched from the imperial heartland.

Those boundaries were cultural, as well as military and political. They were drawn exactly because the Napoleonic state was, fundamentally, the heir and militant proselytiser of a vision of political culture and, indeed, of civilisation, rooted firmly in the ideology of the French Revolution that sat ill with the societies of eastern and southern Europe, as well as with much of 'old France', notably -but not solely -the Vendée-Militaire. French civilisation, not merely the Napoleonic state, had its limits, and it had to fight on them. Not just this, for on these margins, its enemies were clear, and they were not purely military: In Naples, Murat famously declared he wished most to be remembered as the destroyer of feudalism; in Spain, Joseph sought to ban bullfighting, while Lannes stabled his cavalry's horses in the side chapels of Pamplona Cathedral. In the East, in his newly created Kingdom of Westphalia, Napoleon told his youngest brother, Jerome, what sort of model state it was meant to be, and why: 7 M. BROERS, The Napoleonic Empire in Italy, 1796-1814. Cultural Imperialisn in a European Context?, London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, espe cially p. 181-187.

The German peoples want equality and they want liberal ideas… a liberal government would be a much more powerful protection against Prussia than fortresses or Imperial troops… What nation would want to return to arbitrary Prussian rule after it had has enjoyed the benefits of a wise and liberal administration? 8 8 Cited in James J. SHEEHAN, German History, 1770-1866, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989, p. 270.

The decree of 15 April, 1811, reorganising the Illyrian Provinces is, perhaps, the starkest evidence Napoleon got a lot of answers to this he did not like, but the immediate point is the mission and the message. It was loud and it was clear -and it translated into the particular from this general statement of intent. This amounted to a policy of 'Gallicization', both in its brief to establish the mores and institutions of Revolutionary and Napoleonic France throughout the empire, and in its desire to turn other Europeans -as well as other Frenchmen -into Frenchmen. All this was axiomatic to the servants of the regime, from Napoleon himself down to the Frenchmen at the helm of local government in the imperial possessions. Revolutionary battles continued on the frontiers of the empire, against the oldest enemies -the Church, the aristocracy, and the 'thousand Vendées', as so many French officials called so many parts of the Italian departments.