

In seeming contradiction, in the course of my own research on Italy, I have come to think that an imperial model is the most illuminating optic through which to study Napoleonic Europe. Indeed, perhaps one of the most salient failings of Turner's thesis, is his failure to see American expansion as predominantly aggressive. However, like Turner's America -and unlike the imperial models I am so often drawn to, particularly Spanish America --the Napoleonic empire was a contiguous land empire.

It expanded directly from a heartland, across a continent, driven by a sense of 'manifest destiny', of national mission that invoked nation-building in harness with, and inspired by, imperialist expansion.

Invoking Turner thus forges the vital link between la Grande Nation and imperialism.

Of all Turner's essays on the American frontier, the ones which has struck me most, in my own work, in 'Contributions of the West to American Democracy', first published in 1903, and his first venture La Fondation Napoléon| Downloaded on 03/18/2026 from https://shs.cairn.info (IP: 154.16.8.176) into the 'frontier thesis', 'The Significance of the Frontier in American History', 11 which appeared in 1893, the year the government declared the frontier officially closed. In them, Turner stressed most directly, the ability of events on the frontier to mould and drive the political culture of the heartland.

The two political cultures I juxtapose here -Turner's vision of the perpetuation of American democracy and that of Revolutionary-Napoleonic France, are not comparable, nor do I propose to pursue a path precluded by no less a thinker than Tocqueville. What is comparable, however, is the centrality of territorial expansion and of a sense of civilising mission, to both empires, into spaces where they felt the inhabitants they found had no intrinsic right to do other than conform to their vision of civilisation. More precisely, Turner advanced five salient points: 12 TURNER, Frontier, p. 15.

-Turner argued in 'The Significance of the Frontier in American History,' that 'the unifying tendencies of the Revolutionary period were facilitated by the previous co-operation in the regulation of the frontier.' 12 It is arguable that nowhere else were the twin ideals of the Napoleonic regime -ralliement and amalgame -better made real, than on the dangerous borders of the empire, where exroyalists, ex-revolutionaries, and the sons of both, merged in their contempt and fear of the societies surrounding them. Indeed, in the last years of the Empire, as the provincial notables quietly withdrew their support for Napoleon, the vitriolic hatred of imperial officials on the peripheries for the enemies of the regime seems to have increased. Novi, in north-western Italy, was a haven of brigandage and recalcitrant Catholicism. The clergy and confraternities of the town, and the bandits of the surrounding hills, were constantly harassed, for nine years, by its French sub-prefect, one Charles-Alexis Reboul-Berville, nephew of the confessor of no less personages than the aunts of Louis XVI, a man among the first émigrés. 13 erhaps Turner's most controversial assertion was his belief in what might be called a mentalité frontalière: 'From the conditions of frontier life came intellectual traits of profound importance…traits of the frontier, or called out elsewhere because of the existence of the frontier.' 14 Whether Turner is correct in his own context or not, something like this emerged on the margins of the Empire, among those who served. There emerged a determination to fight, and to pursue the 'civilising mission' against 11 Cited here from Frederick Jackson Turner, The Frontier in American History Dover, (1996 edition) p. 243-268. 12 TURNER, Frontier, p. 15. 13 For his background and career: ANP F1bI/172/4, Dossier: Reboul-Berville. On his anti-clerical battles in Novi: M. Broers, The Politics of Religion in Napoleonic Italy. The war against God, 1801 -1814 , London: Routledge, 2002, p. 74-76. 14 TURNER, Frontier, p. 37 .