

All this is well known. The demolition of the Napoleonic Empire as a tawdry imitation of the Ancien Régime has long been under way. However, there are still clear paradoxes in need of unravelling.

The socially conservative image of the Napoleonic regime is far from unfounded. Napoleon made no attempt to create a new elite at local level within the core of the empire. The archives, themselves -so well exploited by Louis Bergeron and Guy Chaussinand-Nogaret -are testimony to its determination to seek out and attach 'old money' and 'solid citizens' to itself in the provinces. Les masses de granit 9 was what the regime, itself, not later historians, dubbed them. More to the point, in the present context, it was from their ranks -from their sons, to be precise -that a new generation of imperial administrators was to sally forth, to rule the empire and Gallicise its administrés. Isser Woloch, in a particularly prescient essay, has drawn attention to how accurate was the correlation between the new generation of civil servants, concentrated in the institution of the auditeurs of the Council of State, and the masses de granit. Auditeurs had to prove they could command a private income of 6,000 francs per annum, a sum which put them firmly within the ranks of the provincial elites. 10 Even if many families had to scrimp hard to assure such a sum, auditeurs were almost invariably the scions of families among the 600 highest taxpayers of their native departments; and the 600 highest taxpayers were, almost invariably, landowners; and the auditeurs were almost invariably the young fonctionnaires sent forth to be tested on the wildest frontiers of the Grand Empire. The growing weight of empirical evidence would seem to indicate, however, that these young professionals drawn from the most conservative -as quite distinct from, but not entirely excluding, reactionary or royalist -elements in French society, did not behave in accordance with their backgrounds. In many significant cases, the frontier radicalised them.

The residual 'Jacobinism' of the Grande Armée is well known; its ranks were still fed on revolutionary journalism -the title of its official gazette was the Le Père Duchesne -and could attend Mass only with the permission of their officers, as no chaplains were ever assigned to the imperial forces. They returned to France in 1814, as the démi-soldes, the lifeline between the 1790s and 1830. Perhaps even more intriguing, I might venture here, is how the well-healed sons of the masses de granit came to join them, royalist counts and all; for join them, they did.

Why invoke Frederick Jackson Turner, in the particular, as well as the general? First, I must stress that I do so with care, and in a limited manner; the first such, is to emphasise that I would not seek to enter into the fierce and long debate among American specialists as to the significance of Turner's thesis for their own specialism; I am drawn to certain central aspects of Turner's thoughts on the frontier, because they appear to yield insights into the frontiers of Napoleonic Europe. For all the caveats and qualifications attendant on such a step, I feel it is worth doing.