

                                   vii
Acknowledgements


There are dozens of people whom I thank for their guidance and support
with this project. Many a chance conversation with a colleague in the
Biblioteca Nacional, with Spanish archivists, even chats with members
of the public have all contributed in their own way. My particular
thanks go to such academics as Roger Hausheer, Jorge Luengo Sánchez,
Rosa María Navarrete, Jordi Roca Vernet, Adrian Shubert, Guy Thomson,
Isabel Burdiel and, especially, Charles Esdaile. I have been fortunate to
have been surrounded by great friends and historians whose research
interests lay outside Spain. They have provided great company and
support, and have shared with me the ups and downs of twenty-ﬁrst
century academia. My particular thanks go to Jon Hogg, Brian Marren,
Rhian Wyn-Williams and Christoph Laucht. I am indebted for the intel-
lectual and moral support of friends and colleagues alike, and of my
Newcastle University students. Needless to say, their support was of a
positive nature and any errors or weaknesses in my script are entirely
my own.
   Above all I thank my wife, Susana, for her unﬂinching love, support
and patience. Life as an academic presents immense challenges as well
as rewards but our team efforts have paid off. Este libro está dedicado a
nuestra hija, Nicole.




                                   viii
1
Introduction, History and Sources




Tragedy invites study, and wars, especially civil wars, are tragic by their
very nature. National, imperial and civil wars dominated Spain dur-
ing the revolutionary and counter-revolutionary turbulence of 1808–48,
pitting Patriots against Frenchmen, americanos against peninsulares, and
Liberals against Carlists. These interminable conﬂicts have shaped works
of ﬁction. Benito Pérez Galdós’s Episodios Nacionales serialised calamities
from the Battle of Trafalgar to the Carlist War and beyond, weaving ﬁc-
tional characters into real historical events in a didactic construction
of national truth. Political elites contested the legitimate nature of the
state but generally had no interest in social change. Instead, they relied
upon a surfeit of army veterans who ‘pronounced’ against governments
in return for pay and promotion, precious commodities in a bankrupt
economy. The predominantly rural masses were integrated into political
programmes as a last resort. Yet the inability of elites to rescue Spain
from its post-imperial crisis condemned their people to two generations
of upheaval and war, to the extent that upheaval has been seen as the
normal, if problematic, functioning of politics. The longest nineteenth-
century Spanish conﬂict, the First Carlist War (1833–40), began with a
dynastic dispute. But it developed into an unlikely agent of modernity
on account of the unequal demands it imposed on the people who, in
response, and for the ﬁrst time in modern Spanish history, found their
own voice, agendas and solutions.
   It is surprising that Spain’s First Carlist War remains Europe’s most
neglected nineteenth-century civil war in the English scholarship. This
lacuna is unworthy of the conﬂict’s importance. It was both the
last great European conﬂict of the pre-industrial age and, before the
nineteenth-century military revolution, an iconic moment in the pan-
European struggle between liberalism and absolutism, and a key stage in