


has revised the Marxist and neo-Carlist emphasis on structural causation
by showing the ‘multifaceted’ nature of its militants in different regions,
social contexts and times, distinguishing between Carlists as pragmatists
and Carlism as a creed. It has also rejected the neo-traditionalist ﬁxa-
tion with the ‘Marxist distortion’ of history: in claiming to be apolitical
and interested only in ‘objective’ facts, the Navarra school has failed to
acknowledge its own right-wing political mission (i.e. another politicisa-
tion of history).29 The freer intellectual environment since the Cold War
inspired new research questions, such as what quotidian Carlism meant
in practice.30 This has been answered by outstanding regional research
by such ﬁfth-category scholars as Pedro Rújula and José Ramón Urquijo,
who have shown in the Maestrazgo and the Basque country respectively
that support for Carlism was far more conditional than traditionalists,
neo-traditionalists and even Liberals believed.31
   The sum of Spanish historiography allows two relevant observations
to be made for this volume. First, it lays bare just how few histories of the
First Carlist War beyond travel and campaign narratives are available in
English. Although serious studies have been written, they have discussed
the First Carlist War only as part of either a wider narrative or a particu-
lar interest.32 The best English-language study is by John Coverdale, but
even this covers only one-third of the conﬂict’s span and, more impor-
tantly for this book’s rationale, explains the Carlist side much more than
the Cristino.33
   Second, twentieth-century research into the First Carlist War has
been more interested in the Carlist losers than the Cristino victors.
Nineteenth-century writers often referred to this conﬂict as the ‘seven
years’ war’, arguably a better title as it removes Carlist ownership of
the conﬂict and instead obliges scholars to understand the war’s impact
on the Cristino side. Carlism was both Europe’s most enduring legit-
imism and, paradoxically, a creed of losers, even when it was part of
the winning side in 1939. As a corollary to this, Spain’s Liberal revo-
lution, which was deﬁnitively victorious as a consequence of the First
Carlist War, has been seen as the normal trajectory of Spanish history.
This attitude was internalised by the school of Marxist social history
pioneered in Spain in the 1950s by Miguel Artola-Gallego, which was
morally driven by the need to historicise the Left’s defeat in the recent
Civil War, in other words, to explain the defeat of the ‘normal’ trajec-
tory of history. To this end, these social historians footnoted the military
history of the Cristino side to what they saw as the far more impor-
tant social and political transformation of the hallowed ‘bourgeois’ or
‘liberal’ revolution which Marxism could explain in structural changes
10   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


of the 1830s without having to resort to the contingencies of military
history.34 They found Spain’s 1830s liberal revolution not to have been
arrogant, as the neo-traditionalists held, but timid. The capitalist prop-
erty revolution actually left the old nobility’s socio-economic hegemony
unmolested and frustrated the ‘correct’ emergence of new forces as dur-
ing the French Revolution.35 As such, it is hard to categorise the Artola
school as part of the First Carlist War historiography, as these social his-
torians, with some important exceptions,36 saw the war as a symptom
rather than a cause of social conﬂict. As a result, the Cristino response to
the First Carlist War has not been studied with anything like the degree
of innovation as the Carlism side. Because of this, perhaps, the con-
ﬂict’s collective memory remains weighted towards the smaller Carlist
side, in their victory anthem ‘Oriamendi’ and the recording of colour-
ful village memory (‘Espartero hid in this farmhouse’).37 The relative
dearth of Liberal memory is especially stark when compared with the
1872–76 Second Carlist War, a conﬂict which forged a galaxy of Spanish
intellectuals across the political spectrum in a European context of class
conﬂict.38
   Yet the Cristino side deserves a study of its own in English: it was
both by far the larger side and ultimately victorious. As Cristino Spain
was the government rather than insurgent side, its hundreds of thou-
sands of conscripts had no a priori reason to be ideologically committed
(although interesting exceptions can be seen in the volunteer free corps
and militia) as they were recruited indiscriminately and via the estab-
lished arms of the state.39 Even during the most extreme episodes
(1835–37) of Carlist expeditions and Liberal revolutions, the vast major-
ity of Spanish territory and population remained outside of formal
Carlist control. Thus, the civil war, in all its diverse demands of mobili-
sation, violence, insecurity, militancy and deprivation, impacted on far
more inhabitants in Cristino than Carlist zones of control. Even cities
such as Málaga and Cádiz, hundreds of miles beyond formal front lines,
were affected by the civil war. Given that Cristino Spain’s war with
the Carlists profoundly shaped the 1830s liberal revolution, a narrative
study of the popular impact would seem particularly propitious. A study
of the militancies of combatants and non-combatants would offer schol-
ars a more diverse understanding of the conﬂict, going beyond the
historiographical pitfalls of elitist censure or apology and beyond struc-
tural analyses of the ancien régime. The civil war, after all, left no part
of Spain untouched and over seven years killed 5 per cent of the 1833
population. A new study therefore needs to show how the experience
of warfare shaped the politics and society of 1830s Spain, especially
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   11