

                                    1
2   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the history of modern Spain. Yet, unlike the Peninsular War (1808–14),
the First Carlist War is something of a Cinderella for monographs and
transnational histories alike.1 The conﬂict’s Spanish historiography is far
better, thanks to such scholars as Jordi Canal, Josep Clemente, Alfonso
Bullón de Mendoza, Ramón Urquijo Goitia, Pedro Rújula and the late
Julio Aróstegui, to say nothing of the wealth of local and regional stud-
ies. But it is surprising that even the Spanish historiography was late in
applying modern historical methods to the conﬂict; rather, until the
1970s, the war, like the broader issues of Carlism and Liberalism in
general, was the battleground of ideologically committed panegyrists
and detractors. Antonio Pirala’s exhaustive six-volume study, written
between the 1850s and 1870s, remained authoritative for more than
a century as a consequence. But the Spanish innovation has not yet led
to a monograph of the conﬂict in English. In principle, then, there is a
need for a new study in English which will examine the whole of the
war and integrate the military narrative into wider questions concern-
ing politics and society. This monograph shows how the First Carlist
War created a radical movement within the ranks of Spanish liberalism
which thereafter never ceased to exert pressure on its more moderate
(and distinctly elitist) movement.
   Spain’s Carlist Wars make interesting and exciting reading, especially
the ﬁrst and most prolonged of these civil wars, the First Carlist War
of 1833–40. The background to this conﬂict is extremely complex, but,
in brief, as a result of the Peninsular War (1808–14) Spain had been
plunged into a far-reaching political, social and economic crisis. The
only way forward from this situation was a comprehensive programme
of reform that extended and deepened the changes already made in
the reigns of Charles III (1759–88) and Charles IV (1788–08). Initiated
by the progressive group of liberales that had dominated the Cortes of
Cádiz (1810–14), and picked up in more timid fashion by the counsellors
of Ferdinand VII after 1814, this programme of reform was challenged
by elements in the Church and the nobility who had hoped rather
to ‘colonise’ Ferdinand VII and to make him not only turn back the
clock in respect of the changes made in the period of 1808–14, but
reverse those made in the period of enlightened absolutism as well. For
a long time it seemed that they would ultimately reverse the tide of
reform – the heir to the throne, Ferdinand’s younger brother, Prince
Charles (‘Don Carlos’: hence the word ‘Carlist’) was very much under
their thumb – but the last months of Ferdinand’s life saw a compli-
cated series of events threaten their dominance, and no sooner had he
died than they staged an armed revolt aimed at ensuring their triumph
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   3


by force. This civil war has attracted nothing like the critical attention
lavished upon its iconic successor a century later. In some ways this sit-
uation is surprising, as, for a start, the enduring stereotype of the ‘Two
Spains’ – which for so long was deemed central to understanding mod-
ern Spain – might have seemed an equally compelling paradigm for the
First Carlist War: whereas the Spanish Civil War saw Nationalists and
Republicans ﬁghting for their respectively hegemonic visions of Spain,
the First Carlist War offers a comparable struggle between legitimist
Carlists and modernising Liberals which took twice as long to resolve
as its successor, exacted relatively more casualties and even anticipated
the International Brigades (some 18,000 French, British, Belgian and
Portuguese volunteers for liberty). One major difference lay in the rever-
sal of the term ‘national’. Whereas in the 1830s it was the progressive
Liberal side which was ‘national’, in the 1930s the Francoist coalition,
heirs of the vanquished Carlists, claimed this title. Spanish nationalism
had evolved from Left to Right, from a civic force of nation-building
into a conservative force of National Catholicism.2
   It was a dynastic dispute about who should succeed to the throne in
1833 that provided the trigger for war, but the latter’s roots in reality
stretched far wider. The ﬁrst root was contested legitimacy, which was
no arcane matter but an issue that shaped all sorts of popular militancy.
Spaniards had traditionally held their monarchy in great reverence:
unlike the French and English, they have never killed their king. The
illegitimacy of Napoleon’s seizure of their throne in 1808 in the name
of his brother, Joseph, had been the formal casus belli for the Peninsular
War. But to the question of legitimacy needs to be added the question
of absolutist royal will. In 1789 Ferdinand’s father, Charles IV, had used
a secret session of the Spanish Cortes to issue a decree opening up the
royal succession to female as well as male heirs. This broke with the
Salic Law which the Bourbon victor of the 1701–13 War of the Spanish
Succession, Philip V, had conferred on his new dynasty and which
effectively excluded female heirs from the succession by exhausting
all legitimate male bloodlines to the throne. Any doubts surrounding
the validity of the Salic Law had long remained moot: Ferdinand’s ﬁrst
three marriages bore him either no children or resulted in miscarriages
and infant mortalities, which could only mean that the King’s younger
brother, Don Carlos, would succeed him. But the healthy birth of the
royal daughter, Isabella, born in October 1830, revived the question of
the succession. Don Carlos did not challenge his brother openly, and
much of the running was made by Ferdinand’s wife, María Francisca,
who was at odds with his sister-in-law, Luisa Carlota. Bourbon women
4   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40