


had always dominated when their menfolk were weak. But now this
tradition was given new form, as the dynastic triumph of the women,
María Cristina and her young daughter Isabella, was countered by the
Carlist faction in sexist propaganda.3 As a leading Carlist propagandist
pronounced, ‘Phillip V knew how nature demands that a man should
command and a woman obey, and that there is barely one out of a
million of the fairer sex ﬁt for something greater than homespinning.’4
Despite this sexism, the war would place women into roles ‘naturally’
reserved for men. Pre-war court politics foreshadowed this. From 1830,
after the birth of Isabella and then a second daughter, it became possi-
ble for the Cristino faction to win the succession. Under pressure from
María Cristina, whom events would throw into the arms of the Lib-
eral reformists, Ferdinand timidly reissued the 1789 decree, now termed
the Pragmatic Sanction, thereby announcing Isabella’s succession to the
throne in the event of his death. Pro-Carlist court pressure succeeded
in prevailing upon Ferdinand brieﬂy to revoke the Sanction.5 But the
Carlist recovery was by no means assured. In 1832 the King lapsed
into what was thought to be terminally poor health, and his powers
were passed to the regency of his wife who presided over a purge of
Carlists from the army and administration. During a brief Indian sum-
mer in the King’s health, three months before his death, the Cristino
faction again secured the King’s approval for the re-abolition of the
Salic Law. Thus, Carlist hopes of a smooth transition were dashed: the
royal will was that the infant Isabella’s minority reign would be exer-
cised by her mother’s regency when the King’s death ﬁnally came in
September 1833.
   Don Carlos, devout and tenacious, refused to recognise the Isabeline
succession: the recent legitimist rising known as the Agraviados had
taught him the wisdom of awaiting events. But he also refused openly
to challenge the King whilst the monarch still lived. This legitimist pro-
priety did not have to matter as such. Early nineteenth century Spain
had been littered with examples of pronunciamientos, or military coups,
being mounted in order to change politics and, in the case of young
Prince Ferdinand and his elderly father, Charles IV, in 1808, even to
force a royal abdication. And Don Carlos suffered no lack of proxies
prepared to do his bidding, including several in some of the highest
positions of authority in the Bourbon state. The purge of these Carlists
during the last months of Ferdinand’s life was explained by Liberal his-
torians with references to the ‘illegitimacy’ of the Carlist dynastic claim.
The dual issue of the secret decree of 1789 and the deﬁnitive expres-
sion of royal will of 1833 supported their case. According to the Liberal
historian, Antonio Pirala, the Cristino case may have been impolitic
                                         Introduction, History and Sources   5


but was by no means illegitimate. Not only had the Cortes effectively
legitimised a female succession as early as 1789, but the Salic Law in
any case was the worst example of ‘foreign despotism’ to contravene
centuries of Spanish tradition, and which had been instigated by the
Bourbons in 1713 solely in order to settle European fears of a formally
integrated Franco-Spanish monarchy.6 One of the ironies of the dynas-
tic dispute was that modernising Liberals invoked medieval Spanish
tradition whereas medievalist Carlists invoked the eighteenth-century
Bourbons, the very dynasty whose enlightened absolutism created the
conditions for nineteenth-century liberalism to emerge.
   Certainly, nineteenth-century Liberals used Spanish tradition in other
contexts for political ends. Most markedly, the 1820s radical-liberals
named their secret society the Comuneros in honour of the 1520s
Comuneros revolt of Castile, the founding myth for Spanish Liber-
als who viewed it as the ﬁrst modern defence of popular sovereignty.
Historicism came easily to nineteenth-century Spanish Liberals, many
of whom (Count Toreno, Agustín de Argüelles and Alcalá Galiano, to
name a few) were themselves historians. But despite their erudition,
their works are unhelpfully partisan and self-exculpatory with regard
to the early nineteenth-century crisis that unleashed the Carlist War.7
This is not only because an equally strong case could be – and was –
made by Carlist historians for Don Carlos’s claim,8 but also because
most nineteenth-century histories lacked the analytical and contextual
rigour demanded by modern scholarship. An adequate understanding
of the background to the First Carlist War needs to integrate archival
research with the advances made in Spanish social history since the
mid-twentieth century.