


the Cristino zone. My approach is no whim: the late Julio Aróstegui
observed that ‘the options for violence by individuals or groups ended
up creating cultures of their own’.40 In this spirit, this book tells an
untold story of how otherwise undistinguished Spaniards who hitherto
had been absent from political history underwent seven years of bru-
tal civil war and revolution and framed this military experience in a
politically meaningful and radical way.
   The state of affairs described above creates virgin territory for new
interpretations and justiﬁes the sources I use for this volume, most
of which logically come from Cristino rather than Carlist quarters.
I defend this stance in part in deference to the fact that Carlist archives
in the Basque country have already been mined by some outstand-
ing researchers,41 and in part because the Carlist sources I do use (the
Gaceta Oﬁcial and published memoirs) reinforce my general approach,
which is to show the impact of the war on Spain as a whole. This ambi-
tious task must inevitably fail to exhaust all sources, and experts will
doubtless be alarmed at omissions. Nonetheless, my combination of
secondary with primary sources must perforce appear selective within
the constraints of a medium-sized monograph. The primary sources
are in three categories, published memoirs, newspapers and unpub-
lished archives. The rationale for using memoirs, from both Carlist and
Cristino authors, is explained by the events described. Cristino news-
papers are particularly valuable, especially the advanced Liberal Eco del
Comercio, because their networks of provincial correspondents reported
on local military developments, and newspapers led the maturing Left
versus Right divide in Liberal politics. My unpublished sources come
from three major archives in Madrid (the Archivo Histórico Nacional,
Real Academia de Historia, Archivo General del Palacio), the munici-
pal archives of Barcelona, Málaga and San Sebastián, and the university
archive of Zaragoza. The unpublished campaign letters of the Cristino
‘Duke of Victory’, General Espartero, complete my Spanish archive base,
whilst some foreign sources (George Borrow, French and British press,
German campaign memoirs) help to internationalise the conﬂict.
   A note of caution is necessary with regard to my use of newspapers
as a primary source. News of atrocities was often embellished in the
telling. The war shattered normal systems of information gathering,
and terriﬁed correspondents often lent credence to the worst rumours of
Carlist atrocities, which subsequently sometimes appeared unsubstanti-
ated in the Cristino press. The press thus contributed to the perceptions
of such atrocities, and the degree of terror depended as much on per-
ception as concrete facts. The hold of ‘Carlist atrocities’ over Cristino
12   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


opinion is explained not only by the events to which they referred
but also by deeper mentalities and traditions through which they were
expressed. Neither the content nor the vocabulary was new, owing to
the trauma of Spain’s recent Peninsular and Royalist Wars. But the
greater duration and irregular quality of the First Carlist War created
a press-driven ‘myth-cycle’ which ﬂourished on patchy knowledge of
the march of events, and reduced strange experiences and inexplica-
ble events to a conspiracy of Carlist ﬁfth-columnists, poisonings, prison
breaks, arms storage in churches and so forth. Confused and poorly
led Cristino conscripts in unfamiliar territory sometimes ﬁred on each
other by mistake, but these shots were reported to have been ﬁred by
‘Carlist’ inhabitants: with dire results. As the war in 1835 expanded
beyond the Basque country, demographic factors increased the scope
both for actual and ‘reported’ atrocities to take place. Cristino atrocities
were often harsher in such irregular areas of Carlist control as north-
ern Castile and, especially, Aragón and Catalonia, precisely because,
in contrast to the Basque country, ‘suspect’ men of military age were
usually encountered inside hostile villages. (The Carlist Basque coun-
try, by contrast, had been thoroughly militarised by mid-war and thus
offered greater resistance to Cristino incursions, and those incursions
that did take place usually encountered few ‘suspect’ combatants as vir-
tually every available man was at the front.) Equally, Carlist raiders into
Cristino territory encountered a vulnerable population disproportion-
ately composed of women and children. Masculine anxieties in a culture
of honour must account for part of the rise in reports in the press of rape
and murder.
   Thus, even though real atrocities took place, it is in fact impossible to
know whether they can really be taken at face value. This uncertainty
can be mitigated in two ways, of a practical and conceptual nature. Prac-
tically, I have endeavoured to substantiate accounts of atrocities and
counter-atrocities, or at least tried to qualify their reporting. Readers
may still feel a humanitarian scepticism at the evidence offered through-
out these chapters, and such a response would ironically match that
of the Cristino Liberals whose politics were radicalised by the need to
combat ‘savage’ Carlists and the backward religiosity and royalism they
represented. Conceptually, then, what matters is not what happened but
what was believed to be happening. Much of the political radicalisation
of Cristino Spain was caused by ‘news’ as much as lived experience. This
news often came from anonymous sources, a routine cause of frustration
for historians interested in the social background of protagonists and
in corroborating facts. Yet anonymity also reveals two types of sources,
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   13