


The First Carlist War: history and sources

Whereas most publications relating to the First Carlist War appeared
during the conﬂict itself and its immediate aftermath, the highest qual-
ity of publications has appeared since the 1970s.9 That said, the most
important single body of work remains Antonio Pirala y Criado’s six
volumes, written over two decades from the 1850s. Pirala was a posi-
tivist progresista (Spanish ‘Whig’) and sometime ﬁction writer who, in
his youth, ﬂirted with democracy in response to failure of the 1848
revolution in Spain. His politics moved to the Right in proportion
to his advancing age and career. But he remained a Liberal, thinking
the Carlists were wrong even though he was objective and unusu-
ally knowledgeable about them. His even-handedness was commended
by the Carlist side. He was bequeathed private Carlist correspondence
6   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


by the Carlist commander-in-chief who, in 1839 made peace, Rafael
Maroto.10 When Pirala, in the 1870s, began his ﬁve-volume Historia
Contemporánea, dealing with the Second Carlist War (1872–76), he was
granted privileged access to Carlist papers.11 Yet Pirala’s prolix narra-
tive means that he was often cited but seldom read. As a positivist
he expressed immutable moral norms and was constrained to give
meaning to the political and social radicalisation unleashed by the
war. In committing details of massacres, violence and riots to paper,
Pirala conforms to a peculiarly nineteenth-century humanitarian liter-
ary model designed to make readers feel part of national suffering.12
Pirala was not the ﬁrst to use this technique. As the historian of
Aragonese Carlism, Pedro Rújula, has pointed out, three Radical-Liberals
who had exercised public roles in Aragón during the war (Francisco
Cabello, Francisco Santa Cruz and Ramón María Temprado) were quick
to write a leftist history of the conﬂict which amassed details of heroism
and massacres in order to cast the Liberal militia as the martyred van-
guards of a civil society whose memory must be avenged not just against
any resurgent Carlists, but also against the conservatives (moderados)
who brutally disbanded the militia whilst these authors were writing
in 1843.13 But Pirala, less radical in his liberalism, provided the clas-
sic nineteenth-century expression of the humanitarian narrative. Yet
he was not without his shortcomings. In particular, he neglected the
Cristino ‘home front’, especially Andalucía where Carlism was admit-
tedly at its weakest, but where so much of the social and political
radicalism was nonetheless produced by the war.
   Pirala’s failure to integrate the Cristino experience of civil war into
the Liberal revolution has still not been fully addressed. At the turn of
the current century Jordi Canal lamented that there was still no reliable
synthesis of the First Carlist War.14 Certainly, no adequate attempt has
been made to undertake this in the English language, but it is interest-
ing to reﬂect upon how even the more sophisticated Spanish scholarship
presents challenges and controversies. The Spanish historiography may
be divided into ﬁve broad categories. The ﬁrst comprised nineteenth-
century dynastic and classical military histories, contemporary (and
generally inferior in quality) to Pirala’s volumes.15 The second comprised
the panegyrics from Franco-era traditionalists who depicted Carlism as
an organic Christian good resisting the onslaught of godless and artiﬁ-
cial Spanish liberalism.16 The First Carlist War was but one protracted
episode in the wider war between Christianity and the Anti-Spain that
was joined in 1808 and won by the crusaders only in 1939. The most
impressive work in this vein was the 30-volume history of traditionalism
                                           Introduction, History and Sources   7