




Ferdinand VII described himself as a cork in a bottle of beer: as soon
as that cork was removed, all the troubles of Spain would explode into
the open. He is routinely considered the worst of all Spanish monarchs.
Timid, mediocre and vindictive, his reign compounded such geopoliti-
cal disasters as the Peninsular War and the interconnected loss of Spain’s
mainland American empire. During the Peninsular War (virtually all
of which Ferdinand would sit out in the gilded captivity of France) a
Liberal clique had emerged to dominate the politics of the Spanish Patri-
ots who were ﬁghting against France in the name of the captive King.
This clique, led by such enlightened young nobles as Count Toreno,
Agustín de Argüelles and Martínez de la Rosa, was besieged in Spain’s
most bourgeois port-city, Cádiz, during 1810–12, crucial years in which
the Liberals pointed to the repeated defeats sustained by the Patriot reg-
ular armies in the rest of Spain as evidence of the need for a ‘Great Leap
Forward’ of political reform, the most iconic and advanced of which
was the Constitution of 1812, also known as the Constitution of Cádiz,
which would be adopted as a mascot by Spanish Radicals for much of
the nineteenth century.1 During the whole of the Peninsular War the
French army never conquered Cádiz, but bombarded it from afar on
occasion, and this gave the Patriot Liberals the illusion that they were
sharing the suffering of the rest of Spain.
   The Liberals, resentful of the eighteenth-century militarisation of
Spain’s Bourbon monarchy and resolute in their belief in the rights of
the individual against arbitrary power, cast a suspicious eye towards
Spain’s Bourbon military, even though most members of this had
sided with the Spanish Patriots in 1808 and subsequently took to the
ﬁeld against appalling odds, never abandoning the struggle against
Napoleon.2 The social composition of the ofﬁcer corps was already

                                   21
22   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


changing in response to the demands of the war. The revolution of
1808 saw ofﬁcers from undistinguished social backgrounds rise through
the Patriot ranks, whilst the Patriot provisional government (Junta
Central) embarked upon crash military reforms which were at least
beginning to improve the army’s ﬁghting potential. Yet the Spanish
Liberals divided opinion both inside and outside the military. Liberal
journalists, taking advantage of Cádiz’s ﬁrst (and ﬂeeting) free press,
frequently goaded Bourbon commanders to prove their patriotism in
battle against obvious French superiority on Spain’s high plateaus – with
appalling results. Just as the Carlist War would show, Spanish generals
did not like being second-guessed by civilians. Even though the Spanish
army did eventually prevail, it did so only as a humiliatingly junior
partner under British leadership, ﬁnanced and even clothed by British
subsidies.3 Factionalism, also a dominant feature in the Carlist War,
characterised the Liberals who, from the convocation of the Cortes in
Cádiz in 1810, increasingly dominated the war effort. On the one hand,
the Patriot Liberals championed several military mediocrities, such as
General Ballesteros (who had unsuccessfully challenged the Duke of
Wellington’s appointment in 1812 to the Supreme Command of Allied
Forces), mainly because they proved useful agents in domestic politics.4
On the other hand, the Liberals exaggerated out of all proportion the
effectiveness of the famous guerrilleros, or Patriot guerrilla bands, who
have given the Peninsular War its most enduring image. Viewed by the
Liberals as a useful counterweight to the ‘despotic’ army, the guerrillas
also neatly served the ideological purpose of the ‘people in arms’, literal
embodiments of national sovereignty – though the reality was, in fact,
far more complex.5 Meanwhile the Liberals, especially the more radical
ones, planned to check the Bourbon army with the National Militia, a
part-time citizens’ force organised at local level and in the hands of prop-
erty owners. The National Militia was written into the Constitution, yet
its existence during the Peninsular War was ephemeral: called into being
as late as April 1814, it survived only two weeks in the places where it
had even organised at all before the royalist coup of May rendered all
the reforms of the Liberals null and void. Yet this seed would germinate
during the later Liberal revolutions of 1820–23, and especially during
the Carlist War of 1833–40 when the militia would be dragged as much
into conﬂict in Liberal politics as against the Carlists.
   Given the anti-militarist trajectory of the Liberals, a faction grew
within the army that was hostile to the whole constitutional exper-
iment. Some historians have explained this disaffection in genera-
tional terms, with older ofﬁcers who had established themselves during
                                             The First Carlist War: Origins   23