


monitoring the transit of outsiders.17 The army was thus key to the
Fernandine police state. But soldiers faced arrears in pay, casual bru-
tality at the hands of ofﬁcers and inadequate rations: hardly conditions
propitious to law and order. Meanwhile, despite the coup of 1814, the
army was no monochrome: a Liberal faction remained amongst its ofﬁ-
cers, often now being placed on half-pay or in remote garrisons by a
suspicious King.18 During the autumn and winter of 1819 several such
ofﬁcers were amassing forces around Cádiz as part of Ferdinand’s effort
to dispatch reinforcements for the cause of royalism in Spanish America.
Under the command of Rafael del Riego they would end up marching
not on Mexico, but on Madrid. And they would succeed where previous
Liberal pronunciamientos had failed.
   The ﬁrst of these failures would later end up as the sword-arm
of Spain’s Liberal revolutions during the Royalist and Carlist Wars.
Francisco Espoz y Mina had been the most successful Patriot guerrilla
commander, turning Navarra, a conservative and autonomous region
where socio-economic conditions had generated a uniquely popular
armed mobilisation against the French, into a virtual ﬁefdom (his
French enemies even dubbed him the ‘King of Navarra’). Despite his
later politics, Espoz had been violently at odds with the Liberals dur-
ing the Peninsular War, even allegedly executing by ﬁring squad a copy
of the Constitution of 1812. This anecdote remains apocryphal, but it
would have suited the Navarrese he commanded. Thus, when he hur-
ried to the newly restored court of Ferdinand VII, he expected a reward,
nothing less than the Viceroyalty of Navarra. But the King snubbed
his entreaty, and Espoz returned to his Pamplona garrison and raised
a revolt in the name of the Constitution he had so recently derided.19
When this failed, Espoz escaped retribution by escaping to France (his
idealistic nephew, Xavier Mina, even following through on his uncle’s
pretexts by ﬂeeing via France, the British Isles and the USA to Spain’s
restive Americas where he would die ﬁghting for Mexican indepen-
dence from Spanish absolutism). Ironically, when Espoz ﬁnally became
viceroy, it would be as a Liberal ﬁghting against the Carlist sons of veter-
ans he had once commanded, failing militarily in his advanced middle
age where in his youth he had triumphed. The year 1815 saw another
guerrilla leader, Juan Díaz Porlier, pay the ultimate price for rebellion,
and the following year saw an abortive Republican conspiracy called the
Triangle.20 In 1817 another popular war hero, Luis Roberto de Lacy, was
executed amid much controversy after having tried to raise Barcelona,
whilst in 1819 another commander, Vidal, would meet the same fate.
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   27


These veterans had acted with not insubstantial civilian support, often
networked via powerful Masonic lodges which provided a natural con-
spiratorial environment for progressive elites who liked to exhaust all
options for keeping the people out of politics. Yet their conspiracies
ended in failure. What gave Riego success was Ferdinand’s resolve to
bring metropolitan rule back to Spanish America. The absolutist regime
set great store by pacifying America so that bullion could ﬂow again.
Yet quite apart from the unpromising diplomatic environment, this task
could only be achieved with the dispatch of sufﬁcient troops, itself a
task which was so costly as to be undertaken in circumstances which
virtually guaranteed military rebellion: namely, inadequate and irregu-
lar pay and troop concentrations around the Liberal port of Cádiz which
were slow to disperse due to insufﬁcient trans-Atlantic shipping being
available. Thus, when, late in 1819, the King ordered ten battalions to
the province of Cádiz to await transport on festering hulks to Spanish
America, the stage was set for disgruntled commanders to rally their
equally disgruntled men – whose rallying cry was ‘No America’ – to over-
throw the Restoration regime. Consequently, it was the army in 1820
which was breaking a regime, just as in 1814.
   For several weeks it seemed as though Riego’s revolution would meet
the same fate as that of his predecessors. Marching across Andalucía,
Riego’s army blended Liberal appeals aimed at the urban well-to-do with
populist promises aimed at the masses. The port-city of Algeciras, one of
the ﬁrst urban centres to be taken by Riego’s army, saw its import duties
on foreign goods abolished, the unpopular derechos de puerta tax system
mothballed ‘pending the design of a better system’ and the important
state tobacco monopoly broken up.21 Similar measures were enacted as
other cities fell to the constitutional rebellion in January, February and
March, whilst an open trade in grain imports was proclaimed as means
of staving off recurrent famines.22 Despite these measures, Riego’s ris-
ing soon petered out, as populations failed to rally, horses were hard
to ﬁnd, rains were torrential and soldiers deserted into banditry. Even
those men remaining under Riego’s command had no commissariat
and were thus so reduced by hunger as to make enemies of the rural
Andalucían communities in their path, demanding cash from the gen-
erally cashless villagers, and pillaging when none was forthcoming.23
Other soldiers, like the cash-strapped privates in General Freyre’s army,
feared becoming substitutes for the American expedition and so tried to
demonstrate their indispensability by pronouncing against Riego, com-
mitting atrocities (some 71 deaths and 171 wounded) in the genteel
28    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40