


his career. As his career had been doubly marginalised in 1814 due
to both his suspected Liberal sympathies and his lengthy captivity in
France, Riego was now psychologically incapable of merely settling for
the promotion to general which he had gained for reasons of politi-
cal expediency during the Andalucían rising.36 In fact, in September he
entered Madrid amidst a wave of agitation stoked up by the Patriotic
Societies, whose members hoped that the liberator Riego might offer
a better ladder for gaining ofﬁce. Yet September 1820 was no Spanish
Brumaire. Riego was bought off with the Captaincy-General of Galicia
(followed early in 1821 by that of Zaragoza), and his men were sent
home to their villages. These men had hoped to gain from a September
1820 Cortes decree awarding parcels of land to revolutionary veterans,
but local authorities dragged their feet on this measure now that Riego
had been neutralised.37
   This particular wedge driven between the army elite and the rank and
ﬁle was masked by a humiliation of the throne and altar which appeased
Radical-Liberal opinion and added insult to the injury of Ferdinand’s
royal instincts. In the November 1820 ‘Carvajal affair’, the royal will
came second to the oratorical prowess of the most prominent Liberal in
the Cortes, the ‘divine’ Agustín de Argüelles, author of the Constitution
of Cádiz. Like all Liberals, Argüelles wanted to advance the regalism of
the eighteenth century by subordinating Spain’s traditionally powerful
Catholic Church to state power. Whilst parish priests would be left in
their posts and even paid stipends from the public purse, the cloistered
clergy should be defrocked, put to useful work, and their substantial
lands sold off for proﬁtable and productive uses. Thus, when el divino
threatened to raise the streets of the capital if the King did not sign a bill
to cut the cloistered clergy, Ferdinand ominously left the capital for the
sanctuary of El Escorial, where the clerical party of his younger brother,
Don Carlos, was known to hold sway. Having failed to rally support
there, however, the King had no option but to return to Madrid and
sign the bill into law. Now a virtual prisoner of the Constitution, things
took a turn for the worse for the King as some ‘hotheads’ (exaltados), or
‘men of 1820’ (so-called for their desire to make more radical reforms
than the ‘men of 1812’), triumphantly joined the government.38
   Yet this Liberal bipartisanship did not portend stability. The army lost
its revolutionary unity as Riego and his clique gradually dominated the
levers of power whilst the rank and ﬁle went unpaid and unshod. Just
as the Peninsular War had shown (and as the Carlist War would show)
army ofﬁcers tended to see politics in narrow career terms and their
men as pawns to this end; purely military considerations came second.
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   31


As one historian put it with perspicacity, ‘Men who did not want to serve
were led by men who did not know how to serve.’39 And as the Riego
revolution had burdened the state with an excess of political ofﬁcers,
these potentially dangerous men had to be bought off with appoint-
ments which the Constitution had designed for civilians. Much of the
blame for this situation should be laid at the polarisation of Liberal pol-
itics. Certainly, Spanish liberalism was steeped in generational conﬂict,
young Radicals resenting the stranglehold of old conservatives. The men
of 1820 grew so embittered at the older Liberal generation’s stranglehold
on public ofﬁces that they forged pseudo-Republican Comunero clubs
which promoted increasingly violent attacks on the Church and monar-
chy in a bid to win power. The Left-Liberal challenge to the men of 1812
(moderados) in turn divided as the 1820 generation was caught between
the rock of moderado and court disapproval and the hard place of Radical
pressure.40 Anguished by the collapse in April 1821 of a sister revolution
in Italy, the Comuneros launched a press campaign to uncover absolutist
sympathisers and rebellious priests.41 Rightly fearing the growing hos-
tility of the Holy Alliance, the Comuneros also tried to safeguard the
Spanish revolution by internationalising it. They welcomed Italian émi-
grés (the carbonari) into their lodges and militia battalions, whilst one
Cortes deputy, Zorraquín, ‘the foremost revolutionary in Spain’, estab-
lished correspondence clubs in Gerona and Catalan frontier towns with
the aim of enlisting public support for Liberal Spain in the southern
départments of France.42 When, during September 1821, Riego compro-
mised himself in a plot forged by a group of Spanish and international
Republicans, the moderate-Liberal (moderado) government dismissed
him from the Captaincy-General of Aragón.43
   Meanwhile, government attempts to remedy state ﬁnances fell hard-
est on the poor. The unpopular consumption taxes (derechos de puertas)
were re-established. Even though the Argüelles law began evicting
monks and nuns and bringing their property to market, it was the
highest bidder, not the landless labourer, sharecropper, tenant farmer
or demobilised soldier who got possession of the nationalised property.
The rural masses might yet have been appeased by the early 1821 Cortes
decree that tithes for the parish clergy would henceforth be halved.
But the half-tithe was accompanied by other taxes payable in cash, a
massive burden for a rural population still largely unaccustomed to a
cash economy, which, most devastatingly, came at a time of slump in
prices for agricultural goods.44 In fact, at least some foreign observers
singled out the Liberals’ formalisation of cash taxation as the origin
of the collapse of the constitutional regime.45 Even though this policy
32   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40