


the calls to arms, these acted more as a tax than a ﬁne, and with-
out exception targeted families of Liberal sympathies.’72 But in fact the
Carlists suffered almost as much from draft-dodging and desertion as the
Cristinos, or rather popular Carlism was, at least in part, draft-dodging
and desertion. Even in the case of the Basque country, recent research
shows Carlist insurgent leaders at best tolerating rather than endorsing
the early phenomenon of ‘shirt-changing’ amongst their men.73 Yet for
a long time, shirt-changing, the practice of Carlist insurgents dispersing
in the face of superior Cristino forces, was romanticised as something
nobler than desertion, as a form of voluntarism winked at by other-
wise very authoritarian ofﬁcers. Certainly, geography allowed Carlist
combatants in the Basque country to return to their homesteads rela-
tively easily, concealing their weapons usually in the full knowledge of
civil authorities who not only tolerated but also protected them on the
understanding that they would return to ﬁght the Cristinos as soon as
they could do so with advantage, or at least that they would not cause
trouble with Carlist military authorities. But the consolidation of Carlist
military control in the Basque country diminished this practice, and
even though shirt-changing remained common on expeditions and in
patchy areas of Carlist control, the Basque safe zone, and to a lesser
extent, those in the Maestrazgo and Catalonia, produced predictable
and coercive patterns of conscription into increasingly regular armies.
This militarisation was answered by widespread draft evasion and deser-
tion, not on the scale of Cristino Spain, but signiﬁcant and deleterious
to the war effort nonetheless. Thus, even though the Carlists’ exploita-
tion of local military traditions was more successful, as we shall see, than
that of the Cristinos, it was distinctly qualiﬁed.
   The nature and extent of Carlism beyond the three safe zones diver-
siﬁed still further, and its adherents may be differentiated into Carlists
of conscience (‘civic Carlists’) and of violence (facciosos or ‘insurgents’).
Their geographical distribution was patchy and changing, although sup-
port for Carlism was generally strong in northern Castile, Asturias and
Galicia. Galicia was especially prone to Carlism as its clergy were lease
owners of tiny, subdivided peasant plots (minifundia) in a social geog-
raphy sometimes referred to as ‘Spain’s Ireland’. Several Galician clerics
self-interestedly mobilised their rural dependents against the enemy’s
property revolution.74 In general militant Carlism was dispersed into
the countryside and away from the larger towns. Rural pockets were
often held by ‘insurgents’, but many of these ‘Carlists’ were really ban-
dits looking for political cover or deserters from the Cristino army. Many
more Carlists were peaceful (‘civic Carlists’), and were found, above all,
20   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


amongst the religious but also in other walks of life. Even the largest
Cristino towns contained Carlist sympathisers (and Cristino support-
ers also remained in revolted provinces). Those ﬁnding themselves in
the wrong zone could be subjected to ﬁnancial penalties, imprisonment
and even death, in proportion to the approach of enemy forces, popu-
lar demands for reprisals and the radicalisation of politics produced by
the war.
   In sum, the diverse dimensions of early Carlism present scholars with
a striking paradox, namely that 1830s Carlism was militarily most devel-
oped at a time when its ideology was least cohesive. Early Carlism was
a mix of radical royalists, absolutists and theocrats, prisoners of Spain’s
multiple pasts, and rivals in court and military politics.75 Later civil wars
during the periods 1872–76 and 1936–39 never came close to threat-
ening a Carlist conquest of the state to the extent that 1833–40 did.
Yet Carlist ideology – its traditional culture, intense Catholicism and
espousal of a medievalist decentralised political structure – was more
developed then.76 Thus, events demand greater scrutiny than would
be the case in studies of the later Carlist conﬂicts; they justify this
book’s chronological history approach, liberal with the conﬂict’s ide-
ological background but rigorous with its physical manifestations. This
approach can be justiﬁed by the scale of the conﬂict. The First Carlist
War was the bloodiest civil war in nineteenth-century Europe – by some
measurements bloodier than the Spanish Civil War – with military casu-
alties alone amounting to as much as 2.5 per cent of Spain’s entire
population.77 This notwithstanding, it is the great conﬂict of which
most scholars and students outside of Spain are ignorant. If this vol-
ume makes even the slightest dent on this ignorance, this author will be
satisﬁed.
2
The First Carlist War: Origins