


rural population was hostile to the cash economy, whilst recurrent Lib-
eral land reform in the Maestrazgo encroached upon the de facto rather
than de jure property rights in agriculture of ‘tenants’ who were really
common-law smallholders, or peasants. Nonetheless, these regions did
not enjoy the fueros of the Basques either, which meant that the popu-
lation here had perhaps the most to lose and the least to gain from the
war, as even Cristino urban centres in the region had to spend all their
economic gains defending themselves against the impoverished rural
population which joined the Carlist guerrillas. Thus, as Pedro Rújula,
Josep Fontana and Manuel Ardit have explained, this rural economic
stress fuelled such other factors as the local Carlist religious, and the lack
of sound administrative organisation and communication (caused by
adverse terrain), in turning the Maestrazgo Carlist.61 The Carlist insur-
gency gave political expression to recurring rural émeutes in Valencia
caused by a legacy of Spain’s harshest feudal regime.62 The Carlist effort
in the Maestrazgo was led from 1835 by Ramón Cabrera and went
through three incremental stages. During the ﬁrst stage, 1833–35, the
Carlist effort here was dispersed by the Cristinos and conﬁned to rural
guerrilla warfare. The second phase, 1836–37, saw the breakthrough as
Cabrera expanded the boundaries of the Carlist safe zone and turned it
into a military state. The third phase, 1838–39, in contrast to the stagna-
tion in the Carlist Basque country, saw the Maestrazgo reach its apogee
in terms of geography, military victories and recruitment. The August
1839 Peace Treaty in the north orphaned these achievements and sent
Cabrera into exile the following year, ending the First Carlist War.63
   A third Carlist safe zone operated in the Catalan interior adjacent to
the Pyrenees. Economic crisis again explains much of the rural sup-
port for Carlism here, but in contrast to the situation in the Basque
country, the nature of Catalan Carlism was not well understood by
Cristino Liberals at the time. For Espoz y Mina, Captain-General of the
Principality, his Catalan enemies were no social bandits but incorrigible
mountain folk, driven to violence from superstition and lack of civic
education.64 His fellow Liberal, Evaristo de San Miguel, held a vague but
kinder judgement: ‘agricultural improvements’ based on the true ful-
ﬁlment of the Constitution, so he thought, could win over the rural
masses from Carlism.65 It was not until the twentieth century that social
historians probed the economic complexities of Carlism in both the
Maestrazgo and Catalonia. Thus, the threat of Liberal property revolu-
tion in the Maestrazgo, and memories of how this, in the early 1820s,
had threatened common-law ‘ownership’, from 1833 pitted the country-
side against the towns.66 Studies of Catalonia, meanwhile, have shown
18   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


how economic reforms impoverished such declining economic centres
in the hinterland of Liberal Barcelona as Baix Camp and Berguedà, a sit-
uation which, in contrast to their counterparts in Castile and Andalucía,
persuaded many Catalan aristocrats to support Carlism.67 Thus, eco-
nomic factors explain some of the motivations for Carlism: a viable
rural economy in the Basque country, a traumatised economy in the
Maestrazgo and an impoverished rural economy in Catalonia. But the
economic factors cannot be simpliﬁed as a ‘rural–urban divide’, as even
in urban settings artisans threatened by recurrent Liberal abolition of the
guilds and redundant ofﬁceholders (cesantes) could be drawn to Carlism,
whilst, by contrast, villagers who had beneﬁted from the Liberal prop-
erty revolution would correspondingly turn Cristino;68 ﬂight either from
or to the countryside in many cases entrenched a rural (Carlist) ver-
sus urban (Cristino) divide, but as an effect rather than a cause of the
conﬂict. Moreover, as the 1832–33 palace revolution had driven Carlist
conspirators from the court and into the country, regional hierarchies
decided local popular political allegiance. The poorest areas of Spain,
which were in Extremadura and Andalucía, were lost causes for Don
Carlos. Carlist writers explained this by congratulating themselves on
how advanced, rather than backward, areas embraced the legitimate
cause.69 But the bald fact was that any nobles outside of the three heart-
lands pronouncing in favour of Don Carlos would have been banished
from Madrid and had their extensive lands and incomes in the south
seized. The northern nobility, by contrast, had either few or no lands
to lose.70 Economic factors thus explain the structural context, indeed
it would be strange if they did not, given that the Spanish state in 1833
collected in revenues barely more than half what it had at its imperial
peak in 1792.71 But they do not explain everything.
   Further explanation can be sought in the Carlists’ exploitation of
local military traditions, although recent research has shown this to be
more coercive in nature than voluntarist, as was previously assumed.
Both the Basque country and rural Catalonia had strong armed militia
traditions, the requetés originating in Navarra and the somatenes, respec-
tively. These militia, especially the Basque militia, which had employed
irregular resistance against the French during the periods 1793–95 and
1808–13 and against the Liberals during 1820–23, certainly possessed
a psychological ‘DNA’ of popular armed mobilisation. Carlist writers,
especially leftist neo-Carlists attracted to the ‘people’s war’ paradigm,
claimed these mobilisations were voluntary rather than coercive in
nature: ‘Don Carlos’s army was fundamentally popular, nourished by
volunteers . . . although ﬁnes were imposed on families who resisted
                                           Introduction, History and Sources   19