


streets of Cádiz in the name of the absolute king.24 And if fellow ofﬁ-
cers saw Riego’s men as deserters, so did the civilian population. In a
January 1820 letter to a fellow revolutionary, Riego admitted the lack of
popular support: ‘What guarantees could we give to anyone who joined
us? . . . What help can we expect from the pueblos? Everyone runs for the
hills as soon as they hear the sound of our drums.’25 What saved the
situation were the calculations of commanders elsewhere in Spain who
thought that their careers would be better served by a constitutional
regime. Thus, on 4 March, Ocaña’s garrison pronounced for Riego, and
the Liberal hero of 1812, Ballesteros, followed suit in Madrid, thereby
sealing the fate of absolutism. Crowds sacked the gaols of the Inquisition
and invaded the palace, and the King’s nerve ﬁnally broke on 7 March
1820 when he swore allegiance to the Constitution of 1812.26 A provi-
sional junta staffed by what Ferdinand called his ‘gaolbird’ Liberals came
into being. This junta was soon replaced by the Cortes, whilst those Lib-
eral politicians who had been exiled or imprisoned even claimed six
years’ worth of back pay in a bid to re-establish the continuity with
1814.27
   Even though the army had restored to Spain its ‘liberty’, a crisis
ensued as the resurgent constitutional authorities tried to subordinate
it to civil supremacy. Liberal newspapers noted that, whereas in 1820
the army had been the nation’s liberator, as recently as 1814 it had been
its gaoler.28 As a safeguard, the ‘people-in-arms’ principle now dictated
the creation of the National Militia, a reform which, under the 1810–14
Cortes, had barely left the drawing board. For the time being the mili-
tia was little more than a society for the local well-to-do, enlistment
into its ranks being conditional upon both a literacy test and the ability
to afford the uniform.29 The militia ordinances of 1820 were similar to
those of the later Carlist War, when the citizens’ force was reformed
more cautiously. Zaragoza, a provincial capital with a population of
36,000, was, in April 1820, ordered to create six companies of 144 men
each plus nine ofﬁcers:

     Uniform and turquoise pantaloons, white-metal buttons and black
     boots; ofﬁcers and sergeants longcoat with buttoned lapels, high-
     peaked cap marked with the sign of town and province. Duties to
     include patrols to maintain order, pursue and arrest deserters and
     wrongdoers, whilst militiamen will enjoy fuero militar when active
     in these duties and will thus be bound by army ordinances, and will
     be paid a daily wage of 5 reales for each soldier, 6 for each corporal
     and drummer, and 8 for each sergeant (without bread ration).30
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   29


   Only under duress did the Liberals seriously open its ranks to ple-
beians, and even then on the understanding that they would do the
bidding of their social superiors. From the outset the militia vexed the
regular army, which was set on extracting a reward for having liber-
ated the nation. Militiamen enjoyed the same immunity from civil
jurisdiction (fuero militar) as the army, the only vague and practically
meaningless condition for this privilege being ‘when on active duty’.
Thus, as during the Carlist War, militiamen and ofﬁcers shared similar
facilities enabling them to compete on matters of entitlement and hon-
our. The army reserved the power to force the militia to disband under
a state of siege, but this ‘nuclear option’ only displaced inter-service
rivalry, to the streets, cafes and the Cortes where the Jacobin deputy,
Romero Alpuente, repeatedly called for the army to be replaced by the
militia altogether.31 Radicals like Romero Alpuente were representing
the Radical Patriotic Societies and local militias which increasingly exer-
cised an extra-parliamentary ‘double regime’ in Liberal Spain. Romero
Alpuente owed his radicalism in part to his antimilitarism – the Liberals
saw soldiers as brutish mercenaries lacking in civic nationalism – and
in part to his passion to cut the tax burden, the beneﬁts of which, to
his mind at least, should be used to improve living standards. Many
more civilian Liberals, by contrast, assumed that Spain’s depleted post-
imperial coffers should fund the expansion of state power provided for
by the Constitution. The dissident sevillano utilitarian, José María Blanco
White, criticised this careerism, noting that only Spain’s minority classes
of students, literati, merchants and ofﬁceholders could gain from con-
stitutional rule, and his words were borne out by the empleomanía, or
unrestrained competition for the government posts, unleashed by the
Triennium.32 Whilst many Liberals sincerely believed that expanded
government would eventually reverse Spain’s social crisis, empleomanía,
as in other Hispanic polities, should really be understood as the lad-
der undistinguished place-seekers climbed in order to achieve personal
honour.33
   The regime had to recruit constitutional administrators on a dimin-
ishing budget: the populist suspension of consumption taxes during
the Riego rising had robbed the government of 88 per cent of its pro-
jected revenue for the ﬁrst half of 1820.34 Forced to make economies, the
government ordered the disbandment of Riego’s revolutionary ‘Army
of Andalucía’.35 But Riego’s army resisted dissolution, and forged a
personality cult around its leader. Born in 1784 in Asturias into a typ-
ically minor noble background, Riego was the epitome of the Spanish
careerist ofﬁcer bent on mastering the vicissitudes of politics to advance
30   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40