


the Church, defected to the Carlist cause.53 In fact, the fueros grew in
importance only when military victory seemed impossible in the wake
of the failed Royal Expedition, and as Carlist peace feelers voiced a grow-
ing willingness to abandon Don Carlos who, since 1834, had been the
fueros’ champion.
   In sum, the fueros do not by themselves explain the prevalence of
Basque Carlism; yet Basque Carlism is also impossible to understand
without them, not least because their most outspoken defenders were
to be found in Carlist ranks and their most outspoken critics amongst
the Cristino Liberals. This dynamic was especially intense in the Basque
country itself, which entered the war bitterly divided. The port-cities
of Bilbao (Vizcaya) and especially San Sebastián (Guipúzcoa) welcomed
their Cristino garrisons. This was because the Cristino-Liberal policy of
moving the customs frontier from the River Ebro to the actual Spanish
frontier in the Pyrenees promised to achieve by war what frustrated com-
mercial elites had failed to achieve at the foral level for decades.54 Even
in the rural areas satisﬁed with their fueros, local juntas and deputa-
tions were split between supporters of Cristinos and Carlists in 1833.
Cristinos were sidelined and then expelled, but the powers of the fueros
themselves were increasingly curtailed by the Carlist Royal Government
in the name of the war effort. These actions made the government
unpopular, not least because they were frequently carried out by non-
Basque Carlists, ‘Castilian’ refugees from Cristino areas of control whom
Basques suspected of meaning to harm local interests.
   Such Basque versus Castilian friction within Carlism, combined with
the wider Cristino versus Carlist struggle, led some Basque nation-
alists to originate their cause in 1830s Carlism, stressing inchoate
wartime demands for Navarrese independence and the ancient fueros
as a blueprint for modern autonomy. The most vociferous nineteenth-
century example was the French Basque Augustin Chaho, for whom the
First Carlist War was a war between the Basque country and Castile.55
But such teleological nationalism deﬁes scrutiny. The late nineteenth-
century founder of Basque nationalism may have come from Carlist
ancestry, but Sabino Arana rejected Carlism because it sacriﬁced Basque
interests to Spanish dynastic politics.56 However, the link persisted in
the minds of several Basque nationalists. In 1935 Bernardo Estornés
Lasa claimed Carlism’s ﬁrst warlord ‘wanted to proclaim Basque inde-
pendence’, and in more recent years the vandalism inﬂicted upon
the ‘English cemetery’ at San Sebastián by the armed Basque sepa-
ratist organisation, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), shows a link between
memory and contemporary militancy.57
16   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   In fact Francoism manoeuvred the Carlists – who had already merged
with National and Traditionalist Catholics in 1931 to become the Tradi-
tionalist Communion – into a right-wing coalition of virulent Spanish
unitary nationalism and anti-separatism, the very antithesis of Basque
independence. Whereas Franco rewarded his allied provinces of Navarra
and Alava with limited autonomy, he stripped the Republican provinces
of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa of theirs. Franco-era Traditionalists lauded
their 1830s Basque forefathers and their fueros as traditionalist models
not for Euzkadi, but for Spain as a whole. Although some complained at
how the ‘ungrateful’ Francoist regime was pushing the Basque language
and fueros into virtual extinction, most stressed their national region-
alism as Spaniards above all else, rejecting regional nationalism.58 That
said, even though Basque Carlists during the First Carlist War were not
ﬁghting for the independence of their homeland in the modern sense,
they certainly formed a caucus, not just against the Cristinos but also
against the non-Basque Carlists (the ‘Castilians’). This Basque–Carlist
cohesiveness was reinforced by priests who were always local as they
had to hear confessions in Euskera. Cloistered clergy, meanwhile, had
comparatively little presence in the Basque country, and those institu-
tions which did exist were disproportionately of the humbler Franciscan
orders; this explains the alliance of the vast majority of Basque religious
with Carlism.59 Thus, even though Carlism was not Basque proto-
nationalism, the Basque Carlists certainly mustered enough identity –
in particular, popular Catholic piety – to separate themselves culturally
and psychologically from the rest of Spain. Evidence of this is the persis-
tent xenophobic term guiri coined by Basque Carlists, an abbreviation
of the Euskera guiristino, or Spanish Cristino name of their enemy, a
term which survived the conﬂict to describe the centralising paramil-
itary police force, the Guardia Civil and, in the twentieth century, even
foreign tourists.
   But the Basque Carlists represented just one part (albeit the biggest
part) of the insurrection. Carlism in the 1830s was Janus-faced. Whereas
in the Basque country Carlism defended a still-viable socially conserva-
tive, stable rural society from the onslaught of liberalism, in the eastern
areas of rural Aragón, Valencia and Catalonia it was a protest vehicle
for peasants whose livelihoods were already being eroded by capital-
ism in nearby urban centres and by the Liberal property revolution.60
These socio-economic issues were the reasons why a second ‘safe zone’
for Carlism was forged in Lower Aragón and adjoining inland areas of
Valencia and the northern extremities of historic Murcia (an area known
as the Maestrazgo). The character of the war was different here. The
                                           Introduction, History and Sources   17