


one motivated vindictively and the other ethically; that is to say, either
delation or whistle-blowing. These motives had an intimately violent
dimension that characterised the local experience of civil war. In sum,
the questionable veracity of sources is not the central issue. There was
enough truth in the sources as a whole to unleash violence and polarisa-
tion, plunging Spain into seven long years of civil war. The Carlists were
always the smaller side in this chaos, which means that there is greater
scope to study the impact of the war in Cristino areas of control. Yet the
frequently asymmetrical nature of expeditions, banditry, revolution and
conspiracy undermined Cristino control and gave the war an enduring
dynamic of insecurity. As most of this book studies the insecure Cristino
zone rather than the Carlist heartlands, it is helpful to set the context
by introducing the debates and dimensions of early Carlism.

Early Carlism

Carlism’s ﬁrst ‘safe zone’ was in the Basque country. The Basque coun-
try comprises the three Basque lordships – later provinces – proper,
Alava, Guipúzcoa and Vizcaya, and the ancient autonomous Kingdom
of Navarra. The early attempts of the Viceroy of Navarra to recruit vil-
lagers into Cristino ranks failed miserably, even when service wages were
offered of double, then treble, what the Carlist insurgents promised.42
Coverdale summarised four factors as to why this was so: (1) traditional
society was still economically viable for most of population, hence liber-
alism was seen a threat; (2) natural leadership strata (clergy, landowners)
lived cheek by jowl with peasants and supported the Carlist cause;
(3) the terrain was sufﬁciently abrupt and broken to prevent the use
of cavalry and to facilitate small bands to escape (to change their shirts
and ﬁght another day), whilst the landscape was densely populated
enough to allow regular food and supplies; and (4) the appearance of
the extremely gifted guerrilla leader, Tomás de Zumalacárregui. Other
parts of Spain may have had one, or some of these factors, but not
all four.43 (In the Aragonese Maestrazgo a comparable situation would
pertain only from 1836.44 ) The Basque provinces, like Catalonia, also
had a long-standing tradition of irregular military service (in the Basque
country recruits were called requetés and in Catalonia somatenes). The
Basque Carlist acceptance of war and armed struggle as a legitimate
means to seize power gave the cause its most enduring characteristic,
resurfacing 100 years later in preparation for the Spanish Civil War as
‘a quintessential part of the Carlist way of life’.45 Contemporary writers
noted the independent, agile and hard-drinking (by Spanish standards)
14   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Basque character, believing this to be the result of centuries of autonomy
and hardy geography.46 Recent victories against the French taught
the Basques to feel naturally superior in terms of military prowess.47
Writers of Basque culture have stressed the provinces’ historical pre-
eminence (the three lordships – señoríos – and the Kingdom of Navarra
matched other Spanish kingdoms in longevity). ‘False’ religions had
never penetrated the Basque country, and during the sixteenth cen-
tury the kingdom was rewarded accordingly with the grant of noble
status to all indigenous Basques, which meant that nobility became far
less signiﬁcant as a factor in social differentiation than in the rest of
Spain. This ancient history gave the Basques the conﬁdence to nego-
tiate their Spanishness on their own terms, via their fueros, language,
Catholic piety and the importance of the self-contained homestead – or
caserío (which was handed down in its entirety to a single male heir) –
in family and social relations.48
   The Basque fueros have played a major role in debates about early
Carlism. Marxist historians objectiﬁed the fueros and the local elites
they empowered as a doomed defence of pre-capitalist socio-economic
norms. The popular Catholicism which distinguished pre-capitalist
Basque society, and which was the cause and motive for popular
Carlism, was merged by beneﬁciaries of the fueros into the self-interested
war cry of ‘religion and fueros’, tying their debatable merits to the unim-
peachable merits of religion.49 But it would be superﬁcial to explain
Basque Carlism as a war in defence of the fueros. Whereas Carlist pro-
paganda defended the fueros, it did so in the defensive tone of the
‘ancient constitution’ violated by the pre-war police state (which in
the Basque country intensiﬁed its activities after 1830 whilst relenting
elsewhere in Spain), and by the martial law of Cristino ‘pashas’ once
the war had started.50 In fact early Basque Carlists did not place foral
interests foremost. The Carlists’ second-in-command claimed that the
Basque insurgents of 1833 saw the fueros as secondary to the legitimate
royal succession, and his subaltern, Wilhelm von Rahden, whose for-
eignness made him disinterested, agreed.51 Even though the October
1833 Carlist insurgency in Alava mentioned the fueros, its leader, Valen-
tín Verástegui, had a vested family interest. But the proclamations of
the insurgent king, Don Carlos, were slower to invoke them: not until
September 1834 did he make an explicitly foralist proclamation.52 The
Pretender’s foralism was not proactive but purely in reaction to the fact
that the rest of Spain (which had long been stripped of its fueros) had
failed to rally to his cause. He was forced to rely on the fueros because
no other wing of the Fernandine state, neither the army nor (mostly)
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   15