


against them. Other Carlist sympathisers who escaped the attention of
the Cristino military, were nonetheless driven to insurrection by eco-
nomic insecurity.57 Despite the government purge, it was clear that the
Carlist faction could not be brought to heel. Rather, the purge forced
the Carlists to contest the Cristino succession from the country rather
than the court. Staring into the abyss, the now uniformly Cristino court
faction tried for a ﬁnal time to persuade Don Carlos to renounce his
claim, a courtier asking him plainly: ‘Do you want a civil war?’58 Don
Carlos replied that it was the Cristino faction which wanted war by
illegitimately revoking his God-given duty to rule. Don Carlos’s hand
was then forced when one of the conspiracies (centred on the Bishop
of León) turned into an abortive rising launched in the prince’s name.
Don Carlos ﬂed to Portugal, where he raised his standard amidst friendly
miguelistas. Exasperated by the news that Carlos would not recognise
the Isabeline succession, the dying King ordered him exiled to Italy.
Carlos prevaricated and reopened the miguelista-agraviado conspiratorial
network which had been dormant since 1827, whilst at the same time
making sure he did not risk re-entering Spain until Fernando was dead
and enough armed Carlist support was forthcoming.59 For his part, the
bishop had his assets seized and was placed in solitary conﬁnement, but
escaped to join his King in Portugal after Ferdinand’s death.
   The Pretender’s ﬂight galvanised rather than stymied Carlist conspir-
acies. Arms were forged in convents and monasteries, illicit deliveries
took place between Portuguese miguelistas and Carlists in northern
Spain, whilst even a prospective ‘pan-legitimist’ uprising planned to
link Marseilles and southern France with northern Spain on the occa-
sion of Ferdinand’s death. Whilst Llauder purged Carlists from the army,
Prime Minister Cea Bermúdez, by contrast, pursued a juste milieu policy,
hoping, like any enlightened technocrat, that the ‘nonsense’ of Carlist
versus Liberal violence would cancel itself out.60 Whilst Llauder’s mil-
itary dictatorship was allowed to run its course, Cea hoped that his
crash reforms in the way the state was organised would suffocate the
warring factions ‘from above’. Cea’s civilian absolutism thus rivalled
the regional dictatorships of the Cristino generals. The February and
November 1833 municipal reforms were carried out by force, reforming
town halls to ensure that they would be under the sway neither of tax-
payers as during the Triennium, nor of local Royalist (Carlist) hierarchies
as during the Ominous Decade. Henceforth, town halls would represent
only ‘respectable’ local interests. (The latter were to be elected only on a
highly restrictive franchise: masters of guilds and members of other cor-
porations became local electors along with an equal number of those
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 47


who paid the highest rates of taxation.61 ) Cea’s moderate reformism
might have worked a decade earlier, but now it was largely irrelevant.
Carlists and Liberals were locked into a ﬁght to the death which was
not just played out on the streets but also at the highest levels of the
state. For Carlists, Cea was a servant of usurpation, and the thin end of
the wedge for godless revolution, and for Liberals, his reforms – and the
associated Royal Statute (see below) – did not go far enough. When Cea,
on 4 November 1833, proclaimed that ‘the principles of government
observed by the late Ferdinand VII will never be changed’, he showed
his fundamental misunderstanding of both sides.62 This popular ten-
sion was described in an 1833 literary journal by the young Romantic
and pessimist, Mariano José de Larra: