


was accompanied by the renewal of the 1811 Cortes decree which abol-
ished feudal jurisdiction in the countryside, in theory obliging manorial
lords to provide legal proofs of landownership and the right to receive
rents from villagers, these crucial conditions were blocked by royal veto,
whilst only a minority of Cortes deputies like Romero Alpuente and
Alvaro Flórez Estrada pressed the matter, seeing reparto as a way of mak-
ing the countryside constitutionalist instead of royalist. When the royal
veto was ﬁnally overcome in May 1823, this was done merely as a for-
lorn attempt to win over the countryside from royalism. The Liberals’
failure to enlist much support beyond the urban clubs and militia does
not mean that the rural masses were apolitical. Attempts by the Liberal
bourgeoisie to advance capitalism were met by a recognisably modern
defence of traditional work practices. Alcoy was the textile capital of
the old Kingdom of Valencia, employing some 40,000 rural outwork-
ers. Thanks to the recent abolition of guilds, textile entrepreneurs were
able to introduce self-acting lathes (selfactinas) as means of employing
fewer workers more productively. The workers’ response was decisive:
some 1,200 of them overwhelmed the local militia, helped themselves to
arms and seized control of the town for four days whilst they painstak-
ingly dismantled all the selfactinas.46 Although the Argüellian Liberals
in the Cortes condemned these attacks on the sacred right of prop-
erty, brushing aside Romero Alpuente’s defence of the workers, similar
episodes happened in centres of Catalan proto-industry amidst the
French invasion of 1823.47
   As rural Spain moved from indifference to outright hostility to con-
stitutional rule, it was clear that it was royalism rather than liberalism
which enjoyed the initiative. This is a matter which divides historians.
Leftist historians hold that the 1820–23 revolution failed because it was
betrayed by its own leaders, the wealthy landowners and bourgeoisie
having hijacked the democratisation process inherent in the Constitu-
tion of Cádiz and steered the ship of state back towards absolutism.48
Rightist historians hold that if the masses remained royalist in 1820,
they were even more fervently so in 1823, as the King abandoned all
remaining pretences of accepting the revolution.49 Since the 1990s other
writers have tried to rescue Spanish history from its ideological parti-
sanship by offering regional, comparative and international studies of
the Triennium in a bid to Europeanise Spain.50 The exaltados certainly
went to great lengths in their attempts to embed the revolution in the
masses. Yet most Liberals, even radical ones, shared a superior disdain
for common Spaniards; and time and again they failed to comprehend
the degree to which they were hated in return. Romero Alpuente had
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   33


co-founded the Radical Comuneros Society, and dominated the impor-
tant 1822 Landaburiana Patriotic Society. But even though both of these
clubs presided over sophisticated and virtually democratic networks
of participation and reward for the urban popular classes, they were
late in addressing the social crisis, and their leadership failed to rally
to match the counter-revolution of 1823.51 Royalist resistance to Lib-
eral rule in the countryside, by contrast, had been coterminous with
the Liberal revolution itself. There were 122 local revolts against Lib-
eral rule between 1820 and 1823.52 Royalist resistance was explained
by Spain’s geographical, social and economic diversity. As would be
seen during the Carlist War, the heartlands of anti-Liberal revolt were
to be found in the countryside rather than the towns, and, broadly,
in increasing proportion the further north and north-east the consti-
tutional authorities tried to impose their regime. The cradle of royalist
resistance was in upland Navarra and the villages and small towns of
the neighbouring Basque provinces, although resistance to the Liberals
also spread to inland Catalonia, Aragón, Galicia and Old Castile. By the
summer of 1823 even Andalucía, New Castile, Extremadura, Murcia
and the Valencian-Catalan coastline – all areas where commercial and
landowning oligarchies had vested interests in making liberalism work –
witnessed violent popular royalism following close on the heels of the
invading French army.
   By the summer of 1822 formal civil war raged in Spain between Lib-
erals and royalists. This ﬁrst modern civil war in Spanish history was
a geographical dress rehearsal for the Carlist War.53 Until the summer
of 1822 moderado-dominated governments had shown restraint towards
royalism in the countryside, releasing scarce monies to fund public
works and buy foodstuffs in the provinces, understanding that hard-
ship was driving peasants affected by necessary Liberal reforms into the
arms of rebellious priests and royalist guerrillas.54 Meanwhile since the
Carvajal affair the King had seemed safely under the Liberals’ thumb,
out of reach of the royalists acting in his name. King Ferdinand was an
inviolable prisoner of the Constitution, relegated like Louis XVI before
him to saying all the right things in public whilst conﬁning his real
thoughts to diplomatic correspondence. Don Carlos and his restive cler-
ical faction, meanwhile, would not move openly against his brother’s
ofﬁcial display of constitutional monarchy. But on 7 July 1822 a royalist
coup attempt in the heart of Madrid transformed the situation. The
Royal Guard rising (which had been ﬁnanced by the French embassy)
was quashed, the defeated royalists taking to the hills to wage guer-
rilla war on a government which, after July, was in the hands of the
34   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40