


Radical Left, or ﬂeeing to France whence many would return the follow-
ing year under French arms.55 The judicial execution of General Elío,
Captain-General of Valencia, who had captained the absolutist coup in
May 1814 and hanged Vidal in 1819, united the new government in a
pact of blood whilst serving notice on those army ofﬁcers who lacked
ideological commitment to exaltismo that it was time to quit.56 Several
ofﬁcers, seeing that the national and international winds were turning
against the revolution, either followed the royalists into exile or defected
to the rebel regency which was proclaimed in Ferdinand’s name at La
Seo de Urgel in August 1822. In turn the Radical regime installed Riego’s
men in civilian governorships, and set about imposing a military dic-
tatorship which foreshadowed the most radical episodes of the Carlist
War a generation later. Although Romero Alpuente’s Comuneros were
far-sighted enough to use this crisis to parcel out some marginal lands
in the antediluvian south, most exaltados did not think beyond using
state terror against royalist villagers.57 The government of Riego’s right-
hand man, Evaristo San Miguel, imposed crippling cash ﬁnes on villages
which failed to resist royalist bands, or even simply failed to show ‘due
respect towards constitutional forces’.58 At the local level, priests and
absolutists were ﬁned, imprisoned, expelled, even killed. Espoz y Mina,
whom the revolution had drawn from his French exile, led a reign of ter-
ror against royalist villagers in the north, destroying the Catalan town
of Castellfullit.59
   If the constitutional army had managed, by the end of 1822, to
crush royalist bands, whether it would stand up to Congress Europe was
another matter. In October 1822, the Great Powers met at Verona to dis-
cuss intervention against Jacobinism in Spain. In the same month the
San Miguel administration formally militarised Liberal society by impos-
ing martial law on the National Militia and calling up some 67,000
men into the army.60 For a generation afterwards the men of 1812
remembered these actions as proof that the exaltados were the ‘real
absolutists’.61 But foreign diplomatic pressure only increased in response
to these measures, which emboldened the timid King to sabotage the
work of his Radical ministers. In February 1823 Ferdinand, seeing that
San Miguel had split the exaltados, exercised one of his remaining pre-
rogatives by dismissing him, surviving the inevitable mob invading the
palace shouting ‘Death to the king!’62 The Radicals retaliated by derogat-
ing the King’s remaining powers, pending the ‘recovery of his health’.
Meanwhile, the Congress of Verona, brushing aside Britain’s absten-
tion, ﬁnally invaded. Louis XVIII was eager both to lance a new boil
of Jacobinism and to revive French prestige in Europe. He sent some
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   35


into Spain 56,000 French troops, accompanied by some 35,000 Spanish
royalists, with the mission to restore Ferdinand to full powers.63 The
invasion of the ‘One Hundred Thousand Sons of St. Louis’ was astound-
ingly successful: unlike Napoleon’s invasion in 1808, the French met
virtually no popular resistance. The networks of Spanish elites who had
mobilised the people in 1808 could not (or would not) do the same
in 1823. The French invasion even faced little sustained resistance by
either the army or the militia of the Liberal state. Had the army lead-
ership united against the invasion, such was the suffering of their men
that they would likely have turned on their ofﬁcers. The National Militia
either hid its guns, deserted or went openly royalist. Even the artillery
corps, a socially mobile and exclusive part of the army noted for its
liberalism, preferred to spike its guns rather than ﬁre on the French.64
The breach caused by factionalism, an unfair and political promotion
system, and the inability of the constitutional regime to pay or even
clothe its soldiers, had thus rendered the army unﬁt to face a profes-
sional invasion force in 1823 – all this despite the fact that some 88 per
cent of taxes received by the Treasury in February 1822 went to fund
the military.65 By the end of August Cádiz was once again under French
siege, and only some three weeks later this cradle of the Constitution
fell, the Liberals releasing Ferdinand from captivity in the vain hope
that the French might prevail upon him to issue an amnesty.
3
The First Carlist War: Context