


to Charles Henningsen, a British volunteer in Don Carlos’s army who
later fought for the Confederacy, Spanish civil wars were essentially a
conﬂict between Liberal towns and royalist countryside, an observa-
tion shared a century later by the Hispanist, Gerald Brenan, for whom
‘Carlism (was) nothing else than the hostility of a sturdy race of moun-
taineers and farmers to industrial life.’9 In fact, as we shall see, the
urban versus rural divide was at least as much an effect as a cause of
the Carlist War (on account of the displacement of refugees and com-
batants). But certainly, historians have seen the land as the root of
popular fanaticism. Evaristo San Miguel, exiled in 1823 and returned
to Liberal politics during the 1830s civil war, thought that the spread
of Carlism to the eastern Spain could be arrested by equitable agricul-
tural reforms.10 Twentieth-century historians interpreted the endurance
of rural Carlism, not just during the 1830s war but also in a century
of subsequent conﬂagrations, as evidence that Spanish revolutionaries,
unlike their French counterparts, failed to win over popular support.11
   Some 24,000 Liberal families ﬂed Spain, and military tribunals pro-
cessed those who remained. By the time of their dissolution in August
1825, the tribunals had dealt with some 1,094 individuals, rather more
than half of these being charged with political crimes. Whilst around
three-quarters were condemned to punishments of varying severity,
including death (132), the rest were absolved.12 Former constitucional-
istas were condemned to banishment of a minimum of ﬁve leagues
from Madrid.13 The commercial elites of Málaga recorded the repression
unfolding around them:


     5 September 1823: Málaga has been occupied by French and absolutist
     troops who have decreed the establishment of the old system. The
     municipal staff have ﬂed, and the Constitution tablet has been
     smashed to pieces. Ofﬁcial celebrations have been proclaimed, and
     the pre-1820 municipal system reintroduced.
     27 October 1823: Orders have been issued to dismiss all teachers guilty
     of having taught the Constitution, whilst all National Militia arms
     have to be handed in within twenty-four hours.

     18 July 1824: 3 supporters of the Constitution have been executed for
     no other crime than having been found with several proclamations
     against the government.

     22 July 1824: General O’Lawlor has made important arrests of well-
     known malagueño Liberals.
                                            The First Carlist War: Context 39


   15 September 1824: 3 men have been sentenced to death and shot in
   Málaga: Lorenzo González (known as el Pato), Mateo de la Cruz and
   Antonio González; all for the ‘atrocious crime of having destroyed
   the royal tablet’ in the township of Benahavis.14

But even these draconian steps did not satisfy the Carlists. Despite
the execution of some high-proﬁle constitutionalists, and the venge-
ful imprisonment and internal exile of thousands who had not ﬂed,
political, ﬁnancial and diplomatic expediency persuaded Ferdinand to
relent. Although laws were passed making execution the penalty for
acts of ‘rebellion’ – laws which would be used by both sides in the
civil war after Ferdinand’s death – these could be implemented as much
against the Carlists as against the Liberals.15 Moreover, this crackdown
was to be enforced not by the Inquisition, as in 1814, but by Spain’s
ﬁrst centrally organised police force, which the Carlists condemned as
the ‘Frenchiﬁed’ takeover of Spain’s traditional character and an outra-
geous end for the Church’s temporal power, which was now reduced
to watered-down ‘faith councils’ (juntas de la fé).16 All these measures
conﬁrmed the worst fears of the royalists who were now referred to as
the ultras, apostólicos and Carlists. A token political amnesty as early
as 1824 provoked a royalist reaction in the abortive ‘Capapé affair’,
followed a year later by a more serious rising at Brihuega. When, in
1826, Ferdinand agreed to a more substantial amnesty aimed at former
moderados, royalist manifestoes denounced the King as a coward and a
disaster as ruler.17
   As with the Liberal ofﬁcers of 1814, part of this invective was
explained by frustrated careers. Reserve armies of royalist ‘heroes’ sought
ofﬁce and promotion but Ferdinand’s second Restoration found the state
coffers even emptier than in 1814. Once again, the state was virtually
bankrupt. Ferdinand’s default on the debts incurred under the Consti-
tution brought only temporary relief as this action barred Spain from
lucrative British debt markets. Ferdinand’s technocratic Finance Min-
ister, Luis López Ballesteros, managed to source new loans from Paris
and Amsterdam, but only under onerous conditions.18 Spanish America
remained free. Even though penny-packets of troops from Cuba and
San Juan de Ulúa continued to harass Mexico as late as 1829, any last
hopes for restoring metropolitan rule to the American mainland were
ended by the defeat of the last great imperial army at the Battle of
Ayacucho (Peru) in 1824. Moreover, even though Ferdinand ruthlessly
dispossessed Liberal ofﬁcers of their commissions, he did not replace
them with royalists. Rather, the regime maintained a French garrison
40   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40