




The defeat of what historians call the Liberal Triennium strengthened
Spanish royalism, although not in the way that Don Carlos’s faction
demanded. In order to trace how the ‘Carlist’ movement campaigned
not just against the vanquished revolutionaries, but also against the
Ferdinand’s restored absolutism, we must ﬁrst explain how the social cri-
sis undid constitutionalism and bequeathed the conditions for renewed
civil war. The reasons for the constitutional collapse are threefold. The
regime had made itself unpopular with its repeated drive for taxes, con-
scription and the liberal property revolution, which, owing to both elite
disdain for the character and capabilities of the masses and the constant
economic crisis, had generally beneﬁted elite interests at the expense of
commoners. Thus, the Constitution was discredited, and the counter-
revolution vengefully triumphant. A royalist ofﬁcer in Córdoba pro-
claimed: ‘the whole nation has been subverted by secret societies which
have foisted upon us the foul Constitution of 1812, which, in the three
years of its existence, has produced evils which will take three cen-
turies to resolve’.1 This was good propaganda, but the terror royalists
unleashed against local Liberals was even more impressive.2 The other
reasons lay with the Spanish army, where divisions and political unrelia-
bility stretched from top to bottom. Whereas some ofﬁcers (like Manuel
Llauder) had remained royalist throughout the Triennium, many more
(like Vicente Quesada) opportunistically defected to royalism during
1822–23. As the Liberal poet, Manuel José Quintana, who had written
that ‘kings are for the people, not people for the kings’, would soon
note from the cruelty of his internal exile, these latter men vainly hoped
that by changing sides they might retain the careers and honours they
had obtained under the Constitution.3 Other ofﬁcers thought that more

                                   36
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 37


might be gained by defending the revolution. General Zorraquín, the
international revolutionary, died in a skirmish with French troops near
Vic on 26 May 1823.4 The tragically miscast hero of the revolution,
Rafael del Riego, was captured and executed, although not before he
became a left-wing martyr in the process. Corralled by the moderados,
Riego had returned to Madrid in August 1822 as exaltado President
of the Cortes. Having lacked the time and means to gain the respect
of his fellow ofﬁcers, Riego could not but divide army opinion, and
ended up being more admired by civilian Radicals than anyone else.
Other army Liberals played a more ruthless game. Espoz was involved
in skirmishes enough to save his honour, and then led his men into
French captivity, complaining without irony that although the Consti-
tution was great, it was detested by the Spanish people.5 A refugee in
Plymouth, Espoz became a Garibaldesque international celebrity avant
la lettre, local crowds ﬂocking to his public appearances and obliging
the jaded veteran to travel incognito to London; Riego, by contrast, was
publicly garrotted.6 During the decade of reaction that was to follow,
Espoz in exile would reinvent himself as a Radical ‘Great Dictator’, mix-
ing Benthamite with Bonapartist principles, and maintaining an iron
grip on the Spanish Liberals in ﬁrst Britain and then France.7
   But the constitutional collapse of 1823 did not produce the ascen-
dancy of the royalist faction surrounding Don Carlos. It had been
vanquished by Espoz, and remaining royalists who rallied in 1823
necessarily fought as auxiliaries to the French and thus lacked the
independent gravity to sway Ferdinand. What the ‘Carlists’ wanted
(the term ﬁrst appears in ofﬁcial correspondence in 1824) was not the
sort of modern absolute police state which Ferdinand favoured and
which had been common throughout Metternich’s Europe since 1815,
but a full-blooded reactionary policy that would restore the privileged
positions of the Church and nobility, decentralise legislative and juris-
dictional powers, and relegate the monarchy to a medieval coordinating
role. In other words, the Carlists wanted to revise not just the recent
Liberal revolution but the entire eighteenth-century legacy of enlight-
ened absolutism.8 These hopes were dashed during what was called the
‘Ominous Decade’ of 1823–33. The Carlist conception of society was
organic, and in the Basque provinces and Navarra in particular it spoke
out in defence of local traditions and privileges and against the cen-
tralising impulses of Madrid. The strongly Catholic, conservative and
economically stable countryside of upland Navarra made this the nat-
ural refuge for Carlist insurrection. Even so, Carlism during the 1830s
would spread to rural areas outside of its northern heartland. According
38    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40