


enlightened absolutist reforms into the modern realm of national
sovereignty, constitutional monarchy and individual (rather than cor-
porate) rights of property, the Right was divided in two ways. The
absolutist wing, personiﬁed in Ferdinand VII, understood ‘absolutism’
to rest on purely in the powers of the king. The traditionalist, or legit-
imist, wing of the Right, however, wanted to strip the monarch of all the
Bourbon reforms which, since the eighteenth century, had so enhanced
his power, passing onto the Church, nobility and other corporate bod-
ies the ‘absolute’ right to enjoy their traditional privileges.43 In the rural
Basque provinces and especially Navarra, where the fueros were resilient,
the Church popular and arms never more than a few yards away, this
Carlist current could raise an insurrection.44
   Luckily for Ferdinand’s regime, the failure of the Aggrieved meant
that the Carlists, for the time being, were a spent force. Don Carlos
remained loyal in deed if not in conscience.45 Portuguese miguelistas
tried to circulate proclamations aimed at reigniting a fraternal rising
in Spain, but postmasters in Badajoz intercepted these with apparent
ease.46 For the Liberals in exile, however, the failure of the Aggrieved
transformed their invasion schemes from spontaneous ‘heroic gestures’
into properly organised affairs.47 But the Fernandine regime also organ-
ised its repression, at both home and abroad. When in 1828 some
Burgos printers produced the inﬂammatory ‘Tears of Mother Spain’,
a thesis which condemned the entire history of Bourbon absolutism,
and demanded that the ‘deaf king’ reconvene the Cortes (‘for Spaniards
saved the nation on the 2 May 1808’), the government response was
ruthless. The writer and his printers were all gaoled, although not before
several copies of the thesis had circulated.48 Abroad, the Spanish gov-
ernment exploited exiles’ penury to inﬁltrate their networks. Romero
Alpuente was so short of cash that he wittingly maintained a spy for the
Spanish regime as his manservant and tried in vain to extract a subsidy
from Prime Minister Wellington, a man whom, in a previous incarna-
tion, he had excoriated.49 In July 1829, Spain persuaded the Wellington
administration to scrap the exiles’ subsidy.50 This was the nadir of Lib-
eral fortunes. But in 1830, the international situation changed in the
exiles’ favour and against the Carlists. In Britain a Whig ministry came
to power and boosted the long-standing links its Radical wing had cul-
tivated with Spanish Liberal exiles.51 More importantly, in France, the
Orleanists came to power in the Revolution of 1830.
   The centre of Spanish Liberal operations thus shifted to France,
where the revolution of July 1830 initially portended better prospects
of success. In October, Espoz sent one invasion across the Pyrenees in
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 45


coordination with a 400-strong invasion of assorted émigrés and adven-
turers led by the veteran of the lost American wars, General Jerónimo
Valdés, who had resisted coming under Espoz’s direct command. Espoz’s
propaganda appealed to Spaniards to ‘forget the past’, a shrewd choice
of words which might relate either to absolutism or to the disastrous
effects of Liberal rule during the Triennium. But they were defeated by
a 7,000-strong government force under General Llauder. Valdés’ force
was defeated at Vera, and only the swift intervention of Espoz extri-
cated the survivors and brought them back across the frontier.52 Despite
Espoz’s show of contrition, the civilian population did not rally to the
Liberal invasion, and it was small consolation that the Carlists failed
to answer with a rising of their own. But the Carlists were not demor-
alised. Don Carlos was still the heir to the throne and victorious General
Llauder accordingly ingratiated himself with the heir apparent.53 But
the changed international context belied Carlist conﬁdence. Although
Madrid got Paris to seal the border to Spanish émigrés, the Liberal French
regime received Spanish diplomatic recognition in return.54 Moreover,
the Whig administration in Britain, Belgian revolution, Polish rising
and the resilient pedrista side in the Portuguese civil war, combined
with the French Revolution, all had the hallmarks of an emerging
‘Liberal international’ which might sway Spanish affairs. In November
1831, an international force of idealists, led by the Spanish Liberals
Torrijos and Manzanares, invaded southern Spain in a Mazzinian-style
gesture of ‘spontaneous revolution’.55 This attempt also failed, but in
circumstances which made martyrs out of the invaders.
   Despite – or perhaps because of – the changed international scene,
Carlist conspiracies mounted during 1832–33. As Ferdinand’s health
deteriorated, a series of court manoeuvres contrived to put the crown
beyond Don Carlos’s reach. This scenario was caused by the ‘La Granja
affair’ of 1832, a palace revolution which conﬁrmed that María Cristina
would succeed King Ferdinand as regent until their daughter, Princess
Isabella, came of age. Thus, Don Carlos was excluded from what he saw
as his God-given duty to succeed. With the moribund King handing
over the running of the monarchy to his reformist wife, a crackdown on
Carlists ensued. The Royalist Volunteers were opened up to recruits of
non-royalist backgrounds and state power centralised over them. A tech-
nocratic Ministry of Development (an Interior Ministry by another
name) was created with wide-ranging powers against regional Carlists,
and this was reinforced by the 1833 territorial reorganisation of Spain
into 49 similarly sized provinces.56 Manuel Llauder, who so recently
curried favour with Carlists, now established a military dictatorship
46   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40