

  In our vulgar language we are experiencing phrases which have come
  of age and are being spread throughout a whole nation. In political
  vocabulary especially it takes only one word to fall from the lips of
  an orator in his small circle, and a great number of people, anxious
  for words, pick it up, spread it by word of mouth, and with the speed
  of an electric bolt a larger number of living machines repeat and con-
  secrate it, most times without understanding it [Larra’s emphasis], and
  always failing to calculate that it sometimes only takes one word to
  raise a mob, inﬂame passions, and so cause a revolution.63

Meanwhile, Cea’s purging of political factionalism in the army reduced
this force by the time of Ferdinand’s death to the toothless size of
45,000 men. This was certainly too small for a military coup to seize
the state, which was his intention: but it was also too small to crush
the Carlist insurgency that grew in the north upon word of the King’s
death. By 1837, the Cristino army would grow to over 200,000 effec-
tives; but the early months of the civil war would prove the error in
Cea’s strategy.64
4
The Basque Phase, 1833–35




        I believe in the power of Queen Isabella II, creator of Spanish
        felicity, and in María Cristina her mother, our Queen-Regent,
        who gave birth to Ferdinand VII’s daughter in order to con-
        sole us and to condemn the friars. I believe that the mother
        and daughter suffered under the infernal government of
        Calomarde, that the mother was infamously oppressed and her
        honour outraged, that she descended to the dungeons to save
        faithful liberals . . . I believe in pardoning those who have been
        led astray, in the resurrection of our National Congress, in our
        political regeneration.1

This chapter narrates and explains the First Carlist War from the start
of the insurgency in October 1833 to the start of the siege of Bilbao in
May 1835. It shows how the Carlists mobilised the charismatic leader-
ship of Tomás de Zumalacárregui and propitious socio-political factors
in the Basque country to create a Carlist state which expanded in spite of
increasingly desperate Cristino military attempts to vanquish it. It also
introduces the signiﬁcance of Carlist insurgencies in the Maestrazgo and
Catalonia, although these are explored in greater depth in subsequent
chapters. It explains how the cumulative Cristino defeats on the bat-
tleﬁeld were both the cause and consequence of political revolution.
The popular experience of the Cristino war effort created a ‘commu-
nity of sacriﬁce’ amongst both soldiers and militiamen, who gave this
radical political expression through mutiny, defection, atrocities and a
new popular aesthetic of heroic martyrdom. Finally, this chapter also
introduces the fraught international context of this civil war.
   Ferdinand’s death in October 1833 transformed Carlist violence into
formal civil war. Technically the ﬁrst Carlist rising began not in the