


as a Varangian guard, and reduced the Spanish royalist army to a mere
skeleton. Even though the French carbonari had tried to sow discord
amongst the Duke of Angloulême’s troops before their 1823 invasion,
the French garrison – which did not withdraw until 1828 – proved a reli-
able tripwire against renewed revolution and could be counted upon to
stay out of Spanish domestic politics.19 Quite apart from the ire this pro-
voked amongst a population which, a generation earlier, had fought the
French, army elites bristled at the patronage diverted away from Spanish
pretendientes. In July 1824, General Quesada’s troops even skirmished
with the French garrison in Madrid.20 But during 1823, just as 1814, the
army had some grounds for optimism. Whereas constitutional regimes
had tried to subordinate the Spanish military to civilian authorities, only
tacitly accepting the abusive ‘fuero militar’ and grudgingly accepting
the rights of captains-general to declare states of siege, Ferdinand VII,
in 1824, opened up the chances for a military recolonisation of soci-
ety once more. The provincial assemblies and governorships instituted
under the Constitution were abolished, and the captains-general saw
their traditionally extensive police, judicial and administrative pow-
ers restored.21 But, in return, ofﬁcers’ commissions were squeezed and
a French garrison of occupation maintained from the public purse.
This meant that even during the Ominous Decade, around 50 per cent
of state expenditure still went on security, with Spanish forces com-
prising, by 1833, some 50,000 regular troops and 652 generals and
around 100,000 Royalist Volunteers (see below) according to an 1830
estimate.22
   And if army insiders had to endure Fernandine parsimony, things
were far worse for the thousands of ilimitados, cashiered ofﬁcers who
were forced to eke out whatever meagre living they could, sometimes as
‘professional subversives’.23 Several ilimitados, and many more deserters,
turned to brigandage. Brigandage has been asserted to be a ‘natural’ phe-
nomenon in geographically and economically marginal societies like
most of rural Spain.24 But during the Peninsular War it had become
conﬂated with patriotic resistance, and had thus been given political
legitimacy.25 Brigandage peaked in 1822 when unpopular conscrip-
tion and economic reforms drove thousands of men into the hills.
During 1822 two of the south’s most notorious bandits, ‘El Barbudo’
(the Bearded One) and ‘El Tempranillo’ tried to insure their careers by
asserting their royalism. It was a wise calculation, but it yielded very
different results. El Barbudo, a brigand at large in Alicante and Murcia
who had fought the French in the Peninsular War, was hunted down
and hanged.26 By contrast, El Tempranillo, a stronger presence in the
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 41


Andalucían Sierra Morena in command of a sophisticated extortion
network, was not only pardoned by Ferdinand but also given a for-
mal commission to punish other wrongdoers. El Tempranillo proudly
quipped ‘Ferdinand rules in Spain and I rule in the Sierra’; in 1833, at
the age of 27, he was killed by a Liberal bandit.27
   Wrongdoing was honoured by political ﬂags of convenience; during
the Carlist War banditry and Carlism would be, in many ways, indis-
tinguishable when operating behind the front lines. Spaniards since the
Peninsular War had been suffering a collective trauma which made them
materially and psychologically prepared to take to arms: this ‘reserve
army’ of demobilised soldiers, deserters, outraged priests and downtrod-
den peasants could become a potent weapon if they could be harnessed
to a political aim. At ﬁrst it seemed as though the restored absolutist
regime might channel this disaffection. As soon as the military tribunals
were wound up, the reactionary militia force of ‘Royalist Volunteers’
(Voluntarios Realistas), which had come together during the Royalist
War, was formalised by War Minister José de la Cruz, with a dedicated
budget independent of army funding, and no real ‘bottom limit’ on
recruitment. As Cruz remarked, this plebeian force would be instilled
with ‘elements of order and monarchical subordination’ in contrast to
the extinguished National Militia, which ‘seemed set on turning each
town into a state, and each town-hall into a government’.28 Rising in
number from 70,000 in 1825 to a peak of 284,000 in 1832, the Volun-
teers, however, proved to be no Sanfedisti. Like their National Militia
forbears the Volunteers enjoyed both immunity from civil prosecution
and cash remuneration when on service, and got to run all manner
of municipal rackets, whilst terrorising village Liberals. Thus, histori-
ans have labelled the Volunteers fanatical, violent and a ﬁnancial black
hole.29 Ferdinand hoped that they might please the royalists, thwart
the Liberals and check the ‘professional subversives’ in the diminished
regular army. Yet Ferdinand would not concede the Volunteers’ main
demand that they replace the army altogether. Nevertheless, the Volun-
teers blocked Liberal attempts to regain power after 1823. The Liberals’
attempts were organised by Espoz who, from his London exile, directed
doomed but often dramatic Liberal invasions. In 1826 the Bazán expe-
dition to Valencia, learning the lessons of the Royalist War, blanketed
villages with propaganda promising land.30 Liberalism was not just a
creed of desperate exiles. A few months after the Bazán expedition,
Don Carlos’s new bride, María Teresa, the ultra-conservative princess of
the miguelista side in the Portuguese civil war (1826–34), was publicly
insulted by a crowd shouting mueras whilst she toured Madrid.31
42   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40