


was merely ‘one more insurgent’ angered the Army of the North, which
by now thought Madrid was losing all grasp of reality.85 The union of
the Pretender with his commander-in-chief appeared the worst possible
outcome, and the Cristino army responded by waging war more strate-
gically. Serious consideration was given to conducting a scorched earth
policy.86 In a limited form this was carried out: raids routinely destroyed
war-related material which could help the insurgency, from ramparts to
entire arms factories. But this economic war was countered by the Carlist
soldiers’ readiness to use the arms of Cristino prisoners and defectors,
and even to loot their corpses. The ﬁrst and last year of the war when
the Cristino army was adequately supplied was 1833/34, which made it
a cash cow for the scratch Carlist forces. And the Carlists’ resourcefulness
countered the Cristino blockade. Zumalacárregui demanded parsimony
in his soldiers’ use of powder, ordering his men to take only ten
musket cartridges into battle and to ﬁre these only when the enemy
was in sight and range.87 Meanwhile Carlist materiel was improving.
An initial ‘powder scandal’ was gradually overcome when the quality
of powder smuggled from Aragón and France or made in overworked
forges was improved, and the conditions of Carlist armaments work-
ers militarised.88 The father of the Carlist artillery arm was Vicente
Reina, a Cristino defector who was killed in action in July 1835.89
By the end of 1834 the Carlists got to possess their ﬁrst artillery pieces:
three guns (including two captured from defeated Cristinos at Alegría).
Reina expanded this number by building two howitzers, improvising
shells from materials collected from villages. An ironmongers in a forest
near Labayen became the early centre of Carlist mountain-gun making.
An old iron gun with a wide calibre was pressed into service and chris-
tened ‘El Abuelo’ (grandfather) by its Cristino targets on account of its
age, and this name stuck with the Carlists, too.90 Now Zumalacárregui
had sufﬁcient siege and ﬁeld artillery, whilst the travails of ‘El Abuelo’
made the gun as much a propaganda as a military weapon, as it was
transported from burial in a Cantabrian beach and pulled by six-pair
of oxen until it reached Urbasa, where it was secretly reburied. A for-
eign observer noted ‘if the Carlists win, it will be lodged in the Madrid
museum as a memorial of the war’.91
   Carlist military expansion underpinned Zumalacárregui’s authority
in religious, political and economic matters. He embodied the ‘throne
and altar’ reaction of the Carlist movement, combining the role of
Christian soldier with exterminating angel, presiding over his troops’
daily attendance at Mass on the one hand, and endorsing the public
execution of some 70 Cristino captives in reprisal for Madrid’s Jesuits on
66   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the other.92 Zumalacárregui combined austere charisma with discipline,
planning and resourcefulness. He responded to villagers’ complaints
about Cristino raiding parties by arming ﬂying parties tasked with their
protection. He also used draconian punishments when he judged it nec-
essary. In September 1834, he decimated a battalion of his own men
when their timidity spoilt his plan to trick his way into a key forti-
ﬁed village (Echarri-Aranaz) on the Pamplona–Vitoria road (pro-Carlist
sources conceded Zumalacárregui rare emotion when he halted the
executions halfway, tearfully realising the men were ‘his children’).93
Zumalacárregui’s military state was already in place when the King’s
court arrived. It had even established regular ﬁnance from internal
sources: the revenues of customs posts the Carlists were seizing along
the border with France, taxes levied on parish clergy, and ﬁnes imposed
on Cristino sympathisers and hostile settlements. The harvest of 1834,
meanwhile, was abundant without collapsing market prices, owing to
war depredations and Zumalacárregui’s supply needs.94 Expanding ter-
ritorial control allowed battle casualties to be transferred from homes
to Carlist military hospitals; patients in the latter stood better chances
of recovery than Cristino patients did in theirs. Cristino casualties, by
contrast, had to be transferred over exterior lines of communication,
which gave them greater exposure to the Asiatic cholera epidemic and
also absorbed far more manpower – some ten Cristino soldiers to litter
each patient to safety.95
   By the time of his King’s arrival, Zumalacárregui was thus already pre-
siding over an integrated military state. He even kept a platoon-strength
bodyguard who also relayed messages day or night.96 This insurgent
model provided a mystique for Carlist supporters which their Cristino
enemies completely lacked. Cristino commanders, by contrast, cut lum-
bering, conspicuous ﬁgures, which afforded local authorities time to
desert their posts en masse, so as to avoid reprisals from the stronger
Carlists.97 Thus, the Cristinos routinely lacked local intelligence and
liaison networks, and so manoeuvred their men into vulnerable group
formations and corralled them in valleys. Consequently, the Carlists had
little difﬁculty intercepting communications and, unlike their enemy,
faced no shortage of willing spies in the Basque country.98 The effect of
superior local intelligence was plain to see in Carlist victories through-
out 1834. In August, Zumalacárregui defeated a Cristino division at Las
Peñas de San Fausto (Navarra), inﬂicting some 250 fatalities for the
loss of barely more than a dozen of his own. Zumalacárregui seized
the secret codes with which Cristino commanders communicated with
one another yet, remarkably, the defeated general took no measures
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   67