


to change them. General Carondelet, who was called embarrassed or
incompetent, knew that Carlist spies were tracking his every move even
without the codes.99 Even worse, the numerical and material superior-
ity which the Cristinos had once enjoyed was now being eroded by
Carlist rearmament and recruitment of conscripts and defectors. The
Carlists formed a battalion of scouts called the Guías de Navarra, com-
prised entirely of Cristino defectors, and their artillery and even cavalry
arms were beginning to match their enemies’. On 4 September at Viana,
Carlist cavalry were decisive in victory for the ﬁrst time.100 For their
part, few Cristino commanders could match the Carlists in mountain
warfare, and ofﬁcers had to wait until late 1834 for a book on the
subject to appear.101 Much depended in the meantime on such resource-
fulness and initiative as the Cristino ﬁeld commanders could muster.
General Oráa, dubbed the ‘grey wolf’ by the Carlists on account of his
complexion and risk-taking with rapid marches,102 was one of the best
hopes the Cristinos had. A native of Beriáin (Pamplona), and Penin-
sular War veteran, Oráa knew local terrain.103 But he was nevertheless
outmanoeuvred and defeated by Zumalacárregui at Los Arcos.
   In November 1834, Cristino fortunes appeared to change with the
appointment to the Command of the Army of the North of the swor-
darm of Liberalism, Espoz y Mina, who replaced the exhausted Rodil.
Espoz’s advanced liberalism had made him one of the last exiles to be
amnestied, and his appointment to the most senior appointment in the
Cristino army divided military opinion far more than Jáuregui’s candi-
dacy. Espoz offered the surrounding Carlists an amnesty or even service
under his command, whilst imposing martial law in Pamplona, includ-
ing a shoot-on-sight curfew after nightfall. Despite Espoz’s recourse to
such illiberal measures, the Liberal press carved out an image of him as
the grand old man of liberty. A Zaragoza newspaper called him a ‘man
of his fatherland (patria)’, in contrast to Zumalacárregui who was merely
a ‘man of his mountains’.104 Espoz certainly had a great reputation,
but this did not bode well as Zumalacárregui had already spent a year
humbling Cristino reputations. A German Carlist compared Espoz to ‘a
well-practised gladiator forced to ﬁght his enemy with a shield instead of
a sword’.105 Yet it was nonetheless remarkable how the Liberal-patriotic
allure of Espoz persisted amongst the Cristino rank and ﬁle despite his
failures. After his death from stomach cancer in December 1836, Espoz’s
mortal remains were carried around Cristino Spain in a revolutionary
ritual of popular liberty. Evidence of the strength of feeling arose when
the Málaga militia rioted at their city’s refusal to pay public homage.106
On paper Espoz found the Army of the North still in a strong state, as it
68   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


included some 23,357 infantry and 1,089 cavalry, but barely more than
half of these were actually available for campaigning. Espoz knew that
they were tired, poorly equipped (they still only had summer uniforms)
and demoralised from previous encounters. However committed Espoz
was to remedying this, he continued the incompatible War Ministry
policy of garrisoning isolated small settlements, diluting his campaign
strength whilst failing even to defend in depth. Most settlements in
Navarra and the Basque provinces proper were unwalled and located in
militarily indefensible valleys, which left ridges and peaks free for Carlist
activities: indeed Cristino attempts at defence in depth had done noth-
ing to break the siege of Pamplona.107 Whilst the Carlists were amassing,
Espoz’s energies were absorbed safeguarding essential relief column sup-
plies for besieged Pamplona. Local Cristino victories at Mendaza and
then Puerta de Arquijas (12–15 December) ensured Pamplona received
supplies safely but barely altered the strategic situation.108 This remained
bleak, as Zumalacárregui’s victory the same month at Las Arquijas
attested.109 Then, inevitably, both sides yielded to the elements, with
a virtual truce over Christmas whilst Spain and the world took stock of
an alarming year of civil war.
   Zumalacárregui retired his army to his stronghold of the Améscoas
valley (Navarra) whilst Espoz had no option but to withdraw Cristino
forces from the countryside. Espoz’s background gave him an advanced
understanding of the war, but his illness usually conﬁned him to
Pamplona, and so he delegated generals to escort convoys into the
city. Espoz’s strategy was to box in Zumalacárregui by arming local
militia units as much as possible. This ran the risk that the inhabi-
tants, especially in the smaller settlements, would turn their arms over
to the Carlists, but Espoz hoped that their initial resistance would
‘soak up’ Carlist forces and free up the Cristino army for a decisive
counteroffensive. This close engagement strategy would turn on the
Cristinos’ clinging on to villages in the valley of Baztán (Navarra),
especially its local capital, Elizondo, as this region controlled access
to French customs revenues and contained valuable arms factories like
Orbaiceta.110 Espoz’s strategy was clearly informed by his ideology, a
form of Bonapartist Liberalism dictating that the people be armed for
authoritarian ends.111 He could claim a common touch (he wrote a
number of key proclamations in Euskera). Like any Bonapartist, Espoz
harmonised Cristino military with civilian administration and proved
tolerant towards civic Carlism, but also intervened ruthlessly when-
ever this turned to violence or reprisals. Thus, when Zumalacárregui
raided the Baztán he imprisoned the wives of absent Cristino soldiers
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   69