


   Beyond these emerging Carlist safe zones, insurgents were moti-
vated, above all, by adventure and wrongdoing. The mundane case of
‘El Locho’ (Manuel Adame), a pig-rustling day labourer and veteran
of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, and the main guerrilla plague
of La Mancha in 1834, was not untypical. Other bandits preyed on
Manchegan communities using Carlism as their cover. Their colourful
nomes de guerre (the Palillos brothers, Tercero, Rompe, Ventero, Barba,
Lobito) exempliﬁed the Spanish popular culture of using resonant nick-
names to hide mundane identities. Further south and west, virtually all
insurgents were bandits using Carlism as the ﬂimsiest of political covers.
Extremadura had a long border with restive Portuguese miguelistas, but
Cristino border garrisons prevented any organised Carlist insurgencies
from taking hold and security forces instead had only bandits to sup-
press. Andalucía’s aquiline bandits were already infamous, and attempts
to recruit them met with derision from several quarters. Nonethe-
less, Carlist emissaries were dispatched throughout the war to turn the
bandits, smugglers and deserters of the Serranía de Ronda into a guer-
rilla force.64 Thus, even though organised Carlism outside of its safe
zones could never prevail without outside help, the countryside was
strewn with bandit gangs whose varied motives (desertion, landless-
ness, crime) they often explained by allegiance to Carlism. In short,
Carlism was often a cover for contingent rather than ideological
motives.
   This is not to say that Carlism was nothing more than a ﬂag of
convenience. Civic Carlism in the Cristino zone, especially of priests,
often spilled over into incitement or violence in the face of leftist
provocation. Throughout 1834, Cristino authorities uncovered plots
involving Carlists who had got involved with the new Militia,65 sus-
picious arms caches66 and, especially, hostile clerics. Clerical hostility
included incitement: one cleric brought to trial proclaimed ‘Death to
all negros [pejorative for “Liberal”]! The Holy Spirit speaks through me!’
whilst a Valencian capuchin preached that the Church would resist the
onslaught of the ‘philosophers’ of the century and that the cholera
which appeared between 1832 and 1834 was divine punishment for
Spain’s wickedness. The cleric’s curse probably instilled the fear of God
into his parishioners. The Asiatic cholera epidemic had ravaged the pop-
ulation, with the province of Granada alone registering a grisly toll of
5,293 dead between January and August 1834, notwithstanding munic-
ipal quarantines uselessly designed to contain the ‘miasma’.67 In fact,
the cholera had an even more sinister legacy in the pretext it pro-
vided for Cristino elites to channel the anger of those elements of the
62   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Cristino population who saw the Church as the cause of the war. Inﬂu-
enced by similar phenomena in central Europe and Russia (and the
assaults on the Jesuits during the July 1830 revolution in Paris), Lib-
eral agents in July 1834 spread rumours in Madrid that the cholera
was caused by Jesuits poisoning the wells. The response was horriﬁc.
The militia rallied mobs in a violent assault on Madrid’s convents and
monasteries, massacring seventy-eight Jesuits, Dominicans, Franciscans
and Mercedarians. Whilst Liberal newspapers drew a veil over the whole
affair – ‘a few bad apples’ according to El Eco del Comercio68 – a police
report found the Militia to have been the chief culprits, whilst the addi-
tional participation of some Royal Guards conﬁrmed the suspicion that
the events of 17 July 1834 enjoyed both the foreknowledge and the tacit
backing of the government. Leniency was shown towards those token
culprits arrested, whilst for days afterwards groups of militiamen swag-
gered about the streets ‘boasting of their crimes’ and ‘showing more
pride and haughtiness than the French after Marengo’.69 A savage tra-
dition of anti-clericalism had been born, and generations of clerical
historians would remember 17 July as a day of infamy.
   Although religious personnel in the rest of Cristino Spain were spared
a massacre for the rest of 1834 and the ﬁrst three months of 1835, the
climate of hostility grew in the wake of Madrid. To some degree this
was remarkable, as even though relations between Madrid and the Holy
See deteriorated, culminating with the expulsion of the nuncio in 1835,
all but one of the Spanish bishops obeyed Rome’s orders not to recog-
nise the Carlist insurgency as legitimate. Thus, clerics who joined the
insurgency did so as individuals rather than as an institution, but given
the well-known religious claims of the Carlists, it was understandable
how episodes of anti-clerical violence spiralled at local levels in Cristino
Spain.70 Monks in Huéscar (Granada) were deported after they tried to
evict militiamen who played revolutionary music and adorned their
hats with the green ribbons of the Constitution. Fines were imposed
upon priests who refused to offer blessings to Isabel II during Mass.71
The enemy’s anti-clericalism gave Carlists hope of intervention in their
favour from abroad. One priest whipped up popular Carlism in the
Almanzora river area of Almería – hundreds of miles from the front line –
with the promise that Carlists from Genoa would make landfall.72 In fact
the expedition landed in Catalonia, and comprised mainly Catalan émi-
grés from the transition of 1833 rather than Italians. These went to
ground in the Barceloneta district of Barcelona, troubling the watch-
ful Cristino city authorities who feared a ﬁfth column.73 This was the
ﬁrst and last expedition organised from abroad before the British Navy
                                            The Basque Phase, 1833–35   63