


liberated the city, they exposed this embarrassing accommodation, for
which the Madrid government made the commander of the Cristino
liberation force, General Sarsﬁeld, a boisterous Peninsular War veteran,
responsible, rather than the local authorities. Sarsﬁeld was removed by
the Cristino regime, which had had cause on other occasions to suspect
his loyalty.9 The early loss of Bilbao was a blow for the cause of Carlism,
as most of the Vizcayan volunteers deserted when Bilbao ceased funding
their pay, and would not return to ﬁght until Carlist territorial expan-
sion throughout 1834 subjected them to compulsory enlistment.10 The
burghers of Bilbao, for their part, stiffened their resolve against future
Carlist attempts.
   Risings elsewhere in the Basque country and beyond hardly com-
pensated for this loss. Royalist War veteran Valentín Verástegui raised
a Carlist insurrection in Alava, named himself commander-in-chief,
and invaded Alava’s capital of Vitoria. Here, foral authorities, as at
Bilbao, tried ‘neutrality’, deﬂecting Verástegui’s overtures. Verástegui
prevaricated and set up a rival junta in the name of Carlos V, an omi-
nous move which could only point to the eventual suppression of the
civil authorities.11 But the foral authorities persevered until Sarsﬁeld’s
Cristino division on its way to Bilbao defeated Verástegui’s insurgents
and liberated Vitoria. Unlike Santos Ladrón, Verástegui survived to ﬁght
another day. Looking beyond the Basque country, the internal threat
to Madrid had been quashed, but there remained the prospect of a
descent on the capital from without. The threat came from the aged
priest, Jerónimo Merino, famous guerrilla veteran of the Peninsular and
Royalist Wars and the obvious choice to command the forces of the
Carlist junta of Old Castile which convened in Merino’s old ‘ﬁefdom’,
the heavily churched province of Burgos. Merino’s conservatism posited
the Cristinos as dangerous revolutionaries: ‘Do you believe that the
declared enemies of Ferdinand VII, those who dragged him captive to
Cádiz, and who proscribed faithful royalists, can in any way be trusted
to defend our monarchical institutions and religion?’12 This proclama-
tion appealed to several thousand more in his path during his march
on Madrid, who remembered the disappointment of Liberal rule during
the Triennium and the opportunities offered by royalism in 1823. Some
even included disbanded royalists ﬂeeing from the Cristino capital. But
Merino was swamped with men he was unable to arm or provision,
and soon had to release the married volunteers from his service. Mean-
while, the Carlist junta near Burgos lost conﬁdence in his campaign and
ordered Merino to return to defend Carlism in La Rioja against Sarsﬁeld’s
counter-insurgency. Thus, the ﬁrst ‘March on Madrid’ in the conﬂict
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   51


proved abortive. But its impact was felt inside the capital, where the new
Liberal press decried the subversive opinions and violence of disbanded
Royalist Volunteers, and demanded that the Liberals’ militia of 1820–23
be resurrected.13 Even though fears persisted of a Carlist ‘ﬁfth column’ in
the capital, the immediate danger to Madrid was over. General Sarsﬁeld
marched east from the Portuguese frontier, pursuing Merino’s retreat to
Salamanca and thence to Burgos, near which he clashed with Merino
in an inconclusive foggy battle on 13 November 1833.14 Merino rallied
in northern Castile, reinforced by Colonel Cuevillas, purged Military
Governor of Zaragoza who had raised a guerrilla force in La Rioja. But
Verástegui refused to send him any reinforcements from Alava, and a
Cristino force soon put Merino’s men to ﬂight, leaving the priest with
only Cuevillas and a dozen other followers, little better than fugitives.
Merino and Cuevillas now ﬂed west towards Portugal, avoiding Cristino
security patrols and escaping from a number of ambushes. At the end of
1833, Merino ﬁnally reached northern Portugal and the relative safety
of Don Carlos’s fugitive court and friendly miguelistas.15
   The Carlist insurgency obliged María Cristina to look for political
support amongst the exiled Spanish Left. On 23 October 1833, despite
Cea’s objections, a near-total amnesty was proclaimed for exiled Lib-
erals. Meanwhile, army ofﬁcers whose careers had survived the purges
were rewarded with powers to control, and disband where necessary,
the Royalist Volunteers. At ﬁrst these measures, along with initially suc-
cessful counter-insurgency operations and the onset of the northern
winter, promised an early peace. However, the Carlists had merely dis-
persed – ‘changed their shirts’ – and would return to ﬁght again.16 Given
that the number of rural insurgents was potentially limitless, and given
that the Cristino army was still too small, no end to the conﬂict was
in sight in 1833. A Cristino cordon sanitaire around the Basque coun-
try was spread too thinly and sapped reserves which might have dealt
a decisive counter-insurgency blow. Meanwhile, the process of purg-
ing the Carlist-ridden Volunteers was still not complete. At one end of
Spain, the weeks after the start of the war saw Liberal Cádiz reinforce
its Volunteers against any Carlist attempts, whilst at the other end the
Royalist Volunteers had either gone over to the insurgency or were held
in abeyance by Cristino captains-general reluctant to call them out in
a poisoned and uncertain political climate.17 Into this vacuum stepped
the Cristino army, but this was too small due to Cea’s fears of a coup,
and it had risen to only 60,000 effectives by the end of 1833. Also, a
large part of these were assigned to Extremadura and Portugal as the
‘Army of Observation’, tasked with ﬁghting miguelistas and arresting
52   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40