


  The Liberal press blamed Quesada for his failure and in June 1834 he
was relieved of his command.31 Having conceded that the Carlists could
no longer be crushed by mobile counter-insurgency operations, Quesada
knew that fortiﬁed lines would be the best strategy but protested he
had too few troops to implement this.32 Even though this ‘blockhouse’
counter-insurgency strategy had been successfully pioneered by the
French during the Peninsular War, the Cristinos still lacked the resources
to make it effective, as one of his ofﬁcers complained in response to
the criticism of the Liberal press: ‘let us not fool ourselves . . . many
more troops are needed if we are to crush the hordes infesting these
provinces, just as our commander-in-chief explained when this com-
mand was conferred upon him’.33 Quesada’s strategy avoided expanding
the war effort to the people, in contrast to the doctrine of his leftist
colleagues, Espoz and Jaúregui. Gaspar de Jaúregui (alias ‘El Pastor’),
guerrilla veteran of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars and of Espoz’s
Pyrenean invasion, was amnestied and recalled to his native Guipúzcoa
to lead a local Cristino free corps. Jaúregui was ambitious to replace
Quesada, but Madrid thought him an uncouth parvenu and blocked his
promotion.34 His case was not helped when the French press reported
that he had promised to rid the Basque country of rebels within a
fortnight.35 Quesada’s replacement was actually the Galician Marquess
José Ramón Rodil, the only veteran of Spain’s lost American wars to have
emerged with any credit as a tactician, who, in April 1834, was disengag-
ing from the Quadruple Alliance invasion of Portugal. Unlike in Navarra,
Cristino operations here had been generally bloodless and effective.
Rodil’s force had helped force Dom Miguel renounce the Portuguese
throne (in the 26 May 1834 Treaty of Evora-Monte), even though the
Cristinos’ real prize, Don Carlos, escaped on a Royal Navy ship bound
for an exile in Britain.36 Despite this failure, Rodil’s 12,000 troops, fresh
from Allied victory in Portugal, were the best in the Cristino army.37
Rodil began his command of the Army of the North with speechifying
optimism, scorning the enemy as ‘weak, exhausted and agonised’. Yet
his results proved no better than Quesada’s. Zumalacárregui drew Rodil
into a fruitless summer campaign invading Navarra, managing to entice
the Cristinos away from strategic targets of any real signiﬁcance and
refusing open battle. After weeks suffering ambushes and empty cam-
paigning, which resulted in mass desertion from Cristino ranks, Rodil
had to retire to his fortiﬁed base at Mendavia near Logroño.38
  The only Cristino ofﬁcer to distinguish himself was Baldomero
Espartero, the son of a carter whom the Carlist War elevated from
mere divisional commander to Regent of Spain. Espartero led a clique
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   55


of ‘ayacucho’ ofﬁcers, veterans of the lost American wars who, during
the Carlist War, forged a highly praetorian bond of leftist politics. The
campaigns of both Napoleon and Espartero show how men who fol-
low their leaders on distant campaigns grow very attached to them,
with destabilising consequences for civilian politics, as Espartero, the
‘Spanish Napoleon’ of 1840, would show. But whilst Espartero after the
war would divide Spanish politics, in 1834 his local victories had already
made him the symbol of Cristino hopes. Physically brave, Espartero was
wounded several times throughout the war and even more times had his
horse shot from under him. In February 1834, Espartero was promoted
to major-general, and later to Comandante General of Vizcaya. His hum-
ble background and bravery gave him good qualities for leadership, even
though these made him prone to immodesty. Espartero conﬁded to
his wife that ‘the troops love me like a father . . . they have an enthu-
siasm for me which borders on delirium and I fear that this could end
up harming me’.39 This dramatic irony was condemned as callow self-
aggrandisement by the British consul at Bilbao, who thought Espartero
was deluded in thinking that Zumalacárregui’s forays into Vizcaya were
anything more than a feint: