


suspect governors of Spanish border garrison towns.18 Admittedly, the
insurgents were also too few, as Don Carlos’s refusal to lead an insur-
rection until his brother died had limited their organisation. But the
regional balance in the Basque country would shift in favour of the
Carlists thanks to the emergence of a charismatic military genius as their
leader.
   Tomás de Zumalacárregui (1788–1835) is central to understand-
ing the Basque phase of the war. Born in Ormáiztegui (Guipúzcoa),
Zumalacárregui was a veteran of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, as
a Patriot and Royalist respectively, and was purged for his Carlism
in 1833. Many of his biographies border on hagiography, detailing
such colourful episodes as his men accepting half-pay without protest,
and a Basque grandmother who offered her last surviving grandson
for service, and then a horse after Zumalacárregui tearfully rejected
her blood sacriﬁce.19 Such miracle stories reveal the imaginative and
ideational world of the Carlists. These stories were probably nonsense,
or grossly distorted, but useful, as in being deprived of the open sup-
port of Rome and almost all of Spain’s bishops, the Carlists rallied to
Zumalacárregui as their own Christian soldier, and even refashioned
their own organic religious iconography around him and subsequent
national models and symbols. Unsurprisingly, most modern histori-
ans have seen through this Romantic haze. His most recent biography
reverts to the Romantic legend, however.20 John Coverdale defended a
contingent interpretation of Zumalacárregui’s motivations: he was apo-
litical, the only books he was known to have read being either military
or religious in nature.21 Zumalacárregui’s importance explains the quan-
tity and diversity of his representations. Within weeks of the ﬁrst rising
in October 1833, Zumalacárregui made himself Carlist Commander-in-
Chief of Navarra, at the head of a growing army of local peasants which
used guerrilla tactics to turn Cristino garrisons and expeditions into a
pale imitation of the French a generation earlier.22 These guerrilla tac-
tics were overborne throughout 1834 by Zumalacárregui’s painstaking
formation of cavalry and artillery units, eroding Cristino superiority
in these arms (and indeed despite the lack of a cavalry tradition in
Navarra).23 Zumalacárregui’s military success earned him full admin-
istrative powers, conferred upon him by Don Carlos’s exiled court in
March 1834. Zumalacárregui thus enjoyed untrammelled power until
the King arrived in the Basque country in July.24
   The ﬁrst stage of Zumalacárregui’s strategy began between the winter
of 1833 and the following summer with the employment of his army
in a guerrilla war of surprise and ambush. During this ﬁrst stage his
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   53


army lacked the strength to wrest Bilbao from its Cristino liberators.
His ﬁrst set-piece battle on 29 December 1833 in La Berrueza valley was
indecisive: Zumalacárregui simply wanted to blood his men against the
superior Cristino forces and disengaged in good time to prepare for his
next operation. This was a raid into the fertile Ribera region of south-
ern Navarra, populated by hostile Castilian-speaking landowners, whose
‘enemy’ produce would feed his guerrillas.25 Zumalacárregui’s second
stage ran from the summer of 1834 until the winter, and involved con-
trolling rural territory and communications. The ensuing third stage
involved taking Cristino forts and fortiﬁed towns.26
   Cristino Spain would never produce a commander to match
Zumalacárregui. Quesada, who had abandoned a lifelong career of royal-
ism in order to escape the Cristino purges, used court pressure to replace
Jerónimo Valdés as Viceroy of Navarra, an old ofﬁce which was inter-
changeable with the new command of the Army of the North. Valdés
was a veteran of the American Wars and Governor of Cartagena (Murcia)
in 1833, but his liberalism was ahead of court politics at the time.
Quesada, by contrast, had absolutist credentials which recommended
him to the Queen-Regent, and, as a ‘pasha’, in January 1834 had dis-
solved a defence junta in Santander which an advanced Liberal had
led against local Carlists.27 His perspicacious ‘State of Navarra’ letter
to María Cristina claimed detailed knowledge of the insurgency and
won him the viceroyalty. As Cristino Viceroy, Quesada acted on his
rightist political instincts by writing to Zumalacárregui, offering him
a post in Burgos in return for his recognition of the Cristino transi-
tion. But Zumalacárregui, in conference with his staff, publicly rejected
Quesada’s overture, thereby reinforcing his own authority and image of
indispensability for the Carlist cause.28 Writers from both sides agreed
that Quesada’s overture was a disastrous own-goal, for in reinforcing
Zumalacárregui’s legitimacy it weakened the Cristino claim they were
ﬁghting outlaws.29 Moreover, Quesada could not parry this blow by suc-
cessful campaigning. Although the new Urban Militia (see below) was
beginning to garrison towns, freeing up the army for mobile operations,
Quesada was deaf to its Liberal-patriotic pull and instead relied on his
army. But the latter waged war ineptly: launching frontal attacks against
mountain positions, losing baggage and communications, and being
outmanoeuvred and outfought by Zumalacárregui’s genius in active
defence.30 A key early Carlist victory occurred at Alsasua in April 1834
when Zumalacárregui routed Quesada’s convoy, cutting Pamplona off
from supplies from Vitoria, and enveloping the Navarrese capital in a
siege which lasted on and off throughout the war.
54   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40