


closed off the Mediterranean to all but the most intrepid volunteers for
Carlism.74
   But from the landward side there was one volunteer who would not
be kept out of Spain. Don Carlos’s exodus through Portugal was remark-
able, even more his escape from exile in Britain. Reaching Spanish soil
via the Pyrenees at Urdax in July 1834 – around the same time as the
massacre of his beloved Jesuits in Madrid – Don Carlos ﬁnally gave the
insurrection its natural leader.75 This was a far cry from the months of
exile in Portugal. There the Pretender’s supply trains had been seized
by Rodil’s vanguard and his entourage reduced to scavenging potatoes.
Rodil had almost captured Don Carlos himself, a feat which earned him
Quesada’s incumbency. But this reward backﬁred when news shocked
both Rodil and his government – Don Carlos had reached Spain to pre-
side over the insurgency.76 Some of Madrid’s blindness in this affair may
be attributed to the Cristinos’ poor diplomatic connections resulting
from six years of miguelista control of Lisbon.77 Even though the pedris-
tas captured the Portuguese capital in 1833, the new Cristino legation
in the city had been powerless to inﬂuence Britain’s usual hegemony
in Portugal, in particular the latter’s resolve to undermine the Carlists
by exiling Don Carlos from Iberia, in the same way that the exiling of
Dom Miguel had ended the Portuguese civil war. Upon the Pretender’s
arrival in Britain, the Cristino ambassador in London at last managed
some intercession. Although Foreign Secretary Palmerston protested he
could not hold Don Carlos prisoner, he made the Pretender give his
word that he would not leave Britain, and in any case satisﬁed Cristino
foreign policy by signing the Quadruple Alliance. In the long term this
alliance augured well for Cristino Spain, as it united the constitutional
monarchies of Britain, France, Spain and Portugal in diplomatic sup-
port for Madrid, and was followed by agreements to raise volunteers in
these countries for service in Spain. As this alliance brought Europe’s
two foremost powers to the aid of the Cristinos, an unqualiﬁed Carlist
victory was now highly unlikely. At the heart of the alliance was the
Anglo-French ‘Liberal international’ of Whigs and Orleanists. Whereas
London used this to support a new era of Liberal interventionism in for-
eign policy, Paris used it to help fend off legitimism at home (Orleanist
fears had been evoked by an abortive rising in the Vendée in 1832). But
in the immediate term the alliance fell at the ﬁrst hurdle when Don
Carlos escaped from London, making for Brighton, then Dieppe, Paris
and Bordeaux and Bayonne, and ﬁnally Spain. Don Carlos was himself
amazed, whispering to his companion, Auguet Saint-Sylvain, ‘My good
cousin of the Orleans dynasty is very far from suspecting that I’m going
64   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


through his territories without his permission, to go and tear asunder
at the point of my sword his treaty of the Quadruple Alliance.’78 This
journey would have failed without the protection of Saint-Sylvain, the
French Carlist and private secretary to Don Carlos, who drew ﬁnance,
obtained passports and secured safe houses in France, and consequently
joined the Pretender’s court in Spain.79
   Once on Spanish soil, Sylvain helped the King to forge a central provi-
sional junta out of the several local Carlist juntas and set it to assessing
the economic and military potential of the newly created Carlist zone.80
The King’s mere appearance on Spanish soil galvanised the insurrection
and became the biggest propaganda weapon against both the Quadru-
ple Alliance and the Cristino war effort. In a revealing proclamation,
Don Carlos appealed to conscripts to the Cristino army to defect. Don
Carlos equated the sex of María Cristina with illegitimacy, weakness and
indiscretion, attributing these to the usurping nature of the entire Lib-
eral project.81 This was integral propaganda, but the fact that defectors
from Cristino ranks greatly outnumbered those from the Carlists owed
more to Madrid’s inability to succour its conscripts than to any dynas-
tic attraction. Cristino defection grew during 1834, and even though no
exact numbers exist – the Gaceta Oﬁcial printed the names and units
of defectors for propaganda purposes, but obvious fears of retribution
appear to have limited this practice82 – it is clear that their numbers
peaked during 1835–37, as expeditions tore across Spain and revolu-
tion derailed Cristino military strategy. Both defectors and non-Basque
recruits were called Castilians (castellanos) by the Basque Carlists – who
soon used the term to describe all Carlists who were not from the Basque
country – and by 1835 several battalions described as such had been
formed. The Castilian Carlists occupied an awkward position during the
war: loathed by the Cristinos, they were also treated with suspicion by
the Basque fueristas who saw them as a ‘foreign’ threat to Basque auton-
omy, as non-productive refugees consuming resources and as proxies for
the unpopular Castilian-dominated Carlist Royal Police.83 A diametri-
cally opposed suspicion pertained to the considerably fewer recruits and
defectors from the Basque country who served in Cristino ranks. Espoz
actively recruited deserters and villagers in his native Navarra, even from
French border villages. Their different language, uniform and pay struc-
ture, and, above all, their self-interested bravery in battle (they were
particularly vulnerable to Carlist reprisals), alienated conscripts from the
rest of Spain whose only thought was survival in a strange land.84
   Meanwhile, the arrival of the Pretender on Spanish soil threw Cristino
politics into turmoil. Prime Minister de la Rosa’s refrain that Don Carlos
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   65