


inside. A truce was brokered to allow the release of the militiamen’s
women and children, but shots were ﬁred during this delicate oper-
ation and Zumalacárregui reacted by beating and feather-tarring the
refugees. Before the surviving defenders choked to death, they stormed
out of the church and charged the Carlist ring. Those militiamen who
were not killed were captured and shot. Heroic Villafranca, and its
heroic refugee women, became Liberal cause célèbres. On 10 December
1834, after the Cristinos had retaken the town, the Cristino government
decided to rebuild the church, and compensate the widows and orphans
(the Queen-Regent, seeing the emerging popular meaning of the war,
prudently made a public donation).56 The martyrdom of Villafranca
was downplayed by Carlist historians who resented the muddying of
Zumalacárregui’s own heroic image.57
   The violent, sudden and unsolicited martyrdom which overtook
overwhelmed Militia detachments and pitiful prisoners of war pro-
voked demands for vengeance. Whilst poorly led Cristino armies were
defeated at every turn, these rural defeats were offset by urban defensive
victories – or by valiant defeats which made martyrs to liberty out of the
armed citizens who suffered them. Vergara (Guipúzcoa) controlled vital
communications with the French border, and its Militia garrison distin-
guished itself resisting a Carlist attack in August. In September, a Carlist
force which struck west into Old Castile was defeated by the outnum-
bered militia garrison of Villarcayo, which fought without outside help
and despite half the town being burnt by the attackers. Thus, whilst the
Cristino army elites failed on campaign, the ‘people’s army’ succeeded
in point defence.58 It would not be long until the militia cashed in these
military honours for a stake in politics. In the early stages this radicalism
amounted to vengeance, targeting Carlists captured on the battleﬁeld,
languishing in prisons, or civic Carlists cloistered in monasteries and
nunneries. But it also targeted Cristino elites who were either callous or
incompetent towards their men. And the militiamen were not the sole
agents of vengeance, as the result of Zumalacárregui’s great victory in
October 1834 at Alegría (Alava) showed. This triumph was prepared by
Zumalacárregui’s expert command of geography. Civilians in his path
were forced either to join his columns or to be corralled under guard
away from roadsides, out of sight of Cristino scouts. Then he ambushed
a superior Cristino force, dividing it into two and defeating both sections
in detail. Some 2,000 surviving Cristino soldiers (twice as many as he
had killed in action) defected to the Carlist side and made no protest
when he had their captured Cristino commander shot.59 As Cristino
revolutions and Carlist expeditions afﬂicted Spain from 1835, civilians,
60   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


too, followed the lead shown by militia and soldiers by making decisions
and acting on them. Episodes like these grew to spawn a Cristino mar-
tyrology that was distinctive in its subaltern and civic qualities, in being
no longer concerned with avenging heroic elites (like Riego in 1823 or
Torrijos in 1831), but about avenging popular grievances. In this regard,
1830s Spain contrasted with comparable ideological struggles in such
other Latin polities as Italy, where both nationalist and ultramontane
martyrologies were crafted to support elite rather than popular aims.60
   This civic martyrology had no equivalent on the Carlist side where
the motives of religion, dynasticism, impoverishment, adventure and
wrongdoing did not naturally lend themselves to progressive, civic
martyrdom, and still less beyond the Basque country, in areas where
wrongdoing and poverty played a larger role in Carlism. Throughout
1834, Cristino counter-insurgency forces in Catalonia had varied success
suppressing Carlist guerrilla bands raised from the traditional somatén.
The war here divided the staunchly Cristino coastal range, inhabited by
an inﬂuential bourgeoisie, from the front-line plateau and mountains of
the Catalan far west, where Cristinos fought Carlist guerrillas. The early
Carlist insurgency was led by the cleric and Royalist War veteran, Benito
Tristany. His opponent, Catalan Captain-General Manuel Llauder, com-
plained of the inextinguishable Carlist conspiratorial networks based
around parish priests and monasteries, but believed he had vanquished
the Carlist somatenes by the summer of 1834.61 But they never lost a
foothold in the mountainous north of the Principality, where a Carlist
rural network was ready to revive the disbanded somatenes for another
insurrection. Meanwhile, army detachments were drawn away from
Catalonia to reinforce the hard-pressed Army of the North, and Llauder
himself left for Madrid where, on 2 November 1834, he became Minis-
ter of War. Thus, the newly constituted Urban Militia was left to defend
itself against resurgent somatenes without much help from the regular
army.62 Outside the Basque provinces, Catalonia and the Maestrazgo,
Carlist risings had a symbiotic relationship with banditry, both feeding
off it and reverting to it when dispersed by Cristino counter-insurgency
actions. Carlist bandits were dangerous not only for operating outside
the norms of war, but also because of their example of ill-gotten gains,
which might encourage Cristino conscripts to desert. In October 1834,
one Cristino military commander in action against Carlist irregulars in
the Maestrazgo was acutely aware of this when he wrote to the War Min-
istry demanding that his troops get proper rations of bread, wine and
meat, ‘as it is most demoralising for them to discover that the facciosos
take and eat what they want’.63
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   61