

  (Zumalacárregui) seldom came into Biscay. Apparently convinced of
  the inefﬁcacy of Espartero’s operations, he let him amuse himself by
  running after the Biscay battalions, who were accustomed to lead
  him a dance all round the province; and when his men were totally
  fatigued with four and ﬁve days’ marches, they would make a stand
  upon some hillside, right in his road; then after disputing the ground
  for half an hour or an hour, and causing the loss of some 50 or 100
  men, they would run off, leaving the victorious general to write such
  bulletins as were never equalled . . . the ﬁeld of Burseña (for example)
  was cubierto de cadáveres (covered with corpses). There were plenty of
  spectators, the writer among the number; and yet nobody could ﬁnd
  above 18 dead bodies!40

The Carlist press matched the consul’s parody, punning Espartero’s
name, ‘General Embustero’ (General Fiction).41 But Espartero’s minor
victories at Portugalete, Guernica, Sollube and elsewhere, certainly won
him plaudits from the Liberal press. Unlike Espoz, future Commander
of the Army of the North who professed a particular understanding of
his native Navarra, Espartero claimed no insight into why the Carlists
were ﬁghting. His letters throughout 1834 spoke of the enemy as rabble
or canaille and his dealings with Carlists were as harsh as any Cristino
56   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


commander. Yet Espartero’s humble origins and political exploitation of
victories recommended him to Spain’s Romantic movement, and to left-
ist tributes to the ‘son of the people’, a Spanish George Washington.42
This rhetorical hyperbole was, of course, divorced from military reality,
from the martial law which Espartero, like other Cristino commanders,
imposed on Carlist territory. On 4 May, Espartero threatened ﬁnes for
families of insurgents, that houses locked upon the approach of Cristino
troops anywhere in Vizcaya would be treated as fair game, and also that
all 17 to 40-year-old men capable of bearing arms and who had had their
hair cut (a sign of military service) were to be sent to Bilbao to prove that
they were not Carlist guerrillas. Those who did not convince were to be
expelled from Vizcaya.43 Espartero’s repressive occupation was accom-
panied by the provisional suspension of the Basque fueros, a measure
which included the shifting of the customs frontier from the Ebro to
the Pyrenees, and replacing Navarra’s historic status as a kingdom with
that of a province conforming to the 1833 model. Henceforth, areas that
came under Cristino occupation would be doubly subjected by the state
of war and the emasculation of civil authority.44
   Zumalacárregui matched the Cristinos in ruthlessness as his reach
widened, demanding that local authorities throughout Navarra and
Upper Aragón swear allegiance to Carlos V or face the ultimate penalty.
This radicalisation placed the Deputation of Navarra in a dire posi-
tion. Early in 1834 Zumalacárregui ﬁnally moved against this ‘nest of
traitors’, pointing to its duplicitous care for the preservation of the
fueros on the one hand whilst speaking out against Don Carlos and peti-
tioning Madrid to reconvene the local Cortes on the other.45 By early
1834 binary Carlist and Cristino authorities confronted each other in
the Basque country. The Carlists had formed a ‘Superior Governmen-
tal Junta of Alava’, a ‘War Deputation of Guipúzcoa’, a ‘Governmental
Junta of Navarra’, along with their own Deputation. The Cristinos,
for their part, imposed their own authorities in the same provinces,
although their remit was shrinking beyond fortiﬁed urban centres on
account of Carlist military successes. As each side refused to recog-
nise the other, even a modest incursion imposed double jeopardy in
terms of taxation, conscription and reprisals on local communities
in the armies’ path. Particular stress was placed on the lowest lev-
els of local authority, aldermen and mayors forced to raise exorbitant
sums to fund both armies, and who faced brutal reprisals for hav-
ing been found to have helped the wrong side. Thus, local authorities
increasingly deserted their posts.46 As Zumalacárregui expanded territo-
rial control throughout 1834, local authorities logically became more
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   57