


prone to ﬂee before Cristino incursions, compounding Cristino weak-
ness in local intelligence.47 One of the most mobile Cristino tacticians,
General Marcelino Oráa, blamed his defeats at Zubiri and Urdaniz on
the enemy’s superior local intelligence.48 But Carlist domination by no
means ended the strain on local authorities. Zumalacárregui increas-
ingly overrode civil authorities whilst arrogantly rebufﬁng petitions for
alleviation by Carlist juntas and the Deputation. And little relief came
from the arrival of Don Carlos’s court: although Zumalacárregui’s per-
sonal authority was curtailed, the burdens on the civil authorities only
increased.
   But the military–political crisis of 1834 was far worse for the Cristino
side and quickly made the premiership of Cea untenable. Opposition
centred on the Isabelina Society, whose membership ranged from Lib-
erals of radical to moderate opinions and included several ‘pashas’ who
resented Cea’s civilian absolutism. Demands grew for a Liberal regime to
root out Carlists and attract intervention from Britain and France. Bow-
ing to this pressure, in January 1834 María Cristina appointed as Prime
Minister Martínez de la Rosa, an Andalucían patrician of Spain’s ﬁrst and
second Liberal experiments, who promised to restore Spain’s happiness
by marrying ‘order with liberty’.49 One of his ﬁrst moves was to create
the Urban Militia, to be organised at local level under the command
of the reformed town halls. The advanced Liberal newspaper, Eco del
Comercio, hailed this force as the ‘people in arms’ destined to vanquish
the Carlist insurgency.50 The reality in its ﬁrst year of existence was very
different, however. Property owners remembered the royalist proscrip-
tion of 1823 and had no wish to suffer the same now in the event of
a Carlist victory. Cristino captains-general in Andalucía and Valencia
despaired at the middle classes’ reluctance to lead the Militia, and exer-
cised a range of coercion against them as a consequence.51 The Radical
press complained how patriotic economic dependents substituted their
masters in dangerous roles, and how the notables’ listlessness meant
that disbanded Royalist Volunteers were being enrolled in the Liberal
force.52 Alborea (Albacete), for example, was dominated by the Meoro y
Sánchez family, who maintained their grip on local policing when the
Volunteers’ commander, Anacleto, later Governor of the Bishopric of
Almería, handled the Cristino purge by simply abdicating his command
and preparing his nephew to take command of the ‘new’ militia.53
   The Cristino militia was despised by Carlists as a club for playboy
revolutionaries and was routinely the ﬁrst to be subjected to reprisals
whenever urban centres fell into their hands. It was also poorly regarded
by the Cristino army, which resented the militia’s parochial structures
58   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


(including, from 1835, elected ofﬁcers), comparatively good pay and
beneﬁts, and internal restrictions on where and when it might serve.
In return, the urbanos resented army ‘despotism’ and protested the Mili-
tia’s exclusion from an internationally brokered agreement in April 1835
which promised quarter to surrendering soldiers serving in the north.
Ultimately the Cristino army retained the upper hand in this inter-
service rivalry: it could impose a state of siege in response to revolution
or Carlist invasion, subjecting the Militia to martial law or even dis-
banding it altogether. But the Militia grew in power. The revolutionary
summer of 1835 made Militia service more attractive, and as its num-
bers expanded, its control over urban spaces and Liberal pageantry
claimed privileged ownership of Spanish patriotism: time and again this
was turned into a focus for radical political action, massacring clerics
and Carlist prisoners, and in September 1835 leading a Liberal revolu-
tion across Cristino Spain. A generation of historians saw this Militia
radicalism in Marxist class-conﬂict terms.54 But whilst class interests
were not absent, members of the Militia were radicalised more by the
experience of the civil war. Their sacriﬁces for the Cristino cause were
used to justify revolution and even the most extreme atrocities. Cities
like Barcelona were ﬁlling with refugees who had witnessed murders
and wanton destruction. Their arrival provoked demands for revenge
against Carlist sympathisers imprisoned in Cristino gaols, a demand that
became impossible to resist during the revolution of 1835.
   The inter-service rivalry about who was making the biggest sacri-
ﬁces raged as Zumalacárregui tightened his grip on the Basque country
and Carlist risings ﬂared up elsewhere. In 1834 the urbanos defend-
ing Cristino towns in the Basque country, Catalonia, the Maestrazgo
had no doubt that they were the defenders of liberty. During the win-
ter of 1834–35, besieged Pamplona ﬁlled with timorous army ofﬁcers
who avoided rejoining their units by exaggerating or inventing per-
sonal injuries, and often hiding behind the presence of their families.
Pamplona’s militiamen, by contrast, with a great deal more than hon-
our at stake, manned their city’s defence by day and night, often in
conditions of appalling hygiene and hunger.55 Forty miles south of
Pamplona, the besieged Militia garrison of Villafranca was heroically
martyred by defeat. Villafranca was the gateway to the Ribera and a
customs-post before the 1834 Cristino suspension of the fueros, and its
Militia garrison went to the utmost lengths to resist Zumalacárregui’s
siege. The Militia retreated into the defensive redoubt of the village
church. Zumalacárregui burnt down the adjoining buildings and burnt
sacks of chilli at the foot of the church in order to suffocate the defenders
                                               The Basque Phase, 1833–35   59