


some ending up being lynched by enraged Basque villagers, and oth-
ers reaching the temporary safety of Estella. The Army of the North
was spent, and even worse it had not even drawn any Carlist battal-
ions away from their offensive against Bilbao.154 As the English Carlist
veteran Henningsen noted:

   The high expectations entertained in both London and Madrid, of
   what Valdés was to do against the faction, were crushed, particularly
   when it was known that Zumalacárregui had overthrown him with
   eleven battalions, having in the provinces twenty-eight under his
   command, if he had chosen to bring them up; but that while he
   effected this, every fortiﬁed place was as strictly blockaded as ever.155

The defeat at the Améscoas valley handed the initiative to the Carlists,
who now embarked upon a general counteroffensive. Espoz’s recent
strategy of mobile warfare to retain as much territory as possible was
now impossible to sustain, and by the end of May Cristino forces were
driven from all of the Basque country outside the fortiﬁed capitals of
Pamplona, Vitoria, San Sebastián and Bilbao. The greatest loss was the
Baztán valley and the huge stretch of sensitive French border it com-
manded. The evacuation of the Baztán was followed by that of all
Cristino fortiﬁed centres in Navarra outside of Pamplona; the Carlists
occupied them and sometimes even did not even bother to harass
the retreating Cristinos. Liberals, especially those enrolled in Elizondo’s
Militia, felt abandoned and fearful of Carlist reprisals: Oráa called an
extra-ordinary session of the Baztán town hall in order to allay their fears
of the army’s retreat. It was to no avail. This episode crystallised an ide-
ological divide between the army and the militia which had, of course,
long distinguished Spanish liberalism but which now, in the context
of brutal civil war, became an anguished question of survival. Unlike
the Militia, which answered to local government, the army followed
a chain of command deaf to local interests. The militia, by contrast,
was a localised force that in the Carlist north made more enemies than
friends. The army’s retreat from the Baztán turned into a rout in wet
weather, with swollen streams hampering the retreat of often barefoot
soldiers. And the situation for the Cristinos elsewhere in the Basque
country was equally grim. In late April, General Iriarte was defeated at
Guernica, losing almost 500 in action and countless others when sol-
diers careered off a bridge into a fast-ﬂowing river. Captured ofﬁcers were
shot in reprisal for a recent Cristino atrocity elsewhere.156 The only ofﬁ-
cer who stemmed the offensive was Espartero, who, at Rentería, halted
80   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Iriarte’s ﬂight and reoccupied Guernica. A grateful government pro-
moted Espartero to Comandante General of the Basque provinces.157 But
the cupboard was bare when compared to the prizes on the Carlist side.
Zumalacárregui took Treviño (an exclave of Castile inside the Basque
country) after an almost bloodless siege. Its demoralised garrison of both
soldiers and Militia was happy to surrender on the Carlists’ word that the
new Eliot Treaty would be binding on both forces. Zumalacárregui now
had truly contiguous territory under his command with all its economic,
demographic and military potential, and he justiﬁed his overlordship
using the language of a Christian soldier.158 He implored his prisoners
to renounce revolution and embrace Catholicism and King Carlos V.
Learning of his commander’s ﬂourish, the pious Don Carlos offered
Zumalacárregui a noble title: Duke of Améscoas, but Zumalacárregui
coyly replied that he would ‘accept this honour once the Carlists are
marching into Cádiz’.159 But despite Zumalacárregui’s plans for Vitoria,
the court had resolved that the path to Spain’s Babylon lay through
Bilbao. Only Bilbao now stood between the status of Carlism as a rural
insurgency and Carlism as a regime-in-waiting.
5
The War Radicalises Cristino Spain,
1835–36