


front.26 Riding the tiger of army grievances, Cardero went on to become
a darling of the Left, and the nemesis of conservative army elites.
   In the wake of this rising a memorable debate ensued in the Cortes
in which Palarea, a mooted beneﬁciary of the rising, bizarrely attributed
the 18 January events to a Carlist plot, whilst Alcalá Galiano and others
condemned it as showing how honest, liberty-loving soldiers and militi-
amen had been led astray. The rightist Liberal, Fernández de Córdova, by
contrast, was scathing both of Cardero’s careerism and of Llauder’s weak-
ness in allowing the insurgents to march out unpunished. All pointed
the ﬁnger at Manuel Llauder, who had combined Bonapartist vainglory
with shocking timing and incompetence. Llauder was dismissed from
the War Ministry and dispatched with a token decoration to captain the
generals in Catalonia. His replacement was Jerónimo Valdés, a man of
the Left, whose reputation had grown as Captain-General of Valencia,
in which role he had virtually wiped out the insurgency, and who had
acted as temporary Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the North in
April 1835.27 When the speaker of the Cortes on 21 January made a
widely reported speech condemning the heavy-handed treatment of
Liberals across Spain, including their imprisonment in Cartagena for
singing the Riego Hymn, it was clear that the Cardero rising had shifted
Cristino politics to the Left.28
   Madrid remained in a state of heightened tension for months. A riot
on 11 May 1835 provoked by the Eliot Treaty led to rioters surround-
ing the Cortes in protest against Martínez de la Rosa, who narrowly
avoided being lynched by indignant Urban Militia when he alighted
from his coach. The capital was becoming ever more radicalised, as
remaining royalists found that they could not walk the streets in safety.29
Popular royalism had been greatly diminished by the Bourbon feud
which saw Don Carlos rebelling in the north and the emigration of
other family members, leaving María Cristina and her two daughters
alone in the capital to negotiate the leftist shift in Cristino politics.30
Thus, a leftist junior ofﬁcer and his network of Liberal conspirators had
caused the death of Madrid’s captain-general, the humiliation of the War
Minister, an embarrassed debate in the Cortes and a terminally weak-
ened moderado administration that was unable to survive any further
radicalisation.31 For a while it even seemed as though the controversial
question of foreign mediation, in the form of the Eliot Treaty, could be
such a spark. Despite the Francophile de la Rosa’s constant reluctance
to see British-led foreign intervention, the government now sought it,
citing relevant clauses in the Quadruple Alliance which had been signed
the previous April. It was desperately hoped that even the symbolic
88   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


showing of the Royal Navy ﬂag off the northern coast would cow the
rebels, and also that the French would send in an army.32 But Britain
would not move. Westminster knew that greater intervention in Spain
would need another Act of Parliament and that this would be rejected
by a resurgent Tory opposition, in both chambers, which was either neu-
tral or Carlist in sympathy. If the reactionary Northern Powers tried to
put Charles X on the French throne, then Britain would act, but for the
time being Britain thought that the Spanish Liberals could manage by
themselves. The only olive branch was an undertaking not to oppose
a stronger intervention from the French side. But France would only
intervene after a British security guarantee against the Northern Powers,
which was not forthcoming. The absence of an interventionist French
army, which Interior Minister Thiers desired for purely expansionist rea-
sons, fatally weakened the de la Rosa government and strengthened the
hand of the Radicals.33
   Meanwhile, the Cristino home front beyond Madrid underwent radi-
calisation. In March 1835, Málaga saw riots provoked by the supposedly
lenient treatment of a few Carlists behind bars and the militarisation
of the citizens’ force for service in the Serranía de Ronda. The mili-
tary governor and de la Rosa’s relative, Nicolás de Isidro purged the
citizens’ force of troublemakers, only to ﬁnd a trenchant rival in the
civil governor, who publicly sided with the militia. The clash between
the heavy-handed military governor and the more conciliatory civil
governor resulted in a power vacuum which the militia ﬁlled. Fearing
that what had happened in Madrid could follow in Málaga, Isidro tried
to disperse the crowd, only to be thwarted by a local agitator, Miguel
Deomarco (a tinker by trade and progenitor to a Radical dynasty in
Málaga), whose cry of ‘¡Viva la Constitución!’ rallied the militia to defy
martial law. The following day saw a funeral cortège of a dead mili-
tiaman pass by Isidro’s residence, playing the Riego Hymn. An order
the following day prohibiting subversive music and establishing a cur-
few went unheeded, and the situation spiralled quickly out of control.34
When, on 22 March, the militiamen were summoned to hear a War Min-
istry circular about discipline, they broke ranks and marched into the
town square shouting vivas to the Constitution. Three days of stand-
off followed, as rival factions patrolled the streets: the civil power led
by the militia who besieged Isidro’s residence, and the military power,
which had recruited a posse of some wealthy individuals who had ‘a
decided interest in re-establishing order’. Yet on 24 March, it was the
militia which triumphed, as Isidro suffered a negative pronunciamiento in
his ranks and was forced to resign and ﬂee to Granada. The replacement
                                   War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   89