


in authority. This tense situation was soon made worse by the execu-
tion of a cabal of conspirators led by a purged army ofﬁcer. They failed
to raise Seville for Don Carlos, but not before renewed riots and a pru-
dent decision by the Cristino authorities to execute the conspirators in
secret.124
   Tensions grew between mobilised militiamen and civilian popula-
tions in either front-line or bandit-infested areas. By the summer of
1834, Cuevillas had returned from Portugal and was invading several
rural communities in the province of Logroño, and Cristino mobile
Militia was sent out on a punitive expedition. Unable to catch up
with Cuevillas, the militia nonetheless ﬁned villages which ‘failed to
report’ the transit of Carlists, whilst militiamen were also entitled to
claim ‘expenses’ incurred whilst away on campaign.125 Militiamen sent
on fruitless campaigns to exterminate Carlist bands often vented their
frustrations on civilians. Irregular risings to the south of Madrid that
summer caused a tense atmosphere in Ciempozuelos, where the Urban
Militia rampaged in reprisal for the killing of one of their number in a
tavern. This arrogant paramilitarism was ﬂawed because it tied the exer-
cise of Liberal patriotism on terms favourable to the Militia to the use of
force. To some extent violence against non-combatants was understand-
able in a civil war which was both highly localised and asymmetrical.
But Cristino heavy-handedness often recoiled on the authorities. When
a June 1834 tax riot in Corella (Aragón) was brutally suppressed by
militiamen, the population responded with cries of ‘¡Viva Carlos V!’126
In Novelda (Alicante), local people proclaimed the Pretender in protest
at the continued imprisonment of hundreds of men who, in December
1833, had attempted a Carlist rising. In this case, the Militia likewise
brutally cleared the streets, banishing ﬁve ringleaders, and forbidding
meetings in the open.127 The terrible – and sometimes liberating –
choices that civilian communities were forced to make in this war would
be starkest during the years of ‘deep war’ between 1836 and 1837. In the
meantime, the civilian experience of the war, at the hands of both
Carlist and Cristino forces, created its own community of sacriﬁce which
had a distinctive impact on popular politics. Fundamentally, civilians
under Cristino control resented conscription. The ‘blood tax’ by the end
of 1834 was set at 8,000 reales, a sum beyond the means of all but a
select few, and draftees could not easily escape, as communities had to
provide replacements for any of their number who failed to enlist or
soldiers who subsequently deserted.128
   The blood sacriﬁces demanded by the Cristino regime poisoned the
popular reception of its Liberal project whilst also providing Radicals
72   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


with political oxygen. Popular disaffection was heightened because
Carlist violence obliged Liberals to explain often elite-driven reforms
in the strident language of liberty. In order to rally Spain to reject
Don Carlos, it was necessary to make the cause of the infant Isabella
that of liberty against despotism, constitutional government against
absolutism and civilisation against barbarism. Thus, the government
decision in February 1834 to create the Urban Militia on a very lim-
ited basis was quickly overturned by a press campaign, which saw this
force’s expansion as a tripwire against despotism. By the end of the
year the Militia contained about 200,000 effectives, one-third of whom
were unarmed.129 Political newspapers, which were permitted for the
ﬁrst time since the Triennium, exercised unprecedented importance
in radicalising the politics of the Cristino zone. Strict censorship laws
passed in January and June 1834 would be swept away in the revolu-
tion of 1836.130 The Eco del Comercio was mouthpiece to the Left-Liberals
(known as the exaltados – ‘hotheads’ – and, after 1836, progresistas),
whilst more radical, Republican journals emerged besides. The Right-
Liberals (moderados) were represented by a succession of titles (La Abeja,
El Español, El Castellano, El Correo Nacional, El Piloto). The civil war thus
ushered in a recognisably bipartisan political system. The Carlist press,
by contrast, constrained by territory and prior censorship throughout
the conﬂict, failed to evolve. Its ofﬁcial gazette, of which Metternich
despaired for its inquisitorial, sermon-like quality and blindness to
positive propaganda opportunities, was the Gaceta Oﬁcial.131 Just like
the Liberal press with its correspondence, the Carlist Gaceta ﬂourished
on the correspondence of fellow travellers, especially civic Carlists in
Cristino territory. This led Cristino authorities to destroy as many edi-
tions of the Gaceta as came into their hands.132 Liberal newspapers, by
contrast, due to their sheer quantity, inﬁltrated the Carlist zone and
permeated Cristino territory where they became a vehicle for political
parties and revolution.
   Newspaper opinion was central to pressurising María Cristina into
yielding to progressive reform. In April 1834, the Royal Statute (Estatuto
Real) was ‘granted’ by the Crown to the nation. But the bicameral Cortes
it established was even more restrictive with regards to suffrage than
the French Charte of 1814, and only 27 representatives of the 188-
strong lower house had been deputies during the Triennium, and fewer
still exaltados.133 Much of its conservatism was overruled by liberalising
decrees in 1835 before the Statute itself was abrogated the following
year, but this liberalism had to be wrested from a Queen-Regent who
remained almost absolutist in her political instincts. The war caused
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   73