


and militiamen; Espoz responded in kind with the wife of a Carlist
mayor and several other prominent Carlist women, ransoming them
in a Pamplona prison.112
   Escalating reprisals provoked international interest in the conﬂict and
motivated foreign volunteers. Zumalacárregui assembled a squadron
entitled the Defensores de la Legitimidad, comprising Spanish and
foreign ofﬁcers who served as simple soldiers, and they increased in
number and distinction (research has revealed between 120 and 250
foreign Carlist volunteers, of whom more than a quarter boasted noble
titles).113 It became fashionable for European aristocrats hooked on
the Hispanophile Romanticism of writers like Chateaubriand, Schlegel
and Hugo to assert old-fashioned notions of honour in a continent
which had otherwise lapsed into the juste milieu. French volunteers were
the most numerous; reeling from their recent failure in the Vendée,
Spain’s conﬂict offered legitimists the chance to reignite the cause of
Henri d’Artois and restore honour. Aubert, a French ofﬁcer and fugi-
tive of 1832, ﬂed France under a death sentence to serve under Don
Carlos in Spain, but faced the same sentence once captured by Cristino
forces. Rejecting an invitation to defect and save his life, Aubert died
a Carlist: ‘In France I would have given my life for Henri V; here,
I owe it to Carlos V. Long live the king!’114 Prussians formed the sec-
ond largest contingent of volunteers; their Protestant piety in the service
of the Carlist Catholicism was explained by a pan-European, interde-
nominational defence of legitimacy.115 German conservatives of both
denominations united in pro-Carlism: the ultramontane Rheinlander
Josef Görres shared Protestants’ enthusiasm for Carlism as the organic
Spanish resistance to ‘foreign’ Liberalism.116 The prospect of adventure
lured other young legitimists. The young August Karl von Goeben, full
of a sense of Romantic adventure, followed his countrymen:117

  A royalist in the full sense of the word . . . I imagined those mountains,
  how the Carlists there were struggling against the overwhelming
  might of the revolutionary armies, bowing neither to sword, hunger
  nor death, and I resolved to offer my blood for the cause of legitimate
  monarch.

The Carlists claimed their cause was truly Spanish, unlike the ‘foreign-
ness’ of the Liberals. Yet his knowledge of European divisions inﬂected
Don Carlos’s proclamations against the Quadruple Alliance. The quar-
ter Zumalacárregui offered to Cristino prisoners after his victory at Los
Arcos was used by the King to counter the black legend his cause
70   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


attracted in the foreign press and capitals: ‘Europe does not know us and
yet pronounces without hearing us . . . and offers us nothing but unjust
hatred.’118 As we shall see in Chapter 5, far more foreign volunteers with
far more varied motives would soon join the Cristino side, with the
result that, by the summer of 1835, the expanded Spanish political and
military battleﬁelds were accompanied by an expanded international
civil war of ideologies and volunteers. Contemporaries certainly saw the
war as an international struggle between Liberty and Catholicism, not
unlike their great-grandchildren during the Spanish Civil War a century
later. According to three Aragonese Radicals, ‘the Spanish civil war was
not just a dynastic issue between Isabel II and her uncle, Don Carlos,
nor was it just a contest between despotism and liberty in Spain, but
also between Dom Miguel and María de la Gloria, and Henri V and
Louis-Philippe, between Liberal and Absolutist Europe’.119
   But, as with the Spanish Civil War a hundred years later, international
involvement had a ‘great distorting’ effect. The ﬁrst two years of Cristino
Spain, from the start of the war in October 1833 to the revolution of
the juntas in September 1835, were certainly marked by growing polar-
isation between Left (which tended towards republicanism in extreme
cases) and the Right (which in many cases leaned towards Carlism).
Leftist climates along the Mediterranean littoral (Barcelona, Málaga,
Seville) saw Cristino governors there champion reformist calls whilst
the inverse was true in such conservative cities in the north as Burgos
and Salamanca. But beneath this macropolitical trajectory, several thou-
sand local disputes were given a political dimension by the demands of
war. The Liberal postmaster of Valladolid had his house ransacked and
family abused by Merino’s royalist bands in 1822; in 1833 he faced the
same terror at Merino’s hands in 1833 when he refused to frank Carlist
mail.120 Women from the poor neighbourhoods in the south-west of
Madrid regularly invoked the cry of ‘Long Live Carlos V!’ in a primitive
protest against cholera – from which many of the wealthy classes had
ﬂed – and taxes.121 Journeymen resented master tradesmen who man-
aged to embellish their fortunes with Militia service, whilst unskilled
labourers (such as Madrid builders) jeered passing señoritos in uniform.122
Newspapers reported violence between militiamen and soldiers, which,
though sparked off by rivalry over women, in reality was caused by
resentment between those who had to go to the front and those who
could stay behind.123 The poor Triana neighbourhood of Seville saw riots
in protest against the cost of expanding local Militia forces and against
their insufferable behaviour strutting about in the name of liberty hun-
dreds of miles behind the front line, persecuting those without friends
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   71