




This chapter charts the Carlist recovery from their failure to take Bilbao
(ﬁrst siege) and the death of Zumalacárregui, including Carlist territo-
rial expansion in the Basque country, the Maestrazgo and Catalonia.
It explains how Carlist military success was both a cause and a con-
sequence of the Radical-Liberal revolutions in the Cristino zone of
September 1835. It shows how this leftist shift in politics was fed
by a popular anti-militarism and anti-clericalism, which, with varied
results, forced the hand of the Radical Prime Minister, Mendizábal.
Whilst his anti-clerical reforms solidiﬁed Cristino support at the expense
of provoking support for Carlism, his 100,000-man levy provoked an
expanded pattern of desertion, particularly because of the peculiar sup-
ply problems the Cristino army faced. It shows how the war radicalised
international opinion and led to volunteers enlisting for both sides,
especially the Cristino auxiliaries who helped defeat Bilbao’s second
siege, and explains their impact on Spanish politics and society.
   The Cristino army now abandoned all of the Basque country apart
from San Sebastián, Bilbao and Pamplona, the front line being estab-
lished at Miranda del Ebro. The Carlists thus gained population, money
and other war-ready resources. Eraso already had Bilbao under siege:
now the Carlist cry went up of ‘To Bilbao!’ Eight artillery pieces were
trained on the capital of Vizcaya, and shortages, if not outright hunger,
began to envelop the city. Carlist women followed the besieging army
in the hope of entering Bilbao for plunder.1 Count Mirasol, Cristino mil-
itary governor of the province of Vizcaya, came from second-generation
military aristocracy and was no natural friend of the popular cause. Yet,
on 18 June 1835, he made a stirring speech to the Urban Militia of
Bilbao, telling them they had ‘nothing to learn from the army’. The

                                   81
82   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


walls were breached on 14 June, but the Militia managed to secure the
gap. Even though the Carlists, as always, managed to work miracles with
their limited artillery, two of their guns were so worn that their bores
split. The Carlists were too exhausted to continue the assault on the
night of 14 June, and the Cristino batteries opened up a counter-ﬁre.
Mirasol had scoured the northern front for spare artillery, as far aﬁeld
as San Sebastián. British and French gunboats were also active in the
River Nervión, and the allies accepted Mirasol’s request to strip their
vessels of some of their guns in order to bolster the defences of the city.
Mirasol’s resourcefulness was matched by a chance catastrophe in the
enemy camp. On 18 June, Zumalacárregui was wounded outside the
walls and died a week later.2 Zumalacárregui’s death turned him into
a Carlist legend, at the right hand of such patriotic ﬁgures as Pelayo
and El Cid.3 Carlism was deprived of its ﬁrst and last undisputed leader,
and no sooner had Zumalacárregui died that rumours abounded that he
had been poisoned by Don Carlos’s court.4 It was therefore strange that
early Cristino responses included panic as well as triumphalism. The
consulate at Bayonne repeated ill-digested rumours that the Quadru-
ple Alliance was abandoning plans to reinforce the Cristinos with some
3,000 Polish émigré infantry who had been awaiting embarkation from
Southampton; news of Zumalacárregui’s death, it seemed, convinced
Paris and London that the war would now be short and that interven-
tion was both unnecessary and dangerous in view of renewed legitimist
plots in France.5 In fact, Liberal Polonophilia in the wake of the recent
Russian repression of Poland had exaggerated the real ﬁgure of 500
infantry, and these Poles would still reach Spain as part of the French
Foreign Legion (and they would be joined the following year by three
Polish cavalry squadrons).6 Rumours and half-truths shaped the Carlist
War like no other.
   Cristno spirits were raised when a relief force led by General Manuel
Latre, a veteran of the Riego revolution, forced a gap in the Carlist
siege line. On 26 June, Don Carlos appeared in person before Bilbao,
but this emboldened rather intimidated the defenders. When a particu-
larly savage bombardment on the morning of the 27th opened a breach
in the walls, into it sprang soldiers and the artillerymen of the Urban
Militia, even British Royal Marines, the shock troops of the Quadruple
Alliance, all of whom displayed doggedly high morale, shouting vivas
to Isabel II and liberty.7 Seeing this resolve, on 27 June Eraso made a
plea for the besieged to surrender, promising even to show mercy to
the Militia as the Carlists recently had at Villafranca and Vergara. But
the resolve of the Militia, Quadruple Alliance and even Bilbao women
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   83