


extra-parliamentary radicalism to re-emerge, the ﬁrst manifestation of
which was the Radical Isabelina Society. Government listlessness in
response to the anti-Jesuit massacres encouraged the Radical Isabelina
Society to act. Meeting in secret on 20 July whilst the cinders of Madrid’s
monasteries were still warm, the society’s leader, the now elderly Romero
Alpuente mobilised a petition of prominent leftists to the Queen-Regent,
saying that the Royal Statute was too restrictive and asking for it to be
replaced by a Constituent Assembly tasked with introducing a version
of the Belgian Constitution. The petitioners threatened street barricades
if these demands were not met. But whereas the government was pre-
pared to overlook anti-clerical violence, the threat to the monarchy
posed by advanced Liberal elites was another matter. The conspiracy
was quickly penetrated, but despite the arrest of Romero Alpuente and
such other Radical elites as the leader of the dissolved Santander junta,
Flórez Estrada, the network was so wide and well connected that only
Eugenio de Aviraneta e Ibargoyen, an experienced Liberal conspirator
and veteran of Spain’s last attempt to reconquer Mexico, was actually
convicted and imprisoned. Aviraneta was the easiest Isabelina leader-
ship scapegoat for the government. But Madrid’s Liberals did not forget
him. Aviraneta was allowed to keep abreast of politics from his prison
cell, a concession which, so Liberal opinion fumed, had to be wrenched
from the Apostolic ‘Junta of Selva’, a group of Carlist political prison-
ers who informally determined which privileges and punishments their
fellow captives might receive.134 The notion of Carlist prisoners running
a prison in the Cristino capital is almost as striking as the subsequent
story of Aviraneta, whom the 1835 revolution would free from captivity
and elevate to the leading counter-espionage role in Liberal politics.
   The Carlist state would also become politically divided, between
theocratic and enlightened absolutist factions, jostling in a notori-
ously Byzantine court. Indeed, Don Carlos’s civilian court faced several
problems improving Zumalacárregui’s military state. Lacking formal
diplomatic recognition, even from sympathetic absolutist powers, the
Carlists lacked predictable foreign ﬁnancial support. The Carlist com-
mander in Catalonia, the ill-fated Count Romagosa, may have managed
to secure a substantial donation from Turin, but British markets were
the most lucrative, and this foremost ally of Cristino Spain blocked
most private Carlist efforts to tap London loan markets. Privately con-
tracted arms shipments frequently failed to reach the Carlists either
because cargoes were impounded in French and British ports or because
they were intercepted by Quadruple Alliance seapower before they could
reach the safety of the Carlist-held coastline.135 Therefore, populations
74   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


under Carlist control had to shoulder the burden, which meant Navarra,
Alava, Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa (in that descending order of magnitude).
A junta collected income from customs posts which the Carlists had
seized along the French frontier, monies were raised from Basque and
Navarrese clergy, especially during Lent (‘a crisis time for the cause of
Isabel II’136 ), titles and ofﬁces were sold, and other income was found
in ﬁnes, both in an ad hoc (i.e. against local Cristino sympathisers) and
organised basis, such as the 20,000 duros ﬁne imposed on Cristino com-
munities that came under Carlist occupation in the Baztán. Don Carlos’s
arrival had brought some new money from international sympathisers,
but also court sinecures who frittered away the budget.137 Nominally, the
Carlist war economy was dwarfed by the economic and demographic
potential of the Cristino zone, even though revolution there meant that
this was not optimised. Carlist geostrategic inferiority could only be
overcome by formal and substantial diplomatic support. And this, in
turn, could only be won by decisive victories on the battleﬁeld to make
foreign powers view the Carlists as a regime in waiting instead of a mere
rural insurgency.
   The year 1835 seemed to promise the Carlists such an outcome.
Bloody three-day actions opened on New Year’s Day at Celandieta and
Ormáiztegui were defensive victories for Zumalacárregui (they were
falsely reported as Cristino victories in San Sebastián where the Mili-
tia had to rescind victory celebrations).138 Zumalacárregui intensiﬁed
pressure on besieged Cristino towns by employing guerrilla forces. The
Cristino army could win few victories, and those it did win were
ineluctably skewed by political and careerist considerations. General
Córdova, whose later leadership of the Army of the North I address
in Chapter 5, felt his role in the victory had been downplayed and
offered Madrid his resignation in protest; Madrid appeased him with
the comandancia of the Basque provinces, replacing the American wars
veteran, Canterac, who was made Captain-General of Madrid. Political
pressure, buoyed by a radicalised press, exhorted Cristino commanders
to win victories no matter what the cost. Zumalacárregui was dislodged
by overwhelming enemy numbers at Orbiso on 17 January 1835, and
this was subsequently celebrated as a Cristino victory, even though
the Cristinos then abandoned their useless territorial gain, allowing
Zumalacárregui to claim the ﬁeld.139 Two weeks later Zumalacárregui
repulsed a Cristino attempt to seize the bridge at Arquijas, in cir-
cumstances which summed up the Cristino quandary: Córdova and
Oráa saw their communications paralysed by Carlist interception, and
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   75