


weaknesses in Espoz’s strategy by dispatching guerrillas to harass multi-
ple Cristino fortiﬁed centres simultaneously, always reserving his main
effort for Bilbao. Eraso was aided both by increasing defections from
Cristino ranks (during the ﬁrst ten days of March alone some 76 men
and an ofﬁcer defected) and by crisis within Bilbao. The Basque capital
was in the grip of an economic crisis caused by the inﬂux of refugees,
mainly from the exposed coastal towns of Portugalete, Bermeo and
Lequeitio, and by the paralysis caused by rural Carlism to local eco-
nomic activity.148 The world anticipated some sort of decision at the
Vizacayan capital; Carlists indeed hoped that their capture of this port
would trigger decisive aid from Metternich’s Europe. International inter-
est in Bilbao also magniﬁed reports of atrocities. On one occasion some
37 Cristino soldiers captured by the besiegers outside the city walls were
shot in reprisal for the killing of three wounded Carlists. The Carlists
castrated some of their victims, as if playing out the emasculation trope
of dynastic propaganda.149
   Mounting atrocities like these alarmed European opinion, and caused
the British expert on Spanish affairs, Lord Wellington, to dispatch a
humanitarian mission under the politician and diplomat, Lord Eliot,
and his adjunct, the Peninsular War veteran, Colonel John Gurwood.
The ‘Eliot Treaty’ which resulted from this mission gave quarter to
regular Carlist and Cristino troops who surrendered in the Basque
country, allocating them mutually recognised prisoner-of-war camps, or
‘depots’, from which they were to be exchanged at regular intervals.
Both Zumalacárregui and Cristino War Minister Valdés agreed that the
treaty could be ‘extended if the war reaches other places’, even though
the Cristinos were horriﬁed by this prospect.150 In fact, this humanitar-
ian mission by their Quadruple Alliance ally poisoned Cristino politics,
especially later in the war when pressure grew from some quarters
to extend the treaty to the irregular war raging in Catalonia and the
Maestrazgo. Both Left and Right Liberals protested that the treaty treated
the Carlists as equals, and even worked in their favour as their forces
were numerically inferior. Left Liberals protested that the treaty allowed
the Carlists to exclude militiamen, foreigners and Cristino free corps
from quarter, licensing them in particular to massacre any militiamen
they captured. As one Bilbao Radical complained whilst his city was
under Carlist siege: ‘here is a treaty which carefully excludes the mili-
tia, the very pith of the popular cause . . . The Spanish Generals ought
to have spurned the mere idea of bargaining for their own safety at the
cost of the families who fed, clothed, and paid them.’151 Other Liber-
als in safe urban centres shared the same indignation in the press.152
78   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


The treaty touched a raw nerve in terms of inter-service rivalry, and
the behaviour of Spanish ofﬁcers increased leftist grievances. Episodes
abounded of Cristino ofﬁcers’ callousness towards the Liberals’ Mili-
tia. When the Cristino commander of Ochandiano surrendered his
town to Zumalacárregui, he negotiated the safe handover of his horses
but neglected to negotiate anything for the town’s Militia garrison.153
Episodes likes these fed a popular martyrdom complex and primed the
‘people-in-arms’ to start the revolution of the juntas in 1835. In the
meantime, the Eliot Treaty could not have come at a worse time for
Cristino fortunes, for Valdés signed it only days after having left his
Ministry to replace Espoz in the command of the Army of the North in
order to mount what turned out to be a disastrous offensive.
   On 18 April 1835, the Army of the North mounted the biggest cam-
paign of the war so far, involving some 21,000 Cristino soldiers, which
led on 22 April to the Battle of Améscoas. Valdés’s offensive aimed to
destroy the Carlist army in its ‘den’ of the valley of Améscoas in Navarra,
which Zumalacárregui had developed as a redoubt in the early days of
the insurgency. The army invaded as pincers, one arm led by Valdés
and the other by Córdova from his base at Vitoria. The Cristinos’ 34
battalions vastly outnumbered the 11 which Zumalacárregui had com-
mitted for defence (his main effort was massing against Bilbao) but
the Carlists’ signature tactics of ambush and superior local intelligence
hampered the invaders’ progress. Early success by Córdova’s pincer at
destroying Carlist depots proved a false dawn when his men lost disci-
pline and gorged on the supplies Carlist civilian evacuees had stashed
in oak boughs. Both Cristino armies lost around half their effectives to
desertion during the two-week campaign, and these losses were com-
pounded by suffering as the Cristinos’ ﬂimsy footwear broke on the
notoriously tough limestone terrain and their supplies broke down.
The hunger of Valdés’s men drove most of their effectives away from
the planned route and towards the Carlist capital of Estella instead.
Even though they occupied Estella, their ignorance of local geogra-
phy and a complete breakdown of communications caused the Cristino
columns to ﬁre on each other the whole night before the occupation.
Meanwhile, Zumalacárregui’s rearguard wore out Córdova’s force with
repeated ambushes, especially at night, which meant the Cristino force
which reached Artaza, the gateway to the Améscoas valley, on 22 April,
was hungry, sleep-deprived and diminished. Zumalacárregui issued a
halt order, and repulsed the Cristino attack despite his three-to-one
inferiority, inﬂicting over 700 fatalities. The Cristino line broke and
the demoralised soldiers ﬂed for their lives, vanishing into the hills,
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   79