


Oráa ended up advancing onto the wrong enemy ﬂank, allowing
Zumalacárregui to defeat both armies in detail.140
   Whilst the Cristino army was bogged down, the Carlists were suc-
cessful in a series of localised offensives to expand their hold on the
Basque country. In the front line was the Baztán, whose hard-pressed
Militia felt abandoned by the Cristino army. Elizondo was terrorised by
artillery bombardment: such was the panic that the town’s women were
allowed to leave to take their chances with the surrounding Carlists.
The town made desperate appeals for reinforcements from Pamplona
but Espoz, conscious of Pamplona’s precarious situation, at ﬁrst rejected
these. Espoz himself begged Madrid for more reinforcements, but those
that arrived were of insufﬁcient quantity and quality.141 War Minister
Llauder, himself so recently a royalist and accustomed to seeing Espoz
as a revolutionary, was reluctant to send him reinforcements, and did
not believe his remark that ‘it did not matter whether Juan or Pedro
are War Minister as I know how to obey’.142 Rather, Llauder was one of
the ﬁrst moderados to utter a preference for an international rather than
national solution to the conﬂict, precisely so as to avoid Espoz’s revo-
lutionism. Espoz would soon have his revenge by publicly condemning
the leftist Cardero rising of January 1835, thereby placing the blame
for its success entirely on Llauder’s shoulders.143 Meanwhile, as besieged
Elizondo began to starve, pressure mounted on Espoz to send a relief
force, which he scraped together by mobilising Pamplona’s militia cav-
alry. But this suffered a reverse at Larráinzar, where Espoz himself was
almost captured by the Carlists after a series of errors which histori-
ans have explained along partisan lines.144 Espoz eventually relieved
Elizondo and made a brutal example of the nearby village of Lekaroz,
which had been a Carlist thorn in the Cristino side of the Baztán cap-
ital, executing three male residents and relenting only when villagers
marked for execution disclosed the whereabouts of three buried Carlist
cannon. Carlists condemned Espoz for repeating his terrorism during
the Triennium at Castellfullit. But to the Carlist cry to avenge Lekaroz,
the Cristinos answered with Villafranca. Espoz defended his ruthless-
ness as stiffening the resolve of front-line Cristino communities and
intimidating other Carlist villages.145
   But a pattern had emerged whereby a Cristino local victory in one area
would be cancelled out by two defeats elsewhere. Whilst Espoz relieved
Elizondo, Zumalacárregui took Los Arcos after a bloody siege involving
artillery which the Cristino garrison – accustomed to seeing the enemy
as insurgents rather than a regular army – assumed the Carlists could not
76   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


have. Unlike at Villafranca, the Cristinos yielded the town, evacuating
safely under cover of night and rainfall. Whilst the Cristino rearguard
fought off Zumalacárregui’s cavalry pursuit, the vanguard faced the
wrath of Espoz, who arrested the ‘cowardly’ garrison commander and
his ofﬁcers.146 Espoz knew that the Carlist ring was tightening on the
sensitive Baztán valley, but his exhortations for a maximum effort
sounded hollow as defeatism swept his ranks. When Zumalacárregui,
on 19 March, made a second attempt at Echarri-Aranaz on the key
Pamplona–Vitoria road, the town yielded after a short bombardment
from El Abuelo, the Cristino ofﬁcers accepting terms to keep their swords
and withdraw to Pamplona, whilst the subaltern ranks (including the
artillery), who were also free to go, chose to serve under the Carlists
rather than their own ofﬁcers. These defectors were amazed to discover
the still shoestring nature of the attack: El Abuelo’s bore had worn out
just as the garrison accepted terms (Carlist soldiers joked that it had gone
quiet due to it being ‘promoted’ to lieutenant-colonel), whilst the par-
simonious Zumalacárregui uncharacteristically bribed the inhabitants
with scarce money in lieu of sustaining a full garrison of occupation.
He had now consolidated his communications between Guipúzcoa and
Navarra; Espoz, by contrast, had to abandon and destroy the nearby
fort at Olazagutía, which had now been rendered indefensible.147 Espoz
thus lost hope in destroying the Carlist army in open battle, and instead
focused on holding fortiﬁed towns, and absorbing virtually all his ener-
gies escorting supply convoys. And when fresh troops became available
for a major offensive in April (see below), they failed to wrest the initia-
tive from the Carlists. For the Carlists, meanwhile, only one prize now
mattered.
   Carlist legend says that Zumalacárregui opposed the decision to
besiege Bilbao. Rather, Vitoria, so Zumalacárregui thought, was an eas-
ier target, whose fall could easily be followed by a general offensive
towards Madrid. As he would be killed during this siege, it was com-
forting for the Carlists to read infallibility – and martyrdom – into their
fallen leader. Certainly, the overruling of Zumalacárregui on the Bilbao
question gave the court a pretext for bringing its commander-in-chief
to heel. But early events also strengthened the court’s case. Bilbao was
blockaded from the land as early as March 1835, and illness and exhaus-
tion forced Espoz to resign his command only weeks later. This deprived
the Cristino cause of an experienced counter-insurgent strategist and
Basque speaker. Also, the Bilbao operation was led by Zumalacárregui’s
second-in-command, the very able Francisco Benito de Eraso, who had
fought Espoz during 1822–23 and again in 1830, and who probed the
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   77