


who answered the sound of shellﬁre with piano music and dancing,
emboldened Mirasol to reject capitulation.8
   The Carlist siege was formally broken by the arrival, on 30 June, of
a Cristino relief force led by Córdova, acting head of the Army of the
North. The Carlists had ﬁred a total of 1,580 projectiles into Bilbao,
and, in all, more than 200 soldiers and militiamen had been killed or
wounded (no exact ﬁgures exist for civilians).9 On the one hand, the
Carlists had been defeated by the Cristino defence: Bilbao’s Militia had
excelled in urban point defence, giving time for the relief force, and
the propaganda value of the Liberal ‘people in arms’ surged in the wake
of the victory.10 On the other hand, the Carlists also defeated them-
selves via internal dissent. The Carlist court was riven with intrigue and
animosity. Maroto and Eraso disliked each other whilst Villemur, the
French émigré of the 1790s and now Carlist prime minister (‘Universal
Minister’) disliked Zumalacárregui. These court divisions in part resulted
in the Cristino relief force from Portugalete relieving Bilbao. Sturdier
siegeworks and more intense bombardment might have taken the city,
so the Carlists reckoned.
   Meanwhile, the death of Zumalacárregui and the victory at Bilbao
gave the Cristino side the initiative for the ﬁrst time since the Améscoas
offensive. Strategically, the situation showed promise: on 17 March
1835, Madrid had decreed the creation of a Reserve Army comprising
both regular troops and, controversially for the Cristino Left, mobile
militia, to be based in Castile to combat both Carlist incursions from
Navarra and guerrilla activity behind the front line. Valdés’s failure to
lead the lifting of the siege of Bilbao had cost him his job, and on
2 July 1835, he was replaced as commander-in-chief by Luis Fernández
de Córdova.11 A royalist during the Triennium and diplomat during the
Ominous Decade, Córdova’s career was tarnished by a notorious alterca-
tion in 1831 with Prime Minister Calomarde. But Córdova returned to
favour after the transition and became an intimate ally of the Queen-
Regent.12 For the ﬁrst time since the appointment of Espoz the previous
November, the Cristinos had a commander with real vision, albeit a very
different one (Córdova planned a static war of attrition). The Carlists,
by contrast, never found a replacement equal to Zumalacárregui. The
hero’s successor, Vicente González Moreno, was 58 years old – almost
20 years older than Córdova. Moreno’s Ominous Decade had honoured
the Liberal black legend: as Captain-General of Granada he had presided
over the execution of Torrijos. The ‘Hangman of Málaga’ also alienated
his own side: in 1827, he had supported Calomarde’s anti-Carlism and
had timorously ﬂed possible retribution from vengeful Liberals after
84   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


being purged of his captaincy-general in October 1832. Moreno thus
needed some military success to restore Carlist fortunes and silence his
detractors.13
   Moreno advanced the Carlist army to Mendigorría (Navarra), rashly
joining battle with the Cristinos in a tactically weak position, as the
River Arga lay behind his troops with only one bridge allowing for
the contingency of retreat. Thus battle opened on 16 July 1835, and
Córdova won his ﬁrst victory as commander-in-chief, even though his
cavalry failed to exploit this in pursuit. For the ﬁrst time, Carlist casual-
ties (some 2,000 dead) signiﬁcantly exceeded those of the Cristinos, who
lost about half this toll.14 Moreno’s hopes of silencing his critics were
thus dashed. It was suggested that Moreno hoped his reckless deploy-
ment would intimidate an enemy which had been showing every sign
of nerves, and yield the possibility of a general invasion of Castile.15
Don Carlos, who had never forgotten Moreno’s betrayal during the
Agraviados, replaced him with the ambitious Nazario Eguía, who was
of a similar age but was a career ofﬁcer and a better tactician.16
   Even though Córdova was feted in Pamplona as a hero, the strate-
gic situation was not signiﬁcantly changed. Despite Cristino defensive
victories at Bilbao and Mendigorría, the Army of the North remained
chronically undersupplied, only limited help came from outside Spain
and poor conditions made an ideal environment for Radical agitators
to subvert the army. Córdova repeatedly offered his resignation in dis-
gust but Madrid neither called his bluff nor managed to attend to his
needs. The ﬁrst problem was that the granaries and other foodstores
established in northern forts were either abandoned or empty. The sec-
ond problem was the corrupt and chaotic system of private contractors.
The government regularly defaulted on its payments to the contractors,
or asentistas, and these in turn did not supply the army, or at best, supply
would be partial, erratic and unpredictable. The largest contractor of this
chaotic scheme was Agustín Alinary, and as little as 30 per cent of his
contracted supplies actually reached the army. The third problem was
that it proved difﬁcult to surmount this shortfall by living off the land.
Cristino invaders in Navarra seldom found booty as Carlist defenders
were supplied at short range and the Royal Government issued decrees
against the hoarding of foodstuffs (Carlists invading Castile, by con-
trast, could get booty). Córdova thus had to show an administrative
and political acumen beyond his relatively young years. On the one
hand, he coerced Cristino civilian populations in his zone to shoulder
the burden of supply. This won him the loyalty of his soldiers but not of
civilians. For operations either on the actual front or in hostile territory,
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   85