


Córdova contracted 1,000 muleteers, of whom some 700 presented for
work (not enough, but a valuable addition nonetheless). But as these
men routinely went unpaid, or were paid only in arrears, most ended
up deserting. Córdova blamed the political leadership for these failings,
and owing to the revolution of the juntas in September 1835, his sup-
ply situation deteriorated still further as Radical juntas exercised their
‘sovereignty’.17
   The everyday life of the Cristino soldier and the ofﬁcer on campaign
was thus precarious in the extreme. Letters to ofﬁcers from loved ones
at best arrived twice per week when soldiers were in garrison, and not at
all when they were on campaign. Relatives might send mail to fortresses
and towns which approximated the soldiers’ whereabouts, but there was
no guarantee that recipients would pass through.18 Billets were dreary
and unwelcoming: Pamplona, Vitoria and even San Sebastián lay under
close blockade. Only Bilbao, with its busy port and entertainments, was
a popular posting, at least for ofﬁcers. But as for the ranks, foreign
observers of both Cristino and Carlist sympathies agreed upon their dire
state. Pro-Carlist Honan remarked: ‘(Cristino conscripts) were chieﬂy
boys from sixteen to twenty years; many of them in tatters, and present-
ing most ungainly specimens. They took all opportunities of deserting,
and some old soldiers escorted them from town to town to prevent it.’19
A British Legion ofﬁcer in San Sebastián, for his part, saw wonders in his
allies’ predicament:20

  The Queen’s recruits are mainly short, poorly clothed and worse fed.
  It is a mystery to me how any man can survive on their fare: meatless
  rations of rice some days, boiled vegetables with an ounce of bacon
  on others, coarse dark bread, no wine, and the meanest serving of
  rough spirits on Sundays.

In fact, this diet compared favourably with that of the civilian popula-
tion: it has been estimated that in 1834 only some 13 per cent of Spain’s
population, some 1,550,000 out of 12,000,000, ate meat as part of their
diet.21 But food supplies were erratic, especially at times of revolution,
which fed a spiral of popular radicalisation, and the war for supplies was
a constant Achilles heel for the Cristinos.
   Meanwhile, politics radicalised in Cristino Spain. A pre-emptive
rightist coup was plotted by Manuel Llauder: the ministerial La Abeja
newspaper, on 18 January 1835, called for a military dictator to come
to power and end the war. Llauder, meanwhile, ordered a levy of 25,000
men into the army and that martial law be imposed on the Urban Militia
86   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to replace troops in fortiﬁed areas.22 This threat spurred a leftist coup
forged by the Isabelina and led by a junior rather than senior ofﬁcer, Lt.
Cayetano Cardero, a man with unlimited reserves of ambition. Such vet-
erans of the 1834 Isabelina as Quiroga and Palarea were to be assigned
to captaincy-generalships, whilst the cry that went up in the centre of
Madrid on 18 January was ‘Down with Llauder!’ Llauder, occupying the
all-powerful War Ministry, had got wind of the plot, including its exact
details, through his ﬂourishing network of spies and informers. But,
refusing to stop a ball being held in honour of the Queen-Regent, he
self-assuredly predicted that the plot would fail. But the Madrid rising of
18 January went far beyond Llauder’s expectations. The Captain-General
of Madrid, Canterac, was drawn into negotiations as a stand-off emerged
outside the Post Ofﬁce on the Puerta del Sol, the centre of the revolt.
Seeing that the militia had gone over to the rebellion, Canterac voiced
an appeal for the rebels to unite behind the Royal Statute, but their
response was ‘Long live liberty!’ Canterac then made an appeal to the
loyalty of a palace regiment, but this was misheard as a Carlist cry.23
A hail of bullets was the response from the rebels, who took little con-
vincing to suspect ofﬁcial collusion with the enemy, and Canterac died
instantly.24 Seeing that they had crossed the Rubicon, Cardero’s men
returned to fortify themselves in the Post Ofﬁce whilst pro-government
troops descended on the centre and opened ﬁre. Several bystanders,
especially the ubiquitous aguadores, or water-sellers, were caught in the
crossﬁre. Madrid, which had already suffered cholera and the anti-
Jesuit massacres, had now become an open battleground between the
ministerial and radical wings of Cristino liberalism.
   Eventually a ‘no-winners-no-losers’ truce was negotiated, and Cardero
was even allowed to send a petition to the nearby Cortes (the former
Radical, Argüelles, contrived to ruin the document by spilling ink over
it). Cardero and his men marched out of Madrid towards Navarra, draw-
ing the cheers of a large part of the population. At Burgos Cardero
was taken aside from his detachment and dispatched to ‘safety’ in
the Balearic Islands. But real damage had been done to the Martínez
de la Rosa government. Whereas Liberal writers explained Cardero’s
actions generously in idealistic terms, conservatives condemned the
moral defeat the rising imposed on lawfulness and respectability, and
the political cover it gave to urban criminality which had been rising
since the anti-clerical massacres of July 1834.25 In any case, such was the
powerlessness of the government that all those soldiers involved were
pardoned, Cardero even being promoted, after which, like Riego before
him, he entered the Cortes; by contrast, his soldiers were sent to the
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   87