


enraged popular radicalism with his policy of militarising some 40,000
Militia for want of regular troops.51 Whereas members of the Militia
did not object to being sent out of their homes on active patrol, they
did object to garrisoning distant villages and forts surrounded by rural
Carlism, where torture and summary execution often awaited those
citizen-soldiers unlucky enough to be captured alive in ambush.52
   The patricians’ ‘negative pronunciamiento’ against Llauder served
notice on him to leave Barcelona. Leaving for Mataró, Llauder left
power in the hands of his fellow Catalan who became Captain-General,
Pedro Nolasco Bassa y Gerona, and civil governor, Pedro María Pastors.
But hopes of re-establishing normal control were rendered impossible,
because the assault on the convents had unleashed the people not only
against Carlism, but also against the economic liberalism of the Cristino
elites. The eve of the war was also the eve of the modern industrial age
for Barcelona, as José Bonaplata built the country’s ﬁrst steam-powered
cotton mill, known simply as the ‘Steam’ (El Vapor) or the Bonaplata
works. The machines required fewer workers than had been custom-
ary, and even those workers the employers retained were made to do
unpopular piecework, with the measure of cloth per worker being con-
stantly widened for each wage. Meanwhile, the dislocation caused to
agriculture by the war had increased food prices more quickly than
commensurate wage rises.53 But the Bonaplata was well protected: its
owner, José Bonaplata, commanded a militia battalion which had led
the attacks on the Church, and there were middle-class vigilante juntas
besides. The propertied elites also had Captain-General Bassa on their
side, whose ‘restraint’ (moderantismo) was unequivocal. Yet the revo-
lutionaries had not dispersed since their 25 July assault. Whereas the
civil authorities dared not turn the militia against them, Bassa decided
to follow the letter of martial law by marching 1,500 troops down the
Ramblas, rounding up and imprisoning revolutionaries. The revolution-
aries tried to win over Bassa, and when this overture fell on deaf ears,
the civil authorities, on 5 August, implored him to follow Llauder into
ﬂight. But Bassa was adamant: ‘within two hours either I or the people
will have succumbed’.54 The revolutionaries held nothing but contempt
for Bassa, an armchair general who had ‘never even seen a faccioso’, and
the riot that broke out was inevitable. Bassa ﬂed to the near-deserted
Ciudadela, the eighteenth-century fortress overlooking the city, seek-
ing reinforcements in vain, but the mob broke in, cornering Bassa,
shooting him dead and defenestrating his corpse. They then moved on
to the Bonaplata. The militia battalion defending the factory failed to
pacify the revolutionaries with invectives against Don Carlos and the
92   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Church. The anti-clerical massacres may have bound the executioners
together and intimidated the restrained Liberals, but they had failed as
a social prophylaxis against working-class radicalism, for the revolution-
aries killed more than 15 militiamen who were defending the works
whilst they also burned the Bonaplata to the ground. Meanwhile Bassa’s
body was dragged around the city and burnt to ashes in a bonﬁre in La
Rambla.55
   The following day, the civil governor, Pastors, who had survived the
violence, made a show of humility which won over both the anti-clerical
and working-class factions of the Left and halted further fratricidal
killing. Two prisoners were executed in a pathetic resurrection of law-
ful authority, a Carlist cabecilla (Garri) and the Radical instigator of the
Bonaplata attack (Pardinas). Llauder, his nerves wrecked, crossed into
France and exile.56 The militia was expanded from six battalions to 13 in
order to accommodate hungry workers, entrenching popular radicalism
in Barcelona.57 But matters did not rest there. Barcelona’s example was
followed by other Cristino cities threatened by Carlist encroachments.
Tarragona and Valencia, whose hinterlands were invaded by the Carlist
forces of Quílez and Serrador, both saw their prisons invaded by mobs
and several inmates lynched for ‘conspiracy’, whilst the authorities
saved more than a hundred others by hurriedly exiling them to garrison
prisons in Ceuta, North Africa. Equally, Murcia and even Zaragoza, the
latter already an exaltado stronghold saw similar violence. Seven Carlist
prisoners were executed in kangaroo courts, including Don Carlos’s con-
fessor, Blas de Hostalaza.58 The growing violence propelled attempts
ﬁrst by the toothless parliamentary opposition, and then by radicalised
militia in the provinces, to replace the moderado government with a
proactively Liberal and anti-Carlist regime.59
   The Cristino government soon discovered that it was powerless to
arrest this radicalism. A cosmetic cabinet reshufﬂe in July replaced one
restrained (moderado) prime minister with another, Martínez de la Rosa
with Count Toreno, both former Radicals who now shared a grim assess-
ment that popular opinion in the country as a whole had swayed in
favour of Carlism. They may have been right, but this guardedness
was read as defeatism, even as collusion with the enemy, in Radical
circles. On 15 August, Radicals raised the capital’s militia in rebellion,
demanding the imposition of the Constitution of 1812 and the release
from prison of the leader of the Isabelina, Eugenio de Aviraneta e
Ibargoyen.60 But this insurrection was met by a Carlist rising in some
of the poor neighbourhoods of Madrid where artisans and women sus-
tained a low-level urban guerrilla against Militia patrols. Aviraneta had
                                   War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   93