


not been the only prisoner running street politics from his prison cell:
the Carlist Junta of Selva had been doing the same. Seizing the chance to
re-establish order, the moderado government mobilised army units and
conservative elements in the Militia to disband three of the capital’s
most radical Militia battalions. The War Ministry then reformed them,
ﬁltering out the Radicals.61 Powerless to resist this purge, the Radicals
replied with a pamphleting campaign. Whereas the Militia was praised
for its sacriﬁces resisting Carlism, the army was scorned as the parasitical
tool of despotism: ‘You are not the people! Nor are you Spaniards! You
don’t belong to or care about our soil and laws at all! It’s a shame you
forget that you clothe and feed yourselves on our blood and sweat!’62
   The government’s success in Madrid encouraged the Interior Min-
istry to issue a triumphalist communiqué the following day (17th),
but this sangfroid proved short-lived. Revolution was sweeping across
all provincial capitals. And gone were the days of popular riots: now
the Radicals were linking the struggle against Carlism to a positive
programme of Liberal renewal. Insurgent juntas frequently restored to
buyers the nationalised property which royalists in 1823 had conﬁs-
cated. They also tried to win over the unpropertied by abolishing the
hated consumption taxes called the derechos de puertas.63 Revolutionar-
ies, meanwhile, attacked not just Carlists but also moderado elites who
attempted resistance. In Tarragona, the governor was killed trying to
escape the revolutionaries by boat.64
   The alarmed Toreno administration reshufﬂed the cabinet again,
but no serious candidates could be made to resist the revolutionary
tide, posts being ﬁlled with the senile and politically innocent. The
ministerial Gaceta de Madrid condemned the revolutionaries as dis-
honourable cowards. But the revolutionaries were no longer leaderless.
Juntas were being formed by exaltado public ﬁgures, including members
(procuradores) of the parliamentary opposition. Even though the gov-
ernment decreed the ‘abolition’ of these juntas, this was vain rhetoric.
The government may have hoped for survival due to the 9 September
1835 proclamation from the Commander of the Army of the North,
Fernández de Córdova, that he would defend the central government.
But Córdova’s attention was absorbed containing a Carlist breakout and
suppressing mutinies in his own ranks, and he could spare only piece-
meal forces under General Latre to shore up the central government.65
At ﬁrst, Latre’s forces were successful pacifying such provincial capitals
as Burgos and Palencia, which were instinctively conservative anyway
and whose militia revolutionaries were not dispersed in the countryside.
Unlike the Carlists, the Radicals centred their militancy in towns, which
94   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


meant that government troops and artillery could easily be concen-
trated against them. But the further south Latre pushed the greater the
degree of revolutionary resistance he encountered. Juntas in Andalucía,
Valencia and Catalonia had won over local regular forces in addition to
the Militia, and some had launched populist manifestoes which went
beyond a mere tax amnesty. The Andalucían revolutionaries convened
their junta at Andújar under the leadership of Count Donadío and
throughout September waged a physical struggle against Madrid, which
they justiﬁed, in part, by sloganeering social justice. Whilst Donadío
let his 4,000-strong revolutionary army behave like ‘anarchists’, cut-
ting all communications between Andalucía and Madrid,66 his future
father-in-law, the procurador Count Navas, rallied Andalucían labourers
with the cry of íViva la República!67 When Latre’s column passed the
Andalucían frontier at Depeñaperros on 17 September, his men defected
to the revolutionaries; only the elite cavalry and artillery stayed loyal to
the government.68
   The juntas have been heralded by leftist writers as evidence of nascent
socialism and federalism. Twentieth-century Andalucían regionalists
saw the Andújar revolution as a vehicle for combating the notorious
abuses of the agricultural proletariat, and a model of regional solidarity
against centralising diktats of Madrid.69 Equally, members from revo-
lutionary juntas in Valencia, Aragón and Catalonia discussed federating
themselves along the historical lines of pre-absolutist Hapsburg model.70
In fact, these later representations overlooked the actual behaviour of
the juntas and how their revolutionary decisions were driven by the
contingencies of the war rather than ideology. The republicanism of
Navas and Donadío was mere rhetoric. When Navas was returned to the
revolutionary Cortes he lost interest in land reform and never bothered
to intervene in debates about widening suffrage.71 Donadío’s radicalism,
meanwhile, was bought off with his marriage into the Navas family and
the military governorship of Málaga.72 The federalism plan was dropped
as soon as the juntas realised that the Toreno government could no
longer use military force against them. Its real rationale, in any, case
was telling. The Captain-General of Valencia brieﬂy captained the con-
federation idea for military rather than political reasons, in protest at the
Cristino government policy of denuding the east of regular troops: ‘The
only sufﬁcient force under my command is the militia.’ Unless excep-
tional rulings applied, the militia answered to local civil authorities, and
the captain-general therefore sensibly subscribed to ‘a type of confed-
eration between the three kingdoms that used to form the Crown of
Aragón’.73
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   95