


grew concerned at the growing number of women visiting newly con-
ﬁscated monasteries, hitherto a closed and sexless male world which
was now the haunt of rowdy National Militia musters, and, it was
feared, copulation.153 In Barcelona, the captain-general was forced to
deal with the local authorities’ quandary about the former convent of
San Francisco del Asís. Its premises had ﬁrst been used for cholera vic-
tims, and then as a ‘lock hospital’ for prostitutes whose numbers had
been increasing since the start of the war. But, much to the annoyance
of the captain-general, both male and female prostitutes were still sell-
ing themselves there, undermining the physical and moral condition of
his conscripts154 :

   It has come to my attention that the inmates there, far from being
   cured of the vice of prostitution, have been propagating it amongst
   themselves, drawing to them individuals who have no other business
   being there. They have been engaging in homosexual acts (amance-
   bamientos de un mismo sexo), corrupting those of a youthful or gentle
   disposition.

Centrifugal radicalism impaired Mendizábal’s relations with General
Córdova. By early 1836, the moderados were openly calling Mendizábal
a dictator, forcing a parliamentary vote of no conﬁdence, blocking
attempts to expand the electoral franchise and politicising the tensions
between the Army of the North and Madrid. All this tension caused
Mendizábal many sleepless nights. Aides recounted how he would spend
days without proper sleep, collapsing onto his papers at his desk for
snoozes, or stealing carriage time for sleep during his trips to the
Queen-Regent at El Pardo.155 The British missionary, George Borrow,
who secured a brief interview with Mendizábal, remembered the prime
minister’s remarkable ability to maintain an English-language conversa-
tion without once looking up from a pile of documents at his desk.156
But even Mendizábal’s energies were exhausted by summer 1836, as his
erstwhile exaltado allies refused to serve under the ‘dictator’, the Cortes
was dissolved, and the Carlists expanded their domain over the north
and east of Spain.157 Again, both the cause and effect of this political
disunity was the failure of the Cristino army to arrest the spread of
Carlism. Mendigorría was the last signiﬁcant victory in a long time, as
the Carlists regrouped, tightened their blockade of Cristino towns in the
Basque country and dispatched expeditions deep into Cristino territory.
   In August 1835, the Carlist court launched the ﬁrst major expedition
of the war in a bid to link the Basque country with Carlists in Catalonia.
                                War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   107


Juan Antonio Guergué, a purged colonel of 1833 and prominent ‘brute’
in the theocratic wing of Carlism, on 8 August 1835 led a legion
of just under 3,000 men past Córdova’s covering force and towards
Catalonia. Since the Cristinos had executed Count Romagosa, Catalan
Carlism had been in almost as much disarray as under Llauder’s early
counter-insurgency. Guerrilla bands led by Porredón, Borges, Sobrevías,
Galcerán, Vall, Masgoret, Zorrilla and, above all, Tristany, had kept the
insurgency alive, but Guergué’s expedition aimed to unite the striking
power of these bands and carve out contiguous territory.158 Taking small
towns along the way in Aragón, he intercepted diplomatic correspon-
dence from the Cristino legation in Paris which conﬁrmed Carlist hopes
that the revolution was debilitating the Cristino war effort. Guergué was
welcomed into Huesca on 16 August by local authorities who had tired
of revolution and who implemented Carlist orders to demobilise the
Militia, seize its arms and draft men of military age. Guergué enjoyed
similar success occupying an abandoned Barbastro, where he resurrected
the Royalist Volunteers of 1833 and used them to repulse an attempt by
mobile Militia to recapture the town. Crossing into Catalonia, Guergué
was joined near Tremp on 25 August by Antonio Borges’s force of 500
irregulars and then by the 3,500 Carlists of Jacinto Orteu, landowner
and ex-colonel of the Royalist Volunteers. The next day a Cristino reg-
iment at nearby Orgaña was subverted by conscripts who disarmed the
local militia and defected to Guergué’s Carlists. In two weeks Guergué’s
expedition had traversed Aragón, subverting Cristino populations and
defences at every turn. Major difﬁculties began only as he entered
Catalonia, caused both by his own Navarrese, who complained of inad-
equate food and footwear, and by a stiffening Cristino defence, owed in
part to the unpardonable excesses the revolutionaries had recently car-
ried out. Guergué sent home his troublesome Navarrese, who by now
formed a minority of his force, and concentrated on regrouping the
Catalan guerrillas: by the end of the year these numbered some 22,363
infantry and 395 cavalry.159
   Since the revolutionaries had ousted Captain-General Llauder, neither
Bassa nor Pastors had matched his counter-insurgency zeal. The revo-
lutionary crisis had ended any hopes of regular army reinforcements
creating a mobile reserve. Thus, virtually the entire Carlist offensive
was met by the Militia, ensuring hatred and atrocities on both sides.
When Carlists attacked the village of Camarasa, its 50-strong garrison
of mobile militia fortiﬁed itself in the church, but were soon smoked
out by the outnumbering Carlists and forced to surrender. All were then
executed, most by gruesome beheadings, their corpses being dumped
108 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40