


governor did the Radicals’ bidding, presiding over a tablet-laying cer-
emony honouring the Constitution of 1812 and collecting signatures
for a petition to the Queen-Regent protesting the states of siege. The
moderado government was losing control of its rearguard.35
   Málaga, one of the most Liberal cities in the kingdom, had been rad-
icalised by a civil war whose front line lay hundreds of miles away,
and both central and regional authorities were heeding its example.
Ofﬁcers needed special leave to enter Madrid and a mass purge of the
Urban Militia was decreed. Captains-general were empowered to assem-
ble military committees against anyone disturbing the peace and a
crackdown was ordered on La Isabelina and other secret societies. But
central government decrees were countered by a Radical double regime
at local levels. Cristino militiamen cleansed town halls of symbols of
absolutism, especially the ﬂags of the disbanded Royalist Volunteers,
and organised revolutionary symbols in their stead, such as a marble
statue of Riego in Seville and a cenotaph to intimidate priests and pro-
Carlists.36 Civil governors publicly burnt police ﬁles from the Ominous
Decade, channelling revolutionary tension and also removing evidence
of their own collusion with the police state.37 It took little to turn this
atmosphere into violence against both real and imagined Carlist ﬁfth
columnists. In Zaragoza, a Cristino priest led a mob against the pseudo-
Carlist archbishop. The violence intensiﬁed as part of the militia went
over to the assailants, and several clerics were killed. Three clerics were
also killed in Murcia on 6 April 1835.38 More serious violence ﬂared up
again in Zaragoza on the night of 5 July 1835 when some 11 clerics were
killed, and similar killings followed in Barcelona. In both places, the
militia stood by as the mobs burned convents and monasteries, a few
hours later, most actually went over to the side of the assailants.39 The
militia stepped in to halt the riots only at the point when the crowd,
having satiated itself on the Church property, moved on to rob nearby
shops.40 Assaulting the Church was one thing, but property was sacred,
and the ‘safety valve’ of popular anti-clericalism could not be allowed to
recoil on Liberal interests. Drawing on this lesson, the military governor
of Huesca forestalled similar riots in his provincial capital by temporarily
evacuating the nuns from their convents and placing them in asylums
which were protected by militiamen he could trust.41 The Cristino mil-
itary was seeing its supremacy challenged by the rising radicalism of its
Militia rivals. Whereas Zaragoza’s captain-general conﬁded his fears to
paper, noting how ‘popular heroes were being made out of the militia
who committed the most atrocious crimes’,42 violence in other Cristino
cities soon forced the military to more drastic reactions.
90   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   The worst anti-clerical violence struck Catalonia, where mountain
Carlists threatened Cristino garrisons protecting the Catalan coastal
plain. Carlists were blockading the proto-industrial town of Reus and
ambushing its garrison’s supplies and patrols. An ‘exterminating angel’
monk led an ambush in July which left, amongst seven Cristino dead,
a mutilated militiaman who was father of eight children. In response
Reus’s convents went up in ﬂames, whilst Llauder had few troops to
spare outside of Barcelona even to ﬁght the Carlists let alone pacify
the militia on his own side. Even in Barcelona the military authorities
were losing control.43 Monasteries were torched and religious person-
nel killed, often at the hands of what contemporaries called ‘obscene’
women. The defection to Carlism of the Catalan nobility had made
the Principality’s clerics second only to those in the Basque country in
their pro-Carlism, and they were confronted by Cristino Spain’s reddest
city in 1835.44 Barcelona’s new anti-clerical tradition was forged by its
war refugees, nascent proletarian militancy, and even its inauguration
in 1834 of crowd-pulling bullﬁghting in the working-class Barceloneta
district.45 Part of this revolutionism was being channelled in support
of the federal Republican agenda of Xaudaró y Fábregas, editor of El
Catalán and a militia commander known for recruiting citizen-soldiers
who failed to meet supposedly stringent property qualiﬁcations.46 The
ministerial press, by contrast, was relegated to impotent commentary,
complaining how ‘the worst symptom of our situation is the simultane-
ity of the killing of the clerics on the one hand and the, if not universal,
then common indifference with which they were witnessed, heard, and
spoken of on the other’.47 Ambivalence describes attitudes better than
indifference, as Catholics were cowed by the collusion of the author-
ities with the massacre, or, as a young girl later remembered: ‘I recall
the upheaval at home and my family’s despair. As if in a dream I recall
the reddish glow illuminating a high wall overlooking our roof-terrace,
and of the horror etched in my mother’s face as two friars ran for their
lives past our house.’48 An out-of-town lawyer who tried to stop a textile
worker beating a captive priest was told to ‘fuck off!’49 Captain-General
Llauder’s humiliation during the Cardero crisis had weakened the once-
strong relationship he had enjoyed with Barcelona’s dominant business
community and the militia it patronised. His military tribunals failed to
arrest any serious anti-clerical instigators, and his inability to protect the
Church matched the distant Carlists’ inability to rescue it. Barcelona’s
realistic civic authorities conﬁscated the contents of the religious insti-
tutions, boarded their doors and windows, and then abandoned them
to their fate.50 Llauder had not only estranged the bourgeoisie but also
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   91