




This chapter charts ‘deep war’, when the extent of violence, suffering
and civilian casualties reached their peak. It is the geographically most
extensive chapter, detailing the Gómez Expedition of 1836. It explains
how the collapse of the Cristino war effort – pace the Carlists’ third
failed siege of Bilbao – radicalised Liberal politics and disrupted social
and economic relations across Spain, and forged new patterns in their
place which became a focus for Radical political action. It shows how
this radicalisation was caused by suspicion of moderado collusion with
Carlism, by actual or threatened Carlist invasion, and by the interlinked
phenomena of mass desertion and gloriﬁed banditry that this provoked.
It explains the diplomatic crisis into which Cristino Spain was plunged
by the August 1836 revolution at La Granja.
   The cycle of Carlist atrocities and Cristino counter-atrocities mounted
throughout 1836 and provides the crucial context for the La Granja rev-
olution. The Basque theatre had the Eliot Treaty and increasingly formal
(though still porous) front lines, but Catalonia and Aragón witnessed
an increase in military activity without any of the humanitarian pro-
visions of the north. By April 1836 Carlist forces in Catalonia alone
had grown to 13,367 infantry and 218 cavalry, reinforced by troops
from Navarra, and this greater military presence led to a correspond-
ing war for resources. On 10 May, Tristany sacked the town of Caldes,
25 miles north of Barcelona, after it had failed to supply his forces,
destroying all but a handful of its buildings. Mobile Militia chased the
invaders northwards, but not before Tristany’s men had abducted the
wives of several militiamen and pillaged villages in their path. Terroristic
episodes like these were met with harsh countermeasures, targeting not
just the Carlists, but also demoralised Cristino militia garrisons which
were ordered to ﬁght Carlist invaders whenever the latter’s numbers did

                                    124
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   125


not exceed one-half of local available defence forces. Crippling ﬁnes
were to be imposed on local authorities which failed to enforce this
order, whilst a deforestation programme was even ordered in an attempt
to deprive Carlist bands of natural cover.1 Months earlier, the ﬁrst siege
of Gandesa was underway, a town whose siege became legendary in
nineteenth-century Spain on account of its heroic women. On 5 March
1836, Cabrera, Torner, Quílez and El Organista attacked the town. Not
only the local militia but also the civilian population, including women,
rallied to its defence. Luisa Bará honoured the example of Zaragoza’s
Agustina de Aragón by delivering arms and food to the defenders whilst
under ﬁre. Turning to terror to subdue the defenders, Torner seized from
adjoining villages the wives and daughters of militiamen and impris-
oned them. The Cristinos replied by imprisoning powerful men and
women in Gandesa who were related to the besieging Carlists. Gandesa’s
heroism was thus overshadowed by a mundane cycle of reprisals.2
   The war in the east was Cabrera’s war: on 11 April Eguía promoted him
to brigadier, and on 15 August 1836 to major-general.3 On 29 March
1836 Cabrera took Liria, just four hours from Valencia and a wealthy
town in its own right. Some 20 militiamen were killed in the ﬁelds and
streets. Twenty-seven more were captured and led to Chiva where they
were slowly murdered by a gruesome ritual, which included being shot
in the kneecaps at point-blank range before having their genitals sliced
off.4 Castration had been a common ritual in the French Wars of Reli-
gion for emasculating the enemy, feminising bodies in death which in
life had not been ‘truly masculine’.5 Carlists saw their enemy as emascu-
lated by the double usurpation of an illegitimate and female candidate
on the throne. The wives and daughters of the Chiva victims, for their
part, did not submit to the domestic grief traditionally prescribed to
their sex. Rather, they joined militiamen on campaign seeking to exact
vengeance on the perpetrators. Palarea overwhelmed Cabrera’s rear-
guard near Chiva and committed a revenge massacre against captured
Carlists.6 But Torner soon counter-attacked, dispersing Palarea’s men.
Women avenged their men not only by killing Carlists, but also incom-
petent or cowardly ofﬁcers on the Cristino side. When some militiamen
were killed in September 1836 in a skirmish near Alcaraz (Albacete) with
the Carlist irregular, Orejita, their widows went to the Militia captain’s
house and, ﬁnding him absent, burnt it down, killing his wife who was
inside.7
   Catalan communities were thus put in an impossible position. Both
Cristinos and Carlists punished communities severely for helping the
other side. Even though the Cristinos lifted the provincial state of
126 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40