


face reprisals from outraged Carlists. Two weeks after the Barcelona mas-
sacre, Córdova began an offensive at the mountain pass of Arlabán
dividing Guipúzcoa from Alava, employing ‘foreign revolutionaries’ –
French and British auxiliaries – in large numbers for the ﬁrst time.
But the Carlists turned the geography, snow and fog to their defensive
advantage, repelling the Cristinos at the cost of only half the enemy’s
600 casualties. Captured British and French auxiliaries were shot, and
retreating French committed reprisals of their own against Carlist pris-
oners whom the Cristinos had handed over to them.204 Arlabán had
been one of the strongest parts of the Carlist defensive line, but
Córdova lacked the intelligence networks needed to have known this
in advance.205 Consequently, he was thrown back onto the defensive,
resorting to the static strategic warfare of the blockhouse system.
   In different conditions Córdova’s static strategy might have been
sounder than Espoz’s war of movement. But the Carlists turned the
enemy’s revolutionary crisis and the porous French border to their
advantage. The Royal Army, with its 16,000 infantry, 1,000 cavalry and
13 artillery pieces, was vastly outnumbered by the Army of the North.206
But superior local intelligence, internal lines of communication and the
distraction provided by the expanding Carlist forces in Catalonia and
Aragón, all allowed the Carlists to wrest the initiative after Arlabán in
a series of victories. On 8 February 1836, the Carlists overwhelmed the
1,300-strong Cristino outpost of Valmaseda, capturing ﬁve swivel-guns,
360 riﬂes, 60,000 bullets and 65 quintals of cod, 800 bread rations, 53
boxes of biscuit and other stores besides. The quarter shown to the garri-
son encouraged the capitulation of nearby Mercadillo three days later.207
Things got worse still for Córdova. Plencia, a coastal town on the west-
ern extremities of the Basque provinces, was taken after a short siege
on 25 February 1836, giving a morale boost to the Carlists, who had
now captured a seaport (albeit a very modest one); another seaport,
Lequeitio, would follow on 12 April. A total of 800 prisoners were taken
at Plencia, including National Guardsmen, the revolutionary rebrand-
ing of the Urban Militia, who were conscripted into Carlist ranks whilst
their ofﬁcers went to depots to await exchange. Some 13 artillery pieces
and other effects were taken as prizes, and a 3,000-real ﬁne (the Cristino
‘blood tax’) was imposed on those refusing to defect to Carlist ranks.208
Apart from a minor cavalry victory at Orduña by General Esparero
(whom Córdova had placed under Lacy Evans’s command in a bid for
more British support), followed by a bloody stalemate at Unza two weeks
later on 19 March, the winter and spring of 1836 had seen the Carlists
steadily undermining the Cristino blockade.209
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   117


   The greatest strategic blow to the Army of the North originated not
at Don Carlos’s court in Durango but in Paris. Since July 1834, the
French had ofﬁcially closed their south-western border to all supplies
destined for the Carlists. But smuggling was a way of life in the Pyrenees,
and it was in part due to this that Zumalacárregui, throughout 1834,
had been able to assemble his army under the noses of the Cristino
forts. That said, the Spanish Liberals knew from bitter experience that
the French police force was the best in Europe, and French protesta-
tions to the contrary cut little ice with Prime Minister Mendizábal, who
scoffed, ‘let them treat the smugglers as they treated me and other Patri-
ots when we tried to cross the Pyrenees in 1830’.210 But worse was to
come. In February 1836, the Broglie government fell and was replaced by
a new administration led by Thiers, which tried to appease Metternich’s
alarm at the internationalisation of the Spanish revolution. Hence, on
26 March 1836, the French government revoked its 3 July 1835 decree,
which had intensiﬁed the embargo on any trade with Carlists on the
Spanish side of the border. French legitimists rejoiced when they heard
that their allies in Spain would not be starved into surrender. Madrid’s
indignation was only partly appeased by French permission for the
transit of Cristino troops and supplies across their territory. This mea-
sure may have allowed Córdova to outﬂank some Carlist positions, but
its advantage paled in comparison to the abandonment of the French
blockade.211
   Córdova was caught in the vice of Radical pressure and Carlist rear-
mament, and whereas the Carlist threat could be evaluated, that of
the revolutionaries could not. In April 1836, as two regiments rose in
a pay revolt in Bilbao, Córdova conﬁded to General Narváez: ‘I fear that
agents of different extreme parties are working my men with sinister
aims, singling out the sergeants and troops who are most vulnerable
to seduction and intrigue.’212 In May 1836, two companies of Mili-
tia rampaged through the village of Arévalo (Soria), some 50 miles
behind the northern front, smashing the windows of ‘Carlist’ inhabi-
tants. Cristino civil authorities were helpless and the militiamen had to
be disarmed at gunpoint by loyal troops.213 Only victory could silence
Córdova’s critics and stem rebellion in the ranks. British auxiliaries
allied with Royal Marines (a new departure for Quadruple Alliance ‘non-
intervention’) and Cristino militiamen in a bloody attempt on 5 May to
relieve besieged San Sebastián. The withering bombardment by Anglo-
Cristino gunboats and the death of the charismatic Carlist commander,
Sagastibelza, sealed the Allied victory, and the siege of San Sebastián
was lifted.214 At the same time, Córdova renewed his offensive against
118 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40