


garrison to withdraw into the city proper. As the pursuing Carlists occu-
pied the ruins, they burned the wooden bridge linking the remains of
the convent to the rest of the city. Therefore, San Sebastián was closely
blockaded from the landward side, but the offensive lacked the strength
to storm the city. Carlist cannon-bores had become so overworked that
Montenegro was delighted to pose as a humanitarian by agreeing to
a French-brokered ceaseﬁre to evacuate foreign civilian casualties: this
gave him time to repair his guns.170
   Meanwhile, Eguía’s next effort came on the Carlist Left, with the
assault on the fortiﬁed port of Guetaria. At ﬁrst General Córdova, as if
remembering Napoleon’s famous dictum of not interrupting an enemy
making a mistake, indulged Eguía’s strategy. The Carlist drive towards
the coast diverted attention away from the demoralised centre of his
army at Miranda del Ebro. That said, Guetaria commanded a harbour
and a promontory which could shut off most Guipúzcoan cabotage
when emplaced with coastal artillery. The Cristino garrison knew this:
when Carlist guns, on 19 December, opened ﬁre on the town, the
defenders answered with some 13 guns of their own.171 The Carlists
stormed the town, but not before virtually every building in Guetaria
had been destroyed or damaged. They did not remain long in posses-
sion, as Carlists were caught between the pincers of Espartero’s landward
march and amphibious reinforcements from Bilbao.172 Espartero’s troops
included a free corps of Cristino Basque scouts, the chapelgorris, who
were noted for their brutality and who had looted and destroyed ‘Carlist’
churches during their march.173 When they looted a ruined church
in Guetaria, however, Espartero ordered harsh reprisals. He could not
afford to alienate war-ravaged guetarense civilians and accordingly con-
demned ten chapelgorris to death, actually carrying out the sentence on
nine.174 Espartero’s disciplining of anti-Carlist Basque volunteers made
every possible wrong impression with Cristino Radicals who were still
indignant after a publicised exchange of gifts between the Cristino and
Carlist Commanders-in-Chief, and there was even talk of the need for
revolutionary justice against overbearing ofﬁcers. Espartero thought this
interference by civilians the utmost impudence, conﬁding to his wife
that he would: ‘break the heads of those who have asked for mine’.175
   Elsewhere Catalan Carlists were encroaching on the frontier with
France, causing consternation amongst Cristinos and French alike.
Unlike General Arispe in the Basque country, the governor of the border
fortress of Bellagarde appeased the Carlists by promising to permit no
more armed Cristinos into French territory. This overture recoiled on the
French: not only did it recognise the Carlists as legitimate combatants,
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   111


but it also failed to prevent their border violations.176 These were starkest
in the Cerdanya/Cerdagne region of Catalonia, where Cristino loyalties
in the border town of Puigcerdá and the exclave of Llívia invited hostile
Carlist attention. Llívia was separated from Spain proper by two kilo-
metres of French territory through which a ‘neutral road’ ran to the
Franco-Spanish border at Bourg-Madame/Puigcerdá. The Guergué expe-
dition made refugees out of Puigcerdá’s public ofﬁcials.177 Their ﬂight to
France was followed by an attempt by townsfolk who were stopped, dis-
armed and returned by Carlist irregulars operating in French territory.178
The Carlist violation of French territory was repeated on 6 February
1837 when some 200 of them crossed the border in order to loot Llívia.
On the way back along the neutral road French troops arrested the
Carlists and conﬁscated their pillaged goods.179 On occasion Carlist sol-
diers were found 45 miles inside France, and Carlists issued passports
to aid smuggling.180 Border contingencies like these involved France in
local interventions which moulded debates about the extent of French
intervention in the civil war. This section of the border would not sta-
bilise until Puigcerdá decisively defeated the Carlist siege of November
1837.181
  Mendizábal desperately summoned Espoz from his French convales-
cence to captain the generals in Catalonia and arrest the spread of
Carlism. Espoz was a leftist hero, a sop to junta opinion, and he was on
good terms with the French who gladly transferred to him impounded
Carlist arms. On 29 November 1835, he imposed a state of siege on the
Principality, with measures including collective punishment on commu-
nities invaded by Carlists, ranging from summary executions of heads
of households harbouring enemy agents to the conﬁscation of property.
These conditions were so draconian that even his Liberal allies in gov-
ernment resiled from them. Espoz had always seen the Catalan Carlists
as criminals deserving of no better treatment. But the effect of these
measures was to promote reprisals and to terrorise civilians caught in
the war zone.182
  Espoz had used collective punishment in the Royalist War, and it was
more than matched by what Cabrera was doing in the cruellest front,
the Maestrazgo. Cabrera’s eastern Carlists combined ruthlessness with
bravery but without the magnanimity that had characterised many of
Zumalacárregui’s operations. Cabrera established a pattern of attack-
ing small towns which were garrisoned only by a handful of local or
mobile militiamen. During these localised but ferocious sieges, Cabrera’s
Christian soldiers ironically became more prodigious at church-burning
than the mobs of Barcelona. This was because the church steeple was
112 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40