


in early 1838.232 Radical liberalism was more implacably opposed to
Carlism than moderantismo ever was. But leftist mayors maintained a
parochial relationship with the war, especially in parts of Cristino Spain
far from the front line, defending the expansion of their local power-
bases, the militia, but opposing conscription. In some instances, this
anti-militarism bordered on terrorism. In early 1840, the prefect of
Granada toured his restive province and was depressed to discover a
history of wrongdoing which local authorities could not – or would
not – prosecute. In August 1836, the Mayor of Baza had sent militia-
men to seek and murder an unpopular customs guard and war veteran,
Antonio Honorati, whose body was dragged back into Baza bearing both
his assailants’ wounds and older ones inﬂicted by Carlists in Navarra.
The following year, another Cristino soldier was murdered in public
view and his killers went unpunished. Mayors who tried to punish sub-
sequent killings were themselves terrorised and even banished. At the
root of this lawlessness, the prefect held, were the decrepit militia forces
which, in this region, ‘contained simple day-labourers and vicious fel-
lows with no stake in society’, including brigands who (before 1834)
‘belonged to the frenzied royalists who committed outrages in the name
of God and who were now doing the same in the name of Liberty’.233
   Episodes of popular anti-militarism were repeated across dozens of
locations throughout Cristino Spain. By the summer of 1836, these
had been exploited by Radicals to expel the commander-in-chief and
restrain the powers of the Queen-Regent with the Constitution of 1812
during the revolution at La Granja (see Chapter 6). Córdova had just
suppressed a military conspiracy at his base in Logroño in favour of the
Constitution of 1812 (a plot which appeared to be political cover for
mass desertion as the city’s artillery was to be spiked and troops were
to retire to Aragón). Soon after his success, however, news reached him
of the La Granja rising, which had made that Constitution the law of
the land. Córdova saw this as ﬁnal notice to quit. The exit of Córdova
meant the exit of the natural leader of the moderados, in the same way
that the death of Espoz four months later would deprive the progresis-
tas of their hero. The government asked Córdova to recommend his
successor, which he did willingly, recommending Espartero, despite the
latter’s rumoured progresismo. Córdova made his way to France with his
personal escort, refusing to swear allegiance to the Constitution of 1812
whilst not directly disparaging it either. Crossing into France unscathed,
on 25 August 1836 he met the Spanish consul at Bayonne, instructing
him that he should obey the new government, whilst also conferencing
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   123


with some exiled Carlists, including Maroto, with whom he would even
strike up a friendship. Córdova’s parleying with the enemy appeared to
conﬁrm Radical accusations that the moderados were a ﬁfth column for
Carlism. In all likelihood, however, Córdova was motivated by humani-
tarian rather than treacherous concerns.234 But whatever the truth of this
matter, the march of events had eclipsed Córdova, his military strategy
and his moderado allies.
6
Deep War Feeds Revolution,
1836–37