


siege on 5 November 1836, they also applied the law of 17 April
1821, which exempted charges of ‘conspiracy’ and ‘anti-constitutional
activities’ (activities described as infracción de Constitución) from civil
jurisdiction. Further north in Catalonia, villages were reduced to penury,
something which in itself encouraged villagers to ﬂock to the Carlist
ranks so that they might at least become perpetrators rather than vic-
tims. An economic war ensued. In order to prevent hardship swelling
the ranks of the Cristino Militia, Carlist commanders frequently forced
local landowners under their sway to hire hands in order to starve the
Cristinos of recruits.8 Invasions of Cristino territory were marked by
Carlists’ sacking and pillaging civilian property they did not expect to
hold. Quílez’s guerrillas, who, on 29 June 1836, were repulsed when
they attacked a fortiﬁed church in Alcorisa (Teruel), burnt down 173
neighbouring houses before retreating towards Montalbán. Quílez then
stormed Montalbán after its Cristino militia had murdered two of his
emissaries. Quílez performed a vengeful ruse by burning Montalbán, but
not before granting its inhabitants an hour to ﬂee with as many posses-
sions as they could carry. After burning the town, Quílez’s vanguard
hunted the refugees and robbed them all the same.9 Sometimes even
such acts of total war could appear comparatively merciful. By the onset
of the Maestrazgo winter the Carlists had extended their terror against
remaining Cristino settlements in Teruel province. On 20 October 1836,
some 100 conscripts from Extremadura surrendered the church and
village of Albentosa (Teruel) after brief resistance against the outnumber-
ing guerrilla forces El Royo and Peinado. Evacuation terms were being
discussed when an exterminating angel priest, a certain José Lorente,
who had been attached to a different band, arrived to insist on the
Cristinos’ deaths. Some 73 captives were stripped naked and killed in
the road, including an 11-year-old who had followed his father from
Extremadura, despite desperate pleas for mercy, even offers of ransom,
having been voiced by the local municipality, including priests. Lorente
rejected the ransom, but offered a sadistic compromise: that the people
might ﬁnd replacements for the soldiers’ fate. After the massacre was
over, Lorente robbed the inhabitants of the money they had offered for
ransom all the same.10
   Patrician Liberals unhelpfully condemned the enemy’s barbarity as
the product of an ignorant plebeian rural culture, vulnerable to back-
ward clerics and deprived of productive labour. The rural, asymmetrical
nature of the Carlist insurgency complicated the Cristino counter-
insurgency. The fortiﬁed Carlist hill town of Cantavieja, Cabrera’s
strategically most valuable possession, was thus a rare target for a
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   127


conventional assault. It was known to hold Cristino prisoners as well
as foodstores which could augment meagre Cristino rations at the onset
of the dire regional winter. Evaristo San Miguel, Radical prime minis-
ter during the Triennium and Cristino Captain-General of Aragón since
the La Granja revolution, conquered Cantavieja at the end of October
1836, and the momentum of the offensive persuaded the Carlists to
burn rather than try to defend Beceite, their other fortiﬁed town in the
Maestrazgo. Cantavieja was a boost for revolutionary morale, even if
the foodstores were depleted by corrupt commissaries in the vanguard,
who ended up selling on such delicacies as cinnamon and cocoa at
inﬂated prices.11 Yet San Miguel qualiﬁed his victory address with a grim
prediction for Cristino communities:12