


home of a Radical editor, assaulting him and insulting his wife. A simi-
lar episode almost unfolded at the headquarters of the all-powerful Eco
del Comercio, but a National Militia detachment was on its premises to
face down the indignant ofﬁcers.223 But Córdova’s ascendancy could not
last long. His return to the northern front did nothing to arrest the dete-
rioration of the war effort. On 11 July 1836, Carlists repulsed a British
attempt to evict them from the French frontier at Fuenterrabia, and on
17 July 1836 a Franco-Cristino force of six battalions failed to force the
Carlist-held bridge at Muniáin on the River Ega. In frustration Bernelle’s
legionaries burnt the harvest of local Carlist villagers, which the Carlists
publicised as part of their reactionary Black Legend against the French
Left and with a threat to execute Cristino prisoners if such outrages were
repeated.224
   The Quadruple Alliance had undertaken a greater military burden
because desertion and draft evasion had rendered the Cristino Army
of North unﬁt for further offensive operations. Even defensive troops
increasingly surrendered at the ﬁrst opportunity, many of these defect-
ing to the Carlists. On 10 June, Carlist Commander-in-Chief Eguía
publicised his government’s offer to ‘true Spaniards’ who wished to
defect, including a sliding scale of rewards depending on rank and chat-
tels, and promotions for ofﬁcers who brought numerous defectors with
them. In response the Cristinos imposed drastic measures, including
cash incentives and even promotions to informers betraying plots to
defect, and verbal councils of war imposing the death penalty against
offenders.225 Yet even if such measures stemmed some defection on the
northern front, they could do nothing to reverse the draft-dodging and
desertion that plagued the Cristino safe zone behind the formal front
line. Virtual ‘reserve armies’ of deserters roamed across the country-
side, sometimes securing remote territory against punitive missions of
mobile militia and preying on civilian communities and travellers. The
revolution of 1835–36 may have ‘democratised’ conscription by abolish-
ing exemptions which the nobility traditionally enjoyed (by abolishing
the nobility as a separate legal estate). Yet in their place it formalised
the system of cash payments (‘blood tax’) for exemption.226 And the
vast majority of draftees had neither money nor protection to escape
conscription. As a British pro-Carlist remarked:

   I had no idea of the desolating effects of the repeated quintas, or
   conscriptions, until I had traversed Spain in so many directions, but
   I was not so forcibly struck with them anywhere as in Estremadura,
   where I saw only old men, women or children; the youth having
                                War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   121


  been carried off four times within the last two years, and the land
  being tilled only in the immediate neighbourhood of the villages.227

It was small wonder that conscripts increasingly either absconded or
deserted once they had been pressed into service. Fugitives and desert-
ers, of course, resented state power in principle. But given the tendency
of the Radical-Liberals towards populism, and given that their platform
of autonomous town halls offered certain networks to shield men from
conscription (Militia membership, employment, fraud), Radical-Liberals
were often successful at mobilising a popular hatred of conscription
against the moderados, especially in regions like Andalucía that were
far from the Basque country. Earmarked conscripts without friends in
authority sometimes committed the desperate act of leaving town to
impersonate militiamen in settlements where their anonymity could
make them look convincing, complete with embellished uniforms and
fake moustaches. Local authorities often chose to ignore this tragic cha-
rade, except when this phenomena evolved into further wrongdoing,
such as in Seville, where complaints reached the national press of fake
militia street-rowdies, and in Granada, where a spate of burglaries were
committed by ‘criminals masquerading as militiamen’.228 In 1837, the
Ofﬁce of National Sub-inspector of Militia was set up in order to stamp
out this fraud. In Málaga during the May 1836 elections mendizabal-
ista Liberals conveniently described wrongdoers in nearby Vélez-Málaga
as ‘enemy insurgents’ rather than the deserters and draft-dodgers the
moderado newspaper magnate, Andrés Borrego, believed them to be.
Borrego, whose surname means ‘lamb’ in Spanish, was lampooned in
a charivari involving the symbolic slaughter and skinning of a lamb,
which was then turned into the mascot at the helm of a wagon carrying
copies of Borrego’s offending newspaper that was publicly burnt. Radi-
cal Málaga did not like being reminded that so much of its power rested
on indulging the popular classes’ hatred of military service.229 When the
government, in October 1835, complained of its slowness in drawing up
lists for conscription, Málaga responded by vehemently professing its
patriotism whilst ‘disappearing’ draftees from the lists all the same.230
   Other Andalucían communities also shielded their menfolk as best
they could. Antequera, for example, exaggerated the very modest con-
cessions to anti-militarism imposed by exaltados in 1836 (men’s right
to object to their name being included on a list of potential draftees at
the very moment that the list was compiled) into a vehicle for shielding
virtually all of its menfolk from conscription.231 Vélez-Málaga’s munici-
pality continued to connive in draft-dodging and was ﬁned accordingly
122 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40