


into the River Segre weighed down by stones. Residents at nearby set-
tlements for months afterwards avoided the river-water for drinking
and ﬁshing. Such brutality was counterproductive for Carlist campaign-
ing, as news of such outrages only served to embolden the Cristino
defence elsewhere. After Torá, on 8 August 1835, came under Carlist
siege, it resisted against appalling odds, including an all-enveloping
inferno of outlying buildings, set by the Carlists. Concepción Preciado,
wife of a Cristino captain, stepped into the breach brandishing a sabre
and goading the men on. A total of 200 Cristinos had been wounded
and some 70 killed before a relief column ﬁnally arrived to save Torá.
Pastors’s counteroffensive halted the Carlist incursion on his left, retak-
ing Guimerá and establishing a front line from there to the university
town of Cervera and Torá. This protected Barcelona by ensuring Cristino
control of southern, and a large part of central, Catalonia, but it relin-
quished much of the north and all of the far west to the Carlists, who
made a regional capital out of Berga and blockaded remaining Cristino
fortiﬁed centres (Olot’s garrison defected to the Carlists on 28 August).160
Even at his base in Cervera Pastors’s control did not extend far beyond
the town. Cervera, the base of the Aggrieved of 1827–28, had a violent
history of conﬂict between its reactionary ‘town’ and Liberal ‘gown’.161
On 12 October 1835, the Liberal university – whose students, travel-
ling to and from Barcelona, had repeatedly been robbed and attacked by
Guergué’s men – was closed.162 After Pastors repulsed a Carlist breakout
towards San Quintín on 23 October 1835, executing prisoners he had
captured, the Catalan front reached stalemate between a Carlist west
and a Cristino coastal hinterland.163
   Elsewhere the Army of the North came under political pres-
sure to match Mendizábal’s rhetoric with action. The two opposing
commanders-in-chief, Córdova and Eguía, fought a bloody stalemate at
the Carlist capital, Estella. Both sides claimed victory, Córdova because
he managed brieﬂy to occupy the capital on 16 November and Eguía
because he quickly liberated the town. Some residents who had bro-
ken cover by welcoming the Cristino occupation were imprisoned and
ransomed.164 With Cristino forces monetarily spent, Eguía chose to
strike not southwards but northwards, to seize control of the French
frontier and coastal towns garrisoned by Cristinos. The latter objec-
tive, he hoped, would mitigate Quadruple Alliance naval supremacy
by ending the growing Anglo-Cristino naval cooperation in matters of
supplying and fortifying bridgeheads. At the onset of the civil war the
Cristino navy had been small and decrepit. But Madrid acquired for-
eign steamships to sustain the blockade of the Carlist coast, and these
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   109


cooperated with the French and British by transporting men and sup-
plies along the Basque coast; now the Cristino navy would be at full
stretch supplying and defending coastal towns.165 A key target in this
Carlist campaign was therefore San Sebastián, on account of its wealth,
command of the French frontier and its port crammed with Quadru-
ple Alliance vessels. The close blockade had already driven hundreds
of rural refugees into the city and caused a severe shortage of fuel and
food which the shipping bottlenecks had been unable to solve; this was
compounded by the billeting of Cristino troops in private homes. San
Sebastián’s town hall had to counter-license some resident merchants to
whom Carlists had given permits to trade with their zone. These mas-
ters of no-man’s-land brought imported goods to the Carlists in return
for food and fuel for the hungry Cristinos.166
   Carlists began their assault in a swift and devastating conquest of the
fort of Arambarri, adjacent to San Sebastián, wiping out its Asturian
and Andalucían garrison. The Queen-Regent wrote to the city author-
ities, anguished that Arambarri might presage the loss of the city itself,
boosting popular radicalism: ‘it is not just that the faction is embold-
ened insufferably, but also that men may think that my government
has not undertaken precautions in the city’s defence’.167 The loss of
the fort impaired San Sebastián’s deployment of defensive artillery, and
maximised the Carlists’ effectiveness of theirs (only three – but well-
positioned – siege cannon). With the city closely blockaded, the Carlists
turned to securing the French border. In response, French General Arispe
warned the Carlists that if they assaulted the remaining Cristino border
posts, the French army would invade. The French side of the border
had been ﬁlling with refugees, including, ignominiously, the entire
Cristino Provincial Deputation of Guipúzcoa, which timidly feared
Carlist reprisals in the event of San Sebastián’s fall. The French were
afraid the war might spill over the frontier, and whilst they pursued a
hard line with the Carlists, they also ordered all Cristino refugees to
move either deeper into France or back into Spain.168 Sensibly back-
ing down to the threat of formal French intervention, Carlist General
Montenegro decided to assault San Sebastián instead. His close-range,
overnight bombardment of the city began on 6 December. In response,
all remaining 18 to 50-year-old male residents who had not already
enlisted were called into the militia.169 Montenegro hoped that the ﬂight
of city Liberals and the effect of his terror bombardment on refugees
might yield him San Sebastián through a coup from within. But the city
held fast, and the Carlists turned their ﬁre from the city to the forti-
ﬁed ex-convent of San Bartolomé. Concentrated ﬁre forced its Cristino
110 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40