


the heights of Arlabán, even though the same geography, and even
the same snow on the peaks, favoured the defenders once more. The
result was a bloody stalemate, compounded by Cristino casualties from
exposure as men could not light ﬁres lest they reveal their positions,
and instead slept beside each other and mules for warmth. Córdova’s
renewed assault in the same sector of the front was greeted with relief
by the Carlist Royal Government and consternation in Madrid. Eguía
knew that there were more vulnerable sectors of the Carlist front line
(the Baztán, Irurzun, Lecumberri), and he thanked the enemy’s rev-
olutionary crisis for having made Córdova so blind and desperate.
Prime Minister Mendizábal, by contrast, had lost patience with his
commander-in-chief. Córdova’s protestations that the second battle of
Arlabán had actually strengthened the Cristino line around the Basque
country made no impression on the Radicals, who demanded swift
victories.215
  The second battle of Arlabán came in the wake of an irate exchange
of letters between Córdova and Mendizábal, in which the military will
clashed with the political. Both men implied that the other was neglect-
ing to put the interests of the fatherland (patria) ﬁrst, emotive language
in the Liberal revolution, and its use was all the shriller from Mendizábal
because of his cosmopolitan background. He assured his commander-
in-chief that Madrid was doing all it could, decreeing mobilisations,
advancing the revolution and even being aided by a fortuitous cabi-
net change in Portugal – which promised to bring 10,000 auxiliaries to
Córdova’s side – and that all this could come to sound effect if only
the commander-in-chief would show some initiative and achieve vic-
tories. Córdova called Mendizábal’s decrees empty, castles in the air,
and his quest for victories as mistaking cause for effect, of wanting to
reap the harvest of victory without sowing the seeds. Córdova claimed
a detailed understanding of the fundamentally defensive nature of the
war which made no impression on Mendizábal. No Cristino comman-
der could force the Carlists to engage if they did not want to. Finally,
Córdova tendered his resignation, trying to remove the potential polit-
ical threat this posed by reassuring the prime minister of his Liberal
credentials in a manner which nonetheless revealed the powers of his
ofﬁce. Thus Córdova boasted about how many convents he had closed
on his own authority, and stated he was in agreement with the legal
reforms and the sale of nationalised property. Córdova, who claimed to
be non-political, obviously could become political at any moment. The
choice facing the Queen-Regent was obvious: either her prime minis-
ter or commander-in-chief had to go.216 On 4 May 1836, Córdova was
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   119


summoned to Madrid and a council of war; where his fate and that of
Mendizábal would be decided.217
   The Queen-Regent, who was hardly even liberal, let alone progresista,
in sympathies, seized upon Córdova’s presence in the capital to dis-
miss her Radical prime minster and to call new elections. Córdova had
wrongfooted the Radicals by leaving Espartero in temporary command
in the north, dashing their hopes of animosity between the two men.
Once in Madrid, Córdova petitioned for four things, all of which the
government approved. Firstly he sued for reinforcement. He asked for
whatever troops could be spared from Madrid plus that France be asked
to increase its legion by 4,000 to 6,000 men, the same request to be
made to the British that they might thus reinforce Evans’s strategi-
cally vital position. Secondly, he wanted a Reserve Army to be created
and centred on Burgos. This force should be comprised almost entirely
of National Militia that could be subjected to army command when-
ever necessary.218 Clearly, a more divisive issue for Liberal politics could
scarcely be imagined. Thirdly, he begged for sufﬁcient supplies so that
his army would not starve, beg and riot. And fourthly, Córdova made a
partisan demand which he disguised as a concern for the morale of the
Cristino ‘home front’, namely that the government should refrain from
making a formal request for direct French intervention unless it was
clear that Paris would reply in the afﬁrmative.219 A likely French refusal
would leave Cristino Spain diplomatically stranded and make the posi-
tion of the French Legion untenable. In fact, Córdova was worried that
a refusal would boomerang against the moderados in domestic politics
as it became clear that they did not have the French army as a counter-
revolutionary card to play as a last resort against the exaltados (as the
absolutists had done in 1823). Silence on this matter, by contrast, might
maintain the illusion of the French army’s moderantismo.220
   But the victory of the Queen-Regent and her general was short-lived.
The Cristino army continued to collapse as a cause and consequence
of Carlist expansion, and ousted mendizabalistas began to manipulate
Radicals in the army in order to win back power. The Radical revolu-
tion of August 1836 would be made by junior ofﬁcers and sergeants
against their own leaders, and the Constitution of 1812 they revived
was designed to ensure both a greater degree of civil authority over the
suspect army leadership, and an emasculation of the powers of the trou-
blesome Queen-Regent.221 In the meantime, the removal of Mendizábal
encouraged ofﬁcers to take revenge on the Liberal press for ‘abusing’
its freedom of expression to criticise the army.222 Córdova’s brother, a
colonel based in the capital during the summer of 1836, invaded the
120 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40