


usually the ultimate refuge for Cristino militiamen resolved to ﬁght to
the last, and was targeted by Cabrera’s artillery and arson. Cabrera’s
rural terrorism was answered by Cristino municipalities organising fund-
raising not just for the Militia but also local fortiﬁcations and defences,
all in addition to the usual taxes and conscripts levied by the central
government.183 Carlist atrocities provoked reprisals against mountain
villages where, as the Prussian Carlist, von Goeben, recalled, ‘troops
used terror; all inhabitants, it was said, were Carlists and had to be
destroyed, plundered, violated, and their homes burnt down. Several
hundred were forced by the ensuing misery to join the Carlists.’184 The
Cristino counter-insurgency had the effect of merely reshaping rather
than eliminating the nature of the Carlist threat. General Nogueras
mobilised both troops and mobile militia but his expeditions caused
the Carlists to regroup, reducing their ability to terrorise but increasing
their striking power. Thus, the columns of Miralles and Torner linked
with Quílez in Aragón, whilst Cabrera reorganized his and Forcadell’s
men at Beceite, their fortiﬁed headquarters and refuge.185
   The revolution obliged Nogueras to retire to his starting point, and
Cabrera and Forcadell exploited this in an assault on Rubielos (Teruel),
in the nineteenth century a populous town commanding vital transport
links. Its garrison was outnumbered by the Carlists, whose attack on
11 September 1835 resonates both for its representative military details
and its brutal aftermath. Cabrera fought through the town and obliged
the Cristino garrison to withdraw to the highly defensible convent in
the centre. Cabrera tried to force entry using ﬁre and testudo forma-
tions from carts which were armoured and used as battering-rams. He
then seized an adjoining house in an attempt to break into the con-
vent from the side. Desperate, the Cristinos set ﬁre to the house. But the
wind blew the ﬂames into the convent, so the Cristinos, now thirsty and
suffocating in the fumes, hoisted a white ﬂag on Cabrera’s stated guar-
antee of quarter. But when the pitiful survivors descended the convent’s
tower, many were killed outright whilst the rest of the captives were
herded together and marched to a ﬁeld near Nogueruelas where they
were stripped naked (Cabrera needed the uniforms) and forced to run for
their lives. All the men were hunted and killed by the Carlist cavalry, one
corpse registering no fewer than 26 lance wounds.186 The martyrdom
of Nogueruelas outshone Villafranca’s in 1834, and, soon after the war
ended, the public disinterment and reburial of the martyred militiamen
allowed Radicals to capture public memory of the conﬂict.187
   Cabrera’s initiative turned the remote regions of Aragón and Valencia,
centred on the Maestrazgo, into a hybrid of guerrilla insurgency and
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   113


counter-insurgency punctuated by increasing episodes of intense vio-
lence. Whilst there were indeed economic origins for rural Carlism
and urban liberalism, the war distorted these into geographical loy-
alties as civilians sensibly obeyed whichever side was strongest in
their area. Cabrera’s successful military strategy earned him the sobri-
quet ‘Tiger of the Maestrazgo’, whose threat was answered by signal
sacriﬁces from Cristino populations deprived of adequate garrisons.
Requena (Valencia), for example, resisted Cabrera’s siege because its
women and children dug trenches and constructed barricades, max-
imising the defensive power of its outnumbered garrison until a relief
column arrived.188 The revolution of the juntas undermined Cristino
counter-insurgency efforts as militiamen prioritised parochial interests
and soldiers deserted. Nogueras’s minor victory at Orta on 24 September
1835 was important only because it helped to stem the desertion
affecting his ranks. Insufﬁcient Cristino forces encouraged the spiral of
atrocities and reprisals. There was no Eliot Treaty in the east, and prag-
matism overrode any residual compassion. Cristinos were reluctant to
take Carlists prisoner as they had too few forces to guard them sufﬁ-
ciently (on one occasion, some 600 captured Carlists escaped because
the Cristinos had too few cavalry to round them up).189 By the same
token, any acts of mercy which did result from military action usually
had pragmatic motives. On 17 October 1835, Cabrera assaulted Alcanar,
only four miles from the Mediterranean Sea on the Catalan–Valencian
border. There, the tragic routine of an outnumbered Cristino garrison
retiring to the biggest church, defending itself to the last, even throw-
ing beehives at the attackers, repeated itself. Cabrera had wiped out a
scratch Cristino force rushed from the nearby port of Vinaroz which
had tried to relieve Alcanar. The desperation of the besieged women
and children compelled the militiamen to surrender and the town was
sacked.190 Alcanar cut off land communications between revolutionaries
in Barcelona and Valencia. But Cabrera’s dash for the sea was short-lived,
as Anglo-Cristino gunboats repulsed his attempt to seize a nearby port,
and overreach eventually obliged him to evacuate Alcanar.
   Cabrera’s ascendancy was formalised with the 11 November 1835
royal decree making him Commander-in-Chief of Lower Aragón.
Cabrera was still theoretically answerable to the junta at Berga, but in
practice his forces – which at the end of 1835 numbered some 3,416
infantry and 218 cavalry – imposed military rule in territory he com-
manded. Cobblers were forced to produce footwear, Cristino columns –
such as that of Terrer (Zaragoza) on 13 December – were wiped out
and raided for weapons and uniforms, and a factory was constructed to
114 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40