


Cuba’s tax revenues – which accounted for some 15 per cent of Madrid’s
exchequer – ‘neutrality’ objectively meant Carlist53 ). Cuba’s fervent reli-
giosity, so Carlists hoped, could be exploited, especially in the person of
Santiago’s Archbishop, Cirilo Alameda y Brea.54 But Tacón expelled the
archbishop from Cuba. Alameda y Brea made, on 2 January, for Jamaica,
then, early in July, to London.55 After a brief exile the archbishop found
his place at Don Carlos’s side as a spiritual leader of the anti-apostólico
faction.56 Deﬂecting the Carlist threat, the Madrid government lost no
time in seeing off the danger that liberalism would lead to indepen-
dence on the island; a special law was quickly passed by the Cortes
exempting Cuba from constitutional rule and allowing for ‘special laws’
in the colony. This came in spite of a spirited campaign by Radical
progresistas to demand political rights for these colonies and even, on
the margins, to abolish slavery (a proposal which was quickly blocked
due to fears of creating ‘another Haiti’ and, most crucially, depriving
the hard-pressed Spanish exchequer of the tobacco plantations’ vital
revenue).57 The effect of these laws was soon felt. In 1838, the ﬁnancially
starved Madrid government ordered the sale of a round of ecclesiastical
property on Cuba, whilst imposing on both Cuba and Puerto Rico an
extra-ordinary tax of 60 million reales.58
   Given Cristino preoccupations with Cuba, it is surprising that the
most impressive Caribbean impact of Spanish Carlism was not conspir-
atorial in nature, but Romantic, in the inspiration it gave to the cause of
Santo Domingan independence from Haitian rule. The Santo Domingan
‘father of the nation’, Juan Pablo Duarte, had spent the Carlist War
in Catalonia, but in 1838 he left for his native Dominican Republic,
inspired to agitate for his nation’s independence against Haitian rule. He
adapted the Catalan Carlist slogan, Rey, Patria y Fueros to Patria, Fueros y
Libertad. This inspired his Trinitaria secret society, which he founded in
1838 in Santo Domingo, and led to the 1844 declaration of Dominican
independence under a Carlist-inspired slogan.59 The symbol of eman-
cipated, black Haitians exercising sovereignty over whites had terriﬁed
colonial societies, and Duarte was doubtless inﬂuenced by the constant
Carlist allusions to the ‘usurping’ Spanish Liberals as ‘blacks’ (negros).
   The international impact of the civil war may have mattered to the
Jacobin politics of Madrid, but was marginal to the daily experience of
war. The Spanish Left’s greatest ‘export’ since 1812 had been the Con-
stitution of Cádiz, but its domestic reimposition after the La Granja
revolution had rendered it otiose as the army overruled local politicians.
Senior ofﬁcers who, unlike San Miguel, Quiroga and Cardero, were not
part of the victorious revolutionary party had even more reason to use
136 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


high-handed military jurisdiction against troublesome civilian authori-
ties. The revived civil supremacy principles of the Constitution of 1812
had rendered the daily management of military operations difﬁcult.
Troops had to go miles out of their way in desperate pursuit of insurgents
just so they did not ‘invade’ the Captaincy-General of Madrid. Mean-
while, contending civilian authorities, both well-established ones like
intendants, and new constitutional varieties of provincial governors,
prefects, elected local mayors and civil governors, may have been pro-
gressive as far as Liberal politics was concerned but proved detrimental
to strategic operations. This autonomy impeded the commissariat’s task
even more than the inefﬁcient system of private contractors, and pro-
voked sharp inequalities. In Valencia province, for example, Chiva and
Buñol were overburdened with demands for supplies whereas nearby
Utiel and Requena were not, even though all four municipalities were
threatened by Cabrera.60
   The insecurity caused by rural terrorism places a virtual embargo on
travel. Even the royal escort was robbed on one occasion. A govern-
ment report in 1837 blamed the human geography of Andalucía for
the rural insecurity of the south, as labourers traipsing miles between
pueblo, cortijo and ﬁeld were particularly vulnerable targets for bandits.61
But matters were even worse in the pro-Carlist north, where the Protes-
tant missionary, George Borrow, reported ‘almost every road is teeming
with banditti, who under the name of Carlists plunder friend and foe,
and to robbery join cruelty so atrociously horrible that indignation at
the crime is frequently lost in wonder’.62 Muleteers and labourers suf-
fered particularly, as they were often the easiest targets for opportunistic
raiders. Their fates made for grim government reports and press cover-
age. Accounts abound of civilians being preyed upon by Carlists acting
as bandits (or the other way round). A raid near Vendrell (Tarragona) was
typical: ﬁve farm labourers ridden down and a ten-year-old boy mor-
tally wounded.63 A Cristino supply column trapped by Carlist invasion
in the village of Ruidera (New Castile) refused to surrender to the local
Carlist bandits led by the Pallilos brothers but agreed to surrender to
a Carlist expeditionary force of outsiders.64 Agriculture, especially valu-
able and vulnerable livestock husbandry, was badly hit. Daimiel in New
Castile was so terrorised by marauding Carlist bands during the autumn
of 1837 that its farmers left their animals exposed in the ﬁelds to die,
the harvest going uncollected.65 The absence of village menfolk femi-
nised the practice of agriculture, devolving food production to the close
environs of dwellings. The war accounted for much of the general sub-
sistence crisis of 1837, just as the Peninsular War had done with the
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   137