


more severe famine of 1811–12.66 It was worsened when the moderado
government of 1837 imposed an extraordinary compulsory purchase of
5,000 horses. This had originally been mooted by the revolutionaries in
February 1837 for the Militia; now the moderados did it for the army,
impairing agriculture whilst also removing the social mobility offered
by Militia membership to peasants with horses.67
   This security crisis meant that villages and small towns in both
Castiles which had no Cristino garrison could be regarded as ‘Carlist’,
either because they were occupied or invaded by bands or because
these bands operated close enough in the vicinity to induce willing or
unwilling ‘geographical loyalty’. At least 24 Carlist bands were known
by Cristino security forces to be plaguing both Castiles in 1836. Their
members came from one or more of the following four categories:
deserters/draft-dodgers, men conscripted by the Carlist bands, crimi-
nals/adventurers and agricultural workers displaced by war-ravaged har-
vests and the Liberal property revolution. The presence of so many rural
poor in Carlist bands, and the fact that these were usually led or men-
tored by reactionary priests, led generations of historians, especially the
Marxists and neo-Carlists of the second half of the twentieth century, to
understand the Carlist war as a conﬂict between a liberal, urban, mod-
ernising bourgeoisie and a backward, traditional, Catholic rural society,
the latter comprising a broad spectrum of threatened livelihoods united
by their false consciousness of throne and altar.68 Yet the twentieth-
century preoccupation with class conﬂict was too self-contained and
hermetic. Castile showed that ‘Carlism’ covered many more categories
than declassés, and in any case the same economic grievance could be a
recruiting sergeant for Cristinism, too. In New Castile, for example, the
naturalised Spaniard and Irish-born veteran of the British Army, Colonel
Jorge Dawson Flinter, beat the Carlists at their own game. Inﬂuenced by
his ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the Spanish American Independence wars,
Flinter created a Cristino counter-guerrilla force of desperate men called
peseteros (they earned one peseta per day) who were armed with nothing
more than shotguns and who fought the Carlists and their support-
ers in a private, asymmetrical fashion.69 Later in the war, the Cristinos
recruited a mounted volunteer guerrilla force in Logroño under Martín
Zurbano Baras (alias Martín Varea), which plundered and terrorised
Carlist villages in the Basque country for pecuniary gain.70
   In effect, the deep war privatised politics, and not just for combatants,
as local communities used the aims of each side in order to protect or
advance their interests. The ﬂight to Valladolid of local village author-
ities drove villagers to seek the protection of rural insurgents, selling
138 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


them arms, sacking the homes of the absent wealthy and proclaiming
Carlos V. When a Cristino counter-insurgency operation at the end of
1837 re-established control, the captain-general showed no compassion
for the villagers’ plight, and imposed crippling ﬁnes on families whose
menfolk had joined the insurgents. The intimate details of ‘wrongdo-
ing’ possessed by the captain-general implies the widespread use of local
informants.71 Sometimes exasperated municipalities protected them-
selves by deﬂecting military oppression back onto the commanders. The
commissariat of a Cristino division quartered in Sarrión (Teruel) refused
to give the municipality a receipt for 3,000 rations commissioner (habiti-
lado de comisario) Castillo demanded as only 2,800 had been produced.
Even worse, the same division returned to Sarrión a few days later. The
Mayor of Sarrión therefore acted fast. He humoured Castillo and man-
aged to get him to sign off the receipts, and not only these but also
some receipts from Cabrera who had plagued the area shortly before
with similar demands. Castillo did not bother to read the small print.
For this mistake a court martial started against Castillo, but before he
could be sentenced, he defected to the Carlists out of embarrassment.72
   The ideologically committed minority despaired at the apolitical prag-
matism of communities at war. A solitary Liberal in Sonseca (Toledo)
complained at how ‘the insurgents are the only people in charge around
here’, conﬁscating the cattle of local Cristinos and abducting the local
mayor for ransom.73 In Méntrida (Toledo), meanwhile, local authority
had passed into the hands of ‘men of no character’ who, so an inves-
tigating judge was appalled to ﬁnd, paid off Carlist irregulars in the
surrounding hills, thereby preserving a modus vivendi.74 Communities in
Toledo which failed to make such accommodations could expect to fare
worse. In March 1837, some 26 irregulars descended on Malpica del Tajo
(Toledo) and might have kept it in their possession, as the few militia-
men who reported for action merely barricaded themselves in the local
castle. Yet the irregulars contented themselves with sacking the house of
the wealthiest Liberal and burning the mayor’s residence to the ground
before moving on.75 The Protestant missionary, George Borrow, was self-
evidently prone to attract hostile Carlist attention. But his account of
León in the summer of 1837 is nonetheless indicative of how nominally
Cristino civilian authorities were powerless in the face of Carlism:76