


was shunned by non-British lending markets. The government decreed
the famous round of nationalisation of ecclesiastical properties (known
in Spanish as desamortización), accompanying this with the abolition
of all remaining noble and clerical distinctions in law by the following
summer. A levy of 50,000 men was ordered, the blood tax for exemption
being lowered to 2,000 per draftee, or 1,500 with a viable horse. This
cheaper tax helped the lower middle-class constituency of progresismo.
Wealthier Liberals, by contrast, tended to support the moderados, and
were collectively subjected to a 200,000,000-reales forced loan (termed a
‘patriotic subscription’), captive subscribers being promised reimburse-
ment in instalments yielding 5 per cent interest. Wealthy individuals
who tried to ﬂee the country without permission were subject to the
decree of 16 September 1836, which conﬁscated their property, this
being made retroactive to emigrants since the victory of the La Granja
revolution on 15 August. Conﬁscation of property had so far happened
only to the Carlist enemy, so sectarian theft was a new departure. But
such was the economic chaos that even Finance Minister Mendizábal
could not prevent Cristino Spain defaulting in November 1836, for the
ﬁrst time, on some of its interest repayments.
   Other solutions conveniently conformed to stated progresista policy,
including the revival of the 1823 municipal legislation, which devolved
wide-ranging local autonomy (and ﬁnancial responsibilities), under-
pinned by voting rights for male householders.32 But this reform was
inoperable for two reasons. First, states of siege grew to combat grow-
ing Carlism, and military law overrode all civil jurisdiction, even in
reformed town halls. Second, the rural insecurity was compounded by
the revolutionary Cortes decree that wealthy notables should quit their
homes for safe urban centres whenever they were threatened by Carlists.
This decree was designed to drain the lake of economic Carlism by
depriving the enemy of loot or hostages for ransom. But in fact it proved
disastrous. It recoiled on poorer citizens who were robbed instead of
their absent social betters. Such citizens were even more likely to take
their chances joining Carlist bands (despite the fact that the families
they left behind faced the full rigour of revolutionary reprisals).33 Third,
the ﬂight of wealthy individuals severely undermined both the prac-
tice of respectable politics and the organisation of the militia. The tragic
Mayor of Urda (Toledo), for example, should have been a Cristino suc-
cess story. He had spent his family fortune to become mayor during the
transition of 1833, but the civil war saw nearby insurgents rally under
the Carlist ﬂag, ravaging local agriculture and forcing the mayor to take
on debts. Failing to negotiate a middle ground between Cristino and
132 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Carlist forces, the mayor’s administration was preyed on by both sides,
as local elections of councillors were dominated by corruption and vio-
lence and the whole administration, including the Militia, collapsed
into decrepitude. In May 1836, a 600-strong force of Carlists sacked
Urda, burnt the militia commander’s home to the ground and raped all
the women they could ﬁnd.34 Urda’s remaining wealthy families were
relieved to follow the revolutionary Cortes’ decree to ﬂee the town for
safer urban centres. The mayor tried to follow them but the Cristino
forces, who had declared a state of siege, ordered him to stay in his post,
also refusing his resignation (and even ﬁning him when he made this
desperate plea). At his wits’ end, the mayor took his own life.35 Whatever
else it was, this era of ‘local democracy’ was no ‘golden age’.36
   The La Granja revolution had a greater impact internationally than
the intervention of foreign auxiliaries discussed in Chapter 5. The
year 1836 was a crisis one for Spanish foreign policy for two reasons:
the La Granja revolution and Madrid’s recognition of the indepen-
dence of the Spanish American republics. Existing studies have stressed
political, cultural and international law factors surrounding this recog-
nition. Politically, the Quadruple Alliance has been viewed as the
subordination of Cristino Spain’s foreign policy to Paris and London,
especially with regard to British pressure for free markets and inde-
pendence recognition.37 Culturally, Madrid’s tardy recognition has been
invoked as Spain’s failure to reinvent itself as a post-imperial state.38
This certainly applied to the Carlists who impotently condemned this
recognition as the bitter harvest of 1820, and of one illegitimate revo-
lution begetting another, to the ruin of Peninsular Spain.39 Finally, the
law of the peoples was being accepted as the natural law base for inter-
national law across the Americas, and Cristino Spain’s honouring of this
integrated it back into the European concert.40
   Whereas links between the Carlists’ war effort and their foreign policy
have been well studied,41 comparatively little has been investigated with
regard to the Cristino Liberals. Yet the very ﬁrst motion passed by the
1836 revolutionary Cortes was to proclaim that Spain would remain a
monarchy. The revolutionaries were right to be worried about European
diplomatic reaction. In September 1836, Tsar Nicholas I, smarting from
a Quadruple Alliance snub regarding his proposed international peace
conference, urged Austria and Prussia to join him in recognising Don
Carlos and withdrawing ambassadors from Paris; Metternich, by con-
trast, urged caution, but agreed this course of action the moment the
Carlists got control of Madrid, whilst in the meantime increasing his
covert help to the Carlists.42 The absolutist powers, Austria and the
                                      Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   133