

   I had scarcely been at Leon three days when I . . . had published my
   advertisements as usual, though without very fervent hope of success,
   as Leon is a place where the inhabitants, with very few exceptions, are
   furious Carlists and ignorant and blinded followers of the old Papal
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   139


  Church. It is, moreover, a Bishop’s see, which was once enjoyed by
  the prime councillor of Don Carlos, whose ﬁerce and bigoted spirit
  still seems to pervade the place . . . I had scarcely risen from the bed
  where the fever had cast me, when I found that my servant had
  become alarmed; he informed me that he had seen several soldiers
  in the uniform of Don Carlos knocking at the door of the inn, and
  that they had been making enquiries concerning me. It was indeed a
  singular fact connected with Leon that upwards of ﬁfty of these fel-
  lows, who had on various accounts left the ranks of the pretender,
  were walking about the streets dressed in his livery, and with all the
  conﬁdence which the certainty of the protection of the local authori-
  ties could afford them, should any one be disposed to interrupt them.
  He moreover informed me that the person in whose house we were
  living was a notorious spy to the robbers in the neighbourhood, and
  that unless we took our departure speedily and unexpectedly, we
  should to a certainty be plundered on the road.

The further south and south-west the Carlist bands roamed the more
they encountered Cristino resistance. Don Carlos knew that the north-
west, Asturias and Galicia, offered the best prospects for a new Carlist
safe zone, if they could be reached by an expedition to match the
achievements of Guergué in Catalonia the previous year. The ‘Batanero
raid’ into Castile of some 220 infantry and 52 cavalry during January
and February 1836 had shown promise of what a force more than ten
times that number might achieve. The summer of 1836 posited the
enemy in an even greater revolutionary crisis than during Guergué’s
expedition. The last weeks of Córdova’s command, in July, had been
marked by a serious mutiny of a battalion in Gerona and a general
breakdown in deference as soldiers disobeyed their ofﬁcers, deserted and
defected in increasing numbers. An irate and desperate Córdova pro-
claimed from his headquarters at Pamplona on 6 July 1836 that the
revolutionaries who were rising in the name of liberty and the Constitu-
tion of 1812 were actually treacherous ﬁfth columnists for the Carlists.77
Subjectively, this was arrant nonsense, and enraged Cristino soldiers at
Lerín (Navarra) almost lynched Córdova for this calumny as he ﬂed the
revolution the following month.78 But objectively the ‘Gómez Expe-
dition’ that summer did indeed show a strong military link between
Carlist expansion and revolutionary militancy.
   Miguel Gómez, born in Jaén province in 1796, veteran of the Penin-
sular and Royalist Wars, and purged colonel of 1833, was like a minor
character in a play whose actions reveal the bigger plot. His expedition
140 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40