

  Cantavieja, hitherto a nest of bandits and false defenders of the
  altar and throne, is now under national occupation . . . Yet, people of
  Aragón, defend yourselves. Dedicate yourselves to this sacred task the
  moment you fall under enemy attack. Defend your homes, which are
  yours after all, along with the fruit of your sweat and toil. Who else
  will care as much about your security and who else is willing to match
  your sacriﬁces?

Civilians were thus on their own, and were exhorted to manage their
own affairs as best they could. Army units were too dispersed, and
even militia garrisons could be overwhelmed in point-defence, often
in circumstances which recoiled on civilians they abandoned. Soneja
(Valencia) during the summer of 1836, for example, saw its militia garri-
son ﬂee the superior forces of El Serrador, but not before it had poisoned
foodstores which it knew the Carlists would seize. El Serrador avenged
the agonies of his men not on the absent militia, but on the inhabitants,
who were ﬁred upon as they ﬂed their burning houses.13 Patrician Lib-
erals who were unable to gain victory over the enemy instead proposed
prophylactic measures to divert listless men from Carlist bands. National
elites, like San Miguel, and the deputy for Alicante, Joaquín Abarques,
shared the vague opinion that ‘agricultural improvements’ could turn
Carlist swords back into ploughshares.14 Abarques became a self-parody
of patrician arrogance when he proposed ‘enlightening’ the insurgent
provinces by sending them copies of the Constitution of 1837.15 Local
elites, like Barcelona’s Council of Armament and Defence, worried about
the inﬂux of refugees who might be blandished into Carlist ﬁfth-column
activities, and prescribed practical measures like putting the idle to
work in nationalised monasteries and convents.16 Such measures were
128 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


either unhelpfully long term in nature or limited to reinforcing control
of urban centres already inside the Cristino zone. But what mattered
most during the middle years of the war was the expansion of the con-
ﬂict, and not just in Catalonia and Aragón, but also across Castile and
even Andalucía, where banditry grew under the banner of Carlism and
expeditions tore across the countryside. Civilians who were neither sol-
diers nor active revolutionary citizens (militiamen) had to forge their
own responses to violence, occupations and counter-occupations in an
insecure environment.
   Popular responses to this security crisis were part and parcel of the
leftist revolution in the Cristino zone. Jacobin politics had overtaken
Madrid in August 1836, and this was soon reﬂected in the ﬁgure of
Antonio Quiroga, who enjoyed even better Radical-Liberal credentials
than San Miguel, taking over the Captaincy-Generalship of Aragón.
The victorious Army of the Centre was stripped of men to help con-
front a Carlist breakout from the northern front (Gómez expedition),
allowing Carlists to regain lost territory. The Carlist breakout tested the
revolutionary Spain of La Granja beyond breaking point.
   Meanwhile, the Queen-Regent’s closure of the Cortes led to insurrec-
tions in Málaga, Granada and Cartagena, the last one being a bloody
exercise in settling scores. When Cartagena’s governor, O’Daly, deported
the miscreants to Ceuta, the prison ships were recalled so the cul-
prits could stand trial and O’Daly was replaced by Count Mirasol, the
hero of Bilbao. The Málaga revolution had heavy republican under-
tones, despite its protestations of loyalty to the Queen-Regent.17 In July
1836, Donadío, now military governor, was assassinated after some
800 troops under his command refused his order to disarm the rad-
icalised Militia and to come to the rescue of the civil governor, José
San Just, who was hiding from enraged militiamen. When San Just
ﬂed to a nearby building, he was shot dead by Carlos Barritaro, a
militiaman who in 1838 became a correspondent in a press campaign
defending the widows of two murdered Radicals against persecution
by moderado authorities. Donadío, meanwhile, disguised himself as a
National Guardsman and tried to ﬂee, only to be executed in a simi-
lar fashion.18 The following day, a quickly assembled junta arranged for
the Constitution of 1812 to be proclaimed in Málaga, and the revolu-
tion spread until the Queen-Regent was physically forced by rebellious
sergeants to sign the Constitution on 13 August 1836. Some 2,000
malagueño militiamen were dispatched to Catalonia to ﬁght Carlists
in the name of the Constitution.19 Málaga’s radicalism expressed one
extreme of the 1836 revolution; the other extreme was the gentlemanly
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   129