


stand-off between the pro-Constitution militia and the town hall of
Cáceres (Extremadura), which went the militia’s way without the need
for any violence let alone killing.20
   As the Radical insurrection spread, the patriarch of exaltismo, Evaristo
San Miguel, deﬁed the Istúriz government’s orders to resign his com-
mand of the Army of the Centre and rallied the Zaragoza Militia
to the cause of the Constitution of 1812, keeping loyal government
forces at bay. Santander’s garrison joined the revolution because of pay
and supply grievances.21 Málaga, the cradle of revolution, exercised its
sovereignty by ‘declaring war’ on the pro-moderado French after one of
the latter’s vessels refused to acknowledge salutes from the revolution-
ary authorities.22 For the time being, meanwhile, Madrid stayed loyal.
Cardero had been mooted as leader of a revolutionary pronunciamiento
in the capital, but Quesada showed some timely ruthlessness for which
he would shortly pay with his life. He proclaimed martial law in the
capital, threatening any political activists who disturbed the peace with
the death penalty. But Madrid’s temporary quiescence was overtaken
by the expanding revolution elsewhere, including Cristino Spain’s sec-
ond city, where Captain-General Espoz, though responding admittedly
less quickly than San Miguel had done in Zaragoza, used his revolu-
tionary credentials to win over Barcelona’s powerful popular Radical
movement to his leadership and to the proclamation of the Constitu-
tion of 1812, thereby forestalling the sort of political violence to which
Catalonia’s capital had become accustomed. The welcome bloodless-
ness of Barcelona’s revolution was Espoz’s last service before he ﬁnally
succumbed to his agonising stomach cancer on 24 December 1836.23
   The revolution culminated at La Granja, at the hands of sergeants
posted to the Spanish monarchy’s summer residence at the town of San
Ildefonso, some 80 kilometres north of the capital. Nineteenth-century
writers, for whom the French Revolution was the dominant example
of royal humiliation, were fascinated by María Cristina’s submission
at La Granja, seeing this as the product of conspiracy funded by Rad-
icals, unlike the popular revolution of the juntas the previous year.24
Certainly, structural pay arrears made even the royal bodyguard vulner-
able to agitators, and it was logical for ofﬁcers and sergeants who could
not pay their men to search for political solutions instead. Twentieth-
century writers gave the La Granja revolution secondary importance to
that of the juntas the previous year. Whilst the social signiﬁcance of
lowly sergeants dictating to royalty was noted, writers saw La Granja
as the work of a mendizabalista clique bent on holding on to power
in the face of newer, and often more radical, chaos generated by the
130 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Málaga revolution and the penetration by the Gómez Expedition of the
Cristino ‘home front’.25 During the ﬁrst days of the sergeants’ rising, the
moderado prime minister who had replaced Mendizábal, Istúriz, tried to
win over the rebels, and when this attempt failed, tensions rose further
as the Madrid government declared the Queen-Regent a captive of the
revolutionaries. London and Paris grew alarmed. But whereas the British
backed the revolution to the hilt (an attitude which raised suspicion that
the whole affair was Ambassador Villiers’ doing), France disapproved of
this violent shift to progresismo. But both Quadruple Alliance powers
advised that the Queen-Regent captain the revolution as an act of free
will on her part: otherwise abdication (or worse) could be the alterna-
tive. Villiers was shocked by the apparent leaderlessness of this army
revolution, and the precedent it might set to Europe.26 Franco-British
diplomacy was proving highly prescient. The militiamen who rose in
1835 and the soldiers in 1836 both did so in the name of the con-
stitutional monarchy, but so central had the army’s claims to Spain’s
political future become that it would not hesitate to dispense with any
given monarch in order to recraft the state in its own image, as the
revolution of 1840 would show. The Queen-Regent was defenceless,
and the revolutionaries sent out fraternal calls to other units exhort-
ing them to proclaim the Constitution of 1812 elsewhere in Cristino
Spain. The army and militia in besieged Pamplona united in replac-
ing the city’s elderly governor with a younger leftist.27 Eventually, María
Cristina agreed to reinstate the Constitution of 1812, and the capital’s
revolutionary militia were rearmed and recalled, unpopular ministers
being sacked whilst other diehard moderados fared worse.28
   The revolutionary repression of political adversaries distinguished
1836 from 1835 as it was done by central government rather than
regional juntas. Mob violence certainly featured strongly, perhaps more
strongly, during 1836, too. Captain-General Quesada was lynched by
a Madrid mob led by revolutionary militiamen, his body mutilated
and paraded around the streets. The former moderado Prime Minister,
Istúriz, escaped a similar fate by ﬂeeing in disguise.29 For weeks after-
wards his son went into hiding whilst his wife was forced into house
arrest by demonstrations of rough music.30 In the provinces moderado
governors were often lynched, such as in Figueres or Cartagena, where
the governor was chased upstairs in his house by militiamen and
defenestrated.31
   Gone were the days of ‘Liberal union’. The capital was placed under
a revolutionary state of siege which invaded the homes of its political
opponents. The war had made the regime desperate for money, but it
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   131