


the Sierra Morena towards another valuable target, Almadén, whose
mercury mines had been leased for a Rothschild loan in 1835.96 The
barren sierra treated Gómez’s forces harshly. His 8,000 infantry were
hungry and badly shod, only 400 of his 1,200 cavalry were battle-worthy
and the lower-ranking Cristino prisoners had to be ‘freed’ to fend for
themselves in the wastes.97 But he was still able to take Almadén, a
town of 8,000 inhabitants stretched along an east–west line which
made it hard to defend against a determined attack. In fact, the town’s
modest 50-strong Militia garrison, earlier in the war, had proved hard-
pressed to keep at bay small guerrilla bands. Continued pressure from
Carlist guerrillas and news of the Gómez expedition led to a reinforce-
ment of the militia and the establishment of a serious, though still
modest, army garrison. Despite these measures, Gómez needed only a
few days’ bombardment carried out by two well-positioned mountain
guns to capture the town on 24 October 1836; the Carlists charac-
teristically employing night attacks to secure parts of the town. The
Military Governor of Almadén, Aranguren, surrendered the town after
its general destruction had served as morbid battle honours. Aranguren,
displaying a non-committal rhetorical ability common to Cristino elites,
made a parting plea to Gómez not to destroy the valuable mercury
mines as these would be vital for national prosperity ‘whoever wins
this war’.98
   The occupation of Almadén was the ﬁnal straw for Rodil’s position.
An image appeared in the press lampooning him: showing him wearing
an eyeglass to survey the campaign horizon, whilst Gómez’s expedition
passed between his extended legs.99 Laughter damaged reputations in
cultures of honour and Rodil was sacked both from the Royal Guards
and the War Ministry. Gómez, for his part, evaded capture yet again, and
on 31 October marched into Cáceres (Extremadura), beginning a three-
day occupation of this provincial capital which had been abandoned to
its fate by its civil authorities and Militia.
   Rodil’s shame was the ﬁrst order of business of the unicameral revo-
lutionary Cortes which convened on 24 October 1836. Cristino Spain
been seized by Jacobin politics. Whereas Espoz and Meer, and other
captains-general, used their military authority to impose forced loans,
a civilian police state gripped Madrid. Salustiano de Olózaga, an ambi-
tious lawyer with excellent radical credentials, was made Civil Governor
of Madrid. He used constitutional defence legislation to open corre-
spondence relating to the forthcoming elections and imprison over
500 civic Carlists.100 Quiroga, Captain-General of Granada, wrote to
Mendizábal informing him of his political opponents. This crackdown
                                   Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   145


was followed in other provinces like Badajoz, where some 160 civic
Carlists were imprisoned.101 Priests who refused blessings to the Queen
or who even expressed sorrow for the plight of the religious evicted by
the disentailment laws were arrested by the National Militia.102 Andan,
Civil Governor of Zaragoza, imprisoned priests without due process,
whilst Latre, Captain-General of Galicia, threatened mayors with prison
if they refused to cooperate with his military orders.103 Civic Carlists
faced unprecedented government persecution.104 The non-ministerial
Left also ﬂourished, as several Radical conspiracies and secret societies
were now liberated, to an extent, from police pressure. Secret soci-
eties old and new ﬂourished such as Joven Italia, Leñadores escoceses,
Templarios sublimes, Asociación de Derechos del Hombre and others
besides.105 The government tried to keep control of the revolution via
such symbolic actions as auctioning church bells and treasures and
rejecting or extorting those wealthy rightists in the capital and else-
where who applied for passports for exile in France.106 Yet the years
1835–37 still saw the ministerial Left outﬂanked by republican secret
societies, which regarded Carlism as a mortal threat because of its roy-
alism. The Federation (La Federación) convened a clandestine network
of Radicals in Andalucían provincial capitals under the leadership of a
‘Supreme Federated Regulator’ (Supremo Regulador Federado), who resided
out of harm’s way in Paris.107 By the end of 1837, government spies
had penetrated much of its activities, recording the oaths taken by new
members: