


westwards from the Basque country into Old Castile and Asturias began
with not much more than 3,000 men, but, crucially, he picked up more
on the way. High secrecy surrounded the expedition before it began at
ﬁrst light on 26 June 1836. Twenty-ﬁve hours’ march later in blister-
ing sunshine got the expedition to Colina, some nine leagues from the
starting point. A crucial early defensive victory was secured for Gómez
at nearby Baranda when General Tello y López’s Cristino division lost
vital hours discovering the nature of the breakout. By the time Tello
had closed on Gómez on 27 June, the Carlists had had time to choose
their ground. Both sides suffered in the baking heat, and several of Das
Antas’s Portuguese literally died of thirst when pursuing this breakout.
But the Carlists intercepted part of the Cristino supply wagons, which
meant that it was the Cristinos who ran out of water ﬁrst. Tello’s defeat
allowed Gómez to continue the expedition, even though Espartero pur-
sued with forced marches, knowing that he had to deny the Carlists
exploitation of territory because it was marked by ‘weak and abandoned
Cristino garrisons’.79
   Gómez’s remarkable invasion has been analysed in exhaustive detail
elsewhere.80 Its salient feature is a six-month campaign across north-
western, western, southern and eastern Spain, which achieved both
remarkable victories (such as the capture of Córdova) and survived
important defeats (such as Majaceite). The expedition was supported
by a more limited westward raid by Pablo Sanz y Baeza, and another
south by Basilio García, and it was joined across New Castile and
Extremadura by Cabrera’s seasoned forces. Oviedo was twice occupied
by Carlists, ﬁrst by Gómez in July who seized its artillery and small arms,
and hundreds of recruits, before Espartero’s vanguard on 8 July obliged
him to evacuate, and second by Sanz in October who was repulsed by
subaltern revolutionaries who shamed the more cautious army and Mili-
tia ofﬁcers and their declaration of an open city.81 As Espartero drove
Gómez from Oviedo, the Carlists continued westwards into Galicia,
following their King’s instructions. Gómez was aided not just by the
Carlism of clerics, but also by the vicious (or virtuous) cycle of military
paralysis and revolution afﬂicting the Cristino zone. Galicia’s Captain-
General Latre, cowed by his failure against the Andújar revolutionaries
the previous summer, thought the streets of Lugo too dangerous to
leave unguarded and therefore refused to intercept Gómez, conﬁning
himself to ﬁring artillery when the Carlists came into range of the city
walls.82 A political crisis in Portugal withdrew Das Antas’s badly mauled
auxiliaries across the frontier. The provincial committees of armament
and defence came under dictatorial pressure from the army to increase
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   141


their contributions; Córdova increasingly had to intervene personally.
On 9 July, Córdova found time between his endless threats of resigna-
tion to warn Madrid that he had only enough food to supply the Army
of the North until the next day.83 On 17 July, General Espartero, the
only ofﬁcer yet to show any élan against the expedition, wrote to the
government complaining of the state of his men. Two weeks later the
response he received was evasive and rhetorical.84 Meanwhile, Gómez
seized Espartero’s pay-wagon carrying 8,000 reales and attracted volun-
teers from across the generally pro-Carlist north. On 18 July, Gómez
reached the cathedral city of Santiago, and was welcomed with a Mass.
Gómez ordered a mobilisation in Santiago, to be enforced by the usual
draconian penalties, but Espartero’s pursuit evicted him the following
evening, although not before the Carlists had stripped the city of 100
oxen, 350 sacks of powder, 450 of bullets, 2,000 muskets, 3,000 bayonets
and some 350 cartridges.85
   Gómez’s subsequent evacuation of Galicia and invasion of Old Castile
was remarkable, not least because his expedition survived a defeat by
Espartero at the Asturian village of Escaro on 8 August and the loss
of some 500 prisoners. Yet even more remarkable was the fact that a
rural expedition alternating around 6,000 men (some of these being
priests and other itinerants of little military value) seemed not only
unstoppable but also an external factor in Cristino Spain’s revolu-
tionary crisis. Gómez spent the ﬁrst week of August occupying León,
before ﬂeeing before Espartero’s vanguard once again. Soon afterwards,
Espartero himself fell ill from exhaustion, and the counter-insurgency
forces were led, from 23 August, by Alaix.86 As the expedition drew
closer to the Cristino capital, revolutionary opinion turned on War
Minister Rodil. Rodil had presided over an embarrassing defeat of the
Royal Guard, which, despite its better training and artillery, had suffered
demoralisation since the La Granja revolution, symbolised by the revo-
lutionaries’ insistence that the Guard’s standard be emblazoned with
the green ribbons of the Constitution. Local authorities at Guadalajara
ﬂed to Madrid in panic.87 Guadalajara province saw its communities
caught between Carlist violence and ‘revolutionary justice’. Cristino
forces ﬁned municipalities which did not display tablets dedicated to
the Constitution of 1812, and Carlists sacked those that did. A consti-
tutional judge of Riaza (Segovia) on the border of Guadalajara cut an
undigniﬁed ﬁgure by ﬂeeing to La Granja soon after exhorting others
to ﬁght to the end.88 The isolated Guadalajara village of Maranchón
was surrounded by opposing forces but had no particular afﬁliation
of its own. Its villagers decided that the Carlists were stronger, and a
142 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40