


delegation gave them intelligence about a nearby Cristino unit which
was then subjected to an attack that yielded dozens of prisoners, several
of whom chose to serve under the Carlists. Other communities were
divided between themselves. Almoguera’s (Guadalajara) divisions had
been dormant, but news of both revolution and Carlist invasion radi-
calised local politics. When its Liberal mayor held a banquet to celebrate
the proclamation of the Constitution of 1812, his address was cut short
by one of the musicians in attendance, who lunged forward with a dag-
ger, killing the mayor’s wife instantly and mortally wounding the mayor
(the local surgeon, a civic Carlist, refused to treat him), before snufﬁng
out the candles to assist his escape. The assassin was later caught by
militiamen and executed, but not before he had declared himself ‘glad
to have killed a negro’.89
   Gómez could not seriously consider assaulting Madrid, but it would
have helped Rodil’s career if he had. War Minister Rodil decreed a
strategy which would soon be his undoing. Adopting his tactic of ‘cen-
tralisation’ sustained by parallel lines of deployments and patrols on
the approaches to the capital – ‘defence in depth’ – Rodil certainly
saved the capital, but in a manner of strategic overkill more suited to
his dogged defence of Callao in Peru than against a guerrilla band. His
strategy ceded the initiative to Gómez, deﬂecting him into the surround-
ing areas of Extremadura, New Castile and, eventually, Andalucía, where
he enjoyed a series of embarrassing conquests. Alaix’s campaign troops,
meanwhile, were impeded by the attitude of the local constitutional
authorities, which wanted to stabilise their power by refusing army
demands for supplies and, especially, the mobilisation of local militi-
amen, out of fear that the revolutionary process could be reopened with
unpredictable results. Cristino troops, tired of having to deal with pre-
sumptuous civilians, reverted to imposing states of siege, suspending
constitutional guarantees in the hope that force rather than negotia-
tion would yield more support. This equated the Cristino campaign to
that of Gómez, who was under no such constraints and could offer
civilians either threats or rewards.90 The threat of martial law sup-
plied Alaix’s troops in Cuenca on 11 September with sufﬁcient shoes.91
Cobblers, like telegraphists in later conﬂicts, were artisans whose skill
was so essential that they were targeted by military law. Consequently,
cobblers in revolutionary Málaga faced forced mobilisation on pain of
imprisonment.92
   The disarray of Cristino forces offered the Carlists surprisingly easy
conquests. News reached Gómez that Córdova was lightly garrisoned
(actually, the Cristino garrison would prove larger than Gómez was led
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   143


to believe, containing some 2,000 militiamen, including several who
had evacuated local villages, and some 200 cavalry). Gómez regrouped
with the forces of Cabrera, and Brigadier Santiago Villalobos managed to
breach the city walls, in part thanks to the city’s restive poor neighbour-
hoods of Santa María and San Lorenzo, whose inhabitants welcomed
the Carlist invasion as an emeute. After days of skirmishing, the Militia
retreated and blockaded itself into the last redoubt, the former head-
quarters of the Inquisition, where it surrendered to terms on 1 October,
only for a misunderstanding to break this truce, which was followed
by a deﬁnitive surrender. Moderados attacked the Radicals’ mismanage-
ment of the war effort. Exaggerating the strength of the Cristino garrison
and minimising the Carlist losses (but not by much in either case), El
Español reported that the city’s 3,000-strong Militia surrendered to a
Carlist force less than three times in number, and which had to suffer a
mere four fatal casualties (including Villalobos).93 Gómez had performed
a rare feat: the capture of a Cristino provincial capital, and his insurgent
lifestyle could, for the moment, take pause. Gómez pointedly remained
in Córdova for a week: hasty departure would be seen by all as a sign of
insurgency, and not the actions of a regime-in-waiting. Hence, Gómez
concocted a deliberately elaborate Carlist regime in the city, led by the
Dean of the Cathedral and effectively run by the subaltern crowds,
who now helped themselves to Militia arms, joined Carlist ranks, and
victimised and sometimes killed local Liberals. Several prominent mili-
tiamen were executed to popular applause, along with their commander
and the prefect. Meanwhile, the city’s poor joined the Carlists in their
plunder of local Liberals’ property.94
   It was a week before Alaix’s force could threaten Córdova. Gómez quit
the city, reoccupied it for a night on 11–12 October, but then left it
deﬁnitively in response to the coordinated movements of Alaix and
Rodil. The War Minister had come under intense pressure to abandon
his cautious strategy, but Rodil dared not leave the capital under-
garrisoned. Although Córdova was retaken, Gómez (and the city’s recent
Carlist junta) remained at large in Andalucía. It was small comfort that
Gómez was burdened by Cabrera’s restive contingents who wanted to
withdraw to Aragón, by a growing sick-train and some 300 Cristino pris-
oners from a Málaga regiment defeated at Alcaudete. Gómez parleyed
with Alaix to propose an exchange of prisoners. But Alaix knew that
the sick and wounded prisoners in the enemy’s entourage were the only
burdens obstructing the Carlist general’s progress, and wished to avoid
offending revolutionary opinion by subjecting virgin Andalucía to an
Eliot Treaty-lite.95 Gómez outmanoeuvred Rodil and escaped through
144 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40