


the Vatican in fact liberated religious commitment away from political
strategy and enabled it to mean different things to different people.7
   The ofﬁcial culture of Christian soldiering was undermined by a
counter-culture of shirking, which shared some of the features, but not
the extent, of the Cristino zone. The ojalatero phenomenon (‘would-
to-God-er’) showed how shirking military duty was more controversial
for Carlists than for Cristinos.8 Ojalatero became a humorous and offen-
sive term to describe all men of ﬁghting ability in the Carlist camp
who, for whatever reason, were not ﬁghting; after the Royal Expedi-
tion it was used by diehard Carlists to describe the disproportionately
non-Basque peace faction known as the transaccionistas. Often, Basque
women unkindly called wounded men in the rearguard ojalateros. The
moral belligerence of Basque women was matched by Cristino women
only in the embittered front-line areas of the east, as was evident in the
enemy camp by the Eco del Comercio’s attempt to shame men into ﬁght-
ing by sensationalising the story of a young heroine. Eighteen-year-old
Luisa Casiñol disguised herself as a man and enlisted in the Cristino
army in Catalonia, proving herself on the battleﬁeld and becoming
something of a mascot (dubbed ‘Luis’) in the eyes of her comrades,
even after her true sex had been revealed.9 Catalan Cristinos had no
problem with temporal rather than supernatural female icons: their
very battle cry ¡Viva la petita! referred to Princess Isabella.10 As the
ojalatero phenomenon had the potential to damage the war effort, it
was answered by repression from the Carlist Royal Police. Measures
included a ban on all non-combatant males from bearing arms or wear-
ing martial moustaches, dishonouring them in a chauvinistic society.11
Towards the end of the war, the Cristino Basque spymaster, Aviraneta,
turned the ojalatero phenomenon into a propaganda offensive to desta-
bilise the Carlist war effort from within. His ‘Letter from a Basque farmer
to a tinker’ was a pun on the shirkers of the Carlist home front (tinker,
or ‘hojalatero’, is a homophone of ‘ojalatero’). Its content brilliantly
set the Carlist Basques against the Carlist ‘Castilians’.12 Even though
Aviraneta’s impact has been overstated by neo-Carlists keen to stress
the autonomism of nineteenth-century Carlism, it remains the most
effective propaganda campaign of the war.13
   The repressive arm of the Carlist state was the Royal Police. Created
in April 1836, initially with the modest aim of being a royal bodyguard,
it quickly assumed classically nineteenth-century police-state functions
in the face of growing discontent and war-weariness, controlling inter-
nal passports, combatting desertion, supervising local foral elections
and, controversially, superimposing its law-and-order jurisdiction over
160 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


that of the fueros. Above all, it hunted deserters. Soon after its creation
the Royal Police enforced punitive measures enacted by the juntas of
each Basque province and Navarra during the spring and summer of
1836, ﬁning and imprisoning the families of deserters, and its repres-
sion reached a peak during the ﬁrst half of 1837.14 The harshness of
the law of hostages was moderated in March 1837 by the personal
intervention of Don Carlos (only families which had sheltered desert-
ers remained in prison).15 Such was the Royal Police’s unpopularity that
it was disbanded in June 1837 by Prime Minister José de Uranga, a
middle-aged royalist veteran of 1821–23 and 1831 and erstwhile ally of
Zumalacárregui. The King was on expedition, hence technically there
was no longer the need for a royal bodyguard in the Basque coun-
try, but Uranga’s real reasons were telling. If legend is to be believed,
Uranga slept protected by a personal bodyguard of two men inside his
room and another two outside. The Byzantine world of Carlist politics
often saw ministers attend meetings armed, and this friction was largely
caused between the disproportionately Basque apostólico (and fuerista)
and the disproportionately non-Basque enlightened absolutist wings of
Carlism. Since the death of Zumalacárregui Don Carlos had appointed
prime ministers whose centralising measures had alienated apostólicos
and fueristas. One such, Carlos Cruz Mayor, a very capable enlightened
absolutist, was already controversial for having led the ‘Bilbao faction’
blamed for Zumalacárregui’s death. But in April 1836 he alienated the
apostólico faction further by speaking out against peace plans to extend
the fueros beyond the Basque country, and Don Carlos yielded to pres-
sure to replace him with the more tactful Juan Bautista Erro y Azpíroz.16
But Erro, a 62-year-old academic and fugitive from Cristino captivity,
soon alienated the same elements with his zeal to centralise revenue col-
lection, his creation of the Royal Police and the ‘Armamento General’,
the May 1836 decree forbidding private ownership of arms. The deci-
sion to attempt a second siege of Bilbao was largely Erro’s, and its failure
provided Don Carlos with a pretext to sack him.17 Thus Uranga, whose
cabinet included both apostólicos and moderates, trod carefully with the
former. His continuation of the centralisation of his predecessors was
made palatable both by his abolition of the Royal Police – who were
sent to the front to assuage ojalaterismo – and his campaign of lim-
ited offensives against Cristino forts in the Basque country to distract
Cristino forces from the pursuit of the Royal Expedition. In August 1837,
Uranga silenced his critics by taking the important Cristino fortress at
Peñacerrada.18
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   161