

   Gómez has proved himself to be a most extraordinary man, and with
   his small army of Aragonese and Basques has within the last four
   months made the tour of Spain; he has very frequently been hemmed
   in with forces three times the number of his own, in places whence
   escape seemed impossible, but he has always bafﬂed his enemies.

Given Gómez’s impact, it was remarkable that the King sided with
Cabrera and appointed Marshal José Mazarrasa, a hard-bitten apostólico
ﬁercely loyal to the King, to lead an inquiry into Gómez’s conduct and
that of other senior ofﬁcers (Eguía, Villarreal, Elío, Guergué) accused of
being too lenient with Cristino prisoners and ‘ignoring the interests of
the Basque country’.141 Gómez sent the King an indignant letter attack-
ing the whole management of a war which had boxed the Carlists into
the Basque country. But Gómez passed into obscurity; besides, the court
had decided to break the strategic blockade by making a second attempt
at taking Bilbao.142 The court were labouring under the old impression
that the capture of this port would lead to Northern Powers’ recog-
nition, and as such had been blind to the possibilities that Gómez’s
much smaller force had shown. Conditions for a conquest were per-
haps worse in the autumn of 1836 than they had been in the spring
of 1835. Espartero, recovered from his illness brought on by pursuing
Gómez, was named Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the North on
16 September, and his bravery was now matched by greater military
skill born out of experience. The Cristinos had shown themselves to
be effective in point-defence whenever the will to ﬁght existed, and
the location of Bilbao played to Quadruple Alliance naval supremacy
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   153


and all its morale-boosting possibilities for reinforcement. British Royal
Marine and Legion commanders, Lord John Hay and Lacy Evans respec-
tively, quickly deployed 6,000 of their men to seal the French frontier
to Carlists between Irún and San Sebastián, and Evans sent 150 artillery-
men to bolster Bilbao’s defences. The Córdova legacy of strong defensive
lines around the Carlist Basque country, including ﬂash telegraphs and
mutually defensible forts, had improved Cristino capabilities for active
defence.143
   Bilbao was certainly not a unanimous decision from the Carlist junta
of generals which met to decide the matter at Durango. La Torre urged
a bold breakout invasion south towards Madrid as the best way to
win European recognition and aid and so win the war. But Erro was
resolved, and Lt-General Vicente González Moreno’s even-handed let-
ter on 15 October 1836 swayed the decision. González explained to his
King that Bilbao was the less worse option (‘better’ options, he insisted,
did not exist in civil wars). A strike south, by contrast, would expose
the Basque country to the mercies of the Cristino defensive ring and
so destabilise civilian morale. Moreover, this time the Carlists had more
artillery to use against Bilbao, including some abandoned pieces from
the Peninsular War which had been salvaged and even those 13-inch
shells ﬁred by the British from Pasajes and San Sebastián that had failed
to explode on impact and had been turned in by local peasants.144 Also,
a dispute between Bilbao’s civil and military authorities over the fund-
ing of fortiﬁcations had simmered since the revolution of the juntas,
slowing progress improving the city’s defences.145 The Carlist hold on
Bilbao’s outlying towns and countryside, meanwhile, had strengthened
since 1835 and had emboldened morale against the blockaded Cristinos.
One local soldier made good was ‘generally on duty blockading Bilbao,
and as soon as the cowardly Cristinos withdraw their advanced guard
within the walls for the night, he and half-a-dozen wags will follow
and write some moral or political abuse of the Queen on the town
gates’.146 But Carlist morale was matched by the Cristinos who had for-
tiﬁed the heights and nationalised convents surrounding Bilbao, and
could rely on some 4,300 soldiers and militiamen garrisoning the city
with as many as 86 cannon. When the Carlists launched their assault
on 22 October, the Cristinos were ready for them.147
   The Carlist bombardment was at its most intense on the 24 and
28 October. Women, children and the elderly took to cellars and store
rooms in order to stay out of harm’s way, even though some ten women,
seven children and three elderly were amongst the 79 fatal casualties in
154 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40