


and turning both himself (ennobled as Count Luchana) and the city
into heroes of Liberal resistance. Cristino casualties during November–
December 1836 exceeded those that of the Carlists: 240 dead and 887
wounded militiamen, 3,700 army dead and wounded (including some
1,000 dead at Luchana), and incalculable civilian casualties. Wide areas
of Bilbao lay in ruins, some 26,000,000-reales worth of damage having
been caused.155
7
Carlist Failure, 1837–39




This chapter explains how Carlist Spain was transformed by the defeat
of the Royal Expedition. The Carlist Basque country was debilitated by
civilian war weariness and army revolts. Popular hatred of ojalateros
(‘would-to-God-ers’, or shirkers) grew on the backs of Basque peas-
antry overburdened by taxes and conscription. War weariness created
factionalism both from within between an ‘enlightened absolutist’
(Marotista) and theocratic absolutist (Apostólico) camp, and even
from without (Muñagorri’s ‘Peace and fueros’ insurgency sponsored by
Madrid). Meanwhile, Cabrera’s military state in the east maintained
its cohesion, defying the Cristino ascendancy elsewhere (as, to a lesser
extent, did the Catalan Carlists). But the strategic situation reverted to
an unsustainable stalemate, renewed minor Carlist expeditions notwith-
standing. The Carlist ‘home front’ in mid-war differed greatly from
that of its enemy. Carlist Spain matched a stultifying social and polit-
ical culture with a generally effective military strategy and order of
battle: the very reverse of the Cristinos. Unlike Cristino Spain, its ter-
ritory was small, restricted to a Basque–Navarrese statelet, and much
more makeshift rural areas of Catalonia, Aragón and Valencia besides.
Although Carlist guerrillas roamed in other areas of Spain, even domi-
nating signiﬁcant geographical spaces, their itinerant nature prevented
them from enforcing anything more than the most rudimentary mil-
itary administration. Thus, the Carlist ‘home front’ entails the Basque
country, and, to a lesser degree, the east. Its study involves three broad
categories, the cultural, the political–economic and the military.
   Culturally, Carlist Spain was characterised by an ofﬁcial puritanism
based on the union of throne and altar. The Vatican never recog-
nised Carlist Spain. Even though most of the cardinals supported such
a policy, Pope Gregory XVI in 1832 had condemned all rebellion

                                   157
158 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


against constituted authority, which meant that Papal recognition of
the Carlists was impossible without either a dynastic reconciliation or
the capture of Madrid. In this respect, the very conservative Pope resem-
bled Chancellor Metternich.1 Yet the lack of formal Papal recognition
did not impede the Carlist mobilisation of Catholicism in its war effort.
On 1 August 1835, the Virgin Mary was proclaimed Generalísima of
Carlist forces, repeating similar anointments by Peninsular War Patriots
and anticipating Franco 100 years later.2 In fact, beyond ofﬁcial puri-
tanism, Carlists exploited the range of popular Catholicism to inspire
Christian soldiery, exculpate exterminating angels or even justify acts
of protest. Faced with the intensely irrational and violent environment
of war, many Carlists relied on the miraculous powers of icons. Hence,
Carlist guerrillas in Aragón turned against their leader, an exterminat-
ing angel priest called Escoriguela, after he discarded a holy cross when
wading across the River Ebro. The weight of the cross almost made him
drown, but this counted as nought to his men who had always kissed the
icon before battle and almost executed the priest for his act of sacrilege.3
  The demands made by the war distorted the public and private
exercise of Catholicism. In April 1836, Don Carlos revived and trans-
formed the Sancti Spiritus University at Oñati (Guipúzcoa), purging
those scholars suspected of the merest whiff of liberalism, replacing
them with theologians of often inferior qualiﬁcations, and forcing staff
to take an oath of allegiance to the King and to uphold the mystery of
the Marian Immaculate Conception. Yet this traditionalist drive failed
as the University had to be used to house armaments, all areas but
the chapel being used for arms storage.4 Ofﬁcial concerns mounted
that total war was eroding popular religiosity and encouraging licence
and blasphemy, and these were answered by punishments targeting
swearing and ‘scandal’.5 Carlist Spain’s greatest female poet, Vicenta
Maturana de Gutiérrez, suffered from the cultural crackdown when,
on 1 May 1838, her ironic lyric poem, Himno a la luna, was banned
from Carlist territory.6 Of greater concern for its pervasiveness was the
growth of extramarital liaisons and the children these produced, bely-
ing the regime’s ofﬁcial piety as expressed in the Gaceta Oﬁcial, and
the cult of the Virgin. A decree was therefore passed on 25 December
1836 allowing soldiers and ofﬁcers to marry, even though these married
men would have to forgo their rights to military pensions. Beyond dog-
matic anti-liberalism, Carlist religion was always a reﬂection of changing
social relationships. Yet both leftist and traditionalist historians have
tended to view Carlist War Catholicism as a constant rather than diverse
and changing, even though the orphaning of the Pretender’s cause by
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   159