


Cortina had risked provoking anti-militarism by mobilising the militia
for service under Narváez. His decision paid off when Narváez expelled
Gómez from Andalucía as a consequence of the Battle of Majaceite on
23 November 1836.130 The Carlist presence in Andalucía had had the
effect of rallying communities to the less worse option of liberalism and
its defence of the municipal autonomy resurrected under the Consti-
tution of 1812. The militia’s battle honours led the citizenry-in-arms
to assert their social and political demands. When, in early December,
some of Loja’s militia were ordered to mobilise, they refused to do unless
the whole battalion was so ordered, as campaign rations and higher pay
were sorely needed for the men’s families, whose livelihoods had been
disrupted by the war.131
   The revolutionary Cortes, desperate for victories against Gómez,
played two generals against each other by ordering Narváez to relieve
the more sclerotic but senior Alaix at the ‘most opportune moment’.
Yet Alaix’s forced marches had made his worn-out men virtually muti-
nous, and they were in no mood to accept command from a more
ruthless general.132 One lieutenant pronounced ‘now is the time to
march on Madrid!’ and demanded the death of ‘counter-revolutionary’
Narváez. However, Narváez used anti-Carlist rhetoric to regain the ini-
tiative before ordering the execution of 11 of the mutineers.133 But these
measures only bought Narváez time, and he was soon embarrassingly
forced to reinstate Alaix (who was an ally of Espartero and had pro-
nounced against his dismissal). Narváez, meanwhile, was summoned
to Madrid to explain his conduct. Luckily for him, the Cortes was far
more divided about what his fate should be than it had been for Rodil;
Narváez asked to be escorted to Cuenca to answer charges, and the
matter passed.134 The Cabra mutiny was a parable of revolutionary mis-
management of the war. A revolutionary Cortes had not allowed its
ignorance of the march of events to override its deliberations and the
revolt of the lieutenants and sergeants had lost Alaix’s division several
vital hours in its pursuit of Gómez. Even though the Carlist expedition
was defeated at Alcaudete (Jaén) on 29 November, Gómez extricated the
bulk of his force once again and disengaged from Andalucía.135 Over
fewer than four weeks, until 19 December 1836 (when Gómez arrived
at the Basque city of Orduña), the expedition executed a remarkable
withdrawal, traversing Bailén and several smaller places on the route
northwards, ﬁghting battles and skirmishes, and bivouacking across sev-
eral rivers, along the way. Gómez halted in friendly mountains near
Soria to take a counsel of his staff: should they continue the retreat or
rally to launch another invasion from this mountain base? Deciding
152 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to continue the retreat, the expedition fought its way past a Cristino
covering force in the Ribera, and arrived back in Carlist Spain and
safety. Gómez returned with twice as many men as he had set out with
(his recruits included 1,643 defectors from Cristino ranks).136 But Don
Carlos, in a move which confounded his international sympathisers,
placed Gómez on trial for having disobeyed his orders to concentrate on
Galicia, and for having ‘deceived’ Cabrera and deprived him of forces
which might have stemmed San Miguel’s offensive in the east.137 The
King was blind to the fact the expedition had destabilised Cristino Spain,
deﬂected the enemy’s war effort away from the Basque country, caused
the panic-selling of Cristino bonds in European bourses,138 and embold-
ened the Carlists into thinking that victory was possible.139 International
opinion was dazzled by the Carlist effort, as George Borrow wrote:140