


   The war forced the Royal Government to impose unprecedented reg-
ulation and taxation upon the Basque population. Money was lacking
and it was only a matter of time before the crushing ﬁnes imposed
on local Liberals, combined with forced loans levied on Carlists (even
on nuns), would run dry, not least because discontent was growing
even within the ranks at the one-third pay given to each soldier and
ofﬁcer. Administrative reforms proved more effective at ﬁnding new
resources: Juntas Generales, it was decreed, should meet every two years
at Guernica, the Carlist Deputation of Vizcaya decreed new levies on
imports, whilst the Guernica junta on 14 July 1835 hit the civil popu-
lation yet again with a new forced loan of 2 million reales to be paid
back at 5 per cent annual interest, and to be guaranteed against all
national assets across Spain. Don Carlos, was less successful, however,
when it came to enlisting international ﬁnancial support for Carlist
Spain. The mooted 125,000,000-franc loan arranged by ﬁnanciers Haber,
Jange and Gower never materialised, nor did other deals, largely because
Don Carlos displayed the rare ability always to pick the wrong argument
at the wrong time. He promised that a future Carlist government would
categorically refuse to honour any foreign creditor who had outstand-
ing debts to the ‘usurping government’. This debacle took the wind out
of the sails of overseas Carlist representatives.19 In the event no real
ﬁnancial help arrived apart from the erratic and varying donations of
European legitimists, despite the varying pledges of ﬁnancial support
made by Prussian, Dutch, Austrian and Italian rulers, so Carlist agents
were forced to tap the vagaries of private lending markets.
   The militarisation of Carlist society proceeded more thoroughly than
in Cristino Spain. The Carlists developed a comparatively more efﬁ-
cient hierarchical organisation of their military. Comandante generales
retained default control of all forces in their province unless a divi-
sion general asked for them.20 Beyond this, the demands of the war
regulated food and production far more than in Cristino Spain. From
28 January 1836 food was rationed: two daily rations of bread and meat
and wine for serving soldiers and workers in arms forges and factories,
and half this quantity for all ‘passive’ classes (such as retired, and other
civilians) except heads of family. The wine ration was harder to pro-
vide in Guipúzcoa and parts of Durango where vines were traditionally
not cultivated, but such was the demand of soldiers for wine, especially
Basque soldiers whose relative lack of sobriety was not satiated by the
abundant but unsatisfying local cider, that the Carlists passed a special
decree reserving all wine in these areas exclusively for soldiers and arms
162 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


workers. Arms workers were given special consideration because of the
vital need for increased output. Output did increase markedly, largely
because of territorial expansion in 1835, but there was an accompanying
rise in explosives-related accidents.21 Otherwise, the Carlists had only
unreliable and intermittent imports from Castile. Alava banned the stor-
ing of grain in order to prioritise military needs; in return a 14 March
1836 decree from Durango treated all food shipments throughout the
Basque country as if they were traversing within a single province (hence
an anti-foral single market), and maximum prices were imposed on
wheat, corn and barley. Thus, the general European grain depression
of the 1830s was distorted in the Basque country into a boom as prices
stayed high.22
   The regulation of the domestic economy was made harsher by the
growing burden of conscription. A decree on 29 January 1836 ordered
all 17-year-olds into the Carlist ranks, imposing a 200 ducados ﬁne on
communities who failed to give up these youngsters within three days.23
Clearly, the early image of hardy Basque volunteers, rising up against
the usurping government in Madrid in defence of throne and altar,
was overborne by the grim demands of total war. This conscription
decree had been preceded by draconian measures targeting desertion.
During November and December 1835, three decrees imposed penal-
ties escalating to the death penalty against deserters. The Carlist state
was thus relying on depressingly modern machinery in order to sustain
the war effort, which contrasted with the timeless religiosity motivat-
ing Carlist villages and combatants. The fact that the Carlist rearguard
still offered a more peaceable and united aspect than the chaos reign-
ing beyond the Cristino lines owed a great deal to the fact that virtually
every available man was at the front, and that Cristino occupation could
realistically threaten any village in the statelet. The taboo of desertion
and draft-dodging thus explained popular anger at ojalateros and further
decrees passed in 1836 tightened up conscription still further, exempt-
ing only the most desperate families (for example, unigeniture with
parents over 60, widowers with dependants under 16).24 The regulation
of the war economy was more consistently applied than in the far larger
Cristino zone. In light of this fact it is remarkable how pre-modern val-
ues of religion and personalities continued to shape Carlist propaganda.
Zumalacárregui was dead but the Royal Government persisted in deploy-
ing the Great Man’s popular resistance motif: the unaltered address of
‘volunteers’ to conscripts, a press publication of an alleged conversation
between a foreign traveller and a belligerent Carlist mother in the Baztán
and the ennoblement of the commoner, Juan Bautista Esaín, dubbed
                                                 Carlist Failure, 1837–39   163