


Spain, placing costumbrista outlaws into an international conspiratorial
network. Even before the arrival of the Gómez Expedition reached the
region, the Carlist Royal Government had appointed guerrilla leaders
there. But Navarra was far away and Don Carlos discovered that Carlist
commanders in the Andalucía had a short life expectancy.
   In July 1835 the former royalist colonel, Vicente Mateos, was caught
near Gibraltar with documents incriminating him as Don Carlos’s man
and was imprisoned pending court martial.121 Mateos was executed
amidst the radicalism of the 1835 juntas in retrospective ‘revolution-
ary justice’ for his role in the execution of the Liberal hero, Manzanares,
in the Torrijos expedition of 1831.122 Brigadier Salvador Malavilla was
named Mateos’s successor as Carlist commander in Andalucía. Malavilla
had presided over a plan to raise a loan in Gibraltar to fund the cre-
ation of a proper army. (Seeing the threat of Gibraltar and suspecting
British motives, Narváez, on 22 November 1836, reported the Carlist
deployment of three battalions on the border in the Campo de Gibraltar
as proof of their intent to launder their loot in the British colony.123 )
But when he was arrested and his correspondence uncovered, Malavilla
was executed in Seville (after which the dangerous rank of Carlist
commander in Andalucía passed to Pedro Fermín de Iriberri).124 The
Gibraltar–Serranía de Ronda conspiratorial network proved a potent way
to induce Carlism in a part of Spain which would otherwise have been
entirely lost to the cause of legitimism. May 1836, for example, saw
Seville rocked by a conspiracy led by a group of priests and redun-
dant monks who had hired the allegiance of some tanners, bakers and
sergeants, to spring Carlist prisoners from gaol and seize the city for Don
Carlos. Luckily for the authorities, government spies were active in the
cafés, and arrests were made before the plot was enacted.125 Gibraltar
provided a springboard for cloak-and-dagger smugglers, especially the
mochileros (‘backpackers’) who made the seldom-trodden paths of the
Serranía de Ronda their own, and who, in the context of civil war, could
be recruited to act for Carlist conspiracies.126 The revolutionary authori-
ties knew that Gómez’s invasion could act as a magnet for insurgents in
the Serranía de Ronda and even ﬁfth columnists inside Cristino towns
and cities. In October 1836 the Seville Armament and Defence Commit-
tee warned that gatherings of more than ﬁve people within a league of
known enemy positions would be broken up by bullets, any correspon-
dence with the Carlists pronounced espionage and Seville closed off to
all comers without passports.127
   Narváez’s famous skill for rapid marches inconvenienced Gómez who
wanted to spend more than a few days regrouping in the Serranía. His
150 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


subordinate, General Rivero, detailed the terror Gómez inﬂicted during
his Andalucían campaign. Liberals imprisoned in Córdova were dragged
on a forced march, tied up in villages in the Carlists’ path whilst the
villages themselves were pillaged. Prisoners who could not keep pace
were bayonetted by the wayside. This terror made Andalucía even more
hostile to Carlism than it already was. Estepona’s militiamen circulated
arms to civilians in a successful repulse of 200–300 ‘Carlist scum’ who
had demanded 30,000 reales. The invaders later returned demanding
half this sum, only to be repulsed again. Several British military and
civilians were spectators of an unlikely invasion from the north of San
Roque, on the actual borderline with Gibraltar, on 22 November. With
British help, the Cristinos had reinforced the border with artillery which
harassed the Carlist occupation of San Roque, provoking Gómez into
reprisals including ‘sacking homes, burning others, and smashing the
town’s vats containing wines, olives, oils and spirits, so that the streets
resembled a noxious ﬂood’.128 This sacking of Liberal San Roque con-
trasted with the Carlists’ behaviour in the Serranía where ‘they took
more care of the inhabitants, as they committed nothing like the same
outrages, nor any signiﬁcant inconvenience’.128 But there was no way
back into the friendly Serranía, and whilst Gómez left half his combat-
ants on the border to negotiate their internment (and that of Córdoba’s
fugitive Carlist junta), the other half invaded the nearest Cristino port
of Algeciras. Here the Carlists’ lack of artillery told once more as they
were repulsed by the concentrated ﬁre of a Portuguese frigate, a British
corvette and Cristino coastguard vessels, suffering considerable losses.
The Carlists invaded the Mediterranean on horseback up to bridle-
height in a vain attempt to get near enough to the Quadruple Alliance
naval supremacy to ﬁre their muskets. However, the pursuit of Cristino
forces obliged Gómez to ﬂee Algeciras, but not before he had burnt the
town to the ground.128
   While Gómez was put to ﬂight, the Carlists and their junta of Córdoba
on the Gibraltar frontier were allowed internment in the colony. The
French consul arrived to agree terms, but the internees’ voyage out
of the colony on 23 November was intercepted by the Cristino coast-
guard, the passengers being taken prisoner and sent to Seville for trial.
There they were defended by the local lawyer, moderado provincial
deputy and National Guard battalion commander, Manuel Cortina, and
despite – or because of – his efforts (Cortina had been targeted by local
revolutionaries during riots in July) the Carlists were all deported to
the Philippines.129 The harsh treatment of Córdoba Carlists allowed
Seville’s Radicals to save some face in the context of the moderado rally.
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   151