


Bilbao that week, whilst dozens more were amongst the total of 307
Cristino wounded. The Carlist projectiles included incendiary ﬁreballs
which had been invented by the French Carlist engineer, Colonel
Lizoire, better known for his braggadocio as ‘Tout-terraser’, whose pro-
jectiles expelled noxious ‘Greek ﬁre’ upon impact.148 Lizoire was joined
by several other European Carlists in the assault on Bilbao, and in being
opposed by European Liberals the struggle for Bilbao became a cru-
cible of the international struggle between Absolutism and Liberalism.149
At one point the Carlists brieﬂy breached the walls, only to be ﬂushed
out by militiamen supported by Bilbao workers. Meanwhile, the morale
of the civilian population was sustained by the erroneous belief that
Gómez had been utterly destroyed somewhere in southern Spain. The
Carlist assault ﬂagged from 29 October and the bitter divisions in the
Carlist court reappeared. Eguía, still rankling from his replacement by
Erro, seized his chance by convincing Don Carlos’s courtiers that he
could take the city within 24 hours, a gambit that won him command
of the besieging troops and the relegation (and subsequent resignation)
of Villarreal.
   Eguía’s conference on 5 November with his artillery generals and engi-
neers resulted in a plan to break the deadlock by assaulting Bilbao’s
adjacent fortiﬁed points and convents which protected its access to
the sea. An unlikely Carlist spy inside Bilbao (an elderly woman) had
disclosed the weakness of the Cristino fort which had been put up at
Mallona on the city’s outskirts. This was taken after a short artillery
bombardment, and was followed up by the capture of a fortiﬁed con-
vent whose surrender gave the Carlists a stranglehold on the city’s river
links to the sea. French residents being evacuated were ﬁred upon by the
Carlists, and, despite the French consul’s protests, Eguía refused them
safe passage. Meanwhile, the Royal Navy commander of the Ringdove
complained to the defending Cristinos of the speed with which the
defenders had surrendered the outlying forts. Eguía in November was
showing promise where his predecessor had failed, as well as a com-
mon touch as he disguised himself as a simple soldier and shared the
violence of the front with his men.150 Time appeared to be on his side:
Carlist espionage revealed to the besiegers that the city was going hun-
gry as food stocks dwindled and the prices of bread, eggs and especially
meat, rose exponentially. A chance shipload of cod had been made to
last and bequeathed Bilbao its signature dish,151 one of two enduring
gastronomic legacies of the First Carlist War.151
   The further Eguía advanced, the stiffer the resistance he encoun-
tered. The Cristino detachment at Luchana withdrew only after it had
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   155


exhausted all its ammunition, and even then it redeployed to the
stronger position garrisoned by an Anglo-Cristino force at a place known
as El Desierto, which was strengthened by the gunﬁre of the Royal Navy
brigantines Ringdove and Saracen.152 But Erro was conﬁdent enough with
Eguía’s progress to outline to his King on 17 November elaborate details
of the peace the Carlists would impose on Bilbao. Thus, foreign consuls
in the city representing powers opposed to Don Carlos would be treated
as nothing more than private aliens, a ruinous 12,000,000 reales tax
would be imposed on known Liberal families opposed to Don Carlos,
all nationalised convents and monasteries in the city would be revived
and even put to work ‘imprisoning and correcting those decent women
who had fallen into corrupt and unruly ways and so scandalised the
people’.153 Clearly, the inference between revolution and breakdown of
family morality, which began in the Carlist imagination with the female
usurpation of the throne, was plain to see. Whereas Carlists had the
unimpeachable Virgin Mary as their icon, the Cristinos had the secu-
lar Isabella as theirs. Isabella’s ‘innocence’ and her mother’s worldliness
provoked a veritable avalanche of books, essays and pamphlets debat-
ing the proper role of woman in Liberal society, the vast majority of
which predictably reverted to the traditional feminine values of religion,
morality, self-abnegation and self-control.154
   But in planning the correction of Bilbao’s corrupted women, the Royal
Government was counting its proverbial chickens. Bilbao’s counterbat-
tery was now outgunning the Carlist attackers. The Carlists managed
to take the fortiﬁed ex-convent of San Agustín before being halted by
a Cristino rally in front of Sendeja, where the defenders intimidated
some of the weary Carlist attackers by draping a barricade in front of
the ex-convent with a slogan saying ‘Transit to Death’. Meanwhile,
Carlist logistics were also ﬂagging. Carlist civilians shirked work building
wooden siege-trains with the result that soldiers had to be redeployed
for this task. One ﬁnal Carlist effort to take the fortiﬁed ex-convent of
La Concepción, which was repulsed on 29 November, ﬁnally pushed
the besiegers into exhaustion. The Cristino garrison was now returning
artillery ﬁre at rates twice and then three times that of the Carlists, who
were under orders to conserve their dwindling ammunition. Even worse,
intelligence arrived of Cristino relief forces. After Evans’s British force
was sent by sea from San Sebastián to Portugalete on Bilbao’s extreme
right, Espartero resolved to relieve the city by striking through the area
of the bridge at Luchana, a key location where the Asúa River ﬂowed into
the Nervión. Espartero’s victory here relieved Bilbao on Christmas Day,
restoring Cristino Spain’s fortunes in the wake of the Gómez debacle,
156 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40