


acting commander who would do his bidding whilst he left for Madrid
with only a personal guard, ready to defend his honour at the capital.
Reaching Almaráz (Extremadura), a further order came into his hands
ordering him to march directly to Toledo, not Madrid. Rodil, terriﬁed of
being made a sacriﬁce to Radicals, wrote to the Queen-Regent and got
her personal guarantee for his safety and modiﬁed terms. He could now
choose internal exile in Ciudad Rodrigo, Zamora or Segovia. He chose
Ciudad Rodrigo for its proximity to the Portuguese frontier. After cross-
ing into exile, he issued an indignant manifesto protesting the political
interference in army affairs, the underhand behaviour of Cardero, the
Radical government’s failure to supply his army, particularly with shoes,
and its second-guessing of his strategy.111
   Rodil’s exile was a sideshow to the government’s inability to control
its territory. One of the most powerful men in Cristino Spain was the
editor of the Radical Eco del Comercio, Fermín Caballero, now president
of the revolutionary junta of his native Cuenca. Gómez’s interception of
his correspondence revealed intelligence about the identities of Carlists
and Liberals in La Mancha.112 Córdoba was reoccupied, but the Carlist
junta had stripped the city of military supplies, including some 20,000
sorely needed pairs of shoes. Cobblers were forced to make as many
shoes as possible, and ofﬁcers ordered to buy soles and to set their men
to work making sandals. Poor supplies and unreliable communications
complicated the Cristino pursuit of Gómez.113 Such impediment as came
to the Carlists came from within rather than without.
   At Cáceres Gómez ordered Cabrera to retire to Aragón, overriding his
bitter protest at this breaking of an earlier agreement, and at the manner
that the order was delivered (Gómez amassed armed men around him in
the rituals of a pronunciamiento). The King, Gómez said, needed Cabrera
in the east in the wake of the fall of Cantavieja, but he provided his rival
with nothing more than a personal guard of cavalry, and a suggested
route which would suspiciously take him close to Cristino garrisons.
In the end, Cabrera accepted his assumed identity (Llorens, a Valencia
guerrilla subordinate of Quílez), but set out on his own path through
Cristino territory. Despite Gómez’s parsimony, ‘Llorens’ fought a serious
of successful rearguard actions, zigzagged in order to confound pur-
suers, set off a minor panic in the capital between 21 and 25 November
by invading the Tarancón (Cuenca) area and, most impressively, as he
neared the Basque country on 24 November, captured the Bishop of
Pamplona, Andriani, who had played a double game with both sides and
whom the Cristinos had been holding in internal exile. Cabrera escaped
back across the Ebro after losing a battle to the Cristino covering force
148 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


at Rincón de Soto, abandoning stragglers and wounded, but keeping
the bishop. He had ignored Gómez’s instructions to go directly east and
would instead protest before his King at his treatment.114
   Meanwhile, the Cristinos dispatched three divisions towards Andal-
ucía under General Ramón María Narváez. Narváez is a ﬁgure who dom-
inated Spain’s mid-nineteenth century as the cornerstone of moderado
praetorian politics. Of a long-standing, moderately wealthy, Andalucían
military-aristocratic family – highly representative of the military caste –
Narváez’s experience in the Carlist War taught him to deride all civilian
politicians as ‘lawyers’ and to conserve a paternalistic disdain for the
capacities of ordinary people. Leftist historians have seen in Narváez
everything that was wrong with Spain’s praetorian politics, whereas
rightist historians, such as Córdova’s brother in the late nineteenth
century and his hagiographer, Andrés Révész, in the mid-twentieth cen-
tury saw him as a Romantic man of action and a political innocent.115
An innovative recent study by Guy Thomson, by contrast, casts Narváez
as a reﬂexive, proactively conservative strongman of post-Carlist War
moderado politics.116 Perhaps Narváez’s legend will shift, from the man
who, on his deathbed in 1868 was asked to forgive his enemies, only to
reply ‘I have no enemies to forgive for I have had them all shot’, to the
man who, for decades, was the next-door neighbour of Andalucía’s most
proliﬁc Democrat. The Narváez of the Carlist War has been less studied
than the Narváez of mid-century liberalism. The Ominous Decade had
not been kind to Narváez’s career as he refused to compromise his lib-
eralism, but the Carlist War saw him re-enter the army as a captain,
after which his bravery on the battleﬁeld (especially at Mendigorría)
saw him promoted to colonel by the end of 1835.117 In November 1836
he became Commander-in-Chief of the Army Reserve, making him the
moderado rival to the progresista Espartero, whose Army of the North was
stretched containing shorter-range Carlist offensives.118
   Gómez’s march from Cáceres to San Roque, Algeciras and other parts
of the Cádiz province was dictated by the presence of the only serious
Carlist enclave in Andalucía, the Serranía de Ronda, where brigandage
in rugged terrain had ﬂourished under the banner of Carlism. This cor-
ner of Andalucía, an acute triangle between Málaga, the Ronda and
Gibraltar, had long been characterised by conspiracy and wrongdoing.119
The Cristino police state had been watchful of subversive activities:
the secretive travels in the region of a Tangier Jew claiming to seek
Christian baptism, and the incendiary activities of a French agent col-
lecting money for Don Carlos once the war had begun.120 More than any
other location, the Ronda conformed to the wild, Irvingesque image of
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   149