


‘Don Carlos’s donkey’, in recognition of his close-run rescue of the King
from Rodil’s forces in September 1834.25
   In the Carlist east, the intangible power of personalities and religion
continued to play a central role as the Carlist state and its civil powers of
regulation were far less developed. Cabrera lacked the Zumalacárregui’s
magnanimity yet his austere charisma commanded the loyalty of his
men. Cabrera was deﬁant: ‘I know the King is being told that I’m not
very pious; this may be true, because I am no saint, and yet I per-
form miracles.’26 As the Carlist north was deteriorating in 1839, Cabrera
inspired his men into victory in battle on his saint’s day, St Raymond’s
Day, the medieval Catalan saint beloved of his men.27 In other words,
the itinerant nature of warfare in the east fostered charismatic rather
than bureaucratic leadership, mobilising religiosity with audacity, just as
during the ﬁrst year of Zumalacárregui’s command in the north. Much
of this was Romantic haze, but this should not discount the impact
of charismatic leadership on Carlist military successes – elements of
nineteenth-century ‘Great Man theory’, rather than twentieth-century
sociology and Marxist social history.
   Meanwhile, both sides recovered, over the winter of 1836–37, from
their respective setbacks of Gómez and Bilbao. A winter ﬂu epidemic
added to the Cristinos’ usual burdens of supply and desertion.28 Statis-
tically, the northern front was as militarised as it would ever be: 30,000
Carlist infantry supported by 1,500 cavalry and 40 artillery pieces and
opposing 59,094 Cristino campaign infantry supported by 2,491 cav-
alry, and a further 23,225 Cristino infantry supported by 293 cavalry on
garrison duty. The Carlists were thus outnumbered, but their traditional
advantage of interior lines of communication was augmented by a ﬂour-
ishing spy network at Bayonne, which had given them advance warning
of Cristino operations during early 1837.29 A major Cristino offensive in
March was turned into a defensive victory at Oriamendi, a mountain
near San Sebastián that gave the Carlist movement its enduring hymn.
   The Carlist victory at Oriamendi on 16 March 1837 was a text-
book example of its superiority in active defence and local initiative in
defence of the Basque homeland. In brief, the pincer action promised
by Sarsﬁeld was thrown into retreat when a forced march by the Carlist
Prince Sebastián threatened his ﬂank, thereby allowing a Carlist counter-
thrust between the forces of Espartero and Evans which defeated both
Cristino commanders in detail. The Cristinos’ losses were more than
400 dead, 900 wounded, and 137 prisoners and several small arms and
artillery pieces captured, whereas the Carlists had 88 dead, 669 wounded
and only a handful of prisoners. This defeat was even harder to bear for
164 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the Cristinos as their offensive had started well, so the Carlist counter-
attack subsequently led to many decorated Cristino ofﬁcers theatrically
forsaking their awards until they regained victory. Evans’s auxiliaries,
for whom Oriamendi was their greatest setback, were singled out for
brutality at the hands of the pursuing Carlists, no quarter being given
to stragglers who failed to keep up with the retreat.30 Only the brief
positioning of a Royal Marines battalion on the road from Oriamendi
prevented a wholesale rout from taking place. Lord John Hay, com-
mander of the British naval squadron stationed at Pasajes which had
disembarked the Marines, had felt obliged to withdraw his men and,
crucially, their artillery, at the ﬁrst available opportunity. He knew that
Tory attacks in the House of Commons and press were mounting against
the Whigs’ forward policy in Spain, and the deployment of regular
British forces some seven miles inland from the coast could hardly be
seen as anything other than formal military intervention.31 The British
Legion’s underperformance at the Battle of Oriamendi provoked an
intense debate in the British parliament.32 The early ground won by the
Cristino offensive, meanwhile, had caused such widespread destruction
in such nearby Carlist settlements as Hernani, much of it malicious,
that even heads of family who had been exempted from conscription
into the Carlist ranks thereafter formed volunteer anti-Cristino guerrilla
units in the area. The retreat of the Cristinos towards Bilbao ensued,
ﬁghting a bloody rearguard action on the way.33
   The Carlist victory did not halt court intrigues. The word ‘transac-
tionist’ (or transaccionista) surfaced as a description of those Carlist
elites who sought some sort of the compromise peace with the Lib-
eral regime in Madrid. In early 1837, this attitude was associated with
Count Casa-Eguía, who, so rumours ran, was conspiring with the French
king, who was exasperated by the cost of fortifying his southern border.
But the transactionist phenomenon still had more than two years to
run before it culminated in the compromise peace accord of Vergara,
and even then the Basque country was divided broadly between pro-
transaccionista Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa and diehard Alava and Navarra.34
These court intrigues impelled Don Carlos to undertake a bold strategic
offensive during the summer of 1837, known as the ‘Royal Expedition’.
   The Carlist capture of the Cristino town of Lerín, lynchpin of the
Ribera, in May 1837, at ﬁrst appeared as a minor victory like any other:
400 Cristino prisoners were taken prisoner and a local judge taken
hostage.35 But this attack was actually the opening feint of the Royal
Expedition. This expedition would last 160 days, traversing Navarra,
Aragón, Catalonia, Valencia, both Castiles, La Mancha and Alava, in
                                                    Carlist Failure, 1837–39   165