

   The letters of very sensible and royalist people leave no doubt of
   the frightful excesses being committed in Catalonia at the hands
   of guerrillas who call themselves ‘Carlists’, because in reality they
   are nothing more than bandits laying the country waste, rustling
   entire ﬂocks, even those belonging to respected local Carlists, looting
   country houses and farmsteads, levying ruinous contributions, seiz-
   ing hostages amongst those who cannot pay and ransoming them for
   exorbitant sums. Many country houses are now closed and the inhab-
   itants of small villages have ﬂed for the safety of forts and fortiﬁed
   places, preferring to live amongst usurping Liberals than to lay them-
   selves open to the constant robberies and violence of the so-called
   defenders of throne and altar. It is imperative that the strictest orders
   be given to our commanders in Catalonia that they impose military
   discipline on those bands of rogues who are laying to waste the most
   industrious province of Spain.

Urbiztondo’s imposition of military discipline was difﬁcult enough.
A biscuit-store bound for Carlist soldiers protecting the Junta of Berga
was violently robbed en route. Battalion commander, Pau Mañó, had
been conducting a private war abducting and extorting local civilians,
imprisoning them in caves to be ransomed. The money families had to
pay for ransom depleted available resources for the Carlist war effort.
Urbiztondo’s siege of Pont d’Armentera was delayed by his need to dis-
cipline a battalion whose ofﬁcers had absconded to sell looted goods
and whose leaderless men had broken ranks.109 But the opposition
of respectable Catalan Carlists made Urbiztondo’s mission impossible.
When he quartered a new, locally raised battalion from the Mondoñedo
area in the monastery of San Francisco (itself inhabited by only 14 friars
and therefore targeted for dissolution by the Cristinos), the men started
stripping an organ to be melted down to make bullets. The Bishop
of Mondoñedo protested, claiming that Don Carlos never stooped so
low in the Basque country and that there was no Papal approval for
such drastic war measures. Urbiztondo, exasperated by Catalan bandit-
priests, replied that he would strip churches of all metal and ‘even force
the slippers off his Holiness if he thought they were made of lead’.
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   183


But Mondoñedo, despite his episcopacy, was a powerful virtual Carlist
whose hitherto quiet hopes for a Carlist victory would soon explode
into a vehement sermon against the Cristino regime and its ‘war against
religion and its opinion’, turning him into a schismatic like León. Mon-
doñedo’s authority proved greater than Urbiztondo’s and the military
power lost to the religious, the troops being billeted elsewhere.110
   The onward march of the Royal Expedition denuded Urbiztondo of
forces and this soon began to tell as the Cristino counter-insurgency
initiative passed to Cristino Captain-General Meer from August 1837.
Urbiztondo’s defeat at San Juan de las Abadesas forced him to do what
he least desired, order his men to change their shirts and resort to guer-
rilla warfare. He complained to Berga at its deliberate neglect of his men,
who had been reduced to scavenging potatoes, but the junta was con-
temptuous in its reply and had in any case been lobbying Don Carlos
for Urbiztondo’s removal. Intelligence reached Urbiztondo of a plot to
kill him, and the junta got the King to promote Urbiztondo’s subordi-
nate, Benito Tristany, a Catalan exterminating angel, to command the
best local forces (his mountain corps). Finally, on 14 November, Berga
presented Urbiztondo with Don Carlos’s note dismissing him. This pro-
duced a stormy junta session from which the deposed comandante was
lucky to escape to Andorra with his life. He was followed into exile by
the Carlist intendant, whose unpopular policing of Carlist mountain vil-
lages, suppression of desertion and heavy taxation of the clergy had also
subjected him to death threats.111 The Barcelona press rejoiced: ‘Berga
is a veritable Babylon, and Urbiztondo has failed in his mission. We are
doing well, very well.’112
   The Urbiztondo controversy had overshadowed the division of the
Junta of Berga, between an aristocrática faction (Catalan nobility led by
Count Fonollar) and universitaria faction (comprising clerics expelled
from the Cristino-occupied University of Cervera). The clerics were
the most intransigent, but the aristocrats had been happy to fol-
low their lead over Urbiztondo, and to persuade Don Carlos to pro-
vide José Segarra as a more amenable replacement comandante. But
Segarra’s command was marred by a vigorous counter-insurgency by
Cristino Captain-General Meer, who reconquered Ripoll and boxed
the Carlists into unyielding mountain areas. By March 1838, Meer’s
counter-insurgency had borne fruit: the Carlist forces had shrunk from
some 13,000 to 7,000.113 Thus Segarra’s command was exposed as
incompetent, and he was replaced in July 1838 by a greater ﬁgure,
Count España, a legitimist of French origin who had been purged from
Catalonia’s captaincy-general in 1832. The Berga aristocrats hoped that
184 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40