


a compromise peace based on Don Carlos’s accession in return for a
general amnesty and the marriage of the infant Isabella to the Pre-
tender’s son. All depended, especially Metternich’s vital approval, on
Don Carlos’s occupation of Madrid. But the downfall in August of the
Radical Calatrava ministry, and the accession of the moderado, Eusebio
Bardají Azara, meant that when the Carlists reached the gates of the
capital on 12 September, the Queen-Regent no longer felt herself to be a
prisoner of the revolution. Hedging her bets even more, María Cristina
sent Espartero a letter begging him urgently to rescue the capital, a let-
ter that the Carlists intercepted, confusing them even further.87 Never
a decisive commander, Don Carlos thus began an initial retreat which
turned into one of general proportions, whilst sheer luck made Espartero
appear the saviour of the capital and the Liberal revolution. Carlist histo-
rians condemned the Queen-Regent’s spite and duplicity, and regretted
that Don Carlos did not force the issue.88 Madrid was now free of exter-
nal threats. Antonio Quiroga made a triumphalist victory declaration
couched in terms of popular defence and rebranding the Queen-Regent
as a constitutional Patriot.89
   The Carlist retreat, meanwhile, was easy prey for Espartero’s van-
guard: hundreds from the Carlist rearguard at Aranzueque were killed
or captured on 19 September. In desperation, the King invited Cabrera
to replace Moreno as the Carlist Commander-in-Chief but Cabrera,
who had wanted a violent pincer attack on the capital, refused due to
thinly disguised disgust at the failure of the King’s leadership. German
Carlists – anticipating the frustration of their great-grandchildren with
Franco’s slow offensive 100 years later – were exasperated with the
absence of the strategic vision worthy of Cabrera. Lichnowsky was baf-
ﬂed: ‘It was as if no-one had given any thought to descending on
Madrid.’90 The artillery expert, Wilhelm von Rahden, did not under-
stand why Carlist victories were squandered with decorations and
festivals of grace instead of a purposeful thrust.91 Now it was too late: the
Expedition was retreating northwards and the initiative was Espartero’s.
Although Espartero could not prevent the Carlist forces of Zaratiegui
and the King regrouping in their retreat, he was ruthless in his pace
and in the way he treated civilian populations in his path, sometimes
promising the death penalty against hoarders of food and drink. The
Castilians had shown little resistance to the Carlists, and Espartero’s
hand was forced by the perennial problem of hunger and insufﬁcient
and inadequate (cardboard-soled) shoes being delivered by asentistas.
On 25 October, despite his victory against the retreating Expedition
at Retuerta two weeks earlier, Espartero offered his resignation in
178 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


frustration at the general neglect of his men. He found time to ask his
wife and friends to send him money on his own authority, giving the
Generalísimo a reputation for paternalism as well as heroism. The imme-
diate crisis passed when Espartero reached Miranda de Ebro on 28 Octo-
ber to ﬁnd that the Expedition had retreated back across the Ebro.92
   In some respects this was a strange victory for Cristino Spain. Despite
all the revolutionary rhetoric of the previous two years concerning the
popular struggle of the Militia and citizens against Carlism, the Expe-
dition had been defeated in a fashion more akin to Early Modern than
Modern warfare: a dynastic misunderstanding, a carnivalesque armed
‘pilgrimage’, a cabinet war across seemingly apathetic civilian popu-
lations. Yet beneath the high politics of Madrid and Estella, the low
politics of desertion, mutiny, even economic militancy had continued
to grow. While the Expedition approached Madrid, the Army of the
North had been paralysed by mutiny. In August 1837, General Ceballos
Escalera, commanding the Cristino lynchpin of Miranda de Ebro, was
lynched by his own regiment, his soldiers subsequently seizing con-
trol of the streets and daring ofﬁcers to come out of hiding. News of
this insurrection quickly spread to Vitoria, the Cristino capital of Alava,
which was blockaded by the Carlists right up to its walls. Whilst its
Cristino citizens dared not leave, a muleteer used to running blockades
by both sides carried the news. In Vitoria, too, the Cristino garrison
lynched its military governor, the elderly Cortes deputy, Cano, the pres-
ident of the Cristino deputation, and the editor of the ofﬁcial provincial
bulletin, all before levying a ﬁne of 40,000 duros against the munici-
pality. This was the downtrodden, brutalised Cristino soldier asserting
his honour in solidarity with his comrades against both Carlists and
against Cristino elites.93 In both cases, the caretaker authorities which
the garrisons permitted to enter the power vacuum were prevented from
taking anything more than token measures against the perpetrators of
the violence.
   The last two-and-a-half years of the war would see a surging popu-
lar radicalism in the Cristino zone that was irrelevant, and ultimately
hostile, to María Cristina’s throne. Even the Carlist zone would reject its
king in a bid to advance the secular rights of Basque autonomy and army
veterans. In other words, the dynastic dispute of 1833, upon which Don
Carlos had made his obsolescent calculations in 1837, had turned into
a war whose meaning was transformed into secular concerns of Cristino
liberty and Basque fueros.
   Don Carlos’s humiliating retreat across the Ebro set in motion the
secularisation of Carlist politics. At ﬁrst, it was the brutish, apostólico
                                               Carlist Failure, 1837–39   179