


  10 December 1837 Delivery arrives from Alcañiz of 306 blankets which
    are distributed amongst the men.
  19 December 1837 Constant daily mortality. Word reaches us from
    Cabrera that our exchange is in train, and that Pellicer should give
    us full rations. Nonetheless, we continue to receive only half.
  28 December 1837 No ration whatsoever today. 21 soldiers die. Such is
    the hunger and misery that anyone with even a couple of maravedis
    (ochavo) in his possession risks being murdered just for this puny
    sum. Any soldier ordered to leave for work on fortiﬁcations would
    pick up bones to be ground into bonemeal to be eaten. The corpses
    of dead comrades are hidden away to be picked over and cooked
    at night by lantern light. Such is the state of the unhappy prison-
    ers of Herrera! History teaches us about the sufferings of ancient
    heroes, and about martyrs in Spain’s bloody wars, but can anyone
    have suffered as much as we imprisoned heroes of Espartero?
  29 December 1837 One-ﬁfth rations today. But a subscription arrives
    from Teruel at the invitation of its prefect of some 2,000 reales
    which are distributed amongst both ofﬁcers and men.
  30 December 1837 One-fourth rations. Ofﬁcers from the regiment of
    Badajoz province garrisoning Tortosa send us 2,000 reales which are
    distributed amongst both ofﬁcers and men. Our thanks are eternal
    and our hearts warm to know that we have not been forgotten by
    our comrades.
  31 December 1837 No rations today. Mortality rises to 13. Only 500
    soldiers are left in their depot, which means that around 600 have
    fallen victim to our appalling situation.

Military solutions to this barbarity were virtually impossible. The
Cristino government hoped that the Expedition had denuded the Carlist
north of forces, yet it had also drawn Cristino forces away from the Army
of the North in pursuit (15 battalions, nine cavalry squadrons and sub-
stantial artillery pursuing the 16 battalions and eight squadrons of the
Carlist expedition). Yet the Carlist Royal Army in the Basque country
retained 31 battalions, four squadrons and almost all its ﬁeld artillery,
against which the Cristinos could mount for campaign 28 battalions, 11
squadrons and rather less artillery. The Carlists thus retained defensive
superiority against Espartero’s Army of the North, even while their Expe-
dition was wreaking havoc with Oráa’s Army of the Centre.70 Espartero
was weakened even further when Portuguese politics robbed him of Das
Antas’s Legion, which Lisbon ordered to redeploy from the Navarrese
174 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Ribera towards Portugal’s frontier. In June 1837, disaffected Portuguese
civil war veterans – one-third of whom were pardoned miguelistas –
revolted, and Lisbon dared not risk them in battle.71 Also, Espartero’s
forces were absorbed by another Carlist expedition, smaller in number
but also more mobile and one that traversed pro-Carlist areas of Old
Castile. Juan Antonio Zaratiegui, a young royalist during the Triennium
and Inspector of Royalist Volunteers in his native Navarra thereafter,
excited exculpatory post-war writings indignant at his ‘scapegoating’ for
the failure of the Royal Expedition.72
   In July 1837, Zaratiegui launched an expedition of some 280 cavalry
and ﬁve infantry battalions imbued with the same religious liberation
ethos as the Royal Expedition. After defeating Das Antas’s Portuguese
on the Ebro, Zaratiegui pushed into Old Castile towards Madrid.73 Most
of the defenders, including the teenage cadets from the military col-
lege, ﬂed to Madrid, even though several college professors offered their
services to the occupying Carlists. News in the capital of Zaratiegui’s
approach caused panic, and a state of siege was imposed on 6 August,
decreeing a wide range of pro-Carlist activities and opinions to be pun-
ishable by martial law. The capital’s Militia came out in a show of force
and was supplemented by the formation of some companies of ‘distin-
guished citizens’ to patrol suspect districts of the capital (although both
Carlist and Peninsular War experience with these units had revealed
them to be ceremonial rather than warlike in their usefulness).74 Key
military facilities in the Carlists’ path, the Military College at Segovia,
the Artillery College at Alcalá and the Engineers School at Guadalajara,
were evacuated to the capital.75 Zaratiegui suffered the usual Carlist vain-
glory at having conquered a substantial city, and began minting coins
embossed with Don Carlos, and publicising his conquest in the language
of the Christian soldier, thanking Divine Providence for triumphing
over the ‘faithless’ anarchy of the Madrid government and all its false
philosophy.76
   Zaratiegui’s victory speech was untimely, as the pursuit of Espartero’s
battle-hardened Army of the North obliged him to abandon Segovia,
although not before he had emptied the city of its volunteers and
artillery, sabotaging those guns that could not be transported. Yet con-
quests like Segovia and others across Old Castile had served the purpose
of destabilising Cristino defences while the main Carlist invasion of
Cabrera and the Royal Expedition approached the capital from the east.
War- and revolution-weary Cristino garrisons had surrendered often
after a symbolic exchange of ﬁre and Zaratiegui got new recruits, both
volunteers and conscripts. Valladolid was occupied in a negotiated,
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   175