


almost gentlemanly manner. Its war-weary municipal delegation rode
out to meet Zaratiegui and Liberal members of the local government
resigned and departed whilst pro-Carlist administrators took their place
and awaited Zaratiegui’s instructions. This accommodation spared the
city from pillage and atrocities. The delegation performed this handover
in reverse when the Army of the North arrived to reoccupy the city days
later.77 Some communities, like those on the Ribera del Duero, showed
the same degree of public enthusiasm for the Carlists as they had pre-
viously for the Liberals. Partisan ideology was negligible in this. Rather,
communities were so terriﬁed by the prospect of violent occupations
and counter-occupations that they resolved to ‘manage’ their occupiers
by staging public welcomes which, in reality, kept the soldiers as much
as possible at arm’s length.78 Local authorities across Old Castile dis-
covered their Carlist sympathies. Or rather, perhaps, they rediscovered
them: the Pretender’s ideas of theocratic monarchy were far from being
alien to men who, under Cristino occupation, would opt for moderan-
tismo, but who would also, without much difﬁculty, move from one
camp to another.
   The disarray of the Cristino war effort led Espartero to ride ahead of
his forces to Madrid in order to reassure the Queen-Regent in person.
A spate of military indiscipline in units around the capital was dealt
with in a lenient fashion by Madrid’s military governor, San Miguel,
who admitted that the gravity of the Carlist invasion outweighed the
need to punish indiscipline.79 The main threat came from Don Carlos’s
expedition in the wake of its victory at Herrera. Eventually the Carlists
occupied Arganda and stood before Madrid’s city walls on 10 September
1837. The capital, which had already been placed under a state of siege,
was now in a state of suspended animation. Contemporaries poignantly
associated this crisis with dust being settled: quite literally, as Madrid,
which was already known as the ‘city of dust’, was choked by the dust
thrown up by the demolition of nationalised church property under-
way since the revolution of 1836.80 As the Carlists neared the walls, the
capital fell deathly quiet, with its shops and industry paralysed and the
streets emptied of people apart from the patrols of the National Militia.
Isolated attempts by Carlist agents to whip up a ﬁfth column failed. San
Miguel judiciously sent one general, whose sympathies were suspect,
away from the walls and to the centre of the capital. Now the Radicals
demanded defence à la outrance, but nothing could have been further
from the minds of the well-to-do ‘distinguished citizens’ who were
happy to preside over glittering street patrols by day – especially when
the Queen-Regent came to inspect – but shirked the more dangerous
176 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


night watches.81 Meanwhile, the capital’s underground Carlist junta
made a clever ploy by circulating a promise not to reintroduce the Inqui-
sition or despotism, and suggesting an honourable Italian exile for the
‘widow of Ferdinand VII’ and the marriage of her child Isabella to the
Carlist Crown Prince. Given this tense atmosphere of plots and counter-
plots, it was remarkable how the crisis was defused: not with conquest
or siege, but with the unmolested withdrawal of the Carlist army from
the capital’s walls.82
   In the midst of this crisis, on 15 September 1837, Captain-General
Quiroga seconded the strident revolutionary rhetoric of Governor
Seoane by condemning the Carlists as vainglorious murderers: brave
words given that many on both sides suspected that a negotiated peace
(transacción) would now take place. Even the session of the ‘besieged’
Cristino Cortes was remembered for being quiet and sombre rather than
inﬂamed and belligerent, in stark contrast to the Patriots’ parliament in
Cádiz during the Peninsular War. Admittedly, Carlist takeover was not
the only threat on the deputies’ minds. Espartero had been drawn into a
stand-off with the capital’s revolutionary dictatorship of General Seoane
over the political leadership of the revolution, which, since 18 July 1837,
had seen its Constitution of 1812 moderated by a bicameral legislature
and other brakes on radicalism that were part of the Constitution of
1837.83 A moderado army insurrection in Pozuelo de Aravaca, to the west
of the capital, had Espartero’s blessing and so the Left-Liberal Calatrava
administration fell. Now Seoane’s ‘revolutionary dictatorship’ had lost
its political support. Espartero’s mobile forces overawed Seoane’s gar-
rison largely thanks to the Carlists’ decision to withdraw in the face
of Espartero’s march. This series of events allowed Espartero – and the
army, as opposed to Seoane’s Militia – to be seen as the saviour of the
capital and the Liberal patria.84 Both men were leftists of the ‘Ayacucho’
clan, but Espartero’s victory consolidated all power in his hands.85
   The expedition’s retreat from the capital opened a series of mis-
fortunes for Carlism from which it would never recover. Redeploying
to Alcalá in a bid to fall on Espartero’s ﬂank, the Carlist army then
received an order to retreat further still, causing outrage in the ranks.
Rumours ran that Don Carlos had ordered the retreat to a more salu-
brious location in order to hear Mass. Others asserted that he wanted
to avoid bloodshed. Both probably played contingent roles, and spoke
of Don Carlos’s piety being his worst enemy.86 But the shifting diplo-
matic situation was the main cause. When the Calatrava administration
expelled the Carlist Marquess Grúa, the Carlist agent carried a letter
from the Queen-Regent to her brother, Ferdinand II of Naples, proposing
                                                 Carlist Failure, 1837–39   177