


powers for peace by both Don Carlos and María Cristina proved not only
hollow, but also the last serious attempt by any Spanish monarch to rule
on so important an issue as war and peace; after the Royal Expedition,
the generals, not the monarch, would have the last word. Moreover, reli-
gious fervour outside of the Carlist safe zones was a notoriously useless
ally. Most purchasers of disentailed Church property had, in any case,
been using intermediaries to avoid excommunication, and could thus
claim innocence if they were unlucky enough to come under Carlist
occupation.
   Don Carlos’s pilgrimage of grace was not immediately exposed as
militarily ﬂawed, in large part because of the usual pattern of Cristino
disintegration. The invasion broke through the Cristino covering force
near Estella on 15 May 1837. Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the
North dispatched a pursuing force under General Iribarren, who was
reinforced by 12,000 militiamen mobilised from Huesca and Zaragoza.
But the ﬁrst battle at Huesca on 24 May 1837 was a Carlist victory, as
some 1,000 Cristino soldiers and militiamen were either killed or cap-
tured as the Carlist invaders were skilled at pinning Iribarren amid the
sticky mud along the banks of the swollen River Cinca, forcing him
to retreat. Virtually all the Cristino authorities ﬂed the city, but the
bishop remained to welcome Don Carlos, who stayed for three days
before moving on to take Barbastro, which surrendered without a shot
being ﬁred. Don Carlos heard Mass in this ancient city’s cathedral whilst
the Cristinos tried to regroup. The next Cristino counteroffensive came
from Oráa’s 12,400 infantry, 1,400 cavalry and artillery of the Army of
the Centre. Yet the Carlists had fortiﬁed Barbastro in time for the bat-
tle on 2 June 1837. The Carlists were massively outmatched in artillery,
but they managed to defeat the Cristinos, by again using the geograph-
ical contours of the river bank to their advantage. Barbastro resonated
for being a civil war within a civil war. The thousand-strong Carlist for-
eign legion (comprised of French Foreign Legion defectors and pardoned
miguelistas defecting from the Oporto Hunters54 ) fought its former com-
rades, and the German Carlist, Prince Lichnowsky,55 was saddened to
hear that they killed each other shouting in French and German.56
One of the fratricidal casualties was the French Legion’s commander,
Brigadier Conrad, an Alsatian Napoleonic Wars veteran known for his
common touch and his humanitarian treatment of civilians, whose
death was all the more galling as it came in a forlorn bid to rally the
terriﬁed ﬂight of men who had recently distinguished themselves at
Huesca.57 The Carlist foreign legion, in the thick of the ﬁghting during
this victory, was almost wiped out and was dissolved.58
170 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   Despite these Aragonese victories, the Carlists’ poor logistics, com-
pounded by the large number of non-combatants accompanying the
invasion, made Don Carlos’s progress appear sluggish when compared
with Gómez a year earlier. Some 300 expeditionaries were drowned in
an ill-fated mass crossing of the swollen Cinca.59 The poor agriculture
of Huesca province could not support invasion, and the Carlists made
enemies of the villages in their path. Angüés had tried to ‘welcome’ the
expedition but had been sacked and pillaged by its hungry contingents
all the same. Estopiñan’s villagers, on 6 June, tried to hide its food-
stuffs, but the telltale eggshells in a pantry drove the Carlists to break in
the chicken pens and slaughter the poultry before moving on.60 Pillage
blunted the expeditionaries’ use of Catholic revivalism in order to win
over civilians. But pillage was inevitable for an expedition advancing
on a nutritional shoestring. Poor nutrition also made it hard to recover
from defeats. It was remarkable that the expeditionaries managed to
extricate themselves from a serious defeat by the Captain-General of
Catalonia, Baron Meer, on 12 June 1837; so remarkable that Cristino
Radicals suspected treachery on Meer’s part.61 Ever since riots had swept
Zaragoza and Barcelona in January 1837 Meer had appeared to be more
concerned about subduing radicalism than ﬁghting Carlism.62
   Radicals were exasperated because the expedition had invaded
Catalonia, a province which, beyond its traditionalist far west, had
become virtually diabolical in Carlist eyes. Santpedor, only 45 miles
from Barcelona, saw its outskirts burnt and far worse threatened after
its militia garrison refused to capitulate.63 The expedition traversed
Catalonia, crossing the Ebro at Cherta on 29 June, a busy day marked
by the defeat of a pursuing Portuguese division, a solemn Mass and Te
Deum in the town’s patron saint church of St Martin (and a pillage of its
surroundings), and a personal meeting between the King and Cabrera,
whose forces were now linked with the expedition.64 Reinforced by
Cabrera, other victories followed. Castellón, a Valencian provincial cap-
ital only a few miles from the Mediterranean, had been abandoned
by revolutionary soldiers and militiamen the previous summer, and
subsequently sacked by Cabrera. The Militia had re-formed since and
those citizens who had not ﬂed were resolved not to face the same fate
again. But Castellón fell a second time all the same, and the expedition
got closer to the safe zone of the Maestrazgo.65 The Cristino Army of
the Centre used superior topography and cavalry to defeat the expe-
dition at the Battle of Chiva (Valencia) on 15 July 1837. But Oráa’s
lack of food and water stopped him routing the expedition, which
escaped into Aragón.66 The march into Aragón was punishing for both
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   171