


wing of Carlism which won the argument, and the cabinet posts,
in the wake of the defeat. On 29 October 1837, the so-called Mani-
festo of Arceniega saw apostólicos capture their King and launch public
proclamations describing the Expedition’s failure as the work of the
transaccionistas. Certainly, few Basques were fooled by the King’s procla-
mation at Arceniega that he had ‘returned only momentarily’ and –
bizarrely – that the Royal Expedition was a promising dress rehearsal
for a future offensive of ‘national liberation’ (rather than the conclu-
sive march on Madrid spoken about only weeks earlier).94 Moderates
were purged from the cabinet and many exiled, whilst such apostólicos
as Teijeiro and Guergué took their place and thereafter maintained a
stranglehold on Carlist politics which would antagonise the army under
Maroto and ultimately result in a civil war within the civil war. That
Maroto would win, and thus clear the way for peace, could not have
been predicted by anyone in late 1837, not as Don Carlos gave three
key ministries (State, Finance and War) to the belligerent José Arias
Teijeiro, a Galician of impoverished noble background, Royalist War vet-
eran and subsequent chamberlain to Don Carlos’s household, whose
promotion into the Carlist nobility of service offended both the older
nobility of birthright and such eighteenth-century military nobles as
Maroto.95
   The only strategic achievement of the Royal Expedition was to lurch
Carlism eastwards. The fact that most of the Expedition’s victories had
been won on Aragonese territory consolidated Cabrera’s leadership in
the Maestrazgo and created a functioning and centralised Carlist state
in the region. An offensive which stalemated the Basque country ener-
gised the Carlist Maestrazgo.96 Moreover, the propaganda value of local
Carlist victories (especially at Huesca, Barbastro and Cherta) encouraged
recruitment into Carlist rather than Cristino ranks (and, further, was
stimulated by the Liberals’ property revolution which created insecurity
in the pre-modern landownership rights that dominated Carlist areas
of Aragón).97 The ‘Supreme Royal Governing Junta of Aragón, Valencia
and Murcia’, set up in 1837, gave Cabrera an effective power of veto on
all matters: whereas he could vote on any matters he saw ﬁt, the junta
was forbidden from interfering in any way with military matters. These
arrangements were similar to those of the Junta of Berga in Catalonia,
whose territory was generally coterminous with that of Cabrera’s after
late 1837. All Cabrera would now need was a run of major victories in
order to make his position unassailable. This would come in 1838, and
so change the centre of Carlism’s gravity eastwards from the stalemate
in the north.
180 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   The Carlist domination of the Catalan far west and wide areas of
Aragón repeated the deep war of Cristino areas of Castile. The rav-
ages of Carlist bands forced agriculture and proto-industry into sudden
slumps, and these in turn fed recruitment. Recruitment into the Cristino
National Militia rose from 1837 due to the salary active service offered.
But as mobile Militia were routinely deployed away from their homes,
this opened up local communities to further depredations at the hands
of the Carlists. Equally, precisely in order to prevent hardship swelling
the ranks of the Cristino Militia, Carlist commanders frequently forced
local elites under their sway to hire hands in order to starve the Cristino
of recruits.98 This economic war was enough to give the Carlists domina-
tion of the Catalan countryside in the interior but could not generally
break the Cristino stranglehold on the towns and cities. Thus, it was
not just the lack of an Eliot Treaty in this part of Spain that made the
civil war particularly devastating for civilian lives and livelihoods: it was
also the total economic war which the nature of the combat here made
logical. This feature of Catalan Carlism has been acknowledged but not
adequately contextualised in war by historians.99
   Consequently, war in the east underwent ‘privatisation’ just as in Cas-
tile. The industrious small town of Valls was ruined when local Carlists
set up a toll gate along the main road leading to the town.100 When
Tristany, Catalonia’s principal Carlist guerrilla leader, saw a royal envoy
from the Basque country pay villagers for some supplies, his remark
showed surprise: ‘Well, I simply take the best of what they have and
pay them with my best wishes.’101 In western Catalonia, where Carlist
control by this time was virtually complete, a two-tiered requisitioning
system operated. Families of known royalist or apolitical backgrounds
were compensated in full and those with Liberal backgrounds, generally
with family members serving in the National Militia, were robbed.102
The privatisation of warfare was sometimes mitigated by community
solidarity. In March 1837, the southernmost Carlist guerrilla leader oper-
ating in the east, Forcadell, occupied Orihuela (Alicante), whose inhabi-
tants were divided between Cristino and Carlist sympathisers (including
its virtually Carlist bishop). Orihuela offered a potential civil war within
a civil war which had nonetheless remained peacefully coexistent until
Forcadell’s occupation. Ardent Liberals left for the safety of Cartagena
ahead of the occupation, but even the civic Carlists who remained
protested to Forcadell about one of his captives, a constitutional judge
of nearby Almansa, Juan Pablo Clemente, a popular local ﬁgure whom
Forcadell wanted to execute. But the judge’s extensive friendship circle
prevailed upon Forcadell to revoke the sentence, even while Orihuela
itself turned Carlist, as some 500 draftees previously earmarked for
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   181