


Cristino conscription enlisted in Forcadell’s force instead. Civil wars fos-
ter virtuous community cohesion as well as vicious denunciations. The
small towns and villages that comprised most Spanish demography cre-
ated networks of social interaction which at their best forged solidarity
and at their worst terror and denunciation. Forcadell told Clemente: ‘if
I had been in your power I’m sure I would be dead, but I grant you your
freedom in recognition of the good you have done to others’.103
   Local mercies, however, barely altered the general terror of warfare
in a region without the Eliot Treaty. In early February 1837, a Carlist
detachment surprised a platoon-sized detachment of Cristino mobile
militia which had been planning to intercept Carlists at San Pedro de
Torelló. Instead, a rapid deployment of Carlist cavalry surprised the
Cristinos, who ﬂed and barricaded themselves in a house where they
refused to surrender and were instead all burnt alive.104 On 18 February,
a particularly gruesome tragedy overtook a sharpshooter column from
Málaga, that southern bastion of radical liberalism which immortalised
its victims as martyrs to liberty. Tristany surprised the column whose
commander, Colonel Francisco Antonio de Oliver, was cut down after
his men refused to follow his death-or-glory charge against the sur-
rounding Carlists. The prisoners, however, fared even worse. Some
280–300 were executed in cold blood, whilst one of their hapless num-
ber managed to take refuge behind a church altar. Although Tristany’s
men searched the building he managed to escape, naked and starv-
ing, to the Cristino stronghold of Calaf.105 But the terror did not end
there. Calaf soon fell to Tristany, some 70 of its houses being burnt and
several wives of militiamen murdered. Tristany was halted at Solsona,
whose besieged defenders underwent the most signal trials (including
the drinking of urine, whose saltiness was extracted by an apothecarist),
and were indemniﬁed by a special Cortes motion.106
   The passage of the Royal Expedition through Catalonia convinced
the King of the need to regularise the chaotic war in the east, so he
made the controversial appointment on 27 June 1837 of an outsider,
the 34-year-old Guipúzcoan, Antonio Urbiztondo, as the Comandante
General of the Carlist Army of Catalonia. A month later, the town of
Berga fell to the Carlists, and this became the seat of the Junta of Berga,
a civilian council which, like its Maestrazgo counterpart to the south,
could not assert itself against Carlist martial law. Whereas Urbiztondo’s
campaign against Cristino fortiﬁed centres bore fruit in the summer –
Gironella and Ripoll fell soon after Berga – his Basque suppression of
Catalan wrongdoing was a controversial centralisation of power over
the bandit-guerrillas (latrofacciosos) and exterminating angels who had
characterised the Catalan far west hitherto.107 The Royal Government
182 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


agreed that regularisation was necessary. In February 1837, the Carlist
representative in Paris, Pedro Gómez Labrador, made his King aware of
the damage Catalan border violations and terrorism was doing both to
Spain’s richest province and to support for the cause amongst legitimists
in France:108