


the chronic shoestring nature of Carlist ﬁnances gave a keen edge to the
war-weariness and outright conspiracies which grew in the north dur-
ing 1838. Sometimes Don Carlos managed to ride out this disaffection
by judicious changes in policy. In March 1838, the Bishop of León suc-
cessfully prevailed upon his King to dismiss the unpopular José Arias
Teijeiro y Correa (who had always been regarded as a vulgar and brutal
upstart) as his War Minister and to have him replaced by friends of the
popular Prince Sebastián. But other conspiracies, whipping up hatred of
the ojalateros as a convenient vehicle for protest, grew in frequency and,
as the Muñagorri phenomenon would show, began to break with the
Carlist regime.121
   Despite this strategic and political malaise, in early 1838 yet another
expedition invaded Castile, led by one of the most controversial ﬁgures
in Carlist politics. Count Negri was a middle-aged Peninsular and
Royalist War veteran and twice-fugitive from Cristino captivity. His skills
as a courtier won him promotion and the scorn of fellow Carlist diplo-
mats like Marquess Labrador who judged: ‘chamberlains, chaplains and
lawyers should stick to their assigned duties and keep out of the affairs
of military strategy and commanding armies’.122 Negri’s incompetence
in setting out with a badly provisioned force across unyielding rocky ter-
rain led one later, admittedly biased, anti-Marotista (Negri was Maroto’s
protégé) traditionalist to suspect that the whole operation was designed
to sabotage the Carlist cause.123
   Negri’s expedition during early 1838 was poorly provisioned even
from the outset. It marched across the Ebro and around northern Spain,
including a westward march towards Galicia, and then south-east via
Burgo de Osma and Segovia towards La Granja. Strategic assistance came
from Merino in the mountains around Burgos and from Basilio’s expedi-
tion in La Mancha, both of whom diverted Cristino troops. Yet Espartero
was hard on Negri’s heels, not allowing him time to regroup or take
proper rations. Negri’s men went months without pay. A modest victory
at Bendejo strengthened Negri’s hand in negotiating prisoners’ treat-
ment with the enemy, and the Eliot Treaty was agreed to be respected
by both sides during the campaign. Meanwhile, Negri went about the
usual Carlist invasion tactic of setting up improvised Carlist juntas in
the settlements he occupied, disarming the National Militia and taking
on recruits who proved to be more of a burden than anything else. Once
again, some communities ‘managed’ Carlist occupations: for example,
by town-hall delegations riding out to hand over the ‘keys’ to their
towns. Other settlements barricaded themselves in defensible points,
such as the army and militia garrison of Burgo de Osma, which held
out in the town’s fort and cathedral tower. Negri ‘poached’ conscripts
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   187


for his own forces and set up workshops on the approach to Segovia
which employed craftsmen with the loot of surrounding villages to pro-
duce badly needed berets and clothes. Negri took Segovia where, like
Zaratiegui before him, he wooed Catholics by hearing a Palm Sunday
Mass and by issuing a 7 April 1838 proclamation to Castilians asking
them to renounce the usurping Cristinos and to rally to his side in the
name of religion.124
   This was clever propaganda for communities which had faced three
years of drastic secularisation measures tempered only by local inertia
and the incompetence of the Madrid regime. But the time for win-
ning over civilians’ religiosity was over. The latter were exhausted by
repeated demands and outrages from both sides, and were in no mood
to receive Espartero’s reprisals. Espartero, for his part, conducted his
most successful counter-insurgency campaign. Appalling weather and
lack of footwear burdened Negri’s march, his numbers dwindling by the
end of April 1838 to 1,800 infantry and 100 cavalry. Since having been
forced to quit Segovia on 10 April, Negri had not had a moment’s respite,
his forces at one point having to perform a 40-mile forced march. Set-
tlements in his path bolted their doors to his men and increasingly
offered resistance, such as the militiamen and peseteros of Aguilar de
Campo, who barricaded themselves on 25 April 1838, resisting Negri’s
Carlists until Espartero’s vanguard arrived. While Negri extricated his
precious artillery, he was less successful at stopping the desertion of his
men. Finally, on 27 April at Brújula, Espartero routed Negri. Espartero
attributed his triumph to ‘free men’ defeating the forces of despotism.
Even though Negri escaped with his bodyguard, and would ﬁght again
in the defence of Morella, this was the ﬁrst unambiguous defeat of a
Carlist expedition since the Royal Expedition. Cristino military morale,
now virtually personiﬁed by the ﬁgure of Espartero, was recovering.125
So was Cristino military materiel. The 163 higher ofﬁcers, 1,662 ofﬁcers,
23,426 troops, 654 cavalry and over 1,000 artillery ofﬁcers and men
counted by the Carlist Royal Army in the Basque country in September
1838 were outnumbered three times by the Cristino forces in theatre.126
Moreover, the Cristino arms production, hitherto massively dependent
upon French and, especially, British factories, promised to improve
markedly when cannon production from foundries relocated from the
Basque country to Seville ﬁnally got underway in early 1839.127
   The Carlists, by contrast, faced a bleak future. Ever since the defeat of
the Royal Expedition, hostility towards Don Carlos in Carlist ranks had
passed its tipping-point. In particular, the King’s treatment of Prince
Sebastián, the hero of Oriamendi, rankled (a ﬂeeting act of insubordi-
nation had been turned by the apostólicos into grounds for dismissing
188 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40