


   Working-class protest came at a sensitive political time. The moderado
government was accused by Radicals of manipulating elections, and a
month after the aguadores’ strike, Fermín Caballero, editor of the Eco del
Comercio and leader of parliamentary progresistas led Olózaga and other
leftists in a walkout of the Cortes.57 By March 1840, Radical political
meetings were taking place in all the Andalucían provincial capitals, and
delegates were dispatched to Seville to deliberate upon a confederation
along the lines suggested by the martyred Catalan Republican, Xaudaró
y Fábregas.58
   Militancies in Cristino society grew while the most savage ﬁghting
shifted eastwards, away from the stagnation of the Basque country and
towards the Carlist ascendancy in Aragón and the Catalan far west. Such
was the pressure that, in February 1838, San Miguel decided to evacu-
ate the entire population of Gandesa rather than continue to waste lives
and supplies in its defence. Refugee civilians from Gandesa were housed
in Zaragoza and a subscription in their aid was opened in Madrid. The
civilians did not return to their destroyed homes until Cabrera left for
France in 1840.59 This Carlist success emboldened Cabrera to launch an
offensive against Zaragoza. Some 2,200 infantry, and 300 cavalry under
the command of the French Carlist, Lespinace, tried to surprise the city
on 5 March 1838. But Zaragoza resisted thanks to its garrison of National
Militia supported by some regular troops and even civilians armed with
such improvised weapons as burning oil and water in imitation of the
greater sieges of the Peninsular War. Carlist casualties were about 20
times those of the Cristinos, so a special medal was awarded to the city’s
National Militia and a laurel added to its emblem.60 Unlike Córdova
in 1836, Zaragoza in 1838 no longer had enough civilians prepared to
act as a ﬁfth column for the besiegers. The failed plot on 27 February
1834 to raise the city for Don Carlos had been answered by months of
ofﬁcial arrests and imprisonments and unofﬁcial anti-clerical outrages.61
By 1838, its streets were indisputably Cristino.
   Cristino operations in Aragón during 1838 were dominated by
attempts to conquer the virtually impregnable Carlist capital of Morella.
Oráa and San Miguel combined an offensive in July which was under-
supplied in food and artillery. The Carlists rounded up cattle in the
approaches to Morella and burnt the ripe corn harvest (both sides cus-
tomarily burnt crops on land that they did not expect to hold), thereby
burdening the Cristinos’ already shoestring supplies. Moreover, Morella
was constructed like a city-tower, its relief and architecture naturally
favouring the defenders. Between the mid-July start of the offensive and
Oráa’s order on 17 August 1838 to retreat, there were some 22 battles
202 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


and two failed Cristino attempts to storm Morella. Oráa was exhausted
by years of war and had long thought a military solution to the conﬂict
was impossible. Moreover, he had had to detach some forces to aid the
Prefect of Murcia to crush some revolutionary National Militia. An inter-
cepted letter revealed to the Carlists that Oráa’s colleagues thought him
old, vacillating, bereft of his earlier speed and unable to leave anything
to chance.62 Cabrera’s defensive victory was followed with an offen-
sive victory at the Battle of Maella against a division led by one of the
Cristino’s most popular generals, Pardiñas, whose élan contrasted with
Oráa’s circumspection. Yet Cabrera won the battle, killing Pardiñas in
combat and massacring most of the several hundred Cristino prisoners
taken.63
   Cabrera’s ascendancy in the Maestrazgo was secured. At the end of
1838 his army numbered some 15,255 infantry, 1,328 cavalry, and 378
artillerymen with some 40 guns. Moreover, Carlist artillery had been
improved by the Prussian Baron von Rahden, who had voluntarily quit
a post in the Basque provinces to come to the Maestrazgo for this
end. A grateful Cabrera made him comandante general.64 The brutal-
ity of Cabrera’s war effort continued to be a source for consternation for
Cristino Radicals: