


him); equally so did the imprisonments and suspended death sentences
handed down to such popular leaders as Zaratiegui and Elío. The latter
two were championed by a mutiny by troops in the Carlist capital, dur-
ing which demands for their release and the removal of Don Carlos were
uttered. The ringleader, a certain Lieutenant-Colonel Urra, was executed,
but the signs were clear that a civil war was starting to engulf Carlist
ranks from within.128 Manuel Lassala, who, since the July 1836 revolu-
tion had been the secretary to the provincial deputation of Zaragoza,
leading the city’s defence in 1838 against Cabañero’s Carlists, was well
placed to judge the mood of Carlists in the surrounding countryside.129
He observed the growing inﬂuence of Carlist transaccionismo, or maro-
tismo, dynastically loyal enlightened absolutism hostile to the theocratic
‘brutes’, or apostólicos, and Basque fueristas who dominated the ranks
of non-Castilian Carlism. The loose bag of absolutists, foralists and
medievalists of 1833 was splitting into an absolutist and apostólico wing,
with Basque foralists between the two factions. For the moment, the
dynastic loyalty to the person of Don Carlos made both factions priori-
tise the war over their own divisions. But as the compromise peace offers
from the Cristinos improved, Carlism’s last commander-in-chief, the
absolutist, Rafael Maroto, would make peace over the heads of his King
and his theocratic entourage. Don Carlos, after all, had become at best a
mere cipher and at worst the object of ridicule. His time-wasting Masses
during the Royal Expedition, his ﬂat refusal even to consider recognis-
ing Cristino debts and his insistence on sharing the military ‘advice’ he
regularly received from a nun all made the marotista faction see him as
a liability.130 The increasing extremism of the Carlist Royal Government
also sapped the willingness of Basque villagers to sustain the ﬁght. The
prohibition placed on ofﬁcers and men marrying any woman with rel-
atives who were Cristinos was particularly resented, as was the clique
of religious extremists who ‘worked towards’ the King’s poorly articu-
lated will by launching ill-conceived expeditions and leading cultural
crackdowns. Manuel Lassala observed that a growing clamour rose for
moderation on the Carlist side:131

   Don Carlos was too fanatical, bloody and superstitious. True Carlists
   did not volunteer for this, and did not mean to sacriﬁce their lives
   and goods in order to hand over Spain to the hangman and the
   backward times of Philip I. Those were Carlists never worthy of the
   name; no, a thousand times, no! – supposing all Carlists wanted to
   reignite the bonﬁres of the Inquisition is as unjust as supposing that
   all Liberals were partisans of the guillotine and lamp-post lynchings.
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   189


   This grassroots discontent could not fail to play out on the battle-
ﬁeld. The Madrid government, thanks to growing Carlist defection to
the Cristinos and to the cross-border intelligence networks of Spymaster
Aviraneta, was keenly aware of the divisions in Carlist ranks and sought
to exploit them. José Antonio de Muñagorri, a native of Verástegui
(Alava), began the war as the backbone of Carlist war-related industry,
owning six factories in Guipúzcoa and Navarra. He has been repre-
sented as a treacherous buffoon in traditionalist scholarship.132 After
his repeated petitions to the Carlist court for a compromise peace fell
on deaf ears, he emigrated to the French side of the Pyrenees where
he contacted Cristino agents and forged a plan to raise a guerrilla
force of Spanish Basques. By November 1837, Muñagorri had become
a salaried Cristino ofﬁcer, and on 18 April 1838 he raised his standard in
Verástegui calling for peace and fueros (paz y fueros), designed to divide
the fuerista Basques against the transaccionista Castilians. Muñagorri’s
gambit reﬂected the growing willingness of both many fueristas and
many disenchanted absolutists (who would soon be captained by
Maroto) to forge a compromise peace sacriﬁcing Don Carlos in return for
Basque autonomy.133 In fact, Muñagorri’s military operations proved to
be tragicomic, and Cristino generals were so vexed by the desertion his
‘free corps’ attracted from conscripts that they refused to cooperate with
him, and his whole force was interned in France the following year.134
   The sudden Cristino rediscovery of the Basque fueros was as much
for its own security as for the division of the enemy. On 27 May 1838,
the Cristino free corps in Pamplona rose in rebellion, killing General
Sarsﬁeld and Colonel Mendívil, and occupying the city for more than a
month before Espartero’s paciﬁcation action.135 The motives for this ris-
ing betrayed the divided loyalties of Basques serving the Cristino cause:
for its leaders, the Peninsular War guerrilla veteran, Colonel León Iriarte,
and Comandante Pablo Barricart, were motivated by the anti-foralismo
of Madrid, and proclaimed the independence of Navarra.136 But the
fueros were still peripheral to Cristino strategy, whereas for the Carlists,
except in Aragón and the Catalan far west, they were part of its termi-
nal crisis. An unlikely understanding of two Ayacucho veterans, now
opposing one another as rival commanders-in-chief, would soon bring
the war to an end over the heads of crowned princes and even elected
governments.
8
Stalemate and Cristino Victory,
1838–40