


lampooned by the opposition Eco because ‘although he is completely
untested commanding men on the ﬁeld of battle, he may nonetheless
prove some use commanding women’.42 One hundred and ﬁfty male
snuffbreakers who had been conscripted into the Cristino army returned
to Seville after the war protesting their patriotic right to regain their
jobs. Insult was added to injury when the government offered them
alternative jobs in public works projects (which had been notorious for
employing Carlist prisoners).43
   The greatest wartime economic militancy came from the strikes and
smuggling of the tobacco women. Demands for increased wartime pro-
duction were worsening their working conditions which, in addition to
an eight-hour day, pensions and free overalls, had included the provi-
sion of crèches and wet nurses.44 On 2 August 1838, after suffering four
months’ pay arrears and deteriorating factory food, all 2,000 Seville taba-
caleras went on indeﬁnite strike. The male minority was co-opted into
joining the women, strike-breakers were barred, and the mayor received
a delegation of 20 tabacaleras. The captain-general, who feared the
impact of tobacco shortages on soldiers’ morale, intervened to source a
Chambers of Commerce loan to pay the backlog of wages. The captain-
general conceded this in bad grace, stressing that so many young men
were spilling their blood for liberty and the crown of Isabella whilst
silently suffering pay arrears (a grating and also inaccurate statement,
as at least one conscripted tobacco worker had recently been executed
for turning his musket on an ofﬁcer in the course of a pay dispute).45
Even though the women failed to get their secondary demands met
(removal of the 3-reales weekly levy for medical and burial insurance,
and the right to hold meetings), this ﬁrst great Seville strike passed
without further incident.46 Four more strikes would ensue in as many
years, the May 1842 strike being the most prolonged.47 In July 1839, the
Madrid tabacaleras launched a strike in protest at the continued humili-
ation of having to undergo a body search at the end of shifts. This time
the factory administrators enlisted 40 militiamen to lock the women in
the building, denying them food until they submitted. The authorities
were right to suspect smuggling, but the women did this via a tun-
nel to a secluded street outside. When this was discovered, two weeks
after the strike, the press condemned this ‘sabotage of the state coffers’
at a time when the war for liberty was still ongoing.48 Not only had
Carlist smuggling across the Pyrenees lengthened the war, but Cristino
civilians were doing the same by exercising their ‘moral economy’: in
October 1839, Málaga’s shop owners closed their premises in protest at
200 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


overzealous carabineers.49 Smuggling had long been a way of life along
Spain’s porous borders and coastline, practised in three ways.50 But the
civil war had politicised it like never before.
   The war also inﬂected Spain’s experience of the European trade slump
of 1839 and the default it made on National Debt interest repayments.51
Spain’s ﬁrst strike movement to be coordinated across industries was
broken by government charges of ‘Carlism’. The Cristino abolition in
1837 of the guild system had advantaged wholesalers, who ratcheted
up prices.52 This was answered in Granada by a movement led by a
certain Julián Malaguilla, silk worker artisan, who rallied 200–300 fel-
low silk workers to halt work and ransack the premises of wholesale
silk merchants who had hiked prices. The Militia was overwhelmed and
the city’s shoemakers joined the strike. Three companies of infantry
had to be drafted in to uphold the state of siege. But the strike held
as workshop masters were sent letters threatening them with 50 lashes
if they did not cease production. The movement collapsed only when
Malaguilla was tricked into arbitration at the city hall. He was arrested
and imprisoned upon charges of ‘Carlism’ (letters were produced show-
ing Malaguilla’s appeal for volunteers to join insurgents in the restive
Serranía de Ronda).53 Madrid itself saw signiﬁcant strike action, and
from very proletarian quarters. The water-bearers (aguadores) of Madrid
were mostly Galician migrants, numbering some 900 in the capital in
1840.54 The luckiest of these water-bearers rented licences from the
municipal authorities to carry drinking water to Madrid’s private houses
and businesses; the less lucky might subcontract these licences or work
in small teams as journeymen for the licensee; whilst the least fortu-
nate would work the streets as water-vendors.55 As municipal licences
were hard to acquire, and as most of the water-bearing labour involved
seasonal migration, the luckiest aguadores had the opportunity to sell
their licences for inﬂated prices. By February 1840, it emerged that a
cadre of aguadores in Madrid was doing precisely that, the money being
found by raising the monthly fee levied on water delivery from 6 to 8
reales per household to 12. When consumers complained to the author-
ities, the municipality arrested some of the ‘usurers’ whilst enforcing a
cut in water levies. The response from the aguadores was to launch a
strike, which resulted in no water being carried anywhere in the capital
for a whole day. Militia were dispatched to force the aguadores back to
work. The authorities’ hard line was welcomed by several of the most
recent migrants, who had run the virtual blockade of Carlist banditry to
reach Madrid and had indebted themselves in order to subcontract the
licence.56
                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   201