


‘Count’ España would be their ally, but in fact he silenced them ﬁrst, and
most of their junta members either ﬂed to France or remained to rubber-
stamp military policy. Then España turned against the universitarios, but
not before he had met, and exceeded, their demands for the most dra-
conian military and most reactionary cultural policy.114 In the latter
regard, for example, España showed particular contempt for ‘geographi-
cally Cristino’ priests. The predicament of the Priest of Balsareny showed
the dangers facing clerics near front lines who made accommodations
with the ‘usurping’ Cristinos. Balsareny was strongly garrisoned enough
to make its priest feel safe from Carlist reprisals by both complying with
the Cristino abolition of the tithe (since 1837), and, consequently, refus-
ing to hand over these monies to the Carlists, thereby breaking with
this wartime tradition of covert clerical ﬁnancing of Carlists in front-
line areas. But one day, the priest went to visit a neighbouring priest on
the occasion of a religious feast. The latter had him seized and carried
into Carlist territory where España set him before an ecclesiastical tri-
bunal. On España’s instructions, the local Carlist paper Restaurador spun
this story in a dastardly fashion. The newspaper reported that the priest
had ﬂed Balsareny to reach loyal territory where he altruistically handed
over not only the tithe but also other donations as well. This marked the
man as a true Carlist. España was unmoved by the fact that this made
the poor fellow a marked man, as the Cristinos would doubtless tar-
get him for his ‘betrayal’. But España was unmoved: ‘a revolutionary
cleric is either a madman or a monster who deserves neither pity nor
sympathy’.115
   España’s military ruthlessness carved out for him the title ‘Tiger’ in
the enemy press, a title hitherto used only to describe Cabrera further
south.116 His Catalan soldiers nicknamed him the ‘decapitator’ (Trenca-
caps), and the count was famed for keeping a gallows outside his sleeping
quarters that was always busy hanging some unfortunate victim of his
wrath. España perfected the role of exterminating angel, renaming all
battalions as ‘Catholic and Royal’ (deliberately imitating the counter-
revolutionary Vendée), marrying it – during 1838 at least – with the role
of successful military strategist.117
   Whereas the Carlist east reached its apogee, the cradle of Carlism,
the Basque country, never escaped from the stagnation caused by the
failed Royal Expedition. Nothing more imaginative than yet another
expedition was proposed late in 1837. Even though the expedition led
by Basilio Antonio García on 28 December 1837 succeeded in break-
ing into Castile, it did not alter the Carlists’ stagnation. Furthermore,
weary Cristino civilians proved both far less willing to collaborate with
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   185


yet another Carlist invasion and far more willing to oppose it. Two
graphic episodes illustrate how Cristino citizens had learnt from bitter
years of war to mobilise popular resistance against invasion. García’s
Carlists passed through the eastern Andalucían village of Nerpio on
13 February 1838; the village’s resentful inhabitants were rallied by
the local sheriff and murdered some stragglers who had fallen behind
the invaders’ rearguard. But Basilio, unaware of this atrocity, returned
Nerpio whose inhabitants, fearing the worst, deserted their village en
masse. The Carlists did not suspect anything sinister until the bloodied
clothes and powder of their unfortunate comrades were found in the
loft of the sheriff’s house. Outraged, the expedition burnt the house,
and then the whole village, to the ground. Whilst other villages did
not fare so badly, they nonetheless experienced routine ransacking and
wastage: whatever was not useful to the Carlists was destroyed.118 And
even innocent villages sometimes paid the ultimate price for resistance.
When the expedition swung north into New Castile it made an example
of Calzada de Calatrava. Some 166 of its inhabitants – militiamen and
their women and children – were either burnt or crushed to death after
the church they had fortiﬁed was set on ﬁre, weakening its roof, which
collapsed onto the defenders. This catastrophe was made possible by the
defection to the invaders of the local prior. When Army of the Centre
Commander-in-Chief Narváez arrived to liberate Calzada, he bowed to
popular pressure and had the cleric shot.119
  The Basque war effort never recovered from the defeat of the Royal
Expedition. The Royal Police were gone, but the Royal Police state
remained and became more irksome on a population exhausted by the
war. A law passed on 22 January 1838 banned any interaction by any
persons other than designated men with Cristino prisoners-of-war. This
was very hard on families caught between lines and sides. On 19 Febru-
ary 1838, a quarantine was placed on all foreign and Cristino vessels
trying to enter Carlist ports. The ﬁnancial demands of war were exhaust-
ing even the stoic ability of the Basques to give. Total Carlist tax
revenue raised in Navarra, Guipúzcoa, Vizcaya and Alava in the year
up to November 1838 amounted to some 40,188,886 reales, plus some
3,400,000 reales raised at customs. But this 43,588,886 total fell short
of the 46,355,000 expenditure for the same period, leaving a deﬁcit of
2,766,114 reales. This had to be bridged by yet more indirect taxes, ‘vol-
untary’ contributions from clerics, ﬁnes on Liberals and by grants from
foreign powers whose sympathy was wearing thin. In May, the King
of Sardinia promised some 800,000 francs to Carlist Spain, offering to
increase this donation if Russia, Prussia and Austria followed suit.120 But
186 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40