




The defeat of the Royal Expedition passed the strategic initiative to the
Cristino army. Whilst Espartero’s Army of the North tightened the noose
around the Basque country in the north, Narváez’s Army of Reserve
suppressed both remaining Carlist pockets and radical liberalism in
the south. Cristino tactics, strategy and supplies improved. States of
siege were imposed in a growing number of Cristino provincial capi-
tals, Revolutionary Militia units were purged, militarised or disbanded.
The moderado government (elected in 1837) justiﬁed counter-revolution
in terms of the Carlist threat, eroding constitutional liberties and
governance in order to streamline the war effort. But the progresista
opposition rallied by mobilising disbanded militia, press campaigns and,
above all, their resilient power bases of popularly elected local govern-
ment. They also enlisted the support of the Cristino war hero, General
Espartero. Espartero brokered a victorious peace settlement with his
Carlist opposite number, Rafael Maroto, which outlawed Don Carlos,
allowed Carlists to join Cristino ranks, and promised that the Basque
ancient laws (fueros) would be respected. Rafael Maroto’s command of
the Carlist army from June 1838 excluded the Apostólico faction from
power, culminating in his execution of several of their leading ﬁgures,
and prepared the way for a compromise peace with the Cristinos. The
August 1839 Treaty of Vergara was negotiated by commanders-in-chief
from both sides, demonstrating the degree to which the civil war had
emasculated civilian authority. It orphaned Cabrera’s achievements in
the east, whence the following year he left for exile, ending the First
Carlist War.
   The year 1838 saw the Madrid Cortes conduct debates about how to
end the conﬂict. Whereas moderados proved willing to entertain some
sort of negotiated peace on Cristino dynastic terms – a ‘transaction’ –

                                  190
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   191


progresistas argued that both national honour and revolutionary logic
demanded unconditional victory. Moderado Finance Minister, Alejandro
Mon, complained about San Miguel’s appeal for yet another levy of
100,000 men, as it was clear that the previous batch had largely gone
over to the facciosos. In the end, it was agreed that a quinta of 40,000
men be added to the nominal Cristino strength of 207,000 infantry
and 14,000 cavalry (a number which casualties and desertions in fact
rendered much lower). Progresista San Miguel observed that only a war
to the death could end civil wars, transacción being a canard; he was
answered by Toreno that history proved the opposite. San Miguel coun-
tered that he meant that only Carlist idea could be crushed forever, not
its defenders. The rareﬁed nature of Spanish Cortes debates, involving
Europe’s most elegant political addresses, was almost obscenely divorced
from reality. This was symbolised by Cristino Spain’s last prime minister
to have commanded a civilian power base (juntas, militia), Mendizábal,
who grew tired of the complaints of senior army ofﬁcers in the wake
of the La Granja revolution. His Cortes speech that ‘each ofﬁcer had a
girdle of gold’ which they might divert from their pleasures to pay their
men, following the brazen claim in the same speech that no Cristino
units were owed more than four months’ pay arrears, was met with rage
by the ofﬁcer corps and demands for personal satisfaction.1 Leftist politi-
cians could not see beyond their ingrained anti-militarism: Mendizábal
answered Espartero’s complaints in a tactless fashion, implying soldiers
were little more than beasts of burden (‘mercenaries’, as Argüelles had
slandered them in 1813) and that Espartero’s soldiers had consumed
40,000 rations per day for ten weeks after his relief of Bilbao even as his
army stood idle.2
   With the crucial exception of Espartero, most senior Cristino ofﬁcers
were aligned with the authoritarian moderados, especially as this fac-
tion endorsed the tendency of regional captain-generals, after 1837, to
subordinate National Militia rivals to army power, usually through the
imposition of states of siege. Yet the Liberal parties had limited impact
on the civil war: indeed, despite some consistent constitutional disagree-
ments (suffrage, municipalities, prerogatives of the Crown), the Liberal
parties themselves barely amounted to more than patronage networks
held together by subscriptions to rival newspapers and occasional ral-
lies disguised as banquets, and as such they rode rather than made the
waves of the civil war. Rather, the last three years of the war saw the
militarisation of the politics of both ‘home fronts’, most enduringly
in the victorious side of Cristino Spain, where the years 1837–40 have
been seen as the advent of praetorian politics in Spain.3 On the one
192 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40