


defeated Merino, inﬂicting some 800 losses on him. Merino retreated
and never took to the ﬁeld again. After Vergara settlement he joined
the exodus into France where he would become a minor celebrity on
account of his Peninsular War fame and reputation.69 Other minor raids
may have got the royal sanction but barely amounted to more than
organised crime. The raids of Carrión and Cellis are remembered mainly
because of their vindictive atrocities in the village of Villada (Palencia),
whose wealthy residents had recently welcomed a stay by Espartero. The
occupying Carlists imposed ruinous forced contributions on the munici-
pality and even killed the young wife of Lino de Cosío, a wealthy Liberal
landowner, who had only just given birth.70
   The era of Carlist expeditions had passed. The last one, during the
winter of 1839–40, came not from the Basque country (which had
surrendered) but as a desperate move from Cabrera in the east to over-
winter his troops on the food supplies of New Castile.71 It was not only
Carlist exhaustion and demoralisation which ended this offensive strat-
egy but also the decision of the moderado government in early 1838 to
form an established Army of the Reserve in Andalucía, under the com-
mand of General Narváez, who was tasked with both eradicating Carlist
bandit-insurgents and with bringing Radical cities to heel. Lengthy
states of siege were imposed in Málaga, Cádiz, Huelva and Córdova,
whilst Seville was the last provincial capital to follow this example after
a coup attempt in the city by Narváez himself backﬁred in November
1838, sending its instigator into exile in Gibraltar. Narváez had been
locked in rivalry with Espartero, but although he had the support of sev-
eral moderado deputies and ministers in the capital who wanted to see
him replace Espartero, the Queen-Regent, grateful for her rescue from
the Royal Expedition and despite her Generalísimo’s leftist politics, still
trusted Espartero. On 31 October 1838 Espartero wrote her a lengthy
letter that was devastatingly critical of Narváez, and riots followed in
Madrid. Pro-Narváez moderados fought pro-Espartero progresistas as pop-
ular proxies of praetorian politics, and the Radical Eco del Comercio dared
to call its readers ‘to arms, then, against the traitors’. A confused and
sometimes tragicomic few days followed when the new prefect of the
capital, Brigadier Puig, on 8 November 1838, decided to crack down on
the disturbances by ordering the arrest of all men with moustaches who
were not members of the army or Militia. In the end it suited both Lib-
eral factions to describe the disturbances as a Carlist plot, and many
civic Carlists still residing in the capital were arrested, a renewed round
of injustices ensuing only two weeks after the expulsion from the capital
of the wives and children of absent Carlists.72
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   205


   Defeated in the capital, Narváez joined with the former Commander-
in-Chief, Córdova, in seizing control of the Seville’s garrison and Militia,
and proclaiming a junta.73 But the Captain-General of Andalucía, the
Conde de Cleonard, condemned the rising from Cádiz and the Army
of Reserve failed to rally to its commander. Thus Narváez and Córdova
ﬂed into exile, their parliamentary immunity notwithstanding: Narváez
to Gibraltar and thence to France where he sustained a petitioning cam-
paign to the Cortes and his friend and owner of a moderado press empire,
Andrés Borrego.74 Espartero now reigned supreme, and the Army of the
Reserve – Narváez’s power base – was dissolved. Actually the humilia-
tion and banishment of Narváez would prove a pyrrhic victory. The man
from Loja had been made into a man who, like Louis Bonaparte, would
prove to have greater ambitions than careerism and personal rivalry.
   Narváez had been a visible threat to Espartero, but the last years of
the war saw Radical plots ﬂourish from lower ranks. In November 1838,
prisoners at the Spanish North African garrison at Alhucemas rose in
revolt, even though barely more than a quarter of the rebels were actu-
ally Carlists, pressed a claim to being Spanish ﬁrst before Liberal or
Carlist and promised to defend the colony against any Moroccan attack.
A similar Carlist takeover ensued at Melilla, before the insurgents agreed
to a negotiated peace and to being shipped back to the peninsula on
the condition that they would be free.75 A plot to assassinate Espartero
was centred on Manuel García Uzal, a Radical Cortes deputy, newspa-
per correspondent and, since 1835, a captain serving in a battalion of
‘guides’ (a species of elite unit generally associated with scouting activ-
ities), the fact that he was also battalion adjutant making him ideally
placed to radicalise the troops. Uzal forged a strange conspiracy between
his own circle and Carlist ﬁfth columnists (led by a writer called Vicente
Canseco), but the plot was penetrated by Espartero’s intelligence net-
works and its leaders imprisoned.76 A republican conspiracy in the army
just a few months earlier at León had petered out quickly. Its two cabecil-
las, the standard-bearer of an off-duty battalion, Francisco Doti, and a
lieutenant, Joaquín María Guisasola, seized a caravan of rations as bait
for the troops to second their calls of ‘Long Live the Constitution of
1812’ and ‘Long Live the Republic’. Even though this pronunciamiento
attracted a limited following, after three days, most had deserted, before
the 12 remaining revolutionaries were captured by loyal troops. Doti
and Guisasola were executed.77
   The war had created a radical constituency in the army and society
which had digested the constant diet of ‘liberty’ and was expressing
it on its own terms. Both Spains were weary of conﬂict, and despite
206 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40