


marched on Segura, but he found the town in ashes as Cabrera had
levelled it rather than spend resources on its defence. A series of engage-
ments in March and April 1839 ﬁnally wore out Van-Halen’s momentum
and he was forced to retreat. This sent shock waves through the Lib-
eral government, which had banked on Segura being an easy victory.
Bowing to the inevitable, Van-Halen offered his resignation, which was
accepted.134 War Minister Alaix replaced him with Nogueras, who was
appointed on 16 April 1839 but whose ill health required the temporary
nomination of General Bartolomé Amor in the interim. On 27 April
1839, War Minister Alaix gave both Amor and Nogueras special instruc-
tions to seek out any offensive opportunity against Cabrera in Aragón
and Valencia, lest the northern side of the Ebro end up turning into
Carlist-dominated territory with all the adverse diplomatic connotations
that would produce. In order to streamline this effort, he instructed
them not to prioritise payments to the unpopular asentistas except in the
case of food deliveries.135 The latter stipulation was a shrewd response to
the renewed crisis of morale in the Army of the Centre, with hunger, lack
of footwear and desertion taking their toll.136
   Banditry and insecurity continued to blunt the by-now nominally
massively superior Cristino forces, some 31,556 infantry and 2,136 cav-
alry in the Army of the Centre in April 1839. Furthermore, this army
was riven with unimaginative and timorous commanders who failed to
progress from the inﬂexible tactics of halting their infantry to ﬁre long-
distance volleys at Carlists, even though rushing the enemy from the
outset would have yielded better results. The army was also chronically
undersized by desertion and overstaffed by ofﬁcers – brigades compris-
ing only 12 companies, each of these commanded by comandantes,
being a common phenomenon.137 In short, the Cristino offensive was
a laborious affair. Thus, the suffering continued to devolve onto civil-
ians. Montalbán (Teruel) had been devastated by Carlists in 1836; now
tragedy overtook it again when its National Militia commander, Jaime
Vicente, requested from Cabrera a temporary truce so that medicines
might replenish the exhausted supplies of the town’s hospital which, as
stipulated by the Treaty of Lécera, was treating both Cristino and Carlist
casualties on an equal basis. Cabrera refused, but suggested the defend-
ers hoist a ﬂag on the roof of the hospital so that the Carlist artillery
would be able to spare it their bombardment. As soon as the ﬂag was
hoisted, Carlist artillery rained down a withering ﬁre on the building.
In one day some 66 shells fell on the building, reducing it to ruins and
killing its inmates, including some 13 of Cabrera’s own men. After 50
days of bombardment, the Cristinos abandoned the town, which had
                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   219


now been reduced to ruins. Against Cabrera’s terrorism the Cristinos
constructed a narrative of heroic defence, including that of 22-year-
old woman, Manuela Cirugeda, who distinguished herself ﬁghting as
a soldier in the town’s defence.138
   The Cristinos launched assassination attempts against Cabrera, but he
became aware of these plots throughout 1839 and 1840, and took pre-
cautionary measures. No one, except trusted comrades, could get close
to him. He randomly changed his routines, calling on villages for food
and accommodation, in order to either remain anonymous or minimise
the chance of malicious plots coming to fruition. A special police force
was set up to ﬁlter defectors from the Cristinos army for possible assas-
sins and he built up a counter-espionage network which soon foiled
Cristino plots. An elaborate plot involving a poisoned dagger hidden in
the baggage of a ‘Carlist horse-trader’ who claimed to be ﬂeeing Madrid
was thwarted, the unfortunate assassin being caught, tried and decap-
itated. More than ever Cabrera began issuing verbal orders rather than
committing anything to paper, and subordinates obeyed them down the
line of military hierarchy.139 Cabrera imposed a reign of terror against
civilians who threatened to compromise Carlist positions and morale
in any way. In Rossell (Castellón de la Plana) an elderly local notable
with whom Cabrera was billeted pleaded with him to realise that the
Carlist cause was lost. Making an immediate example of this defeatism,
Cabrera marched the old man outside, ordered him to kneel and had
him shot from behind by his escort, Cabrera giving the execution order
himself.140 Any sign of communication with the Cristinos could likewise
spell death for the civilian involved, however innocent and helpless.
A nine-year-old girl from Pobla de Claramunt (Barcelona) who had been
sent to carry chocolates to the fortiﬁed Carlist weapons factory at Forts
del Turó was stopped and searched on her way by some facciosos from
nearby Igualada. In her basket they discovered a letter from her brother,
which conﬁrmed the fall of the Carlist stronghold of Morella. The girl
was executed on the spot.141
   The Treaty of Vergara ended the war on its main front and promised,
ﬁnally, to produce Cristino victory in the east. Cabrera was fortunate
to receive news of the northern ‘treachery’ – the northern Carlists had
tried to ‘prolong their miserable existence by selling out to the revolu-
tionary power’ – in the wake of two local Carlist victories at Carboneras
and Chulilla. His men were thus well-blooded when he summoned a
meeting to give his ofﬁcers the choice of release from service and safe
conduct to their homes, or the strictest discipline and subordination
to continue the ﬁght. Clutching at straws, he thought that the coming
220 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40