


nothing else in the Basque country besides. Maroto was also enlight-
ened absolutist in his politics, and was therefore a perfect broker for a
‘transacted’ peace: indeed, during 1839 the Marotista and transaccionista
parties in the Basque country became synonymous. Maroto had few
Basque or apostólico friends and his appointment to commander-in-chief
in 1838 was the result of patient networking and military accomplish-
ments. Once appointed, Maroto knew that time was not on the Carlists’
side. No sooner had he regularised the disorderly and parochial fortress
system which defended the Basque country at local levels, than he had
to ﬁght against court intrigues (especially that of a certain Eustaquio
Laso, placed at his side to spy on him). Even worse, Maroto’s Cristino
enemies now had a ﬂourishing spy network of their own, straddling
both sides of the French border.87 And militarily the Cristinos had noth-
ing more to learn from Carlist territory or tactics. Under Espartero’s
leadership they knew the ground and in September 1837 marched on
the Carlist capital of Estella. Hence, any new Carlist offensive had to be
perfectly coordinated in order to avoid catastrophe.
   Maroto understood that the apóstolico ‘universal minister’, Teijeiro,
would exploit any military defeat to oust him, so he focused on reor-
ganising the army and ﬁghting only local battles rather than bold
offensives. Maroto enjoyed exceptionally good relations with Carlist
agents abroad, which allowed him to increase the always haphazard for-
eign subsidies.88 But hostility towards him grew, and Maroto realised
that only the execution of the conspirators could reassert his author-
ity. He prepared his ground by warning the King at Tolosa. Kissing Don
Carlos’s hand, Maroto theatrically quipped that his King had no desire
to kill him. The surprised King replied in the afﬁrmative. Maroto replied
that in that case it was his duty to request royal approval for the exe-
cution of rebellious ofﬁcers. Don Carlos temporised, assuring Maroto
that the conspiracies were no more than hot air, and that he knew
from experience more about these things than his loyal commander-
in-chief. Maroto made his intention clear, and left for his headquarters
at the Carlist capital of Estella. There he found the streets suspiciously
deserted, and those of its war-weary inhabitants and garrison he did
encounter hurled abuse at him from windows and doorways. Maroto
summoned one of the apostólico conspirators, General Carmona, to meet
him at a café. Maroto’s escort arrested Carmona the moment he arrived,
whilst swift arrests ensued of García, Sanz, Guergué and Intendant Uriz.
Two other generals, the Conde de Negri and Silvestre, quickly rallied to
Maroto’s side. All the captives were imprisoned in the town’s fort and
executed by ﬁring squad two days later, each offering ﬁnal indignant
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   209


words foretelling the damage that the execution of loyal ofﬁcers of the
King would do to the Carlist cause.89 However, violence, even projected
assassinations, had long characterised the Byzantine world of Carlist
court politics, and Maroto’s ruthlessness was met as much by relief as
indignation. Only the year before a Carlist princess fundraising at Italian
and German courts had been approached by a Royal Government agent
seeking support for a plan to execute certain Carlist generals.90
   Maroto wanted to kill Balmaseda, too, a particularly efﬁcient guer-
rilla comandante in Aragón who was ﬁercely loyal to the King, but a
signed message arrived from Don Carlos in the nick of time ordering this
man to be spared. Don Carlos, shocked by Maroto’s purge and swayed
by Teijeiro, lost little time in condemning his commander-in-chief as
a traitor and dismissing him from command. Knowing that this would
be his death sentence, Maroto received this dismissal using the familiar
ritual of the pronunciamiento. Gathering his men around him, he read
out the letter in order to provoke their indignation. Having secured
his ofﬁcers’ loyalty, the fate of the Carlist War now basically lay in
Maroto’s hands. Maroto marched on Tolosa and overwhelmed the King
into rescinding his order and sacking Teijeiro and the Bishop of León.
Maroto put his friends in leading positions in the army (Zaratiegui,
Eguía, Villarreal and Elío). The King’s humiliation was almost com-
plete, whilst Maroto’s coup certainly was complete, at least as far as
the provinces were concerned.91 His supporters, Generals Elío, Villarreal,
Eguía and Zaratiegui, quickly occupied leading army posts.
   The Frenchman, Saint-Silvain, stepped in as a go-between between
the chastened court and Maroto, thereby saving himself from the list of
apostólicos Maroto had ordered expelled to France, and allowing Don
Carlos himself to save face.92 Saint-Silvain had been the unimpeach-
able face of French legitimism, and Don Carlos’s most active diplomat
in Spain.93 Don Carlos caved in with understandable meekness, giving
ﬁnal proof, as if any more were needed, that the absolute King was
absolutely helpless in the face of the two main Carlist court factions,
the transaccionista one of which had become triumphant. Teijeiro, who
had been subject to personal attacks in a proclamation Maroto made
to his army, led the ﬂight of elites for France, one step ahead of the
assassins. Carlism’s diplomatic agents endorsed the coup. Even the King
of the Two Scillies had found the machinations of the apostólicos dis-
tasteful. The unofﬁcial Carlist ambassador to Naples, José Alvarez de
Toledo, summed up this mood by declaring that ‘some men at court had
been doing more damage to our cause than Espartero and Van Halen
combined’.94 Maroto marched into Tolosa where Don Carlos reviewed
210 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40