


of winter would buy them time. He promised the most draconian disci-
pline, including the death penalty for anyone even suspected of desiring
transacción with the enemy.142 By giving his ofﬁcers this sole and ﬂeet-
ing opportunity to abandon the Carlist cause, Cabrera showed that he
retained control of the situation. His army, after all, peaked at some
30,000 at the end of 1839, some eight times larger than what he had
found in 1835, whilst he cherished hopes that the diehard apostólico
opponents of Maroto might yet be rallied along the French border for
a fresh attempt to reignite the northern front. But Cabrera would need
to strain every nerve to resist the 50,000-strong army and overwhelm-
ing artillery launched from Zaragoza in October. Moderados accused
Espartero of delaying his descent on the east in order to maximise his
political power, but his gradual rather than rapid offensive still left no
one in doubt as to the hopelessness of the Carlists’ strategic situation.
As we have seen, the immobilisation of Catalan Carlism caused by the
España affair gave Cabrera no relief from the north. Cabrera’s active
defence began well but turned for the worse in mid-December when
he fell gravely ill. In February 1840, the Valencia press reported popular
manifestations in the Maestrazgo willing Cabrera’s recovery, evidence
of resilient morale, perhaps, but also evidence of how personalised the
leadership of the Carlist east remained.143 Whilst Espartero picked off
fortiﬁed points one by one, Cabrera could not even rise from his bed
until May 1840.144
   Cabrera knew that his line could only hold if the war were reignited
in the north. But the French police frustrated most plots and prevented
suspicious Spaniards from concentrating on the border. Despite these
measures, it was remarkable that Balmaseda still managed to invade the
Spanish Basque country in June 1840 with some 510 men and 470 cav-
alry. But this failed to reignite the war. Seeing this, Cabrera, on 5 July
1840, crossed the French frontier at the head of some 4,600 infantry
and 300 cavalry.145 Cristino forces now occupied all national territory.
But the victorious Liberals did not take any chances. The major Carlist
arms foundries at Villarluengo were destroyed in order to dissuade local
Carlists from restarting the war. The First Carlist War was over.146
Conclusions




At the war’s end in 1840, the Catalan priest and ‘common sense’
philosopher, Jaime Balmés, posited an apposite question: ‘if the Carlists
had been nothing more than a gang of thieves and outlaws, why could
the Cristino armies not destroy them?’1 Of course, thieves and outlaws
may have used Carlism as a ﬂag of convenience, but this was largely
outside the safe zones of the Basque country, and to a lesser extent,
Catalonia and the Maestrazgo. But Balmés was correctly parodying the
self-assured arrogance that made Spanish Liberals view opposition to
their transition and regime as a symptom of rural, priest-ridden igno-
rance. The Cristino denigration of their enemy as ‘bandits’, caribes and
facciosos was as facile as the Carlists’ ﬁght against negros and ‘usurpers’.
Yet the fact that Carlist wars would resurface (in 1846, in 1872 and again
in 1936), albeit on nothing like the scale of the ﬁrst war, showed that
there was no peace and reconciliation, and the persistence of belligerent
language represented far deeper tensions.
  For one thing, the peace of 1840 was really no peace at all. Spain
would remain in a revolutionary versus counter-revolutionary crisis
until 1844 at least, when a draconian moderado crackdown and the insti-
tution of the ﬁrst rural gendarmerie (Civil Guard) illegalised most open
recourses to popular radicalism (i.e. deﬁnitively abolishing the veterans’
Militia) while also presiding over the ﬁrst real economic boom of the
nineteenth century. The immediate weeks and months after the con-
ﬂict saw violence persist. The Vergara settlement had positive effects in
Asturias and Galicia where ‘Carlists’ had to revert to banditry and were
therefore targeted by united local communities.2 But it was powerless
in other areas to arrest violence. The area around Ciudad Real (New
Castile) was particularly disﬁgured by conﬂicts between ‘Liberals’ and
‘Carlists’, which quickly turned into a cycle of blood vendettas, in which