

   Princes, just like all kings, are either too good to be true that we lose
   them, or are so bad because they are worked on by a rabble of ﬂat-
   terers. And do you believe that if our prince came here or to Aragón
   he would not be accompanied by a court worse than Satan’s? Haven’t
216 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   you seen what’s been happening and it still happening in Navarra?
   Haven’t I told you several times that Navarra on its own is enough to
   lose us this war?

But the reinforcement of enemy troops made the situation bleak, even
for the Tiger of the Maestrazgo. Lord John Hay operated as a conduit for
negotiations between Van-Halen and Cabrera to instate the Eliot Treaty
in this region. Hay had greater obstacles to overcome in committing
Cabrera to the agreement, as the Count of Morella continued to com-
mit atrocities even after his signature had been secured in March 1839.
Cabrera was reeling from the loss of a shipment of arms which he had
procured in Britain. The Cristino coastguard intercepted a British ves-
sel carrying weapons bound for a remote beach under Carlist control,
impounding the cargo in Barcelona. The Cristinos did not know that
these arms were detailed for nothing less than a 22,000-strong expedi-
tion which Cabrera planned to lead against Madrid in the summer.127
Cabrera tried to take this strategic calamity in his stride, reverting to the
mystique of the guerrilla:

   War has secrets which are not explained in books. Any general who
   does not know more than what is written down may make an excel-
   lent writer of military books and lose all battles at the same time.
   In the War of Independence we saw how Blake hardly won a single
   action in spite of being brave and a great tactician . . . Napoleon’s gen-
   erals who came to Spain were the same, and our guerrillas defeated
   them . . . Now all the generals of the Army of the Centre who are ﬁght-
   ing me think they have technical superiority over me, and I don’t
   mean to debate this . . . but war gives results, not theories. I repeat
   that the science of war has its secrets.128

This ‘people’s war’ theme, inherited from the Peninsular War, was
a desperate but logical response to enemy superiority. But people’s
war requires civilian support, and this was ebbing among the war-
weary communities of the east. Cabrera found civilians feared Cristino
strength whereas once they had feared his own. Cabrera ordered that
Segura (Teruel) organise its own Carlist garrison in order to free up his
sorely needed troops for deployment elsewhere. Fearing the wrath of
the Cristinos, its inhabitants declined, so Cabrera tore down Segura’s
impressive church, other public buildings and some 350 houses. A total
of 1,600 inhabitants were thus turned into homeless refugees, seeking
shelter in nearby settlements and the caves of Los Pinares.129
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   217


   The pressure on Cabrera to agree to a more humanitarian conduct of
the conﬂict grew unbearable once Don Carlos added his name to the
criticism. The King’s censure was wide-ranging, and included criticism
of Cabrera’s zeal in suppressing even the most moderate Liberal tracts
which made it into Carlist territory. Don Carlos did not think it wrong
to censor, only that this was the proper duty of the civilian junta, not
the military. But Don Carlos’s most pressing critique was on humani-
tarian grounds. Finally, early in April, both Cabrera and Van-Halen put
their names to a version of the Eliot Treaty in the eastern zone, Cabrera
signing at his headquarters at Segura on 1 April 1839, whereupon the
emissary took it for Van-Halen’s signature at Lécera on 3 April 1839.
Cabrera had initially been piqued that such an important negotiation
had ﬁrst been opened up only verbally when Van-Halen had despatched
to him a Carlist prisoner as an emissary. The Treaty of Lécera (known by
Carlists as the Treaty of Segura) also excited controversy besides, by civil-
ian politicians and journalists. George Villiers defended Van-Halen’s and
British government policy in this matter from an attack in the House
of Lords by Lord Londonderry on 23 July 1839.130 And the interna-
tional controversy paled in comparison to that raging in the press of
Cristino Spain. In particular, the treaty’s provisions to protect the lives
of captured Carlists who had previously served in Cristino ranks, the
insistence that both able-bodied and wounded prisoners be given treat-
ment equal to those of serving soldiers, and the ban placed on deporting
prisoners overseas all excited the ire of the Liberal press, which pointed
out that these points privileged the Carlists more than the Cristinos.131
Moreover, problems remained as civilians would still be subject to the
rigours and excesses of armies, even though local communities now felt
encouraged to strike bargains with local Carlist forces in order to be able
to work their lands unmolested (deals which local Cristino forces were
obliged to tolerate out of sheer necessity). Also, local commanders were
still prone to ignoring or distorting the provisions. Prisoners numbering
more than 300, for example, were to be left in open towns devoid of
all war-related material and to be quarantined up to a distance of two
leagues’ radius from any troops. The Carlist deputy comandante general
of Aragón interpreted this provision as excluding everyone on pain of
death.132
   Meanwhile, pressure was mounting on Van-Halen to inﬂict a
decisive defeat on Cabrera. Cabrera still dominated large areas of
Aragón,Valencia and Catalonia. Carlist domination included an armed
river and coastal ﬂotilla on the Ebro estuary, the only instance in the
war where Carlist naval power matched that of the enemy.133 Van-Halen
218 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40