


his army. The King did not even speak about the events of Estella. The
initiative was now Maroto’s.95
   Meanwhile, Espartero had been pondering the best way to take advan-
tage of the civil war within Carlist ranks. Much might have been
achieved by merely awaiting the enemy’s collapse, as the Carlist war
effort was now grinding to an exhausted halt. Overburdened arms
foundries produced inadequate weaponry: shoddy workmanship and
lack of inspection led to tragedy at the fort of Guardamino on 1 May
1839, when its defending Carlist garrison opened ﬁre on the enemy,
only for the shell to explode in the cannon’s bore, igniting the maga-
zine, which killed most of the fort’s garrison outright.96 On 23 March
1839, Espartero wrote to War Minister Alaix, explaining two possi-
ble ways of ending the war, namely, via either a compromise peace,
or transacción, or a scorched-earth policy to devastate the provinces.
Espartero had no qualms about justifying such a policy for the sake of
national integrity: ‘It is best to amputate a diseased member than let it
infect the whole body.’ He was convinced that the civil war could only
be won in the provinces. He hoped an offensive strategy in the north
would capitalise on Carlism’s internal divisions and win the conﬁdence
of sympathetic European powers. But Alaix’s response was unsatisfying.
Whilst he offered Espartero limited and temporary reinforcements from
Galicia, and authorised him to take any action in the north that he saw
ﬁt, he also stressed the self-serving moderado position: that the north-
ern front would have to take its turn for reinforcements along with the
east.97 Espartero was thus ever more inclined to use his military powers
to search for peace above the heads of the politicians.
   Luckily for Espartero, Maroto wanted the same, but for more desperate
reasons. He marched the Royal Army westwards on the back of military
operations towards Santander, a mundane deployment which, in real-
ity, was cover for interviews with Cristino and Quadruple Alliance (Lord
John Hay of the naval squadron at Pasajes) intermediaries. The road
to the Vergara settlement became easier and more comfortable as these
illicit contacts increased. Cristino military superiority obliged Maroto in
any case to approve increasing parleys with the enemy. He negotiated
the surrender of the fort at Guardamino on 12 May 1839: the magazine
explosion of the 1 May combined with a failure to dig in at the crest
surrounding the fort had made the position poorly defensible. For this
feat Espartero was awarded the title Duke of Victory, and Cristino cel-
ebrations embittered the Carlist press, which was at pains to represent
Guardamino as a truce rather than defeat. Maroto was in an unenvi-
able position: he needed to achieve some signiﬁcant victory both in
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   211


order to stem the growing tide of desertion from Carlist into Cristino
ranks (which had been particularly marked in the lines facing Cristino
Bilbao)98 and to strike a peace from some position of strength. But
the latter was growing more improbable by the day, whilst Espartero’s
encroachments into the Basque–Navarrese heartland heaped suffering
on the already exhausted Carlist home front, which then fed back into
demands for peace.99
   Meanwhile, anti-marotistas may have been cowed but they were not
inactive. Propaganda was spread describing Maroto as a traitor prepared
to sell the King for English gold, and starting rumours that Carlist defec-
tors, contrary to being welcomed into Cristino ranks, were being shot.100
An exchange of letters between the apostólico priest, Juan Echevarría,
and Maroto, revealed a personal antipathy which typiﬁed the mali-
cious gossip that had dominated Carlist court politics over six years.
Maroto, whose impressment into his personal service in 1835 of a cap-
tured adolescent British auxiliary had been the subject of apostólico
gossip and innuendo, now vengefully repaid his tormentors in kind,
waving off Echevarría’s accusations of treason and accusing him of hav-
ing fathered children, and of trying to hide the affair by forcing their
unhappy mother to marry her brother.101 The puritanism of Carlist
political culture was being cast off by its own elites.
   On 9 August, the late Zumalacárregui’s right-hand man, Zaratiegui,
led four battalions in a pro-war pronunciamiento near Pamplona.102 But
this rising was deadlocked: both marotistas and apostólicos competed to
win over the vital legitimacy of Don Carlos, but the King now had grave
doubts about his personal situation in the wake of Maroto’s coup. When
he reviewed some Basque battalions at Elorrio, rather than shouting the
customary ‘Long Live the King’, the men cried ‘Long Live Peace!’103 This
civil war within a civil war was sapping the war effort from within.
General Elío was caught between the Scylla of Cristino invasion and
the Charybdis of the apostólico rising, remarking ‘If I attack the ris-
ing, we are lost, and if I don’t, then I see no hope.’104 This scenario
revived the fortunes of the much-derided Muñagorri who linked up with
Jaúregui on the frontier under the ever-more attractive banner of peace
with fueros without Don Carlos.105 Knowledge was widespread that a
transacción along these lines was the subject of negotiations, especially
at Bayonne.106
   This move towards peace became all the stronger as Espartero’s
summer offensive penetrated ever more into Carlist territory, captur-
ing Estella, impounding villages’ harvests and burning produce that
could not be carried or consumed. This military crisis sharpened the
212 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40