


political one, and Maroto asked Espartero for a truce, which the latter
refused.107 Meanwhile, Espartero continued invading Navarra, scorching
farmsteads in his wake. Maroto was in an invidious position because of
Espartero’s refusal to agree to a peace which would allow Don Carlos
to participate in the transacción. Espartero was determined that peace
should be brokered by Spaniards alone, and that international medi-
ation should be minimised. Espartero’s attitude hardened when the
French government, in June 1839, launched its proposals for a mediated
peace which were virtually pro-Carlist, and conﬁrmed the long-held
suspicions about King Louis-Philippe’s afﬁliation. Thus both the fueros
and Carlist military commissions and salaries would be respected, whilst
both Don Carlos and María Cristina would be sent into exile, and the
Spanish Bourbon dynasty reunited via the marriage of the Carlist infant
and Isabella. The repeated use of the French raisonnable to describe these
terms stuck in the throats of the Cristinos, and allowed the British to
monopolise the international side of peace-making to which Espartero
did consent.108
   Meanwhile, Espartero maintained the pressure with a calculated,
gradual pace of invasion designed to exact the maximum psychologi-
cal effect on his opponent. Maroto was also under immense pressure
both from the restive Navarrese peasantry and from their King, who
grew suspicious and fearful of his commander-in-chief’s negotiations
and would launch a furious counter-manifesto once the Vergara terms
were proclaimed.109 Both Espartero and Maroto knew that military logic
would dictate peace on Cristino terms. Both men carried out secret nego-
tiations via Bayonne and an elaborate fourfold secret code. Maroto was
desperate to save face by gaining the concession of either a Cristino for-
tiﬁed town (‘victory’) or the marriage of Don Carlos’s son to the young
Isabella (‘honour’). Espartero refused both, but reiterated his promise
not to harm the fueros and his offer of army commissions for Carlist ofﬁ-
cers as long as Don Carlos was either handed over or sent into exile.110
In the end Maroto caved into these terms, but until the last moment
could not actually bring himself to discuss preliminaries at Vergara,
deputising General La Torre to lead the delegation in his stead. What-
ever the anguish of the Carlist high command, the attitude of the Carlist
rank and ﬁle had become both so despondent and enraged with army
elites that a negotiated peace promised to safeguard against something
far worse. When the Carlist generals set out to meet Espartero at Vergara,
they found a group of Guipúzcoan deserters in their path. The desert-
ers damned the generals and detained them. The situation might have
ended disastrously, but the generals convinced the deserters that they
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   213


were on a mission for peace, and Spanish soldiers’ love of peace in 1839
was greater than their contempt for their leaders.111
  Finally, on 29 August 1839, the Vergara settlement was signed. Carlists
were to switch allegiance to Isabel II in return for continued careers for
ofﬁcers and men in the reuniﬁed army if they desired and Espartero
promised to speak in favour of preserving the fueros at the reuniﬁed
Cortes. Anti-marotista Carlists left for French exile. The King reached
exile safely but not all were so fortunate. General Vicente Moreno, the
‘hangman of Málaga’ and one of Maroto’s great enemies, was caught by
Carlist soldiers at Urdax, just one kilometre from the French frontier,
and murdered.112 Ironically for its eponymous peace settlement, Vergara
was the last Carlist fort to surrender to Espartero’s victorious army. Thus,
the Treaty of Vergara (also known as the ‘Embrace of Vergara’ – Abrazo
de Vergara – for the theatrical embrace that Espartero and Maroto gave
each other as a symbol of peace and reconciliation in front of their men)
was the compromise peace that ended the war in the north.113 Thou-
sands of pro-fueros Carlists, almost all from the mooted loser provinces
of Alava and Navarra, rejected the peace and followed their commanders
into French exile. They were right to suspect Maroto’s verbal assurance
from Espartero that a reuniﬁed Spain would ‘respect the fueros’. Near
Elizondo, the Cristino consul at Bayonne reported that four companies
of the ﬁfth battalion of Navarra honoured the passing into exile of their
King with the cry of ‘Death to Maroto, Long Live the King!’114 Risings
continued into 1840, such as the failed attempt of Balmaseda to reignite
the civil war, but the country was exhausted. Foral privileges were
eroded, which was a matter for the Cristino cities as much as the Carlist
countryside. Vitoria saw its lucrative customs frontier redeployed at the
French and coastal frontier to the beneﬁt of Bilbao and San Sebastián.115
  The nineteenth-century Liberal historian, Antonio Pirala, tried to
rehabilitate Maroto, but to no effect: Maroto remained forever tarnished
with treason in both Romantic eyes and those of the theocratic wing of
Carlism.116 Thus, a persistent ‘Vergara literature’ was spawned, repro-
ducing the myth that Carlism was stabbed in the back but undefeated
on the battleﬁeld, the culmination of a betrayal of popular Carlism
that began with the connivers of Don Carlos’s court and ended with
Maroto’s treachery.117 The 1898-generation ‘Great Man’ novelist, Pío
Baroja, called Don Carlos’s climbdown cowardly.118 Maroto died in exile
in Chile, ending his career where he had begun it, having tried to defend
two lost causes of Spanish monarchism.
  Fighting continued in the east, but not even Cabrera’s genius could
hope to withstand the 50,000 battle-hardened Cristino troops bearing
214 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40