


the misﬁred diplomatic venture of the Royal Expedition, various efforts
came from the Cristino side for peace. In January 1839, Eugenio de
Aviraneta designed a plan to abduct Don Carlos via a naval landing
near his lightly guarded winter quarters at Azcoitia, to be launched
on British vessels from Pasajes. Only the reluctance of Lord Hay to
breach British rules of engagement grounded the abduction mission.78
Any effective diplomatic solution to the Spanish problem could only
come via some accord between Europe’s Liberal and absolutist powers.
Palmerston and Metternich were surprised that they saw eye to eye on
this point from 1838. But Metternich’s Europe still saw Liberal Spain as
the revolution incarnate, an attitude that hardened when Spanish emis-
saries with colourful pasts reached Vienna. Manuel Marliani Cassens, a
cosmopolitan, gaditano friend of Mendizábal and protégé of Calatrava,
was made Spanish consul general to France in September 1836.79 He
forged a plan to impress upon Metternich a dynastic end to Spain’s civil
war via the marriage of the young Princess Isabella to an Austrian prince.
But this plan backﬁred on his mission to Vienna when French agents –
wary of the prospect of a Hapsburg on the Spanish throne – destroyed
Marliani’s credentials by reminding the Austrians of his revolutionary
past in Piedmont in 1821. Metternich refused even to see him, and
Marliani was ordered to leave Vienna within 18 hours, after which the
combined pressure of Austria and Sardinia got him sacked as Spanish
consul to Paris. Even though Marliani rebuilt his career in Spain, his
plan for a dynastic solution to the civil war came to nought.80 Equally
there was no diplomatic breakthrough for the Carlists either. The secret
Carlist junta in Madrid had seen its hopes dashed with the failed Royal
Expedition of 1837. In 1838 the Neapolitan foreign minister, the Prince
of Cassaro, suggested to the Carlists that if they descended on either
Zaragoza or Valencia they would be supported by a naval squadron of
Neapolitan volunteers. However, Cassaro’s enthusiasm was not shared
by his King.81
   Carlist diplomacy made desperate pleas for international help to stave
off defeat. But Don Carlos’s plea on 9 March 1839 for more aid from
friendly sovereigns was met by either cool or business-like responses.
Piedmont-Sardinia refused more money, disgruntled at how money sent
hitherto had been spent on maintaining the Carlist army on home
ground – which was now shrinking – rather than marching on Madrid.
Russia and Austria agreed that to send more money would end up
merely postponing eventual Carlist defeat. The only serious offer came
from a minor absolutist power, the Netherlands, which offered money in
return for Don Carlos’s consent to a Dutch conquest of the Philippines
                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   207


in his name. The Cristino garrison was weak, Amsterdam believed, a ﬂeet
could be launched from Java in the Dutch East Indies, and the Dutch
would be repaid by a stake in Philippine customs revenues. Both Don
Carlos and his cabinet quickly rejected this proposal, but it is unclear
whether they did so out of misplaced imperial pride, realism or supe-
rior knowledge of Philippine affairs. In fact, the Spanish presence in the
Philippines during the 1830s was comparatively strong, as Guillermo
Galvey, amateur ethnographer and Cristino Captain-General of the
colony, led a series of expeditions to expand the colonial frontier in the
Cordillera.82 International supporters of Carlism were disenchanted by
more than just the military situation. Even kings and diplomats openly
upbraided the division and misappropriations of the Carlist court.83
Finally, a plan to sail a 1,500-strong Carlist amphibious force from
Bermeo to attack Cádiz during July 1839 foundered ﬁrst on the lack
of ﬁnancial support from Europe’s absolute powers, and then because
of the Treaty of Vergara.84 Carlist hopes of international aid had col-
lapsed, and Cristino Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the Centre,
Van-Halen, ridiculed Carlists hoping against hope as ‘Jews waiting for
the Messiah’.85
   The Treaty of Vergara ended the war on its main front, and this
came about ﬁrst because of the executive power taken by Espartero,
and more fundamentally, the exhaustion and political divisions of the
Carlist Basque country. The growing clamour for peace in the Carlist
zone in 1839 undermined the Royal Government’s attempts to sustain
the war effort. The demographic losses caused by the war and Cristino
occupation forced the Carlist government, in December 1838, to issue
a blanket amnesty allowing émigrés on the French side of the border
to return to their homes. Meanwhile, the screw of conscription was
tightened still further, and a crackdown was announced on the growing
tide of subversive pamphlets which attacked Don Carlos’s advisers in a
thinly veiled critique of the King himself. Most decisively, the Basque
and Navarrese peasantry was seeing itself reduced to below-subsistence
level by the repeated requisitioning by the Carlist army (and, as 1839
progressed, by the invading Cristinos), which Carlist civilian authorities
never managed to control.86
   The ‘man of Vergara’ was Rafael Maroto. Maroto was a middle-
aged Murcian, veteran of the Spanish-American wars and widower
to a Peruvian wife. Purged from the army in 1833 and imprisoned,
he escaped from Cristino captivity to join his King in Portugal early
in 1834. Maroto was the archetypical ‘Castilian’ hated by apostólicos
and Basque fueristas: dynastically loyal to Don Carlos and loyal to
208 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40