


down on Aragón. Even before the Vergara settlement there were signs
that Carlism was beginning to lose its grip on Catalonia and Aragón.
The year 1839 saw the tide turn even against Count España’s Carlists in
Catalonia. His failure in February 1839 to take the small Cristino town of
Balsareny marked the turn of the tide, and turned the town into a martyr
of Liberal resistance: troops, militia, Belgian and even women volun-
teers had all died in its defence and practically every house had its roofs
blown off by artillery, some 8,000 sacks being ordered after the battle to
provide makeshift shelter. In late May, Carlist fortunes brieﬂy returned
when España successfully besieged Ripoll. Overwhelmed by the odds
facing them, the Cristino governor accepted a negotiated surrender, his
men and arms going into captivity whilst he rejected Carlist guarantees
and shot himself in the head. During the negotiations, Carlist emis-
saries encountered the town’s women and children solemnly gathering
in the beautiful church of San Pedro. The Carlists removed their berets
in respect and let the civilians leave the church so as to avoid being tar-
geted in the event of hostilities restarting. After the takeover, the town
was burnt to the ground, and those buildings which had survived the
ﬂame were blasted into rubble. Even though Ripoll would rise again,
España had achieved what Espoz had done with Castellfullit in 1822.
He ordered a memorial plaque to be constructed in the town’s ruins
saying ‘Here was Ripoll’.119
   España hoped that the downfall of Meer (a victim of the Radical
press campaign), and his replacement as captain-general by Jerónimo
Valdés, might improve matters. But Valdés was both an experienced
counter-insurgent and, crucially, for Radical opinion, politically to the
Left of Meer. When city magnates’ refused him a loan he imprisoned
them for ransom in the Ciudadela, a dictatorial abuse of the state of
siege which nonetheless pleased radical opinion.120 The ﬁnancial statis-
tics certainly justiﬁed his ruthlessness: Catalonia yielded an annual tax
income of 6 million reales whilst military expenditures alone amounted
to 8 million. And yet it was the wealthiest Cristino city. Workers had
tacitly accepted the reintroduction of the machines since the Bonaplata
riots of 1835 because production in general had been booming – as
shown by the more than doubling of raw cotton imports to Barcelona
between 1824 and 1840 – and the capitalist class was awash with cash.121
And, now that peace had broken out in the north, until Valdés could
get reinforcements he was conﬁned to little more than operations of
active defence, such as the bitter battle to resupply Solsona against
Carlist attacks during November 1839.122 Finally, the end of the war in
the north allowed Espartero to reinforce Valdés (only a third of whose
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   215


23,000 troops in Catalonia had so far been available for campaigning)
with the forces of General Antonio Azpiroz (four veteran battalions, one
excellent cavalry squadron, one company of sappers and artillery). These
forces arrived at Lérida on 7 November 1839.123
   España’s notorious theocracy and military discipline had become
objectionable because he had stopped winning battles. España’s strate-
gic defeat revived the Junta of Berga and gave his enemies the chance
to take revenge. España was abducted and forced to appear before the
junta, which dismissed him from his command on 26 October 1839.
España again tried to temporise, this time literally at knifepoint, but it
was to no avail. He pronounced himself happy that his predecessor, José
Segarra, was to be appointed his successor but demanded a chance to
delay handing over his command until he had conversed with Segarra
about conﬁdential military matters which were not appropriate for mere
civilians to hear. The junta was unmoved and España began his forced
journey into exile in Andorra. Although staying at safe houses en route,
travelling by night and undergoing the indignity of being dressed in
peasant clothes, España did not have to endure this humiliation for
long. After crossing the River Segre close to Orgaña España was strangled
by his own escort, and his body dumped in the river.124 His assassins,
who were operating with uncertain connivance of higher authority,
would justify their actions by claiming outrageously that España was a
Mason (i.e. Liberal) and about to turn like Maroto. In reality, the Carlists
knew that once they had bested this fanatical reactionary, they would
have to kill him. Carlos de España, after all, had bloodied Barcelona as
its captain-general during the Ominous Decade, and then subjected the
Carlist war effort in the Principality to the most unforgivingly draco-
nian discipline since. If he lived he could wreak the most abject revenge
upon his enemies, even from exile. Nevertheless, España’s assassination
caused great controversy.125
   The whole of the eastern Carlist zone had been traumatised by the
events in the Basque country. España had never shown much respect
either for the person of Don Carlos or for his Byzantine court. When
desperate diehards in Navarra had suggested placing the Carlist Crown
Prince at the head of the war effort in the east, España’s reply was full of
sententious scorn:126