


still practising in his home parish 30 years later, being paid a stipend
from the Liberal state he had tried to overthrow.4
   But the real legacy of Spain’s bloodiest civil war was embodied in
the thousands of individual anonymous tragedies, beyond the ken of
historians. Often these were given a radical political meaning. Wid-
ows guarded their martyred menfolk’s memory, cherishing images of
Espartero as the people’s war hero, hanging veterans’ militia uniforms
in a pride of place. When militia veterans presided over the 1841
exhumation of the massacred victims of the 1835 Carlist atrocity at
Rubielos, they did so not just to remember these martyrs to liberty,
but also to reafﬁrm the claim of the citizenry-in-arms to a stake in
Spain’s Liberal future.5 The suppression of the militia in 1844 did not
remove it as an actual force. Disbanded veterans retained their own net-
works which sometimes sprang into life during later revolutions. Neither
Cristino militia nor soldiers remained silent about their harsh treatment
imposed upon them as a consequence of the peace treaty, the failure
of land redistribution or even of decent conditions of service in the
peacetime army.
   The Cristino victory was attributed to Espartero, leftist war hero and
‘Duke of Victory’. His success was a cause for both national and sec-
tarian celebration. Whereas his victory parade through Barcelona was
so rapturous that he had to dismount and allow himself to be carried
aloft by the crowd, in Seville, where Espartero’s presence was substituted
by a giant portrait, thousands marched against the moderados and sev-
eral hundred hotheads burnt to the ground the ofﬁce of the rightist El
Conservador newspaper.6 Espartero was leading a groundswell of veter-
ans’ opinions against the socially regressive centralisation of political
power inherent in the moderado abolition of the autonomy of all but
the smallest municipalities. Both militia and army veterans joined this
‘peace dividend’ revolution, and the situation in Granada, where the
army took no time at all in following the lead of the militia, was typical.7
Hopes were brieﬂy raised by the ‘peace dividend’ revolution of October
1840, caused by moderado attempts to abolish municipal autonomy, and
which forced the abdication of that obsolescent symbol of the conﬂict,
María Cristina, and her replacement the following year as sole regent
by the war hero, Baldomero Espartero. The revolution was started by
hundreds of thousands of militia and army veterans, and it was their
common identity as veterans of a struggle for liberty which united
them. Many veterans were swept up in the class conﬂict that reached
an unprecedented scale in Barcelona during 1842 and again in 1843,
and it ended up ousting Espartero from power. The economic tensions
224 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


behind the conﬂict exploded into violence in city barricades manned by
Carlist War veterans.
   The peace was cruel to the losers, especially in the Basque country
which saw a spike in emigration in the early 1840s, in response to the
stripping away of the economic privileges vested in the fueros, and an
economic slump made worse by the devastation and a triumphalist
esparterista elite. As for the vanquished Basque provinces, the Vergara
settlement did nothing to stop the ongoing concentration of power in
the hands of local elites; in fact, it actually encouraged it. Whilst most of
the fueros were left intact, the deﬁnitive removal of the Spanish customs
frontier to the Pyrenees privileged the liberal, commercial oligarchies
of San Sebastián and Bilbao at the expense of the paternalistic, socially
harmonious Carlist heartland of Vitoria.8 As for returning Carlist sol-
diers, little was done for them. The Basque armaments industry was
prevented from supplying the Liberal army, despite the fact that the
largest factory, that of Eibar, had been longer in Cristino hands during
the previous seven years than in those of the Carlists. Workers made
redundant, along with demobilised Carlist soldiers, were thus driven
to emigrate to Cuba and the River Plate (Montevideo). The winter and
spring of 1841 witnessed a surge in emigration from Spain’s northern
ports, whilst newspapers related depressing coverage of the haemor-
rhage of youth, many of the latter ending up shipwrecked, indentured
or exploited upon arrival in Cuba and Spain’s former colonies.9
   The years 1833–40 had submerged Spain in a collective trauma which
killed between 2 and 4 per cent of the 1833 population, and damaged
the lives of hundreds of thousands of survivors. The signiﬁcance of the
First Carlist War is more than what has traditionally been attributed
to it (namely, praetorianism in Liberal politics, proxy for Liberal revo-
lution and the deﬁance of Europe’s most enduring legitimism). It also
created new patterns of popular politics which owed their origins to
the sacriﬁces of communities (army, militia and civilian) that had been
exposed to the conﬂict. This phenomenon shaped the progresista revolu-
tion of 1840. Above all, the length and scale of the conﬂict proved to be
an enduring motor for Spain’s political modernity and, in particular, a
model for plebeian action in Liberal politics. Thus, this book argues that
the First Carlist War shaped Spain’s post-Napoleonic crisis more than it
was shaped by it.
Notes