

                                    221
222 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


women, even pregnant ones, and children, and sometimes whole fami-
lies, were massacred. On 25 August 1839, four days before the northern
peace, families of Carlists began to be held as hostages to be targeted
in reprisals for atrocities from the other side. Gradually this draconian
peace began to work, as villages could see themselves reconnected with
each other and the outside world, and ‘Carlist’ ﬁghters who failed to
submit to the Peace Treaty could now be hunted down as criminals
instead of legitimate enemies. On several occasions local communities,
freed from the fear of organised reprisals, took the initiative in hunting
down their persecutors. But as so many Carlists continued to be active
as brigands beyond the law after the Treaty of Vergara, some unfortu-
nates continued to be held and killed several months after the formal
end of hostilities. Francisco Martín, for example, was the four-year-old
son of a wanted Carlist. He was held hostage and remained in deten-
tion despite the frantic efforts of the residents of his home village of
Fuente el Fresno to retrieve him. On 4 July 1840, the prison comman-
ders ordered a captive to be executed in reprisal for a Carlist outrage and
young Francisco drew the fatal lot. Being led out to face his ﬁring squad,
Francisco was too young to understand the fate that was about to befall
him. He thought the soldiers were going to play with him: ‘Will you buy
me some oranges, and you won’t hurt me, will you soldiers? Nor my
father or mother either?’ The soldiers were beside themselves with grief
about their orders. They temporised frantically, hoping against hope
for their orders to be countermanded, but to no avail. In desperation
they retrieved an orange and threw it in front of the ﬁring squad and
encouraged the boy to fetch it. The soldiers opened ﬁre and Francisco
fell, clasping his stomach wounds before crawling towards the soldiers
pleading ‘Don’t kill me, don’t hurt me.’ Obeying orders the soldiers let
loose a second volley which killed the child outright. The child’s father
later gave himself up and carried on serving in the newly uniﬁed army
under Liberal command. Conditions in Espartero’s army grew so bad
that the man joined a ‘Carlist’ rebellion which killed some ofﬁcers at
Fernán Caballero, a village ten miles away from where his son had been
executed. He was caught and executed by slow strangulation in Madrid
on 9 February 1843. His wife, Francisco’s mother, survived.3
   Perpetrators of terrible atrocities remained at large and were effectively
amnestied by the Vergara settlement. Carlist exterminating angels were
exonerated with the restoration of full diplomatic relations between
the Spanish Church and the Holy See via the Concordat of 1851. José
Lorente, the priest who had ordered the massacre of 73 Cristino prison-
ers by a roadside in October 1836, lived a long and quiet life, and was
                                                           Conclusions   223