

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS a

judging the legitimacy, plausibility, and insightfulness of specific counter-
factuals. It would be a big mistake, however, to confuse epistemic pluralism
(which we accept up to a point) with an anything-goes subjectivism (which
wwe reject and which would treat all counterfactual claims as equally valid in
their own way). The study of world politics has suffered from a lack of self-
consciousness about the counterfactual underpinnings of causal claims
(Fearon 1991). Indeed, different schools of thought sometimes seem precar-
iously close to establishing their own implicit norms for deciding what is
and is not a “trivial” argument (Chapter 12, Weber)—an outcome that would
be disastrous because it would permit rival schools to disengage altogether
from constructive arguments with each other. A science or, more modestly,
‘quasi science of world politics is possible if and only if advocates of con-
flicting hypotheses embrace at least some common standards for judging the
plausibility of each other’s counterfactual claims. Otherwise, we are fated to
talk past each other.

‘To avoid this fate, we advance six normative criteria for judging counter-
factual arguments that appear to command substantial cross-disciplinary sup-
port. To be sure, we do not expect universal consent; we do seek, however,
to initiate a sustained conversation within the research community on what
should count as a compelling counterfactual argument—a conversation that
will allow us to explore the strengths and weaknesses of specific standards in
the abstract, in isolation from the dominant debates of the moment (when
the temptation to play favorites is often irresistible). There should, more-
over, be plenty to talk about. Each standard we propose is open to some
interpretation. Certain standards will provoke resistance from those who de-
nounce it as impossible (Chapter 3, Breslauer) or undesirable (Chapter 12,
Weber) or irrelevant (Chapter 5, Lebow and Stein). And some standards will
clash with each other. For example, consistency with well-established his-
torical fact sometimes conflicts with consistency with well-established statis-
tical or theoretical generalizations. There are at present no generally ac-
cepted principles for adjudicating such disputes and we do not claim to offer
a well-defined “method of counterfactual argument” that researchers can
deploy in an off-the-shelf fashion to solve any and all problems.

With these disclaimers, we list six attributes of the ideal counterfactual
thought exercise (where “ideal” means most likely to contribute to the ulti-
mate social-science goals of logically consistent, reasonably comprehensive
and parsimonious, and rigorously testable explanations that integrate the idi-
graphic and the nomothetic):!

" Readers may wonder how these six criteria for good counterfactual reasoning map onto the
five ideal-type pattems of counterfactual reasoning sketched earlier. Although the answer is
‘complex and the subject of some disagreement among contributors, we can offer the following
‘observations: