

contents itself with estimating mean effects, but as Larch, Shikher, and Yotov (2025) stress, 
heterogeneity is frequently an important dimension of the data with elasticities not being 
constant either across sectors or over time. The impact of a variable such as distance or 
empire on trade depends on two elasticities: the elasticity of trade costs with respect to 
the variable in question and the elasticity of trade with respect to trade costs (Disdier and 
Head, 2008, p. 41). Both of these elasticities might be expected to vary across sectors and 
time. 
Take for example the argument of Magee and Thompson (2010) that empire mattered 
for trade flows because of consumer preferences in colonies settled by British emigrants: if 
this is true, then the elasticity of trade costs with respect to empire should be higher for 
consumer products such as food and drink than for a commodity like iron ore. Turning to 
the effects of distance, these should differ depending on the mode and cost of transportation 
which might be different for fuels like coal than for light manufactured goods like cotton 
textiles. As for the elasticity of trade flows with respect to trade costs, one might expect it 
to be higher for homogenous goods than for differentiated products on both counts. 
One would expect elasticities to vary not only across sectors but also over time, and 
particularly so in our period, since it saw momentous and almost continuous change. 
Shipping speeds rose from the 1780s, and the maritime shipping industry was transformed 
in the 19th century with the application of new metallurgical and steam technologies. 
Meanwhile, railway construction progressively linked ports to their hinterlands from the 
1830s. As we will see in Section 2.1, late 18th century technological progress tended to 
favour long-distance routes over shorter ones which should have reduced the elasticity of 
trade costs with respect to distance. 
Politically, the 18th century was the era of mercantilism, with constant warfare, a 
web of regulations controlling trade between Britain and her colonies, and the East India 
Company monopolizing British trade with China and India. This was succeeded by a 

period of relative peace after 1815, the progressive dismantling of old trading monopolies, 
and a transition around mid-century towards free trade and away from the mercantilist 
restrictions of the previous century. Empire could still have boosted trade flows via 
consumer preferences as in Magee and Thompson (2010) or via “trade-promoting capital 
such as common institutions and business networks” (Head, Mayer and Ries, 2010, p. 9). 
But it would not be surprising if such forces had a smaller impact on trade costs than the 
mercantilist legislation of the 18th century. 
With our new data in hand, we can for the very first time estimate the effects over the 
very long run of these two important proxies for bilateral trade costs, that in turn have 
been central to decades of applied work on the determinants of international trade. In sum, 
we find that the impact of distance fell by roughly two-thirds between the 1780s and 1860s 
but remained essentially flat in the late 19th century. Interestingly, the decline coincided 
with the onset of coppering. Likewise, the impact of empire on British exports was very 
large throughout, but 18th century mercantilism had a much bigger export-promoting 
effect than did "liberal empire" in the late 19th century. Finally, we also establish that 
there was significant heterogeneity across sectors in the impact of distance and empire on 
British exports. 
A brief account of some of the major technological and political changes affecting 
international trade over the course of the 18th and 19th centuries is given in Section 2. 
Section 3 introduces the new data underlying this paper. Section 4 discusses our empirical 
specifications while Section 5 presents our results and Section 6 concludes. 