

for all time-invariant, destination-specific determinants of British exports for k. In the 
panel setting, they are the equivalent of the division-specific pair fixed effects (δ k ij) in 
Equation 2. Obviously, papers estimating distance coefficients typically do not include pair 
fixed effects. We are only able to include γjk because our distance variable is time varying 
due to the opening of the Suez Canal in November 1869. This implies that the distance 
variable will not be absorbed by such destination-specific fixed effects. Our distance 
coefficients estimated without controlling for γjk are thus more comparable with the 
existing literature. Finally, while Equation 3 suggests estimating division-specific distance 
and empire coefficients, we initially prefer estimating coefficients that are common to all 
divisions. This makes the exposition easier and facilitates comparisons with coefficients 
estimated using aggregate trade data. We do, however, provide an assessment of potential 
sectoral heterogeneity below. 
Our inclusion of proxies for destination economic mass and the IMRs terms as well 
as (in some specifications) destination-division fixed effects (γjk) potentially gets us 
closer to what theory requires. It is, however, important to acknowledge that since we 
cannot include time-varying destination-division fixed effects (γ k jt) we are only imperfectly 
proxying for expenditure and the IMR terms in each destination. This could bias our 
results. For example, we might expect that not adequately accounting for the IMR terms 
might bias the estimate on distance upward in absolute value (Anderson and van Wincoop, 
2003). The intuition is that, if the IMR terms are not accounted for, then the estimated 
impact of distance might also capture the impact of multilateral remoteness. Similarly, 
not accounting for the IMR terms could lead to upward bias in the estimate of the effect of 
empire since, without the IMR terms, the model will not account for any trade-diversion 
effects from third countries. Thus, our focus is more on changes over time in these 
coefficients than on their absolute values.14 

14Similarly, our real GDP proxy for destination expenditures is less than perfect. It is aggregate rather

Summing up, the baseline estimating equation for our data is:

x k jt = exp[ψ k t + γjk + α1ln(DISTjt) + α2EMP IREjt] × exp[α3ln(GDPjt) + α4ln(DECGjt) + α5W ARjt] × ϵ k jt. (4)

x k 
jt denotes British exports in two-digit SITC division k to country j in year t.15 As before, 
ψ k 
t are time-varying division fixed effects which control for all determinants of British 
exports that vary across divisions, years, and divisions-by-year. These are very important 
in the context of our data as UK exports were expressed in real terms until 1813 and in 
nominal terms from 1813. These fixed effects then control for changes in division-specific 
price levels and are therefore included in all of our main specifications. Below, we also 
discuss the impact of including destination-division fixed effects (γjk.) 
x k 
jt is now expressed in levels as we estimate the model in multiplicative form via 
Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML). This estimator is the standard in the gravity 
literature due to its ability to account for both heteroskedasticity and the presence of zeros 
in trade data (Santos Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). Furthermore, PPML automatically eases 
the “adding-up constraints” presented by reduced form approaches like ours (Fally, 2015). 
Finally, we cluster standard errors at the destination-division level, ensuring that residuals 
than division-specific, and the majority of observations are assigned a representative income per capita. It is, 
however, less clear to us in which direction this biases the results. Another possible source of bias is reverse 
causality. Two key sources of potential endogeneity in our estimates are: (i) the fact that high trade volumes 
may lead to lower trade costs through scale effects which may impart a downward bias to the estimated 
impact of distance; and (ii) the omitted trade costs between the UK and destinations in the British Empire 
are potentially higher (or lower) than those between the UK and other destinations in the sample which 
would impart downward (or upward) bias in the estimates of empire in our model. If incorporation into the 
empire became more likely as trade flows increased, this would likewise bias the empire coefficient upwards. 
But there are also some partially mitigating factors here: we use time-varying division fixed effects which 
absorb some of the co-variation in the potentially endogenous variables and the error term; to proxy for 
bilateral trade costs we use geographic distances which are exogenous; and we use pooled disaggregated 
data which partially mitigates the possibility that trade flows within a particular division might impact 
average (overall) trade costs or empire effects. 
15In Appendix E, we demonstrate the robustness of our results to using total British exports to destination 
j in year t. 