

V. Those provinces which, on the 1st of January, 1772, formed a part of the kingdom of Poland, and have since, at different times, been subjected to Prussia, (with the exception of the countries named or alluded to in the preceding article, and those which are described below the 9th article,) shall become the possession of His Majesty the King of Saxony, with power of possession and sovereignty, under the title of the Duchy of Warsaw, and shall be governed according to a regulation, which will insure the liberties and privileges of the people of the said Duchy, and be consistent with the security of the neighbouring states.

VI. The city of Dantzic, with a territory of two leagues round the same, is restored to her former independence, under the protection of His Majesty the King of Prussia, and His Majesty the King of Saxony, to be governed according to the laws by which she was governed at the time when she ceased to be her own mistress.

VII. For a communication betwixt the kingdom of Saxony and the Duchy of Warsaw, His Majesty the King of Saxony is to have the free use of a military road through the states of His Majesty the King of Prussia. This road, the number of troops which are allowed to pass at once, and the resting places, shall be fixed by a particular agreement between the two sovereigns, under the mediation of France.

VIII. Neither His Majesty the King of Prussia, His Majesty the King of Saxony, nor the city of Dantzic, shall oppose any obstacles whatever to the free navigation of the Vistula under the name of tolls, rights, or duties.

IX. In order as far as possible to establish a natural boundary between Russia and the Duchy of Warsaw, the territory between the present confines of Russia, from the Bug to the mouth of Lassona, shall extend in a line from the mouth of the Lassona along the towing path of the said river; and that of the Bobra, up to its mouth; that of the Narew Mien; from this village to Nutzeck, and from Nutzeck to the mouth of that river beyond Nurr; and finally, along the towing path of the Bug upwards, to extend as far as the present frontiers of Russia. This territory is for ever united to the Empire of Russia.

X. No person of any rank or quality whatever, whose residence or property may be within the limits stated in the above-mentioned article, nor any inhabitant in those provinces of the ancient kingdom of Poland, which may be given up to His Majesty the King of Prussia, or any person possessing estates, revenues, pensions, or any other kind of income, shall be molested in his person, or in any way whatever, on account of his rank, quality, estates, revenues, pensions, income, or otherwise, or in consequence of any part, political or military, which he may have taken in the events of the present war.

XI. All contracts and engagements between His Majesty the King of Prussia, and the ancient possessors, relative to the general imposts, and ecclesiastical, the military or civil benefices, of the creditors or pensioners of the Old Prussian government, are to be settled between the Emperor of all the Russias, and His Majesty the King of Saxony; and to be regulated by their said Majesties, in proportion to their acquisition, according to articles V. and IX.