

XII. Their Royal Highness the Dukes of Saxe Cobourg, Oldenburg, and Mecklenburg Schwerin, shall each of them be restored to the complete and quiet possession of their estates; but the ports in the Duchies of Oldenburg and Mecklenburg shall remain in the possession of French garrisons till the definitive treaty shall be signed between France and England.

XIII. His Majesty the Emperor Napoleon accepts of the mediation of the Emperor of all the Russias, in order to negotiate and conclude a definitive treaty of peace between France and England; however, only upon condition that this mediation shall be accepted by England in one month after the exchange of the ratification of the present treaty.

XIV. His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias being desirous on his part to manifest how ardently he desires to established the most intimate and lasting relations between the two Emperors, acknowledges His Majesty Joseph Napoleon, King of Naples, and His Majesty Louis Napoleon, King of Holland.

XV. His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias acknowledges the Confederation of the Rhine, the present state of the possession of the princes belonging to it, and the titles of those which were conferred upon them by the act of confederation, or by the subsequent treaties of accession. His said Majesty also promises, information being communicated to him on the part of the Emperor Napoleon, to acknowledge those sovereigns who may here after become members of the Confederation, according to their rank specified in the act of Confederation.

XVI. His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias cedes all his property in the right of sovereignty to the Lordship of Jevor, in East Friesland, to his Majesty the King of Holland.

XXII. The present treaty of peace shall be mutually binding, and in force for His Majesty the King of Naples, Joseph Napoleon, His Majesty Louis Napoleon, King of Holland, and the Sovereigns of the Confederation of the Rhine, in alliance with the Emperor Napoleon.

XXIII. His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias also acknowledges His Imperial Highness Prince Jerome Napoleon, as King of Westphalia.

XIX. The Kingdom of Westphalia shall consist of the provinces ceded by the King of Prussia on the left bank of the Elbe, and other states at present in the possession of His Majesty the Emperor Napoleon.

XX. His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias engages to recognize the limits which shall be determined by Hi Majesty the Emperor Napoleon, in pursuance of the foregoing XIXth article, and the cessions of His Majesty the King of Prussia, (which shall be notified to His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias), together with the state of possession resulting there from to the sovereigns for whose be hoof they shall have been established.

XXI. All hostilities shall immediately cease between the troops of His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias and those of the Grand Seignior, at all points, wherever official intelligence shall arrive of the signing of the present treaty. The high contracting parties shall, without delay, dispatch couriers extraordinary to convey the intelligence, with the utmost possible expedition, to the respective generals and commanders.