

Unbalanced start tag short code found before:

“Signed) C.M. TALLEYRAND, Prince of Benevento
”

Treaty of Peace between His Majesty the Emperor of the French and King of Italy, and His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias. Done at Tilsit, July 7th, 1807.

HIS Majesty, the Emperor of France, King of Italy, Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine, and his Majesty the Emperor of Russia, animated with the same interest in putting an end to the devastations of war, have, for this purpose, nominated and furnished with full power on the part of His Majesty the Emperor of France and King of Italy, Charles Maurice Talleyrand, Prince of Benevento, his Great Chamberlain, and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour, Knight of the Prussian Order of the Black and the Red Eagle, of the Order of St Hubert. His Majesty, the Emperor of all the Russias, has, on his part, appointed Prince Kourakin, his actual Privy Counsellor; Member of the Council of State, and of the Senate; Chancellors of all the Orders in the Empire; Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary of His Majesty of all the Russias to His Majesty the Emperor of Austria: Knight of the Russian Order of St Andrew, of St Alexander; of St Aube; of the first class of the Order of St Wolodimir, and of the Second class of the Prussian Orders of the Black and Red Eagle; of the Bavarian Order of St Hubert; of the Danish Order of Dannebrog, and the Perfect Union, and Bailiff and Grand Cross of the Sovereign Order of St John of Jerusalem ; and Prince Demety Labanoff Van Rostroff, Lieutenant-General of the Armies of His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias; Knight of the first class of the Order of St Anne, of the Military Order of St Boris, and of the third class of the Order of Wolodimir. The abovementioned, after exchanging their full powers, have agreed upon the followings Articles: —

Art I. From the day of exchanging the ratification of the present treaties, there shall be perfect peace and amity between His majesty the Emperor of the French and King of Italy, and Hi Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias.

II. Hostilities shall immediately cease at all points by sea or land, as soon as the intelligence of the present treaty shall be officially received. In the mean while, the high contracting parties shall dispatch couriers extraordinary to their respective generals and commanders.

III. All ships of war or other vessels, belonging to the high contracting parties or their subjects, which may be captured after the signing of this treaty, shall be restored. In case of these vessels being sold, the value shall be returned.

IV. Out of esteem for His majesty the Emperor of all the Russias, and to afford to him a proof of his sincere desire to unite both nations in the bands of immutable confidence and friendship, the Emperor Napoleon wishes that all the countries, towns, and territory, conquered from the King of Prussia, the ally of His Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias, should be restored, namely, that part of the Duchy of Magdeburg, situated on the right bank of the Rhine, the mark of Prignitz; the Uker Mark; the Middle and New mark of Brandeburg, with the exception of the Circle of Kotbuss, in Lower Alsace; the Dutchy of Pomerania; Upper, Lower, and New Silesia, and the County of Glatz; that part of the District of the Netze, which is situated to the northward of the road of Driesen and Schneidemulh, and to the northward of a line drawn from Schneidemulh though Waldau to the Vistula, and extending along the frontier of the circle of Bromberg, and the navigation of the river Netze and of the canal of Bremberg, from Driesen to the Vistula and back, must remain open and free of all tolls; Pomerelia; the island of Nogat; the country on the right bank of the Vistula and of the Nogat, to the West of Old Prussia, and to the northward of the circle of Calm; Ermelaud. Lastly, the kingdom of Prussia, as it was on the 1st of January, 1772, together with the fortresses of Spandau, Stettin, Custrin, Glogau, Breslau, Schweidnitz, Neisse, Brieg, Kosel, and Glatz, and in general all fortresses, citadels, castles, and strong holds may be at present; also, in addition to the above, the city and citadel of Gaudentz.