 viii                A'CJTHOR'S PREFACE
   well for me to point out that I have not had American readers
   principally in mind. Had that been the case, the brief outline
   of Americanpolicywithregard         tothe ContinentalSystem
   (part 11, chapter IV) would have been either enlarged or
  omitted altogether,since      it cannot contain, inits present
  form, much that is unknown to educated American readers.
      The British Orders in Council of 1807 have been reproduced        /
  in an appendix, astheyarefar         moreinaccessible than the
  Napoleonicdecrees, and are, moreover,veryoftenmisunder-
  stood and sometimes
                  misquoted.
                    even                                     *
      The English text is, in the main, the work of my colleague
 Mr. C. S. Fearenside, M.A. (Oxford), Junior Lector in English
 a t the University College of Commerce. There canbe no
 question about the desirability of writingabookfrom              the
 beginning in the language in which it is to appear, since the
 association of ideaswithlanguage,        a t least in political and
 social sciences, is far too close to allow a text to pass entirely
 unscathed through the ordeal of a translation. But in this
 case too much was already written in Swedish to leave more
than one course open to me. Mr. Fearenside has found it the
                                                                            i
best plan to follow the Swedish original very closely, instead
of attempting to recast the sentence structure on English
lines. I amvery grateful to him, not only for the work of
translation, but also for numerous valuable suggestions
regarding the outward arrangement of the text.
     My wife has been my best helpmate throughout the work,
and to the CarnegieEndowment I am deeply indebted for
the reading of the proof.
                                             ELI F. HECKSCHER.

           COLLEGEOF COMMERCE,
  UNIVERSITY
               July 4, 1919.
      STOCKHOLM,
