4              THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
the warrior to wound and kill-to adapt the words of Victor
Rydberg--are here, quite naturally, legion.
     An even approximately exhaustive treatment of the Con-
tinental System,however,liesbeyond         what has here been
attempted. Neither time nor strength wasavailablefor          so
much. It was intended that the followingsurveyshouldbe,
first and foremost,economic in character ; and the aim of
objective treatment was thereby considerablysimplified. For
economy, as is wellknown,simplymeanshousekeeping-the
directing of outward means to a given end. The moral content
of the means in themselves, and still more the expediency of the
end in itself, fall outside the confines of economicresearch.
All examination of the one or of the other will therefore be
avoided. Instead of this, we will have before us two objects :
first, the purely historical one of determining how the means
and the end came into being ; secondly, the economic one of
inquiring into the suitability of the means for their task and
the effects of the policy in general.
    More clearly stated, there are three principal questions to
be examined :
    1. In what economicideas did the ContinentalSystem
        originate ?
    2. What was its actual economic bearing ?
    3. In what manner did it correspond to its aim ?
     The first of these three questions is very richly illustrated,
from a purely external point of view, in the literature already
existing on the Continental System; for thethirdthere            is
likewise abundant, though not completely worked-up, material ;
the second, however, seems to have suffered from the fact that
no economist, so far as is known, has yet subjected it to scien-
tific treatment. On all three questions, and especially on the
last two, a clearer light is thrown by comparison with the recent
blockade.
     A French student of Napoleonic times, M. Marcel Dunan,
has declaredin an engrossing and verysubjectively written
bibliography of the Continental System (1913), that the time
