 10 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTE&f
we must pointespecially to one feature of the mercantilist
point of view whence it sprang, namely, to what we may call
its static conception of economic life. If, for instance,,we refer
to one of the most clear-headed and consistent of the mercan-
tilist statesmen, namely, Colbert,    we learn from many of his
writings that heconceived the industry, trade, shipping, and
bullion resources of the world as quantities given once for all,
which, therefore, couldnot be appreciably increased   or decreased
by human activity. Under such a conception it is obvious that
there can be but one conclusion, viz., that the economic pros-
perity of a country depends on its power to deprive its com-
petitors of their shares of the given quantity, and not on its
power to increase the total quantity. That is to say, only at
the expense of others can a country be rich.1
     It is not difficult to understand to what kind of economic
policysuch a conceptionwould naturally lead. It led to the
policy of commercial war ; and without any great exaggeration
we may say with the well-known German economic historian,
ProfessorSchmoller, thatthetrade         policy of formertimes
consisted of an unbrokenseries        of commercialblockades.2
     1 Lettrea, instructions et m6moire.s de Colbert (Paris, 1861-73), vol. II, p. cclxvii ;
vol. VI, pp. 2646,269 ; vol. M,p. 239 ; et a2. As this sideof mercantilist opinion does
not appear tobe a t all generally understood,we may give a somewhat full quotation
from Colbert's Dissertation sur la question : quelle des deux alliances, de France ou
de Hdlande, peut eatre plus avantageuse d I'Angleterre (March, l669), where the point
of view is brought out with all the incisive  logic of which Colbert was master : ' E o n
peut avancer certainement que le     commerce de toute l'Europe se fait avecle nombre
de 20,OOO vaisseaux de toute grandeur ; et l'on demeurera facilement d'accord que
ce nombre ne peut estre augment&, d'autant que les          peuples sont toujours bgaux
dam tous les Estats,etquelaconsommationestpareillementtoujours                      bgale.'
Finding that one of England's chief considerations in deciding for or against an
alliance muat be the increase of her shipping, he goes on to say : ' Cette augmenta-
tion ne p u t provenir que par la dbcouverte de quelque nouveau commerce jusqu'8
p h e n t inconnu, ou par ladiminution dunombredesvaisseauxdequelqu'une
des autres nations. La dbcouverte de quelque nouveau        commerce est fort incertaine,
e t il n'est pas permis de raisonner sur une chose si casuelle, ou, pour mieux dire,
                                      ..
si oertaine qu'elle n'errivera p., 11 faut donc que ce soit par la diminution du
nombredesvaisseauxdequelqu'unedesautresnations.'                   Lettrea, &c.,vol. VI,
pp. 264-5. Cf. Sombart, Der maZerne Kapitaliemw (2nd ed., Munich and Leipzig,
1917), vol. E, p. 918.
     e Schmoller, Umrisse und Untersuchungen zur Verfassungs-,Verwaltungs- und
Wirtschafttsgeschichte (Leipzig, 1898), p. 95.
