                                  FOREWORD                                       11
    This, then, was the body of ideas in which the Continental
    System originated, in so far as commercial wars, in the current
    view of that time, were bound to seem economically profitable
    to an extent that can scarcely be appreciated by any tolerably
    clear-minded personof to-day.
       All this, however, does not explain of what the benefit and
   profit of commercial war, on the one hand, and the injury and
   loss on the other, were supposed to consist. But on this point,
   too, the mercantilist conception gaveall the guidance necessary.
   Profit was supposed to consist in the augmentation of exports,
   in forcing the goods of one’s own country on other countries ;
   loss, in allowing other countries to force goods on one’s own
   country. Industry,  trade,       navigation, that is, economic
   activity in general, werein a way regarded as ends in themselves.
   The goods that were their fruits, so to speak, wereto be exported
   so far as possible, if they belonged to one’s own country, and
  to be kept out so far as possible, if they belonged to other
  countries. The verdict of the balance of trade-including,
  however, the balance of payments for freightage, &c.-deter-
  mined the result. Moderneconomists are far morefamiliar
  with this trend of thought than they are with the static con-
  ception of things. Even in our own day ‘the natural man’
  reasons in this way ; and this reasoning, so far as one can see,
  is substantially a fruit of the ideas contributed to history during
  the mercantilist period.1
       All this ”makes clear, not only the existence, but also the
  tendency, of commercial wars. Their object was necessarily to
  force the greatest possible amount of one’s own goods into the
  enemy’s country, and, so far as possible, to prevent the enemy
  from introducing goods into one’s own country. Inasmuch
‘ as this, precisely because of the conception indicated, was the
  object of trade policy even in time of peace, the transition from
  peace to warwas veryeasily effected; and for that reason
      This subject is obviously too comprehensive for incidental treatment in this
 connexion. What the writer has in mind is the signal reversal from the rnedimval
 eagerness to keep goods within reach to the opposite eagerness to dispose of goods
 which has been the predominant trait both of mercantilist and of popular present-
 day opinion.
