                             COMMERCIAL POLICY                                     17
       bribery, and similar forms of corruption ; but not infrequently
       theirorigin lay deeper. Partly they were intended to satisfy
       the insatiable demands of trade, which made themselves felt
      either within orin opposition to thelaw, and which, accordingly,
      it was often considered best to satisfy silently beforehand; but
      partly also, and at least as often, they arose from the constant
      need of moneyon thepart of the government. This latter
      consideration gave rise to what one might call fiscalism, that
      is, to the tendency to change a policy with a certain economic
      aim-whether rightly or wrongly conceived-under the pretext
      of bringing revenue into the coffers of the state. On this rock
     a great deal of the economic policy of the mercantilist period,
     to say nothing of that of earlier mediaeval times, had suffered
     shipwreck ; and this, too, was to be of fundamental importance
     in relation tothe ContinentalSystem.           As a characteristic
     example of the combinedeffect of smuggling and the licence
     system, it maybementioned that in the last decade of the
     seventeenth century there werediscovered in England traces
     of a great conspiracy organizedto facilitate the importation of
     prohibited French silks under false or stolen labels of the kind
     prescribed to indicate the fact that the goods involved had
     either been imported under licence or else had been manufac-
     tured within the country.1
          The actual intercourse between two countries thus followed
    a course which diverged considerably from     that laid out by their
    professed policies. But if this was always the case at times of
    more or less state interference in the economic domain, it was
    especiallythe case in theeighteenth century. Duringthat period,
    in fact, the oldpolicywasexposed         to undermining currents
    flowing from two different quarters, namely, from the general
    transformation in all conditions of production which had
    received the nowise exaggerated nameof Industrial Revolution,
    on the one side, and from the new social philosophy which was
    slowly paving the way for economic liberalism, on the other.
    Both of these factors were destined gradually to put an end to
        W.R. Scott, The Cmtitution and Finance of English, Bwttish, and Irish Joint.
    8bCk &wpanie8 (Cambridge, 1911), vol. m, pp. 80 e4 8q.
      1569.43                               C




r
