BO ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENI'AL SYSTEM
anecdote, Smith once arrived at a dinner somewhat later than
the other guests, who rose to receive him. He begged them t o
remainseated,whereupon Pitt remarked that it was onlyright                                      I
                                                                                                i
for them to rise, since they were all his pupils. While this
anecdote is perhaps just as little deserving of unqualified belief
asareother      similaranecdotes, yet one may placeimplicit
confidence in a statement which Pitt is authentically credited
with having madein Parliament after the death       of Adam Smith,
namely, that he (Smith) hadoffered the world the best solution
of all economic and commercial questi0ns.l
    The result of these new forces was the Anglo-French com-
mercial treaty of 1786 (often called the Eden Treaty, after the
name of its English negotiator), which put anend to the hundred
years' commercial warbetween           the twowestern       powers.
During the negotiations Pitt had stood firmly on his ground,
with the result that in the final settlement the British forced
compliance with practically all their demands, while the French
allowed nearlyalltheirs    to drop. Customs duties were lowered                                     t
all along the line, usually down to 10 or 15 per cent, of the value                                 t

of the goods, and prohibitions on imports were abolished. On
the other hand,almost the only British industry which was still
uneasy about French competition,    namely, the silk industry, had
its demands respected to the extentof nothing less than a total
prohibition on the importation of French silks into England.
    But it was soon to prove that this somewhat belated breach
with the century-old restrictivepolicy had no support in French
public opinion, least of all in industrialcircles. Indeed, one mag
go so far as to say thatit was precisely this departure from the
tradition of commercialwar that led to a renewal of the old policy
aftertheFrench       Revolution. TheEdenTreaty,         which was
       On this and what follows, cf. Rose, William Pitt and the National Revival
(London, 1911),pp. 183 et sq., 322 et sep. ; Salomon, William Pittder jiingere (Leipzig
and Berlin, 1906),~01.1,pt. II, pp. 205 et sep. ; Levasseur, Histoire dea c h 5 a mvridreo et
de l'inawrtrie en France avant 1789 (Paris, 1901),vol. II, pp. 546 et seq. ; Levasseur,
Histoire du commerce de la France (Paris, 1911),vol. I, pp. 535 et seq., 542 et seq. ;
elso, Histoirede France (Lavisse ed., Paris, 1910),vol. IX,pt. I, pp. 221 et seq. On the
situation just after the Eden Treaty,       cf. Schmidt, La crise wdustrielle de 1788 ea
France, in Revue Historique (Paris, 1908),vol. 97, pp. 78 et sep. The work of F.Dumas,
Etude sur le traitk de commerce de 1786 (Paris,. 1904),was not accessible.
