 22 ANTECEDENTS O F THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
  and the vigorous protests it had evoked from all parts of the
  country. Public opinion, indeed, was unanimous in attributing
  the severe industrial crisis of 1788 to theEden Treaty,which was
 called the death-warrant of French industry. An inspector of
 manufactures even went so far as to compare its detrimental
 effects with those that had followed the revocation of the Edict
 of Nantes in 1685, which had played havoc with a great deal
 of the work done by Colbert and his predecessors.
     Thus there could be scarcely any doubt as to the political
 effects of this first departure from the policy of commercial war;
 and it is this aspect of the matter which is of prime importance
 in this connexion. It is quiteanother questionwhether the
 Eden Treaty, evenfor the moment,was actually responsible
 for the placing of French economic life uponthe low level where
 it was destined t o remain,with a shortinterruption, during
 the revolutionary and Napoleonic periods. Severe as was the
 crisis to which it gave rise, there can be little doubt that pre-
cisely the last years of the ancien rkgime were characterized by
exceptional prosperity especially, but by no means exclusively,
                                                                                           I
for Frenchtrade, andthat during the following ten or fifteen
years Frenchmen looked backt o this period as thezenith of their
                                                                                           1'
country's economicdevelopment. Even as regards industry,
it is a fact that not even the flourishing period of the Consulate
(1799-1804) elevated it to anything like the same height that it
had attainedunder the ancien rkgime.l Moreover, the difficulties
created by free intercourse consequently appear to have been
exaggerated. There are positive evidences of certain wholesome
effects on French industry which must be connected with the
increased intercourse with Great Britain. Thus, in 1787, the
year of the ratification of the treaty, therewas set up in France
(Orl6ans)"naturally by an Englishman-the f i s t steam-driven
cotton spinning mill.2 Moreover, in the Constituent Assembly
    1 Chaptal, De E'industrie f r u n p i s e (Paris,1819),vol. I, p. xvi ; Levasseur,
Histoire des classes ouwi2res et de l'industrie en France de 1789 ci 1870 (Paris, 1903).
vol. I, p. 405.
      Schmidt, L a d6but.s de l'industrie cotonnikre en France, 1760-1806, in Revue
d'histoire bommique etsociale (Paris, 1914), vol. vq, pp. 26 etsep. ; Ballot, Les prtts
aux manufactzcres, in Revue des dtudes napoldondennes (Paris, 1912), vol. II, p. 45.
