                           COMMERCIAL POLICY                                             15

these measures,the main object of which wasto prevent French
products from competingwith domestic products in the English
market. Later on, France, which as a rule seems to have been
somewhat slower to act, proceeded to adopt similar measures,
especially after the outbreak of the new war in 1701. Thus
whenAdam Smith, who among other things was a Scottish
commissioner of customs, entered into a detailed discussion of
Anglo-French trade policy in the third edition of his famous
work more than eighty years afterwards, he felt justified in
stating that, quite apart from the multitude of import pro-
hibitions, especially on all kinds of textiles, the majority of the
French imports before the outbreak of the newwar in 1778,
were assessed by the British customs to the extent of at least
15 per cent. of the value,of the goods involved, and that, as
a rule, this was equivalent to a formal prohibition.1

                                      SMUGGLING
    Such, then, was the nature of commercialpolicyin          the
eighteenth century, in so far as it is revealed in the customs
regulations of that time. But no idea of the economiccon-
ditions of former days couldbemoreerroneous            thanthat
whichisconveyed      by the content of such prohibitions and
restrictions. The regulations, as a matter of fact, constitute
merely an expression of what the holders of power wished to see
realized, and accordingly may be said to illustrate, primarily,
nothing more than the economic views of the time. As regards
the actual situation, we may safely assume that it was quite
different from what the authorities had in view, since otherwise
the regulations would not have been necessary ; and if we find
them repeated at short intervals, as is usually the case, we may
further assume that this was due to the fact that they were not
compliedwith. In point of fact, the onlyexceptions to this
     statutes of the Realm, vol. v, pp. 862 et seq. ; vol. VI, pp. 98 et aeq., et al. M e y ,
The Tory Origin of Free Trade Policy, in Surveys Historic and Ecmmnic (London,
1900), pp. 277 et seq. ; Levassew, Les trait& de commerce entrela France et l'dngleterre,
in Reme d'dwmie pditigue (1901), vol. xv, pp. 964 et seq. ; A&m Smith, The
W'ealthof Natims (Cannan ed.,London, l a ) ,vol. I, pp. 432, 437-8.
