 14 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
   Tory government then established in Great Britain. But in
   other British circles,especiallyamong merchants and manu-
   facturers, the opposition was too strong, and the treaty was
  consequentlydeprived of the two clauseswhich gave it its
  importance, that is, the clauseconcerningmutua.1 treatment
  as the most favoured nation and the clauseconcerning the
  mutual abolition of a l l prohibitions and customsrestrictions
  introduced since 16M, or,in certain cases,since 1699. The
  result was that the embargo was maintained on both sides,
  without any noteworthy interruptions, throughout the greater
  part of the eighteenth century, or for a period of more than
  a hundred years.
      An elucidation of the nature of this hundred years’ com-
  mercial war between France and Great Britain is essential to
  a correct understanding of the origin and development of the
  Continental System. In England, for instance, all importation
 of French wine, vinegar, brandy, linen,cloth,silk,     salt, and
 paper, and also of all manufactures containing French silk,
 thread, wool, hair,gold,silver,    or leather, was prohibitedin
 1678.l The lawitselfcondemned         importation from France,
 in principle, as ‘ a common nuisance ’, and provided that the
 French goods were to be destroyed and not allowed to enter,
 even if they had been captured by English war-ships or priva-
teers.After     1685, however,when this direct persecution of
French goods was abandoned and replaced by the establishment
                                                                     ,I
of a large number of additional customs duties,2 a number of         I

Severe measures followed on the part of France. Accordingly,
when war actually broke out, in 1689, England returned t o the
principles of 1678. In due formshe introduced a general
prohibition on the importation of French goods and ordered
that all liquid goods that were captured should be poured into
the rivers or the sea, or be ‘ staved, spilt, and destroyed ’ at
the place where they were stored ; also that all cloths, paper,
salt, kc., should be publicly burned.3
     It is unnecessary to dwell upon the protectionist nature of
   29 & 30 Char. 11, c. 1, a. 70.         2 1 James 11, cc. 3 & 5.
   1 W. & M., c. 34, a. 1.
