26 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 though they were indispensable to French consumers and could
 not be obtained from neutral countries (especially sugar). TWO
 or three months later (May 19), accordingly, such goods had to
 be exempted. But thewhole of this first law wasa mild warning
 in comparison with the outbreak of fury, harmonizingcom-
pletely with the spirit of the Reign of Terror, which on October9
of the same year (Vendkmiaire 18, year 11) appeared in the
form of a law bearing the title : Loi qui proscrit d u solde la
rkpubliquetouteslesmarchandisesfahipukesoumalzufacturkes
dans les pays soumis a u gouvernement britannique. Its express
application to Great Britain, one of the enemies of France, is in
itselfsignificant, the wholelaw, asitstitle       indicates,being
a straightforward proposal to persecute all British goods in the
most drastic manner. It imposed on every holder of British
goods the obligation to declare them and hand them over to
the authorities, and provided that any customs officialwho
allowed such
           goods       toenterthe     country would be liable to    I

twenty years’ imprisonment in irons ; and thesame punishment
was assigned to anyperson who imported, sold, or bought them.
But even this was not enough. The law further provided that
anybody whowore or used British goodswas to beregarded as           I
suspect and to be punished as such in accordance with the
notorious loi des suspects ; that is to say, he might be arrested
and imprisoned at any time. All posters or notices couched in
English and referring to stocks of British goods or containing
British trade marks or appellations, as also all newspapers
announcing the sale of British goods, were ‘ proscribed ’ ; and
the punishment in this case also was twenty years’ imprison-
ment in irons.
    After the crisis of Thermidor and the fall of Robespierre
early in 1795, the legislators again retraced their steps to some
extent by shghtly lowering the duties on non-British goods.
This did not last long, however, sincethey were raised again by
the Directory a t the close of the following year. On the whole
it may be said that the rule of the Directory, from the autumn
of 1795 to the autumn of 1799, marked a return to the policy
of the Reign of Terror, though in a somewhat modified form,
