                      BLOCKADE
                        MARITIME                                                33
 envoy in London, Lars von Engestrom-a statement, however,
 which is not confirmedby the brief parliamentary reports-
 referred in the House of CommonsonNovember 3, 1795, to
 seizures of corn cargoes bound for French ports as a means of
 overcoming the exceptional shortageof foodstuffs in England ;1
 and there is also a later utterance of Napoleon to the same
 effect.2 But these caseswouldseem to bealmostunique, as
 one might expect beforehandin view of the fact that theobject
of the seizures was not, as a rule, to acquire goods, but rather
to dispose of them. An explanation must be found elsewhere,
namely, in the fact that captures were a means of encourage-
ment to the captors themselves ; and to this point there was
ascribed the greatest importance. To beginwith, it applied
to the great horde of privateers, who were regarded as forming
a very important augmentation to the fighting forces of the
country, but who manifestly could not embark on that career
except with some prospect of profit. In a highly characteristic
mannerawell-knownEnglish          international jurist, William
Manning, towards the middle of the nineteenth century ex-
plained the benefit of theseprivateerson Iaissez-faire lines.
‘ They increasethe naval force of a state,’ he said, ‘ by causing
vessels to be equipped from private cupidity, which a minister
might not be able to obtain by general taxation without much
difficulty ’?
    EVIDENCE     STEPHENIN ‘ WARIN DISGUISE
           OF JAMES                       ’
    But this held good, not only of the privateering fleet, but
also of the Royal Navy itself, in whichcaptures formed a source
of income to commanders and crew that was of the greatest
importanceinstimulating      their willingness and zeal,How
deeply rooted this opinion still was only a hundred years ago
is best illustrated by abook of that time which perhaps, on the
whole, gives a clearer notion of the pre-conditions of the policy
of blockade than any other, namely, James Stephen’s War in
     L y d i ~Wahlstrom, Sverige och England under revolutionskrigena &jar (Stock-
holm, 1917), pp. 192-3 ; Parliamentary History, vol. XXXII, pp. 235-6.
     See p. 94.
     Manning, Commentaries on the Law of Nations (London, 1839), p. 117.
  1569.43                              D
