32 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
the home country only in so far as the blockade impeded the
foreign sale of the enemy’s own goods. This peculiar and
importantbut usually overlooked inconsistencycan be ex-
plained only by the fact that thepractice of blockade arose in
the pre-mercantilist period. But with the developmentand
spread of mercantilistideas the practice necessarily had to
reshape itself ; and this, in fact, was what actually happened.
    !l%e result was twofold.      In the first place, blockade
measures wereemployed to accomplish other purposes than
those formally intended ; and, in the second place, the regula-
tions existing on paper were annulled, either by exceptions or
by deliberate laxity in their enforcement, to such an extent
as to create an order of things quite different from that which
was officially prescribed.

                FUNCTION
                       OF CAPTURE AT SEA

     First, then, we have to consider the employment of blockade
measures for purposes other thanthose formerly intended. Here
primary importance attaches to the fact that seizures or cap-
tures may be said to have been ends in themselves. To some
extentthisappears       even in the relativeimportance of the
paper blockade as compared with the effective blockade ; for
the former gave much greater chances of capture but, at the
same time, was a far less safe means of preventing intercourse
with the enemy. Moreover, two of the most important methods
of blockade are largely explained when we come to consider
the importance of captures-namely, the arbitrary extension
of the idea of contraband and the persistent refusal of Great
Britain to acknowledge the proposition that ‘ free ships make
free goods ’ or that ‘ the flag covers the cargo ’, which implies
that enemy goods are immune from capture on neutral vessels.
    The object of this encouragement of captures for their own
sake was scarcely in any notable number of cases what one
would nowadays be most inclined to expect, that is, the pro-
curement of goods for one’s own use in this convenient manner.
It is true thatPitt, according to a statement of the thenSwedish
