 emphasized. As is wellknown, the men of the Revolution
 derived their strongest impressions from Rousseau, and, so far
 as one Can see, they were very little impressed either by physio-
                                                                                      i
 cracyor    by British liberalism.  Consequently       they stood,
 unconsciously, but almostentirely,under         the all-pervading
 influence of the old economic conception. Thus it was almost
 in the natureof things that theEden Treaty not only shouldbe
 treated as an isolated episode, but should positively hasten a
 return to the old system-especially inasmuchas thecommercial
 reconciliation with Great Britain was the work of none other
 than the discredited and despised ancien rkgime.
     Naturally enough,however, it was the generalpolitical
 situation whichwaschieflyresponsible for the return to the
policy of commercial war ; and consequently some few years
 elapsed before the change was made. In 1791 the Constituent
Assembly adopted a new tariff, which, after great protectionist
preparations, ultimately came to offer only a very moderate
amount of actual protection. France and Great Britain were
then at peace, and both were respecting the Eden Treaty. But
the new tendency waseven then assertingitselfin             France,
not only in the form of recurring complaints against British
Competition, but also in the form of an actual raising of the
customs rates onwoollens and other textile goods manufactured
in the Duchy of Berg-the even then flourishing textile region
on the eastern side of the Rhine, which was destined to play
an important part in the history of the Continental System.
In justification of these measures, whereby the importation of
textiles into Francefrom the east was cut off, there was asserted
the need of ' alleviating the detrimental effects ' of the Anglo-
French treaty of 1786.l
     Great Britain, under Pitt's leadership, had as long as possible
stood aloof from the struggle against the French Revolution.
But toward the end of 1792 the relationsbetween the two
countries bwame very strained. Great Britain held up cargoes



                                                                                          I
bound for French ports,whereupon            France retaliated by
      Levrtseeur, Histoire dm CEassm ouwi2rea, &e., de 1789 ci 1870, vol. I, pp. 38
et 8eg. ; Schmidt, Le Grand-duche'de Bcrg, 1806-1813 (Paris, 1908), pp. 326-7.



                                                                                          i
