                              MARITIME BLOCKADE                                     37
      It is therefore indisputable, as the neutrals complained and as
      Stephenhimself admits, that Britishvesselswereallowed to
      trade with France, while neutral vessels were overhauled and
      seized.1 In fullaccordwith this and withmercantilist trade
      policy, it was sought fist and foremost to cut off all kinds of
      exports from the enemy to theneutrals, especially if they com-
      peted with those of the home country. In complete contrast
      with the efforts of the recent war, the endeavours of that time
      were aimed, onthe one side,at getting ridof the excess of export
     goods inthe home countryand, on the other side, at preventing
     the enemy from selling his products. This was in part due to
     the fact that apprehensions were always felt of low prices on
     these goods in the home country and also of high prices in the
     enemycountry.On           the oneside,therefore,      the whole of
     Stephen’saccountispermeatedbyanxietylest                the price of
     British colonial goods should decline as a result of their being
     kept out of the continentalmarketsbyFrench              and Spanish
     colonialgoods. In previouswars,according to hisview, the
     British home market, ‘relieved by a copious exportation from
     temporary repletions,’ gave them    (the colonies), ‘in its large and
     ever-advancing prices, some indemnity forthe evils of the war,’
     while at thattime, according to his statements, the prices were
     sinking on the Continent in consequence of the importation of
    goodsfrom the enemy’scolonies.On              the otherhand,he is
     dominated by dislike of the idea that the same neutral trade
    should provide access to America of the textile and iron goods
    of the Continent in competition with those of Great Britain
    herself. What troubled him, therefore, was not that the Con-
    tinent should get colonial goods, but that it should get them
,   from the enemycolonies,which,like the mothercountryitself,
    should becut off from exports, he thought,     but not from imports.
         Finally,therefore,all    this implies that nocutting-off of
    imports to the enemy could come into the line of the policy
    pursued. It denotesmerely an effort to placethoseimports
    under the control of the naval power itself, so that thecountry
         Holm, Danmurk-NorgesudenrigakeHistorie          fra 1791 til 1807 (Copenhagen,
    1876), vol. I, p. 231 ; Stephen, op, cit., p. 170.
