34! ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
Dbguise ; or, the Frauds of the NeutralFlags,           which was
published the same day as the battleof Trafalgar (October 91,
 1805) and within four months appeared in three British          and
two American editions.
    The importance of this book-which, significantly enough,
was republished during the recent World War as a contributory
aid to the    solution of its problems-will appearin several
places later on, and a few words about its author, therefore,
seem in order. James Stephen, father of Sir JamesStephen
(nicknamed ' Mr. Over-SecretaryStephen ') and grandfather
of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen and Sir Leslie Stephen, was
a barrister practising in the Prize Appeal Court of the Privy
Council, the highestprizecourt        in England.Both        inthis
capacity and earlier as a lawyer in the West Indies, he had
acquired anintimate knowledge of the conditions of trade
during the long naval war, as well as of the application of the
principles of law t o them. Thus not only       was he thoroughly
familiarwithmattersinthisdepartment,buthe                  was also
far from representing any extreme jingo view. This is perhaps
best shown by the fact that, like his brother-in-law, William
Wilberforce, thegreat emancipator of the slaves, he was a
decidedly religious person, belonging t o the Clapham Sect, and
devoted a large part of his life to the struggle for the abolition
of negro slavery.This fact gives his utterancesoncaptures
their properbackground.       He dwells long on the injustice
whichwould      beinflicted on ' ourgallantand          meritorious
fellow subjects, the naval captors,' when they were compelled
to see valuable cargoes, ' their lawful game,' passing con-
tinually under their sterns.   ' It is painful to reflect,' he says,
' that these brave men lose the ancient fruits of distant service,
while enduring more than its ordinary hardships.' His account
of the importance of capture as a n inducement for seamen may
be quotedin extenso :
   Let us give full credit to our gallant officers, for that disinterested
patriotism, and that love of glory, which ought to be the main springs
of military character, and which they certainly possess in a most
eminent degree. But it would be romantic and absurd, to suppose that
