e0 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
British West Indian products increasedprodigiously during the
same period, representing in 1806 avalue of no less than
$60,000,000, or one and ahalf times the value of the exports of
the domestic goods of the United States.l

                       TRADING
                             WITH THE ENEMY

      Such, then, were the purposes that the policy of blockade
was intended to serve. But as has already been mentioned, the
 curiousthing about its practicalapplicationdid         not lieex-
clusively in this alteration of its objects, but also in the fact
that the policy actually pursued was in reality quite diKerent
from that which held good on paper. To some extent this was
true of the measures that pertained strictly to thelaw of war at
sea, especially to blockades ; but t o a still greater extent it was
true of trading with the enemy. The prohibition of this was
regarded, especially in Great Britain, as an indispensable prin-
ciple of international law and was therefore rigorously main-
tained on paper ; and this notion was also strengthened by the
desire of every country to mark the moral gulf that should
separate itsown subjects from the enemy, or, as thephrase ran,
‘ t o prevent treasonable and improper intercourse’.2 But there
was not the slightestidea of carrying out this fundamental
principle in practice. With almost grotesque force the contrast
between theory and practice is brought out in one passage in
Stephen’s book in which he discusses the objection that might
be raised against his pleadings   in favour of measures against
neutral trade, namely, that they would plunge Great Britain
into war with the then neutrals and thereby    impede her exports.
He goes on t o say :
   Is it asked, ‘ Who would afterwards carry our manufactures to
market ? ’ I answer, ‘ Our allies, our fellow subjects, our old and new
enemies themselves.’ Inthe last war (1778-1788”whenSpainand
Great Britain were enemies) nothing prevented the supplyingof Spanish
America with British manufactures, in British bottoms, evenwhen they
   1 Haneard, vol. IX, app., col. xv ; Levaasem, Histoire dea classes ouwi2res, &c.,
avant 1789, vol. II, p. 654 note ; Johnson and others, op. cit., vol. II, p. 20.
   e Stephen in the House of Commons, Mar. 3,1812, Hansard, voL XXI, p. 1136.
