                                                                                       c

38 AN’I’ECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
might thereby give preference, so far as possible, to its own
products and thoseof its colonies, and also so that it might take
over tradeandnavigation       with the enemymainland.        The
latter consideration, however, took a secondary place, as Great
Britain often had need of neutral shipping to supplement her
own overworked mercantile marine ; and it is especially note-
worthy that the neutrals’supply of the enemy’s (e. g., the
French)market with the belligerent’s (e. g., Britain’s) own
products was an allbut self-evident matter,against which
there was really no objection to raise from a British point of
view. Manifestly,  such a blockade policy diverged funda-
mentally from that of the recent World War.
    The only substantial exception to this general tendency-
and even that a very partial one-concerned import goods of
purely military importance, that is too say, military supplies,
naval stores, and sometimes, at least in principle, foodstuffs for
the enemy’s fighting forces on land and sea. These items were
emphasized by Pitt, for instance, in the great speech which he
delivered before the House of Commons on February 2, 1801,
immediately before hisretirement,indefence         of the policy
of maritimeblockade that he had introduced. In the actual
execution of the policy, however, it is difficult to find any
marked traces of this ; and, significantly enough, it was coolly
stated in Parliament, in 1812, that the clothing of the French
army came from Yorkshire, and that ‘ not only the accoutre-
ments, but the ornaments      of MarshalSoult and his army ’
came from Birmingham. The reservation was made, however,
that they had notbeen ordered directly by the French govern-
ment !
    It may be remarked in passing that Edward 111, four and
a half centuriesearlier,hadalreadygiven         licences for the
exportation of corn to the enemy, though the ruling thought at
that time was that of procuring revenue for the Crown.2
   1 Stephen, op. cit., pp. 60 et seq., 90, 196, et al. ; Emory Johnson and others,
History of theDomestic and Foreign Commerce of the United States (Washington,
1915), vol. II, p. 23 ; Parliamentary History, vol. xxxv, p. 916 ; Hansard’s Parlia-
mentary Debates, vol. xxm, pp. 8, 423.
   2 Brodnitz, E n g l i d e Wirtsckzf&geschidte (Jena, 1918), vol. I, p. 140.
