                    MARITIME BLOCKADE                               41
were liable to confiscation by both the belligerent parties for the act,
but that thefield of commerce was preoccupied,and the markets glutted
by the importations under neutral flags.
    But would I advise a tolerationof these new ' modes of relieving the
hostilecolonies ' ? Its toleration would not be necessary. Even your
own hostilities would not be able to overcome the expansive force of
your own commerce, when delivered from the unnatural and ruinous
competition, of its present privileged enemies. You might often capture
the carriers of it and condemn their cargoes ; but the effectwould
chiefly be to raise the price upon the enemy, and the difference would
go intothe pursesofyour[prize-taking]seamen.Theprizegoods
themselves,wouldfind their way from your colonies into the hostile
territories.1

      It would be difficult to find a more typical example of the
 capacity to ' make the best of both worlds'. The legal principle
 of prohibiting trade with the enemy was constantly maintained,
 while at the same time fullprovision was madeforexports
above all t o the enemy, which according to the deeply rooted
ideas of the time was of vital interest to thecountry. The same
 combination of incompatible views is revealed in almost every
utterance that has come down from that time ; and when the
w   lliexisted, it was not difficult to find means forits realization.
One of these meanswas the system of licences, of which Stephen
says that ' papal dispensations were not more easily obtained
in the days of Luther '. Another means was the system called
' neutralization,'wherebyvessels and cargoes that in reality
belonged to one or another of the belligerents were declared on
sworn-that is to say, perjured-evidence, to belong to neutrals.
These tactics-which, however, were sometimes turned against
the belligerents themselves, and in such cases were combated
both by the law courts and by the supporters of the official
policy-were employed on a         strictly business basis, commonly
with a commission of 1-2 per cent. for the firm that handled
the transaction.EspeciallyEmden,in            East Friesland,which
belonged to Prussia and was consequently neutral, was a centre
for transactions of this nature, and there were loud complaints
against British marine insurance firms which bound themselves,
                    1 Stephen, War in Disguise, p. 168.
