 36 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 sources of gain which had previously been open to them. It is
 perhaps not altogether clear whether considerations   of this nature
 influenced some of the measures of the recent blockade. But
 however that may be, it is true that such a policy has no con-
 nexion'whatsoever with the blockade of the enemy as such, but
 may be pursued, as actually happened a hundred years ago,
 purely as an end in itself. The objection to the proposition
 that 'free ships make free goods'  was rooted inthis object much
 more than in the inclination to encourage captures for their
 own sake ; for as goods belonging to subjects of enemy countries
 wereliable t o seizure on neutral vessels, theneutrals were
 prevented from takingover the traffic which the enemy himself
 had been able t o carry on before he was driven from the sea,
 as the BritishhistorianLecky has well observed.1And this
 was still more the case with the fourth of the great disputed
 questions concerning the law of war at sea, namely, that of
commerce nouveau, or, in British terminology, the rule of 1756,
the wording of which, as elaborated by Britishjurists, was that
' a neutral has no right to deliver a belligerent from the pressure
of his enemy's hostilities, by trading with his colonies in timeof
war in a way that was prohibited in time of peace.' " h i s prin-
ciple prevented the neutrals from pushing theirway either into
the enemy's coasting trade or-and this was more important-
into what might be regarded as a special form of coasting trade,
namely, trade with the enemy's colonies. I n time of peace both
of these were jealously guarded preservesof the trade and      navi-
gation of the home country ; but in timeof war the belligerent
power that was debarred from the sea willingly turned them
over to neutrals withthe double objectof maintaining the traffic
and of preventing it from falling into the handsof the enemy.
     The characteristic difference between the policy of that time
and the policy of to-day is that, when the masters of the sea
a centuryagotried       to preventneutralsfromcarryingon          a
certain kind of trade, their object was not to kill that trade
altogether, as is the case nowadays, but toseize it for themselves.
  1 Lecky, History of Englancz in t k Eighteenth Century (original library edition,
London, 1882), vol. IV, p. 157.
