 42 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 against a special premium of 1 per cent., not to urge the legally
 valid plea against the enemy origin of the cargoes, which by law
 always involved the invalidity of the insurance. Besides this,
 moreover, there always remained the possibility of winking at
 an illegal practice which there was no intention of preventing ;
 and it is characteristic of the situation that in the year 1794
 Swedish captains openly declared tothe           British
                                                        customs
 officers that their vessels were bound for a French port.
     Trading with the enemy also appears as a fairly self-evident
 practice in nearly all accounts     of the commercial conditions
 then prevailing. This is revealed, for instance, by the British
 trade statistics themselves, whichshow that the share of the
enemycountries, France and the Netherlands (northern and
 southern), in the total exports of Great Britain declined only
from 15 to 13 per cent. in the years 1792-1800. This, too, is
conclusive evidence in support of Stephen’s proposition a s t o
the impossibility of war measures adopted by Great Britain to
the end of overcoming the expansive force of her own trade.l
     Following this hasty sketch of the general character of the
maritime blockade policy of that time, it seems expedient to
show in a more concrete form     the development of those measures
during the years from the intervention of Great Britain in the
revolutionary wars in 1793 down t o the Peace of Amiens in 1803.
It contains, indeed, a good deal which may be of value, not only
in throwing light on the general situation at thattime, but also
in furnishing a backgroundfor what was t o come later.
    1 Stephen, War in Disguise, pp. 39, 70 et seq., 169, et al. ; Rose, vice president
of the Board of Trade in the House of Commons, March 3,1812, Hansard, vol. XXI,
p. 1122 ; Mahan, Influence of 8ea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire,
1793-1812 (London, 1893), vol. 11, pp. 252 note, 309 ; The Laws of England (Halsbury
ed., London, 1W7),8.8. Aliens, vol. I, pp. 311 -12 ; Wahlstrom, op. cit., pp. 62-3. I n
this connexion it may not be irrelevant to referas a parallel toa well-known passage
in the Pickwick Papers (oh. 40) : ‘What, am I tounderstandthatthesemen
earn a livelihood by waiting about here to perjure themselves before the judges
of the land, a t t h e r a t e of half a crown tt crime ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pickwick, quite
aghast a t t h e disclosure. ‘Why, I don’tknowexactlyaboutperjury,               my dear
sir,’ repliedthelittlegentleman.           ‘ Harshword,mydear       sir, veryharshword
indeed ! It’s a legal fiction, my dear sir, nothing more.’
