                       MARITIME BLOCKADE                                      35
 they do not feel the value of that additional encouragement, which his
 l\lajesty and thelegislature hold out to them, in giving them the benefit
 of the captures they make. What else is to enable the veteran naval
officer, to enjoy in the eveningofhislife,      the comforts of an easy
income ; the father to provide for his children ; or the husband for an
affectionate wife, who, from the risques he runs in the service of his
country,ispeculiarlylikely to survivehim ? By what other means,
canavictoriousadmiral,whenraised,asareward               of hisillustrious
actions, to civiland hereditary honours,hope to support hiswell-
earned rank, and provide for an ennobled posterity ?          ..
                                                             . It isfrom
the enemies of his country, therefore, that he hopes to wrest the means
of comfortably sustaining those honours, which he has gained at their
expence.
     As tothe commonseamen and mariners, the natural motives
of dislike to the naval service, are in their breasts far more effectually
combated by the hopeofprizemoney,           than by all the other induce-
ments that are or canbeproposed to them. The nautical character
is peculiarly of a kind to be influenced by such dazzling, but preca,rious
pr0spects.l

           ATTACKSON ENEMY         EXPORTS,     NOT IMPORTS

   With this encouragement of capturesfor their ownsake,
however, there was undoubtedly coupled a desire to cut down
the enemy’s trade. But this desire, too, has to be conceived in
a strictly mercantilist spirit. To inflict military injury on   the
enemy, either directlyor indirectly, was not-at least not to any
notable extent-the object       of the interference with his trade.
On the contrary, the primary object was that of waging com-
mercial war against him, i. e., of depriving him of a source of
gain, or, in other words, beating him off the field ; and, parallel
with this, it was aimed to extend a country’s own trade-which
could be done, and was constantly attempted, at the expense,
not only of the enemy country, but also of neutral countries.
This brought it about that the establishment of ablockade
dealt the latter a much harder blow than is the case at the
present time. The intention was t o prevent them from receiving
any profit either fromthe enemy countryor from other countries,
and so far aspossible to expel them, as well as theenemy, from
   1 Stephen, War in Disguise: or, the Frauds of the Neutral Flags (Pigott, ed.,
London, 1917), pp. 106-7.
                                       D2
