                      MARITIME BLOCKADE                                   49
  of the war-in spite of the fact that the vessel was a French
 prize and had beensold toits then Danishownerby              the
 French captor.
      Justice was indeed a parody. Those    who acted as judges
 were ordinarily the consuls inthe most important haunts of the
 privateers,with whom they oftenactedincollusion;nay,
 someof them were themselves ex-privateers or even still corn-
 mercially interested in the captures-an example which one of
 Xapoleon’s governors was destined to follow in the fullness of
 time.1 The abuses increased to such an extent that they corn-
 pletelyoutgrew the control of the weakgovernment of the
Directory. On oneoccasion,forexample,Reubell,one of the
members of the Directory,informed the Danishminister in
Paris that a French prize court had condemned and caused to
besoldfor the benefit of the captor,aSwedishvesselwith
a cargo destined for the French government itself. Moreover,
the privateers worked into each other’s hands in various ways.
Thus oneof them might rob a neutral vesselof its ship’s papers
in order that another might seizeit with impunity ; for without
papers its condemnation was certain.
     What is peculiar in the policy of the Directory, and at the
same time significant for the ensuing developments, is the fact
that it had the effect of aFrenchself-blockade. It is indeed
manifest, as Admiral Mahan points out, that the power which
was excluded from the sea was the one which really had need
of the neutrals for the procurement of its supplies, and which,
therefore, from a purely material pointof view at least, had the
most to lose by a courseof violent action against them. ‘ Every
blow against a neutral,’ he says, ‘ was really, even though not
seemingly,ablowforGreatBritain.’During             the period of
scarcely two years in which the law of Niv6se was in force, it
practically did away withat neutral trade and navigation with
France which was to some extent independent of Great Britain.
Neutral vessels,in fact,did not venturethere, so that even
during the year 1798 their coasting trade in France declinedby
      Cmreepondmce de N a p o l h zer (Paris, 1858-l869), no. 18,491 (Feb. 8,
1812).
   1560.43                            E
