                     CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE                                      53
  benefit that economic life was carried on, a view which Napoleon
  was afterwards destinedto push to the extreme. Asia, Portugal,
 and Spain were regarded by Kersaint as      the most important
 markets for British industry, and they were to beclosed to
 Great Britainby being opened to therest of the world ; Lisbon
 and Brazil were to be assailed ; support was to be given to the
 old adversary of the British in India, Tippoo Sahib, &c.l
     Thus Kersaint not only passed over the United States, the
 undiminished importance of which for British trade does not
 appear to have been fully recognized in France, but also dis-
 regardedGermany andthe Europeanmainlandproper,                 as
 distinguished from the coastal and peninsular fringes referred
 to above. As arule,however,Germanywasafactor              of con-
 siderableimportanceinthesefforts.          To beginwith, the
 prohibition of 1796 againstBritishgoodswasextendedin
 March, 1798, to the left shore of the Rhine,whichwas then
 unitedwith the Frenchrepublic ; and this prohibition was
 applied with a strictness which, in an account of the situation
 writtenin 1798 and ascribed to Napoleon,wasalleged             to
presage (tbaucher) the ContinentalSystem.2For         the rest, it
was mainly a matter of paper pr,ojects and pious wishes, not of
effectivemeasures, and the majority of themconcerned the
German North Sea littoral. Here,     as a rule, it was the other
side of the policy that was turned outwards,that is, the common
interests of all the continental states againstGreatBritain.
A writer of Germanbirth, Ch. Theremin, whowas later to
serve Napoleon in various posts in Germany, published in Paris
in the year I11 (17944) a pamphlet with the significant title
Intkrdts des puissances continentales rehtivement d t’dngleterre,
in which the afterwards well-known doctrineof the natural and
inevitable conflict between Great Britainand the Continent was
developed at length, and the hostility of the other continental
states to France was shown consequently to be contrary to their
     Le Noniteur, Jan. 3, 1793 ; Sorel, 01). cit., vol. 111, pp. 244-5.
     Cornmentairea de NapoZdon l e r (Paris, 1867), vol. 111,p. 413. As the eesay
is not included in the Correspondance, the authorship of the Emperor does not
appear to be above doubt.
