52   ANTECEDENTS O F THECONTINENTAL                            SYSTEM
 such plans other than those emanating directly or indirectly
 from French sources. Examples of thiskindhave              a great
 interest of their own ; but they are too patent to call for any
 detailed investigation.
     As earlyas 174'7 we know that proposalswere brought
 forward in the French Bureau de Commerce to unite France,
 the HanseTowns, Prussia, and the Scandinavian        powers for the
 purpose of crushing themaritime power of GreatBritain-
 probably a mereincidentin        the long-standingAnglo-French
 duel.1 But it was not until after and in       consequence of the
 outbreak of war between Great Britain and France in1793 that
 this tendency acquired any lasting     significance. The attitude
 took one or another of two forms, according to circumstances :
 either all the continental countries were regarded as commer-
 cially dependentonEngland,andthereforeas                 necessary
 objectivesin the militaryand economic war waged bythe
 French republic against its foremost enemy ; or else, contrari-
wise, they all had the same interest in crushing the power of
England and were thus the naturalallies of France.
     The attitude appears in the first of these two forms in a
great speech which the Girondist naval officer, Kersaint,
delivered in the Convention on January1, 1793-that is to say,
before theoutbreak of war-and          in which heexhorted his
countrymen, with the usual revolutionary         eloquence, t o face
the struggle with the whole world. I n his opinion, France alone
hadher      own industryand      wealth, while Spain,Portugal,
Holland, and the Italian republics worked largely with British
capital and British goods. The New World and Asia, he said,
were likewise economically dependent on Great Britain ; nay,
even the trade of Denmark ( L e . , Norway), Sweden, and Russia
in naval stores was made possible by the co-operationof British
capitalists. ' One cannot find on the face of the globe,' he
declared, ' any lucrative branch of trade which has not been
exploited to the profit of that essentially shop-keeping people.'
In consequence of this, he argued, the injuries inflicted on ,the
states of the Continent fell finally on Great Britain, for whose
                 Schmidt, LCG a d - d w h L de Berg, p. 418.
