 44 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
   World War-when he wrote that the struggle ‘ had passed into
  a kind of political war of religion ’.
      A genuine blockade of the importation of foodstuffs into
  France might therefore have    been expected, that is, a ‘ starving-
  out scheme ’ similar to that of the World War. I n a way such
  a plan might even have    been made t o harmonize fairlywell with
  the continental economic policy of that time, at least until the
 French Revolution ; for as a matter of fact, the prevailing note
 on the subject of foodstuffs continued to be thepre-mercantilist
 tendency to prevent exports, rather than the mercantilist one
 t o encourage domestic production by hampering imports           and
 facilitating exports. As has been already mentioned, however,
 Pitt’s justification for the seizures was not based onthis notion,
 but onBritain’s own quitetemporary need of foodstuffs-
 according to Lars von Engestrom’s statement ;1 and evidence
 of how deeply rooted the notion of the inexpediency of pre-
 venting imports to the enemy was is furnished by the fact that
 the ensuing developments did not at all follow along the lines
 which were indicatedin the first measures. Only fourteen
 months afterwards, on August       18,1794, the previously cited
 article in the June instructions of 1793 was repealed, and this
 meantthattheimportation          of corn intoFrance was again
 permitted. It is true that in thefollowing April a new attempt
 was made t o put the instructions of 1793 into force, but this
 was done chiefly with the object of forcing the United States
into a ratification of the celebrated Jay Treaty of 17%. “hat,
however, wound up the whole of this episode, so that through-
out the entire period of the twenty years that still remained
before Europe obtained a lasting peace, not a single attempt at
starving out France was made, so far as we know, nor were
there any furtherefforts to stop her importson the part of the
power that had thecommand of the sea. Against only one small
country, Norway, did Great Britain occasionally make use of
her ability to prevent the introduction of supplies, for reasons
which will be discussed in due time.
    In contrast with these sporadic attempts to prevent importa-
                          1 See p. 33.
