                      CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE                                        57
foreignminister,wrote    in amemorandumintendedfor          the
Russian government that there could be no doubt as to the
intention of the Directory to seize the coast of the North Sea
as far as themouth of the Elbe, as itsplans were known to be
to isolate England, separate her fromthe Continent and exclude
her shipping from the ports of the Mediterranean, the Atlantic
and the North Sea. About the same timethe American minister
inLondonreported-incorrectly      at the time, it is true, but
evidently in accordwithcurrentrumours-thatFrance           had
demanded the cessation of trade between the Hanse Towns and
England and, its demand having been refused, had recalled its
ministerthere.1 The BalticSeawasalso to beclosed to the
British in 1795by playing Swedenand Denmark against Russia,
which for the moment was on friendly terms with Great Britain.
But the most characteristic example of all these forerunners to
the policy of Napoleon can be found in the instructions (cited
by Sorel) to the French envoy at The Hague, dated Fructidor
6 and 7, year I11 (August 234, 1795). Thisdeserves to be
cited verbatim :
    The alliance with Holland offers the most important result of all,
namely, to exclude the British from the Continent, to shut them out
in war time from Bayonne to north of Friesland and from accessto the
Baltic end North Seas. The     trade with the interior ofGermanywill
then return to its natural channels.        ...
                                            Deprived of theseimmense
markets, harassed by revolts   and internal disturbances which will be
the consequence,Englandwillhavegreat          embarmsments withher
colonial and Asiatic goods. These goods, being unsaleable, will fall to
low prices, and the English will find themselves vanquished by excess
(vuincus pur tubondunce), just as theyhad wished to vanquish the
French by shortage.

    In this utterance the familiar policy of strangling exports
findsclearexpression, and its agreementwith the whole of
Napoleon’s motivesfor the Continental System is very striking.
    1 Preuasen und Frankreich von 1795 bis 1807, in Publieationen aua den
K . PreussisckenStaatsarchiven, VI11 (Bailleu ed., Leipzig, 1881), vol. I, p. 113 ;
Mahan, Injluence of Sea Power, t c . , vol. II,pp. 2476. Admiral Mahan, however,
appears to believe in the truth of this altogether unfounded rumour, for the facts of
which of. Wohlwill, Neuere Ceschic&e, t o . , pp. 161, 188-9.
