 56 ANTF,CEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 need not accept the logic of this argument as irrefutable-the
 point about the imperative necessity of British recognition of
 the new conquests seems particularly weak-to        admitthat
 such thoughts must have occupied the minds of the French
 politicians who, under various names, guided the destinies of
 fiance during the six or seven years that intervened between
 the outbreak of war in 1793 and Bonaparte's definitive accession
 to power in 1799. Therecan be no doubt,therefore, that
 notions of that characterhadlain      at the foundation of the
 majority of the legislative measures previously treated. Thus
 Lecouteulx, the representative who in 1796 reported to the
 Conseil des Anciens upon the legislative proposal for the ex-
 clusion of British goods, justified the measure on the ground
that the flags of France and her allies floated from Emden to
Trieste, and that almostall theports on the coasts of the
European oceanwereclosed to GreatBritain.         Consequently,
he concluded, ' we must put an end to the voluntarysub-
 sidies which consumers of British goods are paying to that
country l.'
    Withregard to foreign policy proper, Sore1 hasbrought
forward a multitude of examples bearing witness to the same
tendency, some of the more significant of which may be men-
tioned here. Thus about 1794 Caillard, a French diplomatist,
proposed that the Continent should be closed by a series of
alliances. ' From the Tagus to the Elbe,' he declared, ' there
is no point on the mainland where the British should be allowed
to set foot.' In 17'95 efforts were made to hand Portugal over
to Spain, in order thereby ' to deprive England of one of her
most valuable provinces ' ; and the closing of the continental
ports was nowto affect the whole coastline from Gibraltar to the
island of Texel, outside the Zuider Zee. The same tendencies,
moreover, determined French policy with regard to Naples and
Belgium. In the early part of 1797 Haugwitz, the Prussian
   1 Le Noniteur, Nov. 4, 1 7 9 6 ; Mahan, Influence of Sea Power, t c . , vol. II,
pp. 248 et seq. Dupont deNemourscombated the proposal, as might have been
expected of an orthodox economist ; but when the President announced that the
motion of Lecouteulx had been carried another member exclaimed : ' Nous sommes
sauvb ! ' Le Honiteur, Nov. 6 (Brumaire 16).
