                           CHAPTER IV
           ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREATBRITAIN
       ‘ THECauses of the Rise and Decline of Cities, Countries,
    and Republics,’DieUrsachendes             Auf und Abn,ehmensder
    Stddt, Lander und Republicken-to quote the title of a book
    by the Germanmercantilist, Johann Joachim Becher-have
    always formed,and still form, a very obscure chapter    in economic
    history, and one which has been far from fully elucidated by
    economicinquiry.During the period with which we are now
    concerned the stability of the position of England as the lead-
    ingmaritime and colonialnation, after the relativedecline
    of the Netherlands,formedaconstantsource             of speculation
    and doubt, It was perhaps naturalthat this mistrust was
    most prevalent in French circles, and particularly among the
    French revolutionaries ; for to those who had been trained in
    the school of Rousseau it was necessarily quite obvious that an
    organization so completelydetachedfrom the land was un-
    natural and, therefore,notdurable-all         the more so for the
    reason that physiocracy, so far as itsinfluence was to be taken
    intoaccount at all,mightalsolead to the sameconclusions.
    The hollowness of the Englisheconomicsystem             is also the
    burden of the oftenquoted officialspeech in whichBrissot,
    the leader of the Girondists, on January 12, 1793, laid before
    the National Conventionthe whole argument in favourof a war
    with England, in terms which were to be re-embodied in the
    final declaration of war. ‘ We must tear asunder,’ he declared,
    ‘ the veil that envelops the imposing colossus of England. .  ..
    When the well-informed observer regards this imposing scaffold
    of Englishgreatness,heisable           to penetrate to itsinternal
-   vacuity, . ..  Say, then, if it will not be an easy matter to over-
    turn a power whose colossal stature betrays its weakness and
    calls for its overthrow.’ 1
t                         Le Yonitew, Jan. 16,1793.
