62 ANTECEDENTS OF THE COPL'TINENTAL SYSTEM
a pamphletpublished      in 1796 with the significant title, The
 Decline and Fall of the English System of Finance. The author
 was the well-known republican and free-thinker, Thomas Paine,
 who had someyearspreviously         fled to France and become
a member of the National Convention. In the French journal-
ism of the perioddealingwith this subject,which has been
sketched by an English woman historian, Miss Audrey Cunning-
ham, an impending British state bankruptcy figures as a fairly
self-evident prospect in the future. This is especially the case
in a very measured paper, Des $names de Z'Angletewe, written
in 1803 by theFrench Zittkrateur, Henri Lasalle, and reproduced
by Miss Cunningham in extens0.l
    It is true that we must beware of overestimating the im-
portance of these views. It would be hard to discover, as a
matter of fact, anything morehopelessly shattered than the
finances of France herselfduring the Revolution ; and her
capacity to develop a great military power, despite the most
thorough-going national bankruptcy, might rather be expected
to have implanted doubts as to far-reachingpoliticalconse-
quences arising from financial difficulties. But the thoughts of
leading French statesmen did not move inthat direction.
Whether because of sincere conviction or because of the effect
on public opinion, therefore, it became in due time an axiom
of Napoleon that his finances both in war and in peace must be
managed as much as possible without loans ; and his ministers
of finance, greatly against their will, had consequently to
resort to the most dubious means of raising funds-not only
increasing the annual deficits in the national budget, but also
sanctioningmeasures      of downrightdishonesty       against the
purveyors to the state-rather than negotiatepublicloans.
Thus the accumulation of debt represented to Napoleon, a t
leastofficially, the one great danger to a state's existence.
   1 MacauLsy, History of Englad (1st ed., London, 1855), vol. IV,ch. XIS, pp. 327-9;
Burke, Observations on a kzte publication i7ttituled The Present State of the Nation '
(1769) ; Adam Smith, op. cit., vol. II,pp. 396, 4074,414-16 ; The National Debt,
2786-1890 (Blue Book, C. 9010. London, 1891), p. 72; Kiesselbach, op. cit., p. 70
note; "iss Cunningham, British Credit in the Last Napoleonic War (Cambridge,
1910)s pp. 17-1 8,27 et s q .
