78 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
    Onemightbeinclined,beforehand,           t o doubt Napoleon’s
interest in these questions, but such a view would be an im-
mense mistake. What was at once the strength and the weak-
ness of Napoleon wasthat he wished himselfto understand every
detail of his government better than any of his assistants, and
this isparticularly true as regardsfinances. I do not know
whether this is a characteristic trait of the French revolution-
aries in general,but the same feature, as a matter of fact, is to
be found in Bernadotte, concerning whom Trolle-Wachtmeister,
an acute Swedish observer, tells us in his diary (1816) that the
then Crown Prince did not at all dispute the possibility that
Sweden had three hundred moreefficient soldiers than he, but
declared that with regard to highfinancehewouldyield              to
nobody, as hehadlongmade           it asubject of specialstudy.
Possibly this was simply an imitation of Napoleon, with whose
remarkable financial measures the later efforts of his old rival
hadmanypointsincommon.              It iscertain that Napoleon’s
fantastic but immenselylaborioussummaries,oftenmadein
the field and always by his own hand, of the tables given him
byhisministers       of finance,reveal an almostinconceivable
attention to precisely these questions, although the results bear
no proportion to his toil or his ingenuity. A,study of his letters
easily reveals this, especially when it is observed from wherethe
writingsdate.Mollien’smemoirs         are a runningcommentary
on the same tendency. He says that ‘ two monthsof discussions
incouncil and privateconferences,whichwerealmostdaily
repeated at Paris or Saint-Cloud after the return of the Emperor
from the banks of the Niemen (in 1807), had not exhaustedthat
curiosity, that passionfordetails,whichhe         felt especiallyin
questions of finance. His imagination created at every moment
new combinations of figures, which he took for the creation of
new resources. His errors of this kind were the more difficultto
confute because the Q r e s in which he expressed them gave
to the mistakes the appearance of mathematicalverities.’
Corrapndance from the Mdmoires de Ste-HQlne, and is dated from a place where
the Emperor arrived only a fortnight later; but there does not appear to be any
reason for doubting its authenticity.
