             ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
                                BRITISH CREDIT SYSTEM
             To all this, however, must be added the fact that there were
         not lacking signs calculated to arouse genuine doubts, even in
         fairly penetrating observers, as to thedurability of the British
         system of credit. The maincause of this was the Bank Re-
        striction Act of 1797, whereby the Bank of England was released
        from the obligation to redeem its notes, an obligation which it
        did not resume for a period of twenty-two years. Thus Great
        Britainhad a paper currency throughout the whole of the
        revolutionary andthe        Napoleonicperiods.    That this was
        a great and unexpected blow,especiallyforadmirers          of the
        British credit system, is fully substantiated by what Mollien,
        Napoleon’s future minister of finance, writes about the matter
Y   .
        in his Mkmoires d’un ministre du trkscvp public. The fact is that
        Mollien, through impressionsreceived partly fromTurgot’s
        most faithful collaborator,Malesherbes, and partly fromhis
        father, a French manufacturer, was entirely dominatedby
        economicliberalism, and that to a far greater extent in the
        English form, as embodied in Adam Smith, than in the French
        form as embodied in physiocracy. I n his memoirs, which were
        begun in 1817, but which were founded, according to his own
        statement, onalmost daily jottings,herefers         to the strong
        impression which the British Bank Restriction Act had made
        on him when he was a man of forty and experienced both as
        a financial official and asa practical manufacturer. Inasmuch as
        the Bank of England was solvent, he believed that it was in
        a position to meet its liabilities without loss to its creditors ;
        but in that case, he says, its notes would decline in value, the
        BritishExchequer would have to close,&c. ; and he adds :
        ‘ Those who have long prophesied disturbances and ruin for
        England have never had greater reasons for their gloomy fore-
        bodings.’ The remarkableness of the situation madesuch an
        impression on Mollien that at the close of the following year
        he went so far ast o make a flying journey of observation to the
        enemy’s territory, zria Germany, with the Wealth of Nation8 as
        his only c0mpanion.l
                         Mollien, op,- cit., vol. I, pp. 185 et sq., &c.
