        ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN                                   73
Consequently, it is not at all unlikely that Napoleon ascribed
to hisnotionson the creditsystem and the preciousmetals
a decisive influence on hisgreat policy against England.'

                        ECONOMIC DISLOCATIONS
    Probably, however, other matters also played a part.                   One
of these was the ratherself-evident ideawhich has already been
 incidentally mentioned, viz.,that of causing dislocations in the
 economic life of England, especially in her industry. He caused
 one of his penmen, d'Hauterive, in a paper published in 1800,
 De l'ttat de la France d Za J;n de l'an V I I I , to dwellon the
thoroughdivision of labour,onwhich          the economiclife of
England was built, as a specially detrimental circumstance in
every ' sudden change in  the channels of trade ', to use Ricardo's
famous expression. As far as wecanjudge, it wasespecially
unemployment, and consequent labour unrest, that Napoleon
hoped to bring about in England through his policy     of exclusion.
At any rate, it is a fact that few matters in his own domestic
policy occupied his thoughts to the extent that this did. The
system of grants which he introduced forthe benefit of industry
in the crises of 1807 and 1810-11 he justified withhis usual, and
in this case very sensible, lack
                               of sentimentality in a letter which
he addressed onMarch 27,1807, t o his Minister of the Interior,
Champagny, on the ground that he was anxious not; to save
certainbusinessmenfrombankruptcy,           but to prevent great
numbers of workmen from being without work ; and for the
opposite reason no helpwas to be obtained for handicraftsmen
and petty manufacturers on whom only a few workmen were
dependent. Mollien,who entertained an orthodox laisseg-faire
dislike of this entire system of grants, also describes in detail
how a large wool manufacturer, Richard Lenoir, who was in his
opinioninsolvent,succeededinobtaining         a loan of 1,500,000
francs owing to thefact that he was the owner of a largefactory
inone of the mostpopuloussuburbs of Paris,Faubourg St.
    1 Trolle-Wachtmeister,Anteckningar och minnen (TegnBr ed., Stockholm, 1889),
vol. n,p. 74 ; Mollien, op. cit., vol. II, p. 155, et at.
