70 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 subsidies, the ratesof exchange will then go against her to such
 a n extent as to be ruinous to     hertrade.    As usual, external
 phenomena, more or less correctly conceived, here affected the
 train of thought. There had been a heavy decline in themetallic
 reserves of the Bank of England (almost down to ;Ii1,000,000)
 which had led to its suspending payments in February 1797 ;
 and the attention excited by this event seems to have over-
 shadowed the fact that the reserves only the next year rose
again t o ;Ii6,500,000, or even $7,000,000, and that during the
following years, despite considerable fluctuations, they never
again went down to the point where they were at the time of
the suspension of payments. TheBritishrates of exchange,
 especially on Hamburg, had fluctuated violently,and had been
particularly ' unfavourable ' t o England, as has already been
partially hinted,l inthe years 1794 and 1800-1801 ; and thiswas
popularly connected withthe great paymentson the Continent,
which undoubtedly coincided to some extent in timewith these
phenomena.2 De Guer'sviewwas              consequentlyvery easily
explained ; to what extent it was correct, is a question which
does not appertain to this stageof our inquiry.
    What does concern us here, on the other hand, is the excel-
lentbasisfor       an attack onBritishexportscreatedbysuch
a theory. On the onehand, the conception of the rates of
exchange and the supplies of precious metals, as effects of the
balance of payment abroad, and, on the other hand, the con-
ception of the general solvency of Great Britain as dependent
on the bullion reserves of the banks, had carried people forward
(or back) to a justification of the old mercantilist trade policy
on a much strongerbasis than before. For thecommercial policy
of the mercantilesystemalsobuilton             the doctrine of the
balance of trade, on the 'danger of ' insufficient weight in the
scales of trade '; but in the sixteenth and seventeenth  centuries,
unlike the Napoleonic period, therehad been nosystem of
note circulationwith        a metalliccovering    which might be
assumed to be ruined by an unfavourable balance of payments.
          1 see p. 42.
          Tooke, op. eit., vol. I, pp. 197-207, 239-52 ; vol. II,p. 384.
