66 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

              EXPORTS
                   AND WAR O N THE CONTINENT

     I n this respect, too, Kersaint’s previously cited     speech of
 January 1, 1793, is significant, as was pointed out as far back
 as 1850 by the first historian of the Continental System,Kiessel-
 bach, and has been emphasized in our own time by theEnglish
 historian, Dr. J. Holland Rose. ‘ The credit of England ’, says
 Kersaint,‘restson fictitious riches. Therealriches           of that
 people arescattered everywhere and essentially mobile.On
 her own soilthe national wealthof England isto befound almost
 exclusively in her Bank, and the whole of that structure is
 supportedby the prodigious activity of hermaritime com-
 merce.’ With such an idea it was evidently easy to arrive at
 the thought of ruining the whole credit system of England by
an attack on her trade. The same line of thought-the depen-
 dence of the credit system on foreign trade-is followed more
completely in several papers of French authorship referred to
by Kiesselbach andmadethe            subject of an interesting in-
vestigation by Miss Cunningham. The writer was a Chevalier
De Guer (or Deguer), who had gone to England as a Royalist
hnign? and had there made      a special study of the British system
of finance. He is of especial interest in this connexion, for the
reason that Napoleon, in a letter of 1803, expresses great
satisfaction with hiswork, and desires from him a more detailed
account of the position of British finances. On the whole, he
regarded that system as well worthy of imitation,even as
regards the circulation of bank-notes, but at the same time he
believed that it had certain weak points. H e brought out his
results, for the enlightenment of his countrymen, especially in
a paper entitled Essai sur le crddit commercial comme m q e n de
circulation, which was originally printed in Hamburg in 1801,
but was afterwardsreprintedinFrance,andalsoinother
articles, one of which Napoleon caused to be inserted in his
official organ, Le Moniteur, for 1803.
    The discussions in question were connected especially with
the questions of the gold reserve of the Bank of England and the
British rates of exchange ; and these connexions are of great
