           ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN                      69
     entirelyreservedfor later discussi0n.lTheonlything            it is
.    necessary to point out here is-how very obvious such a conse-
     quencemust have seemed. In DeGuer’swritings,              as sum-
     marized byMiss Cunningham,that conclusion is reached without
     reference to Adam Smith, it is true, perhaps without his being
     known and, inany case, .withoutany of his lucidity of thought.
     De Guer pbints out that, when war was waged in Westphalia or
     the Netherlands a hundred years earlier,    as in Marlborough’s
     ti.me,England had nodifficultyeitherinprovidingher            own
     troops with what they required or in paying subsidies, for she
     could send goodsthere and thereby obtain balancesto her credit
     on the spot. But as the Belgian ports had nowbeenclosed,
     and the theatreof war had also been movedto theUpper Rhine
     and the Danube, great credit difficulties had arisen in
                                                           the paying
     of subsidies. Thus De Guer’sway of putting thingsmight
    inspire still greater hopes than that‘of Adam Smith as to the
     difficulty of maintaining the continental war if the exports of
    the subsidizing power werecut off from the Continent. Indeed,
    the French Ziittdmteur seems to have simplified the problem to
    the extent of having left outof account whatis called ‘ triangular
    trade ’, which means that the exports to one country are used
    in order to buy drafts on, Le., to pay debts to, another country.
    With such a conceptionthe mere closingof the Continent might
    seem sufficient for the purpose, even if British trade asa whole
    were left undisturbed.
         In his practical conclusions DeGuerapproaches the view
    that Adam Smithundertook to controvert.WhenEngland
    cannotpaysubsidies by exportinggoodsabroad, the conse-
    quences, in De Guer’s opinion, will be one or the other of the
    following : either she must export gold ; and with the great
    circulation of paper currency within the country, as contrasted
    with the small increase ofits supplies of metallic currency, this
    exposes all the note-issuing banks to the danger of collapse ;
    or, on the otherhand,shemustneglect           to exportprecious
    metals ; and as she has not sufficiently large balances to her
    crediton the Continent to correspondwithherpayment               of
                              See pt. IV, ch. IV.
