             ECONOMIC
                    POSITION                 OF GREAT BRITAIN                  65
      During the first decade of the British paper currency, that
  is, from 1797 to about 1808, the depreciation of the bank-notes,
  as measured by the price of bullion and the rates of foreign
  exchange,wasonly      intermittently (principally inthe years
  1800-2) of any very great importance.During that period,
 therefore, there was no great danger to be seen in theirredeem-
  ability of the notes, and least of all any danger to the public
 finances of Great Britain or to hercreditsystem in general.
 But ideas onthis subject beingas thoroughly mistyas theywere,
 it is perhapsalmost natural that the situationshould have
 been misunderstood. In Great Britain not only the politicians,
 but also the bankers and business men, obstinately refused to
 recognize any real depreciation of the notes,evenwhen           it
 became, in the course of time, very considerable. In France,
 on the other hand, the people, under the influence of the woful
 history and far-reaching injuries done by their own assignuts,
 saw a peril .overhanging England in the mere existence of an
 irredeemablepapercurrency.Thecontemporary              literature
 previously cited laaboundswith suchviews ; and during his reign                    ,


 Napoleon never failed to boast it as absolutely inconceivable
that a governmentso extremely well organizedas his should ever
have to fall back upon such a disastrous expedient as the use
of 'paper money, 'the greatest foe to the social order (l'ordre
social),' of which ' the history of all times confirms that its
fatal experiences occur only under emasculated governments'.2
      But all this could at the mostshow the weakness of the
economic position of Great Britain, and thus inspire a general
hope of success in the struggle against such an 'enemy. It had
apparently no direct connexion withthat special kind of tactics
in commercial war which is called continental blockade. Such
aconnexiondoes not appear until wecome to consider the
importance that the trade of Great Britain, and especially her
exports to theContinent, were regarded as having for hercredit
system, and in general the conception of the effect of the con-
tinental connexions on British currency.
     See p. 62.
   2 Correa.pondam,     nos. 9,929 (Mar. 5, 1806), 14,413 (Oct. 25, 1808), 21,020
(Dec. 19, 1813), Bcc.
   1588.43                               B
