             ECONOMIC POSITION OF GREAT BRITAIN                                      ?‘I
                                  EXPORTS   OF GOLD
           Such trains of thought were certainly not foreign to Napo-
       leon, as will appear from his observations at a later period, to
       be treated in their proper place    ; but inthe main it may be said
       that he was dominated by simpler economic notions. Judging
       from his own utterances, as well as from the evidence of his
       assistants, indeed, we cannot easily doubt that, thanks to his
       contempt for the ideologues, he was stillin the pre-mercantilist
       orbullioniststage,whichsawsomethingunfortunate                  for
       a country in the exportation of the precious metals and good
       fortune in the importation of gold as such. Thus, for instance,
      in a highly characteristic letterof Nay 29, 1810, to Gaudin, his
      Minister of Finance,Napoleonwriteshowsmugglingwith
      England is to be arranged. ‘My object’, he says, ‘is to favour
      the exportation of foodstuffs from France andthe importation
      of foreignmoney.’ In another letter, of April 3, 1808, to his
      brother Louis of Holland, he gives instructions as to how to
      export gin to England by means of smugglers,ending in the
      bullying apostrophe: ‘ They must pay with money, never with
      goods,never,doyouunderstand            ? ’ In accordancewith this
      idea licences were issued which authorized voyages to England
      againstexportsfromthere           of gold and silverinspecie and
     bullion, but nothing else; and in a report      to theEmperor dated
      November 25, 1811, Gaudin gives as the object of the licensing
     system ‘the extraction of metallicmoneyfromEngland, the
      exportation of French goods, and activity in our ports.’ His
     colleague,Mollien,alsomentions as an explanation of an ex-
     tremelycuriousbusinesswithenormousadvancesfrom                   the
     French treasuryto the financiers, whose business,on     thecontrary,
     would have beento advance the taxes(lesfaiseurs de service), that
    .a thing of that kind could never have taken place unless those
     gentlemen had undertaken to obtain precious metals from the
     Spanish colonies, which were regarded as being of incalculable
     value.1 With such a conception, the war against British exports
     justified itself as soonas it caused Great Britainto export gold,
        C m m p d n c e , nos. 16,508,13,718; Servi&ws,op.cit., p. 13% note 3, pp. 138-
    9; Mollien, op. cit., vol. I, p. 493. The letter to King Louisis printed in the
f
