 68 ANTECEDENTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

 part either of ' its accumulated gold and silver ',. or of ' the
 annual produce of its manufactures ', or of ' its annual rude
 produce '. After a clear discussion of the first of these alterna-
 tives, he lays it down that ' the enormous expense of the late
 war (Seven Years War) must have been chiefly defrayed, not
 by the exportation of gold and silver, but by that of British
 commodities of some kind or other ' ; and he makes the    weighty
 observation that, as a consequence of this, the exportsof Great
 Britainhadbeenunusuallygreatduringthe               war, without
 yielding any corresponding imports in return. But in so far as
 payment for thecontinental warwaseffected           bymeans of
 precious metals, ' the money of the great mercantile republic,'
 thosemetalsmust        also have been purchasedwithBritish
 export goods, since neither the accumulated bullion reserves
 nor the annual production of gold and silver was anything like
 sufficient to cover the huge sums in question. I n general, there-
fore, he concludes that it is the exports of England that enable
her to wage war on the Continent, and chiefly the exports of finer
and more fully manufactured industrial articles, which are able
to bear high transportationcharges. ' A country whose industry
produces a great annual surplus of such manufactures, which
are usuallyexported to foreign countries,maycarryon             for
many years a very expensive      foreign war, without exporting
any considerable quantity of gold and silver, or even having any
such quantity to export.' Adam Smith also describes how this
works out in practice. The government arranges with a mer-
chant to remit thenecessary supplies to the theatreof war, and
the merchant,inorder to establisha claim there, sends out
goods either to that country or to another country where he
can buy a draft on the f0rmer.l
    To what extent this in itself absolutely conclusive state-
ment-the capacity of which to throw light on the Continental
System has not,to my knowledge, been observed-rightly leads
to the conclusion that the exports of GreatBritain were a
necessary pre-condition for hercapacity t o carryona          war
against France on the mainland, is a question which must be
                1 Adam Smith, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 407-11.
