 78     ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 short career. For instance, we have his pronouncement to his
 assistant,Roederer (December 1800), astothe          necessity of
 ' blockading the English on their island ' and ' turning to their
 confusion that insular position which causes their insolence,
 their wealth, and their supremacy '.l Napoleon already posed
 as a champion of the freedom of the seas, and in a treaty with
 the United States, signed in 1800 and ratified in 1801, he laid
 down the same principles ashad been championed by the
 Armed Neutrality. But, as is well known, the Armed Neutrality
 came to an end after some few months with the murder of the
 Czar Paul I and the Battle of the Baltic, in March and April
 1801 ; and the only result of the action of the neutrals was
 an Anglo-Russian navigationconvention (June 5/17 of the
 same year), with the belated and somewhat reluctant adhesion
 of Denmark and Sweden. By this conventionGreatBritain
 succeeded in establishing the principle that free ships should
 not make free goods, and that war-ships, but not privateers,
 should be allowed to search convoyed trading vessels, in return
for the abandonment, in theory, of the paper blockade and for
restrictions in the definition of contraband, which was further
limitedby an agreementwith Sweden in 1803. Napoleon,
however, followed up his plans of cutting off England in other
quarters bymeans of what the Englishhistorian,Dr.           Rose,
making use of an expression of Napoleon himself, has called
his ' coast system ', that is to say, the adoption of the French
policy of the 'nineties of excluding Great Britain from access
to the mainlandbymaking          himself master of its coastsin
some form or other. After Austria had concluded formal peace
a t Lun&ville, in February 1801, therefore, first Naples and the
Papal States, and later    on in the yearGreatBritain's      own
ally, Portugal, had to acquiesce in the closing of their ports
to the British.
    This phase of the blockade policy came t o an end fairly
     Sorel, L'Europe et la rkvolution franpise, POI. VI, pp. 22-3 ; Holm, Danmark-
Norges Histurie fra den store nordish Kriys Slutning til Rigernes Adskillelse, 1720-
1814 (Copenhagen,1912),POI. M, pt. I, pp. 42-3. Cf. also de Watteville, Souvenirs
d'un downier du Premier Empire (Boucherde Perthes), in Revue Sapolionienne
(N.S., Rome, 1908),vol. 11,p. 71.
