 82     ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 between the Elbe and the Emswas annulled on September 25,
 1806. Of course, these wobbling measures could notfail to
 hit the towns of North Germany especially very hard ;and
 theirpaper-blockade naturekept alive theunpopularity of
 British poli.cy in naval warfare.l
     Napoleon, on his part, had caused manythousandsof
 EnglishmentravellinginFrance        to be arrestedimmediately
 after the outbreakof war, and shortly afterwards had extended
 this method of belligerency to Holland as well ; and he now
 proceeded to more comprehensive measures in two different
 directions.Thefirst     WBS the exclusion of Englandfromall
 connexion with the mainland, especially with the North Sea
 coast. For this purposehe occupied Hanover, which, as is
 well known, belonged to the Britishroyal house, and from
 there he extended his repressive measures t o the great centres
 of maritime trade, Hamburg andBremen. His general,Mortier,
received orders to seize allBritish ships, goods, and sailors
that were to be foundthere.         And althoughthismeasure
failed, the French largely made themselves masters of British
trade to thesepoints,both      in generalby the occupation of
Hanover, and in particular bythe seizure of the little Hamburg
district of Ritzebuttel, which included its outport, Cuxhaven,
at the mouth of the Elbe. The first of the above-mentioned
British declarations of blockade formed the answer to this ;
and the independence of the Hanse Towns was consequently
subjected to newblows frombothantagonists.           In October
1804, for instance, Napoleon simply kidnapped the British
envoy from Hamburg, that is to say, from neutral soil. More-
over, inthe beginning of 1804 a double action was taken against
the influx of British goods farther south. The imports through
Emden, in Prussian East Friesland, up the Ems to the great
market of Frankfurt-am-Main were barred bythe occupation of
the town of Meppen on the Ems ; and at the same time large
quantities of British goods were confiscated in the vassal state
of Holland. I n May 1805, Napoleon resolved to intervene
     G. F. & C. Martens, Nouveau recueil de traitks (Gottingen, 1817), vol. I, pp.
433-9; Smart, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 70-1 ; Stephen, War in Dia3uiac, p. 31.
