                         THE BERLIN DECREE                                           91
it was not to be applied to the sea, that is, to lead to captures ;
 but this only bears witness to that capacity of forgetfulness of
 whichNapoleonwas masteron occasion. It is true that his
 naval minister, Admiral Decrhs, in answer to a question from
 the American envoy, gave it as his opinion that a vessel could
 not be captured simply and solely because it was on its way t o
an English port. It is also true that captures or condemnations
 of captured or stranded vessels onthe basis of the Berlin decree
 did not occur in1806 or in the first seven months of 1807 ; and
this caused shipping premiums to drop to 4 per cent. and in
England formed the basis of the regular standing argument of
the opposition against the government’s measures of reprisal.
But it is equally true that this state of affairs came to an end
with a declaration made by Napoleon himself, after his return
from Poland, and communicated to the Law Courts in Septem-
ber 1807 ; in point of fact, the practice had already been altered
in August and consequently not, as Napoleon later gave out,
by the newMilan decree of December 1807. TheEmperor’s
exposition of the law states that English goods on boardneutral
vessels should be confiscated ; and in practice the decree was
interpreted in such a way thatan enemydestinationwas
sufficientgroundfor the condemnation of avessel. For that
matter, this wasin fullaccord both with the principles of
blockade and with the practice of the period of the Directory.’
    Even after this interpretation, however, the Berlin decree
was so muchmilder than the NivSselaw of 1798 that the
occurrence of British goods at least did not occasion the con-
demnation of the vessel itself and the rest of its cargo.

                                  SIGNIFICANCE
   From a formalpoint of view there are at the mosttwo
novelties in the regulations of the Berlin decree. The one is the
declaration of blockade against the British Isles, which could
    1 C o r r e e w n c e , nw. 16,127,17,014 (Jan. 10, Oct. 7,1810); Hansard, voL x m ,
app., pp. xxxiii et eeq. ; Mahan, znfiuence of sea Power, &c., vol. E,pp. 83,281-2;
cf. also p. 245 ; also, Sea Pww in its Rehthm, &c., vol. I, pp. 143, 189 note 1.
