86      ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 as well. Yet at this time cotton had already    become an absolute
necessity.. In later years, a t St. Helena, Napoleon made out that
the Conseil d’lhzt had shrunk from this project, but thathe had
forced his will through by quoting the authorityof Oberkampf,
the leading maninthe        Frenchtextileindustry.Naturally,
Napoleon had no difficulty in getting his support of a policy
that protected his own particular industry. At the same time
theimportation       of cotton  twist     (JilBs pour m2ches) was
forbidden ; the customs duty on yarn was raised, especially
for the lower numbers, i. e., the coarser qualities ; and it was
publicly stated that thisarticle also would have been prohibited
altogether if it had been thought possible to spin sufficiently
high numbers in France.l
    Southern Europe came under the same r6gime as early as
1806. In Italy, during that year, Napoleon pursueda policy
which was intermediate between the earlier and the later French
method. Thus in the Kingdom of Italy (North Italy),of which
Napoleon was king, anumber of articles, especially textile
goods,were     declared,inaccordancewithearlier          examples,
to be eo ipso British, and were consequently prohibited when
they did not come from France-a declaration which in reality
was directed principally againsthe continentalrivals of France.
On the other hand, in theKingdom of Naples, which was ruled
by JosephBonaparte, only really Britishgoods were prohibited ;
but in addition all British property wasseized. In the same
year Switzerland was suddenly obliged to pass a lawwhich,
underseverepenalties,prohibitedallimportation            of British
manufactures except cotton yarn. Thiswas an actof retribution
because Swiss merchants, in theweeks just prior to the transfer
of the principality of Neuchfitel to France, had been importing
colonial goods and manufactures there and afterwards had      been
daring enough t o complain when they were all confiscated by
Napoleon.
    Bythesemeasures Napoleon felt that he had effectively
   1 Theprincipalchanges     in Frenchcustoms duties oncolonialproduce          from
1802 to 1810 are tabulated in app. II, from which a better view of the aituation map
perhaps be obtained than from the enumeration in the text.
