                 THE DECREE
                     BERLIN                               93
 was thereby given an opportunity to affect the life of Europe
 for better or for worse.
     The content of this system should be sufficiently clear from
 what has already been said, but it may nevertheless be set forth '
 here, when we are entering upon the further development         of
 externalevents. As adeclaration of blockadeagainst Great
 Britain was littlemorethanatheatricalgesture,and               as
 Napoleon was almost entirely destitute of means to assert his
 will on the sea, the blockade had to be applied by land. This
 means that it was, and aimed at being, a self-blockade on the
 part of the Continent, just as had already been the case with
the Directory'sNiv6se law of 1798. With the object of pre-
ventingGreatBritain        from disposing of hergoods onthe
Continent and thereby bringing her to herknees, the Continent
itself was to renounce all importation of Britishgoodsand
colonial wares, so far as the latter came from British colonies
and Britishtrade.      The whole thingnotonly        was, but was
intended to be, a ' self-denyingordinance       '. Theprivati.ons
to which the Continent was afterwardssubjectedwerethus
a designed effect of Napoleon'smeasures, and not a t all the
work of his enemy, who, on the contrary, devoted himself to
relieving them, forthe most part in principle and almost entirely
inpractice. Unless thisstarting-point, which to our way of
thinking seems very paradoxical, is firmly grasped   at the outset,
the following development will appear inexplicable. To what
extent Napoleon realized all the consequences of his measure,
we have, it is true, no means of knowing ; but evidence is not
lacking that he was conscious of theirmainfeatures.Even
when he issued the decree concerning the closing of the Hanse
Towns (December 3, 1806), he wrote to his brother         Louis of
Holland that theserious obstacles in   the way of intercourse with
England would ' undoubtedlyinjureHollandandFrance                ',
but that theyweIv necessary; and in a letter 1 addressed to the
same correspondent a few days later he says that the system
would ruin the greatcommercial towns. Moreover, in connexion
with the intensification of the system bythe second Milan decree
                       1 Cited ante, p.   80.
