                           "HE RERLIN DECREE                        ,              89
    in the heart and to attack her alliances at the same time as her
    continental intrigues. But the idea that peace withthe different
    powers would haveas a necessary pre-condition    the closing of all
    the ports of the mainland to the Britishwasevidentlyvery
    widespread, as can be seen from a contemporary utterance of
    Frenchindustrialists.And,indeed,evenbefore           the issue of
    the decree we find Napoleon, both in one of his army bulletins
    (October $3) and in a letter to his brother Joseph (November  16),
    speaking of the continental blockade as a matter of course. At
    the same time as this last letter, another letter was addressed
    to thecommander of North Germany, Marshal Mortier, instruct-
    inghim to close the Elbe ' hermetically ', to confiscate all
    Englishgoods, and even to arrestthe English and Russian
    consuls a t Hamburg.1 In everyrespect,therefore, the Berlin
    decreestands out as aculmination of earlierthoughts and
    measures, dthough, despite all this, it had the effect of a bomb,
    thanks to Napoleon's masterly capacity as a stage manager.

                                      PREAMBLE
        Like most of the measures of both parties, the Berlin decree
    purported to be a measure of reprisal rendered necessary by
    numerousaggressions of the adversary ; but its regulations
    wereneverthelesssolemnlyproclaimed         as embodying ' the
    fundamental principlesof the Empire ', until England disavowed
    herfalsepretensions. In content the regulations, as isusual
    inFrenchordinances, are veryclear, at least at firstsight,
    although they weregradually to prove,intentionallyorun-
    intentionally, rather ambiguous. The preamble states : (1)that
    England does not acknowledge international law ; (2) that she
    treats all enemy subjects as enemies (this is directed against
    herlegislationagainstalienenemies);      (3) that sheextends
    the right of capture to merchantvessels and merchandise
    and private property; (4)that sheextends the blockade to
         bel, op. cit., vol. W,pp. 55, 104, 114; memorial printed in Tarle, 'Konti.
    n e M m j a blokada (Mosoow, 1913), vol. I, p. 706; C o r r e s w m , nos. 11,064,
    11,271, 11,267, 11,283 (Berlin decree).



I
