92    ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM                           I


 scarcely have occurred to anybody except Napoleon a t a time        t
 when not a single war-ship held the sea against the British.
 Its principal object, indeed, was to form an effective and
 grandiose gesture ; and not without reason the famous British       f

 lawyer, Lord Erskine, could later (February 15, 1808) say in
 the House of Lords that Napoleon might just as well have            I


 declared the moon in a state of blockade.1 Presumably, how-
 ever, Napoleon aimed not only at thetheatrical effect, but also
 a t reducing the British principle of a paper blockade toan         I

 absurdity.The second novelty was the treatment of British
 subjects and their property on the Continent. Like the former
regulation, this came about as a continental parallel to the
 British system of capture at sea. Its practical effect, as far as
 one can judge, was restricted to the moment of proclamation,
as the law took by surprise many Englishmen and their enter-
 prises,
       especially    in the German territories governed by
Napoleon.
     The epoch-making character of the Berlin decree, therefore,
is scarcely duetoeither     of these formally new regulations.
What is important is the wide range which from the time of
the Berlin decree was given to a whole series of measures which
for a long time had been applied more or less sporadically. It
was only now that i t had becomepossible to elaborate the
different methods of reprisal into a truly ' continental ' system,
that is, one embracing - the whole, or nearly the whole, of the
European mainland. And it was only now, too, that they were          1
made the central point in the entireinternal and external
policy of France, around which everything else had to turn in
an ever-increasing degree. It was only now that the idea was
seriously taken upby a ruler and statesman who had theunique
capacity and ruthless consistency whichwere the necessary
prerequisites for transforming the plan from a mere visionary
programme into a political reality. Theinterest surroundq
the development of the Continental System, therefore, is
connected with the fact that its idea now came to be followed
up in deadly earnest, and that the entire content of the ideas
                      1 Hansard, vol. x, p. 473.
