                  BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                       101

                    COLONIALCARRYINGTRADE
     Thecentral point in the colonial trade at thistimewas
 formedby the WestIndies, especially intheircapacity              as
 sugarproducers ; andamong these the French and Spanish
 islands, especially Haiti and Cuba, were distinctly superior to
 the Britishislands, Jamaica, and the rest. The trade to the
 West Indian possessions of Napoleon and hisSpanishally,
 therefore, was regarded almost as the great prize of maritime
 commerce, whichwas sought after by the neutrals           with the
 eager support of the European mothercountries so long as they
 were powerless on the sea, while Great Britain wished to make
‘use of her power to win this prize for herself. It is true that the
 foremost colony of all, Haiti, or, more correctly, its western or
 French third, St. Domingue, had suffered immensely from the
 many negro insurrectionsever since the firstyears of the
revolutionary wars ; but sufficient was left to arouse the desire
 for gain. Furthermore,   the      remaining French colonies-
 Guadeloupe and Martinique in the West Indies, Guiana on the
 South Americancontinent,Isle-de-France(nowknown                  as
Mauritius) and Rkunion and Senegal in Africa-were somewhat
less damaged by the course of events during the war, while the
Spanish possessions seem, on the evidence of outside witnesses,
not t o have suffered seriously. The country which lay handy
to seize the trade with all these territories-which trade was
jealously guarded in peace time-was clearly the United States.
The latter had just begun its independent        politicalexistence
and was seeking ways which might lead them away from the
exclusive economic connexion with Great Britain that had been
created andmaintainedduringthe          colonial period. In this
way there arose a triangular trade which washighly impor-
tant for the Atlanticstates of the American Union. Vessels
quotation on p. 107 comes from his pp. 81-2), Johnson (from whom    is takenthe table
on p. 103), and Martens, as well as t o the Statutes at Large of the United K Z ~ d o m
and Hansard‘s Parliamentary Debates, but also to J. B. McMaster’s chapter in the
Cambridge Yodern History (Cambridge, 1903),vol. M, pp. 323 et sq., and Charming,
The Jeffersonian 8 y s t m , 1801-1812, in TheAmerican Nation: A History (New
York and London,1906), vol. XI, chs.13-15.        Thequotation from McMeeter on
p. 104 is taken from his History of the People of the United States, vol. m, p. 225
(ap. Johnson, op. cit., vol. II, p. 28).
