     !X     ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
      he wrote a year later (December 17, 1807) to theminister of the
      interior, Cretet, and ordered him to encourage capturing as ' the
      only means by which the requirements of the country could be
      supplied '.  On the same 'occasion, also, his minister of finance,
      Gaudin, in a report written in connexion with the Milan decree,
      pointed out the injury inflicted by the system on the French
      industries, which had already found it difficult to obtain colonial
     raw materials ; but he considered that the injury to England
      was yet greater owing to her greater dependence onindustry and
     foreign trade.
          Admiral Mahan, in his somewhat harsh criticism of Napo-
      leon's policy, condemns the Continental System on the ground
~    that it injuriouslyaffected the neutrals, who wereespecially
     indispensable to France because she herself was excluded from
     the sea. ' The neutral carrier,' he says, ' was the key of the
     position. He was, while the war lasted, essentially the enemy
     of Great Britain, who needed him little, and a friend of France,
     who neededhimmuch.' 9 This statement appears to involve
     the ignoring of all the motives behind this mode of warfare, the
     object of whichwas to conquer Great Britain economically ;
     for that object Napoleon could neverhave attainedby allowing
     neutral trade tocontinue. That Napoleon had to expect greater
    'injury to Great Britain than to his own countries from the self-
     blockade of the Continent was a necessary consequence of the
     viewswhich, as we have already seen,werecommon to him
     and his adversary; and from his standpoint, accordingly, the
     policy was sufficiently justified. Whether he and his opponents
     conceived the economicconnexions aright, is quiteanother
     question,whichbelongs to a later chapter. It is a question,
     moreover, which can by no means be disposed of by a mere
     reference to his need of the help of the neutrals for supplies
     which he thought he could do without or replace from other
     sources.
         Correapondanw, nos. 11,378, 13,395; Servibres, L'Allemagne franqaise, &c.,
    pp. 12930.
         Mrthan, In$uence of Sea Pow~r,&c., vol. II, pp. 353 et seq.
