                  BRITISH
                  COUNTER-MEASURES                                          99
   by economicor otherpressure, to revoke his self-blockade
   decree. In form, indeed, this is what was attempted, inasmuch
   as all measures on both sides were represented as actsof reprisal,
  that is to say, as being caused by the aggressions of the enemy
  and as being intended to lead him into better ways. In the
  English official language the declared object was ‘ t o restrain
  the violence of the enemy and to retort upon him the evils ofi
  his own injustice ’, as it was expressed in the Order in Council)
  of January 7, 1807. And undoubtedly these declarations were
  in many cases seriously meant. But if such pressure was to be
  exerted in the sphere of economics, it almost necessarily had to
  takethe oppositeform to penetratingintothecontinental
 market: it had to be an effectual (;.e., import-preventing)
 blockade of the Continent. And this, as we well know, was just
 what people would not thinkof doing, for it would have implied,
 as was indeed said in Parliament, ‘ that France had shut the
 door against our commerce and that we had bolted it.’ AI-
 thoughthis ideacame uptimeandagain,everything                  else
 contributed toput thesepositivecounter-measuresaside              :
 Napoleon’s obstinacy, which held out small hopes of any change
 in his tactics ; the slight prospects of giving any appreciable
 strength to such pressure;andthedirectdisadvantages
thereof for GreatBritain’s own industrial life. As before,
therefore,nothingmore        was possible than ameregesture,
which was contradicted by every detailof actual trade life,
     But by the side not only of attempting to break through
the blockade, but also of placing obstacles in theway of imports
with the object of bringing economic pressure t o bear, there
was a third,anegative         line,namely, totryto     injure the
trade of France and herallies in the same way as Napoleon had
sought to injure that of Great Britain. In other words, it was
intended to cut off their exports, and in that way, according t o
the then prevailing view, to undermine the possibility of their’
economic prosperity, just asNapoleon intended to do asregards
England. It was ‘ the policy of commercial rivalry ’,as distinct
from the policy of retaliation, to use Canning’s expression.
    The expreesionWEE cited by Perceval in the House of Commons, Fob. 5, 1808.
Haneard, vol. x, p. 328.
                                    H2
