             BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                       109
  ‘ rule of 1756 ’, even irrespective of the question whether any
 blockade had been ordered, and consequently it could not be
 regarded as annulled by the fact that the blockade had been
 made less strict on certain stretches.
      Both in Great Britain herself and also in America and on
 the Continent of Europe, indeed, these different British measures
 during the years 1805 and 1806, especially the new exposition
 of the law in the prize courts, were regarded as serious blows
 against the neutralcarryingtrade.         Butthe A.merican trade
 statistics given above do not point      to this. On the contrary,
 they show a higher figure for exports of colonial goods during
 1806 than during the yearbefore or after; andthe figures
 relating to captures do not show any considerable rise untilthe
 followingyear. It ispossible,therefore,         that inreality the
 application of the measures was such as Mahan has laid down.
 In any case: it may surely be considered clearthat during 1806
 Great Britain did not get rid of the neutral trade of which she
 disapproved or put an end to the advantages which,from a
British point of view, this trade afforded to the enemy part of
the Continent.
      Then, at the close of the year, came Napoleon’s Continental
decree.Owing to the enormousemphasiswithwhich                 it was
proclaimed, as well as to themeasures by whichit was followed,
this gave a tangible occasion for    the discussion of new measures
chiefly against the neutrals. The ministry which came to power
in Great Britain after Pitt’s death in January 1806, was under
the leadership of Lord Grenville, who had for many years been
Pitt’s foreign secretary and fellow worker ; and for the reason
that it embracedmany of the mostgiftedpoliticiansin              the
country, it isknown inhistory as the ‘ Ministry of All the
Talents ’. The foreign secretary at the start was Fox, the most
Francophile of all British statesmen, and,after his death in the
middle of September, the future leader of the Whig Party, the
then Lord Howick, but better knownunderhis later title of
Earl Grey. This government was not inclined toward forcible
measures ; and the only British statesman after Pitt’s death
                          See ante, p. 103.
