                 BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                   111
hercolonieswasforbidden          as a matter of course, butthis
implied nothing new. On the other hand, as regards coasting
trade proper, it was more difficult to get at than any other part
of the enemy’s shipping,a point to which the domestic opponents
of the government did not fail to call attention. On March 17,
1807, inacommunication to J. G. Rist, the Danish chargk
d’aJgPniTeS at London at the time, Lord Howick amplified this
further bydeclaring that there wasnoobjection t o neutral
vessels carrying cargot o an enemy port, thence goingin ballast
to another port, and then carrying cargo from this last port to
the home country. It was just the flourishing Danish Mediter-
ranean trade that was hit by the new law ; but apartfrom that
the importance of the measure can not be regarded as great,
except that toa certain extent it compromised the Whig Party
with regard to the justifiability of measures of reprisal, and so
far rendereddifficulttheirposition        with regard to the more
comprehensive   measures       of their
                                     successorsin        the same
direction.’
    It was quite natural,therefore, that those whowere in
favour of more forcible measures on     the partof the government,
eitheragainstNapoleon         or against the neutrals,were     not
satisfiedwith the January order. In this connexion we have
first to think of Stephen and his supporters, who, according to
the later evidence of his opponent, Brougham, constitut,ed the
greatmajority. It is true that Stephen’sbook had appeared
as far back as the autumn of 1805, or more than a year before
the issue of the Berlin decree ; but there is nothing to indicate
that either the man or his book had exerted any influence on
the January order. The positive demands of Stephen are not
quite clear, it is true ; but in any case they can not be regarded
as having been satisfied by  the measure ofthe Grenviue ministry,
In manypassages in hisbookStephenassumesanegative
attitude toward the thought of using the war as a pretext for
     1 Lord Eldon in the House of Lords, Feb. 15, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, p. 475) ;
Peroeval in the Home of Commons,Feb. 4, 1807 (Hansard, vol. m,p. 629). Lord
Howick’s declaration is given in Hansard, vol. x, pp. 402 ef, seq. &vald, Badrag
le’l Oplysning om Danmk-Norgea Handd og Skibsfart, 1800-1807,in          Hkh&k
Tidsskrift, VI11 (1917), vol. VI, pp. 409,433-4.
