 112 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
   commercial advantages, which he calls ' a morbidexcess of
   sensibility to immediate commercial profit ' ; and as a warning
  example to his countrymen he mentions the action of the
  Dutch, during a siege, of selling powder to theenemy, whereby,
  he says, they ' preferred their trade to their political safety '.
  In accordance with this? he adopts for the most part a purely
  naval standpoint and urges that the neutrals, with very few
  exceptions,should be entirely preventedfromdealing          with
  enemy countries and in enemy goods,and especially with enemy
  colonies. In that way the enemy would be compelled to carry
  on his trade himself and tofetter his naval forces by convoying
  trading vessels and protecting his colonies and providing them
  with supplies ; and by all these things the desired possibility
  of captures would also be secured to its fullest extent. Along-
  side all of this, however, we also find hints that more directly
 anticipate the followingcourse of development, namely, that
 the goods of the enemycolonies might be conveyed to the
 British market and there taxed tosuch an extent as to prevent
 them from competing with those of the British colonies.
     Stephen wascloselyconnected         with the English Tory
 politician,Spencer Perceval, who as prime minister wasin
 company with Stephen at the time of his assassination by a
 lunatic in 181%; and it was from Perceval that there came the
 first positive criticism of the January regulations, wiz., in the
 House of Commons on February 4, 1807. I n hisspeech,too,
we have the first complete explanation of the motives that lay
behind the definitive Orders in Council ; and to judge by the
speech it would seem that the detailed framing of those orders
was due less to Stephen than to Perceval. The latter clearly
takes his stand, from the very first, on what we have designated
above 1 as the ' third line ' of policy, namely,Jhgt O  ,  M
rivalry. After a criticism of the January regulations he comes
t m t he regards as two possible expedients for meeting the
Berlin decree. The one would be ' to exclude certain necessary
commerce ' from the territory of the enemy. But if this leads
us to expect a plea foran effective blockade,we are immediately
                         1 See ante, p. 99.
