 110 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
                                                                                                 I
 who was to some extent equal to Napoleon, but who did not
 belong to the Talents Ministry, namely, George Canning, some-
 what later said disparagingly thatthe Grenvillemeasures
 against the Berlindecree ' partook of all the bad qualitiesof                                   1

 half-measures '.I
                                                                                                 1

            FIRSTORDERIN COUNCIL(JANUARY              7, 1807)                           '   8


       However, Lord Howick's governmental measure turned out
  to be the first step in the British counteraction which was to
  occupy the thoughts of the whole world during the following
  fiveyears.Like its successors, it assumed the form of a measure                                1
  by theKing in Council,without the co-operation of Parliament,                                  t
                                                                                                 i
  and it was therefore, from the point of view of public law, an
  Order in Council. Hence, this term became afterwards in the
 popular mind almosta proper name for regulationsof this kind.
 The first Order in Council was issued on       January 7, 1807, or
 a month and a half after the Berlin decree.2 As a measure of
 reprisal against the Berlindecree        and with the reference,
                       to~ thenecessity of ' restraining the violence
 previously q ~ o t e d ,
 of the enemy and to retort upon him the evils of his own in-
 justice ', trade between enemyports was entirely forbidden,and
also trade between otherports at which the Berlindecree
 prevented Englishshipsfromcalling.            The members of the
 Grenville governmentafterwards maintained that this was only
an application of the ' rule of 1756 ', which includeda prohibition
of coasting trade along the territory of the enemy. But if that
had been the case, there would have been no use of asserting
an intention of reprisal ; and theopponents of the government-
e. g., Lord Eldon, the Lord Chancellor in the following Ministry-
also observed that the order went outside the alleged principle,
in that it prohibited, for instance, trade between French and
Spanish ports. Trade between the enemy mother country and
     Hansard, vol. IX, p. 687 (June 30, 1807).
   2 All these Orders in Council of 1807 are printed in Hansard, vol.  x, pp. 12648;
but as some of them are nut r e d l y acceesible outside of Great Britain, and a8 they
are, moreover, very often incorrectlysummarized, they are reproduced inapp. I
from Hansard.
   3 See ante, p. 99.
