               BRITISH COUPlrTER-MEASURES                           107
     Merchants who, immediately prior to the last war,werescarcely
 known, even in the obscure seaport townsa t which they resided, have
 suddenly started up as soleowners of great numbers of ships, and sole
 proprietors of rich cargoes, which i t would have alarmed the wealthiest
 merchants of Europe t o hazard a t once on thechance of a market, even
 in peaceable times. A man who, a t t h e breaking out of the war, was
 a petty shoemaker in a small town of East Friesland, had, a t one time,
 a hundred and fifty vessels navigating as his property, under Prussian
           .
colours . , The cargoes of no less than five East Indians, all composed
of the rich exports of Batavia, together with three of the ships, were
contemporary purchases, on speculation,of a single house a t Providence
in Rhode Island, and     wereallbound, as asserted, to that American
port ; where, i t is scarcely necessary toadd, nodemandfortheir
cargoes existed. ...      Single shipshavebeenfoundreturningwith
bullion on board, to the valueof from a hundred to a hundred and fifty
t,housandSpanish dollars, besidesvaluablecargoes of other colonial
exports. Yet even these daring adventurers have       been eclipsed. One
neutral house has boldly contractedforallthemerchandize            of the
Dutch East India Company at Batavia, amounting in value to no less
than one million seven hundred thousand pounds sterling.

    All this led, in the spring of 1805, to an alteration in the
practice of the British law courts, which considerably damaged
the possibilities of the American carrying trade. The highest
British prize court, the Prize Appeal Court  of the PrivyCouncil,
in the famous case of the ship Baez with its cargo from Barce-
lona to Salem, Massachusetts, and thence to Havana, declared
both the vessel and the cargo forfeited, despite the facthat the
latter had been unloaded and passed through the custom-house
in the usualway in the Americm port (May      22). This precedent
wasimmediately followed bytwoothersintheAdmGalty
Court,whereby the intention of eluding the regulationswas
declared to be decisive as against the external criteria. At the
same time the British' went a more direct way to the end of
obtainingcontrolover       the American colonies of the enemy,
namely, by passing a series    of laws which were promulgated
in April and June 1805, and in July 1806. These were intended
to encourage the importation of the products of those colonies
either directto England bylicence or to theBritish West Indies,
either to sixteen free ports established there or, with somewhat
