                                                                                   k.

                                                                                   1
 108 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 less liberty and on the basis of a licence, to other islands, with
 a somewhat varying right to be forwarded tothe British home
 country. At the same time permissionwasgiven              to send
                                                                                   I
 a return cargo from the British to the foreign colonies. To the                   f
 sixteen free ports importation might be made in small vessels                     1
 of any nationality whatsoever, that is to say, even of enemy
 nationality.1
     This new application of the law as regards ‘ circuitous
 voyages ’ aroused a great deal of feeling in t,he United States,
 and in April 1806, led to an American counter-measure ; and
 at the same time therewere issuedthe British blockade declara-
 tions concerning the North Sea coast and the English Channel
 on whichwe have previouslytouched.* The most important
 of these in all respects was the blockade which was proclaimed
 on May 16, 1806, on the initiative of the then British foreign
 secretary, the celebrated Whig politician, Charles    James Fox.
This created a strictly blockaded region between Ostend and
the mouth of the Seine-that is to say, practically Havre-and
also two less strictly blockaded regions to the north and to the
south thereof-from Ostend       to the Elbe and from the mouth
of the Seine to Brest,    respectively.     Neutral vessels were
conceded the right to call at theports on the last two stretches,
on condition that their goods were not contraband of war and
did not belong to enemy subjects, and on the further condition
that they hadnot been loaded in an enemy port and were not,
to begin with, bound to such a port.
     Like most of the British blockade regulations, this was very
obscure ; and it is not known to me how it was applied during
the remainder of the year.Mahan’sview            that it liberated
neutrals from the obligation laid down in the Esses case, honestly
to import the goods of the enemy colonies beforethey were again
exported to Europe, i: not very satisfactory as an interpretation
of the law ;3 for the condition was absolutely binding by the
     45 Geo. 111, cc. 34 & 57 ; 46 Geo. 111, c. 111.
     See a d e , p. 81.
   3 Mahan, InfEuence of Sea Power, &e., vol. II, pp. 269-70; alao, Sea Power in
its Relations, &c., vol. I, p. 108.
