 120 ORIGIN AXD EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 vessels on their way to Europe, either to Gibraltar or to Malta
 or to any port in the   British Isles.
     In addition to all this, finally, there were pure measures of
 reprisal, framed according to their      French
                                               counterparts.
 Trading vesselswere to remain enemy propertyandto               be
 confiscated as such, even if they weresold to neutrals ; and
 what was the most unreasonable of all the regulations, the mere
 possession of a French certificateof origin as to thenon-British e
 nationality of the cargo was to involve the confiscation of both
 ship and cargo. On the otherhand, since the lack of such
 certificates involved capture on the partof the French, a neutral
 vessel, a t least if it did not sail under British convoy, had,
 according to this last regulation, no alternative between break-
ing the orders of one power or the other, with the consequent
risk of capture from one side or the other, provided, it is well
to remark, that they wished to act openly and honestly, which
therefore was practically impossible. The only effect of all this
was the establishment of asystem of double ship’s papers,
which gradually attained animmense scope ; and thus inreality
the consequence was that the laws of both sides were broken.
    I n this multiplicity of regulations-which,however,        have
notby     any means been fully reproduced here-the             most
prominent thing of all is the obligation to call a t a British port,
with the possibilities thereby created of controlling and render-
ingdearer enemy products; especiallyenemycolonialgoods.
In the course of time, too, the British ministers managed to
find a comparatively clear expression of their ways of thinking
in this respect. This was especially the case in almost identical
utterances made in thespring of 181%by three of the ministers.
As formulated by Lord Bathurst, the president of the Board of
Trade, that is to say, minister of commerce, it ran as follows :
‘ France by her decrees had resolved to abolish all trade with
England : England said, in return, that France should then
have no trade but with England.’ 1 This, of course, did away
     House of Lords, Feb. 28,1812. Hansard, pol. XXI, p. 1053.Almost        to the
same effect,cf. Rose, vice president of the Board of Trade, in the HomeofCommons,
Mar. 3,1812, and Perceval on the same day and Apr. 17, 1812. Hansard, pol. XXI,
