                 BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                  121
 with the idea of blockade as such, and the licensingsystem
 took its place in theseat of honour, partly through the ‘ proviso ’
 regulations of the ordinancesthemselves and partly through
 the licences expresslypermitted in them.
     This, however, was far from clear to everybody ; nor was
 it approved by all to whom it wasclear.Some of the home
 critics of the Britishgovernment,somewhat         later including
 Canning,whowas        amember of the government when the
 ordinances were issued but had to leave it in 1809, considered
 that they ought to be true to their alleged purpose of making
 the enemy feelthe consequences of his own injustice and to that
 end cut off hisupplies.’       But morenumerouswerethose
 attacks of the opposition which blamed the government for its
advertised intention, doingso under the unfounded assumption
that it wassincere.These        criticsdwelton the impossibility
of starving outthe Continent, the small extent to which a
 shortage of certain articles of luxury was felt, the encourage-
ment to new branches of production and the invention of
substitutes whichsuch ablockademightintroduce             intothe
Continent, and all the consequent injury to British industry and
Britishcolonies. In point of fact, however, all this criticism
did not apply t o the Orders in Council as they worked and as
they were intended to work, but to Napoleon’s Continental
System. To that extent, therefore, it implied a recognition of
the appositeness of that system, whichwas certainly not the
intention of the critics, The real character of the government
policydid not, however, escape criticism altogether, as when
Lord Grenville in one of his first discussions on the Orders in
Council, in the House of Lords on February 15, 1808, declared
that : ‘ This principle of forcing trade into our markets would
have disgraced the darkest ages of monopoly.’On the whole,
however, it may be said  that thecriticism, usually very much em-
bittered, missed the truepoint of the policy of the government.8
pp. 1120,1163; vol. XXII, p, 434. Cf. also, LordWellesley’sutterance in 1811
(see below, p. 208).                                       1 See ante, p. 99.
    e The following are a few examples : Fiat standpoint : Canning in the House
of Commons, Mar. 3,1812 (Haward, vol. XXI. p. 1147); Lord Sidmouth,the
former and far from eminent prime minister under the name of Addington, in the
