                 BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                   119
 prohibition of export was created, one would expect      to meet
 with an aim at the actual blockade of the Continent, which the
 opposition indeed often assumed, more or less bona &de,to be
the realobject of this measure. But, as a matter of fact,
nothing was further from the thoughts of the government.
Perceval,whoinhiscapacity         of chancellor of the exchequer
introduced the billson this subject,justified the prohibition
oncinchonabark,       it is true,byalleging     that the greatest
difficulties had already revealed t.hemselves on the Continent,
especially in Napoleon’s armies, throughthe scarcity of medica-
ments, as was indeedshownby the fact that the pricehad
increasedsevenfold.      But hewentonimmediately          t o say :
‘ The object of the prohibition in this instance was that it might
ultimately be the means of introducing other articles into the
Continent.’ For these reasons the laws themselves authorized
licencesfrom the prohibitions, as Perceval again emphasized,
inorder to prevailon the enemy to receiveBritishgoods,
‘ Therewouldbe no difficulty,’hesaid, ‘in obtainingany
quantity of this article, the moment the enemytook off his
prohibition from the importation of other articles,’ 1 Thus the
competitionpoint of viewwas the decidingfactor all along
the line,
    But it remained to regulate the control by seeing that the
vesselswent as a matter of fact to the Britishports ; and
the regulations onthis subject wereamong thosethat attracted
the greatest attention, althoughthey are not of equal interestin
principle. The commanders of British war-ships and privateers
were instructed, before the new regulations became known, t o
warn vessels onthe way to enemy or other forbidden ports, and
also to order them to make their way to specially named ports.
Vesselson their way to an American port whichwas not in
their own country were to go to Halifax in Nova Scotia (which
was also used for similar purposes during the recent war) or to
a West Indian free port ; vessels south of the Equator were to
go to Ceylon, to St. Helena or the Cape ofGood Hope ; and
   1 House of Commons, Feb. 22 and 24, Mar. 16, 1808 (Haneard, vol x, pp. 695-8,
728, 1168) ; 48 Geo. 111, cc. 29, 33, 34.
