                  BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                       117
in these measures, despite their seeming aimlessness ; and this
 showed itself in a number of details.
     The principal thing in all respects was the obligatory call
 at a British port. The intention of this regulation was presum-
 ably, above all,to raise the prices on the products of the enemy
 colonies and the enemy parts of the European mainland in all
 ports where they might compete with goods of Great Britain
 or her colonies.' For this purpose it was laid down that both
 goods of enemy destination and goods of enemy origin, as well
 as goods which had been loaded in      an enemy port, should be
 discharged on the arrival of the vessel at a British port. The
 onlyexceptionswerecorn,        flour, and otherunmanufactured
 natural producebroughtdirectfrom          the producingcountry,
 where there was no competition with British goods, and where
 it was thought possible, without inconvenience, to show a cer-
 tain consideration for the exportation by the United States of
 their own products, as opposed to theire-exportation of
 colonial goods. The whole of this exception, however, furnishes
very significant evidenceof the long distancethat Great Britain
had travelled fromthe temporary plan of 1793 to starve out the
Continent.
    When the goods were afterwards to be exported again, the
majority of the foreign goods,but not the British colonial goods,
nor the actual products of neutral countries just mentioned,
were subjected to customs dues; and in complete accordance
with the aim of the whole measure these dutiesattained a con-
siderableheight : for instance, for coffee, 28s. percwt. ; for
brownsugar, '10s. ; and forwhitesugar, 14s. At the prices
then current these rateswould seem to have corresponded to at
least 20 or 30 per cent, of the value.*
    Whatthismeantforgoods          that hadbeenbroughtunder
British control only by military pressure, appears from such
a detailas the fact that a special provision inthe most important
    1 Cf., for instance, the utterancesof Lord Bathurst, the president of the Board
of Trade, and Lord Hawkeabury (afterwards Lord Liverpol), the home swretarg;
in the House of Lords, Feb. 15, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, pp. 471, 485).
    * The figures relating to prices w llibe found in Tooke, A Histmy of P r k , $c.,
701.II,pp. 398,414.
