 122 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
  TERRITORIAL EXPANSION      OF THE CONTINENTALSYSTEM         (1807)
     I n order to make the connexion clear, the British counter-
 measures to the Berlin decree have been followed to the close
 of the year 1807, and evensomewhatbeyond.             But on the
 Continent the year 1807 had been rich in tremendous events
 with far-reaching consequencesfor the Continental System.
 At Tilsit Napoleon had prevailed upon Russia to join the great
 policy of reprisals in the event of her failure to mediate a peace
 between Great Britain and France ; and naturally enough she
 failed. The bombardment of Copenhagen-Canning’s act of
 violence against Denmark, which, as we know,lwas              quite
 superfluous-had thrown that country entirely into the hands
of Napoleon and made its ruler, the Crown Prince Frederick,
who shortly afterwards ascended the throne as Frederick VI,
one of his few sincereallies.Meanwhile,Napoleon’sown
aggression against Port.uga1had put anend to theindependence
of that country after the royal family had fled to Brazil. The
remaining states of Europe were either moreorless            purely
subsidiary states to France, or a t leastohad been so recently
vanquished by Napoleon thatthey could not contemplate
resisting the introduction of the Berlin decree. To the former
category belonged the kingdarns of Italy (North Italy),   Holland,
and Naples, the Confederation of the Rhine, and in the    main (for
the present) Spain ; to the latter, Prussia and Austria. Besides
these, the kingdom of Etruria (Tuscany) was reduced to sub-
mission by military occupation and the other Italian territories
House of Lords, Feb. 17, 1809,   and Feb. 28, 1812(Hansard, vol. XII, pp. 791-2 ;
vol. XXI, p. 1071). Second standpoint : Lord AuckLand, president of the Board of
Trade in ‘ All the Talents ’ and in his time the eponymous negotiator of the Eden
Treaty, in the Houseof Lords, Feb. 15, 1808   (Hanstard, vol. x, p. 468); Lord Henry
Petty,chancellor of theexchequerin        ‘ AU theTalents’andafterwards          Lord
Lensdome, in the House       of Commons, Feb. 18, 1808     (Hansard, vol. x, p. 682);
Whitbrad, one of the principal speakers of the Opposition, in the House of Corn-
mons,Mar.     6, 1809 (Hansard, vol. XII, pp. 1167-8). Thirdstandpoint:Lord
Grenville, as above (Hansard, vol. x, p. 483). Cf. the more perspicacious criticism
of Lord Grey, formerly Lord Howick, in the House      of Lords, June 13, 1810 (Han-
srtrd, vol. XM, pp. 546 et-eeq).
       Forthe Scandinaman investigationsthereader         is referred to theleading
authority on Danish history intheeighteenthandearlynineteenthcenturies,
Professor Edvsrd Holm, Dannaccrk-Norgea Hietorie fm 1720 til 1814, vol. w.
