    118 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
    of the statutes had to concede to the owner of the goods the
    right to allow them tobe destroyed inport without duty.1 But
    besides t.his there were also certain restrictions in the right to
’   re-export these goods a t all, still without the slightest intention
    of cutting off the enemy’ssupplies, although it oftenmight
    seem so, but only in the interests of commercial rivalry. The
    greatestrelaxations,therefore,       curious as it may seem,were
    made in the permission to export to European ports, inasmuch
    aseverything might go there, even enemy property(to be
    distinguished, of course, from commodities of enemy origin) ;
    this was otherwise excluded from all toleration byreason of the
    British denial of the rule that ‘ free ships make free goods                          ’.
    The reason, of course,was that Britishstatesmen, as usual,
    wished to force upon a reluctant enemy goods via England.
    All British and East Indian commodities and captured goods
    wereallowed to go to enemy colonies ; and foreign goods
    imported to England might go there by a licencewhichwould                                  .
    always still furt-her increase their price   ; while, finally, other
    places, chiefly,of course, the British colonies, might not, without
    special licence, receive six kinds of goods that played a special
    part in the colonial trade, namely, sugar, coffee, wine, brandy,
    snuff, and cotton.2
         But there were two commodities concerning which there
    arose a veryvehement          struggle, namely, rawcottonand
    cinchona bark, usually called Jesuit’sbark. The former was
    naturally of the greatestimportance in the continental industry
    that competedwith the British, while the latter, as is well
    known, was a p 2 c e de TBsistance in the older pharmacopeia in
    all febrile maladies. After having originally thought of imposing
    an export duty onthese goods too, the Britishgovernment
    decided to prohibit their export. Here, a t least, where an actual
        1 48 Geo. III, c. 26, 8. 16 (the Principal ‘ Orders in Council Act ’). Cf. Lord
    Emkine in the H o w of Lords, Mar. 8, 1808 (Hansard, vol. x, pp. g6-7).
        8 This seems to the writer to be the only possible interpretation of the most
    obaure of all the ordinances, namely, the Order in Council of Nov. 26, 1807 (printed
    as no. IX in app. I), which is clearly the one alluded to by Grenville in his utterrrsce
    previously cited(pp. 114-16), compared withthe Order in Council of the same
    day (printed as no. x).
