116 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 trade in their products is prohibited. Every vessel trading to
 those countries shall be fair prize, as well as its cargo and all
 goods coming from there.
     But immediately following thesedraconicregulations           are
 exceptions which entirely nullify the rule and makepossible the
 very trade so rigorously prohibited. Out of alleged regard for
 the neutrals, in fact,it is declared that theyshall stillbe allowed
 to provide themselves with colonial goods for their own con-
 sumption and even to carry on ‘ such trade with His Majesty’s
 enemies as shall be carried on directly with     the ports of His
 Majesty’s dominions or of his allies ’. And in this the true
 fundamental principle has found expression. Ignoring details,
 we maysay that the realprincipalregulations,            asdistinct
 from the apparentones, consists in permitting both direct trade
 between the home country of a neutral vessel and enemy
 colonies and alsodirect trade between the EuropeanBritish
 port and enemy ports. What is prohibited in the first place,
therefore, is direct intercourse between the enemy colonies and
theirmother countries. But further,in the main, alldirect
intercourse between the enemy countries andotherports               is
prohibited, except when the ‘ other ports ’ are either European
British ports or ports in the vessel’s own country. That is to
say, intercourse is also prohibited between enemy ports and
neutral portselsewhere than in the home country of the neutral
vessels.
    Thus the regulations left the intercourse of the neutrals,
principally the Americans, with the enemy West Indian colonies
so far undisturbed. But bypreventing the American vessels
from conveying the products of those colonies direct to any port
on the European mainland, neutral or enemy, the Orders in
Council practically cut them off from almost the whole trade
with the enemy colonies, except in so far as they were willing
to put in at a British port ; for the intercourse which was still
allowed between the enemy colonies and the United States       itself
was of no very great importance, the Union’s requirements of
West Indian products being quite insignificant. Consequently,
we can not deny the existence of a certain amountof consistency
