                  BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                    ,115
 absolutely to contradict one another, of the same day or with
 only a few days’ interval. This incomprehensibility not only
 holdsgoodfor      the people of later generations, but alsofor
 the people of that time ; and the fogginess of the regulations
 was a standing butt for the jeers of the opposition.Thus,
 Lord Grenville declared his belief that the very persons who
 drafted them had scarcely understood their content; and he
 also alleged that four points in the same ordinance contained
 four contradictions, and that he   was not a little proud of having
 been able t o understand the connexion at 1ast.l The often
 confused and mutually conflicting explanationsof the ministers
 did not, as a rule, help to clear matters ; and owing to the total
lack of all special investigations, especiallyas t o their connexion
withgenerallegislationregardingshipping           and the colonies,
certain points at the present time are not easy to interpretn2
But this does not apply to thegeneral line of thought, which is
quite clear ; and the pretended object of the measures can be
distinguished without any considerabledifficultyfrom their
real objects. The fundamental idea is to be found practically
in the germ as early as Perceval’s speech in February.
    Seldom,however, has the contrast between the policy
officially proclaimed and the policy actually pursued stood out
in a more striking way than in the chief of the three Orders in
Council of November 11, the one which can properly be called
@e3-2?                       After a declaration that the January
ordinance had not attained its object, either of compelling the
enemy t o revoke his measure orof inducing the neutrals to take
action to thesame effect,this ordinance simply proceedsto copy
the most important points of the Berlin decree, Thus not only
all enemy countries withtheir colonies, but also all-placesfrom
which the British flag is excluded (this last point has nothing
corresponding to it in the blockade declaration of the Berlin
decree), are declared to be subject to the same rule as if they
were really blockaded inthe strictest manner ; and, further, all
    Hansard, vol. x, pp. 482-3 ; vol. m, p. 774.
  * The reader is here referred to the text of the Orders in Council in app. 1.
    See app. i, no. v.
                                      I2
