132 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 a constant disobedience to the provisions of the law. As early
 as January 9, 1808, special enactments were made as to the
 security that coasting and fishing vessels would have to give,
 and it was declared that the exceptions made in the Embargo
 Act in favour of public armed vessels did not apply to priva-
 teers(chapter 8). OnMarch 12, inthe sameyear, foreign
 vessels also were required to give security t o the extent of four
 times the value of vessel and cargo, or twice as much as for
 native vessels, that they would not sail to foreign ports ; and
 for fishing vessels, a declaration was imposed under oath as to
 whether any of the catch hadbeen sold during the trip. At the
 Same time, however, the President was authorized, very im-
prudently, to grant vessels the right t o go in ballast to foreign
ports in order to fetch from there the property of American
citizens, on giving a pledge to return with that property, and
 not to carryonanyothertrade,            etc.(chapter   33). Still
more forceful was the intervention a month and ahalf later by
a law of April 25, which both forbade all loading of vessels
except under the control of the authorities, and also in general
terms forbade any vessel to depart, without the special per-
mission of the President, to any United States port or district
whichwas adjacent to foreign territory ; andthecustoms
staff was charged to take under their care anysuspiciously large
stocks of goods in such border regions. Further, the law gave
to naval and customsvessels the right of search and authorized
the customs staff, pending the President’s decision, t o detain
vessels suspected of intending to break the law, and so on
(chapter 66). Finally, on January 9,1809, there was passed an
Enforcement Act,l which summoned all the weak public powers
of the Union to compel obedience to the law. Thus the Presi-
dent was authorized to employ the fighting forces of the United
States by land and sea and to hire the imposing number of
thirty vessels for the purpose. At the same time all theprevious
laws were made more severe. Vehicleswere also subjected to
the embargo, in order to prevent the law from being circum-
vented by land routes ; permission had to be obtained for the
               United States Statutes at Large, vol. rr, p. 606.
