                   BRITISH COUNTER-MEASURES                                         1%
 longer any neutrals, inasmuchas they were either, and as a rule,
 Englishmen in disguise, or, at all events, had made themselves
 the accomplices of the English by accommodating themselves
 tothe OrdersinCouncil.Thisconstructionputuponnon-
 French shipping applied almostas a matter of course to vessels,
 not only from allied, but also from purely vassal powers, On
 the very same day    that theMilan decree was issued, for instance,
 Napoleon gave orders to DecrPs, his minister of the marine, to
 detain a Russian vessel-that is to say, a vessel belongingto an
 alliednation-whichhadarrivedin             the port ofMorlaix in
 Brittany ; and for thisorderhegave           the truly Napoleonic
 justification that it was either really English-inwhichcase
 it was condemned as a matter of course-or that it was really
 Russian, and in that case should be detainedto prevent it from
 being taken by the English.DecrPswasalsocharged             to give
 orders to thesame effect to all French ports concerning Danish,
 Dutch,Spanish, and allothervessels,            and to investigate
 whether the regulations weresimilarlyappliedin the vassal
 states, On this   basis
                       Napoleon afterwards
                                         systematically
 built up his treatment of non-Frenchvesselsin the ports of
France and itssubsidiary states, with gradually more      and more
developedprotectionisttendencies as againstshippingwhich
 was not purely French.l
     On the same day that the Milan decree was issued, Cham-
pagny, the foreignminister at the time,receivedorders to
transmit it by a special courierto Holland, Spain, and Denmark,
with the request that these nominally sovereign states should
complywith (obtempker h) it ; andthe continentalpowers
immediately set to work to bring their legislation into accord-
ance with the new decree of the master.2 Of greater interest
than the details of this development, which becomes important
onlyinconnexionwith the inquiry into the actual workings
of the system, is the attitude assumed by the United States-
   1 First Milan decree : Bdletin dea l&, &o., 4th ser., bull. 172, no. 2,912, Second
Milan deoree : Corr-nce,              no. 13,391 ; of. also, Napoleon to Champgny,
Jan. 10, 1810, no. 16,127; also, Napoleon to Deorda, no. 13,398.
   * C o r r e s w n c e , no. 13,393 ; M a ~ t e n ~ ,
                                                    Nmveau recueil, &aa, vol. I, pp. 458
et sq.
