128 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
againbyPresident       Madison in 1809-17, partly because of
political traditiondating    from the time when France co-
operatedin the American War of Independence, and partly
because the conflicts of a neutral sea-faring nation must always
be keenest with that combatant who commands the sea. The
remarkable thing about the situation is that it was precisely
those economic interests andthose parts of the country for the
defence of which the campaign of neutrality was carried to
extremes, that were its most zealous opponents and did their
utmost to prevent its efficaey. Nor did they hesitate to follow
the same tactics even during the war to which the policy of
neutrality led, just because the measures of neutralityhad
necessarily to be directed against the few remnants of inter-
national intercourse that the belligerents had left undisturbed.
Both in this respect and in other respects the neutrals of our
day have had something to learn from American developments.
    The increased severity in the British treatment of neutrals,
as we know, went back especially to the new interpretation of
' broken voyages ' in the Essert! case in the summer of 1805, and
in April, 1806, it had occasioned the American counter-measure
in the form of the Non-importation Act,l which prohibited the
importation, both from England and from other countries, of
most of the main groupsof Britishindustrialproducts, excluding,
however, cotton goods. But the American law did not enter
into force until November 15, and was suspended at the close
of the year, so that it turned out to be nothing more than a
threat. The Berlin decree of November 21, 1806, immediately
led the American envoy in Paris to address an inquiry to the
Frenchminister of the marine, Vice Admiral Decrds, asto
the interpretation of the new law a t sea. In theabsence of the
Emperor the answer was favourable,2and consequently there
was no immediateoccasion foruneasiness on the partof America.
On the contrary, there were complaints in England that the
Americans were making common cause with Napoleon in order
to supply France with the industrial products      that she was
otherwise wont to obtain from England. Nor was any great
 1 Undted Statea 8tatute.a at Large, vol. n, p. 379.   2   See ante, p. 91.
