130 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 part of its cargo which’wasof British origin declared fair prize.
 However, the new Orders in Council were known in the United
 States (in fact, thongh not     officially) whenonDecember      $22,
 1807, Congress and the President enacted the Embargo Act,l
 which is one of the most interestinglegislativeproducts          of
 the period. As hasalready         been indicated, it was a self-
 blockade of the purest water, but, unlike Napoleon’s, an open
 and direct one. An embargo was laid on all vessels lyingin
 American portsand bound for foreign ports. The only ex-.
 ceptions were foreign vessels,whichwereallowed           to depw<
 after being informed of the enactment of the law ; and-vessels
 in the American coasting trade were t o give security that the
 cargo should be discharged in an American port. Alrhost at the7
 sametime the Non-importation Act, passed in the previous
 year against British goods,was put into force and excluded
importation in foreign bottoms from the only power that was
in a position to carry on trade by sea. ‘Cinder the pressure of
the unreasonable    procedure      of both thecombatants,       the
American government thus sought to cut off a t a blow the
abnormallylarget,rade and shipping that the United States
had until then enjoyed. I n principle the policy was impartial,
inasmuch as it was intended, on the one hand, to deprive
Great Britain of American cotton and grain, as well of sales on
the American markets, and, on the other hand, t o put an end
t o the colonial trade from which France and Spain and their
colonies derived equal advantages, and also to the importation
of theindustrial products of the EuropeanContinent into
America. Although the measure was thus indisputably two-
sided, the simultaneous enforcement of th.e one-sided Non-
importation Act gave the policy the appearance of being
directeddistinctly
                against
                      Great
                          Britain.                  That country,
indeed, had touched on a particularly tender point     by imposing
duties on the goodswhich compulsorily passed throughits
territories, inasnpch as both theUnited States and the British
opposition put it on a level with the taxation of American
trade which in the preceding generation had given the final
            1   United!States Statutes at Large, vol. n, p. 461.
