                  POLICY OF THE UNITEDSTATES                                 131
  impulse tothe Declaration of Independenceby            ' the old
  thirteen '.*
      President Jefferson's motive seems to have been partly the
  bias of the plantation owners, emphasized by his physiocratic
  tendency toward regarding agriculture as the highest work of
  man and hisgrave distrust of everything which departed
  from agriculture. To beginwith, at least,heundoubtedly
  considered, as the American historian, Channing, says, ' that
 to put an end to, let us say, three quarters of the commerce
  of t€ie United States would beablessing,       albeit somewhat
 indisguise '.z But evidently this, likemost of the measures
 of thedifferent powers in the commercialwar,wasalso
 a measure.of reprisal, an endeavour to compel the embittered
 belligerents to bereasonable. In fact, unlike the majority of
 their own measures, it was a sincere attempt in that direction.
 It seems also as if the Embargo Act was a means of saving the
 great Americanmerchantfleet,        the largest next to that of
 Great Britain, from the extinction which must otherwise have
 been the almost necessary consequence of the Berlin and Milan
 decrees and of the OrdersinCouncil.Thus,           €or instance,
 a' large ship-owner in Maryland stated that of fifteenvessels
 which he had dispatched during the bare four months between
 September 1 and theenactment of the Embargo Act, onlythree
had arrived at their destination, while two had been capt,ured
by the French and the Spaniards,one had beenseized a t
Hamburg, and nine had been taken to England.
     However, it is rather an academic question what the effect
of the Embargo Act would have been had it been obeyed, for
nothing was further from reality. It makes an almost moving
impression t o seehow onesupplementarylawafteranother,
eachmoredetailed and moredraconic than t,he other,seeks
to stop up the holes in the original law, which was very sum-
mary ; but it hasseldombeenshownmoredistinctly               that
a constant succession of new laws on the same subject means
   1   Cf. Lord Grenville in the House of Lords, Feb. 17, 1809. &mard, vol. XII,
p. 714.
   = charming, w.cit., Pol. XII, p. 201-2.
                                        K2
