             POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES                                143
   irrespective of this question of interpretation, putthe pre-
   viously mentioned parts of the Non-intercourse Act into force
  again as against Great Britain. This was the Non-importation
  Act of 1811.1 Curiouslyenough, this lawseems to have been
  very effective, so that the old methods of evading the prohibi-
  tion on trade by shipping cargo via Amelia Island in Canada
  were but little used.Cottonltccumulatedmore           and more in
  Charleston in the course of 1811 ; and in the autumn no quota-
  tionscouldbepublishedbecause           there werenobuyers.      The
  whole situation was very peculiar from a commercial point of
 view, inasmuchas theclaims of the cotton exporters on England
 could not be satisfied directly, in the natural manner, by the
 importation of British goods, since all such imports werenow
 forbidden. Probably         the triangular trade through   other
 countries also offered great difficulties, for we find the cotton
 broker in Charlestonwhosereports            Mr. Danielshasedited
 complaining of the fact that drafts on Englandwere unsaleable,
 thanks to the new Non-importationAct ; and similarcom-
 plaints wereregistered on the British side in a petition from
 the cotton importing town of Liverpool.2
      However, it now became more necessary than ever for the
 Americans to convince the British of the genuineness of the
 Frenchrevocation ; andthis offeredgreater and greater
 difficulties, especially in the face of Napoleon’s own utterances.
 In two great speeches delivered in March,1811, one to deputies
from the Hanse Townsand another to deputies from the French
 Chambers of Commerce (the second of which was not published
officially, but was circulated in different versions), he repeated
his old phrase about the Berlin and Milan decrees asthe funda-
mentallaws of the Empire,whosevalidity             was coextensive
with that of the Orders in Council. In thesecond of the speeches,
it is true, he declared himself preparedto receive the Americans
in French ports, on conditionthat they should upholdthe same
principles as he did ; and if they could not compel England to
respect them, that they should declare war on that country.
       United dtatea 8tatutea at Large, vol. II,p. 651.
       House of Commons, Apr. 27, 1812 (Hanserd, vol. x u , p. 1081).
