  142 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
   to those which had disobeyed them, no change tookplace
   except that they were not, it is true, condemned to confiscation
  but werenevertheless detained by the French authorities.
  None the less, Napoleon did accord a limited amount of con-
  sideration t o the trade andshipping of the United States in the
  autumn of 1810, inasmuch as he issued a number of licences to
  Americanvessels that wished to importintoFrancecertain
  Americancolonialgoods,       with French consularcertificates
  written in cipher in order to provide security that the British
  should not appear in the guise of Americans. He also reduced
  to one quarter the enormous customs dues that the Trianon
 tariff of August 5, 1810, had imposed upon colonial goods when
 the importation hadbeen directly effected by American vessels.
 A contributory motive behind this measure was the necessity
 of being able to appeal to the support of the United States in
 the pressure which Napoleon was now bringing   t o bear, though in
 vain, on Emperor Alexander of Russia in order to keep that
 country within the Continental System. But none of these
things altered the fact that the system itself remained un-
changed.l
     However, the American statesmen had already bound them-
 selves to regard Champagny’s August note as a genuine and
already effective revocation and therefore wereplaced in an
extremely awkward position when compelled to maintain this
standpointintheir      negotiations with the British. For they
were at the same time exerting all their powers of persuasion
t o induce the French to make the revocation a reality. As the
putting into force of the American law of 1810 was made de-
pendent on the willingness of the oneor the other of the
belligerents to rescindhislaws,       there consequently arose a
difficulty in applying the law against Great Britain, which had
not taken any conciliatory steps ; and it was therefore con-
sidered necessary, on March 2, 1811, to pass a new law which,

     Napoleon to Eugene,Viceroy of Italy, Sept.. 19, 1810,and to Champagny,
Dec. 13,1810 (Cwrespondance, nos. 16,930,17,206); decree of Nov. 1, 1810 (Bulletin
dm lo&, &e., 4th ser., bull. 324, no. 6,067; Martens, Nouveuu recueil, &c., vol. I,
pp. 527-8).
