                POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES                                      141

 the representative of the United States (August 5). The foreign
 secretary there says that he is authorized to declare that the
 Berlin and Milan decrees are revoked and thatthey cease to be
 enforced after November 1, ' it beingunderstood, of course,
 that inconsequence of this declaration the English must rescind
 their Orders in Council and renounce the new blockade prin-
 ciples that they had wished to establish, or else that theUnited
 States, in accordance withthe law of which you have informed
 me, should make their rights respected by the English '. This
 note was inserted in Le Moniteur a few days later, and toward
the end of the year it was followedby a letter from the minister
of finance to the director general of customs, written by the
Emperor's order, to the effect that the decrees 'should not be
applied to Americanvessels ; and this, too, wasinsertedin
the official newspaperof France.1
     One cannotbesurprised,       it is true, thatthe American
statesmen and diplomatswere at the &stblushhighlyde-
lightedwith the Frenchdeclaration of August and, on the
strength of it, immediatelyrequested a correspondingcon-
cessionon the part of GreatBritain.Nevertheless,         the very
forminwhich       the ' fundamentalprinciple ' of the French
Empire-the laws around which the whole of European politics
hadrevolvedforwell-nighfour         years-was revoked was so
far peculiar that it mightreasonablybeexpected          to super-
inducescepticism.And        it provedalmostimmediately       that
the Continental decrees were applied just the same as before,
not only in general, but also against American vessels. When
this waspointed out to him,Napoleondeclared that it was
really due to the fact that the vessels had disobeyed his port
regulations and not the internationalrulescontained in the
Berlin and Milan decrees. But in reality the fact of the matter
was that theonly vessels which were liberated were those which
had not disobeyed the Continental decrees; and with regard
      CorresMme, nos. 16,080,16,127,16,384,16,736,16,743;        Bulletindeolois,&c.,
4th sei-., bull. 286, no. 5,402. Memoirs and Correspondence of Lord Ti'&esley (Pearoe
ed.,London, 1846), vol. III, pp. 116-17, 134 (here, too, can be found the correspon.
dence of 1810-11 between Wellesley, in his capacity as British foreign secretary,
and the American minister in London) ; Le Moniteur, Aug. 9 and Dec. 25, 1810.
