                   POLICY OF THE UNITED
                                     STATES                                     135
     disastrous consequences that its Orders in Council had hrtd by
    givingrise to the EmbargoAct,whichhad           cut off both the
     supply of raw materials from the United States and, above all,
    the possibility of sales there. In accordance with the good old
    Britishparliamentarycustom,        they made the government
    responsible for all the maladies of the body politic, while the
    government, also in the usual stereotyped fashion, pictured the
    situationin as favourablealight        as possible and ascribed
    the undeniabledifficulties to othercauses.Anyinquiry          of
    scientific value, however, must consider the course of economic
    development as a whole, and for this reason the question of the
    effects of the Continental System on the belligerents has been
    held over for separatetreatment in the fourth part of this work.
    In any case, the difficulties accruing to Great Britain in con-
    sequence of the Embargo Act were not of such consequence as
    to lead its government in 1808 either to rescind the Orders in
    Council or even in the least degree to modify their application.
    On the contrary, Canning, as foreign secretary, conducted the
    almost continuous exchange of notes with an ironic superiority
    and a diplomatic skill which were calculated to irritate more
    and more the American government withits clumsier methods.1

                          DECREE(APRIL 17, 1808)
                    BAYONNE
I       TheAmericanlawhad,            if possible,stillesseffect,        in the
    directionintended,onNapoleon’smeasures.Decrhs’soriginal
    uncertainty as to the scope of the Berlin decree had inspired
    the Americangovernmentwithwhat                    it somewhatvaguely
    called an assurance that the measureswouldnotbeapplied
    against the UnitedStates ; and this curiouspositionwas
    maintained by the Americansin the exchange of notes with
    Great Britain even after the Milan decree and its application
    shouldhavedefinitelydissipatedallsuchhopes.LikeGreat
    Britain,France was constantlycapturingAmericanvessels                     ;
       1 The most important debates on this subject were in the House of L
                                                                         o& on
    Mar. 8,1808, and Feb. 17,1809, and in the House of Commons on Mar, 6, 1809.
    For the diplomatic correspondence, cf. Hansard, vol. XLI,pp. 241 et sep. ; vol. m,
    app. ; vol. XIV,pp. 881 et wq. ; vol. xm,app.
