138 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
 regarded as attractive from an American standpoint. Cotton
 went also via Lisbon, Cadiz, the Azores or other permitted ports,
 while persons who had no reputation to lose made shipments
 direct to Liverpool. But the need of the goods was so small,
 comparatively, in Great Britain, that the increased prices which
 were a consequence of the roundabout journeyand thedifficulties
 of transportation lowered profits for the American exp0rters.l
     But while the economic effects continued t o arouse discord,
 the political effects seemed, though somewhat late, to promise
 the results expected from a policy of reprisals. Madison,who
 had succeeded JeffersonasPresidenthreedaysafterthe
 passing of the Non-intercourse Act, was rejoiced to receive an
 English proposal for a settlement, which rapidly attained an
 apparent result. In reality, to be sure, Canning’s conditions
 for an agreement were entirely unacceptable by the American
government. But the British minister at Washington, Erskine,
son of the Lord Chancellor in the ‘ All the Talents ’ ministry,
went in his zeal for a settlement quite beyond his instructions
and promised on behalf of his government the rescinding of the
Orders in Council as against the United States from June 10,
1809. On this, Madison, in accordance with the authoritygiven
him in the Non-intercourse Act, announced this concession on
the part of Great Britain in a proclamation which suspended
the American act from the same day. An immense movement
immediately began in all American ports, where six hundred
vessels lay ready to sail on the appointed day ; and during the
week June 16-23, Liverpool received more American cotton
than it had received throughout the entire year of 1807. At
this point, however, it was found that the British government
disavowed its minister, and the President wascompelled to
revoke his proclamation. The new British envoy who succeeded
Erskine came immediately into sharpconflict with the American
government and was recalled ; after which all prospects of an
immediate settlement in this quarter were again blighted.
       Vogel, op. cit., p. 36 ; Rubin, 1807-1814, Stwlier til K0benhmns og DanmarL
i%torie (Copenhagen, 1892), pp. 381-2 ; Bergwall, Historisk under dtteZ8e om staden
cftilhebmgs betydligaste varu-atskeppningar (Gothenburg, 1820), p. 9 note ; Daniels,
loc. cit., p. 281.
