 THE CONTINENTALSYSTEM IN EUROPE (1808-1813) 153
 manner of opening a door to the navigation of his enemy. To
 complete the picture,dutieson the wines of France and her                             4
 allies were increased to twice the amount levied upon those of
 South-eastern Eur0pe.l
     Theorder of Napoleonwhichreceived          this unwelcome
imitation was the Fontainebleau decree of October 1810, which
prescribed the destruction of all English goods throughout the
Continent, This formed the complement tothe Trianontariff                                  ,+


of August of the same year,which, in contrast to this, admitted
colonialgoods, although onlyagainstenormousduties.          Pre-
cisely at the time of this new turn in the Continental System,
moreover, a serious crisis broke out in England and in France,
and also in many other places ; and the difficulties of Great
BritaininspiredNapoleonwithstrongerhopes           than ever of
attaining the object of his great system, regardless of the fact
that thedislocation of French economic life wasat least equally
deep and far-reaching.

                           THEFINALCOLLAPSE
    By the apostasy of Russia,however,            the Continental
System had lost one of its retaining walls ; and in the course
of 1811 the breach was more and more widened by Alexander’s
constantly more open favourabletreatment of British shipping.
Napoleon had to try to raise a new barrier along the western
frontier of Russia toward Prussia, the Grand Duchy of Warsaw,
and Austria, and to have recourse to still more active measures
to bar the south coast of the Baltic, now that British ships had
points d’appui on its east coast in addition to those they had had
all the time among the Swedish skerries. The last step in this
direction was taken by the occupation of Swedish Pomerania
in January 1813 ; but the immediate effect of this was to cause
Swedenopenly to fall away, Meanwhile, the preparations for
the great trial of strength with Russia afterwards made heavier
   1 I have followed the translation of the ukase in Le Noniteut, Jan. 31, 1811.
Vandal, in his NapoZh et Alexandre Zer (vol. 11, pp. 52930), refers to this paper,
but I have been unable to bring hia account into accord with the text of the decree.
The CorrBmwe is, of course, f u l l of the subject.
