144 ORIGIN AND EXTERNAL COURSE OF SYSTEM
But manifestly this implied something quite different from the
idea that the decrees had been abolished as far back as the
November of the previous year. Napoleon expressed himself
in a still more unqualified manner in an unpublished message
to his Conseil d’administratim du commerce (April 29, 1811),
after the passing of the Americanlaw of 1811. Inasmuch as
that law forbade American vesselsto go t o England, it followed,
he thought, in accordance with his old way of thinking, that
a vessel which nevertheless went there was not American at all
but English ; and on this hypothesis one could quite well say
that the Berlin and Milan decrees were revoked, a t least so far
as the United States were concerned !

                   OF ORDERSIN COUNCIL(1812)
           REVOCATION
     Meanwhile, the British governmentremained undecided and
awaited developments. But after Napoleon had caused to be
published a report by Maret, Champagny’s successor as foreign
minister, onMarch 10, 1812, in which the blessings of the
Continental decrees were oncemore asserted, the British Prince
Regent replied by a proclamation, dated April 21, t o the effect
that, assoon as theBerlin and Milan decrees had been expressly
and unreservedly revoked, the Orders in Council should also
be regarded,withoutfurtherado,        as having lapsed. This
at last placed in thehands of the American diplomats a weapon
againstFrance which bore fruit. Maretallowedhimself              to
be induced by it to bring forward the lastof this series of strange
documents, namely, a decree of April 28,1811, which, according
to its date, was more than a year old, but whichwas never
published and was quite unknown until that time. This decree
declared that the Berlin and Milan decrees had ceased t o hold
good for American vessels from November 1, 1810, more than
six months earlier, in accordance with the original declaration.
When this document was laid before the British government,
the British statesmen were not a little confounded, for which
     Correspondance, nos. 17,482 and17,669.  For the speech t.0 the deputies of
the Chamber of Commerce, of. Thiera, Histoire dzc Conmdat et de I‘EmpiTe (Paris,
lw),vol. x m , pp. 27 et seq.
