                  POLICY OF THE UNITED
                                    STATES                                             145
  one can hardly blame them ; but after some delay they con-
  sidered that they ought to declare that, though the decree did
 not contain the general revocation that had been stipulated in
 the Prince Regent's proclamation of April 21, nevertheless the
  Ordersin Council should berescinded as regardsAmerican
 vessels. Accordingly,with the enthusiasticapproval of the
 Britishopposition, the Ordersin Council were revokedon
 June 23,1812,so far as Americanvessels with American cargoes
 were concerned.Thisrevocation         was totake effect asfrom
 August 1, though only under the condition that the American
 government revoked its prohibition of commercial intercourse
 with Great Britain. It is evident that many factors contributed
 to this result : dearth and disturbances in England itself, for
 which the oppositionlaidalltheblameon             the Ordersin
 Council; the desire to disarm the war party, which had grown
 stranger and stronger in the United States     ; and the need of
 American supplies of grain for the greatly impoverished Iberian
 peninsula.1
     When the British government had a t last made its decision,
however, Napoleon had already attained his object, although
neither he nor anybody else had been able to foresee the order
in which the events were to take place. On June 19, in fact,
that is, four days before the rescinding of the Orders inCouncil,
the United States had declared      war on Great Britain, partly
because of the disputes which have here been described        and
partly because of the impressmentof seamen and various other
things. I n Great Britain it was generally expected, especially
by the opposition, that the declarationof war would be recalled
when the conciliatory decision of Great Britain became known.
But this was'not the case ; and the war went on for two and
a half years,untilChristmasEve          1814. It cametoolate,
    1 For the documents issued by Maret andthe BritishPrince %gent, cf. Martens,
iVoumu recueil, %c., vol. I, pp. 630 et eeq,, 542 et eeq. For the revocation of the
Orders in Council, cf. Hansard, vol. XXII, pp. 853 et eeq. (under an incorrect date),
and vol. xxm, pp. 716 e-t eeq. For the debateson the subjectin the House of Commons
on ME^ 22, 25,26, and June 16, 19,23, and in the House of Lords on June 18,1812,
of. Hansard, vol. xxm, pp. 286 et eeq., 295 et eeq., e86 et eeq., 496-7,587 et eeq., 600 et
seq., 715 et eeq. See also Mahen, Becc Power in ita Relations, %c., vol. I, pp. 286-76,
   1660.43                                  L
