            TREATMENT OF CONFISCATED GOODS                                       159
 competentobserver,     Johann GeorgRist,theGerman-born
representative in Hamburgof France's intimate ally, Denmark,
 writes in his memoirs, compiled in the years1816 to 1881, that
nooneamong        the merchants,peasants or officials, oreven
among the scholars,believed in any plansfor the good of
Europe, but only in the desire t o line French pockets. It was
commonly held that no justice was to be expected, but merely
arbitrariness and the basest motives, all marked by high      words,
threats, and deception. And with regard to the last phase         of
the system (from 1810 onward) almost exactly the same words
fall fromMollien, who was Napoleon's good and faithful servant,
though a man of strong and independent judgment. He says
that ' this pretended system            .. .
                                     deprived of every vestige of
political prestige, has only proved itself in theeyes of everybody
to be the most pernicious and false      of fiscal inventions '.l It
was precisely fiscalism, the baneof so many systems of commer-
cial policy, which thereby got a footing from the very beginning
in the imposing and soaring plan and threw radical difficulties
in the way of its execution.
    This was all the more the case forthe reason that Napoleon's
assumption that everything was sold on credit was so far from
being correct that it was the very reverse of the truth. Ap-
parentlythedemandthat          prevailedontheContinentfor
British and colonial goods made it possible for them to be sold
practically always for cash; consequently it was the continental
buyers who were the chief sufferers. And even when that was
not the case, one finds the continental buyers, e. g., not only
Hamburgmerchants,butimportersalloverGermanyand
Holland generally-according to the evidence& 1807 of their
British creditors themselves-displaying an extraordinary zeal
in the regular payment of their debts.2
     J. G . Rist, Ldenserinnerungen (Poel ed., Gotha, 1880), vol. n, pp. 29-30;
Mollien, Ndmodra, &c., vol. 11, p 462. Cf. Louie Bonaparte to his brother Jerome,
Oct. 15, 1808, in Duboecq, Louzs Bonapzrte en Hollande, d'aprPs sea lettres (Parie,
1911), no. 186.
     Mollien, op. cit., vol. n, p. 461 ; Konig, op. cit., pp. 180-1 ; Mahan, Znflwence
Of Sea Power, &c., vol. II, p. 306 ; Tarle, Kontinmtai'naja blokzda, vol. I, pp. 287,
361, 384; Tarle, Deutsch-franziisieche WirtschajMeziehu?qen, h.cit., pp. 679-80,
718.
