                              CHAPTER I
           TREATMENT OF CONFISCATED GOODS
     THEtaskthatNapoleonmadethecentralpoint                  of his
 policy manifestly imposed the greatest demands on its inventor
 and his helpers, especially when we take into consideration the
 administrative powers at the disposal of the governments of
 the time.
     With regard to what was by far the most important point,
 namely, the exclusion of British and colonial goods, the question
 of the application of the system a t once struck upon a peculiar
 difficulty,namely, the problem of what to dowith the con-
 fiscated merchandise. To Napoleon himself, strange as it may
 seem, this problemwas a matter of minor importance, inasmuch
 as fromfirst to last he adhered to theview taken over from the
politicians of the Convention, that all goods were sold on the
credit of Englishmen and thuswere not yet paid for when they
were seized, and that, accordingly, the loss in any case hit the
enemy,With a persistence that neverwaveredhepreached
to his allies and helpers the doctrines that, ' inasmuch as the
(continental) merchants never buy except on credit,it is a fact
that no goods are ever paid for,' and that, ' all goods being the
property of the English,'theirconfiscationmeans          ' a back-
handed blow for England which is terrific '.l On this assump-
tion,moreover, the whole difficulty would pretty soon have
been overcome ; for after a sufficiently large number of such
losses had been inflicted on the English they might reasonably
    1 Quotations from two letters addressed to his brother Jerome, King of West-
phalia, on Jan. 23,1807, and to the Emperor Alexanderof Russia on Oct. 23, 1810.
Corres@w de Napoldon Ier, nos. 11,682 and 17,071. In consonance with this
the representative of Napoleon in Switzerland, Rouyer, declared in 1810 that the
Swiss oommercial houses were generally only ' mmnditaires et ex$aWonlaadres '
of the English. Letter reproduced in deCBrenville, Le syat&w wntinenld, $c.,
p. 337, See also Schmidt,Le &and-duchd de Berg, p. 374, note 2.
