160          INTERNAL
                    HISTORY                   AND WORKING
    Consequently there was little or nolikelihood thatthe
 British would tire of supplying the Continent with goods. On
the contrary, the inner history of the Continental System came
to consist essentially inthe         embittered anduninterrupted
struggles against the endless stream of British goods.
    This difficulty with whichNapoleonwas          confrontedwith
regard to the very structure of the blockade was further com-
plicated by the difficulty of getting honest and zealous persons
to assist him in putting it into execution. It was almost
impossible to obtain such assistants among his allies and their
organs ; and consequently one of the most amplyjustified
views inthe historicalliterature of the presenttime is the
explanation that the incessant extension of the empire along
the coast of Eutope was due to the Emperor’s need of direct
control, witha view tothe observance of the Continental
System. Of the innumerable examples of this we may mention
two, one Swedish and one Prussian. I n August 1811, when
Sweden was nominally at war with Great Britain, Axel Pontus
von Rosen, the Governor of Gothenburg, informed the minister
of state, von Engestrom, that for once in a way he had caused
to be confiscated ten oxen intended for Admiral Saumaree’s
English fleet, which lay off Vinga, and added : ‘ I entreat that
this be put in the  papers, so that I, wretched that I am, may for
once wearthe nimbus of Continental zeal in theannals of Europe.
Saumarez was informed beforehand, so that he will notbe
annoyed.’ During the winter of 1811-12 a systematic import
of forbidden colonialgoods by thestate itselfwenton             in
Prussiathrougha         specialcommissioner for the minister of
finance, Privy Councillorvon Heydebreck; and a t the same
time Hardenberg, the leading minister, wrote to that very man
and requested the strictestinquiry into thesmuggling.l
    But the fact that the       situation was untenable when the
application of the system lay in such hands must by no means
be interpreted to mean that the difficulties were overcome so
      Von Rosen to von Engestrom, Aug. 7, 1811, in Ahnfelt, Ur rSven8ku hfvete
och arietokratiens lif (Stockholm, 1882), vol. v, p. 269 ; Peez and Dehn, Englands
?‘orim78ch&!.   Bus der Zeit der K o n t i n e W p e r r e (Leipzig, 1912), p. 268.
