   RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 167
  and increased guaranties were provided in various ways      that
  unlawful goods shouldnot be permitted toescape examination.
  In doing this Napoleon fell back on the old and very clumsy
  expedient of declaring large main groups of goods to be eo ipso
 British when they did not     come from France, that is t o say,
 the majority of textile goods, (except certain ones imported by
 theDanishEast        AsiaticCompany),cutleryandhardware,
 glass, pottery,andlumpsugar       ; and for the colonialgoods
 detailed certificates of origin were required from the French
 commercial agentsinthexportingport.              As regards the
 question as to whether a vessel had put in at an English port,
 a searching examination was prescribed of the captain and the
 sailors separately, and the arrestof such of them as should give
 falseinformation,after     which they shouldbesetfreeonly
 after the payment of a heavy fine (6,000 francs for the captain
 and 500 francsforeachsailor).       All such vessels were to be
 confiscated, while the Berlindecreemerelyprescribed         their
 expulsion. Thelatter of these two decrees, that concerning
 certificates of origin, the examination of the crews, and the
 confiscation of the vessels, was givenpracticallyunaltered
validity for the whole Empire through what is called the first
Milan decree,issued tendayslater(November           23). Within
barely a month, as we have seen,l there followed the answer
to the Orders in Council, the great second Milan decree, which
markstheend of Napoleon’s measuresbearingon              the Con-
tinental System in 1807. On the heels of all this, immediately
after the beginning of the new year (,January 11, 1808) there
came the so-called Tuileries decree, which sought to induce the
crews and passengers of vessels to reveal any call in an English
port by promising one-third of the value of the vessel and cargo
as a reward. I n September 1807, Napoleon, with his customary
ruthlessness, had intervened in Holland and, to the despair of
his brother Louis, had calmly caused his gendarmes to convey
to France from that nominally independent kingdom a citken
of Breda and a citizen of Bergen-op-Zoom on the suspicion of
smuggling.
                         1 See ante, p. 123.
