  RESULTS OF THESELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809)                  171
  any great scarcity of raw’cotton, especially owing to imports
 through the Mediterraneanports         of Lisbon, Leghorn, and
 Trieste. The fmt of these, however, disappeared through the
 conquest of Portugal in the autumn of 1807, and the second
 through the occupation of Etruria at the close of theyear.
 But Holland remained as an important gap, which became the
 moreserious from Napoleon’s point of view after he had,
 in the second Milan decree of December 1807, passed to the
 view that there wereno suchthings as neutrals ; and con-
 sequently he could no longer tolerate the American.shipping in
 Dutch ports. At the turn of the year 1807-8, it ietrue, British
 industrial products did not seem to enter as easily as before ;
 but it was soon to prove that Napoleon had underestimated
 thestrength of two forces which were constantly to riseup        ,

 against his plans, ziz., smuggling and the opening-up of new
 commercial routes.
    Finally, if we regard the process of development from a
 British standpoint, we have the evidence, already cited,l of the
 witnesses before a parliamentarycommittee that Napoleon’s
 many counter-measures inthe late summer and autumncaused
a sudden stagnation in trade with the Continent. The marine
insurancepremiums, which at the time of the issue of the
Berlin decree had risen from 6 to 10 per cent., but had then
declined to 4 per cent.,were stated to have reached such amounts
as 15, 20, and 30 per cent. before the middle of October 1807.
In sixty-five cases during September and October vessels that
had taken in cargo for the Continent had requested permission
to discharge them again. If we look at the statistical material
available to throw lighton the matter, we canestablishin
acomparativelyexact          way the effects of theContinental
blockadeduring 1807. It is especially noteworthy thatthe
greatexports of cotton goods show almostabsolutelyun-
altered figures ($9,708,000, as against $9,754,000 in 1806 and
an average of only ;E7,34,000in theyears 1801-5, all according
to the ‘ official values ’, which are based upon unchanged unit
prices from yearto year); nor do the farless important exports
                        1 See ante, p. la.
