1M          INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
from England. I n these     very     f i s t orders, however, the
difficulty emerged of obtaining honest executors of the measures.
The naval minister received a special reminder to send ' un-
bribable ' officers ; and from the very beginning an effort was
made to interest thesoldiers themselves in theeffectivity of the
blockade by the regulation that they should have the benefit
of all confiscations of goods which should try to pass. But in
several of the letters, especially that t o Fouchh, the minister
of police, Napoleon says that he has received complaints-in
reality only too wellfounded-abouthisconsul          in Hamburg,
LachevardiBre, who ' seems.to steal with impunity '.l
    In Hamburg there still survived the continental establish-
ment of the Merchant Adventurers'Company, the most notable
English trading company of an older type (the ' Regulated
Company '), though it no longer played any considerable part.
I n order to save this for the English, the Senate of Hamburg
purchased the whole establishment, called ' The Merchant
Adventurers' Court ', and presented it to the members, who
became citizens of Hamburg besides and in this way escaped
imprisonment, so far asthey didnot escape by flight. The
main thing, however, was the seizure of the English stocks of
goods,whichNapoleon,        after variousnegotiations, fixed a t
the somewhathighfigure       of 17,000,000 francs for Hamburg
and 2,000,000 francs for Lubeck ; meanwhile Bremen, by
delaying the operation for a whole year, managed to smuggle
away the greater part of the goods there and had t o account
for only 377,000 francs. In Leipzig, whose Fair still constituted
by far themost important market in Central Europe,       especially
for manufactured goods to and fromall points of the compass,
the stocktaking gave a value     of 9,150,000 francs, whichwas
redeemed for 6,000,000 francs. Things went in the same way
elsewhere.
    I n GreatBritainthe       publication of the Berlin decree
caused, according to evidence given before a parliamentary
committee, a cessation of exports to the Continent during the
      c h w q m d a n c e , nos. 11,355; 11,356; 11,363 ; 11,378; 11,383; Proclama-
tion of Dm. 2, 1806, printed in Konig, q ,cit., Anlage 2.
