 168          INTERNAL
                     HISTORY                     AND WORKING
     At the same time, thanks to Canning’s almost Napoleonic
 contempt for the independence of neutrals, Napoleon received
 valuable assistance in the blockade o r t h e North Sea coast in
 consequence of the bombardment of Copenhagen in the begin-
 ning of September aird the breach between Denmark and Great
 Britain. As a matter of fact, Schleswig-Holstein, during the
 whole of the preceding period,had been a serious obstaclein the
 way of Napoleon’s measures south of the Elbe. When the Elbe
 and the Weser were  barred, Tonningin particular, but also Husum
 on the west coast of Schleswig, had largely replaced the Hanse
 Towns during the years 1803-6 as importers of English and
 colonial goods ; and their trade had flourished like plants in
 a forcing-house. All attempts to prevent the passing of goods
 tothe south fromHolstein territorythroughthe             town of
 Altona,whichwaspracticallycontinuous          with Hamburg (all
    nah), met with almost insuperable difficulties, all the more
as the localHolstein authorities neverfailed to certify the
neutral origin of the goods. It was, therefore, of very great
importance thatthe ruler of Denmark, the Crown Prince
Frederick, embittered through the conduct of Great Britain,
placed himself at the service of the Continental System, with
almost unique loyalty, and as early as September 1807 ordered
the seizure of all forbiddengoods in Holstein.Almost alone
among the allies of Napoleon, he repudiated the idea of feigning,
adherence to the system while the real intention was to allow
intercourse with Great Britain. His was not the principle
auaviter in re, fortiter in modo, to quote amodernhistorian.
It is true that the British, on their side, made a counter-move
which was to have far-reaching consequences in the opposite
direction, in that, simultaneously with the attack onCopen-
hagen, they occupied the Danishpossession of Heligoland ;
but the effects of this did not immediately show themselves.1
     For the decreesofAug.      6 and Nov. 13, 1807,cf. Konig, op. cit., Anhge 2.
For the h t Milan decree, cf. Bulletin des lois, BEG., 4th ser., bull. 172, no. 2 912.
For the Tnileries decree, cf.Martens, Nouveau recueil, &c., vol. I, p. 457 ;Duboscq, op.
cdt., no. 95 and p. 14 ; Holm, Danmark-Norges Histork, &c., vol. VII,pt. I , pp. 1234,
180,197; Linvald, Bidrw til O&aniq, &c., vol. VI, pp. 448 et seq. The following
may also be oonsulted : France : Levassew, Hietoke dea classes mvritea, &o., de
