 166          INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
  the consul afterwards issued a certificate as to thenon-English
  origin of the goods ; and fabricated Holstein certificates of
 originwere always available to bolster up the certificate. At
 the close of May 1807, Brune went a step farther and removed
 the always relatively zealous customs officials from the Ham-
 burg-Travemiinde frontier line and theElbe line from Harburg
 (immediately opposite Hamburg) to Stade, replacing them by
 gendarmes. Consequently, during the five and a half months
 down to the beginning of August there arrived in Hamburg,
 without impediment, 1,475 vessels with cargoes estimated at
 590,000 tons, including the most notoriouslyEnglishgoods,
 such as coal.According to the investigator just mentioned,
 Hamburg was chock full of English and colonial goods, which
 weresold as openly as in London, and not a singleseizure
 had occurred. This would also seem to have been the time at
 whichBourrienne,Napoleon’senvoy         in Hamburg-according
 to his own story, which is in this case confirmed from English
 sources-obtained cloth and leather from England in order to
 be in a position to supplyNapoleon’sown          army with the
 uniform coats, vests, caps, and shoes which he had to procure.1
     The farce of Brune’sconduct in Hamburg, however,was
too much for Napoleon, who removed him in the latter half of
 July and appointed Bernadotte as his successor. This appoint-
ment manifestly brought with it a stricter enforcement of the
law, although the new and well-meaningdespot            thatthe
Hamburgers thereby got proved rather costly to the town ;
nor did he entirely escape more or less unproven accusations
of corruptibility, both from Napoleon and also, later on, from
the Senate of Hamburg.2Aboveall,however,            afterthe re-
moval of Brune, Napoleon regulated the blockade. by means
of two new decrees of August 6 and November 13,1807. These
placed the right of seizing English goods into the hands of the
customs staff, which was strengthened at the same time, while
the troops were placed at the disposal of the customs officials
     Bourneme, dldntoirea BUT NapoUon, &c. (Paris, 1829), vol. M,pp. 291 et sq.
   2 Lettres i d i t e a de Naplion l
                                    er (Lecestre ea.),nos. 523 (Sept. 12, 1809), 823
(June 13, 1811), 826 (June 22, 1811) ; Servidres, op. cit., p. 124 ; Wohlwill, Neuere
Geachichde, &e., p. 300.
