170       INTERNAL HISTORY AND
                             WORKING
 products and colonialgoods during the earlier part of 1807,
 including among other things the parcels confiscated in Ham-
 burg and redeemed, Thesecommanded a ready sale, despite
 the fact that the manufactured goods included in them were
 largely out of date. But the autumn measures in the Hanse
 Towns and Holstein led to a great scarcity of British textiles
 and an enormous rise in price (over 150 per cent.) on British
 cotton yarn, so that Napoleoncouldhere be assured of an
 immediate result from his own measures and those of his new
 Russian ally. For the Hanse Towns this result extended also
 to colonial goods, so that the price of coffee, for instance, stood
 20 per cent. higher inthe old coffee-importingtown of Hamburg
 than in Leipzig ; and contrary to anything that had ever
 before been beheld, it was conveyed to the former place from
 the latter. Accordingly, the decline of shipping in Bremen
 stands out very clearly even in the statistics of 1807. A similar
transformation occurred in Holstein, but with regard to the
rest of Central Europe the effects did not yet extend to the
colonial goods. This was chiefly due to the fact that the trade
through Holland, in spite of everything, was still comparatively
undisturbed, especially with American vessels, as the Embargo
Act was not passed until the latter part of December 1807.
Moreover, Rotterdam was alleged to have daily communication
with England, just as in time of peace. British yarn was also
shipped to Leipzig and Holland, and in September, 1807, the
Belgian manufacturers complained that The Hague was so
crowded with British cottons that a man might fancy himself
in Manchester. With regard to colonial goods,it was also stated
that the great Amsterdam firm of Hope & Co. had huge stores
of sugar and coffee. This firm, which during the whole of this
period played a leading part in almost all great international
transactions of a commercial and financial nature,and also
intervened in matters of public policy, was,incidentally, a living
monument of the closecommercial relations between the
enemies, asit had a French head, LabouchAre,who stood
in close connexion with the world-famous British commercial
house of Baring Brothers. Nor does there appear to have been
