 172          INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
  of yarn show any great decline ($60R,000 in 1807, as against
  $736,000 in 1806 and an average of $666,000 intheyears
  18014). The probably less reliable figures for totalexports
  show a somewhat more marked but nevertheless insignificant
 decline, namely, in relation to the year 1806 (8.1 percent.
 according to the'official values ' and only 6.4 per cent. according
 to ' real values ', which are also affected by changes in price).
 On the other hand, we can see from these statistics that the
 sales on the Continent were much more limited, namely, by
 nearly 33 per cent., according to ' real values ' in ' the north
 of Europe, including France ' ; and probably the exports of
 manufactured goods to thosemarkets           declined more than
 exportsasa     whole. This resultagreesvery        well withwhat
 mighthave been expectedunder the restrictive measures of
 the last quarterof the year.1
     Next we have to consider colonial goods, which wereintended
 to ' conquer England by excess '.2 The trade statistics do not
 show any decrease of exports a t all, but rather asbght increase;
and not even the sales to the Continent are notablydiminished.
But one can see from the tables in Tooke's History of Prices
thatthe price of coffee and sugar declined slightly inthe
autumn of 1807. Possibly one may point to a slightly greater
dislocation in one single department, namely, in the imports
of Baltic goods ; and the fact is that this applies to the Baltic
trade in general, evidently in consequence of the breach with
Russia and Prussia, ratherthanthroughthe                Continental
System proper. Hemp       and more especially tallow, both from
Russia, show a rise in prices in the course of the year, and
timber from Memel exhibitsviolentfluctuations            from the
middle of 1806. But all this is a trifle ; and during 1807 there
are,broadly speaking, no traces of any substantial result of
the policy as regards Great Britain's foreign trade as a whole.
    1 It should be remarked once for all that the British commercial ststistios are
not only highly uncertain in themselves, but also show inexplicable variations in
different sources. But the relative changea, as a rule, exhibit a considerably better
agreement than the absolute numbers, and map therefore be assumed to deserve
greater confidence than the latter. For the absolute figures, Bee pod, p. 245.
     See ante, p. 61.
