   RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 165
 months of December 1806, and of January and February 1807,
 with a rise inthe marine insurance premiums. But the absence
 of captures on the basis of the decree, which, as we have seen
 before, was at first regarded as not applying to the sea, after
 that put new life into commercial intercourse ; and an Order
in Council of February 18, with instructionsfor the commanders
of vessels, granted unrestricted traffic for the vessels and goods
of the Hanse Towns and therest of that part of North Germany
whichwasoccupied        by the French ; and this safeguarded
intercourse with them.l
    During the whole of the first six months of 1807, indeed,
the Continental self-blockade may be saidto have been practi-
callyineffective, at leastinNorthGermany.Thesystematic
dishonesty of Napoleon'stoolsgaverise           to regularorgies
during this time, especially withthe help of the new commander-
in-chief in Hamburg,MarshalBrune, whomNapoleon,with
unusuallygoodreason,branded         as an 'undaunted robber                               '.
According t o the report of de Tournon, whowas sent there
especially to investigate,Brune'sinstructionsthemselves         to
the customsstaffwere       calculated to encouragesmuggling;
but that was the case to a very much greater extent with the
application of the instructions. Whenvesselscame           up the
Elbe, they wereallowed, in absolute defiance of the instruc-
tions quoted above, t o continue their journey past Stade, with
onlyonesinglepersonfrom          the barriercontrol on board,
usually an ignorant seaman, while the customs officials them-
selves were consistently kept at a distance. The bill of lading
was examined by a sub-officer of the navy ; and the inspection
which it was the duty of Consul Lachevardibe to carry out,
was handed over by him to a Hamburg broker, who had the
greatest possible interest in lettingeverythingpass.       On the
basis of the entirely uncontrolled investigation of this person,
     1 For this and what follow concerning the Hanee Towns,of. Wohlwill, N w e
GesdicMe, &c., pp. 339 et seq. ; Ser%%res,     L'Allemugne. franp&e, &c., pp. 98 et 8eq. ;
Vogel, Die Haweskidie, %c., loc. cit., pp. 18 et 8e4. ; Schifer, B r e m a und die Ken-
tinentaleperre, lot. cit., pp. 416 et seq. Ab0 Konig, op. cit., pp. 179 et 8q., 356 et aeq. ;
Staphen in the Home of Commons,Mar. 6, 1809 (Hansard, vol. x m , app. pp. xxxiii
et 8eq.) ; Order in &unci1 of Feb. 18, 1807 (Hansard, vol. x, pp. 129 et seq.).
