 182      INTERNAL HISTORY AND
                            WORKING
  his unhappy brother, but also his brother's correspondence with
  the Dutchministers, show distinctly enough how smuggling was
  going on in Holland itself throughout the entire year.
      Farther to the north  smuggling through Oldenburg continued
  into the following year. A sudden fall in the price of cotton
  yarn in northern Germany was caused in February 1809, by
  the large stocks that the Manchester manufacturers had laid
  up in Heligoland ; and as anexample of the scope of the traffic
  which was carried on from that island, it may be mentioned,
  on theauthority of thestatements of the Heligoland mer-
  chants, that sixty-six vessels and seventy smaller boats were
  able, during nineteen days in June 1809, to land on the coast
  goods to the value of several hundred thousand pounds. Ac-
  cording to French reports, the guards along the Elbe and the
  Weser, too, were now     reduced to a few untrustworthy Dutch
 soldiers and gendarmes underthe command of a drunkenofficer.
 If we cross to Schleswig-Holstein territory, we find there the
 same phenomenon, namely, a huge expansion of the colonial
 trade.Whatis        called the second Tonning period, which is
 markedbythese        American visits, began in June 1809, and
lasted to the end of the year. The traffic all along the line was
 formallyfacilitatedby      the British goveriment by means of
 the new Order in Council of April 26, which restricted the
 declaration of blockade in the north to theRiver Ems, at least
in so far as the German North Sea coast was not reckoned as
a dependency of France, which, of course, is just what it actually
was. In reality, however, thismeantcomparativelylittle,
inasmuch as theold regulations were in practice applied by the
issue of the British government Kcences,which shipping was
scarcely able to do without.
    At the sa.me time English trade wasbeing transferred to
Gothenburg and the Baltic ports. I n Gothenburg the British
set up, in 1809, special warehouses and storeson Foto im-
mediately opposite theentrancetothe           harbour. The re-
exports of raw sugar almost trebled,while the exportsof coffee,
like the shipping of the port in general, more than doubled.
The Prussian and the Pomeranian ports now became regular
