 192      INTERNAL
                 HISTORY                  AND
                                            WORKING
the use of British textilegoods came very close to theEmperor’s
person. According to him, Napoleon learned, in the course of
a journey with.Josephine, that her trunks were crammed with
the forbidden goods, and made the customs authorities merci-
lessly seize them all.
                     Normality of Smuggling
      Through this all-pervadingsystem smuggling acquireda
 stamp of normality, which was of great importance, especially
 for Napoleon’s subsequent policy, and which forms yet another
 significant example of the general contrast between appearance
 and reality by which the policieswere dominated. On both
 sides the smugglers were used as ordinary means of commercial
 intercoursein cases where it was not desired to recognize a
 traffic which could not be done away with.      I n this case the
 French made use of the English word in the slightly corrupted
 form of ‘ smoggler ’.   Boucher dePerthes, whowas sub-in-
 spector of customs at Boulogne in 1811 and 1812, in a letter.
from there defines them as‘ contrabandists of their (the British)
nation, who are attached t o our police and who at the same
time carry on a traffic in prisoners of war and guineas, people
of the sack and the rope, capable of everything except what is
good’. In another letter he relates how they smuggled French
brandy into Great Britain, well as as guineas out o€ that country,
besides acting as spies for both sides. Two or three letters from
Napoleon are particularly striking as to the normality of these
transactions. I n a warning that has already been mentioned,l
one of the many received by King Louis of Holland, the Em-
peror writes (April 3, 1808): ‘ If you need to sell your gin, the
English need to buy it. Settle the     points where the English
smugglers are to come and fetch it, and make them pay in
money but never in commodities.’ I n a letter two years later
(May 29, 1810) t o Gaudin, his minister of finance, he develops
in thefollowing way the tradewhich is carried on withthe help
of the ‘ smogglers’ : ‘ My intention is t o favour the export of
foodstuffs from France and the import of .money from abroad.
                         1 See ante, p. 71.
