                                  CHAPTER I11
            SMUGGLINGAND CORRUPTION ; FISCALISM
                       AND LICENSING

>,
         THEtendencies described in the last chapter made it in-
 '    creasingly clear to Napoleon during the year 1810 that he must
     find new expedients if he was ever to succeed in making the
     Continental self-blockade effective; and he also had another
     reason for reshaping his policy, in the great inconveniences
     which had revealed themselves bothin his finances andin
     French economiclife. In order to form a clear idea of this
     second phase of the history of the Continental System,however,
     we must consider in a little more detail the smuggling and the
     system of bribery.1
                               SMUGGLING
         Concerning the prevalence of smuggling under the Conti-
     nental System lengthy books might be written,for it flourished
     throughoutEurope toan extent of which the world since
     then, and perhaps even before then, has rarely seen the like.
     Coercive measures in the sphere of commercial policy have at
     all times found a palliative in smuggling, But that palliative
     was used to an infinitely larger extent now that coercion ac-
     quired a range previously undreamt of ; and at the same time
     it was felt to be unendurablein a quite different way than
           For the smuggling and corruption there are a h m t unlimited materials in the
     extensive literature bearing upon this subject, particularly in the works of Konig,
     Schmidt, Serviires, Fisher, de Ckrenville, Rambaud, Rubin, Peez and Dehn,       and
     also in the treatises of TarleandSchafer.Tothese,moreover,should          be added
     the work of Chapuieat, Le COntmerCe et i'i&wtrie d Genbe, &c., pp. 29 el 8% 44.
     The quotation fromBourriennerefers to his MMres, vol. VIII,oh. XI, pp. 196-6. The
     quotation from Rist refers to his Lebenssinwuqen, vol. II, pp. 106 et sq. The
     referenoe to Simond's Journal will be found in vol. I, p. 242 ; vol. XI, p. 77. Aa
     to thetrustworthiness of Bourrienne and Rist, cf. Wohlwill,N e w e Geschichte, &e.,
     espeoially pp. 295 note, 397 note ; also his review of Servihres, in Hanaische Ge-
     8Chichtdliitter for 1900.
