             SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION                        191
 prohibited,and eau swrde when raw sugar was prohibited ;
 how coffeewent in as horse-beans, sugar as ;    starch
                                                      and how the
 names of pepper were legion. The same systemflourished, how-
 ever, from Gothenburg in the northwest around    all the coasts of
 Europe to Saloniki in the southeast, without any great varia-
tion in the methods. Probably the most primitive. expedients
were resorted t o ontheBalkan peninsula. Here sugar was
packed in small boxes weighing at the most 200 kilograms,
so that they could be transported ,on horses and asses ; in this
way it was conveyed by armed bands through Bosnia, Serbia
and Hungary to Vienna. France proper was undoubtedly the
most closely guarded country, but even there, accordingto both
English and French witnesses, smuggling flourished to a very
large extent. A t the very same time when the Berlindecree
was flung out, when the new prohibitive customs ordinancewas
enforced forFrance herself, the English MondhZy Magazim,
following the,statements of experts, described how British goods
of different kinds were exported on French orders       to France
everywhere along the frontiers and could easily be insured up
to the place of their destination, and how immediately after
their arrival they were stamped as of French manufacture and
made to serve as evidence of the high level attained by French
industry. A well-informed andintelligentFrench-American
traveller, Louis Simond, who visited Great Britain in 1810-11,
relates how the English goods ' are packed in small packages,
fit to be carriedbyhand,andmadetoimitatethemanu-
factures of the country towhich they are sent, even to the very
paper andoutwardwrapper,andthenames                of the foreign
manufacturers marked on the goods.' On pieces of broadcloth
in Leeds, for instance, he observedthe markof Journaux FrBres
of Sedan.
    On the sea the smuggling is said to have started principally
from Cowes, in the Isle of Wight. Here the goods were packed
into hermetically sealed chests, which were afterward thrown
into the water, chained to little buoya, like fishing nets, and
safelyhauledashoreon        theFrenchsidebytheinhabitants
under the very eyes of the patrolling vessels. If we may credit
an active French customs   officerat the time, Boucher de Perthes,
