                   SMUGGLINGAND CORRUPTION                                       193
  At the same time it should be possible to impose a pretty stiff
  fee, whichshouldbe fairly profitable                ...
                                               For that matter I
  should be very much inclined to let the smugglers in only a t
 Dunkirk, unless current practice required that they should also
 be received at Flushing.’ Thus the whole line of thought as it
 appears in this letter is almost grotesque ; the influx of money
 is to be effected by smugglers, who are to be treated with such
 consideration that even their habits are respected. This last is
 especially striking whencompared with Chaptal’saccount of
 Napoleon’s behaviour toward the legitimate trade, how he
 wished to command it like a battalion and ruthlessly directed
 it now here, now there. But the smugglers were necessary for
 the prosperity of Dunkirk and made that town exempt from the
general crippling of economic lifein the ports ; it was therefore
a serious matter for the town to see the smugglers moved from
there, as Napoleon threatened to do in 1811.1
     Naturally enough, this good-will toward the smugglers was
displayed only when they served the interestsof the government
policy ; apart from this there prevailed a war to the knife. On
the other hand, the normality was not limited to these cases,
but held goodover the whole line;andthe              governments
maintained an unequal struggle against the smugglers. In
one passage Mollienspeaks of the futility of the efforts of 20,000
customs officials, whose posts were known, to guard a frontier
threatened bymore than 100,000 smugglers,whowere              sup-
posed to have goodconnexions in Paris and were favoured
by the population besides.2According to Bourrienne’s state-
ment, there were no fewer than 6,000 smugglers in Hamburg
      De Watteville, Sozcvenirs d’un douanier, &c., hoc. cit., vol. 11 (NOS), p. 113
note 2 ; vol. m (1909), pp. 78, 82-3. Althoughtheanecdote about Josephine’s
British goods does not appear in the contemporary letters, but in the much later
memoirs, it gains credibility from theassertion of BoucherdePerthes that the
ex-Empressoftenreminded him of theincidentduringher             last years. For the
smuggling from Cowes,cf.Kiesselbach,        Die Continentakperre, kc.,p. 122. For
the rest of thetext, of. C o r r e s M m , nos. 13,718, 16,508; Lettree iddites,
nos. 874,877 ; Chaptal, Souvenirs, bo., pp. 274-8 ; Tarle, KontinentccFnaja b l o w ,
vol. I, pp. 308-7, 515-0. The authenticity of the letter of 1808 is not altogether
above suspicion, but it is in complete consonance with Napoleon’s correspondence
88 a whole.
      Mollien, Hknoires, &e., vol. III,p. 10.
   1569.43    .                            0
