l€%      INTERNAL
                HISTORY           AND WORKING
 of the Rhine. At the close of July,Frenchcustoms officers
 were moved into the country, forming a chain from Bremen
 through Osnabruck down to the Rhine at Rees close to the
 Dutchfrontier, which was therebycut off fromconnexions
 eastward. This cordon was made threefold, consistingof troops,
gendarmes and customs officers. According to one statement,
one of the lineswentalong        theDutchfrontierfrom        Varel,
near the beachof Jade, to Emmerich on the Rhine immediately
north of Rees. The violence with which the whole thing was
carried
      out,     however, caused great confusion. The local
authorities refused to assist the customs officers and protested
againsttheirmovements         ; thegendarmes      were at times
positivelyhostile to them ; and to crown all, the customs
officialswere sometimes corrupt, so that the blockade of the
non-French partof the Continent still continued to be practically
a failure on well-nigh all points. The unbroken severity of the
action that Napoleon followed inHolland, especially by the
incorporation of the region south of the Waal in March 1810,
seems not to have borne any great fruit either.       At any rate,
as late as May of the same year King Louis wrote sourly         to
Marshal Oudinot, Duke of Reggio : ' I have received the letter
in which you inform me that smuggling is going on to a great
extent on the coast of my kingdom. Like you, I believe that
it goes on wherever there are coasts, in Germanyas in Holland,
and even in France.'    The complete annexation of Holland in
July createda new situationhere, but at the sametime it
madethebarrier      betweenHolland and Germanysomewhat
purposeless.
    During the firsthalf of the year 1810, therefore, the situation
was notgreatly     changed. Frankfurt,inparticular,          could
rejoicein an entirelyundiminished trade in colonial goods,
which came in through the ports of. the North Sea and the
Baltic, and were conveyed thence to northern Ita.ly, southern
France,and even to HollandandeasternFrance.Thethen
minister of Prussia in this capital of the Confederation of the
Rhine actually declared at the beginning of the year that the
townhad neverbeforeplayedsuch           a part in thetrade of
