 188        INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
formerly, owing both to the increased importanceof international
intercourse and to the fact that outside the limits of France
proper it represented a foreign dominion and lackedmoral
support in all classes of the community. The purely external
forms of the smuggling are of relatively subordinate importance
in this connexion. The examples that have been mentioned in
the preceding pages, and that will be mentioned in the follow-
ing pages, mayherebesupplementedby           a couple of con-
temporary descriptions. One of these by Bourrienne refers to
the year 1809 and has a more or less anecdotal character.

                         Bourrienm’s Anecdote
    To the left of the short road leading from Altona to Hamburg there
 lies a field that had been excavated in order to get gravel for building
 houses and roads. Theintention was to repair the broadand long
 street in Hamburg running to the Altona gate. During       the night the
 hole from which the gravel had been taken was filled up ; and the same
carts which as a rule conveyed the gravel to Hamburg were filled with
raw sugar, the colour of which resembles sand. They contented them-
selves with covering the sugar with a layer of sand an inch thick. The
pikes of the customs officials easily penetrated this thin layer of sand
and the sugar underneath it. This comedy went on for a long time, but
the work on the street made no progress. Before I knew the cause of
this slowness I complained about it, because the street led out t o a little
country place which I owned near Altona, and where I used t o go daily.
Like myself, the customs officials a t last found out that the work of
road-making took rather a long time, and one fine day the sugar carts
were stopped and seized. The smugglers then had to devise some other
expedients.
     In the region between Hamburg and Altona, on the right bank of
the Elbe, there is a little suburb inhabited by sailors, dock-labourers,
and a very large number of house-owners, whose burial ground is in
thechurchyard of Hamburg. Onenowsaw              more often than usual
hearseswiththeiradornmentsanddecorations,             processions, burial
hymns and the usual ceremonies. Amazed at the enormous and sudden
mortality among the inhabitants    of Hamburgerberg, the customs house
officiaIs a t length ventured to examine one of the deceased a t close
quarters and     discovered sugar; coffee, vanilla,
                                                  indigo,     &c. This,
accordingly, was another expedient which had to be abandoned ; but
others remained.
