                    SMUGGLING AND CORRUPTION                                     189
               Rist's Description of HamburgSmuggling
    Withthismay       be comparedthe moreinformative and
certainly quite trustworthy account given by Rist, the repre-
sentative of Denmark, of the position at Hamburg a year after
the period with which we are chiefly concerned here, namely,
at the beginning of 1811.l
     For some time there had developed a peculiar and flourishing con-
 traband traffic which was carried on from Hamburgerberg with varying
 success in full daylight and under the eyes of the customs officers. About
 this I wish t o speak, becauseit was not onlypeculiar in its kind, but   also
 not without influence upon the manners of the people and later events,
 and even became the subject of a genuinely humorous popular poetry.
     The abundance of cheap colonial goods in Altona, which could not
 be prevented by any prohibitions or other measures from this side of
 the frontier, and the    similarly unpreventableconnectionwithHam-
 burgerberg, macle this last-named place a regular emporium for contra-
 band goods. Speculators in that line of business had at that time hit
 upon the idea of entrusting t o all kinds of low-class people, chiefly
 women, boys and girls of the rabble, the task of carrying the forbidden
 goods in small quantities through the customs guard stationed at the
town gates. The attempt had been successful and was soon continued
 on a large scale. The city gate was thronged with all kinds of canaille
 coming in and going out in a steady stream.Behind some wooden sheds
near the city gate one saw the arsenal of this curious army and its
equipment,  which      was a t once disgusting    and laughable. There
women turned up their dresses in order to shake coffee beans down in
theirstockings and to fastenlittlebags of coffee everywhereunder
their clothes ; there boys filled their ragged trousers with pepper in
the sight of everybody ; others poured syrup in their broad           boots ;
some even claimed to have seen women conceal powdered sugar under
their caps in their black tangledhair. With these burdens they a t once
started off, and afterward delivered over their goods in certain ware-
houses located near the city gate and received their pay. In this way
immense quantities of goods were brought in ; and agreements with
these petty dealers, based solely on good faith, seem seldom to have
been broken on either side.
    Thistrickerycouldnotlongremainconcealedfromthecustoms
officers ; and thereis no doubt but that they  could soon have checkedit.
Rut thisdoes not seem to have been the intention a t all. This ' filtration '
   1 We b o w from a letter of Bourrienne to Napoleon in October 1809 that the
same situation existed at that time.Lingelbach, Hiatorical Investigation and the
Commercial History of the Napoleonic Era, in the Amerdcan Historical Review (vol. XTX
(1913-14), p. 270.
