 190        INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
 -that   was the technical term-was         regarded as a happyhunting-
 ground, which was preserved as a means of enabling officers always to
 cover their requirements from it. If the officials seized every third or
 fourth ‘ bearer (Truger)-that was the people’s technical term-and
 kept his or her load, they derived a fine income from it ; but thetraffic
 was not a t all disturbed by this,for losses were part of the business, and
 the customs officials had simply to hold out their hands to getall that
 they needed. Many of them were also well bribed by the principal
 participatorsinthe traffic. If an unknownfaceappearedon              duty,
recourse was had to strategical measures : a dense column was formed,
some heavily armed persons in the van were sacrificed, and the others
burst through like a whirlwind, to the great joy of the spectators. The
 manifold incidents and perils which surrounded this Schuckeln or Tragen,
the spirit of good-fellowship with which the trade was carried on, and
the gallows humour that it’created, inspired a poet, and by no means
contemptible poet of his kind, from this or some neighbouring depart-
ment t o indite some ‘Schuckeln ditties ’, which for some time were in
everybody’s mouth and were highly characteristic. It is certain that
this business was for severalyearsin         succession a source of good
earnings for the poorest elements of the population and considerably
diminished mendicity. When the poor lawofficials              asked parents
receiving supportabouttheir       children’s means of livelihood, their
answer as a rule was : ‘ Hee [or see] drigt ’ ( h e - o r she-bears).  This
offscum of society had suddenly appeared as if sprung out of the soil,
and in thesame way i t afterwards vanished.

    AU this was by no means peculiarto Hamburg, althoughthe
fact that Hamburgerberg and country residences and places
of amusement lay on the Holstein side rendered control very
difficult and led to the rudest and   mostrepulsivecorporeal
searchings of both women and men in the middle of the open
road. Rist says that it was an especially difficult time for the
corpulent, just as seems to have been the case duringthe recent
World War on the. shores on the Sound. On the North Sea
coast the smuggling was still more systematicin Bremen, which,
according to Max Schafer, the latest describer of its fortunes
under the Continental System, was a ‘ smuggling metropolis ’.
It derived special advantage from what Vandal has called the
amphibious nature of the coast, in that, thanks to Die Watten
(the numerous islands lying flush with the water), goods could
be smuggled in direct from the British. From English sources
we learn how rawsugar was sent when refinedsugar was
