    RESULTS OF THE SELF-BLOCKADE (1806-1809) 185
 Europe nor been so full of colonial goods ; and the tradeseems
 further to have increasedin the course of thesummer. As
 regards Leipzig, to be sure, it was stated before and during the
 Easter Fair in 1810 that the imports through the North Sea
 ports, especially of English yarn, had practically ceased. But
 to make upfor this, the transfer of the trade to the Baltic ports
 was now definitive, helped withthe best of good-will by Prussia,
 and alsobySweden        and Mecklenburg, tocircumvent the
 ContinentalSystemineveryconceivable           way, and, for that
matter, with useful helpfrom the corrupt French consuls in the
ports. Konigsberg above all, but to a great extent the other
townson the south coast of the Baltic-Rostock, Stralsund,
Stettin, Memel, and even Riga-now took the place of the
Hanse Towns and the Dutch ports ; and there began a unique
importation of American cotton, which attaineditshighest
level during the summer. The whole of the Confederation of
the Rhine, Austria, Switzerland, and even France, were pro-
vided from there a t a time when spinning mills were spring-
ing upontheContinent         likemushroomsfrom       the ground.
At the Michaelmas Fair in 1810 the value of the supplies of
colonial goods in Leipzig was estimated at 65,500,000 francs ;
and although only a sixth part remained    in the town, all cellars,
vaults, and storehouses were full to overflowing, chiefly with
cotton, but also with coffee, sugar, and indigo.1

                                     EPIGRAM
                           D’IVERNOIS’S
    Naturally enough, people in England, especially in govern-
ment circles, took a very optimistic view of the situation. The
new Order in Council of April 1809, however modest was its
modification of the paper blockade, is an evidence of this fact.
Reasons are found for it in ‘ different events and changes which
have occurred in the relations between Great Britain and the
territories of otherpowers ’, which meant, of course, the Iberian
      Correqondunce, nos. 16,470,16,713 ; Duboscq, op. cit., no. 290 ; Schmidt,
op. cit., pp. 3503 ; Konig, op. cit., pp. 225 et sq., 230-1, 238 et sq., 241-2 ; Derm-
Btadter, Das UrossherzogtumFrankfurt (Frankfurt-am-Main,1901), pp. 311-12.
