              SMUGGLING
                   AND               CORRUPTION               195
British industrial products, it is true, came in on a large scale,
though, to judge by a statement from Leipzig, principally yarn ;
but their entrance was resisted by the different governments
even in most of the vassal states of France, because they wished
to exclude British manufactures on protectionist grounds. The
situation was quite different with regard to colonial goods. In
this respect all people, from the crowned ruler down to the day
labourer, were of one mindand thought intheir desire to break
the iron band of the Continental System ; and the smuggling
of these goodsaccordingly met with nothing but assistance
and support.
                     OFFICIALCORRUPTION
      But the unevenness of the struggle with the great organiza-
 tion at the disposition of the smugglerswasenormously in-
 creased by the thorough-going corruption which was also dis-
 tinctive of all branches of administration at thetime, especially
 those branches which had to deal with the blockade.
     In part the system of bribery in earlier times undeniably
 formedsimply a kind of payfor the servants of the state,
 although of the most objectionable kind possible ; and the h e
 between perquisites and bribes was often as fine as a hair.
 With regard to Bremen, for instance, we are told how the con-
 stant exactions of money for commandants, war commissaries
 and consuls-for non-dutiable goods, certificates of origin, and
 all kinds of lawful intercourse-took the form of b e d fees with
 definite names ; thusthe feesfor certificates of origin,for
instance, increased tenfold during the first six quarters after
the issue of the Berlin decree. There was scarcely a place in the
territories occupied by France or under French control where
similar tactics were not employed. In the autumn of 1810
Napoleon wrote to Marshal Davout instructing him not to let
the commander at Danzig, General Rapp, tolerate any corrup-
tion, although ‘everybody takes bribes ’. Hamburg seems to
have been especially exposed to people of this type. Marshal
Brune, Consul Lachevardi&re,and almost more than anybody
else,Bourrienne,wereperfect        &uo&     inthis respect. As
                               0 2
