                          FISCALISM                            201
out of regard for the captors, but not exclusively in their favour,
it was conceded that the dutymight be paid in kind, that is to
say, by means of a corresponding part of the goods which were
to comein, and also in promissory notes ; and without this
concession it is certain that in many cases such large amounts
could not have been gathered in. Every holder of colonial
goods was bound to declare them, so that, as Thiers expresses
it, the whole was taken in any attempt at barratry and half in
case of honest declaration.

                 Trialton Tarifl (August 5, 1810)
      The whole of this arrangement has taken its name from the
 Trianon tariff of August 5, 1810, which is one of the funda-
 mental lawsof the new system. This does not provide for
 customs duties based on a percentage of the values, but laid
 downspecific duties by weight (per 100 kilograms) on the
 different kinds of colonial goods. Duties of 4d and 50 per cent.
 still seem to have been applied, however, for prize goods and
 goods imported by licence, respectively. How high these rates
 were may perhaps be more clearly set forth by comparing with
 the highest rates of duty, namely, those on goods from non-
French colonies, in the tariff of 1806, to which reference has
already been made;and          yet the 1806 duties had already
formed 'the corner-stone of a whole series of rises in customs
duties. The duties at different dates are tabulatedin appendix
ii,which will perhaps afford the clearest view of the amount
of the increase. The most violent was the rate on raw cotton,
which as late as 1804 was assessed at only one franc per 100
kilograms, I n 1806 this rate was raised to not less than sixty
francs, notwithstanding that raw cotton had become the
foundation of a main departmentin the new industrial de-
velopment which began under the Empire. These rates, how-
ever,dwindle into insignificancewhencompared          with what
wasnow      enacted. According t o the Trianon tariff, South
American andlongstapled Georgia cotton hadto pay 800
francs ; Levantine cotton, if imported by sea, 400 francs, and
