 198         INJXRNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
  a competition with the smugglers. This was to be arranged in
  such a way that in some form or other the importation of the
  hitherto forbidden goodswas to be permitted, but only on
  payment of a duty that exactly corresponded to an amount
  which, as we have seen, the smuggling business had previously
  cost. In that,case no more goods would comeinto the country
  than had been the case beforehand, but the profit would fall to
  the state instead of to the smugg1ers.l
      Such a device could not fail to appeal to Napoleon with his
  cynicalsense of reality for everything that had to do with
  means ; but what he shut his eyes to till the last was the great
  extent towhich this means damaged hisgreat end. As a matter
 of fact, this meant that fiscalism had definitively gotten the
 upper hand over the Continental System, at least in one-half
 of its range. The object was no longer to exclude goods, but to
 make an income by receiving them instead ; and no sophistry
 in the world could make the latter compatible with the fotmer.
 But we cannot maintain that Napoleon in this respectcon-
 sciously acted in opposition to his objects. His line of thought
 was as inconsistent as that which is still constantly found
 outside the circle of professional economists, in which the fact
 is ignored that themore prohibitive or protectionistic a customs
tariff, the less it brings in, and consequently that that part of
a customs duty which keeps goodsout brings in no money to the
treasury. This duality of conception in Napoleon finds a very
typical expression in a letter addressed to his brother Jerome,
King of Westphalia, on October 3, 1810, in which he first points
out how advantageous the new system would be for this young
prodigal by bringing him in a larger income ; and after that he
goes on to say : ' It will also be a great advantage in othei
respects, since the continental customers of the English mer-
chants will not be able to pay for them (the goods), and the
consumption of colonial goods, which will be rendered dear in
this way,will be diminished. They will thus be exposed to
     Darmstiidter, Das&osslmmgturnTrankfurt,    p. 308 note 3. Cf. Peroeval in
theHouse of Commons in the Debate on the Budget, 1810. Hansard, vol. XM,
p. 1056. See also Schmidt, Le Grand-ducU de Berg, pp. 358-9.
