                               FISCALISM                                 199
attack and at the same time driven out of the continent.’ The
representatives of Napoleonused the samelanguage in de-
pendent countries.1 So far, therefore, the reshaping of the
Continental System aimed at no real increase in its efficacy,
butrather at the reverse,inasmuch as Napoleon acquired
a direct interest in the admission of goods into the country.
    On paper, however, no departure from the principles of the
Continental System was ever acknowledged, inasmuch as the
Berlin and Milan decrees were retained unchanged t o the last ;
and Napoleon zealously impressed on his stepson Eugene, the
Viceroy of Italy, the necessity of not letting the goods in ‘ to
the detriment of the blockade ’, But inhis inexhaustible supply
of expedients Napoleon founda simple means of circumventing
his own system in fact, namely, by granting exceptions from
the prohibition on import in the matter of captured goods.

                Prize Decree (January 12, 1810)
    By a law issuedat the very beginning of the year 1810 (Jan-
uary la), it was laid down that goods the importation of which
was forbidden (with the exception of certain kinds of cotton
fabrics and hosiery) might be introduced into the country on
payment of a customs duty of 48 per cent. when ~ e y      came
from prizes captured from the enemy by war vessels or licensed
privateers. This was called ‘ permitted origin ’ (wigines per-
mises). Buthe exceptionhereestablished          with regard to
cotton goods was developed still further in the course of the
year; and in this processNapoleonskilfullytook advantage
of the differentfeeling that prevailed on the Continent with
regard to colonialgoods and English industrial products. In
accordance with this, the newsysteminvolved        a relentless
prohibition of British goods, but made concessions with regard
to colonial goods,whichwere admitted onpayment of huge
duties, So far as the system in this formcould be enforced,
Napoleoncontrived at least notto favour British industry,
but only British trade. Thathe exception was in form
       1 Comeqmdance, no. 16,983 ; de CBrenville, op, cit., pp. 331-2.
