 196         INTERNAL
                    HISTORY                    AND WORKING
 regards Bourrienne, Napoleon is alleged to have said that he
 (Bourrienne) would have been able to find a silver mine in the
 garden of the Tuileries if he had been left alone there ; and a t
 the beginning of 1811 the Emperor calculated that his former
 secretary had made seven or eight million francs a t Hamburg.
 The Emperor’s letters are full of embittered outbursts against
 his corruption, whichseems to have been carried on quite
 systematically with the connivance of sub-agents of different
 sorts, and which finally led, first to his being prohibited to sign
 certificates of origin, and then tohis being removedfrom office.
 But these are only isolated examples of things that occurred
 everywhere.l
     Rist, who, like the purely Hamburg;-an writers, fully confirms
 the French statements as to the    corruptibility of Bourrienne and
 his associates, does not represent the conduct of his Holstein
 compatriots in any better light. Moreover, passing       to another
country, we are informed that in Geneva eighty customs offi-
cials had to be dismissed in seven months forcomplicity in
malversation ; and from the Rhine frontier we have further
information thatthe director of customs and his relations
directlyhelped      the illicit trade in the smuggling centre of     .
Strassburg, and that the        customs lieutenants on theRhine
lived on bribes when they had no British pension.
   However oppressive a corrupt administration may be t o the
population, yetthe bribery system wouldscarcely have led
Napoleon to changehispolicy, if the whole thing had been
limited to exactions above those allowed by laws and ordi-
nances. From the standpoint of the Continental System, how-
ever, the unfortunate thing was that at least as much, and
probably more,could be gained by facilitating or actually
encouraging-always for        a consideration-precisely the traffic
which the Continental System aimed to annihilate by every
possible means. For such illegalities on the part of the officials
the people were willing to pay munificently, and they were, if
   1 Besides the above-cited passages, cf. especially Napoleon’s letters of Sept. 2,
11, and Dec. 18,1810,and of Jan. 1 and Sept. 3,1811. Currapondance, nos. 16,859,
16,891, 17,225, 17,257, 18,111.
