 1%        INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
alone, a figure, of course, which can make no higher claimsthan
those of Mollien to express anything more than a general notion
of the enormous scope of the smuggling.

              Commercial Organizationof Smuggling
      Of special importance is the organized,or, to express it
  better, the commercial, character of the smuggling. In Naples
  an economicwriter,Galanti,spoke         of it as ‘ a useful trade,
  inasmuch as it prevents the ruin of the state ’ ; and in various
  places Napoleon’s organs complainthat it is regarded as a quite
  honourable occupation. Smuggling had also quite lost the char-
  acter of managingbychance to break through the customs
  barrier on the chance of profit. It was based on definite busi-
 nesspractices,withfixedcommissions           that varied with the
  degree of certainty surrounding a successful result or the diffi-
 culties in the way of getting through t o different places or with
 different goods. In Strassburg there were ‘ insurers ’ of different
 grades, the chief of which charged a commission of from 44)to
 50 per cent. ; in 1809 it was considered that the expenses of
 passing the frontier of France were, as a rule, 30 per cent., while
 the above-mentioned new customslinebetweenRees                 and
 Bremen could be broken through for 6 or 8 per cent. ; and a t
 about the same rate it was possible to smuggle any commodity
 whateverfromHolstein         into Hamburg. A convincing im-
 pression of the business-like character of the smuggling is
 alsogiven by Napoleon’s Fontainebleau decree(October 18,
 1810), where a careful distinction is drawn between leaders or
 undertakers-in Adam Smith’s sense-(entreprelzeurs),        insurers
 (assureurs), shareholders (intkressks), managers of the practical
work (chefs de bade, directeurs et conducteurs de rdunions de
fraudeurs), and finally ‘ ordinary bearers ’ (simpbs p~rteurs),
in whichwe       b d a completehierarchy ranging downwards
from the directors of the smugglingenterprises through the
capitalists and officials to the unskilled workers.
     But there was a marked difference with regard to the ease
with which the different kinds of goodscould be smuggled.
