  200         INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
   restricted to prize goods was in reality of no importance. It is
   true that Napoleondeclared, in a letter to Eugene, that all
   colonial goods which had not been captured or seized should
   remain excluded ; but according to Thiers,express          orders
   were given in the correspondence of the Customs Department
   that this should not be strictly observed-and there can be no
   doubt about the practical extension of the concession to all
   colonial goods.1
       As regards the customs rates, the principle, as has been said
   already, was that they should correspond to the costs of smug-
   gling. When Holland was incorporated with France on July 9,
   1810, it was laid down, in approximate conformity with the
   above-mentioned law of January, thatthe largestocks            of
   colonial goodsin that country should beadmitted to theempire
   on payment of a duty which in the decree of incorporation was
   fixed a t 50 per cent. of the value, but which, according to a
   somewhat later declaration, was to be 40 or 50 per cent., accord-
  ing to the time of the declaration. This principle was applied
  not only to France, but also to all the vassal states, which now
  became the object of the same merciless pressure with regard
  to thenew system as they hadformerly been with regard to the
  Continental decrees and which, as a rule, formally submitted
  at least as obediently as then.         Buto     make assurance
  doubly sure, every stock of colonial goods which was as much
  as four days' journey from    the French frontier was to be re-
. garded as intended to injure France, and was therefore to be
  subjected to examination by French troops ; in fact, French
  troops were actually employed for the purpose. I n order that
  the right degree of pressure should be attained, it was the in-
  tention that the new order should be carried through simul-
  taneously over the whole Continent, so that there would be no
  country to which the goods could fly in order to escape these
 heavy burdens ; consequently Eugene at least received orders
 to keep the new instructions secret for the present. Principally
     Law of Jan. 12, 1912 (Bulletin h lois, k c . , 4th .eer., bull. 260, no. 6,122);
Letters to Eugene of Aug. 6 and Sept. 19,1810 (Cwrmpondance, nos. 16,767,16,930) ;
Tbiers, Histoire dzc coneulat, &c., bk. X X X ~ ,
                                               vol. XII, p. 186 note.
