  204         INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
   instead of the complete blockade. On the contrary, we fmd
   proportionally a still larger number of examples of bribery and
   embezzlement after the Trianon and Fontainebleau decrees
   than before. But Napoleon, on his side, had to a great extent
   changed his treatment of them, in accordance with his new
  fiscalist tendencies.Hismethod        became simply to demand
  a share of the bribes of the dishonest officials, and in that way
  convert them into sponges with which to soak up revenue from
  the illicittrade.The      resemblance to the Trianonsystem is
  thus striking. Two or three cases from the beginning of 1811
  are particularlycharacteristic in this connexion.One         of the
  most fully compromisedofficialswas         theFrench consul a t
  Konigsberg, Clbrembault, who released fourteen British ships
  in the Baltic, belonging to a large flotilla which Napoleon had
  pursued the whole autumn-of which more anon-with a cargo
  worth 2,800,000 francs, and was stated to have obtained the
  magnificent sum of 800,000 francs on this affair alone and
  1,500,000-1,600,000 francsaltogether. A t the same time the
 malversations of Bourrienne and Consul Lachevardiche still
 went on in Hamburg. With reference to this Napoleon wrote
 to his foreign minister, Champagny, a hghly characteristic
 New Year's letter to the effect that Cl6rembault was to hand
 over to the Foreign Office all that he had received ; and he
 also declared his intention t o compel Bourrienne to payin
 2,000,000 francs in the same fashion, while LachevardiBre was
 to pay 500,000 francs to thesinking-fund of the French govern-
ment. His intention was that the first two amounts should be
employed for the erection of a residence for the foreign minis-
ter ; and the letter ends : ' Youwillsee that I shall get the
money for a reallyhandsome palace which will costme nothing.'l
This was not a mere idle fancy ; on the contrary, it turned out
that Cl6rembault had already anticipated matters by paying
of his own accord 500,000 francs to the Emperor's privy purse
(caisse de Z'extraordinaire), and that he had     stillearlierpaid
    Letters to Champgny (Jan. 1) and hvary, minister of polioe (Jan. 7). Lettrea
iddites, nos.733, 748. Cf. letter to Davout (Jan. 1). Curreapondance, no. 17,267.
See a160 Kijnig, op. cit., p. 237.
