                          LICENSING SYSTEM                                     813
 the wind blew when they left Rotterdam (although they        were never
 near the place) when they took a pilot on board, and a number     of other
particulars, which they are obliged to asseverate on the most solemn
oath which it is possible t o conceive ; knowing at the same time that
they sailed from London and not from Rotterdam, that they took no
pilot on board, and that their other statements are utterly     false. So
that, under this system, the     whole crew and captain are under the
necessity of perjuring themselves, if they wish to act up totheir instruc-
tions. I n confirmation of these statements, I will read to the House a
letter of a most curious description which hasbeen put into my hands,
written to an American merchant, of the highest respectability, the
contents of which would be extremely ludicrous, if the contemplation
of them were not accompanied by a feeling        of disgust at the moral
depravity it displays. It is written by a professional man, not that he
is either a lawyer, a physician, or a divine, for he would be a disgrace
to anyof these honourable occupations; but he is a man who has made
the forgery of ships’ papers a regular and organized profession. I shall
omit the names of any of the parties, becauseI should be sorry to injure
individuals, whose only connection with the writer has been, that he
has dared to send them this most atrocious circular.It is as foll’ows :
                                                                          -.
                                                                 Liverpool,
    GENTLEMEN-we take the liberty herewith to inform you, that we have estab-
lished ourselves in this town, for the sole purpose of makingsimulated papers
[Hear,Hear I] which we are enabled to do in away   which willgive ample Satisfaction
to our employers, not only being in possession of the original documents of the
ships’ papers, and clearances to various porta, a list of which we annex, but our
Mr. G       ”  +    having worked with his brother, Mr. J - h ,        in the eame
line, for the last two years, and understending all the necessary languages.
    Of any changes that may occur in the different places on the continent, in the
various oustom house and other offices, which may render a change of signatures
necessary, we are careful to have the earliest information, not only from our own
connections but from Mr. J-B”,          who has proffered his assistance in every
Way, and who has for some time past made simulated papers for Messrs. B”
and P-,      of this town, to whom we beg leave to refer you for further informa-
tion. We remein, &c,
    Then follows a long list of about twenty places from and to which
they can forge papers (having all the clearances ready by them, from
the different public agents) the moment they receive intelligence that
any merchant mayneed their assistance in this scheme   of fabrication.

                                    France
    That part of this whichmade an impressionuponNapo-
leon must above all have been the last-mentioned side of the
licence system, for it evidently enabled the British to evade his
