  a12         INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
     standing,says this paper, which is countersigned by his Majesty’s
     Secretary of State 18,000 times in a year, this trade is carried on by
     fraudandperjury,      wewill sanction that foulness, and wewill give
    orders that these ships shall be enabled to pass through the British
    fleets. Perhaps thefull import of this clause is not known to theHouse.
    It is proper they should be informed that papers are put on board
    stating the actual place from which the ship cleared out, signed in the
    proper and usual manner, with lettersfrom the ship-owner to theproper
    persons ; and that these real documents form what is called the ship’s
    papers. By this license the captain is enabled to takeon ‘board another
    set of papers, which are a forgery from beginning to end, and in case
    his vessel happensto be overhauled by ourcruizers, he escapes detention.
    If the ship happento clear from London, it is perhapssaid to clear from
    Rotterdam, and the    proper description is made out, as nearlyas possible,
    in the hand-writing of the Custom-house officerat Rotterdam, andif i t be
    necessary that thepaper should be signed by a minister of state, asis the
,   case in Holland, his handwriting must be forged, frequently that of the
    duke of Cadore [Champagny],or perhaps, as I happened to see the other
    day, thatof Napoleon himself. Not onlyare thenames forged, but theseal
   is also forged, and the wax imitated. But this is not enough. A regular
   set of letters is also forged, containing a good deal of fictitious private
   anecdote, and a good deal of such news from Rotterdam as might be
   supposed to be interesting to mercantile people, and a letter from a
   merchant in Rotterdam to the ship-owner. Thus provided, the vessel
   sails, and the object of the clause in thelicense which I have just read,
   is to prevent her from being seized by any of our cruizers who may
   intercept her. This is what is meant by the general expression of-
   ‘ Notwithstanding all the documents which accompany the ship and
   cargo may represent the same, &c.&c.’ So much for the system of
   forgery on which this license trade rests ; but all this is not enough.
  All this must be done with the privity of the merchant here, and of his
  clerks. That most respectable branch of society, and these young men,
  whom they are initiating into trade, areno longer a t liberty to follow
  the system, by which our Childs and our Barings have risen to such
  respectability and eminence ; but from their very outset in         life, are
  now to be initiatedinthehumiliating           mysteries of this fraudulent
  commerce. All these forgeries, too, are confirmed by the solemn oaths
  of the captain and crew when they arrive at theirdestined port. They
  are obliged to swear in words, as awful as i t is possible to conceive, that
  alI these documentsand letters aregenuine. Every sort of interrogatory
  is put to the captain andthe whole crew, whichis calculated to discover
  what is the real port from which the vessel sailed, and to the truth of
  the answers to all these interrogatories the captain and thewhole crew
  are obliged to swear. They are obliged to declare from what quarter
