214       INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING

blockading decrees with success. But the whole fashion of say-
ing one thing, and meaning and doing another, accorded ex-
quisitely with his general and   bent
                                    created apossibility, which was
particularly welcome under the then prevailing circumstances,
of altering his r w e in fact without formally repealing ‘ the
fundamental law of the Empire ’ before the English had given
way. It was only natural, therefore, that the licensing system
on the British side should encourage imitation on the side of
Napoleon.Accordingly,        the ContinentalSystemduring        its
last years developed into a huge system of jugglery on both
sides, when neither side honestly applied its own regulations,
but both broke them with a capriciousness that to some extent
increased the sufferings of the already more than sufficiently
harassed peoples.
     Rut this external resemblance between the tactics of Great
Britain and Napoleon concealed a fundamental internal dis-
similarity. In this case there is an unusual amount of truth in
the old dictum quumduo fmiunt idem, non est idem. The
licences created, or at least had the power t o create, a perfectly
consistent application of the policy that Great Britain wished
t o pursue, namely, the promotion of trade with the Continent.
For Napoleon, on the other hand, every licence, his own no less
than his opponent’s, meant a breach in theself-blockade of the
Continent andinthe        isolation of GreatBritain,      andthus
drove one more nail into the c o f h of the Continental System.
For Napoleon the licences were an integral part of the new
order of things, the otherhalf of which was the Trianon regime ;
and like that, the licences on his side contributed greatlyto the
more and more dominant fiscalism, which was not the case, to
any notable extent, in Great Britain. I n this way the licensing
system in Great Britain acquired its real importance for the
Continental System by kveigling Napoleon into an imitation
which removed him still further from his great aim.
    Sometimes this factfmds very open expression in Napoleon’s
copious explanations of the licensing system, alternating with
highly confusing and obscure accounts of its significance. ‘ I n
this place it is necessary to tell you again what you already
