 a22      INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
 the vassal states contrived to make. We have a t present no
 complete survey of the total yield of the newpolicy to the
 government treasuries,but a general ideaof the whole situation
 is given by the fact that,    according to Thiers, the auctions
 aloneduring the remaining months of 1810 yielded a cash
 return of almost 150,000,000 francs. In the contemplation of
 such figures it isnot difficult to understand the magnitude
 that the fiscal side of the policy was destined to attain ; and,
 indeed, it was t o become more and more marked during each of
 the remaining years.
    Thecorner-stone of the new building, visible to all the
 world,was formed by the incorporationwithFrance of the
 Hanse Towns and Oldenburg and the rest of the North Sea
coast. This took place about the turnof the year 1810-11, and
 brought it about that the new measures, both administrative
and military, struck by far the hardest on the North Sea. It is
true that from the beginning this involved a great limitation
in effectiveness, inasmuch as thecentre of gravity of the British
continental traffic had alreadybeen moved definitely from there
to the Baltic coasts and Gothenburg.
    The special regulations that were issued in the early part of
October concerning the payment of customs duties for goods
between the coast and the old Rees-Travemiindeline are of less
interest ; and their relations to the Trianon tariff are not clear
in all details. Of the greatest importance, rather, are the new
judicial system-if such a fair-soundingword can be used-and
the new military barrier.

        CUSTOMSCOURTSAND THE MILITARYCORDON
   It was on the North Sea coast that the new customs courts
were of the most importance, and it was there that they pro-
ceeded with all the cruelty and contempt for private rights
that invariably characterize an unscrupulous police. The new
customs staff, which is represented as a rabble scraped together
from different countries, penetratedbgdayandnight           into
dwelling houses, and espionage flourished more than ever.
