                     LICENSING SYSTEM                          215
 understand,’ runs an unusually explicatory letter to Eugene,
 Viceroy of Italy (September 19,1810), ‘ namely, what is meant
 by a licence. A licence is a permission,accorded to a vessel
 that fulfrls the conditions exacted by the said licence, to import,
 or export a certain kind of merchandise specified in that licence.
 For thosevessels the Berlin and Milan decrees are null andvoid.’

                  LICENCE DECREE JULY (25, 1810)

     What an almost all-embracing range this suspension of the
  Continental decrees attained is shown by an express order, the
 so-called ‘ Licence decree,’ of July 25,1810, and also by a number
 of confirmatory measures adopted by Napoleon during the sub-
 sequentperiod. Thus it was laiddownin the licencedecree
 that beginning on August 1,1810, no vessel bound for a foreign
 portmightleaveFrenchportswithout              a licencesigned by
 Napoleon’s own hand. If the vessel was bound for any of the
 ports of the Empire, or was engaged in coasting traffic in the
 Mediterranean, a moregeneralpermit          (acquit-d-caution) was
 required, but also a written bond which was not annulled until
 evidence couldbe furnished of the vessel’s arrival at the French.
 port. All vessels that were devoted to le grand commerce or la
 gTande navigation were therefore obligedto have a licence ; and
 for this procedure there was given the hghly significant justi-
 fication that nosuchtraffic      was possible withoutcalling at
 a British portor a t least being examinedby the British-which,
according to the Milan decree, involved ‘denationalization ’ and
 confiscation. Despite the fact that both the Berlin and Milan
decrees strictly forbade all intercourse with England and        all
calling at English ports, Napoleon now went so far as t o make
it a point of honour that French vessels should visit English
waters, and go to London,eventhoughthey              were under a
neutral flag. ‘ Under this disguise England receives them, and
I make laws for her owing to her pressing need of commercial
intercourse.’ It was not surprising that such a change of front,
which in 1812, for instance, led to a licence for the importation
of rice from London,befogged many people completely.
