                    LICENSING SYSTEM                         217
to Hamburg. One of the most stringent conditions for licences
was that imports into France, and to some extent also into
Italy, of whatever kind they might be-apart from foodstuffs
during years of famine, as in 181R"required from the importing
vessel a return cargo of French goods from France or Italian
goods from Italy of at least the same value. Such return freight
was particularly silk and other French textiles, but also wine
and brandy, and,in goodyears, natural produce,especially
fromItaly. All this was to be in proportions which varied
a great deal from time to time, but were usually determined in
great detail. This very far-reaching system, whichalso had
something, though on a smaller scale, corresponding to it on
the British side, as has already been mentioned,l had developed
from a regulation introduced into the French customs ordinance
of 1803 as a kind of punishment for vessels whose papers were
not above suspicion in respect of the innocent origin of their
cargo. This even applied to incorporated territories, such as
the Hanse Towns, when importing to 'the old departments     '.
    It may be said at once that this attempt on the part of
Napoleon to transform the Continental System from a gigantic
plan of blockade against Great Britain to an in itself less note-
worthy method of augmenting the exports of France, led to an
almost complete fiasco. The goodswere taken on board, of
course, but as their importation was prohibited in England,
and as, moreover, they were not in a position to compete with
British manufactures, there could be no sale, And it i s in the
very nature of things that the method of circumventing such
export ordinances must be still more varied than in regard to
obstacles in the way of imports, and the dodges invented were
all the more numerous. On the whole, it may be regarded as
a general rule that purely coercivelaws in the sphere of
economics have far fewer possibilitiesof being made effectivein
a positive direction than in a negative one. In most cases, in
fact, it is almost impossible that the positive law can effect
anything more than theexternal forms of economic transaction,
while the negative regulation or prohibition can much sooner
                         1 See a n k p. 84.
