224       INTERNAL HISTORY A N D WORKING
 of the Hanse Towns people suddenly found the border of the
 Empire running between Altona and Hamburg. Consequently,
 the most elementary economic functionshad to come to a
 standstill owing tothe       prohibitive legislation. This was
 carried to such an extent that the Holstein peasants were a t
 first not permitted to take back over    the frontier the money
 they had received in payment for the foodstuffs that they had
 sold, because it was against the law to take money out of the
 country.
     Alongside this new system of justice on the basis of the
 Fontainebleau decree, Napoleon now fell back on his military
 resources to a greaterextenthan         ever before. Massha’s
 army corps, now under the command of Oudinot, was stationed
 on a line from Boulogne along the coasts of Brabant . and
 Holland, with its strongest division a t Emden to maintain
 the connexion with the Hanse Towns. Next came Davout’s
 corps, which, accordmg to Thiers, was ‘ the finest, most reliable,
and best organized ’ in the army, ‘ the invincible third corps,’
the only corps in the whole of Napoleon’s army whichnow,
during the short interval of peace upon the mainland, was kept
upon a war footing. It consisted of three divisions, each com-
posed of five regiments of infantry divided into four battalions
(sixty battalions of infantry in all), with eighty cannons ; and
in addition t o these there was one division of cuirassiers and
one division of light cavalry, a great    siege train, and finally
a flotilla of gunboats stationed in the mouths of the rivers.
The extreme outpost of this line was General Rapp’s force at
Danzig. In a letter of September 28, 1810, to Davout, the
mainstay of this organization, Napoleon gavedetailedin-
structions as to how the differentgeneralswiththeir         forces
were to be distributed, and he expressly declared that the two
divisions stationed along the German North Sea coast had as
their sole task the prevention of smuggling. Moreover, con-
siderablefortifications were madealong the coastwith the
same purpose in the lastmonths of 1810, after a plan to capture
Heligoland without maritime forces had had to be abandoned.
