        TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY                              %3
   a southern one to the same point (Brody), a t first from Odessa,
   that is to say, across the Black Sea, and after the outbreak of
   the Franco-Russian war, wia ConstantinopleandSaloniki to
   Lemberg. Butthis connexion was bynomeanslimited               to
   supplying EasternEurope. On the contrary, it also became,
  just as Bacher had predicted, the starting-point of a transport
  of goods throughBavaria,         which permittedtheduty-free
  transit of colonial goods and even passed British manufactures,
  to the rest of South Germany and Switzerland, and making
  possible their smuggling into France.
      But it is obvious that these roundabout routes andlicensing
  fees or smuggling expenses and bribes were bound to increase
  the cost of transport enormously ; and so far this new policy
  also threw serious obstacles in theway of British trade, although
  these were relative and not absolute hindrances, as the Conti-
  nentalSystemin       its originalform was intended to create.
  Tooke gives a number of interesting examples of the immense
 cost oe freight during the years1809-12 in comparison with the
 year 1837, when his book was written.l For instance, wheat
 freights were 50 shillings per quarter, as against h. 6d. ; hemp
 freights were $30 per ton, as against $2 10s. ; timber freights
 were 330 per load, as against $1, &c. Silk had to go round-
 aboutwaysfromItaly,         e.g., fromBergamoinonecase         &a
 Smyrna, and in another case via Archangel (sic), so that the
 transport tookoneyear        andtwo years,respectively ; and
 when it went through France, the expense was $100 per bale,
 besides the freightfromHavretoEngland.            Tookeparticu-
larly states that the freights to and from France  were enormous.
For a vessel of little more than one hundred tons the freight
and the French licence might amount to no less than E50,000
for a trip from Calais to London and back to Calais, which for
indigo meant a freight of 4s.6d. per English pound,as compared
with Id. (that is to say one fifty-fourth) in 1837 ; and the gross
freight for a ship whose total value was $4,000 was S80,OOO for
a trip from Bordeaux to London andback.
          1 Tooke, History of Prim, &c.,   vol. I, pp. 309-10 note.
