226       INTERNAL
                 HISTORY             AND WORKIEG
 scale ; but none the less Darmstadter, the German historian,
 reckons the yield to the French treasury at 9,OOO,OOO francs.
     The fact that thedirect intervention of France thus caused
 the other states tolose the profit served to stimulate the measures
 of those states themselves ; and externally, at least, they began
 to show great zeal in obeying the new decrees, so that colonial
 goods were seized everywhere. I n Leipzig, which corresponded
 in eastern Germany to Frankfurt in thewest, there was an un-
 usual amount of colonial goods in the autumn of 1810, as has
 previously been mentioned ; 1 but the great interest         of the
 Saxon government in maintainingthe fairs evidently prevented
 very forcible measures there against goods that were always in
 suchgreatrequest.       Among the moststriking measures are
those taken in Holstein,which had become one of the principal
regions for the storage of colonial goods. In order to get them
into his hands, Napoleon now conceded that for a limited time
they might be imported intoHamburgonpayment                  of the
duties corresponding to the Trianon tariff ; and at the same
time hecaused the Danish governmentto impose corresponding
duties within his territory, in order that the owners should not
be tempted to retain their goods. From Napoleon’s point of
view this move turned out better thanmost of the others. The
final date had time after time t o be moved forward until the
spring of 1811, so that theenormous stores could be completely
exported ; and theFrench treasury made 19,700,000 francs on
the payments in kind alone, and 4!2,500,000 francs altogether.
Rist describes how during the last weeks the highways from
Tonning were never free of loaded carts, inasmuch as half the
peasants of Holstein had deserted their fields. Thousands were
lost, many thousands were stolen, and hundreds of &-loads
waited all night at Hamburgerberg for the gates of the town to
be opened. Cotton lay all about the fields like snow.
    For the states of the interior there was a special difficulty
in the treatment of colonial goods that had already. passed
through another state in Napoleon’s sphere of power and had
there paid duty according to the Trianon ‘tariff. T h e method
adopted at first, namely, the exaction of the duty in every
                          1 see ante, p. 186.
