       TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY                     2%'
 country, was evidently fatal for intermediary states such as
  Frankfurt ; and gradually an arrangement was made whereby
 the tariff was generally applied as a tax on consumption, not
 as a transit duty, but with freedom for goods that had once
 paid the duty. In this connexion,however, there was the
 usual difficulty created by the systematic measures of Prussia
 and Sweden(Swedish Pomerania) calculated to make the
 Continental System illusory, despite the most abject terms in
 the ordinances issued. Prussia allowed payment at par in
 government securities,which stood at 59.5 per cent. ; and
 when the goods afterwards went through to otherquarters
 with Prussian certificates of payment, the measures once again
 missed their aim, This went on until in the spring and summer
 of 1811 the Prussian certificates were disapproved and a fresh    .
 violent raid was made on what had been let through in the
 meantime. In consequence of this, the results of the new policy
 in Central Europe proper could not emerge clearly until the
 middle of 1811.
     Owing tothe confiscationswhich took placewhennon-
 declaredcolonialgoodswerediscovered,       great auctions were
arranged-preferably in towns which lay at some distance from
the great smugglingplaces,because the priceswere highest
there. Foremost among these was Antwerp, but of consider-
able importance also were Frankfurt, Cologne,Mainz, Strass-
burg, Milan, Venice and other towns near the old frontier of
France. At these auctions the colonial trade was provided with
goods and thus given a constant source of supply alongside the
smuggled goodsand theduty-paid imports ; and bythis means
there was created a possibility, besides smuggling,of purchasing
the goods at a rate lower than theforeign priceplus the customs
duty.
                           AUTOS-DA-~fi
     What we have here dealt with are the colonial goods pure
and simple. British industrial products, of course, according
to the Fontainebleau decree were under all circumstances con-
demned to destmction ; and from this rule Napoleonnever,
so f a r a6 is known, made an exception. But itwould be a great
                              82
