            TRIANON AND FONTAINEBLEAU POLICY                    2%


                          CONFISCATIONS
      Aswas to be expected, the execution of the new decrees
  encountered far greater obstacles in the vassal states than in
  the incorporated territories. According to French opinion, the
  Trianon decree, in the beginning at least, remained a dead
  letter in all the states of the Confederation of the Rhine, except
  Baden. Prussia, like Saxony, made an attempt to except raw
  materials from the tariff ; and the somewhat moreindependent
  states, such as Russia, Austria, and Sweden, never, so far as is
  known, introduced-the tariff as a whole. It seems as if it was
 just this passive resistance in August and September 1810 that
 contributed to bring about the issue of the Fontainebleau
 decree in October. The great decree (for France) that usually
 bears this name, dated October 18 or possibly 19, was preceded
 a few days before (October 14)by a decree for the Grand Duchy
 of Frankfurt and followed by corresponding laws promulgated
 by the other states of the Confederation of the Rhine, as well
 as by Denmark and Switzerland. The mostnotorious and
 dramatic was Napoleon’s intervention in Frankfurt. Although
 that town, and the Grand Duchy created for the last electoral
 prince of Mainz that bore the name of the town, was nominally
 a sovereign state, on October 17 and 18 it was suddenly entered
 by two French regiments of infantry without the Grand Duke
being so much as informed of the event. All the gates were
occupied and artillery was stationed on the great square, after
which the decree was posted up and an order was given that
a declaration should be made of all colonial and English goods.
French customs officialssearched all warehouses,sealed all
vaults and seized all books and letters ; in fact, the whole of
the great trade movement was stopped. For several days there
was a violent agitation, as the general belief was that all the
goods were going to be confiscated ; but the excitement abated
somewhatwhen the colonialgoodswerereleased, by a new
decree of November 8, on payment of duty according to the
Trianon tariff. As usual, malversation occurredon a large
  1569.49
                                Q
