 m            INTERNAL
                     HISTORY                    AND WORKING

                              ROUTES(1810-12)
                  NEWCOMMERCIAL
      The most remarkable consequence of the new system was
 a new arrangement of the traderoutes, which took place in two
  directions. In the first place, the sea route was again brought
 officially into favour by the licence system, as it had not been
 since the Berlin decree. This change evidently was mainly
 important for France herself,wheresmuggling          had always
 encountered the greatest difficulties ; and it put an end, for
 instance, t o the prosperity which Strassburg had enjoyed as
 a staple for French imports, both legitimate and illegitirnate.l
 In the second place,and thiswas the most important, the whole
 of this tradein colonial goodsand British manufactures shifted
 from Central Europe proper-the regions of the Rhine, Weser,
 Elbeand Oder-to EasternEuropeandtheDanube                  basin.
 Beginning with the summer of 1811, there was apractical
 cessation in the supply of British goods to the Leipzig fairs,
 and even colonial goods declined there to an insignificant pro-
 portion of what they had been.Curiouslyenough,         Frankfurt
 suffered less, comparatively speaking. This was evidently due
to the fact thata genuine good-will to obey the system existed
to a considerably greater extent in Saxony than in the other
 states of the Confederation of the Rhine ; and this, in turn, is
partly explained by the fact that the great and        flourishing
textile industries of Saxony profited by the measures against
British competition, while Frankfurt in particular had nothing
similar t o gain by those measures. But at all events, this de-
velopment shows an increasing efficacy of the blockade in great
parts of Germany. The question naturally arises,however,
why Leipzig did not take advantage of the licence system with
regard to colonialgoods ; but the answerseems t o be that
imports throughthe Baltic portscould not penetrateto Leipzig
after thePrussian certificates of payment hadbeen disapproved.
But this does not imply any general success for the new policy
     Darmstiidter, Die Verwaltung   ~     Unter-E.?-9ae8(Bae-Rhin) unter N a p d m 1,
in &it8chrift fur die Ges&ich$e des Oberrlaeina (N. F., XIX, IW),    pp. 662 et seq. ;
Tarle, Rontinental'naja blokada, vol. I, pp. 2744,280.
