    (r   !&      INTERNAL
                        HISTORY                AND WORKING
      and printing works that are now so flourishing in his territories, might
      be willing t o extend the customs cordon from Wittenberg to thefrontier
      of Bohemia, and at the same time be induced to place a tax on raw
     cott,on, which is in conflict with his interest in procuring the best con-
     ditions and qualities for hismills, nevertheless this painful sacrifice,
     whichwould reduce the whole of the mountainous part of Saxony
     [Erzgebirge, the chief seat of the calico industry] to thedeepest misery,
     would be no profit to France. It would only enrich the government and
     merchants of Austria, who would derive benefit from the customs duties
     on imports and exports and    a substantial profit on the transitof colonial
     goods, which one could never prevent from penetrating as contraband.
         Through Bohemia into Voigtland, Bayreuth, and the Upper Palati-
     nate, and through Upper Austria. and Styria into Salzburg [which a t
     that time belonged to Bavaria]and Berchtesgaden. Forthesehave
     always been corridors through which French and otherprohibited goods
     have passed into the empire of Austria [that is t o say, in the opposite
     direction], despite all vigilance on the part of the customs officials of
     that empire.
         Thecottontrade       workerswouldbecompelled         to emigrate from
     Saxony and Voigtland, and even from Bavaria, Baden, and Switzer-
     land, in order to seek their livelihood in the Austrian factories erected
     and managed by Englishmen, whoby this meanswould again over-
     whelm the statesof the Confederation of the Rhine with their products.
     In this way France during and since the Revolution has lost a valuable
     part of the masters and workmenwho in their time contributed             to
     makefamous the manufactures of Lyons, St.ztienne, Sedan, and
     Verviers, and the departments of Ourthe and Roer, but who afterwards
     enriched Austria, Moravia, and also Saxony.
         I n other words, the fact was that trade had moved outside
'    Napoleon's jurisdiction. Vienna, inparticular, now obtained
     a great part of the central position in the tradeof the Continent
     that had previouslybelonged to Leipzig. At an even earlier
     stage the Jewish Jierante of East Europe had sought on the
     coast of the Baltic, at KSnigsberg and Riga, the British goods
     which they or their customers would not do without, and had
     not been satisfied with the substitutes in the way of Saxon and
     Swiss manufactures that Leipzig had to offer. They now found
     a staple in Vienna. To that place the goods went by two routes,
     a northern one through the Prussian and Russian Baltic ports
     round the Grand Duchy of Warsaw to Brody in Galicia (on
     Austrian territory, quite close to the Russian frontier) ; and
