228       INTERNAL
                 HISTORY              AND WORKING
 mistake to conclude fromthis that the blockade was more
 effective inthis point thaninthe       other. On the contrary,
 quite the reverse is true, and the reason is the total absence of
 pecuniaryinterest, public and private, in obedience to the
 latter regulations. The public burning of goods, as ordered by
 the decree, was a genuine auto-da-fb (act of faith), which was
 performed publicly to the accompaniment of military music
 and in the presenceof all the high dignitaries of the place.
 But theceremony was just as great whatever     was the realvalue
 of the goods burnt at the stake ; and against the possibilities
 of malversation thatthis offered thevirtue ofNapoleon's
 officials could naturally make no resistance. It is improbable,
 indeed, that the autos-du-fkwere 'comedies ', as Darmstadter
 calls them, everywhere ; but the fact that they      were so in
 a large number of cases is shown by the accessible material,
 and was also admitted in cautious terms       evenbyNapoleon
 himself. This was especially the case inFrankfurt, where
at thefirst inventory, inNovember 1810, there was set to work
an imperial commission consisting, amongothers, of French
officers.Whenrolls       of goldcoinswere    placed in a drawer
especially set apart for the purpose, the goods became Swiss or
Saxon instead of British ; and the goods which actually came
to the stake were regarded as having a value of only 800,000
francs, although they were officially valued at 1,&00,000francs.
At the renewed purgation at Frankfurt,afterthePrussian
certificates of origin had been condemned in the spring of 1811,
one firm had a whole warehouse full of British goods ; but here
again the same story was repeated. A Jew from Friedberg by
the name of Cassella was made a scapegoat, and only his British
cottons were burnt. On this occasion the mayor wrote with
refreshing candour : ' When they were spreadout,            there
seemed t o be a lot of cloth, and they could give the impression
of a great quantity at the burning '-which, in his opinion, was
all that was required, as the object must be ' t o ward off un-
pleasantness from France, not to ruin 'our own population        '.
For other places we have less detailedstatements,although
a number of figures are available. It is,however,impossible
t o check these figures with reference to their authenticity f o r .
