       TRIANONANDFONTAINEBLEAUPOLICY                         235
 Alexanderobstinatelyrefused to have all nominally neutral
 vessels confiscated, and, besides, denied that more than about
 sixty vessels (the French ambassador  at St. Petersburg,Caulain-
court, gave the figure for loaded vessels since the middle of
 September,according to Russianallegations, as onlyfifteen)
had airived at his ports ; and this fact he tried to explain by
 stating that some of them had returned and others had dis-
charged at Gothenburg and other Swedish ports. This latter
statementmayindeed benearlycorrect.            In consequence of
all this, it is apparent that Napoleon’s action had failed in the
main, although evidently agood deal hadbeen seized in Russia.
A memorandumfromBritishmerchantsin               1816 gavesuch
a high amount (as far as we can judge, much too high) as 14.0
cargoes with a value of ~1,500,000. I n Sweden, where smaller
practicalresults    than ever were to be attained-so        unre-
servedly was Swedish policy based on the support of the British
fleet under Saumarez-there was effected in the spring of 1811
a t Karlshamn, by accident, a great seizure of over a hundred
vessels under the flags not only of Denmark and Prussia, but
also of Hamburg,Papenburg,         &c., inthe belief thatthey
really w-ere cargoes of the furst twonationalities. But when
they proved to be British property, of an estimated value of
S500,000, a settlement was effected whereby the goods were
treated as Swedish and then by fictitious purchase returned
to their former owners, so that the British here lost nothing.
The heat with which Napoleon had pursuedhis course of action
against Russia with regard to the British vessels-among other
things, the demands laiddown in a personal letter addressedto
the Emperor Alexander-largely contributed to widen the gulf
between the two allies, and was a contributory cause to the
breach in the sphere of trade war which was practicalIg brought
about on the last day of 1810 by the famous Russian customs
ukase, which, as hasbeen mentioned before,l was directed
againstFrench goods. In the course of 1811 the splitwas
steadily increased by Alexander’s more and more openly dis-
played good-will towards British vessels, whichnow came in
                         1 See ante, p. 152.
