 !24!0     INTERNAL
                  HISTORY                AND WORKING
  out as a principal cause is the all but inevitable rebound from
  the huge speculation, especially in South America, but also in
  the West Indies and the Iberian      peninsula, which has been
  described previously ;1 that is t o say, it is still a phenomenon
  having no direct connexion with the Continental System. I n
  allprobability it was furtheraccelerated,as the British op-
  position alwaysmaintained,by        an exaggeratedgranting of
  credit, caused bytooextensive an issue of notes(inflation).
  The course of events appearsto have been somewhat as follows :
 First of all, exporters could not get payment from their South
  American buyers. As early as August 1, 1810, we hear of five
 business houses in Manchester, with aggregateliabilitiesamount-
 ing to what was for that time the stupendous.sum of 322,000,000,
 that had come to grief in this way ; and at the end of the
 year we hear of bankruptciesin Manchester occurring not
 merely daily but even hourly. The inability of exporters to
 honour bills drawn upon them by manufacturers involved the
 latter also, particularly the Scotch ones, in the crisis ; and
 later the confusion spread to the credit-giving banking houses
and through them, in ever-widening circles, not only to the
 cotton trade butalso to thehardware trade. Excessive specula-
tionson the South American market also affected prospects
of the future, inasmuch as not only was there no payment for
goods already sold, but .also new sales were largely rendered
impossible. So far a completely adequateexplanation of the
dislocation is given by the South American trade. But to this
there was added, as from March 1811, a new factor, which
likewise. lacked any direct connexion with the Continental
System, namely, the unusually successful strangling of Anglo-
American trade which the United States set going through the
passage of the Non-importation Act. Finally, it isa self-
evident matter that thesufferings caused by the crisis, and the
deeptraces it left among the working population of Great
Britain, were largely due to the fact that the country was in
the midst of the sweeping transformation to whichArnold
Toynbee gave the name of ' Industrial Revolution     '.
                         1 See ante, p. 176.
