              THE BRITISH CRISIS OF 1810-13                     M
  countries which had beengoing on throughout the reign of
  King Louis.At the beginning of August there followed the
  Trianontariff ; inOctober, the intensifiedblockadeof           the
  German North Sea coast, the Fontainebleau decree,and the per-
  secution of British and colonial goods in all Napoleon’s vassal
  states .; and at the same time six hundred trading vessels were
 wandering around the Baltic. It was also in the sphere of
 colonial trade that the first blow occurred, in that one of the
 foremost dealersin West Indian products became insolventand
 dragged down with him his bankers, who in their turn dragged
 after them the provincial banks with which they were associated. .
 A meeting of London merchants and representatives of the
 Scottish manufacturing districts in February 1811, summed up
 in proud and somewhat exaggerated terms the situation in its
 connexion with the Continental System by saying that Great
 Britain had become ‘ the emporium of the trade, not only of the
 Peninsular but also of the Brazils, of Spanish settlements in
 South America, of Santo Domingo, the conquered .colonies of
 Guadaloupe, Martinique, &c., but even of countries under the
 directinfluence of the enemy ’, inasmuch as the latter had
 wished to take advantage of the protection of British justice
 and the honesty of British merchants. ‘ The measures of the
 enemy having been especially directed toward preventing the
 exportation of the immense quantities of merchandize of all
 descriptions thus accumulated, the consequences are that the
 goods became a burthen.’ Thefollowing remarks of the French-
 American, Simond, upon his visit to the West Indian docks in
August 1811, are infull accord with this : ‘ At present  . ..  the
giant receives, but sends nothing away.Thewarehouses            are
so full that it has been necessary to hire temporary ones out
of the docks. The export district is literally deserted.’
     The connexion with the Continental System thus seems to
be manifest ; and tojudge by alI English sources, the difficulties
connectedwith the disposal of colonialgoodswere at first
even greater than in thecase of exports of manufactures. Duripg
1810, forinstance, thetrade statistics givepractically un- *
altered figures forthe exports of British goods, though, of course,
                              R 2
