 25%      INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
  no traces in his correspondence of any formal measures on the
  lines of theJanuary memorandum. Evenhissuperhuman
 powerswere      more and more completely absorbedbyhis
 militarypreparations ; andinthe         sphere of economics the
 threateningshortage of corn formed a peril whichoccupied
 his thoughts to the exclusion of all plans with more remote
 objects in view. From what is so far known, therefore, it does
 notappear that the new order of things was everformally
 accepted,eventhough       theactual policy, so faras onecan
 judge, came’ nearer and nearer    thereto.       Besides, already
 during 1812 the economic situation slowly improved in Great
 Britain, especially afterthe South American tradehad got
 into a healthy state as early as February, although, it is true,
 there were stilldisturbancesin       the textiledistricts.    The
 Continental System was deprived of a main pillar quite early
 in J812 (March)through the fact that Davout, whomSore1
 calls the ’ archi-douanier ’ of the empire,left for the front,
 which meant the removal of the inflexible determination to
prevent smuggling into the country via the North Sea coast.
After the retreat from Moscow and the advance of the Russian
troops along the Baltic coastin thebeginning of 1813, it became
manifestly impossible to maintain      the    barrier.
                                                     Thus      the
prefect of the Weser department reports that ‘ smuggling was
raising its head all along the line ’ ; the warehouses were filled
with contraband, and smuggling vessels went openly across the
 seas to the enemy. Rist gives a vigorous description of the
rising against the French customs officials in Hamburg at the
close of February 1813, when a whole army of trouserless
smugglers hurledtheirhereditary        enemies intothedried-up
canals and good-humouredly stormed their premises. ‘ Thus,’
he goeson, ‘ there disappeared within a few hours all those
barriers, those densof imperial avarice,and theforbidden goods
streamed unimpeded along the forbidden ways.’ In the same
way smuggling broke out openly in Switzerland, after having
been kept down as much as possible during the preceding period.
     This, however, did not mean that Napoleon had abandoned
the Continental System. I n HamburgDavout resumed his
