250       INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
 a consequence of it.’ He maintains, in fact-in             the ,most
 palpable c o d i c t with his own decrees, thoughwithout the
 slightest sign of embarrassment-that he has never said that
 France should not receive sugar, coffee, and indigo, but alleges
 thathehas been contentwithcustomsdutiesthereon.What                    U


 he now pretends to have said is merely that the goods were
 not to be received except in exchange for French goods on
 French vessels and dependent upon the licences. Of all this,
 needless to say, the Berlin and Milan decrees gave not the
 slightest hint. .‘ Accordingly, it is the thus improved system
 that has achieved this result,which had not been counted upon
 for several years.’
     However, the question arises how such a general granting
 of licences, with the object of bringing in money to the treasury
 and forcing up exports, would affect England, the crushing of
 whom, of course, was the primary object of the original policy.
 ‘This will not benefit England with regardto industry, brokery,
or freights ; it w    li profit England solely as a saleforher
                       l
[colonial] goods,and a part of those goods are really Dutch and
French [as originating in their colonies]. Without doubt this is
very advantageous for England, but it will cause an upheaval
there ; and is the profit less or greater for France ? ’ ‘ That
profit,’ continues Napoleon, ‘ is for France like three to one,
while the profit of the Treaty of Versailles (the Eden Treaty)
was more like one to seven,’ and therefore we have now to deal
with ‘ a lasting system that may well be eternal ’.
     For the present, however, in the opinion of the Emperor,
it is unnecessary to discuss whether the system can be intro-
duced, for it should a t all events be attempted ; if it fails, the
whole thing may well remain in the minutes of the Council.
The execution is to take the form of a normalization of the
licensing system, in thattwo kinds of licences are tobe granted,
the one unconditional for the import of foodstuffs, the other
for the import of colonial goods on condition of the export
of wine and brandy from Nantes and Bordeaux and of textiles
from the north of France. For the non-French territories of
Napoleon there are to    be arranged fourteen‘ series ’ of importing
