          SELF-DESTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM                     %9
     In his introductory wordsNapoleonlays           it down that
 there are two alternatives : ' either to remainwherewe are,
 or to march with great steps toward a different orderof things '.
 As an illustration of the established order he makesacom-
 parison between the prices of sugar in the different countries
 underhisrule in relation to the customs rates, and on the
 basis of this comparison he concludes that thelaws are enforced
 loyally in France, the Kingdom of Italy, and Naples, but less
 diligentlyin thestates of the Confederation of theRhine;
 after this a calculation is made of the requirements in those
 three countries, on the supposition that the consumption has
 been reduced to a third. So far as one can understand, it is
 on the basis of this that thesecond alternative is to be founded,
namely, an altogether unimpeded granting of licences for the
whole requirements of all transmarine goods,onpayment of
heavyduties, and alsooncondition of the export of French
goods. The requirements of sugar       imports,      estimated at
450,000puirztauo, will thus bring into the coffers of the state no
less than 70,000,000 francs ; and this importation will be allowed
against an export of money to the amount of 1O,OOO,OOO francs
and of goods tothe value of 30,000,000 francs. The same
system is afterwards to be applied to coffee, hides, indigo, tea,
raw cotton, and dyewoods. ' This will produce,' he says,
' a great activity in industry, encouragementfornavigation,
thenavy andthe brokeragebusiness, a customsincome of
200,000,000 francs a year, and agerm of prosperity and life
in all our ports.'
    So far there was nothing more than a consistent following-
out of the established licensing system, even though the last
expressioncited hints how heavily the policy had fallen onFrench
economiclife.      Butthe reasonsalleged andthe immediate
executionshowhow        far Napoleon had travelledfrom the
originalplan of the ContinentalSystem. It is truethathe
does not make the slightest admission of this. ' For France,'
he says, ' the result will be a dream '- a dream which could
not have been attained without the Continental System. ' His
Majesty does not regard this as a change in the system, but as
