              SELF-DESTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM                                         ,253
  power and exacted a frightful vengeance ; and as late as May
  and June 1813, the Emperor caused'quantities of colonial goods
 to be confiscated in the Grand Duchy of Berg, Hamburg, &c.,
 even such as had paid the proper dues or had been sold by the
 French customs officials, and had them conveyed to the usual
 placesfor the collection of such goods.On the other hand,
 this does not settle the question whether, and to what extent,
 the object pursued wasthe great aimof the Continental System,
 orwhetherNapoleon,        aftertheretreat     fromMoscou~, still
 believed in the possibility of success in his struggle against the
 economic fabric of England. At times this lastwas undoubtedly
 the case, as is stated by so credible an observer as Mollien,
 who lays particular stress on the hopes of an impending ruin
 for the credit of England with which the unfavourable rates of
 exchange inspiredthe Emperor at that time. Still, this question
 must be separated from that of gaining the end in view through
 the particular meanscalled the Continental System ; and on
this subject, which concerns us here, it must be said that fiscal
considerations had now become so pressing that it was necessary
t o brush aside the idea of carrying out thewar against the trade
of Great Britain. Napoleon's utterances at this period become
more and more frankly mercenary ; and we mayregard as
the epitaph of the system a new memorandum by.the Emperor
immediately after his return from Moscow (December 22,Isla),
a significant counterpart to the long memorandum of January
in the same year that we have summarized at length above.
In that document the Emperor charges his minister of finance
to inform the ministry of commerce that he needs 150,000,000
francs in ordinary and extraordinary customs revenues during
1813, giving the following reasons :
    In order to arrive at this result, you must consider what remains
to be received for licences already granted ; and for those additional
ones which must be granted to obtain this result, which is necessary
for the first of all considerations, namely,that of having what is indis-
pensable for the present Bervice of the state. Undoubtedly it is necessary
to harm our foes, but above allwe must 1ive.l
   1 CorreepndanCe, no. 19,391 ; k r e a idditea, hoe. 1,002, 1,013, 1,018, 1,082;
Mollien, op. cit., vol. 111, p. 237 ; Rist, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 142-3, 159-60 ; Smart,
