            SELF-DESTRUCTION OF
                              THE                         SYSTEM              251
 places
      with
         corresponding            export obligations, whichwill
 partly include the products of these countries themselves, but
 should take place through French licences. Of the duties,
 an amount between one-third and two-thirds shall fall to the
 princes concerned and the remainder shall fall t o the French
 treasury, provided they follow the routes indicated.Danzig
 may possibly be allowed to export not onlybuilding timber
 but also corn to England, on condition 02 sending twiceas much
 to France, and on payment of a special export duty, which
 should be considered in detail.1
     We thus seeon what coursesNapoleon had now started
out. We are hereconcernedwithabalancing             of the purely
commercial advantages of France against those of Great Britain,
that is to say, the points of view of the kind that are usually
put forward, for instance, in negotiating a commercial treaty;
and in full analogy with this, the system is thought of as a
permanent measure, not as a war measure, designed to destroy
England.The
          concession,deliberately
                               shoved                   aside by
Napoleon and treated by him as a trifle in form, that the new
order of things would be advantageous for England in respect
of the trade in colonial goods, stands in the strongest possible
contrast tothe proud announcement of 1807 that England
sees her vessels laden withsuperfluouswealth,wandering
around the seas and seeking in vain a port to open and receive
them. NowNapoleonhimselfconsidersopening             an his ports
for the purpose, if only he can get these vessels to take French
goods in exchange.Thismeans             thathe principle of the
Continental System has been abandoned. To use an expression
of Professor Hjlirne, in his book Revolutionen och Napobon, in
connexion withother sides of the policy of the empire, one may
call this the ‘ self-destruction of the system ’.
    During the period of barely fourmonths that remained
before Napoleon’s departure for the Russian campaign we find
   1 Cwre.s@nce,      no. 18,431. There is a kind of germ of all this in the Memo-
randum of July 25,.1810,which forms the hasis of the licenqe and Trianon decrees,
extracts from which are given in Schmidt, op. cit., p. 368.
   a See ante, p. 74.
