!&4           INTERNAL HISTORY AND WORKING
it is possible that in the first half year there was a rise which
 made up for the decline in the second half year ; on the other
 hand,they show a decline of 199 percent. for foreign and
 colonial goods, and it was notuntil 1811 thattheexports
 declined more or less parallel for both groups. From this one
 may safely concludethat theTrianon and Fontainebleaupolicy
 practically had the effect, at least for the moment, of making
 thingsmoredifficultby       the strictercontrol than of making
 them easier by the fiscal customs and licensing system. As
 regards the effect of the different markets on the development,
 we may possibly makecautious use of thetradestatistics,
 althoughtheirreliabilityisundoubtedlylimitedevenwith
 regard t o the legitimate trade, and of course much more dubious
 with regard to smuggling intothe Continent. We are here
 concerned with ‘real ’, that is to say, declared, values ; but the
 decline is no lessmarked as regards the   ‘official ’ values, in which
changes of price have been e1iminated.l (See opposite page.)
- We note immediately the pronounced decline in 1811-for
colonial goods partly even in 1810-for the northern part of
the Continent, which, together with the almost complete dis-
appearance of exports t o the United States and the substantial
diminution in the figures for South America explains the great
decline m the totals. On the other hand, it is remarkable how
little the Mediterranean trade was disturbed, which indicates
the importanceof the Balkan peninsula as a port of penetration
for the new trade route through Vienna. The relatively strong
rise for Portugalin 1811 indicates a transformation at this
point, which was favoured by Wellington’s military successes.
This increase in the trade with Portugal, which is confirmed
from other sources, constituted the first sign of the limitation
of the crisis in thesphere of foreign trade asearly as the spring
and early summerof 1811.
    It is also of interest to follow the development at closer
range, so to speak, with regard to the most important domestic
  1 flansard, vol. XXII, app. 1, cols. Ixi-lxii (the total figure for 1806 beingcorrected).
b usual, the figures are for Great Britain only, not for Ireland.
