    258    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
     of a highprotectionismenforced        with the greatest violence
     and with all the resources of the state for a short period. The
     difference between thisandthe        rkgimewhich characterized
     the blockaded states of the Continent during the recent war
     lies solely in the fact that such a system of protection was then
     freelychosen,whilein        our own dayit wasimposed           from
     without. On the other hand, the Continental System, like the
     state of affairs prevailing during the recent war, exhibits one
     significant and very fatal dissimilarity from the ordinary kind
     of protection that prevails in peace time, namely, that under
    the latter r4gime the obstacles in the way of imports usually
     embrace only the products of industry and agriculture, not the
    raw materials of industry, whereas the natureof the Continental
     System as a general self-blockade compelled, or a t least should
    have compelled, equally rigorous embargo against all kinds of
     commodities imported by sea. The efforts of the all-important
    individual who dominated the Continent had consequently t o
    be directed toward procuring of raw materials within his own
    territories, a task whichalways encounters more insuperable
    limits than that of working up materials which are to be found
    within one'gown borders. And so far as such an effort failed,
    there was an irremediable self-contradiction within the policy
    itself. Either, in fact, it was necessary to sacrifice the industrial
'   development by which the position of GreatBritain asthe
    workshop of the world was intended to be crushed, or it was
    necessary to accept raw materials through the co-operation
    of the ruler of the seas and thereby fail in theobject of destroying
    the commercial and maritime power of Great Britain and
    consequently fail also in the object of ' conquering herby
    excess '.   When Mollien speaks of the inexplicable ' contradic-
    tion ' between the obstacles in the way of the supply of raw
    materials and the prohibition of British manufactures, because
    t,he formerbenefited British industry more thanthelatter
    damaged it, consequently he puts his finger on this irremediable
    doubleness of the very principle of the Continental System.1
         On the Continent, however, there existed a further contrast,
                1 Mollien, Mdmoiru, &c., vol. II, p. 462 ; vol. m, pp. 323.
