                 DIFFERENT TYPES
                             OF                       EFFECT                  261
 didnotprimarilyconsistin            thefactthatthelatter          were
 independent of foreigntrade, since theyalsohadexports.
 It consisted, rather, in the fact that, from the standpoint          of
 the Continental System, the industrial life of the two groups
 of countrieswasaffectedquitedifferentlyby               the blockade.
 Theindustrialcountries,ontheone                side, foundobstacles
 placed in the way of their supply of raw materials ; but, on
the other hand, owing to the strangling of British supply, they
increased the possibilities of sale for their own manufactures
outside of France and Italy. It waq as regards sales that the
agrarian countries were more or less hard hit, partly through
the general obstacles in the way of navigation, which offered
almost the only possibility for the conveyance of their bulky
goods, and partly also through the prohibition of intercourse
with Great Britain, who was their chief buyer.1 Owing to the
tendency of the ContinentalSystem to renderdifficultonly
imports into the Continent, however, the effect of this factor
was considerably diminished for        the countries producing raw
materials and corn. For instance, it practically did not make
itself felt in MecMenburg during this first period. But, as will
be explained more fully later on in this book, Napoleon’s atti-
tude toward the supplying of England with foodstuffs was so
opportunistic, that it is not worthwhile to attemptto draw any
conclusions inprinciple as totheresultsthatmighthave
ensued, So muchmaybeasserted,however                  : the difficulties
of the agrarian countries were due, not to      Napoleon’s deliberate
intention t o cut off England from the supply of foodstuffs or
raw materials, but to his verywell-grounded apprehension that
an export to England from countries which were not directly
under his sway would give rise to the importation of colonial
goods and Englishmanufactures.              I n this way, primarily,
    1 The great advantages accruing to the northern countries in their intercourse
with GreatBritainconstitute the maincontention upheld in J. Jepson Oddy’s
valuable book, European Commerce (London, 1805), and his figures bear out his
statements. As regards Russia, he ‘ cannot help observing how amazingly ad-
vantageous its trade is with the Britishdominions. Not only is the amount of the
sales nearly equal to those of all other nations, but it is from Great Britain only
that Russia receives a balanoe in cash ’ (p. 209).
