                   EFFECTS ON FRANCE                           271
 not only France and Belgium, but also Holland, Italy, Spain
 and the larger part of Germany. At the summit level of this
 prosperity the former ' dead town ' was stated to have fifty
 factories and ten thousand workers in the cotton trade; and
 the shortage of labour was so great that wages jumped up to
 wh.at wasthen the amazing amount of 5-8 francs per dkm.
     In contrast with this production for sale on a large scale
 there existed in Miilhausen, and in southern Alsace in general-
 and had long existed-a flourishing manufacture        of the finest
 qualities of calicoes and printed   cotton
                                          goods.
                                               The              real
 impetus, however, came with the annexation of the town by
 the French republic in 1798 ; and the Continental System made
 it theleading centre for calicoesand prints upon the Continent,
at the expense both of Base1 and of British sales in Europe.
Theimportance of the development a t Miilhausen appears
best,perhaps,from the population statistics, whichshow an
increasefrom 6,628 in the year 1800 to 8,021 in 1805 and
9,353 in 1810, a growth of 41 per cent. in ten years. Alongside
this, however, there were also veryimportant and comparatively
new centres for the cotton trade within the limits of old France,
especially in the old textile districts of northern France and in
Paris and its suburbs. One of the mostcelebratedFrench
leaders of industry, Richard Lenoir, was stated by a German
observerwho isgenerallyregarded          as reliable(Fahnenberg)
to havehad in hisfactoriessuchfor            that timeincredible
numbers of workmen as 10,600 in 1808 and 14,000 in 1810.
According to the statements of Chaptal, who isthroughout
obviously a partisan of the new industry, it is true, but who in
spite of this is in many ways our most reliable source  of informa-
tion, the production of cotton yarn was already sufficient for
homerequirementsalmost        up to the highestnumber(finest
gradeskin reality, however, up to number 100 only. Even
as regardswovencottongoods,          in hisopinion, the imports
had declined to about 6 per cent. of the figure for the last year
of the ancien rdgime ; but in this estimate a considerable
amount of smuggling,forwhich          an overwhelmingevidence
exists, was assuredly left out of account. It is also worthy of
