                          EFFECTS ON FRANCE                                         269
 particular part of the present Rhine province which is situated
 on the left bank of theRhine (Nieder-Rhein). In the now
 world-famous textile,centres,fix-la-Chapelle,      Cologne, &x.,
 there were almost the onlyindustrialcentres which the old
 French manufacturers recognized as equal rivals in the finer
 branches of the clothing trade.1 It is true that the blockade
 against Great Britain also played its part here, and still more,
 perhaps, the blockade against the continental rivals of France,
 But we cannot speak here of any at all decisive effect of the
 ContinentalSystemitself,     as the woollen industry was long
 established in France and was not brought to any distinctly
higherstate of prosperity than it hadattained before the
Revolution, despite the fact that various new specialities were
taken up and also various technical advances       were made, of
which more anon. Thus it was principally for the regions which
had previously been outside France, or had been treated by
the customsauthoritiesas foreigncountries, that the policy
became important, inasmuch as it gave them         a share of the
sales on what was a t leastintended to be the hermetically-
sealed Frenchmarket.        According to Chaptal’scalculation,
exportshadindeedabsolutely          declined, if onetakesinto
consideration only the old French territory, al€hough internal
sales and the total production had increased since 1789. The
situation was less favourableasregards       the linenindustry,
whereevenintheincorporatedterritories           it was only tKe
Belgian district of Ghent thatshowed any marked development.

                               COTTONINDUSTRY
    Especially with regard to the linen and woollen industries,
however, it is true that the comparatively slow development
was caused by the expansion of the cotton industry, an expan-
sion which was unique,and,in      the eyes of contemporaries,
quite phenomenal. Here there is no doubt that we are brought
    1 Cf. a pronouncement of the leading man in the clothing induetry, Ternaux,
sen., in Conseil g 6 r a l des manufactures, immediately after the Restoration ; printed
in Levaaseur, Histoire des chses ouwQres, &c., de 1789 d. 1870, vol. I, p. 732, app. A.
