278    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTALSYSTEM
undertaking ; and he, like his people, had to take the conse-
 quences of a situation from which there was no escape.
     The development of the cotton industry is characteristic
of the effects of the Continental System, not only through t.he
 dualism that existed between the exclusion of raw materials
and the forcing of manufacture, but to anequal extent through
the violently enforced stimulation of a production that had not
grown up out of increasing natural requirements for an article
but outof a sudden embargo in combination with state measures
of all kinds. There is no doubt that great over-speculation had
occurred in the industry and had had its share in the French
crisis of 1810-11, just as a similar over-speculationin thecolonial
trade gave the impulse to the crisis in Great Britain. Mollien,
an observer who formed unusually cooljudgments, pointed
thisoutin      a letterto Napoleon, and especiallycalled his
attention to the insufficient supply of capital possessed by the
industry andits consequentdependenceonloans              and bills
of exchange. I n his memoirs he is, on the whole, very critical
not only of the heads of factories, especially Richard Lenoir,
whose untenable business position and reckless way of living
hesays that heexplained tothe Emperor, but also of the
industry itself, where, in his opinion, many millions had been
invested in what could have been made equallyserviceable
a t half the expense.1
     When, after somemonths, the crisis of 1810 reached the
cotton industry, it hit it very hard and effectively, especially
the spinning-mills,which as a rule seem to have seen their
number of workmen decline by a third in the course of 1811.
There was a general improvement in the course of 1812 which
continued in places during most of the following year, a t least
if we may credit the deliberately roseate reports of the home
secretary to Napoleon in the latterhalf of 1813. But the Ghent
industry declined steadily early in 1813, and lateron in thesame
year, that is to say,before the fall of Napoleon, the decline
spread in ever-widening circles. Probably with great exaggera-
tion, but certainly not,without grounds, the Executive Committee
              Mollien, MLm&res, &e., vol. m, pp. 12,22 et seq.
