                           EFFECTS ON FRANCE                                        281
   great nankeen manufacture owing to the overwhelming com-
   petition of Indian and British goods,whichwereallowed           to
   enter on payment of duty ; and the amount of the duty was
  in reality, according to circumstances, 45-50 centimes per
   metre, which can not have been less than 20-25 per cent. of
  the value of the goods and consequently no mean protection
  in itself.1 But, of course, this was a very considerable step from
  complete embargo, despite the smuggling.
      Whatever construction one may put on the matter, the
  fate of the French cotton industry on the fall of Napoleon
  shows that it had by no means become capable, during the
  time of the blockade, of holding its own against foreign com-
 petition. Nor is the great prosperity which, after a quite short
 interval, occurred under the Restoration any real evidence of
 its competitive efficiency, inasmuch as a prohibition of the
 imports of foreign textiles was almost immediatelyre-introduced;
 and the protection of the industry was thereby evencon-
 siderably increased, as raw cotton now came in free. Indeed,
 as will be shownthroughout this chapter, the technical advances
 in French industry were not, on the whole, very great under
 the Continental System, andthey still fell far behind Great
 Britain in almost every    respect.        Without the help of
 Englishmen very little progress could as yet be made in any-
 thing which had to dowithengineering             or metal working
industries ; and LihvinBauwens,for            instance, started his
machinespinning-mills with the help of fiveforemenwhom
he had virtually kidnapped from England, and whom he
detained half with their consent and half by violence. As has
been indicated before, however, it was almost inevitable that
the blows of the Continental decrees against everything living
ordeadwhichbore         the name of Englishshould have a re-
straining effect on the spread of English ideas and the removal
of Englishmechanicsor          inventors tothe Continent ; and,
indeed, Mollien said somewhat bitingly, in connexion with his
     Loi relative a w douanes, Dm.17, 1814. Bulletin des lois, &c., 5th ser., bull. 62,
no. 529. CT. Levassew, Histoire des ~2assesouvritea, &c., de 1789 & 1870, vol. I,
pp. 562 et seq.
