290    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 whilefor cochineal, dyewood andother dyes the price was
 usually doubled.1By       farthe most important dyeing sub-
 stances were the two first-named : indigo and cochineal. As
 a matter of fact, this was no great novelty in either case, for
 people had long used two native dyeing plants, woad (Isatis
 tinctoria) and madder (Rubia tinctorum), for the production
 of blue and red, respectively, but it was now regarded as a great
 advance thatthe chemists had been able to establish the
 presence of the same dyeing substance, indigo, in woad as ex-
 istedinIndianand      Arnerican indigofera. Expectations,par-
 ticularly as to the domestic production of indigo, were raised
 extremely high. People expected to he forever independent
 of the colonial product, and even as late as1818, that is to say,
after the Restoration, Chaptal cherished the hope that France,
by means of her domestic production of indigo, would even get
an export article that might compensate her for the profitable
trade in colonialgoods that she had lost when in 1814 and
1815 she had had to sacrifice the greater part of her colonial
empire. I n reality, however, the results were very small, and
they had no importance whatever for the future. T h e cultiva-
tion of 32,000hectares with woad had been prescribed ; Indian
indigo had been declared an English product and its importa-
tion had consequently been forbidden ; three imperial indigo
factories had been founded and prizes had been awarded to
private individuals ; but evea as late as 1813 the output came
to only 6,000 kgs., apart, from 500 k g s , of Indian indigo (called
‘ani1indigo ’) from an Italianplantation. Only one single factory
survived 1814 ; and thewhole episode vanished withoutleaving
any traces behind. As is well known, it is by synthetic methods
that substitutes havebeen found inour own day for the natural
dyeing substances, indigo and alisarin (the dyeing substance
contained in madder) ; and during the recent war the reverse
strateof things prevailed to such an extent that Great Britain
had sometimes to fallbackon         natural indigo totakethe
place of the unobtainable synthetic indigo from Germany.
    Withregard to the other colonialgoods, the substitutes
                1 Figurea given in Konig, op. cit., p. 224.
