 286     EFTECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
competitors, who were stated to sell at 3 0 4 per cent. under
French prices ; the blockade hadhad nomore stimulating
effect than that a 50 per cent. customs duty was necessary to
keep the industry going.
    The total impression we get in these essential industries,
therefore, may be summarizedsomewhat as follows : The
effect of the Continental System was primarily to exclude at
least the industry of the French empire fromBritish influences ;
and under the conditions then prevailing these influences were
indispensableforevery      country desirous of participating in
the fruits of the great economic revolution.
                             CHEMICALIXDUSTRY
     There was onedepartment, however, in whichthe superiority
 and pioneering workof French industry were plainlyto be seen ;
 and that department is at the same time one where we have
 an opportunity to study the positive side of the Continental
 System, the side that promoted progress. This is the chemical
industry, or, to put it better, all processes where the results of
chemical studies could benefit pr0duction.l
     The fact that the course of development took this direction
in France rather than elsewhere, it is true, was fundamentally
due to something quite different from politics, namely, the fact
that Lavoisier, through hiswork                  during the two decades
immediatelypreceding the French Revolution, had laid the
foundation of the whole of modern chemistry and had made
it immediatelyapplicable to a number of practical tasks.
Moreover, he had had a number of eminent pupils whose work,
t o a stillhigherdegree,wasdirectlybeneficial                   to industry ;
their results, too, were to a large extent apparent before or
abouthe outbreak of the Revolution,when                        the external
pressure had not yet begun to make itself felt. In certain cases,
also, theyhad becomeeconomicallyusablebefore                        the Con-
   1 Cf.the brilliant sketch by Professor Arthur Binz, Urapung und Ent2oickelung
der c h i s & Indwtrie (a lecture delivered at the Berliner HanaXshbchule in
1910). His statement aa to the development of artificial s& (p. 7 note 2) cannot,
however, be brought into accord with the facts ; and the w e of chlorine bleaching
is older than one might infer from his words (p. 10 note 7).
