E92     EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
therefore, it is not a t all surprising that advantage was taken
of the theoretical results already attained; on the contrary,
there is more reason to be astonished that there was so long
a delay before it was determined to replace colonial sugar in
this way. Before thatthe shortage of sugar hadhadtime
to make itself very perceptible. At Leipzig the price of sugar
rose almost uninterruptedly until 1813, when it was approxi-
mately three and one-half times the amount it had been seven
years earlier ; and in Paris the price rose first (1810) to four
francs per livre, and later (1819) to six francs, or approximately
eight and twelve francs, respectively, per kg.Meanwhile, the
London quotations for even the best qualities of sugar during
1812 corresponded t o between 1.35 and 2 francs per kg., that
is to say, from one-fourth to one-ninth of the French price.l; ,'
    Naturally enough, therefore, people had a t a much earlier
date begun to search the Continent for a substitute, and there
was scarcely any substancecontaining sugar that was not
employed before they came to the beet. Honey, whey, chest-
nuts, pears, apples, maize, maple, potatoes, figs, cherries,
plums,sea-weed, and finally grapes were tried.Grape sugar
was the first stage, and as much as 2,000,000 kgs. were manu-
factured in the years 1810-11 and given a bounty ; but this
syrup, which was black and did not crystallize, was repulsive
and had an unpleasant odour.
    At this time, however, the cultivation of sugar beets had
already been started, and the manufacture of beet sugar had
begun a t several places, especially a t Passy by the firm of
Delessert. It is only natural that enthusiasm was great when
the resultappeared ; and it was alleged, assuredly for that
time with great exaggeration, that the product could not be
distinguished from cane sugar. There followed a visit (dramati-
cally described by Chaptal in his Memoirs) by Napoleon to
Delessert, who was decorated by the Emperor andregarded as
a pioneer. The imperialadministrationtook            thematterin
    1 Calculated from figures given in Kiinig, op. cit., p. 226. See also Levaseem,
Hisfoire a h dU48.54 0um"3res,&o., de I789 d I870, vol. I, p. 475 ; Tooke, 9.cit.,
vol. II, p. 414.
