288    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
previously lacked economic importance may become the best or
 even the onlyexpedient.This         is largely the explanation of
the ' development of the great industrial marvels ', of which
Chaptal and othersof that period speak. Afterwards, when the
 exceptional situation disappeared, the marvels also vanished,
for theyhad      donetheir work. They fell backunder           the
threshold of consciousness, so to speak, and became once more
potential instead of actual ; and this is the only proper thing,
if we wish to keep the economic position of the people at its
highest level. I n this way is explained without difficulty the
general ddbhle which overwhelmed the industrial creations of
the Napoleonic age at the dawn of peace. I n certain happy
 cases, however, the blockade has givenri.se to a new production
that has only needed such a help to strike root ; and in those
cases it has really carried economic development onward and
proved itself a genuine protectress.
    In thesphere of chemical industry proper the great example
here is the production of soda from sea salt. This discovery
had been made by Leblanc as early as some time about 1789-
statements as t o the year vary somewhat, as is usually, and
quitenaturally,     the case in thematter of inventions and
discoveries. The efforts of thegreatFrench         chemistduring
the whole of the revolutionary age to make his work bear fruit
had come completely to grief, however, andhe was ruined
several yearsbefore his death in1806. Then camethe severance
of intercoursewithSpain,        whence soda had previously been
obtained, and this gave a hitherto undreamt of importance to
the production of soda, whichnow proved itself t o be, even
economically, thoroughly justified, inasmuch as it was developed
to such an extent that theprice could be reduced from 80-100
francs to 10 francs per 100 k g s . A similar developmentattended
the manufacture of another product, which in the fullness of
time was one day t o become the basic material for a substitute
of Leblancsoda,namely,ammonia            ; and the production of
alum and camphorby          chemical methodsmayperhapsbe
mentioned here, and possibly, too, the advances made in the
important production of nitric acid.
