300    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 have the redeeming feature of providing the export goods of
 France with the dominant position that was its sole object and
 ruimn #&re. To a considerable extent this was due to thefunda-
 mental character of the Continental System, with its tendency
 to make the supply of raw materials enormously dear and diffi-
 cult ; for, as the figures already given show very clearly, this
hit France the hardest, because smuggling by sea was checked
 more effectually there than farther to the north, while goods
 smuggled by land had      to be filtered through many customs
frontiers before they reached France. But it was further aided
by thefact that French industrywas marked by the production
 of luxuries, which rendered sales extremely difficult, especially
toward the close of the period, when the burden of the endless
wars, both bloody and bloodless, on the whole of Europe was
pressing withincreasing weight. Finally, there was thefact
that France could not by any violent measures overcome the
circumstance that herindustrieshad            not made so much
progress as those of certainothercountries..        In Italy, it is
true, these factors made themselves felt      to a less extent, for
the industries of that country did not really appear as competi-
tors ; and the blockade towards the north would seem to have
hadacertain      degree of efficacy. At anyrate, the available
flgures for the Kingdom of Italy show that Franco-Italian
commerce increased many times over, so that about half the
foreign trade, including both imports and exports, fell to the
exchange of commodities with France ; and from Naples also
there could beascertainedarise          inimports fromFrance.
On the other hand, this implies no increase in the exports of
France on the whole. Only one year during the period of the
empire (1806), according tothe official returns, could show
@yes    as high as those of the last years of the anckien. rkgim,
despite the huge annexations of important industrial regions
that had taken place since then ; and, as has already         been
mentioned, the export of woollens had declined. It is particu-
larly striking how poor a showing France made in competition
with her continental rivals in the German market. It is fairly
obvious, and also confirmed by the sources, that the obstacles
