             EFFECTS ON REST
                           OF               CONTINENT               297
    Accordingly, it was not to exclude England, but to make
 a breach in the customs wall against French goods, that he
 here wishedto make use of his victories ; and in full accordance
 with this the French manufacturers just a week later tried
 to bring about an export of fine French cloth to Vienna on
 payment of a very insignificant duty, without any reciprocity
 for Austrian goods in France.
     But Napoleon’segoisticpolicywasmostclearly            framed
 with regard to the Kingdom of Italy (North Italy), which he
was anxious to transform entirely into an economic dependency
of France. Hermetically sealed to the sales of the industrial
products of all other countries, it was open to receive French
goods andto provide France with needed raw materials
(chieflysilk), but without any corresponding right to derive
advantages from the French market ; finally, it was designed
as a barrier to prevent goods from the competitors of France
from penetrating into Naples, Sardinia, and South Europe in
general. Owing to the fact that Italy for hundreds and even
thousands of years had beeneconomicallyconnected             with
Switzerland and Germany by close commercial ties, this policy
involved a severe dislocation of the industrial life of these last
two countries and compelled them to have recourse to other
markets or to other branches of activity. Napoleon has never
given his general principles relating to the treatmentjof allies
and subordinate non-French territories a more intensive
expression than in another famous letter which he addressed
on August 93,1810,to his faithful and reliable step-son, Eugdne
Beauharnais, who governed Italy in his name as Viceroy.
The fundamental idea of this letter appears in the following
extract, with Napoleon’s own highly significant italics :
    My fundamental principle is, France first and foremost (la France
avant tout). You must never lose sight of the fact that if English trade
triumphs on the seas it is because the English are the strongest there.
It isreasonable, therefore, that as France is the strongest on l a d ,
French trade shouldalso triumph there. Otherwise all is lost. ,    . .
Italy has France to thank for so much that she really should not mind
if France acquired some commercial advantages there. Therefore, take
as your motto : La France avant tout.
