 898   EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTALSYSTEM
      The beginning of this policy inItaly hasalready been
  described,l and thecontinuation followed along the same lines.
  The decree of the year 1806 was directed against Bohemian,
  Saxon, Swiss, Bavarian, and Berg textile goods, and seems to
  have hithardest.the Grand-Duchy of Berg. f i a t country,
  which was at thattime nominally ruled by Napoleon’s brother-
 in-law, Joachim Murat, but in reality by the Emperor’s own
 organs, managed to obtain an exemption for itself in January
  1807 ; but asearly as December of the same year this exemption
  was cancelled. Beginning with the following year its goods were
 definitely excluded from the Italian market, while the exports
 of Switzerland were hit particularly hard by an intensification,
 introduced about the same time, of the decree of 1806, which
 forbade all imports of cotton goods except from France. The
 position of French goods in the Italian market was further
 strengthened in 1808 by a curious Franco-Italian ‘ commercial
 treaty ’ which Napoleon, in his capacity as autocratic ruler of
 both countries, concluded with himself. Finally, this policy
culminated in 1810 in a triple regulation    which in the first
place extended the prohibition of imports from cotton goods’
to woollen goods, when they came from other countries than
France, in the secondplace supplemented the prohibition on
imports by a prohibition of transit,andinthethird           place
forbade the export of Italian raw silk except to Lyons, the
export of silkfrom Piedmont, whichwas incorporatedwith
France, having been forbidden as early as 1805. The explana-
tion given for this (in the letter toEugene just cited) was that
it would otherwise go t o England, because Germany did not
manufacture silk ; buthisexplanation         ignored the fact,
well known to Napoleon, that Switzerland bothcarried on
a trade in Italianraw silk and also had a flourishing silk manu-
facture. Inthe Kingdom of Naples,whichwas             ruledfirst
by JosephBonaparte and afterwardsbyMurat,there                was
applied, under the hard pressure of Napoleon, a similar policy,
first .with preferential duties on French goods and afterwards
with a prohibition on the import of foreign goods.
                          See an&, -p. 86.
