           EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT                      303
 canjudge,sufficient ; and in any case it wasincomparably
 better than in France, as isvery clearly shown bythe foregoing
 tables illustrating the prices of c0tton.l
     Saxony was already at this time a manufacturing country
 with a many-sided development, both as regards the majority
 of textile industries-cotton, wool,linen-andiron-working.
 But so far as I know, it is the history of the cotton industry
 under the Continental System that has been subjected to the
 mostthoroughinvestigation.         This has beendoneespecially
 in the work that has so often been cited in these pages, namely,
 Konig's Die Slichsische Baumwolknindustrie am Ende des
 vorigen Jahrhunderts und wahrend der Kotttinentalsperre (1899),
 which on the whole would seem to be the most useful of the
 existing monographs on the industrialconditions of this period.
 In general, this one-sidedness in the literature very well
 corresponds to the reality, for it is in the sphere of the cotton
 industry that onereally has to expect the workings of the
 Continental System in Saxony.
     The Saxon cotton industry, which had a long history behind
it, had not become the object of British competition until the
seventeen-seventies, after the inventions inthe           spinning
industry, principally as regards the fine goods (muslins) that
were manufactured in Voigtland inthe south of Saxony,
mainly in Plauen. Tne competition had beenmet bythe
imitation of the British goods, but for this purpose the Saxon
yarn was too coarse; and this brought about the admission
of British yarn for the muslinfactories shortly after 1790.
But even thenthere wasnomore              than a short breathing
space, for beforethe close of the century the British competition
was regarded as overwhelming, even in the matter of muslins.
The second main division of Saxon cottons, the coarser calicoes
intended for *printing, whichwereproducedon          the northern
slope of the Erzgebirge, centering in Chemnitz, held out some-
what longer. That too was basedon British yarn as warp,
but it also went under immediately before the introduction of'
the Continental System.
                        See ante, pp. 274, 276.
