            EFFECTS ON REST
                         OF
                          CONTINENT                         309
      However, Napoleon, the ‘ mediator ’ of the Swiss Confedera-
  tion, undeniably had an eye on its industry ; and there was
  no comparison between hisruthless and continuous intervention
  in Switzerland and his relativelymildtreatment       of Saxony.
  This fact explains many of the dissimilarities in the’consequent
  evolution of the two countries. The Emperor never      neglected
  an opportunity to make Switzerland, a dangerous competitor
  that was politically powerless, feel the whole weight of the
  measures both of the Italian and of the French governments ;
  and the states of the Confederation of the Rhine,especially
  Bavaria, were not slow to follow suit. I n 1809 occurred the
 incorporation of Trieste, which was a hard blow for both the
 imports and the sales of Switzerland ; but it was the years
  1810-11 which, so far as external policy is concerned, gave the
 decisive turn toevents. It was then that the lastmeasures were
 taken in Italy which definitively shut off the south of Europe.
 At the same time the Trianon tariff led both to repeated and
 violentransackings of SwitzerlandforBritish        goods and to
 prohibitionson thetransport of colonialgoods (cott.on) from         .i



 the states of the Confederation of the Rhine, and fmally also
 to the decline both of the Frankfurt and the       Leipzig Fairs,
 so that sales for the north were rendered difficult at the same
time that sales to the south were strangled. Nevertheless, we
do not form the impression that these external events were the
main cause of the almost all-embracing crisis which now broke
over the whole of Swiss economic life. Of the seriousness of
thisset-backthere      does notappearto     be anydoubt.     me
Landammann(President)summedupthesituationinApril
1812, inthedistressfulproposition       that ‘the industries of
Switzerland are now nearing their end ’ ; and a considerable
emigration took place, among other places, to the left bank of
the Rhine.
     The fundamental cause of this hard blow seems rather to
have been the general distress which now spread over Europe,
and which struck Swiss industrywithparticularseverity
because mostof its branches were concerned withthe production
of luxuries. In the cotton industry this especially held good of
