   3M     EFFECTS OF THE COPlvllNENTAL SYSTEM
         What made it possible to check this development under
     the Continental System, however, was not only the fact that
     Saxony was an old home of the cotton industry,   which was only
    gradually disturbed inits position, but also two other important
    facts. One wasthat what had been revolutionized in theBritish
    cottontrade at thistime      was really only spinning, while
    the power-loom was still only in its infancy. The beginning of
    the Continental System was simultaneous with the well-known
    and peculiar phase of -the British industrial revolutionwhen the
    hand-weavers, who were later reduced to abysmal misery, had
    brilliant incomes owing to the scarcity of workers t o weave the
    increased quantities of yarn produced by spinning-machines.
    No doubt the economic organization of British weaving also
   had been changed under the pressure of the great spinning-
. mills, and the technique of weaving had also been improved
   in Great Britain. But for a country whichwas able to bring
   its own spinning industryintoapproximateequalitywith
   the British spinning industry, there was still some possibility
   of holding out against British competition ; and we here come
   to the second factthat made possible a restoration of the
   Saxon cottonindustry when the ContinentalSystem placed
   difficulties in the way of theimportation of Britishcotton.
   This second fact was that the spinning-machinery had already
   obtaineda firm footing in the country before the blockade
  rendered difficult the importation of British machines and
   British operators. Hargreaves’s spinning-jenny, which was only
  a multiple spinning-wheel and therefore did not put an end
  to, but rather supported, home industry, had already reached
  Saxony in the seventeen-eighties, and there were thousands of
  machines there before the Continental System. But of far
  greater significance wasthe fact that in the  year 1801, in conse-
  quence of the importations of Britishoperators,twogreat
  spinningmills were started in Chemnitz, one with Crompton’s
 mule andthe         other
                         with    Arkwright’s water-frame. This
  created the possibility of producing both long and fine thread,
  though not by any means so fine as the British thread (mule-
  twist up tono. 70 and water-twist up tono. 36), and, ingeneral,
