31% EFFEClCS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 two stools, being inexorably excluded from the French market,
 but no less inexorably bound to French policy.
     Situated quite close to the French frontier, which at that
 time, as everybody knows, was formed by the Rhine itself, its
 mere geographical position threw obstacles in the way of its
retaining the relative independence enjoyed by the majority
 of the other statesof the Confederation of the Rhine. But this
 was all the more impossiblebecause the countryinreality
 was governed throughout on Napoleon’s own account, at first
 in the name of Joachim Murat, but from 1808 even nomi.nally
 under the rule of the Emperor in his capacity as guardian of
 the new Grand-Duke, the minorson          of Louis Bonaparte.
 Its position, in combination with t.he
                                      measures described above
 for the blockade against Holland by meansof a customs cordon
 betweenRees and Bremen in 1809 and the incorporation of
Holland in 1810, placed difficulties in the way of the supply of
colonial goods both from the Baltic and from the North Sea
to quite a different extent than was the case in Saxony. This
was especially the case after the Trianon tariff, which particu-
larly during its earlier phases involved dues in all the states
through which the goods had to pass ; and there was still less
possibility of any supply throughthe Mediterranean than there
was in the case of Switzerland. Thenativeminister of the
Grand-Duchy, Nesselrode, said    with
                                    bitterness       that Berg
was the only country that had ever conscientiously applied
the Trianon tariff. Every reason conspired to force her to the
French side in the great struggle.
     Under such circumstances ‘it constituted.an excess of
punishment to place the country outside the French customs
frontier, so much the more so because a very extensive mutual
exchange of commodities with France had commenced before
the Revolution, consisting, on the one hand, of the exportati.on
of metal wares, cloth, and ribbons, and, on the other hand, of
the importation of wine,oil, and colonial goods. The more
unavoidable the sufferings that the new situation caused to
Berg, the more persistent and ardent became the desire of its
                       1 See ante, p. 183.
