310    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
the manufacture of muslins and embroidered goods, in which
 Switzerland and Baden had been beyond the reach of competi-
 tion on the Continent and had suffered no inconvenience worth
 mentioning from the Continental System. But it was just here
that a devastating crisis broke out which put an end forever t o
these branches of production in certain districts, and for the
moment practically everywhere. To a somewhat smaller extent
the position was the same for calicoes and coarser unprinted
 cottons. Outside the sphere of the cotton indust,ry, both the
 silk manufactureandthemaking           of watches and jewellery       .
 obviously satisfied what was in.the main a demand forluxuries.
 The most highly developed watch industry, t.hat of Geneva, is
 stated to have declined to a tenth of its former magnitude.
Evidently it will not dot o see in thisan effect of t.he Continental
System ; and the fact that Switzerland during the recent war,
despite far greater difficulties in the supply of raw materials
and foodstuffs, was yet able to avoid such great dislocations
as in 1811-13 is evidently connected with the fact that it has
now, not only industries that supply the luxury demand but
also, and perhaps t o astillgreater        extent, otherkinds of
industries.
     To outward  appearances,
                            consequently,            the difference
between Switzerland and Saxony is verygreat.            If one tries
t o gettothebottom        of the significance of the Continental
System for Switzerland, t h e dissimi-larity,however, will diminish
considerably. I n both   countries
                                 machine-spinning           secured
a firm foothold, while the weaving industry could not maintain
itself in either country. But things were undeniably far worse
in Switzerhd for' three reasons ; because of the much greater
ruthlessness of the Napoleonicpolicy there ; because of its
more intimate connexion withsurroundingcountries             ; and,
above all, because of the fact that Swiss industries were far
more concerned with the production of luxuries.
