    308    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
     their new supplies and at equally good prices. Until this time
     Switzerland had had no very great difficulty in providing
     herself with raw cotton or even with British yarn, especially
     because the important port of Trieste was still open. It is true
     that a shortage of Brazilian cotton had made itself felt, but this
     had been partly replaced by North American cotton.
         What really caused suffering during this period was not the
     general state of the trade, but the hopeless struggle that hand-
     spinning was carrying on against machine-spinning, hastened,
     as it was, by the importation of yarn and also by the increasing
     necessity to fall back on the short-stapled Levantine cotton ;
     for this quality did not admit of the spinning of b e numbers
     of yarn, whichotherwise constituted the onlychance left to
     hand-spinning. The misery of the Swiss hand-spinners would
     seem, as regards the range of the injury, to surpass considerably
     what we know of the correspondingeffects of the industrial
    revolution in Great Britain. But it is in the very nature of the
    case that we here have to deal with sacrifices for what cannot
    possibly be looked upon as anything but lasting material pro-
    gress. The definitive introduction of machine-spinning went on
    in Switzerland, as in Saxony, under the protection of the Conti-
    nental System, but on a foundation which had been laid before-
    hand in both countries-in the year 1801. In Switzerland, in
    much the same way as inSaxony, the new branch of production
    had been in the way of falling a victim to British competition ;
    but it was saved and POW developed itself, partly under Saxon
    influence, by means of a spinning-machineindustry. The last-
    named industry gradually became independent, and acquired
    a great reputation, like machine-spinning itself. It maintained
    its prosperity, not only under the Continental System, but also
    afterits fall, though it suffered a momentary dislocation.
    Probably the manufacture of spinning-machinery in its turn
    is connected wit'h the manufacture of cast or crucible steel at
    Schaffhausen, and possibly also with the general development
    of the engineering industry in Switzerland that has played an
    important part in the economic history of the country during
    the nineteenth century.
.
