            EFFECTS ON REST OF CONTINENT                     305
of keeping pace with the development of British technique.
It was really only the mule-spindles that obtained a firm footing
 during the period of the Continental System; while water-          \


 frames nevercame into commonuse,            and jennies almost
 completely disappeared, the number of mule-spindles increasing
 steadily from 13,200 in 1806 to 255,900 in 1813 (of which in
 the half-year betweenMichaelmas 1811 andEaster             1812,
 there was a rise'from 132,000 to 210,150,an increase of 59 per
 cent.). The development of machine spinning suffered a slight
 check at the collapse of the Continental System in 1813-14;
 but on the whole the results attained in this matter seem to
 have held their ground. Alongside this, moreover, there arose
 8 special and comprehensive industry for the manufacture
 of spinning-machinery, distributed over some dozen workshops,
 of which the most technically advanced, though not the largest,
was under the management of the British mechanic who had
fitted up the first mule spinning-mill in 1801.
     Thus it is fairly clear what causes made it possible for the
Continental System to check the decline in the Saxon textile
industries. Despite their importance, the period did not bring
any general quantitative increase in production.According
to Konig'scalculations,which       are basedon the year 1805
when the effects of British competition had already appeared
all along the line, there was only one year (1810)that exhibited
higherfigures (an increase of 25 per cent.) thanthe year
taken as the basis,while the figures of the other years and
average werelower.        The course of developmentshowed a
decline for the. muslin industry, which was dependent on the
almost unobtainable high numbers of yarn. Thatindustry
partly passed to Switzerland, and partly lost through British
competition its most important remaining market, Turkey.
On the other hand, there was an increase of nearly 44)per cent.
for unprinted calicoes, so that thecotton industry of Voigtland,
and consequently of Saxony as a whole, passed more and more
tothe production of calicoes. In a somewhatsimilar way
calico-printing grew, and the results were so satisfactory that
the British could sell nothmg whatever when, after Napoleon's
  1560.48                      X
