 322    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
  blockade, have been quite different from what it was when the
  normal producers proceed to hinder all supply.
      FinaUy, another contributory cause was the relative self-
  sufficiency ( u ~ T u ~ x E ~
                            which
                                ~ ) ,evidentlygreatlylimitedthe
 effects of the Continental System as regards the satisfaction of
 generalwants      of the population of the continentalstates.
 "he most important factis that difficulties regarding food did
 not possess anything like the importance that they had during
 the recent war ; indeed they practically played no part, what-
 ever on the Continent before the winter of 1811-12. The one
 exception was in Norway.1 This self-sufficiencyas regards food
 was far greater than can be found in our own time, even in
 countries that produce the necessary amount of food for their
 own population, because theyare dependent upon imports
 of manure and fodder, while such a situation was practically
 unknown a hundred years ago. Moreover, the self-sufficiency
 within the continental countries, the relative economic inde-
 pendence of the particular household, went far to prevent the
 hardships occasioned by a blockade in the twentieth century.
The fact that, as a consequence of this, the corn problem was
really a problem only for England, makesit proper to postpone
its treatment to the section in the following chapter dealing
 with the effects of the ContinentalSystem in that country,
and makes a mere reference t o it sufficient in this place. I n
that connexion, too, Norway will be considered. The explana-
tion of the seeming paradox that the scarcity of raw materials
principally hit production andleft consumptionalmostun-
changed, also lies in the consumers' comparatively great inde-
pendence of market conditions as well as in the great reserves
of linen, cloth, and wearing apparel kept inevery self-respecting
household.
    In spite of thelimitationinthe         general effects of the
ContinentalSystem      that follows fromallthis,onecannot
shut one's eyes to the fact that the yeark 1811-13, after the
crisis in France, Great Britain,and most of the othercountries,
are characterized by a serious deterioration of the economic
        1 Worm-Miiller, Norge gjennem W a a r w z e , t c . , pp. 82 et sty.
