  318      EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
  unique consequence of the blockade, which has had analogies
  during the recent war, namely, the great part that Englishmen
  played in theeconomic life of Russia before the Peace of Tilsit.
  This is illustrated by the vast amount of information from
  official Russian sources that can be found in Oddy’swork.
  For instance, in 1804, 35 per cent. of the imports and no less
  than 63 per cent. of the exports of St. Petersburg were in the
  hands of British merchants ; and the three greatest   commercial
  houses, all of them British, taken by themselves, carried on
 more than one-fourth of the export trade of the Russian capital.
  French evidencetestifies     tothe same conditions.General
  Savary, whoreached St. Petersburg in July 1807, on behalf
 of Napoleon, gave a detailed description in his report of the
 all-dominating position of the British trade, telling howhalf
 of all the vessels were British and how Englishmen took over
 all the timber from the nobility and thereby provided them
 with their safest source ol income ; and he also remarked
 that they themselves founded industrial concernsin Russia
 when the importation of British manufactures was too
 much hampered by customs        duties.
                                      When           so important
 a part of the economic activity of Russiaceased to exist
 without warning, it was naturally impossible to obtain sub-
 stitutes either inRussia itself or from France ; and the natural
 consequencewas a stagnationin Russian exports.Napoleon
 was quite conscious of this position, and in November 1807,
he ordered his ambassador, Caulaincourt,to lay before Emperor
Alexander a propositionwhereby           the French government
should buy several million francs’worth of mast wood and other
naval stores for its shipyards. It is uncertain, however,
whether this plan was ever carried out.1
     The Continental System seems to have had a much more
marked restraining effect on the exports of raw materials and
foodstuffs from Prussia, that is to say, chiefly from the districts
     Vandal, N a p o h et Alexandre Ier, vol. I, pp. 140, 324, 513(Napoleon’s in-
structions to Caulaincourt, Nov. 12, 1807) ; Oddy, European Commerce, bk. I,
especidy pp. 130 et seq., pp. 197-8 (computations by the present writer) ; Tarle,
Kontinmtdncsja blokada, vol. I, pp. 477, 482, 486 ; Darmstiidter, Stdien, &c., vol. 11,
p. 610 ; Rose, in the English Historical Review, vol. xvn~, pp. 122 et 8eq.
