 33% EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTALSYSTEM
 important fact-that the particular kind of dislocation in Great
 Britain due to the Continental System which was most favour-
 able to Napoleon, was necessarily of acomparativelysuper-
 ficial nature,just   because it was a dislocation caused by
 obstacles in the way of exports and not of obstacles in the way
 of imports. A failure of exports can always be alleviated by
 production with a view t o accumulating stocks-supported, if
 necessary, by public funds ; but that is not the case with the
 failure of imports, for if irreplaceable commodities are irre-
 trievably left outsideno measures can be of any avai1.l
     Napoleon’s thoughts certainly did not run in thatdirection,
 and the explanation lies in an attitudewe have already learned
 to know, and which he shared not only with all his country-
 men, but also, probably, with the majority of Englishmen.
 But even with due allowance for this, the position he took up
 was very peculiar ; for what England would have needed to
 do was pretty much what he himself did at that very time.
 His own remedy for unemployment, in fact,was state support in
different forms, in order to enable manufacturers t o continue
operations ; and there is no reason to suppose that he ever
ceased to believe in the efficacy of this remedy. In that case
it would not have been a great flight of imagination t o expect
the same capacity on the part of his adversaries, whose fertility
of resource and endurance he was not wont to deny.
     In reality, it is true, these remedieswereemployed        in
Great Britain only t o a very limited extent, owing t o the fact
that the principle of laissez-faire had already obtained a great
influence over the classes that held political power in England.
But we may certainlyassume that Napoleon was not so familiar
with his enemies or their economicviews that he took such
afactorinto account. TheBritish measureswere limited to
an issue of treasury bills for ~6,000,000for the support of
embarrassed business men, chiefly manufacturers, the intention
being to tide them over the time of waiting until the assets
locked up in South America or elsewherecouldbereleased.
.     It may be allowable to point out how well this result, whichwasreached
early in 1918, ia in acoordanoe with later German developments.
