 330    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
  was retarded by the ContinentalSystem.Thepopulation            of
  Great Britain and Ireland increased 13 per cent. between the
 years 1801 and 1811, as compared with 1% per cent. during
 the following decade ; andnaturally          it was considerably
 greater for the industrial districts. Calico-printing works quad-
 rupled their production between 1800-14, and the exports of
 iron increased. Nor did the years of the Continental System
 form an exception t o the general transition t o new technical
 methods which constituted the primus motm of the industrial
 revolution. Thus Cort’s son stated ina petition to theHouse of
 Commons in 1812 that even atthatdate              250,000 tons of
 malleable iron were annually produced by puddling and that
 Cort’s processes had obtained practically general acceptance.l
 The power-loomlikewise       made progress, though a t a con-
 siderably slower pace. A great new revolutiontookplace in
 calico-printingwith the year 1808, in that the pattern        was
transferred to the cylinders from a little steel cylinder instead
of being engraveddirect ; and the lacemachinecameint,o
existence in 1809, &c.
    There was certainly no pause in the industrial revolution,
nor any tendency to a backward development of the industrial
life of Great Britain toward increased self-sufficiency, such as,
in accordance with our previous findings, would have been the
consequence of complete success for the Continental System.
But, of course, it was not in that way that Napoleon himself
thought of the matter ; his hopes were limited to dislocations
in the system.
              EFFECTS   OF DISLOCATION   OF EXPORTS

    It appears from the accountin part 111 that these hopes
were not frustrated, but, on the contrary, were verynearly
fulfilled through the British crisis of 1810-11. Also it appears
equally dear that thiscrisis cannot be regardedwholly, or even
mainly (though certainly in part), asa fruit of the blows of the
Continental System against Great Britain ; nor was the extent
of its effects at all what Napoleon had imagined.
                      Hansard, vol. XXI, p. 330.
