    938    EFFECTS OF THE COhTINENTAL SYSTEM
  amount would thus have been the normal import demand ;
  but if instead of this we wish to investigate the relative magni-
  tude of the greatest shortage during the period, that for the
  year, 1810, we find that not even that, in relation to the then
  greater population, rises to more thanabout 12 percent.
  However, there also occurs a lower calculation of the con-
  sumptionthan      one quarter (eightbushels)per       inhabitant,
  namely, six bushels, which falls slightly short of the Swedish
  consumption of rye and wheat a hundred years later.        As the
  home supply inGreatBritain         can only beobtainedfrom
  a figure based on consumption, this gives a smaller amount for
  the harvest, and consequently a greatershareforimports.
  On such a supposition, that share forms 6& per cent., or some-
  what over one-sixteenth, onan average, forthe decennial period
 of 1801-10, and a good 16 per cent., or scarcely one-sixth, for
 the year of maximum imports, 1810.
     Even if the imports of wheat had been totallycut off,
 therefore, the deficiency, even in years of bad harvest and on
 the most unfavourable estimate, would have been a mere trifle
 in comparisonwithwhat        we had t o accustomourselves t o
 during the recent war. For Sweden the averageimports
 during the quinquennialperiod before the outbreak of that
 war formed a good fourth of the total requirements of wheat
 and rye, while the total supply of cereals in Sweden during
 the bad year 1917-18 was probably less than half of the normal.
This shows to what extent normal food requirements have
been curtailed, even in neutral countries in our own day, and
the shortage a hundred years ago consequently dwindles into
comparative insignificance. In spite of this, the blockade
during the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars was sufficiently
effectiveboth to stimulate the cultivation of corn inGreat
Britain,l and also to bring about a severely felt shortage of
food, which was especially marked in the years1795, 1800, and
1812, and which gave rise to constant apprehensions. A large
number of the measures adopted during the recent war were
‘     Cp. Ricardo, Primiple.g of P o l i t i d Ecolzoney and T d i o n (London, 1817),
  Uf ; Malth-,
~h,                           Of Pditieal Eoon~my(London, 1820), ch. III,
                   P~<n~izyle~l                                               BBC).
                                                                                IX.
