       336         EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM

                                      OF FOODSTUFFS
                          BRITISHIMPORTS
            The question of the dependence of Great Britain on imports
        from the European mainland has generally been regarded AS
        identical with the question of its provisionwithfood.          To
        a large extent this iscorrect,inasmuch         as the majority of
       industrial rawmaterialsimportedcamefrom                transmarine
        countries, and practically all industrial products of importance
       for the mass of the community could be manufactured within
       the country.Yet         it should be mentioned that both naval
        stores(especially timber)and wool formedexceptionsfrom
       this general rule, inasmuch as they were taken from the Baltic
       lands (includingScandinavia) and fromSpainorGermany,
       respectively ; and, as we have already mentioned, there was
       a t times a scarcity of both these’kinds of commodities during
       the course of the Continental System. Consequently it is not
       impossible that twosuch fundamental sides of warrequire-
       ments as shipbuilding and the clothing of troops might have
       offered difficulties if the supply from Europe had been cut off.
I
       It is far from probable, however,that these factors would have
      been decisive, since timber, like other things required for ships,
       could have been obtained from Canada ; and according t o an
      estimate for the year 1800 more than nine-tenths of the wool
      required can be assumed to have been provided from domestic
       sources.Obviously         the question of foodstuffs went
                                                               much
      further.
           The importance of GreatBritain’s imports offoodstuffs,
      which can practicallybe regarded as identical with her imports
    . of wheat, is anything but clear, it is true, as we have no informa-
      tion at all as to the agricultural production of the country
      itse1f.l Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that the previously
         1 Cf. also, Porter, op. cit. ; Tooke, op. cit. ; Smart, o
                                                                 p. cit. ; Oddy, op. cit.,
      bk. III; McCulloch, Dictionary, Practicul, Thuoretiml, arid Hiatoriml, of Cmmerce
      and Commercial Navigation (new ed., London,1862), article on ‘Corn Laws end Corn
      Trade’ ; Cunningham, Ur&h of Enqtish Induatry and Cmmerce, 3d ed., vol. II, pp.
      703 et se4. The British figures corresponding to volume (quarters of 8 bushels)
      have been recalculatedaccording to weight, 1 bushelbeingtaken           as equal to
      28.2 Irgs,
