340     EFFECTS OF "HE CONTINENTALSYSTEM
 come indicates more or less plainly that not even a complete
 barring of imports would have attained its object, even apart
from the fact -that an effective blockade would probably have
 been able, after some time, to pave the way for some of the
effective measures with which a much greater scarcity of food
 was met during the recent war.
     Napoleon's chances of striking a t British food supplies
 were evidentlylimited t o whathad to be taken from the
.mainland of Europe, or, in the case most favourable to him,
from there and from the United States. I n sources accessible
to me there do not exist figures relating t o all the countries of
origin of the wheat imported into Great Britain during this
period. But theAmerican wheat went mainlyto South Europe,
especially to the Iberianpeninsuladuring          thetremendous
 struggles there, while allourinformationpoints        to the idea
that the Baltic lands formed the main sourceof supply of corn
for Great Britain, with Danzig as the centre. From         the very
full statistics on the Baltic seaports printed in Oddy's work, it
appears that in the year 1800, when British imports of wheat
were great, 47 per cent. came from the three ports, Konigsberg,
Elbing,and Danzig, 34 percent.fromDanzig              alone.1 And
besides these, other Baltic ports were of importance also. Con-
sequently, so far as Napoleon could make his will prevail, not
only on the North Sea coast of Germany, but also upon the
south and, t o some extent, the east coast of the Baltic, he did
no€ lack the possibility of hampering the food supply of Great
Britain. Accordingly, the question is, How did he really regard
such a task and what steps did he take t o accomplish it ?
      FOOD  POLICY OF NAPOLEON      AND HIS OPPONENT

   It is on this point thatthe accepted views have been
determined bythe conclusions of Dr. Rose inthe article referred
to above.They         come to this, that Napoleon notonlydid
nothing to hinder British imports of foodstuffs, but actually
sought to encourage the exports of corn to that country with
the object of ruining the enemy through theunfavourable
   * Computed on the basis of Oddy's figures, op.cit., pp. 234-52 ; passim.
