         EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM                       341.
 trade balancewhichwouldbe        the consequencethereof. But
 this account givesa misleading impression bothof the measures
 and of the motives of Napoleon, and it is not borne out by the
 letters cited by Dr. Rose inits support.
     It is true that the notion of,ruining the enemy by imports
fitted in very well with the economic conceptions of Napoleon
and of many of hiscontemporaries, as has beensufficiently
shown in the foregoing pages. But the matter of food supplies
here took an exceptional position, inasmuchas it was regulated
in the continental states, and especially in France, along the
lines of the mediaeval ‘policy of plenty ’ rather than in accor-
dance withthe principles of mercantilism, in that it was desired,
primarily, to provide for. an abundant supply andnot for
profitable production and sale. Napoleon did not swerve from
the economic traditions of France any more in this department
of economicpolicy than in others ; and it would have been
highly peculiar if he had allowed himself to be led by one set
of ideas where his own country was concerned and by another
set when the enemy wasconcerned.Norwas             that the case,
but, on the contrary, his opinion is quite consistent and not at
all difficult to explain.
     The fundamental object of Napoleon’s food policy was, as
has just been mentioned, to secure supplies withinthe country ;
and this not only from the samemotives that actuated his
Bourbon predecessors, but also because of his desire to prevent
labourdisturbances.Consequently,         he is alwaysreminding
his French helpers of the danger of beinginsufficientlypro-
vided with foodstuffs, urging them to remember what it had
cost him in the Year X (1801-2)to procure a few thousand
quintaux of corn, and insisting that itwould involve the greatest
danger if they had not a ‘ double supply ’. ‘ You hate not
sufficient experience inthis matter,’ he wrotein 1810 to Eugene, ,
the viceroy of Italy. ‘ The corn question is for sovereigns the
most important and the most delicateof all.  ...    The first duty
of the prince in this question is to hold to the people, with-
out listening t o the sophisms of the landowners.’ During the
difficulties of the winter of 1812 he strove, by the distribution
