             EFFECTS ON THE
                          UNITED                         KINGDOM                835
power of resistancebyany        social movementscausedby
economic dislocations,This    will beparticularlyclear   if we
compare the attitude of the holders of political power at that
time with the concessions that had to be madeto the demands
of the workmen during the recent war in order not to endanger
their good-will toward a continuance of the struggle.
                 POSSIBILITY
                         OF PREVENTING
                                    IMPORTS
    All tha.t has justbeen said, however, applies only to obstacles
 in the way of exports, with their obviously limited possibilities
 of causingruininthe       economiclife of R country. As the
 economic function of exports is absolutely limited to providing
payment for imports, it is quite meaningless when there         are
noimports.Imports,on          theotherhand,areends        in them-
selves, because they satisfy the wants of the people directly,
which is the h a 1 function of all economic activity. Conse-
quently, we cannot possibly turn our backs on the question as
t o whatchancesNapoleon        would havehad for gaining his
object if he had directed thepoint of his blockadeagainst
the imports of Great Britain instead of against her exports.
It is indeed true that this was quite incompatible with the
economic views that he shared with the majority of persons
of politicalconsequence, as has beenshown throughoutour
previous account. But it does not necessarily follow from this
that he could not have made his object the       cutting-off both
of imports and of exports, as, on the whole, took place during
the recent war ; in any case the problem is so important that
it cannot be ignored. What especially necessitates an investi-
gation of the whole thing, including Napoleon’s policy in the
matter, is that the view which has been pretty generally ac-
cepted during the last decade happens to have been determined
by a populararticleby       Dr. J. H. Rose, which was hastily
drafted for a purely practical purpose and whichscarcely gives
sufficient, or even correct, guidance in the question.1
    1 ‘Britain’s Food Supply in the NapoleonicWar,’ in the MontiaEy Review
(1902), reprinted in Napoleonic Studh, pp. 204 et seq. The later statement by
Dr. Rose in his chapter on ‘ The Continental System ’, in the Cambrae Modem
Iliatory, vol. IX, p. 371, is in far bett.er accord with the 8ourceB as I read them.
