      .%4     EFFECTS O F THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
        motive stands out distinctly in the most celebratedcases when
        extensive exports of corn from France, Holland, and Flanders
        to Great Britain tookplace in the years1809 and 1810. During
        1809 it is stated that about9O0
                                      ,O O tons of wheat, besides other
        grain, came from those countries ; and of the unprecedented
    .. imports in
                the         following year-which,      without
                                                            deducting
        exports, amounted to 353,500 tons of wheat and 135,MO tons
        .of othergrainandrepresented         a totalvalue of morethan
       S7,000,000-one-third of the wheat (evidently unground) and
       half of the flour were said to have come from   Napoleon’s empire,
        all by means of mutual licences. The remarkable thing in this
        connexion is that not only Napoleon but also many Englishmen
        considered these large imports from France, under the existing
        conditions, t o be extremely advantageous for the French, and
        consequently open to grave objection from a British point of
        view, This was partly because it provided means of disposing
       of surplus products, and partly because it was an important
       source of income t o Napoleon owing to the huge licensing fees,
       which, togetherwithfreightandinsurance,            were alleged to
       raise the price by 30-50s. per quarter, or from $6 15s. to E l l
       per ton. This mode of thought, which is just as much French
       as British, was given characteristic expression in     a speech in
       ,the House of Commons (February 19, 1810) by the politician
       Marryat, the father of the famous novelist, fromwhich we cite
       the following :
            The benefit which the enemy derived from the present system of
      licensing the importationof his grain was much more than many gentle-
      men imagined. It was a fact that in July last the farmers of France
      were so distressed bythe low price of grain, that theycould not pay their
      taxes. The price was then so low as 27s. the sack, whilst it was known
      t h a t t h eFrench farmer calculated upon a price of 86s. as a fair ‘return
      for @s expences. Buonapartb, being apprized       of these circumstances,
     .had no hesitation, of course [sic], in granting licences for the exporta-
      tion of that grain, which our government readily granted licences        to
      import ; the consequence of which was the raising of the price of that
      article in France, by the last accounts, above 50 per cent. beyond the
I     ratein July last.Thus were the Frenchcorngrowersbenefited,while
      BuonopartC’s treasury derived at the rate of 18s. a quarter from the
      same means. He would then submit it to the serious consideration .of
