          EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM                      351
  peninsula, for instance,in the formof bills of exchange or claims
  on business establishments there, to an amount corresponding
  to the requirements of the British army, so far as those require-
  ments could not be satisfied by the supply of goods on British
  account.
      It is truethat it ispossible to imagine a situationin
  which Great Britain was cut off from exporting to transmarine
  countries as well as to the European Continent ; and it would
  then become a question of what possibilities there would be for
  supporting the Continent under such conditions. In that case
  the matter was manifestly hopeless ; for a completely isolated
  Great Britain-and a country without exports is practically the
  same as an isolated country-must, no less than a completely
 isolatedEuropeanContinent,        necessarily implythe impossi-.
 bility of Britishhelp for the adversaries of Napoleon. But
 this connexion is self-evident to such a degree that it need
 scarcely be pointed out ; and what is more, the supposition
 of its existence is so devoid of practical importance that it can
 never have played any part in the conduct     of Napoleon or any
 other statesman of the time.
     The next question, then, is whether even a diminution of
 British exports would not have been able to place obstacles in
 the way of supporting the Continent, inasmuch as the assets
 held by Great Britain to payfor the support might in that     case
 beexpected to be smaller. But even thisidea is incorrect,
 because the decisive thing is not the absolute amountof exports
 but the amount       inrelation to imports, i. e., the excess of
 exports. If only imports were diminished to the same extent
as exports, the possibility of giving supportwould be in no wise
 altered. It is in the natureof things that the support mustbe
paid for by limitation of domestic consumption when a country
cannot count upon borrowing abroad,,a thing which was not
to be thought of for Great Britain during the        period of the
ContinentalSystem.Thegeneral            conclusion thusremains
simply this, that exports (including carrying profits and other
f,oreigntrade profits) mustexceed imports by the amount     of the
support given to foreigncountries.        It is truethat. British
