            .EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM
unfeasibility of the thing only in this case, while the argument
might seem to apply with at least equally great strength to
that kind of blockade which he tried to enforce.1

                   GREAT BRITAINAND NORWAY
     Before leaving the subject of food supply, it may be asked
 whether the policy of Great Britain followed the same lines as
 that of Napoleon in regard to the unrestricted exportation of
 corn to enemy countries. It follows from what has previously
 been said that the question was hardly of importance in more
than one case, namely, that of Norway, where, according to the
recent work of Worm-Miiller, about a quarter of the normal
consumption of corn (raw materials for the distilleries not in-
 cluded)wascoveredbyimports.Themotives               which guided
British policy on this particular point hardly appear with the
necessary clearness from hitherto-published materials ; but at
least the externalfacts are not open to doubt.
     In the first years after the bombardment of Copenhagen,
(1807-9) GreatBritainmaintained         a rigorousblockade, but
apparently with no object other than that       of bringing about
a relaxation of the rigours of embargo prevailing on the other
side, and especially of securing a supply of Norwegian timber.
When the needs of Norwayprevailedover              the somewhat
quixoticloyalty of Frederick VI to the ContinentalSystem,
the importation of food, as well as trade in general,was allowed
to continueunhampered,upontheusualsystem                of British
licences, to such a degree that the situation was said to border
on commercialrelations in times of profoundpeace. So far
British policy was apparently guided by the same        principles
which had dictated her earlier measures, e. g., the prohibitions
on the exports of raw cotton and ' Jesuit's bark '. But in the
last years of the struggle (1812-13) these methods were again
reversed, and a food blockade was brought to bear on Norway-
    1 Correepndame, nos. 16,224,16,608; Lettres iddites, nw. 491,662 (toMonta-
livet, July IS, 1810) ; Ransard, vol. xv, pp. 396-7 ; Fisher, Studies, kc., p. 344 ;
Stuhr, q.cit., p. 356 ; Rambaud, op. cit., pp. 426-7 ; Tarle, Kontinental'nuja
btokada, V O ~ .I, pp. 486, 494-5.
