          EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM                                        34!9
remember from part I, chapter IV, it was assumed in French
circles that therewas a more immediate connexion between the
self-blockade of the Continent and the political elimination of
Great Britain than thatwhich was provided by its generaleco-
nomic ruin. It was thought, in fact, that,owing to the inability
t o export, Great Britain would be prevented from supporting the
Continent either by means of subsidies or by the maintenance
of troops. Miss Cunningham, in the little study that has often
been cited in this   work, has not only successfullyelucidated
these ideas and their bearing on the policy of Napoleon but
has also, with less success, so far as I can judge, sought to show
the validity of that train of thought to such an extent as to
prove the correctness of Napoleon's (falselyassumed)object
of ruiningGreatBritainbysupplyingherwith                foodstuffs.
Miss Cunningham's thesis, indeed, is that the excess of imports
gave rise to an export of gold which came near t o exhausting
the metal reserve of the Bank of England and thus shaking
' the real foundation of the credit system x.' This contention
does not appear to give due weight to the real significance of
international exchange as that was brought out, not only by
Adam Smith, but more,particularly by the leadingeconomists,
in the great currency debate which went on during the actual
period of the Continental System. To begin with, we must see
whether that French line of thought was correct which made
Britishexports theantecedentcondition          for themaking of
payments on the Continent ; and in so doing we must connect
the matterwith the discussion in our first part towhich reference
has justbeen made.
     The kernel of the question, then, is the point that Adam
Smith maintained, namely, that both war and other functions
are in reality paid for by goods and human efforts (services),
andnotbymoney          or preciousmetals.      The subsidies that
G h t Britain had to pay on the Continent        were intended t o
procure necessaries for her allies, and the same were required
for the maintenance of the British troops after Great Britain
had begun operations by land.      Consequently, the business in
      1 Miss Cunningham, British Credit, Bco., pp. 4 et set&, pp. 71 et 8eq.
