 948     EFFECTS OF THE CON'I'XNENTALSYSTEM
 so far a s is known, the only serious instance of such a measure
in the course of the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. The
 blockade could be made exceptionally binding and effective,
 especially after Sweden and Russia had joined the anti-Napo-
 leonic alliance. A contributorycauseundoubtedly            was that
the need for Norwegian timber, as well as for exports to Nor-
wegian markets, had lost their importance         to Great Britain.
In other words, the policy which made exports of vital interest
had lost a great deal of its force since the palpable breakdown
 of the ContinentalSystem.         But even if theseconjectures
prove to be correct, the incident shows that Great Britain was
already at that time more willing than her adversary t o use
 a food blockade as a weapon of war.
     The weapon, however, came far from gainingeneral
approval even among Englishmen, and naturally it called forth
anathemas from the opposite side. The British chargd d'afluires
in Stockholm, Foster, openly told the Swedish statesmen that
' the starvation system appeared to him to be blameworthy,
difficult t o execute, and conducive to numerous dangers               '.
    The result was that Norway came nearer t o starvation than
any other country    during this period, so that her pitiful situation
was alleged by FrederickVI as a reasonfor renouncing his rights
to the country in the peace of E e l in January, 1814. Had it
not been possible for spirited Norwegians and Danes to break
through the blockade with their small corn vessels, the situa-
tion would have appeared all but hopeless in the eyes of con-
temporaries.1

                BRITISHSUPPORT
                             OF THE CONTINENT

    We may now return to the economic life of Great Britain
herself. It has been shown that the more fundamental effects
of the Continental System on herorganism did not playa deci-
sive part in the issue of the struggle. But as the reader may
   * Cf. Worm-Miiller, op. cit., the greater part of which is devoted to this
~ubject. For the later years, cf. Rubin, op. kt., ch. x, end Holm, Danwk.Nol.gea
His2crrie, kc., vol. VII : 2 ; pm&m. The utterance of Fo&r may be found io
Grade, &Age och Tikit-Alliamen, pp. 438-9.
