,   3   4   6   EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
  quite natural to close all ports to him. It would be beneficial
  to thecommon cause if all the peoples of the North Sea and the
  Baltic unitedto deprive Great Britainof her means of existence.’
 But Tarle’s supposition that Napoleon really entertained any      ‘


 serious plans in that direction at the time seems to be refuted
 by the fact that his licences for the export of corn were being
 issued in torrents just then ; and in any case he adhered to
 exactly the opposite view in the following year, as appears from
 a particularly illuminativeimperial
                                   dictated
                                          utterance               of
 June 24, 1811, which Tarlehas also brought to light. The
 situation then was stated to be such that there was a scarcity
 of corn in Great Britainat the same time as therewas a surplus
 thereof in Germany and Poland, which naturally caused the
 British to import the commodity by sea. The question, there-
 fore, was whether this should be prevented. Napoleon’s answer
 to thisquestion was in the negative, for three reasons : I n
 the first place, he regarded it as uselessbecause the English
 would procure the corn from America if they could not get
it from the Baltic. Thus it was the limitations to his power
over the supplies that here blocked the way. In the second
place, it was, according to Napoleon’s declaration, impossible,
even withall watchfulness, to preventPrussia and Poland
from exporting. This is undeniably       a surprising utterance on
the part of a man who was not wont to &knowledge economic
impossibilities ; but anexplanation of it may possibly be found
in his conception that exports are always more natural, and
consequently more difficult to prevent, than imports. Finally,
in the third place, fiscalism stuck up its head as usual, in that
the Emperor debated the question of moving the exports to the
Hanse Towns, whichwere at that timeincorporatedin               his
empire, in order therebyt o give the French treasurythe benefit
of the export dues. It is obvious that thesereasons do not
bear witness to any special zeal to prevent the importation of
foodstuffs into Great Britain ; but, like everything else, they
show that Napoleon did not overlook the utility to England of
those imports, but rejected measures against them owing to
their futility. The remarkable thing is that he recognized the
