$50    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM
 hand was either to provide the necessaries direct or else to
 provide the means with which they might be purchased.
     If, then, the situation was such that British goods could be
imported into the Continent, the simplest arrangement of the
 matter was that described by Adam Smith, namely, an export
 of goods from Great Britain without corresponding imports.
It wasof no consequence whether the British goodswere or
 were not precisely of the kind required by the troops or by the
continental governments. Their sale on the Continent created
in the lattercase British assets which could be used to pay for
the domestic goods needed by the troops or by the allies ; that
is t o say, the purchasers of the British goods in reality paid
their debt, not to theBritish, but to thesellers of the domestic
goods that were used by the British troops or by the govern-
mentssupported by Great Britain. Butthefactthatthe
matter wassimplifiedby        the possibility of exporting British
goods t o the Continent by no means implies that the support
of the continental governments would have beenimpossible
without the realization of such a condition. If, for instance,
we suppose, instead, that no British,but, only transmarine
goods, could get into the Continent, the system only needed to
be supplemented by the participation of a third country, for
instance, the UnitedStates,in the operation. At timesthis
was undoubtedly the case with the payments on the Iberian
peninsula, where American corn went in great quantities. The
assets that Great Britainacquired by her exports in transmarine
countries went, under this supposition, to the European main-
land in payment for continental imports of colonial goods, that
is to say, British exports for the non-European countries paid
for British supportto the Continent of Europe. In the one case
as in the  other it was a question of the exchange of commodities,
and not of any need of payment in money or in gold and silver.
When, therefore, it came about that Wellington wished to make
cash payment during his campaigns in Spain and Portugal, this
by no means meant that he had to have the requisite amount
sent to him in precious metal. The only thing necessary was
that the British government should have assets.on the Iberian
