              EFFECTS ON THE UNITED KINGDOM                                       355
  in chief intheBritishfinancialadministration           of that time
  (1811-16),on which the German economic historian, Professor
  Richard Ehrenberg, has based     that partof his study of the'house
  of Rothschild, Even at that time, with the greatly multiplied
  continental expenses for both subsidies      and military require-
  ments, the financing was a t firstmanagedpartlybyvery
  cumbrous movements of silver from England, and partly, and
  more particularly, by bills drawn from       the Continent on the
  British treasury in London. These last the continental govern-
  ments and generalsafterwardshad the greatest difficulty in
  selling, and therefore they declined heavily in value. But now
 there was graduallycarriedout,through            N. M. Rothschild,
 a change of systemby which bills and coins were privately
 bought up on the Continent, with the result that          difficulties
 of placing bills and the consequent dislocations in theexchanges
 almost ceased. Thus Herries states in his       official report that
 during 1813.bills on Holland and Frankfurt for ~ 7 0 0 , 0 0 0were
 bought up without depressing the exchange, while a payment
 of E100,000 on the old methods would, in his opinion, have had
 ten times as great an effect upon the exchanges.1
     The whole of this account shows clearly enough that the
 difficulties lay in the matter of technical organization and were
not due to any       profound economic obstacles inthe way of
paymentsontheContinent            ; for it is manifest that such
obstacles, had they existed,would no less fully have lain in the
way of Rothschild'spurchases of commercialpaper onthe
Continent, that is to say, his acquisition of continental assets
on British account. What the change of system implied, there-
fore, was t o organize the support in the main on the lines of
international payments in general.
     But it was recentlymentionedthatintheearlierstage
Rothschildsent gold to Wellingtonon theaccount of the
Britishgovernment,and           thathelaterpaymentsonthe
Continent were partly effected bysending silver. One thus
   1 Memoirs of Sir Thomas Powell Buxton (3d ed.,London,          1849), ch. XXI, pp.
288 et seq, ; Ehrenberg, Grosse Vernziigen, ihre Entstehung und ihre Bedeutung (Jena,
1903), vol. I, pp. 58 et sq.
                                        A & 2
