356    EFFECTS OF THE CONTINEXTAL SYSTEM
gets the impression, in spite of all that has been said, that
precious metals were necessary, at least at times, in order to
support the Continent. This evidentlyneedsexplanation          ;
and the explanationmainly lies in the stateof British currency
during the Napoleonic wars.
                      BRITISHCURRENCY
    As has been mentioned in part I, Great Britain had had an
irredeemable paper currency ever since 1797 ; but before 1808
this currency had only inparticularyears       shown any great
deviations from its par value. The quotations for gold do not
appear to have been very reliable at the time, but the rates
of exchange on Hamburg and Paris, both of which, character-
istically enough, were quoted in London without intermission
during the whole course of the last Napoleonic war, make the
matter sufficiently clear. I n 1808, however, a great change set
in. Especially from 1809 the exchanges began to show a very
remarkablefall, i. e., theamount of foreign money to be
obtained for 3 3 sterling declined heavily. The averagede-
preciation for 1809 is given by Mr. Hawtrey as 21 and 23.3
per cent. as compared with Hamburg and Paris, respectively.
This gave rise to a great controversy--which offers a number
of points of contact.with the discussion during t h e recent
war-concerning the connexion between the changes in the
value of gold and the ratesof exchange, o n the one hand, and
the decline in the value of the British paper currency, on the
other hand, and also concerning the true cause of the latter
phenomenon. The first importantcontributions t o this con-
troversy were made byRicardo in the latesummer a,ndautumn
of 1809 in the form of three articles published in the Morning
Chronicle, which were followed up in December by a celebrated
pamphlet, the title of which, The High Price of Bullion a Proof
of the Depreciation of Ban.k Notes, sufficiently expresseshis
point of view. I n this pamphlet,Ricardo, who at that time
was known only as a successful and highly respected broker on
the StockExchange,laid       down what is called the quantity
theory of money and laid the foundationof his still unpresaged
