 372                             CONCLUSION
  states, of course, no feeling of hostility to Great Britain was to
 be expected ; but it is nevertheless remarkablethat Englishmen
 seem t o have lost hardly anything by their continental debtors.
 All this, however, referred to private individuals ; butthe
 grandest exampleof economic co-operation betweenthe enemies
 occurred on account of the governments themselves. This was
 what was known as the Ouvrard Affair, which pops up many
 times in the contemporary sources-most indetailinthe
 memoirs of the great Parisian speculator, Ouvrard, but perhaps
 most authoritatively in Mollien’smemoirs-andwhich            is one
 of the most astounding of the economic events of the period.
 The affair had to do with what was, for the conditions of those
 times, a colossal remittance of silver to an amountof 37,000,000
 francs, which Spain was to maketoFrance               from Mexico
 throughthe      mediation of the Anglo-French-Dutchbanking
 firm of Hope & Co. of Amsterdam, with which Baring Brothers
of London and the ultraspeculative banker, Ouvrard of Paris,
worked. As the British controlled the sea, however, the trans-
ferencecouldonlybe          effected byBritishwar-shipsfetching
the money from Vera Cruz in 1807, and conveying it to a Euro-
pean port on Napoleon’s account. Mollien’s comment on this
is : ‘ Thusthree powers which were wagingwar ci outrarwe
couldsuddenly make a kind of local truce for an operation
which did not seem likely to benefit more than one of them ’ ;
andhe goes on : ‘ When Napoleon expressed t o me some
inquietude regarding the fateof such an important remittance,
I was able t o answer him, with a confidence that the result
fully justified, that the enemy hands that I had chosen would
not provefaithlesshands.’I         Eventhoughfuture       researches
should reveal many transactions from the recent war of which
we now suspectnothing, yet it must be           regarded, to put it
      Mollien, &fdm*ree, &c., vol. I, pp. 434 et aeq., 490 et aeq. ; voL II, pp. 129
et aeq,, 242 (the quotation being from vol. 11, p. 132); Ouvrard, H h o i r e a , &c.,
vol. I, pmsitn, especially pp. 107 et aeq. ; Ehrenberg, & m e Vemdgen, &c., vol. I,
                                             ci.
pp. 72 et aeq. ; vol. 11 (1905). pp. 120 et eeq.  also, a. Weill, Lejinancier Outward,
loc. cit. (1918), VOL 127, p. 39. An article on Pierre C h r LabouchBre, the head
of the Hope fbn, m the Revue d‘;histoire diphm&ique for 1913, gives no informstion
on this .or related subjects.
