        COMPARISON WITH THEPRESENT                   DAY       873
  mildly, as improbable that any of them will prove to show
  such a measure of working agreement between deadly enemies.
      One very importantreason for this lively economic intercourse
  with the enemy is undoubtedly the distinctively mercantilist
  nature of the blockade. When exporting to the enemywas
  regarded as a patriotic action, regardless of the fact that the
  trade prohibitions with the enemy forbade it on paper, this
  really cut off the possibility of a political or economic war of
  religion ; and it was no longer possible in that case to avoid
  forming commercial ties with enemy subjects, so that govern-
 ments had to take theconsequences. Accordingly, the methods
 of the recent war in severing all commercial ties led, in quite
 another degree, tothe establishment of a gulf between the
 combatants that was not merely material but also mental.
      Themost obvious difference between thepastandthe
 present, of course, is precisely this dissimilarity in the object
 of the blockade, which has been set forth and discussed in the
 foregoing account. It is impossible to deny that the blockade
 of the World War, conceived as a means to the end of under-
 mining the enemy’s power of resistance by economic pressure,
 had a far  morecorrect economicobject thanhadthat of Napoleon.
 The recent blockade was primarily directed againstthe enemy’s
 imports, which procure what can be    replaced by neither financial
 dexterity nor credit, while the Continental Systemwas directed
againstexports,andthereforehadverysmallprospects                of
attaining its object. Saying this is not the same asaying under
what conditions the present-day policy of trade war may have
a chance of attaining its object. Economic life has exhibited
a power of adaptationthat was completely undreamt of,
a possibility of changing its direction with the shortest prepara-
tion under pressure of external conditions, which should have
greatly diminished hopes of conquering an enemy by such
means. In consequence of this the problem of self-sufficiency
also has passed intoa new phase. The primary thing for a
country is, or at anyrate should be,no longer to be self-
sufficient in peace, but to possess that elasticitythroughout
its economic organization which creates the power of becoming
