            COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT DAY                             369
  that Britishsubjects would continue the trade with neutral
  foreigners as dummies and resort to every conceivable dodge
  and device to avoid detection. ' In fact,' concluded the British
  minister of commerce, in words which might stand as a motto
  for the entire policy of licences, ' we only permitted him (the
  merchant) to do that openlywhich *he would surely [sic} do
  clandestinely '.I
     It is of great moment t o determine the causes of this enor-
 mous difference in the effectiveness of governments then and
 now. Some of the causes are more or less temporary,that is to
 say, they are due tothe peculiarconditionsgoverning           the
 carrying-on of wars both then and now, especially then ; but
 others, so far as one can judge, express a tendency in develop-
 ment which deserves particular attention. When, in discussions
 as to the possibilities of state intervention in some respect or
 other, reference has been made   to older precedents, people have
 usually failed to see to what an extent those old measures were
 ineffective, and have therefore completely misunderstood the
 connexion between causeand effect.
     The most profound change, so far as one can see, consists
 in the increased honestyand efficiency of public administration.
In the precedingpagessufficientevidence        has beengiven of .p>
the corruption of the executive powers under the Continental                   3
System, so that no further evidehce is necessary.  To some extent
the situation was undoubtedly affected by the reluctance with
whichpeopleconformed          to the Continental decrees,which
was especiallythe case in the non-French states of the Continent;
however, this factor played nopart at all in England, and only
8 small part in France. We must, therefore, search deeper for
the causes, and in so doing we can scarcely avoidthe conclusion
that the majority of European states and also Great Britain-
perhaps thelatter above aU--did not until the nineteenth                       !
century attain anexecutive organimtionon whose senseof duty i
and incorruptibility it waspossible to rely.Therefore, while
in our day it is possible to entrust an executive with functions
   1 Speeches in the House of Lords, Feb. 28, 1812; in the House of Commons,
Apr. 17, 1812. Hansard, vol. XXZ, p. 1056; vol. X=, p. 435.
  1669.49                           B b
