 366                      CONCLUSION.
   ideas with which we have become acquainted, but also with
  %he slenderness of the prospects of starving a country in the
  position of France ; and toa lesser degree the circumstances were
  t h e same with regard to a food blockade of the British Isles.
  On the other hand,it may be takenfor granted that a blockade
  of the latter kind would now be effective if it could be carried
  out. But evenwithregard to its practicability the situation
  is altered.
            Nowadays          such ablockadedemands,
                                                   almost
  inevitably, the command of the seas, as the countries that now
  produce corn are so many and so scattered that it can hardly
  be possible to command them all by land ; and the same holds
  good of the majority of products other than foodstuffs, even
  of the majority of raw materials. The possibility of blockading
  a country simply by power over the sources of supplyhas
  therefore been enormously reduced since the time of Napoleon
  with regard t o all the main commodities of world commerce.
 Such a possibility is mainly reduced to a number of important,
 but quantitatively insignificant, articles, such as certain special
 metals,potassium, and indigo. Therefore, the possibilities of
 a n effective blockade have been so far diminishedthat nowadays,
 t o a much greater extent than   a hundred yearsago, they require
 power over thetransport routes, while formerly there were
 greater possibilities of becoming master over production itself.
 I n t h eopposite scale we have the fact that the damage done by
 blockade, when it can be carried out, is many times greater
 now than then. Consequently, it is obvious that the blockade
 of the Continent, which was nevereven attempted seriously
 during the Napoleonic wars, is now susceptible of a much wider
 range.
      In addition to these fairly self-evident material reasons for
the greaterefficacy of a blockade in our own day, there are other
reasons which lie in thesocial or spiritual sphere,and arethere-
fore far less obvious and generally known, but by no means
less important. Foremostamongtheseshouldbeplaced                the
increased power of governments in comparison with a hundred
years ago. If there is anything which forms theburden of
all discussions under the Continental System it is the hopeless-
