                 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE                         381
 Smart, Economic Annals oftheNineteenth           Century, vol. r,
 1802-20 (London, 1910), which, as thename implies, is a purely
 chronological account of the more important economic events,
 based mainly on Hansard ; Tooke, A History of Prices, and of
 the State of the Circubtwn, from1793 to 1837, vols. 1-11 (London,
 1838), in which the indispensable material is made to support
 certain rather dubious economic theories of the author ; and
 finally Porter, The Progress of the Nation (many editions).
 The English work corresponding to Levasseur’swork is Cun-
 ningham’s Growth of English Industry and Commerce, vol. 11,
 In Modern Times, 3d ed. (Cambridge, 1903) ; but this funda-
 mental work gives much less on the Continental System than
 Levasseur’s,simplybecause      that incident takes a far more
humble place in the economic hist.ory of Great Britain than in
that of France. There is,therefore, really nocomprehensive
 summary for the United Kingdom. A special problemis treated
in Miss Audrey Cunningham’sBritish Credit in t h e h s t Napokonic
 War (Girton College Studies, vol. 11, Cambridge, 1910), which
has beensufficientlydiscussed in the precedingpages.Two
valuable short studies on the currency problems of the time
have been published by    Mr.  R. G. Hawtrey in The Economic
Jourrucl, vol. XXVIII (London, 1918), and reprinted in the volume
Currency and Credit (London, 1919) ; of these the Bank Restric-
tion of 1797 bears more directly upon the problems treated in
this book.
                           GERMANY
    Here we find by far the greatest flood of literature; but
the political conditions in Germany during that period rendered
possible only investigations for particular areas so that many
of the volumes are far too special to find a place here. There
is no comprehensive survey of the economic history of Germany
as a whole in modern times. Curiously enough, Prussia seems
to be the important territory in Germany whose position with
regard to the Continental System has been least fully treated.
    A sort of substitute for a comprehensive survey is offered
by the work which has been frequently cited in the preceding
