    382              BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
     pages, namely, Konig’s Die e&chsische Baumwollenindwtrie
     am E& des vm*gen Jahrhunderts urd zexihrend der KontinenduE
     sperre (publishedin Leipziger S t u d k na w &   em Gebietder
     Geschichte, vol. v : 3, Leipzig, 1899). This has developed
    into a very detailed and useful study of the history of the
     Leipzig Fairduringthis      period, basedonexcellentarchive
    materials ; and owing to the importance of the Leipzig Fairs
    inthe economic life of Germany, it contributesgreatly to
     our knowledge of the position of the whole of Central Europe
     during the self-blockade. According toanannouncement
    published in German periodicals, the Saxon Royal Commission
    for History at the end of 1915 awardedacertainsum              to
     Dr. Konig for a work which he submitted on the influence of
     the ContinentalSystem on the industry of Saxony ; but of
    the fate of this work I have been unable t o obtain information.
     With the work of Konig we may connect an article by Tarle,
    Deutsch-franzosische Wirtschaftsbeziehungen zur nupoleonischen
    Zeit in Schmoller’s Jahrbuch fiir Gesetzgebung, &e., vol. XXXVIII
\
    (Leipzig, 1914), which is also based on valuable archive material,
    with sections on Hamburg, the Grand-Duchy of Berg, and the
    rest of Germany.
         For the Hanse Towns, which are the most important         in
    this connexion, there is aparticularly copious literature, of
    which we may mention : Servidres, L’Allemagne fraryaise s o w
    NapoUon ler (Paris, 1904), a work which, despite its compre-
    hensivetitle,dealsonlywith        theHanse Towns, but which,
    though written by an historical dilettante, is valuable owing t o
    its employment of much French archive material ; Wohlwill,
    Neuere Geschichte der Freien und Hansestudt Hamburg, insbeson-
    &re von 1789 bis 1815 (Allgemeine Staatengeschichte. Dritte
    Abt., Deutsche Ladesgeschichten, 10. Werk, Gotha,       1914),
    acomprehensiveaccount         bythe leading authorityonthe
    modern history of the Hanse Towns, and especially Hamburg,
    but meagre in the sphere of economics ; Vogel, Die Halzsestiidte
    und d k Konthmtabperre in Pfingstbltitter des H a r w i s c h
    Geschichtsvereins(vol. IX, 1913), an unusually good little survey
    which suffers only from its popular, form and its scanty refer-
