                  BLBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE                         383
  ences ; MaxSchafer, Bremen und die Kontinentabpewt?, in
  Halzsische Geschichtsbliitter, vol. xx, 1914, the chief value of
  which consists in thestatisticalmaterials      included. Of con-
  temporaryaccounts, Rist’s Lebenserinwrungen, vol. 11 (Peel
  ed., Gotha, 1880), and Bourrienne’s Mkmoires surNapoZkon,
  le Directoire, le Consulat, 1’Empire et la Restauration, chiefly
 vol. VII (Paris, 1829), are the most important ; but the former
 is in all respects the most  useful and reliable.
      For the states of the Confederation of the Rhine, Konig’s
  work has already beenmentioned. But by far the principal
 work, as an historical account, is Schmidt’s Le Grand-Duchd de
 Berg, 1806-1813 (Paris, 2905), which casts more light on the
 Continental System as a      whole than most works ; the parts
 which are mainly concernedwith the matter are chapters            x
 and XI. Darmstadter’s Das Grossherzogtum Frankfurt (Frank-
 furt-am-Main, 1901) hasalso an account of the Continental
 Systeminthesmalldistrict          covered by the book, which is
 excellent but much shorter and more anecdotal than      Schmidt’s.
     There are three books dealingwith the moreimportant
 Germanterritories      that were incorporatedintheFrench
 Empire : Zeyss, Die Entstehung der Handelskammern und die
 Industrie a m Niederrhein wahrend der franzosischen Herrschaft
 (Leipzig, 1907), is animpartialandhelpfulaccount            of the
 Roerdepartmentontheleftbank              of the Rhine ; Herkner,
 Die oberelsdssische Baumwollindwtrie und ihre Arbeiter   ( Abharzd-
 lungen aus dem staatswissenschaftaftliche7t Semimr 221 Strassburg
 i. E., vol. IV,Strassburg, 1887),gives a somewhat meagreaccount
 of the extremelyimportant Miilhausen district duringthis
period, by way of an introduction to a social-political study of
the presentday.Darmstadter,            DieVemaltung     des Unter-
Elsass (Bas-Rhilz) unter Napoleon I., 1799-1814, in zhtsCh&ft
fur die Geschichte &a Oberrheim, N.F.,vol. XIX (Heidelberg,
1904), treats, in its last sections, the economy of the Strassbwg
district under the Continental System.
