’378             BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
  has so far appeared of the ideas of the ContinentalSystem
  and their application,namely, the last three chapters  of Mahan,
  The I n , w n c e of Sea Power upon the French Re.oolution
  ami Empire, 1793-1812, vol. 11 (London, 1893). Despite its
 weaknesses, this work is still well worth reading. Its general
 thesis has several times been discussed in the preceding pages.
     Of generalhistoricalsurveys      of the time,twoshould     be
 named in thisconnexion, namely, Sorel, L’Europe et ta rkvolution
 fraqaise, vols. I-VIII (Paris, 1885-1904), which has been
 sufficiently characterized in the preceding pages ; and Thiers,
 Histoire du C o w l a t etdeZ’Empire, the twelfth part of which
 (Paris, 1855) contains bk. XXXVIII, entitled Blocus continental,
 which despiteahighlyuncriticaladmiration           of Napoleon-
 particularlysurprisingwithregard        totheTrianon     policy-
 is based upon materials which still give value to an unusually
 absorbing account.
     A contemporary source of great value in regard to ,com-
mercial conditions, especially in the north of Europe, is Oddy,
European Commerce, showing New and Secure Channels of Trade
with the Colztinent of Europe (London, 1805), published little
more than a year before the Berlin decree. The full and greatly
needed particulars of the commerce and econonlic character of
the northern countries, particularly Russia,    are supplemented
by a lengthy section on Great Britain, which is, however, more
in the nature of an economic pamphlet, and besides, distinctly
inferior to the rest.
                               FRANCE
     With regard to source publications, of course, we have here
to take into consideration the Correspondance de NapoUon Ier,
the Bulletin des lois, &., and Le Moniteur, all of them very
helpful. A contemporary,secondary,thoughveryabundant
source is Chaptal, De E’industTie frawoise, vols. 1-11 (Pans,
1819). It suffers from the very obvious vanity and prejudices
of its author, who, however, probably had a better acquaintance
thanmost of his contemporarieswith the economic life of
France under Napoleon. Of the almost innumerable memoirs
