 380              BDLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
     Theliterature concerning the variousincorporatedterri-
 tories is treated below under the countries to which they
 belonged just before the World War of 1914.
                         GREAT BRITAIN
      With regard to published sources there is a very perceptible
  scarcity of all collections. Naturally enough there is nothing
  corresponding to Napoleon’s correspondence ; but there is not
  even any collection of official documents or legal enactments
  otherthanstatutes.       This makes Hansard’s Parliamentary
  Debates (after 1803) ourmain source in avery high degree,
  because it contains, in addition to the debates themselves,
  a number of official papers which otherwise appear only in the
  LondonGazette, whichwas rather inaccessible to me. Besides
  Hansard, however, there is, so far as I can judge, very com-
 prehensive and useful material in the great collection of Blue
 Books or Parliamentary Papers, of which, however, very few
 were accessible to me. The same is the case with the pamphlet
 literature of the period.Among       the writings falling under
 this head is Stephen’s War i n Disguise : OT the Frauds of the
 Neutral Flags (London, 1805 ; reprinted in 1917), which has
 been repeatedly cited in the preceding pages and needs only
 to be mentioned here. Themany accessiblevoluines of Life
and Letters, Memoirs and Correspondence, &c., which largely
have the character of sources, owing t o the number of
originaldocuments included, have proved to containvery
little material of importance for the history of the Continental
System.
     As regards secondary works, the foremost place mustbe
given to those of Dr. J. Holland Rose, of which, however, only
the a‘rticles Napoleonand.British    Commerce (1893), Britain’s
Food Supply in the Napoleonic War (1902), both reprinted in
his collection of essays, Napoleonic Studies (London, 1904),
contain a somewhat detailed discussion of the problems that
concern us ; and even theseare based mainlyon politico-
historical studies. On the otherhand,there         areabundant
economic materials, thoughbut littleworked up,in threebooks :
