                  RIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
           FINALLY,    it seems expedient to give a rapid summary of
        the most important materials that throw light on the Conti-
       nental Systemitself. The presentwriter’sstudies as regards
       the sourcesthemselves, as well as the works in which those
       sources have b.een worked up, were necessarily limited to what
       wasaccessible in Swedishlibraries,since it was practically
       impossible to obtain books from abroad during the period in
       wbich this book was in preparation ; nor had the writer either
       time or opportunity to visitforeignlibraries.      On the whole,
1
       the Swedish libraries cannot be regarded as poorly equipped
       for a subject ‘such as the present one ; but the lack of contem-
    ’ porary British and American publications was nevertheless
       strongly felt‘. Consequently, in this book remarks to the effect
      that information of one sort or another was inaccessible mean
      simply that sources containing it were unknown to the author.
      The more important collections, in so far as they are known t o
      the author, are included herein.
                                BIBLIOGRAPHIES
          Mr. Dunan’sbibliography contained in Revue des &uks
      napoldoniennes, vol. 111 (Paris, 1913), merits study owing to
      its freshneis and searching appreciation of the various works
      (it even contains corrections of mistakes in detail) ; but it is
      far from complete as-regards the several countries, particularly
     as regards British and American literature. This, to a certain
     extent, is supplemented by a valuable article by Dr. Lingelbach
     in the American Historical Rewiew (January 1914), vol. XIX,
     containing a discussion principally of manuscript sources, with
     copious extracts, An extensive and morecomprehensive, but
     lesscopious,bibliography,      together with a criticism of the
     manuscript sources, forms an introduction to the Russian work
     mentioned below, i. e,, Tarle, Ko.ntinenial’mjablokadu (MOSCOW,
     1913).
