                                APPENDIX I
          THE BRITISH ORDERS                      IN COUNCIL, 18071
                                            I
                                First (Whig) Order
                                 J.4NUARY       7, 1807.
 Order in council ; prohibitiug Trade to be carried 01% between Port a&
      Port of Countries under the dominion or usurped controul of France
      and her allies.
    AT the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 7th of January 1807 ;
 Present, The King’s most excellent Majesty in council.-Whereas, the
 French government has issued certain Orders,which, in violation of
 the usages of war, purport to prohibit the Commerce of all Neutral
 Nations with his majesty’s dominions, and also to prevent such nations
 from tradingwithanyothercountry,           in any articles, the growth,
produce, or manufacture of his majesty’s dominions : and whereas the
said government has also taken upon itself to declare all his majesty’s
dominions to be in a state of blockade, at a time when the fleets of
France and her allies are themselves confined within their own ports
by the superior valour and discipline of the British navy : and whereas
such att,empts on the part of the enemy would give to his majest.y an
unquestionableright of retaliat,ion, and would warrant his majesty
in enforcing the same prohibition of all commerce with France, which
that power vainly hopes t o effect against the commerce of his majesty’s
subjects ; a, prohibition which the superiority of his majesty’s naval
forces might enablehim to support,byactuallyinvesting          the ports
and coasts of the enemy with numerous squadrons and cruisers, so as
to make the entrance or approach thereto manifestly dangerous : and
whereas his majesty, t.houghunwilling to €0110~the example of his
enemies, by proceeding to an extremity so distressing to all nations
not engaged in the war, and carrying on their accustomed trade, yet
feels himself bound by a due regard to the just defence of the rights
    1 The Orders in Council are here reprinted from Hamard, vol. X, pp. 126-48.
Although the text, unfortunately, is not very good, i t has been followed literally in
all respects, including spelling, capitalization, $0. A collation, kindly undertaken
at my request by Dr. &ut Peteraron, with the text of the Orders 88 inwrted in
the London Gazette (all except 11,111,VIII, X, and XI1 of the following series), has
shown almost
          complete conformity               with the renderingof      a n s a r d . The
chronologicalorder of the originalhas been presemed ; butforthedifferent
Ordersissued under the same date,the order of the original has beenslightly
changed to one more logical. The headings have been italicized by the editor for
thesake ofconvenience, and signatureshavebeenomitted.               NO. Iv is S i g n e d
‘ Steph. Oottrell’ ; all the rest ‘ W. Fawkener’ or ‘ Fawkner   ’.
