38%               BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
                           UNITEDSTATES
    The principalwork for the historyof the United States during
this period, namely, Henry Adams’s History of the United States
of A m r i c a during the Administrations of Thomas Jeflerson and
James Madi8on, vols. I-IX (New York, 1889-91), has not been
accessible to me. Good surveys of the general course of political
eventsare       given by Edward
                              Channing,          The Jeffemonian
System, in The American Nation ; a History, vol. XII (ea. by
Albert Bushnell Hart, New York, 1906), and J. B. McMaster in
the Cambridge Modern History, vol. VII (Cambridge, 1903). For
the actual course of the trade war, however, there is a work
which largely makes the others      superfluous, namely, Mahan’s
Sea Power and its Relations to the War of 1812,vol. I (London,
1905). I n merits and defects alike it is similar t o his better-
known general work which has previously been mentioned.
                            SCANDINAVIA
    The lack of any kind of comprehensive survey for Sweden
makes itself felt very strongly ; but it may be hoped that the
great history of Gothenburg that is now being planned will
largely fiU the gap. Moreover, a fairly complete collection of
the letters of GovernorvonRosen of Gothenburg from that
time would probably prove t o be of great value. A rather small
number of them are available in Ahnfelt, Ur Svenska hofvets
och aristokratielzs Zif, vol. v (Stockholm, 1882), Schinkel-
Bergman, Minnen ur Sveriges nyare historia,vol. VI (Stockholm,
1855), andvonEngestrom,         M i n m n och anteckningar, vol. 11
(Tegn6r ed., Stockholm,1876) ; and, moreover, Frodinghas
based, mainly on such letters, an article bearing on our subject
in his collection of essays, Det f o r m Goteborg (Stockholm, 1903).
There are statistical materials for the exports of ‘Gothenburg
in Bergwall, Hbtorisk Underr&ttelse om Staden Gotheborga
betydligaste Varu-Utskeppningar (Gothenburg, 1891). Some
contributionstowardanEnglishpresentment               of the period
may be found in Memoirs and Correspondence of Admiral Lord
de Sawnmex, vol. 11 (Ross ed., London, 1838). The only com-
prehensiveaccount, necessarily brief from the nature of the
