 4&2     THE BRITZSH ORDERS IN COUNCIL, 1807
 t o the commanders of all ships of war and privateers, and to thejudge
 of the high court of admiralty, and the judges of the courts of vice
 admiralty, for protecting      goods going from and coming to any port
 of the united kingdom, to whomsoever the property may appear             to
 belong : his majesty, taking the said Draught of Instruction into con-
 sideration, was pleased, with the advice of his privy council, t o approve
 thereof, and t o order, as it is hereby ordered,That, etc. [almost identical
 with no. VIII].

 Draught of an Additional Instruction to the Commanders of Our Ships of
     War and Privateers, and to the Judge of Our High Court of Admiralty,
     and the Judges of Our Courts of Vice Admiralty.
    Our will and pleasure is, t h i t vessels belonging to any statenor [not]
 a t war with us, laden with cargoes in any ports of the united kingdom,
 and clearing out according to law, shall not be interrupted or molested
 in proceeding t o any port in Europe (except ports specially notified t o
 be in a state of strict and rigorous blockade before our order of the
 11th Nov. instant) or which shall hereafter beso notified, to whomsoever
the goods laden on board such vessels may appear to belong : and we
 do further direct, that vessels belonging as aforesaid, coming from any
p o d in Europe (except as before excepted) direct to any port of the
united kingdom with     goods for importation, shall not    be interrupted
in the said voyages, t o whomsoever the goods laden on board the said
vessels may appear to belong : and in case any vessel which shall be
met with, and asserted by her master t o be so coming, shall be detained,
on suspicion of not being really destined t o this kingdom, such vessel
shall be broughto themost convenientport in the course of her asserted
destination, and the captors are hereby required t o enquire, with all
convenient speed, into the alledged destination, and in case any vessel
and goods so brought in and detained shall be proceeded against in our
high court of admiralty, or in any courts of vice admiralty, we hereby
direct that thesame shall be forthwith restored, upon satisfactory proof
being made that the cargo was coming for importation to a port of this
kingdom.

                                    xi
                           NOVEMBER25, 1807
Order in C w d l ; respecting Enemies Produceand       Manufacture on
    board British Ships.
   AT the Court a t t h e Queen’s Palace, the 25th Nov. 1807 ; present,
the King’s most excellent Majesty in Council.-Whereas his majesty,
by his Order in Council of the 11th Nov. inst. was pleased to order and
