 $98     THE BRITISH ORDERS IN COUNCIL, 1807
That in future sale theto a neutral of any vessel belongingto his majest,y’s
enemies shall not be deemed t.o be legal, norin any manner to transfer
the property, nor to alter the character of such vessel : and all vessels
nowbelonging or whichshallhereafterbelong            to any enemy of his
majesty, notwithstanding any sale or pretended sale to a neutral, after
a reasonable time shall have clapsed for receiving information of this
his majesty’s Order a t the place where such sale or pretended sale was
effected, shall be captured and brought in, and shall be adjudged as
lawful prize to the captors. And, etc. [identical with no.   VI.

                                   vm
                           NOVEMBER 18, 1807
Order in council ; approving Draught of I!nstructionsto the Commanders
     of his Majesty’s Ships of War and Privateers, &e. to act in due CMZ-
    formity to and ezecution of the Order in Council of the 11th of Novem-
    ber, declaringthe Dominions of his Majesty’s Enemies and of Countries
    m d e r their Controul,in a state of Blockade.
   .4T the Court at the Queen’s Palace, the 18th Nov.1807 ; present,
the King’s most excellent Majesty in Council.-Whereas there was this
day read at the Board, the annexed Draught of Instructions to the
Commanders of all ships of war and privateers, and to the judge of the
high court of admiralty, and the judges of the courts of vice admiralty,
st,rictly charging and enjoining them to act in due conformity to and
execution of his majesty’s Order in Council of the 11th of this instant,
declaring the dominions of his majesty’s enemies,and of countries under
their controul in a st.ate of blockade, under the exceptions specified in
the said Order : his majesty, taking the said draught of instructions
into consideration, was pleased, with t,he advice of his privy council, to
approve thereof, and to order, as it is hereby ordered,That theright hon.
lord Hawkesbury, one of his majesty’s principal secretaries of state, do
cause the said instructions (a copy whereof is hereunto annexed) to be
prepared for his majesty’s royal signature.

Draught of Instructions’to the Commanders of his Majesty’s Ships of War
    and Privakers, and to the j u d g e of the High Court of Admiralty, and
    Judges of the Courts of Vice Admiraltg.
  Whereas by our Order in Council of the 11thNov. instant, it is recited
and ordered as follows ; to wit, &c. [Here the said Order is recited, as
in no. v, ante, p. 398.1 Our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby
direct, by andwith the advice of our privy council, that thecommanders
