No consideration of colonial mining can afford to neglect the pervasive role of the Spanish Crown. In addition to the issuance of a legal code to govern the physical exploitation of mines, the Crown levied a heavy tax on all silver produced, monopolized the production and distribution of mercury, and greatly profited from its control of the mints. The justification for such extensive intrusion lay in the traditional legal doctrine that all natural deposits of precious metals belonged to the royal patrimony. The code drawn up by Toledo applied in all Spanish colonies until 1783 when Gálvez issued new ordinances for Mexico.46 The commentators all emphasized that the Crown only conceded working rights to the colonial miner; failure to exploit a mine entailed the lapse of all proprietary claim. In the case of the great mercury deposits at Almadén and Huancavelica the principle of direct royal ownership was preserved, the mines being worked by leaseholders or under contract.
The customary tax charged by the Crown amounted to a fifth of production. Once his silver was cast in bar, the American miner was legally obliged to present it at the nearest treasury for stamping and payment of the *quinto*. Another one and a half per cent was also deducted for assay costs.47 In New Spain, as early as 1548, miners obtained a reduction in this tax to a tenth. This concession, at first extended only to miners, as distinct from refiners, workers or silver merchants, later became general throughout the industry. In Zacatecas, the proportion of silver taxed at the old 20 per cent rate fell slowly in an uneven curve between 1559 and 1626, from about a quarter to a seventh of the total. After the late 1620s hardly any further *quintos* were collected. Evidence for other camps in New Spain is lacking until the 1660s, when the Viceroy Mancera reported that the tenth was indeed the usual rate, with only insignificant quantities of silver paying the fifth. This situation was finally legalized in 1723 when it was decreed that merchants and refiners should pay the same tax as miners.48
At Potosí, by contrast, the full fifth was demanded throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Thus the *cerro rico* not merely produced more silver than all camps of New Spain combined, it also yielded the Crown far more direct profit. Naturally, once the rich ores were exhausted, miners found this fiscal burden increasingly onerous, to the point where many, abetted by official laxity, smuggled their silver out through Buenos Aires. Despite various petitions and the prolonged decline in production, it was not until 1736 that the Crown relented and lowered the rate to the tenth. Already several other Peruvian camps had obtained this concession. In 1621, the miners of Castrovirreyna paid only the *diezmo*, a rate which by 1640 fell to 7½ per cent. Similarly, in this latter year, 10 per cent was collected at New Potosí.49 How far the reductions became general is difficult to know; they suggest that, as always, Potosí constituted the greater exception and that other Peruvian camps resembled their Mexican counterparts.
After the Galvez Visitation (1765-71) several leading Mexican miners, all engaged on risky or costly renovations of old mines, received outright exemptions from the silver tithe until their initial investment cost was reimbursed. By the close of the century nearly all the leading enterprises at Zacatecas had secured such concessions.50 This policy largely applied to camps with low grade ores; at Guanajuato and Catorce no one was granted an exemption. Whether this liberal fiscal program was ever introduced into Peru remains to be investigated.
The second great source of royal income derived from the Crown’s monopoly over the production and distribution of mercury. During the colonial period this indispensable ingredient was known in sizeable deposits in only three places: at Almadén in Spain, at Idria in modern Slovenia; and at Huancavelica in Peru.51 Idria, owned by the Austrian emperor, was by far the smallest, and only sporadically entered the American market. The resulting pattern was simple. Huancavelica generally supplied Peru and Almadén supplied New Spain. In both cases failure to produce sufficient mercury could have catastrophic effects upon the local silver mines. At the same time, changes in mercury price could easily alter the curve of silver production. It was this intimate connection which bound the Mexican silver miner to Europe.
Distribution in New Spain remained a royal monopoly managed by treasury officials and licensed magistrates. In the first years, Mexico City auction prices ranged from 132 to 236 pesos a hundredweight. Only slowly, in deference to local protest, did the Crown lower the price from 113 pesos in 1590 to 82½ pesos in 1627, the standard rate for the next century and a half. Northern miners, however, had to pay freight costs from Mexico City. During the later seventeenth century prices rose somewhat. At Zacatecas in the period 1680-1700 the average cost varied between 90 and 100 pesos. This upward trend in price reflected prevalent scarcity. After 1640 Almadén’s production plummeted far beneath the average 4,000-5,000 hundredweight needed by New Spain. During the 1670s Huancavelica sent shipments, but Peruvian mercury cost the Mexican miner 110 pesos, and at best served to supplement rather than replace Almadén as the chief source of supply.52
Although during the seventeenth century Huancavelica produced far more mercury than Almadén, the nature of Andean topography diminished Pern’s advantage as far as prices were concerned. The cheapest route between Huancavelica and Potosí was by sea, via the ports of Chincha and Arica. The Crown contracted with local miners for fixed amounts; by 1600 the usual price it paid was 64 pesos a hundredweight, from which was then deducted the royal fifth. Transport expenses were high, so that cost price at Potosí was estimated at 85 pesos. It was then sold to miners for 102½ pesos. Supply, however, was abundant, since at the beginning of the seventeenth century Huancavelica on average produced 6,000-8,000 hundredweight a year, more than sufficient for the Peruvian industry.53
Under the Bourbons, Almadén took the lead over its Peruvian rival, and especially after 1700 experienced an unparalleled increase, with an annual production which at times exceeded 18,000 *quintales*. More efficient management cut costs and permitted the Crown to lower the sale price. In two steps, in 1767 and 1776, the Mexican price was cut by half, from 82½ pesos to 41 pesos.54 The great Mexican boom in silver production in great measure depended upon this twofold achievement in more than doubling supply at half the former price.
In Peru the same success was not repeated. Huancavelica suffered a decline in the first decades of the century, which, though interrupted by a revival during the 1760s, became permanent following 1779, when Areche terminated the old contract system. Costs remained high, and the Crown could only reduce the sale price to 79 pesos in 1779 and 71 pesos in 1787, a rate far above that charged in Mexico. Huancavelica’s inadequate supply of 2,000 *quintales* a year had to be complemented by shipments from Almadén. After the creation of the Buenos Aires viceroyalty in 1776, Potosí received most of its mercury from Europe. During the years 1786-96, the Crown obtained over 6,000 hundredweight a year from Idria, a sign of the strain caused by Mexico’s soaring production and Huancavelica’s debility.55
Control of the mints provided the Crown with its third source of mining profit. The most obvious difference between the two vice-royalties lay in the location of their mints. Throughout the colonial period until the Wars of Independence, New Spain possessed only one mint, situated in Mexico City. In Peru the Viceroy Toledo established a mint at Potosí in 1572, and in consequence the office in Lima dwindled in importance until 1683, when it was refounded on a new basis. In the same year the Crown decreed that all silver, be it private or royal, must enter the mints for coinage.56 Until then much bullion had been exported in bar.
From their initiation until 1728, all three mints followed much the same system: they all cut 69 reales from each mark of silver and returned 65 to the miner. The official grade or quality was 11 dineros 4 granos, or 930.5 *milésimos*. Most coins of this period, especially those emanating from Potosí, were very crude, resembling stamped pieces of silver rather than true milled coins.57 Responsibility for this inferior performance can be attributed in part to the Hapsburg expedient of sale of office. In effect the Crown lost control of the operation; all mint officials bought their positions. Moreover, it was silver merchants rather than the mint itself who purchased silver bar and financed the coining costs.58
In 1728 the Mexican mint was brought back under direct royal administration. New ordinances introduced a number of reforms. With new machinery the appearance of coins was vastly improved, even if their quality was reduced to 11 dineros or 916.6 *milésimos*. The mint continued to cut 69 reales from a mark, but now only returned 64 reales 2 *maravedís* to the miner. The official exchange ratio of silver to gold was pegged at 16:1, a level considerably lower than the prevailing European rate of just over 14:1.59 The construction of a magnificent new building and the creation of a circulating fund to purchase silver upon presentation completed this set of reforms. Henceforth the mint was to yield high profit to the Crown.
In Peru these reforms were instituted somewhat later. The Lima mint was put under direct administration in 1748 and its new building completed only in 1761. Similarly, at Potosí, the veritable palace which housed the mint was constructed in the years 1753-71. Presumably it was then that the Crown appointed salaried officials. However, the creation of the Banco de San Carlos, responsible for the purchase of silver, eliminated the need for a circulating capital fund. Finally, it may be noted that by the close of the century, the Crown had further debased the coinage to 10 dineros 18 granos or 895.8 *milésimos*.60
## VI. Capital Structure
Whereas colonial texts deal at some length with the problems of labor supply and technology, they rarely comment upon the organization of the industry or its sources of capital and credit. The problems which confront the historian relate to the size and value of the units of production in both the mining and the refining sectors, the degree of vertical integration, and the precise role of the merchant-financiers to whom occasional brief reference is made. Needless to say, in all these areas great changes occurred in the course of two and half centuries.
Potosí especially remains an enigma. Almost nothing is known about the capital structure behind the massive exploitation of the *cerro rico*. By 1585 no fewer than 612 mines and shafts honeycombed the peak’s many lodes. Capoche lists about 500 registered mine owners, at the time none of whom employed more than 50 of the 1,369 *mita* Indians allocated for work within the peak. This system of multiple *claims* and small individual shafts clearly threw the industry into the hands of *azogueros*, the owners of the refining mills. True, some of these men, who in all numbered about 75, owned mines within the peak, but the majority obviously bought ore from the miners, or *soldados* as they were then called. It was the guild of *azogueros* which dominated the industry and dealt in its name with the Crown. Behind them stood a third group, 12 in number, the silver merchants, who bought silver bar and introduced it into the mint.61 Possibly, as elsewhere, they also advanced cash on credit to the refiners.
