For the moment no further evidence is available concerning Potosí. Any number of questions present themselves. As the *cerro rico* declined, did the mines consolidate into large enterprises? Did the *azogueros* take over the peak and establish integrated firms? Or did the miners grow steadily more impoverished and more dependent on the refiners? By the middle of the eighteenth century much of the peak seems to have abandoned to Indian workers, the famous *capchas*, since by 1774, according to the Viceroy Amat, they accounted for half of Potosí’s production. The other important eighteenth-century development was the creation of the Banco de San Carlos in 1751.62 This institution bought bar for cash and hence eliminated the profits of the silver merchants; it also financed the purchase of mining supplies.
For the sixteenth century the picture in New Spain is equally dim. In Zacatecas, a process of concentration was at work. By the middle seventeenth century the earlier multiplicity of claims was succeeded by a group of large enterprises. One miner united four shafts to form one great mine. Also of consequence was the growing reliance upon the silver merchants of Mexico City. Acting through local intermediaries, these finance houses sent cash and supplies to the northern camp in return for bar which they had minted.63 During the next century both of these tendencies reached their culmination.
For the Bourbon epoch the emphasis is on the role of mercantile capital and the tendency for single enterprises to control the exploitation of an entire lode or camp. By then there were silver banks and a handful of great mines with a capital of over a million pesos each. The structure was complex and varied from town to town. In the smaller camps, such as Sombrerete or Bolaños, one great vertically integrated enterprise dominated the industry. In Guanajuato or Catorce, by contrast, the two sectors of the industry remained distinct.64 The effect of the Bourbon reforms was to drive mercantile capital into direct investment in mining ventures.
Contemporaries were aware of the great differences between the industries of Peru and New Spain. Cañete lamented that there were no miners in Peru who possessed the capital resources of their Mexican counterparts. It was for this reason that the local mines were so small; their owners did not command sufficient means to exploit even the 200 yards of lode to which they were legally entitled.65 Certainly, few references to a mining aristocracy such as developed in Mexico appear in the standard descriptions of Peru.
## VII. Production
There are three official sources from which the curve of American silver production can be reconstructed: the royal fifth or tenth; mintage records; and registered silver shipments to Spain.66
The traditional view of colonial silver mining during the Hapsburg era has been largely determined by the impressive series of tables and graphs about transatlantic commerce compiled by Hamilton and Chaunu. Hamilton demonstrated that the level of bullion imports registered at Seville sharply increased after the 1550s to reach an early peak by the 1590s. The period of maximum production spanning the years 1580-1630 was followed by a severe depression, to the point where, by the 1650s, imports fell to the level of a century before. The curve of Atlantic shipping and trade drawn by Chaunu largely coincided with this cycle of high boom and sharp depression.67
Recently, however, Lynch has criticized the entire notion of a crisis which affected the Peninsula and colonies alike. He argues that “Spain’s recession was America’s growth.” The failure in transatlantic commerce did not necessarily entail an internal depression; instead, it may well have stimulated local industry and trade between colonies. A greater proportion of royal revenue was spent in the colonies. Then again, Bakewell, in his key study on Zacatecas, showed that the camp reached its peak in the 1620s.68 The subsequent crisis was severe— production fell by half—but in no sense was as catastrophic as Hamilton’s import figures suggested.
The key to this controversy can be found in the curve of mercury supply. As we have demonstrated above, a straightforward ratio existed between mercury consumption and silver production, a ratio which on average ranged between 100 and 125 marks of silver for every *quintal* or hundredweight of mercury. Since nearly all the mercury produced by Almadén and Huancavelica went to refine silver in America, a simple calculation will yield estimates of minimum silver output. The maximum, of course, depended upon the percentage of ore which was smelted, a proportion which could vary from 13 to 30 per cent. The chief value of this exercise is that it offers the one reliable check upon the veracity of the fiscal data. All the remaining figures—the *quintos*, the mint records, the registered shipments—were collected for taxation purposes. Mercury, by contrast, was an industrial supply. Naturally some was lost in transit; a small part was employed for other purposes; but used with caution, the statistics of mercury production and export throw new light upon an old problem.69
Here then we encounter our first theme of discussion. What were the true proportions of the seventeenth-century crisis? Did Peru and Mexico vary greatly? How extensive was the first boom? What were the causes for this cycle of boom and depression? Naturally our conclusions are tentative; they are offered as hypotheses to explain the available data. Our innovation consists largely in the comparisons drawn between Peru and Mexico and the correlation of mercury consumption with silver production.
The first significant spurt in silver imports recorded by Hamilton occurred during the 1550s. It sprang from the recent discoveries of Potosí and Zacatecas and the invention in New Spain of the amalgamation process. The second jump forward took place after 1580, following the introduction into Potosí of amalgamation and the construction of refining mills. During the subsequent boom in bullion exports, Peru accounted for 65 per cent of all American silver shipped to Seville.70 During this last quarter of the sixteenth century the Andean industry consumed about 70 per cent of all mercury produced. (See Graph III.)
The engines of this first silver boom were the great mines of Huancavelica and Potosí, “the two poles which maintain these Kingdoms and Spain.”71 Its author was don Francisco de Toledo. This viceroy stamped an impress upon the Andean industry which was not erased until the Wars of Independence. He sponsored the amalgamation experiments at Potosí. He opened up Huancavelica and set up the first contracts. He organized vast *mita* contingents for both these mines. He established the mint at Potosí. The results of this structural reorganization were impressive and immediate.72 Production at Potosí, in the doldrums in 1570, soared to unprecedented heights, and during the ensuing quarter century the *cerro rico* accounted for at least 70 per cent of all Peruvian silver production, or, to put the case in wider perspective, about half of all American silver.73 The Toledan achievement depended upon a plentiful supply of mercury and a massive input of state-recruited labor. Its advantage—and danger—lay in the extreme physical concentration which permitted economies of scale and easy access to capital. For a brief moment Potosí acted as the magnet for the entire Atlantic economy.
The exceptional quality of the Toledan system is best assessed from the standpoint of New Spain. There, the mining industry expanded at a slower pace. It depended upon Almadén for its mercury. Its work force, by 1598 already dominated by free wage-earners, was sufficient but not ample. The mines were scattered through vast distances from Pachuca to Sonora. The leading camp, Zacatecas, at most accounted for 40 per cent of all production.74 These characteristics of geographical dispersion, free labor and dependence upon Almadén prevented the Mexican industry from any rapid emulation of Potosí. If Zacatecas be taken as a guide, then during the 1590s New Spains production did not exceed 4 million pesos, compared to the 10 million pesos of all Peru and the 7 million of the *cerro rico*.
However, in the three decades which followed, from 1605 to 1635, New Spain’s industry experienced a steady expansion, whereas Potosí declined. A series of contrasts explain the difference. Huancavelica suffered a series of technical difficulties which cut back its output, whereas Almadén, heavily assisted by Idria, shipped increasing quantities of mercury across the Atlantic. In Peru the number of Indians recruited by the *mita* rapidly fell, so that by mid-century only half the original number appeared for service.75 In New Spain the increase in free wage-earners more than offset the disappearance of the *repartimiento* laborers. Finally, the very rapidity with which the *cerro rico* had been exploited soon led to the exhaustion of its high grade ores, whereas in New Spain the rich middle zones of the lodes had barely been tapped.
All the long-term trends thus favored Mexico. Yet in the decades after 1635, it was the northern viceroyalty, and not Peru, which suffered the severest depression. The causes of this paradox were absurdly simple. In response to a passing setback at Huancavelica, the Spanish Crown diverted European mercury to Peru (see Graph III). After 1630, quite suddenly, mercury shipments to Mexico dropped by a half. Within five years, when all remaining stocks were exhausted, silver production followed suit.76 Moreover, although this preferential treatment for Peru did not extend beyond 1645, by then production at Almadén, following the termination of the Fugger lease, fell from 4,000 hundredweight to just over 2,000 hundredweight, a level insufficient to satisfy Mexican demand (see Graph I). By the 1680s the miners of Zacatecas smelted up to half their ore. Thus we can distinguish short- and long-term causes at work in the Mexican depression. The royal decision to divert mercury shipments to Peru, taken presumably since that viceroyalty paid the *quinto* whereas Mexico only paid the *diezmo*, provoked an immediate crisis. But it was the failure at Almadén which forbade any permanent recovery until the next century. Then in the years after 1705 both mercury and Mexican silver production slowly moved upwards.
Granted the “artificial” occasion of the Mexican crisis, there is no reason to expect a similar accident at Potosí. There, throughout the seventeenth century, the curve of total production as measured by *quinto* payments drifted slowly downwards, from a yearly peak of 7.5 million in the decade 1585-95 to an average 3.2 million in the years 1670-90. Only then did production fall more rapidly, to the point where for the years 1710-30 the *quintos* registered little more than 1.2 million a year, a mere sixth of the former peak (see Graph II). It was an almost natural process, inherent in the slow exhaustion of the ore deposits, the reduction in labor supply attendant upon the wider phenomenon of Andean population decline and the marked fall in Huancavelica output after 1690.77 It represented the slow withering of the Toledan system.
