To understand technical development in New Spain three main problems have to be considered: the dimensions of shafts and adits; the use of underground cartridge blasting; and the type, capacity and number of whims. Dimensions are significant because they provide not merely a clue as to the size of a mine but serve as an index of capital value. To construct a deep shaft cost as much as to build a factory or a church. Moreover, to know the average depth is to gain a guide as to geological possibilities and problems. The same considerations apply even more to the cutting of adits, since these horizontal tunnels rarely yielded any short-term returns to cover working costs.
In 1617 at San Luis Potosí the local magistrate helped to organize the construction of a drainage adit some 250 yards long. In Mexico this is the only reference to this drainage method available for the seventeenth century. At Zacatecas a shaft 112 feet deep was cut during the 1640s. At Parral the deepest level was 130 yards. Nevertheless, by 1697 Gemelli Carreri inspected shafts at Real del Monte and Pachuca that had reached 200, 184, and 160 yards.13
To penetrate to these levels, the Mexican miner needed two weapons: gunpowder to break the hard rock and whims to keep the shafts drained. As yet, we do not know when cartridge blasting was introduced into New Spain. Guanajuato tradition avers that it was José de Sardaneta, owner of the Rayas, who first used it during the 1720s. Certainly Zacatecas in 1732 consumed remarkably little of this commodity—a mere 1,300 pounds.14 The great excavations of the later eighteenth century all depended upon the intensive employment of gunpowder.
Equally obscure is the evolution of the whim from a simple hoist, worked at times by hand, to a powerful machine serviced by teams of six to eight horses or mules and capable of hauling up loads weighing 1,250 pounds. Bakewell refers to their operation at Zacatecas in 1679. Gemelli Carreri found some sixteen at work at Pachuca and Real del Monte. More important, he recorded the installation of two whims in one shaft. By the close of the eighteenth century the Valenciana employed no less than eight whims in one great central shaft, cut in octagonal form to facilitate their use. Elsewhere, the installation of four or five machines became common. According to an informant from Real del Monte, the haulage capacity of whims in that camp quadrupled during the course of the century.15
During the Bourbon epoch, the Count of Regla drove an adit 2,881 yards long beneath the Veta Vizcaína, a project which took over thirty years to complete. The Valenciana’s great shaft, with circumference of 32 yards and a depth of over 600 yards, cost a million pesos to construct—the equivalent of two churrigueresque churches.16 The new technology thus depended upon heavy capital investment.
In Peru, by contrast, deep-shaft mining remained relatively underdeveloped and in consequence whims do not appear in common use. The reasons for this difference were simple. At Potosí and possibly at other camps, the conical peak form of the area of ore deposits made adits the more practicable form of access and extraction. Though work began near the top of the *cerro rico* where the lodes broke the surface, as early as the 1560s depths of 200 and 250 yards were reached. At this point the first adit was cut by the Florentine miner Nicolás de Benino, designed to intersect the lode at a depth of 320 yards.17 By 1585 Capoche recorded one adit, presumably Benino’s, 250 yards long, and referred to another five under construction. These tunnels were six feet high and eight feet wide, measurements which allowed only two Indian pickmen to work on them at any one time.18 From these adits radiated a series of work shafts of the peak’s many mines. All ore was brought out on the backs of porters clambering up rough wooden ladders. The adits at this stage were used, of course, for entry and extraction rather than for drainage.
At Potosí the system of exploitation is difficult to understand. Individual mines only measured a few yards along a particular lode, and owners of adits permitted workers from other mines to use them. Presumably the farther the shafts or work tunnels were driven into the peak’s core, the greater was the need for new, longer adits to intersect the lode at lower levels. In 1640, Viceroy Chinchón related the construction of two new adits, one with a length of 400 yards. No doubt similar projects were initiated both earlier and later. During the eighteenth century the Crown sponsored the construction of a major adit with the purpose of draining the lower reaches of the peak. Work began in 1789, and by 1810 a tunnel six feet square had been driven 2,200 yards at a cost of 560,000 pesos.19 In its last epoch Potosí was thus still able to rival the Mexican mines in the scale of its undertakings.
Elsewhere in Peru information is lacking. At Huancavelica, the great mercury mine, it took nearly forty years, between 1605 and 1642, to construct an adit 434 yards long. Work here, however, was dangerous because of mercury fumes, and at times was suspended. Once completed, the adit permitted a safer and more rapid extraction of ore. As early as 1631 gunpowder was used for underground blasting at Huancavelica. Apparently damage to the mine was so extensive as to soon stop the practice, but it was reintroduced during the 1730s.20
Other Peruvian camps remained technologically backward. At Cerro de Pasco at least two adits were cut during the eighteenth century. But the deepest shaft did not extend beyond 100 yards and was serviced by simple hand pumps and ladders rather than by whims.21 Whether this state of affairs sprang from the nature of the terrain, lack of capital, or technical ignorance is still unresolved.
## III. Refining
In contrast to the paucity of information about excavation practices, an extensive literature surrounds the technique of amalgamation, and, to a lesser extent, smelting.22 As early as the 1530s a group of German miners introduced into New Spain both the stamp mill and lead smelting. Within twenty years, however, high fuel costs, combined with the falling quality of ores, had rendered this method uneconomic. The situation was transformed in 1554 when at Pachuca Bartolomé de Medina, a merchant from Seville, developed the amalgamation process by use of mercury and salt. Some controversy has raged about his right to claim the invention, but without doubt it was the Spaniard who carried out the experiments which made it an industrial reality. Despite the assertion that Medina added a catalyst called *magistral* (copper or iron pyrites), it seems likely that the surface oxidized ores at Pachuca already contained sufficient *magistral*,23 Gómez de Cervantes did not mention this ingredient, and Mota y Escobar, writing about Zacatecas c. 1604, explicitly commented upon the recent introduction of the practice, made necessary by the increasing predominance of sulphides *(negrillos*).24
Bargalló emphasizes that the first printed reference to amalgamation in an open patio was made by Gamboa in 1761. Both Gómez de Cervantes and Gemelli Carreri described a process carried out in large vats or containers.25 The moment of transition remains obscure. Both West and Bakewell presume rather than prove that the patio system was the normal method throughout the colonial period.
Other changes are equally difficult to document. A Guanajuato tradition dates the invention of the *arrastre*, a stone-drag crushing device, to the early eighteenth century. Used in conjunction with the stamp mill, the *arrastre*, rather like amalgamation itself, was extra-ordinarily simple, cheap and efficient. Its reliance upon mule power reflected the lack of water in northern Mexico and the increased reliance upon the animal in New Spain.26
By the close of the eighteenth century Mexican refining was notable for the size of its establishments and the high level of technical expertise. The Count of Regla’s mill at Real del Monte housed 24 *arrastres* and cost a half a million pesos to construct. At Sombrerete the Fagoaga mill had no less than 84 *arrastres* and 14 furnaces.27 Similarly impressive was the diffusion of knowledge. Apart from Gamboa’s invaluable work, four other books were written about refining at this time, two of them by practicing miners.28
At Potosí, the story, especially in its first stage, differs remarkably from that of New Spain. There Indians dominated the refining sector of the industry from discovery of the site in 1545 until 1572. They ground the ore in their simple stone mills called *marays*, and then smelted it in small clay furnaces fired by wind-fanned dried ichu grass or llama dung. At the height of this system over 6,000 of these *guairas* lined the hills surrounding the town. The only European element in this technology consisted in the use of lead or litharge to facilitate the separation of the silver.
By the late 1560s, however, production at Potosí fell dramatically, following the increasing depletion of high grade ores suitable for smelting. Two attempts to introduce amalgamation failed. But finally in 1572 Pedro Fernández de Velasco, backed by the Viceroy Toledo, conducted successful experiments. Immediately the structure of the industry was transformed. Spaniards took over the refining sector, constructing stamp mills, furnaces and vats.29 Although some mills were powered by horses, the majority of these machines were driven by water wheels. To obtain a regulated flow of water, the town financed the construction of a series of dams, eventually creating about twenty artificial lakes. The total cost possibly amounted to over two million pesos.30
The process introduced by Fernández de Velasco did not vary greatly from that described by Gómez de Cervantes in Mexico. The amalgamation took place in a stone vat or container, and was hastened by exposure to a low heat. But if production soared, so did costs. It was only towards the end of the next decade that refiners realized that the dark ores, the *negrillos or* sulphides, demanded the addition of a *magistral*, copper or iron pyrites, if an excessive consumption of mercury was to be avoided. By the end of the century they had worked out which ingredients should be added to the different types of ore. By then they found it cheaper and more efficient to conduct the process without fire. Henceforward no significant changes occurred. In Peru amalgamation was always carried out in stone or tiled containers, never in an open patio. These *cajones* held 50 *quintales* of ore, compared to the 15-32 *quintales* of the Mexican *montón*. The separation of silver went considerably faster than in Mexico, lasting from ten to fourteen days, whereas in New Spain it often took up to six weeks.31
By the early seventeenth century most American silver was produced by amalgamation; only high grade ores and lead compounds were smelted. The deeper or older the mine, the greater would be the dependence on mercury. The only rival to these two methods was the *caso* process developed by Padre Barba, in which the ore was smelted with mercury in a copper cauldron.32 The great drawback here was the tendency of impurities in the copper to enter the reaction. In 1786 the Hungarian Baron de Born invented a variant of this process, using copper-lined barrels. The Spanish Crown commissioned German experts to teach this method to colonial miners. In the upshot, however, the equipment proved to be expensive and complicated, and the practical results unimpressive; apparently it did not separate as much silver as amalgamation.33 We may note that as late as 1870 some 71 per cent of all Mexican silver continued to be produced by this sixteenth-century technique.34
