stress that diplomacy and the relationship between borrower and lender had an impact on bond
issues and prices (Feis, 1930; Ivanov and Tooze, 2011; Oosterlinck and Ureche-Rangau, 2012).
This paper attributes the major changes experienced by bond prices to two elements: the military
threat exercised by the Allies and the establishment of new and credible institutions. In view of
their central role in the analysis, a special attention is given to both elements.

    Historically, interventions on behalf of bondholders depended crucially on a given country’s
practice. Great-Britain refused most of the time to intervene (Platt, 1968; Lipson, 1989). French
and German governments seemed to be more willing to support their bondholders (Eichengreen
and Portes, 1989). Eichengreen and Portes (1989) go as far as to suggest that sovereign defaults
were used as an excuse to intervene. According to them, military actions were mostly driven by
strategic or geopolitical considerations. For a long time however, military sanctions were viewed
as rare and isolated episodes (Lindert and Morton, 1989; Lipson, 1989). Mitchener and
Weidenmier (2010) have challenged this view. They show that supersanctions (military
interventions or political control applied following a debt default) were commonly used during
the gold standard period. They find that 64% of sovereign defaulters experienced a form of
sanction. Sanctions differed from one case to the other and, as pointed out by Borchard (1913),
military interventions were limited to weak states. The literature has also for a long time
overlooked the impact of a credible threat on bond prices. The Roosevelt corollary to the
Monroe doctrine had a dramatic impact on the prices of sovereign bonds issued by Central
American and Caribbean countries (Mitchener and Weidenmier, 2005). By threatening to
intervene in case of default, and by actually intervening in San Domingo to show that the threat
was credible, the United States managed to reassure bondholders about the security of their
investment.

    Another strand of the literature has attempted to determine to which extent good institutions
could increase the probability of reimbursement. As pointed out by North and Weingast (1989),
having good rules is not sufficient if a sovereign can easily overthrow these rules. The
conjunction of adequate rules and credible commitment is thus required. North and Weingast
(1989) argue that the constitutional changes following the Glorious Revolution dramatically
altered the balance of power between the British Parliament and the Crown of England. By
imposing limits on the power of the Crown, the new institutions protected property rights and
reduced the likelihood that the state would renege on its obligations. North and Weingast (1989)
attribute the decline of the long-term borrowing rate (from 14% in 1693 to 3% in 1739) to these
institutional changes.


                                                                                               5
