                                   Kim Oosterlinck

                           Loredana Ureche-Rangau

                               Jacques-Marie Vaslin

   Waterloo: a Godsend for French Public Finances?
 I.      Introduction

      In view of the imbalance between the power of the issuer and the lender, holders of
sovereign bonds require, even in peaceful periods, guarantees that the state will not unilaterally
decide to default on its debt. Regarding sovereign debt, the loss of reputation following default is
often viewed as a factor important enough to force states to respect their commitments.
Nonetheless, history is replete with cases of sovereign defaults. These defaults have been linked,
among others, to macroeconomic imbalances, the size of the debt burden, past defaults, regime
changes and wars.

      This paper analyzes the evolution of the French sovereign debt in the ten years following
Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo. At the end of 1815, incentives for an investor to buy French
sovereign bonds were low as France’s prospects looked terrible. Following the defeat, France had
to come back to its frontiers of January 1st, 1790 losing 5,000 square km of frontiers (White,
2001). It was furthermore forced to pay 700 million francs as war reparations for the Hundred
Days War. This amount was substantial as it was the equivalent of one year of fiscal revenues. On
top of that, additional expenses were imposed, most notably occupation costs for the part of
France where an Army of 150,000 men was stationed.

      The track record of French public finance was also terrible. France had defaulted on its debt
at the eve of the French Revolution. In 1793, Pierre-Joseph Cambon one of the most active
members of the Committee of Finance, undertook one of the main reforms of French public
finances by creating the Grand Livre de la Dette Publique, a book centralizing all public debt. This
creation simplified the management of the public debt since it transformed complex annuities in
simple 5% bonds. This transformation also amounted to a partial default under the cover of


                                                                                                  2
