      This paper aims at understanding how France managed to resurrect its public finances
following Waterloo. Only the firm commitment to honor its debt could have led investors to
revise their vision of French public finance. We argue that two elements allow understanding the
extraordinary change in investors’ expectations regarding French public finances. First, as the
Liberation of the country was conditional on repaying the occupation costs, the French
government had a strong incentive to balance its books. Defaulting on foreign loans contracted
to cover reparation and occupation costs was not an option. Foreign bondholders indeed viewed
the troops stationed in France as guarantor of the debt. The credibility of France’s commitment
to improve its public finances was thus in a first period guaranteed by the occupation of part of
the country which would only be lifted if reparations were paid. Forced to act in investors’
interest, France managed to regain a good reputation. New institutions guaranteeing repayment
were created and the French government adopted a credible position when it stressed the priority
given to debt reimbursement. Paradoxically, Waterloo, by imposing reforms and a credible
commitment to honor its debt, led to an improvement in French public finances.

      In order to develop our point, the paper is organized as follows. The first section reviews the
literature on sovereign debt with a special emphasis on institutions and military interventions.
The second section presents the historical context while the third section highlights the
institutional changes which took place at the Restoration. The fourth section describes the data
and the methodology. To determine which events changed investors’ perception of French
public finance, the paper relies on two approaches, one endogenous and one exogenous. Results
confirm the role of military threat and of institutions. The last section concludes.




II.      Sovereign Debt, Institutions and Military Threat



      Sovereign bonds are peculiar financial instruments: whereas finance textbooks tend to
present sovereign bonds as risk free assets, a large part of the literature has tried understanding
states’ motivations to repay. The literature has emphasized several reasons which could explain
why states eventually repay their debt. The willingness to maintain a good reputation is often
presented as the key to understanding states’ good behavior (see for example Eaton and
Gersowitz, 1981; Bulow and Rogoff, 1989; and Rogoff and Zettelmeyer 2002). The role of trade
sanctions (Rose, 2005) has also been investigated. In the 19th century, sovereign bonds were not
only financial instruments; they had often a role to play in international relations. Several papers

                                                                                                   4
