                         EHES Working Paper | No. 41 | July 2013

                   Waterloo: a Godsend for French Public Finances?

                                              Kim Oosterlinck*
                                         Université Libre de Bruxelles

                                       Loredana Ureche-Rangau**
                                     Université de Picardie Jules Verne

                                         Jacques-Marie Vaslin**
                                     Université de Picardie Jules Verne

        Abstract
        Following Waterloo, managing French public finances represented a daunting task. Defeated
        France had lost a substantial part of its population and territory. The country was partially
        occupied and France was to pay huge amounts as reparations to the victors. Furthermore,
        France’s reputation had been tarnished by several defaults on its debt in the preceding
        decades. Despite all these elements, in the ten years between 1815 and 1825, not only did
        France manage to place a huge amount of debt on the market (resulting in a threefold
        increase) but it did so with a spread, compared to the British consol, falling from more than
        400 basis points to a meagre 100 basis point. Based on an econometric analysis of the yields
        of the French rentes, we show that the military threat of the Allied coupled to a significant
        improvement in French institutions explain the dramatic decrease in yields.

        JEL Codes: N23, F34, G15

        Keywords: Sovereign debt, bond pricing, France, default, financial history,
        Waterloo
       Acknowledgements:
       The authors thank Patrice Baubeau, Nicholas Dimsdale, Benoit D'Udekem D'Acoz, Marc Flandreau, Georges Gallais-
       Hamonno, Oscar Gelderblom, Jane Humphries, David Le Bris, Larry Neal, Kris Mitchener, Patrick O'Brien, Kevin
       O'Rourke, Catherine Pouget, Sébastien Pouget, Erwan Quéinnec, Angela Redish, Christian Rietsch, Albrecht Ritschl,
       Hugh Rockoff, Marti G Subrahmanyam, Dick Sylla, Ariane Szafarz, Eugene N. White for comments and suggestions.
       We also thank participants in seminars at ESCP-Europe, Kedge Business School Oxford University, Toulouse School
       of Economics and the Université d’Orléans, and at conferences held by the CEPR and the Economic History
       Association.
       * Université Libre de Bruxelles, SBS-EM, Centre Emile Bernheim, 50 avenue F.D. Roosevelt, CP 114/03, 1050
       Brussels, Belgium, e-mail : koosterl@ulb.ac.be
       ** Université de Picardie Jules Verne, CRIISEA, Pôle Universitaire Cathédrale, 10 placette Lafleur, BP 2716, 80027
       Amiens Cedex 1, France, e-mail : loredana.ureche@u-picardie.fr, jacques-marie.vaslin@u-picardie.fr

                                                        Notice
 The material presented in the EHES Working Paper Series is property of the author(s) and should be quoted as such.
The views expressed in this Paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the EHES or
                                                     its members
