       In contrast to other papers in the literature, this paper focuses on a case where the
government was forced to regain credibility within a matter of months. Following Waterloo,
defeated France signed the Second Treaty of Paris on November 20th, 1815. The Treaty was a
means for the Allies to guarantee their safety but also to make France pay for the Napoleonic
episode. France was to pay reparations amounting to 700 million FF, an amount close to the total
yearly revenues of the country in 1815 (White, 2001). On top of that, the Treaty provided that a
large part of the country would remain occupied (from Calais to the Swiss border). The Army of
occupation was meant to guarantee that France would honor the Treaty. If France was to pay
ahead of schedule, occupation forces could be reduced and the actual occupation could even be
lifted by 1818. The heavy-handed approach devised by the Allies meant that defaulting on
reparations was out of question. In contrast to the cases discussed by Mitchener and Weidenmier
(2005 and 2010), the military intervention had taken place before default. In the French case, the
threat was not to invade France but to refuse to liberate it fully. Financing reparations was not an
easy task. This paper argues that the threat of a long-lasting occupation forced France to
implement reforms to improve the state of public finance. These reforms allowed France to
regain its creditworthiness. The renewed credibility remained even when the threat of occupation
had subsided. Whereas initially the threat of military intervention guaranteed repayment,
thereafter the institutional changes took over the role of reassuring markets.




III.      Historical Context

       During the two decades following the French revolution, France was almost always in a state
of war. Peace treaties only lasted for short periods and new coalitions were formed against
France. The War of the Sixth Coalition (1812-1814) began when Russia refused to apply the
continental blockade, the system devised by Napoleon to attack Great-Britain’s economy. To
force Russia to implement the blockade, Napoleon invaded Russia in June 1812. The disastrous
Russian campaign allowed the members of the coalition to drive the French out of Germany in
1813 and to invade France in 1814. Napoleon was forced to abdicate on April 6th, 1814 and was
sent into exile in Elba. The victors were left to devise a new political order. Great-Britain and
Austria envisioned a future where France would regain its place in the concert of nation but with
a guarantee that its territorial ambitions would be limited. Prussia and Russia on the other hand
were eager to increase their territories.




                                                                                                  7
