    The role of institutions has since been investigated in many other instances. Acemoglu et al.
(2005) argue that institutions exported from colonizer to colonies are instrumental in
understanding economic growth. La Porta et al. (1997 and 1998) link investor protection to the
origin of the legal system in a given country. They argue that countries whose legal system has
been inspired by the British common law benefit outside investors. Rajan and Zingales (2003)
have revisited this interpretation. They show that there is no obvious mechanism linking legal
system and financial development. At the beginning of the 20th century, financial markets of
common law countries were not more developed than those of civil law countries. The reversal
observed at the end of the 20th century is attributed not to legal origins but to the ability of
incumbents to oppose financial development. In the same vein, Musacchio (2008) convincingly
shows that there is no strong relationship over time between creditor protection and the
development of bond markets. Indeed, the supposed link between a legal “family” and creditor
protection cannot be established on the long run. Regarding sovereign debt and institutions,
Sussman and Yafeh (2006) have reassessed the case of the Glorious Revolution. They find that
new institutions did not immediately lead to a lower cost of government borrowing. They
conclude that the rewards from institutional reforms take a long time to materialize. For the same
historical episode, Cox (2011) has stressed the importance of ministerial responsibility. Other
elements certainly play a role in the development of public finance, and institutions are only part
of the explanation. As pointed out by Dincecco (2009) and Gelderblom and Jonker (2011) sound
institutions and a credible commitment are necessary but not sufficient conditions to see interest
rates decline and public debt grow.

    Sound institutions and credible commitment may emerge in different settings. In the 17th
century’s Dutch case, changes were gradual (Gelderblom and Jonker, 2011) whereas for the
English case in 1688, it was the Glorious Revolution which brought about the changes (North
and Weingast, 1989). In both cases however, the changes were the result of endogenous
evolutions. Following the Glorious Revolution, the institutional changes were nevertheless not
enough to guarantee reimbursement. If political parties in power favored default, then one could
question the credibility of the commitment. Indeed, as stressed by Stasavage (2007, p.150),
“Great Britain’s revolution in public finance may have been initiated during the Glorious
Revolution of 1688, but the British state’s credibility as a borrower was only consolidated after
1715, once the Whig party established lasting political supremacy”. New institutions didn’t thus
directly lead to an increase in credibility.




                                                                                                 6
