    Eventually, the members of the coalition restored the throne of France to Louis XVIII. The
terms of peace were spelled out in the First Treaty of Paris signed on May 30th, 1814. The Treaty
was incredibly soft on defeated France. Article 2 of the Treaty defined the borders of France as
the ones existing on January 1st, 1792. Article 18 declared a reciprocal waiver on all claims related
to war. The coalition however imposed political changes to France. Most notably, the kingdom
became a constitutional monarchy. Article 70 of the Constitutional Charter guaranteed the public
debt even if the situation of public finances inherited from Napoleon was disastrous. To balance
the budget, drastic cuts were made and demobilized soldiers paid only half their normal wages.
Short-term bills bearing 8% interest were issued and several domains from the state put for sale.
In July 1814, Baron Louis suggested, in his presentation of the situation of French public
finances at the Chamber of Deputies, to resume the amortization of the public debt (Vührer,
1886, p. 101).

    In comparison to the pre-1789 period, the King’s power had dramatically decreased. Even if
in theory the King was the only one allowed to suggest laws, in practice, the legislative power
(represented by two Chambers, the Chambre des Pairs, with members appointed by the king for life
or in an hereditary manner, and the Chambre des Députés, elected for 5 years by the “wealthy”)
gained a greater say than ever before (Aglan, 2006). The design of the electoral system led to an
alignment of interest between electors and bondholders. Indeed, only citizens older than 30 years
and paying a yearly amount of 300 FF as direct contribution were allowed to vote. In practice, the
approximately 100,000 citizens fulfilling this condition were from the wealthiest class. They were
thus likely to hold rentes and therefore willing to protect creditors’ rights. In this respect, the
French case differed from the British one and the critiques raised by Stasavage (2007) on politics
unlikely to apply.

    The new repartition of power between the European major countries was disrupted when the
news broke out in March 1815 that Napoleon had managed to escape from his exile in Elba and
was attempting to regain the control of France. French troops joined the Emperor and Louis
XVIII had no alternative than to flee France again. To prevent a resurrection of an Empire ruled
by Napoleon, the coalition sent troops to stop the French advance. Following his defeat at
Waterloo on June 18th, 1815 Napoleon lost the confidence of the chambers and was forced to
abdicate for a second time on June 22nd, 1815.

    After the episode of the Hundred Days, the Allied restored the throne to Louis XVIII who
by then “looked less like a sun king than a paper lantern carried by foreigners” (Longford, 1972,
p. 34). Whereas the First Treaty of Paris had been incredibly soft on defeated France, the Second

                                                                                                   8
