stock exchange to propose new securities to their customers in order to maintain their profits7.
This successful portfolio rebalancing to include French rentes opened a new era for capital
investment, also fueled by the significant financing needs of the newly created Latin American
states following the collapse of the Spanish empire. Neal (1998) stresses that those Latin
American bonds included higher risk premiums compared with the “now-seasoned and solid
French government debt” (p. 63) and by the mid-1820s, the British holders of those foreign
bonds experienced their first experience with sovereign bond defaults. Over that time period, the
French public debt seems thus to have been a good investment opportunity in terms of risk and
return.

    The next section provides an empirical investigation of the impact that these substantial
improvements had on the yield of the French rentes.



    V.       Data and Methodology

          Data

    In order to perform our empirical analysis we built up a hand collected original database. It
consists of the weekly (Friday closing price) bond market prices published by the Moniteur
Universel for the 5% French rente and the 3% English consol on the time period stretching from
July 7, 1815 to January 13, 1826. On bank holidays we generally use the last quoted price; for the
coupon payment period, either the “reduced” consol price or the price obtained from a linear
interpolation based on the prices of other consols is used.

    In the French case, investors faced a conversion risk. The bonds providing the highest
nominal rates were the most likely to be converted and therefore present the highest yields. To
avoid potential bias, the consol with the lowest coupon, i.e. the 3% consol, was chosen. An
additional advantage of this choice is that the 3% consol also happened to be the most traded
sovereign bond on the London stock market, thus, a highly liquid asset. For the French market,
the solution was less obvious as there was only one sovereign bond traded over the period under
study, i.e. the 5% rente. To address the conversion issue, we computed an implied option price by
using the Black and Scholes (1973) formula and derived the price of a non-convertible rente as the
sum of the price of the convertible rente and the option price. Since the conversion was a new



7
  For a more detailed discussion of the role played by underwriters on the sovereign debt markets also refer to
Flandreau et al. (2010).

                                                                                                            16
