concept in France and only became discussed in 1824, as a robustness check, results were also
tested on basis of the bonds’ yield to maturity.

            Methodology

    To determine the elements which led to the drastic improvement in French public finances
one would ideally like to create time series on variables suspected of playing a role and then to
test their impact. Unfortunately, constructing such variables is extremely hard for institutions.
There is indeed no measure of the quality of institutions showing enough variation for our period
(for example, Polity IV data attributes the same value for institutions for the whole period
suggesting that these had a constant quality). In order to overcome this limitation, the analysis
relies on an indirect approach. Since it is impossible to construct an “institution” variable and
regress it on the yields, we rely on changes in the yields and base the analysis on the events linked
to the dates when these changes occurred. The objective of our empirical analysis is thus twofold.
First of all we want to check for the presence of potential fundamental changes in the evolution
of the French yields, to identify the exact timing of such changes as well as their cause. Second,
we aim at measuring the potential short-term impact of specific events/decisions on the
evolution of these yields. To reach these objectives, we apply a structural break methodology
completed by a regression with dummies.

    Structural breaks may be computed on yields or on spreads. Using the spreads with the
British consols allows controlling for “global” shocks. This comes however at a cost, since by
construction the series will also react to British idiosyncratic events. To overcome this issue, the
analysis is conducted primarily on the French yields but explanations are searched both on a
global and on local scale. As robustness check, breaks have also been detected on the French
yields corrected for the trend of the British consol. This approach limits the impact of pure
British events since only the consols’ trend is considered. Using this method leads to very similar
results in terms of breaks.

    The most commonly encountered method for detecting the number and location of
structural breaks that might appear in a time series is the one introduced and developed by Bai
and Perron (1998, 2003). More specifically, we estimate the following general model subject to m
breaks ( m  1 regimes):

                    yt   j zt  ut          t  T j 1  1,..., T j , j  1,..., m  1     (1)




                                                                                                    17
