where y t represents the dependent variable, in our case the French yields, zt (q 1) is the vector

of covariates, u t is the error term at time t ,  j is the corresponding vector of coefficients and

the indices ( T1 ,..., Tm ) stand for the unknown break points. In this approach, the unknown
coefficients and the endogenous breakpoints are estimated simultaneously; moreover, this general
approach allows the coefficients to change while also taking into account potential breaks in the
variance of the disturbance term provided they occur at the same dates as those in the parameters
of the regression. The algorithm computes the estimates of the break points based on the
minimization of the sum of OLS squared residuals segment by segment (Bai and Perron, 2003)
and convergence of the estimation is obtained under a large set of assumptions (however
precluding variables with autoregressive unit root), namely different distributions both for the
regressors and the errors8.

      In testing for multiple potential breaks we use a supF test of no structural break, i.e. m  0 ,
versus m  k breaks. The choice of the trimming parameter  will determine the minimal length
h of a segment, i.e.   h / T , with T being the number of observations. Following Bai and
Perron (1998), first we apply the double maximum tests of the null hypothesis of no structural
break against an unknown number of breaks, UDmax and WDmax 9 and use their reported critical
values for   0.05 , 0.10 , 0.15 , 0.20 and 0.25 (with the corresponding maximum number of
breaks, i.e. 10, 8, 5, 3 and 2 respectively). Then we implement a test for l versus l  1 breaks, i.e.
sup FT (l  1 l ) , applied to each segment that includes observations from Ti 1 to Ti , i  1,..., l  1 .

The model with l breaks is rejected in favor of a model with l  1 breaks whenever the overall
minimum value of the sum of squared residuals is larger than the sum of squared residuals of the
l  1 breaks model. Finally, we use the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and the modified
Schwartz criterion (LWZ) to select the dimension of the model10.

      The structural break approach has been used in many economic history papers (Guinanne,
Willard and Rosen, 1996; Brown and Burdekin, 2000; Frey and Kucher, 2001; Weidenmier, 2002;
Brown and Burdekin, 2002; Oosterlinck, 2003; Frey and Waldenström, 2004; Zussman et al.,
2007; Flandreau and Oosterlinck, 2011; Oosterlinck and Ureche-Rangau, 2012). Its main

8 Potential serial correlation and/or matrix robust heteroscedasticity are taken into consideration and corrected in

order to obtain consistent estimators.
    UDmax                                       WD
9       is an equal weighted test while       max
                                                  applies weights to the individual tests in order for the marginal p-
values to be equal across values of
                                    m  .
10 In the presence of serial correlation and even when no serial correlation is present in the errors but a lagged

dependent variable, with large coefficient, is present, Bai and Perron suggest using a sequential application of the
sup FT (l  1 l )
                    test based on sequential estimates of the breaks.

                                                                                                                   18
