    Institutions alone were however unlikely to restore the state’s credit. The inheritance from
Napoleon was mixed. On one hand Napoleon had created a national bank, the Banque de France.
To further restore the French credit, Napoleon had imposed in 1800 the resumption of specie
payment for the public debt (Jèze, 1925, p. 280). In 1803, Napoleon had set France on a
bimetallic standard by creating the Franc Germinal. However, mistrustful of paper money
Napoleon had built a very rigid monetary system. Even though the Banque de France was allowed
to issue banknotes, the minimal denomination of 500 FF dramatically limited their use (Gabillard,
1953). As a result, payments thus remained mostly done with specie. Furthermore under
Napoleon, the most common way to finance public deficits was to let short term debt
accumulate, leaving a massive amount of debt under the form of arrears. For the new French
government the payment of the arrears inherited from the Napoleonic Regime was an additional
way to show its good faith. By the laws of 28 April 1816 and 25 March 1817, the Crown agreed
to settle the arrears by issuing notes exchangeable for rentes in five installments beginning on
January 1st, 1821 (White, 2001). When the first installment became due, the government honored
its word by issuing a loan to cover the expenses (de Nervo, 1865, p. XVI).

    Even if mistakes were made under the Restoration, there were major improvements in
comparison to earlier periods. Jèze (1925, p. 312) considers that issue of sovereign debt was
rendered possible thanks to political stability, public discussion and approval of budgets and the
introduction of financial controls. Even if some institutions, such as the Caisse d’Amortissement had
existed before, there was previously no credible commitment to respect the objectives given to
these institutions. In this respect, the Restoration marked a clear departure from previous
regimes.

    However, as argued by Gelderblom and Jonker (2011), even commitment and efficient fiscal
policies may not be sufficient in explaining the decline in the interest of public debt. These
mechanisms have to take place in an economic environment characterized by abundant savings
and changes in investors’ preferences regarding the composition of their portfolios. In the
French case, capital flows changed direction, from Great Britain to the Continent, following
Waterloo (Neal, 1998). The newly issued 5% French rentes offered a more attractive investment
opportunity than holding the British consols. Indeed, the rise in the price of British government
bonds induced by the governmental policy aimed at retiring high-interest debt and reducing
expenditures, contributed to a decrease of their yields which in turn altered their attractiveness as
investments. Moreover, as public bonds represented the highest source of income for
underwriters, the new market conditions regarding the British debt forced traders on the London


                                                                                                  15
