market. Despite this measure, the price of the rente kept on falling. This forced a new round of
discussion with the Allies, which ended up on November 19th (de Nervo, 1865, p. 319).
Eventually, a new protocol altered slightly the conditions of payment. The departure of foreign
troops had a double impact on the rentes. On one hand, the departure reduced the burden on the
French budget. In view of the huge costs incurred to pay for the occupation army, the situation
regarding French public finances could only be perceived as improved. On the other hand
however, this departure meant that the implicit guarantee provided by the troops disappeared.
Even though the troops were in theory only meant to guarantee the execution of the Treaty (e.g.
the payment of reparations and occupation costs), the financing through bonds meant that actors
probably viewed the presence of the troops as an additional guarantee for the bonds themselves.
This was certainly the case for Alexander Baring, the banker who managed to float the French
loans abroad. In February 1818, Baring asked the Duke Wellington whether it would be possible,
as expressed by Longford (1972, p. 76), to “persuade the Allies to safeguard his loan by
occupying France for a further period”. The Earl of Liverpool, the British Prime Minister, shared
Baring’s concerns. In a letter addressed to the Duke of Wellington he mentioned that he was
“strongly inclined to think that we shall find it [the appetite for French stock] grow weaker every
day as the period for the evacuation of France by the Allied armies approaches” (Wellington,
p. 268).

    The following years (1819-1821) were not marked by any major innovation or change
(Boiteau, 1866, p. 173). In October 1822, representatives of Austria France, Prussia, Russia and
the United-Kingdom met in Verona notably to discuss the Spanish Question. Ferdinand VII of
Spain was indeed at the time struggling to retain his throne. As a result of the Congress of
Verona, French troops entered Spain in April 1823 to support the king. Following their victory at
Trocadero on August 31st, 1823 the French troops restored Ferdinand VII to the throne. The
French intervention marked its come back in the concert of the Great Powers. The quick military
victory was also positively perceived on the stock exchange (Colling, 1949, p. 199).

    On March 23rd, 1824 in a speech to open the Chambers, Louis XVIII stressed the need to
“mend the last wounds from the revolution” and to convert part of the public debt. The
restoration had brought back Louis XVIII but had left many Ultras frustrated. They considered
that little had been done to address their rightful claims for the losses suffered during the
revolution. The elections of February 1824 had led to such a landslide victory for the Ultras that
the Chamber had been nicknamed the Chambre retrouvée in reference to the Chambre introuvable. To
pay for the compensation, de Villèle, the Président du Conseil, had devised a simple scheme. The


                                                                                                12
