advantage is that breaks are determined endogenously, hence allowing to understanding the
perceptions at the time of the events, excluding any ex-post bias. This advantage is enhanced by
the use of financial market data, highly informative when one wishes to assess the perceived
importance of given events at the moment they happened, as any misinterpretation of
information could heavily penalize the market operators (Waldenström and Frey, 2007).
However, this approach also presents some limits, namely a risk of “over-interpretation” (i.e.
econometrically determined break for which one seeks a historical reason at any costs) and a risk
of omission, particularly in the presence of simultaneous events producing opposite effects.

     In order to infer more information regarding the response of the French yields to the
implementation of several institutions with direct link to public debt management as well as to
decisions leading to an enhancement of their credibility, we test the changes in the French yield at
the dates these decisions were made. Thus, we are able to capture a short-term effect in the yield,
at the dates for which there is an a priori. To do so, we apply a two steps procedure. First of all,
to take into account market trend, the French yields are detrended by using the British consol as
the benchmark for the sovereign bonds market at that time, i.e.

                                                                                                    (2)

where y t represents the French yield, trend _ consolt is the Hodrick-Prescott trend11 of the

British consol over the same time-period,        are the coefficients and      the residual. In a second
step, residuals are described by a GARCH(1,1) model with dummies in the mean as proxies for
the chosen dates as follows:

                                  ∑                                                                 (3)

                                                                                                    (4)

with      standing for the chosen        dummies,       is the conditional variance,       and     are the
different coefficients.

     The advantage of this approach is that there is no risk of over-interpretation, as the events are
chosen exogenously for a specific reason. However, the reverse is that by doing so, there is
potential ex-post bias (choosing events that are nowadays considered as major by most historians
while they were perceived as minor at the time they arrived).


11
  The smoothing parameter  was chosen according to the frequency power rule of Ravn and Uhlig (2002) and a
power rule of 2, following Hodrick and Prescott (1997).

                                                                                                          19
