      The choice of this model was motivated by the results of the ADF tests performed on the
French yields, where the inclusion of an intercept and a trend seems to correct for the presence
of a unit root. Finally, our series of yields shows significant autocorrelation up to lags as high as
thirty12; therefore we include the lagged dependent variable in the right side of the equation.

      Results are provided in Table 4 for a trimming parameter of   0.10 and a maximum
number of breaks equal to 8 which corresponds to segments with a minimum length13 equal to
55.

                                               Insert Table 4 about here

      First of all, both the supF tests and the double maximum tests ( UDmax and WDmax ) of no
break allow rejection of the null hypothesis at the 5% conventional risk level. Hence, there is at
least one break point in our yield series. Regarding the exact number of breaks the three criteria
(BIC, LWZ, and sequential procedure) select 4, 6 and 5 breaks respectively. Following Bai and
Perron’s recommendations, namely in the presence of serial correlation, we choose to discuss the
sequential estimates of the breaks, i.e. 5 breaks.

      The first break falls on February 7, 1817 and has a confidence interval of one observation
before and one after the exact location the observed break. Historically, this date corresponds to
Baring and Hope & Company issuing the first tranche of a loan which made the payment of the
indemnity possible and may therefore explain the descending pattern of the yields.

      The loan was important in many respects. First, it allowed France to pay the due installment
of the war indemnity. Second, this payment was also linked to the withdrawal of 30,000 troops
from the occupied part of the country. Third, it showed that foreign investors were recognizing
the improvement in French public finances and future prospects. The fact that foreign
underwriters had agreed to take interest in the loan was regularly mentioned (Aglan, 2006). At the
time, the Duke of Richelieu went as far as to say that Baring was one of the six main powers in
Europe jointly with Britain, France, Austria-Hungary, Russia and Prussia (Ahamed, 2010). Baring
was indeed one of the leading underwriters (Flandreau and Flores, 2010). Eventually, this issue



12 For space reasons, we choose not to report the results of the Ljung-Box Q-statistics; they are however available

upon request.
13 The choice of these trimming parameters was dictated by Bai and Perron recommendations; as our sample is

composed by 550 weekly observations we chose segments long enough to provide statistically significant evidence
and avoid short lived noise being treated as a break. Meanwhile, the use of too long periods potentially leads to
missing “true shifts” in the series. However, we performed our computation with several other values for the
trimming parameters and the results are similar.

                                                                                                                21
