    Both methods perform poorly when markets only gradually integrate news. This would for
example be the case for institutions’ credibility. Therefore, if anything, finding positive results for
such variables should be interpreted as a minimum impact as their effect could be even higher if
the analysis was based on an alternative method. With those caveats in mind, we apply these two
methodologies on our sample of French yields. Results are presented and discussed in the next
section.


    VI.     Empirical evidence


    We aim at studying the presence of potential structural changes in the evolution of the
French bond yields over a time period of ten years, between 1815 and 1825 as well as the impact
of several identified events on the same yield. More specifically, we analyze to what extent the
newly created institutions following the Waterloo defeat along with the different decisions meant
to enhance their credibility, but also the occupation of the French territory by the enemy, could
explain the observed decline in the French debt yields.

    We start by reporting some descriptive statistics for both the French and British yields, i.e.
5% French rente and 3% British consol. Table 2 shows that the yields of the French rente are, on
average, higher than those of the British consol (by almost 2.5%), while also being more volatile
(e.g. higher standard deviation). The French yield culminates at almost 10%, which is twice as
much as the maximum British yield. Both yields are non-Gaussian, more specifically leptokurtic
and positively skewed (significantly in the case of the French one).

                                                Insert Table 2 about here

    We also check for the presence of potential unit roots in our two series, by performing the
Augmented Dickey-Fuller test. Our results, as reported in Table 3, show evidence that while for
the British consol we cannot reject the presence of a unit root, the French rente is stationary when
we take into account an intercept and a trend.

                                                Insert Table 3 about here

    We then apply the structural break approach in order to check for the presence of potential
major changing points in the evolution of the French yields. More specifically, we estimate the
following version of the general model presented in (2), namely

                yt   1, j   2, j t j   3, j yt 1  ut     t  T j 1  1,..., T j j  1,..., m  1   (5)

                                                                                                                   20
