integration relationship between our two series of yields, both on the whole period under study
and on different sub periods delimited by the nine events mentioned previously. Our results go in
line with the idea that the institutional reforms implemented following Waterloo had a gradual
and cumulative effect as illustrated by a gradual decrease in the yield spread with respect to the
British consol. Indeed, the results of the Johansen test reported in Table 716 show the existence
of one co-integration relationship between the yields only in the last sub period, 1823-1825.
Thus, by the end of 1823 the French and British yields started to move together. The French
government’s borrowing conditions became close to those required from the major player on the
international financial markets.

                                                   Insert Table 7 about here


    VII.      Conclusion

    Following Waterloo, France was in a terrible situation. Public finances were in shambles and
whereas victors had been inclined to show mercy in 1814, following the episode of the 100-days
they imposed harsh terms to defeated France. Despite all these elements, in the ten years between
1815 and 1825 not only did France manage to place a huge amount of debt on the market
(resulting in a threefold increase) but it did so with a spread, compared to the British consol,
falling from more than 400 basis points to a meagre 100 basis point. How did France manage to
regain its credibility?

    This paper argues that the Second Treaty of Paris imposed upon defeated France set into
place a context in which almost all actors had an incentive to make sure that France would pay its
debt. The 100 days had shown to the world the fragility of the rule of Louis XVIII. Louis XVIII
had thus good reasons to please the Allies who had twice restored him. The electoral law limiting
the vote to the richest men of the nation also guaranteed a form of alignment of the interests of
members of the parliament and bondholders. Neither Louis XVIII, nor the wealthy had an
incentive to repudiate the debt inherited from the revolution and the Empire, even less to default
on future loans. Coming back to pre-1789 public finances was not possible. The financial crisis of
1788-1789 was viewed as a trigger for the revolution and reverting to such a system would have
increased the risk of revolution. The presence of the Army of occupation also forced France to
pay its debt. The threat not to leave the country if war reparations were not paid was credible.
The presence of this (unpopular) Army of occupation also allowed France to pass measures

16 To ease the presentation, we only report the results for the two sub periods before and after December 1823.

However, all results are available upon request.

                                                                                                            26
