amortization. In this case, one would expect a gradual impact as investors realize as time goes by
that the restored government is serious about amortizing its debt. Laws increasing the
accountability of ministers and leading to a better management of public finances appear
however to have had a positive short term impact on the yields. The conjunction of all these
institutional reforms and the credible commitment of the French government to guarantee the
respect of all the public debt engagements finally translated into French and British yields starting
to move together by the end of 1823.

     In most studies the credibility of the state is analyzed through the lenses of its actions or its
institutions. The French case following Waterloo is dramatically different. Indeed, the credibility
of the French government was in a first phase guaranteed by the military threat posed by the
Allied occupation Army. Investors knew that France had no choice but to find ways to pay.
During the occupation period (1815-1818), France managed to reimburse the war indemnities. As
such, this fact alone would certainly have increased its credibility. However, the manner in which
the repayment was made possible played probably an even more important role. Indeed, in these
three years, France created new institutions to better manage its debt, passed laws dramatically
enhancing the power of parliament in financial matters and increased the accountability of
ministers regarding their expenses. In terms of public finances, Waterloo and the 100 days
marked the beginning of a new, and better, era for France. Whereas previous attempts to
improve French public finance had proved unsuccessful up till then, the pressure set by the
defeat and the Army of occupation forced the government to act in such a way as to recover its
credibility. Ouvrard (1827, p. 223), one of the French bankers involved in Baring loan of 1817,
highlighted the role played by the occupation. According to him17, out of necessity, France had
discovered the extent of its resources and the Allied had created its creditworthiness. In this
respect Waterloo was indeed a godsend for French public finances!




17 « Il manquait à la France la loi de la nécessité pour connaître toutes ses ressources : vous venez de fonder son crédit ».


                                                                                                                                28
