                                                 Insert Figure 4 about here

     We enlarge the former analysis of the structural changes in the evolution of the French yield
(long term perspective) by a study of the short-term effects in the same yield produced by several
major decisions regarding the implementation of institutions aimed at managing the public debt,
as well as political and fiscal decisions that contributed to enhancing France’s credibility. To do
so, we proxy these dates for which there is an a priori by dummies and run a GARCH(1,1)
model. It is nowadays well-established that financial time series’ volatility is time-varying15;
therefore, one cannot ignore this important stylized fact and consider it unchanged, particularly
during troubled times and over such a long time period (10 years) as the one under study. This
issue is even more stringent as we show evidence that there are structural changes in the pattern
of the financial variable that we are modeling, i.e. the French yield. Therefore we favored a
GARCH framework instead of the simple OLS regression.

     Table 5 provides the list of nine dummies chosen based on Vaslin (1999) and White (2001).
Some of these dates were already mentioned in the description of the historical context (e.g. the
Second Treaty of Paris, the reintroduction of a Caisse d’amortissement, the Chambre introuvable, the
settlement of debt arrears by the crown, the acceptance of wartime claims). To these, we add
three more events that shaped the credibility of the French government in fulfilling its debt
obligations and maintaining sound public finances. The first one is the payment of debt arrears
by the Banque de France. Introduced in 1800 following Gaudin’s proposal, (Finance minister at that
time), this practice was seen as a major measure for restoring public finances and France’s
credibility with respect to its creditors (Vaslin, 1999) as it imposed the resumption of specie
payment for the public debt. However, it was implemented as a short-term measure and indeed,
it only lasted for four years. As the French state continued experiencing financial difficulties, this
type of intervention was used several times afterwards (following a reform of the Bank’s statute
in March 1806). It was namely the case on December 14, 1815 when the Bank insured the
payment of the coupons pending since September 22, 1815 and on June 11, 1817, when the
payment of the war indemnity created huge problems to the treasury. Corvetto insisted then on
the necessity to insure the payment of the 5% rente in a “normal” delay and the Bank was again
designated to meet this objective.

     The two other events that we decided to add are both the consequences of the laws
introduced by Villèle from 1822 to 1827. These laws were meant to guarantee the principles of

15
  For syntheses of the literature on ARCH-GARCH modeling please refer to Bollerslev et al. (1992), Bollerslev et al.
(1994) among others.

                                                                                                                 24
