which might otherwise have met a much stronger opposition. The importance of liberating parts
of occupied France could hardly be questioned whereas at the same time the Allied Army
guaranteed that no revolution would take place. Last, but certainly not least, Wellington acted as
“chef d’orchestre” allowing a smooth transition from the defeat to the liberation of the whole
country. Great Britain had an interest in seeing France pay the war indemnities. In the first years
France needed external finance to make sure that it could meet its obligations. Wellington kept a
regular correspondence with Alexander Baring to ensure that Baring would lend to France, thus
giving some time for the country to restore its finances. The iron fist imposed on defeated France
could thus also prove to be a lending hand.

    The empirical analysis shows that the features of the Second Treaty of Paris had a double
impact on the French state’s credibility. The imposition of an Army of occupation led markets to
consider that default was not an option. Baring, the main foreign banker involved in lending to
France considered in 1818 that occupying France was safeguarding its loan (Longford, 1972). The
imposition of huge war indemnities on defeated France also forced the government to take
drastic measures. As pointed out by Margairaz (2006), the 100 days and Waterloo forced the
persons in charge of French finances to implement laws and institutions leading to the creation
of a real credit system.

    Structural breaks on the French yields show that Waterloo had indeed a positive long-lasting
effect on French public finances. Credible institutions and actions consistent with the
preservation of creditors’ rights improved the state’s credibility. In terms of actions, not only did
France recognize all previous debt but it also took measures to make sure the reimbursement of
this debt would happen. Arrears which had been the tool Napoleon used to finance his regime
were paid. The desire to pay all former debts faithfully was tested twice: first by the opposition of
the Chambre introuvable in 1816, second when the king suggested converting the 5% rentes to pay
for an indemnity for the Emigrés. Both events show up in the analysis, confirming the major role
played by credibility. The payments themselves appear to have had a positive short term impact
on the yields. By the same token, elements linked to the repayment of the war indemnities also
clearly show up in the analysis. Both the issue of a large international loan allowing the payment
and the actual settlement of the war leading to the withdrawal of foreign troops induce
statistically significant structural breaks.

    Institutions such as the creation of the Caisse d’Amortissement don’t seem to have induced a
major break, at least at their creation. This might be due to the fact that many sinking funds had
been created by previous regimes and had systematically been used to other means than the debt

                                                                                                  27
