lifted the Paris stock exchange from its apathy (Colling, 1949, p. 192). With a more active market,
the government could expect a decline in interest rates for future issues of the rente.

    The second break is detected on November 27, 1818 and is also characterized by a very
thin confidence interval, i.e. one observation on each side of the break point. Historical evidence
shows that at this date the Allied troops quit France, which determines a definitive change
towards a continuous decrease of the yield, after a period of downside but also upside variations
of the same yield. A look at figure 4 indicates that this period was marked by a sharp change in
the yields. Indeed, the yields were following a steady declining trend which brutally stopped. This
change in regime is attributed to two elements: in a first phase speculators were hoping that the
departure of foreign troops would diminish the costs for France. When the agreement finally
came, fears that the departure of foreign troops would remove the implicit guarantee provided by
their presence prompted many foreigners to sell their holdings of French rente, driving prices
down and leading to a spike in yields.

    The impact of the final departure of foreign troops from the French soil was certainly a
major event at the time. The liberation of the territory was a central element in Louis XVIII’s
speech for the opening of the Chambers on December 10th, 1818. During the same speech, he
insisted on his willingness to reduce the public debt (de Nervo, 19865, p. 326). The departure of
foreign troops was indeed the sign that France had managed to repay all its war indemnities. The
country was now back to a normal track. The massive amounts paid as reparations were part of
the past and France would from then on save the amounts used to pay reparations (Riva, 2006).
According to Colling (1949, p. 193) investors were betting on the results of the Congress of Aix-
la Chapelle and on the future liberation of the territory. Speculation thus played a major role at
the time. During the summer of 1818, the French government had speculated on the rentes to
increase their price on the Paris Bourse. As the amount due to the Allies was to be paid in rente, a
higher price meant would imply giving a lower number of rentes (Gontard, 2000; Riva, 2006).
Investors who hoped that the treaty of Aix la Chapelle would drive prices even higher were
disappointed and many market operators who had speculated on this hope faced heavy losses
(Riva, 2006). Once the departure of the foreign troops became certain, foreign investors began to
fear that the evacuation of the army would remove the guarantee it represented for the holders of
French sovereign bonds. Gontard (2000) notes five elements mentioned at the time to explain
the crisis: 1) The too high volume of rentes issued by Baring, 2) The action of speculators
transforming paper gains in real ones (following the increase of the rentes), 3) The sale by British
investors fearing troubles in liberated France, 4) The contractionary actions of the Banque de


                                                                                                 22
