unity, integrity, specialization and periodicity of the public budget. The first one is the budgetary
order of September 14, 1822 regarding the liquidation of public expenses during the 9 months
following the end of the fiscal year while the second one is the financial account order of
December 10, 1823 (Vaslin, 1999).

                                         Insert Table 5 about here

    Table 6 provides the results of our dummy analysis. For many dates one can observe a
statistically significant negative impact on the yields. The first payment of debt arrears by the
Banque de France and the dissolution of the chamber were clearly perceived positively by the
markets. Both showed the state’s willingness to honor the debt of the previous regimes, either by
a direct intervention on the market (payment of the pending coupons) or by politically evicting
any potential advocates of a moratoria on the existing debt. The different laws increasing the
accountability of the government and promoting more transparency in public finances were also
positively perceived, and were followed by a decrease in the yield. Restoring a sound management
of the public finances was indeed one key action that contributed to restoring creditors’
confidence in France’s capacity to sustain its debt. Surprisingly, the creation of the Caisse
d’amortissement is not linked to any decrease in yields. The previous aborted attempts in the matter
might explain the reluctance of the markets, at least in the short-run, regarding the success of
such an institution. Moreover, investors probably needed more time in order to assess the
credibility of this institution and particularly government’s willingness to support its functioning
and respect its objectives. Finally, the second intervention of the Bank to insure the payment of
the debt service has an opposite effect on the French yield (e.g. increase). One potential
explanation might come from the fact that by asking for a new intervention of the Bank, the
French government signaled its recurrent financial difficulties. In addition, these interventions
also raised additional expenses for the state; as an example, for the 1823 intervention, the Bank
charged a commission of 1 ⁄ % on the amounts paid to the creditors as well as on the advances
insured to the Caisse d’Amortissement (110,000 FF per day) and a guarantee amounting at 2 million
of FF in rentes. The guarantee was returned to the Treasury in March 1819.

                                        Insert Table 6about here

    Our empirical evidence supports Sussman and Yafeh (2006) who argue that lack of
immediate market response to institutional reforms may be explained either by the time needed
to assess the credibility of the newly created institutions or by the fact that the process itself has
to be cumulative. In order to check this last argument we tested for the presence of a co-


                                                                                                   25
