France, 5) The presence of short-term speculators destabilizing the market. To get out of the
crisis, brokers were asked to support the price of the rentes, an action also undertaken by the
Treasury (Riva, 2006). Following this crisis which led to the insolvency of several important
brokers, the Bourse mutualized for the first time counterparty risk (Riva and White, 2011).

    The third break is the most controversial; detected on May 25, 1821 it has the largest
confidence interval and is the one missing when applying the BIC criteria. The only potential
explanation could be Napoleon’s death on May 5th, 1821; however, it can also fall under the risk
of over interpretation.

    The fourth break appears on January 10, 1823 and has a confidence interval similar in
lengths to the one reported for the first two breaks. The corresponding events that might explain
this change in the evolution of the yields, namely a switch towards an increase of their level,
could be the outbreak of the war with Spain (Expédition d’Espagne) associated to an extraordinary
credit voted by the legislature in order to sustain this war. Colling (1949, p. 199) attributes the
sharp decline of the rente in January 1823 to the prospect that the war would break out.

    Finally, the last break is detected on March 27, 1824 with the same thin, one observation
around, confidence interval. After a period of new decrease in the yield, the victory of the Ultras
at the new elections (Chambre retrouvée) that followed the dissolution of the legislature in
December 1823 determines a new upside move in the French yield.

    The increase in the yield is likely due to the announcement by Louis XVIII at the opening
session of the Chambers that measures would be taken to convert existing bonds and to close the
last wounds of the revolution (Boiteau, 1866, p. 17514). This speech was a clear announcement of
two major changes: the conversion of the rente (leading thus to a reduction on the interest rate)
and the payment of an indemnity to the Emigrés who had been “despoiled” by the revolution.
Both elements could only have a negative impact on the price of the rente: the first one because
there were at the time debates regarding the legality of the conversion and because it paved the
way for future conversions; the second one because the indemnity would have to be somehow
financed. The heated debates related to the conversion show that many viewed the conversion as
a direct threat, an element which would put into question the faith one could have in the French
rente (Aglan, 2006).


14 « Des mesures sont prise pour assurer le capital des rentes créés par l’état dans des temps moins prospères ou pour

obtenir leur conversion en des titres dont l’intérêt soit plus d’accord avec celui des autres transactions. Cette
opération qui doit avoir une heureuse influence sur l’agriculture et le commerce permettra, quand elle sera
consommée, de réduire les impôts et de fermer les dernières plaies de la révolution ».

                                                                                                                   23
