who had been pressed in this fashion.49 As far as the flow of volunteers was concerned, there was a steady decline in the number of foreign recruits who reached Spain. In 1792 the Milán, Flandés, Brabante and Bruselas regiments had
consequently to be disbanded, their rank and file being distributed amongst the other foreign units.50 The shortage of recruits was less acute in the Swiss regiments, but even they were only kept up to strength by extending the area of
enlist­ ment beyond the borders of Switzerland, obtaining recruits ‘by artifice and by force’, and defrauding men of their discharges once they had actually been inducted into the army.51 Yet few Spaniards came forward to take the place of
the foreigners. Despite the finan­ cial incentives offered by re-enlistment, most serving soldiers thought only of ‘the happy moment when they would gain their liberty’.52 As for the civilian population, most regiments could only gain
fresh blood by sending their recruiting parties to the spots where they would find the most ‘dupes and libertines’. In short, soldiers remained ‘the refuse of society’.53 The abandonment of the sorteo was therefore a serious blow. The 14
The Spanish army in the Peninsular War last conscripts which it produced finished their eight years’ service in 1784, after which there was a yearly shortfall in the infantry of some 17,500 men out of a full establishment total of 59,000.
So bad was the situation that only six of the forty-one line regiments could muster the two battalions laid down by the Ordenanzas.54 The gaps in the ranks were partly camouflaged by a series of decrees that cut the establishment of most
units by as much as fifty per cent in order to save money.55 However, the effect of these measures was to leave the army in too weak a condition to fulfil any requirements other than those imposed by the Family Compact. The full extent of
its debility was revealed in 1792, when it was estimated that Spain could put no more than 36,000 men into the field.56 Compared with this situation, the poor quality of the army’s human material was irrelevant: in every country in Europe
it had been shown that the proverbial ‘scum of the earth’ could be drilled and flogged into a perfectly satisfactory battlefield performance. However, that process could not be completed overnight. By allowing their military cadres to
dwindle away so dramatically, the Bourbons ensured that in the event of a major war the Spanish army would be swamped by a mass of raw recruits. No other single factor was to be so influential in its humiliation during the War of
Independence of 1808—14. That humiliation might not have been so great had it not been for the deficiencies which marred the Spanish officer corps. Often technically unskilled, its members had also incurred the wrath of the rest of society
for the exalted position to which they had been elevated by the Bourbons. Yet the officer corps lacked the profes­ sional unity necessary to sustain its predominance. The Prussian army, whose officers were united by a powerful sense of
their common status as junkers^ was able not only to survive the cataclys­ mic trauma of 1806, but afterwards to strengthen its influence in society. In Spain, by contrast, the army proved totally unable to defend itself against attack —
and thus to maintain its influence — when the growing civilian antagonism was finally unleashed by the events of 1808. Totally lacking in any sense of corporate unity, it disintegrated in fratricidal strife at the very moment when its
soli­ darity was most essential. The heterogeneity that marked the Spanish officer corps was in the first place the result of the influx of foreign officers who had entered Spain under the Bourbons. Large numbers of foreigners had accom­
panied Felipe V and Carlos III when they came to Spain, whilst the Under the anden régime 15 Irish, Italian, Flemish and Walloon regiments all continued to be officered by men of foreign descent long after their rank and file had been
hispanicised. In the Guardias Walonas, for example, 176 offi­ cers were still of non-Spanish origin in 1791 out of a total of 185.57 Moreover, a disproportionately number of foreigners achieved high rank: in 1792 they accounted for no
fewer than seventy-seven of Spain’s 327 generals.58 In 1775 the considerable resentment caused by this situation was ignited by the abortive campaign in Algiers. When the Conde de O’Reilly attempted to blame his defeat on the cowardice of
his troops a number of Spanish officers mutinied in protest.59 By the late eighteenth century, however, the foreigners had largely been assimilated into the Spanish nobility, the tension occa­ sioned by their presence being as nothing
compared to that which stemmed from the social composition of the officer corps. As in most European armies, the nobility enjoyed privileged access to the mili­ tary estate. Not only had the Bourbons seized upon military service as a means
whereby the hidalguía could be bound to the throne, but it was traditional to argue that the sword was its chief raison d'être.60 In consequence, only hijosdalgo could become officer cadets (with the exception of sons of commoner officers
of the rank of captain and above). For the artillery, the engineers and the Royal Guards, this meant that all officers would be noblemen, for it was impossible to gain a commission in these units without having first served in them as a
cadet. In the infantry and the cavalry, however, one third of the officers could be promoted from the ranks. Those eligible for such promotion included hijosdalgo, young men who were serving in the rank and file of regiments in which their
fathers held a commission, and finally sergeants who had displayed ‘the spirit... customs and application that make up a good officer’.61 The difficulties faced by commoners in obtaining commissions should not be underestimated. Because
relatively few non-nobles could hope even to reach the rank of captain, the number of commoners who could become officer cadets was small. As for promotion from the ranks, it was only permitted after all officer cadets awaiting promotion
had themselves been given their commis­ sions, whilst even then any hijosdalgo serving in the ranks took precedence over non-noble candidates.62 Yet a substantial number of commoners still succeeded in obtaining commissions, if only
because a resourceful man could always forge the patents of nobility required for acceptance as a cadet, or seek to bribe his way into the 16 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War service.63 However, perhaps the most important factor that
encou­ raged the recruitment of commoners was the reluctance of the nobi­ lity, or at least its richer sections, to endure the dreary servitude of life in a garrison town, let alone the indignity of being commanded by men of a lower social
class. Wherever possible the nobility therefore sought to use their influence at court to gain rapid promotion. In consequence, according to some estimates, at least two thirds of the line officers were drawn ‘from the least powerful and
even less noble part of the population’. Taking the officer corps as a whole, the proportion of non-nobles was probably nearer to one quarter.64 In general, the result of this situation was that the nobility ‘are rapidly promoted and rise
suddenly to the highest rank while meri­ torious, old and experienced officers are left in subaltern situations and tend to vegetate in obscure garrisons’.65 A list of thirty captains in the Fourth Army who were awaiting promotion in the
year 1813 shows that of the twenty-two who had been officers before 1808, six had enlisted as common soldiers, nine as cadets, four as sublieute­ nants in the provincial militia, and two as gentlemen-volunteers (the last had been a royal
page who had been commissioned directly as a captain). The six ex-rankers took an average of fourteen years to reach the rank of sublieutenant, and the four who had been pro­ moted further by the outbreak of the War of Independance had
then had to wait a further seven and a half years before becoming lieuten­ ants. By contrast, it took an average of just over two years for the cadets to be appointed as sublieutenants, and only five more for them to make lieutenant.66 It
would nevertheless be misleading to regard the divisions which accordingly began to emerge within the officer corps solely in terms of a clash between nobles and non-nobles. The hidalguía, which in 1787 numbered 480,592 out of a total of
11,000,000 inhabitants, covered a very broad range of social classes. Because money was as important as rank in becoming an officer cadet, it was in consequence only its upper sections that were in any position to dominate die officer
corps. All cadets had to be provided with an allowance of at least four reales per day, whilst in the military academies they had to pay fees, and to provide their own books, linen and household necessaries. Finally, even in the provin­
cial militia prospective officers had to show that they enjoyed a reasonably decorous standard of living.67 These economic requirements could not be met by a proportion of the petty hidalguía, but even those who could afford to become
Under the ancien régime 17 cadets were placed at a disadvantage by the system of promotion. Except in the engineers and the artillery, where promotion depended entirely upon seniority, all patronage was in the hands of the King, to whom
the Minister of War passed on the recommendations of the Inspectors. Carlos III, in particular, took a very close personal interest in these duties, in one instance vetoing the promotion of an officer for thirty years simply because he had
appeared at a parade with a parasol.68 Given the upper nobility’s close association with the court, the lower nobility and the ex-rankers were placed at a serious disadvantage. Whilst they languished in the lower ranks, the scions of the
grandeza received commissions whilst they were still children, and in some instances before they were out of their mother’s arms: the Duque de Rivas even became an officer in the Guardias de Corps at the tender age of six months. Once they
were embarked upon their careers, their promotion was frequently meteoric, the Duque de Alburquerque advancing from the rank of captain to that of lieutenant general in just four years.69 By 1792 eighty generals out of 327 were titulados
even though that group represented less than one quarter of one per cent of the nobility as a whole.70 Although the privileged position of the aristocracy would have caused considerable resentment at the best of times, it was exacer­ bated
by the severe inflation that gripped Spain after 1780. Prices rose by some fifty-nine per cent in the period 1780—98, but the wages of the officer corps remained pegged at their 1768 level until 1791 when they were raised by an average of
sixteen and one half per cent.71 Pay had never been especially high in the junior ranks of the officer corps: in 1788 a sublieutenant received only 250 reales in basic pay every month, compared with a skilled artisan who could earn as many
as 180.72 This level of payment was soon eroded by the spiralling inflation. As early as 1775 it was noted that no officer could survive on his pay without the command of a company or some other emolument.73 Twenty years later it was
alleged that ‘prices have reached such a level that for some time the officer has not been able to subsist on the pay which is accorded him’, as the minimum monthly expenditure of a sublieutenant came to 392 reales, and his pay to only
272.74 An officer without independent means could only hope to escape from the poverty with which he was increasingly threatened by achieving promotion: aside from the obvious increase in salary, the command of a company offered 18 The
