Compact.25 Political and economic considerations are also apparent in the manner in which the army was recruited. Because it was believed that armies were inherently unproductive and wasteful, soldiers were deliberately recruited from
those groups who were assumed to have least to contribute to society. As was the case with most other European armies, the ranks were therefore filled with the urban and rural poor, criminals and foreigners. Whether or not this policy
fulfilled its economic aims, the army as a result became regarded as a sink of iniquity that ‘spread throughout the kingdom the vices of the soldiery, poisoning the seed of future generations and perverting morals’.26 Military service
eventually became so unpopular that the regime was forced to abandon the idea of conscription altogether. The outcome was a shortage of manpower that was to dog the army right up until 1808. Until 1770 the army was chiefly recruited from
volunteers. In so far as was possible the ranks were filled with foreigners, for such a policy not only reduced the need to force native Spaniards into the army, but also increased the population of the state, which was then held to be the
key to its prosperity. Though the proportion of foreigners in the Spanish army never reached the same level as that attained in some other forces, the Bourbons sent out recruiting parties to scour Catholic areas for suitable volunteers.
The early years of the eighteenth century had also witnessed the arrival of a considerable of number of Irish refugees who were eager to gain revenge against the British. A further source of recruits was provided by deserters from the
French army who had fled across the Pyrenees. Thanks to the steady influx of Frenchmen, Irishmen, Germans, Walloons, Flemings and Italians, Felipe V had been able to form as many as twenty-three foreign regiments, but by the late
eighteenth century the number had been reduced to eight — three Flemish, three Irish and two Italian. In addition, there were six battalions of Wall­ oons amongst the Royal Guards, and four infantry regiments that were recruited by
contract from the Catholic cantons of Switzerland. In 1788, the whole force of twenty-eight battalions amounted to some 23,000 men out of a total establishment for the regular army of 95,000.27 The problem with these recruits was that they
were ‘deserters and vagabonds from all over Europe, a most wretched crew’.28 10 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Notoriously drunken and dissolute, it was also suspected that their ranks contained large numbers of Protestant
heretics.29 The evil reputation with which the army was in consequence imbued ensured that only the most desperate Spaniard would enlist in the army of his own free will. This, of course, served only to worsen the army’s reputation still
further, for its ranks became filled with what were commonly regarded as the dregs of society. Since the number of foreign recruits could never have been sufficient to meet all the army’s needs, the outcome was a shortage of manpower so
severe that when war threatened with Britain over the Falkland Islands in 1770 not even a draft of 12,000 men from the provincial militia could fill up the gaps in the ranks.30 The only solution seemed to be to the réintroduction of some
form of conscription. Conscious of the unpopularity of this measure, the regime decided to make the system as equitable as possible by keeping the number of exemptions to a minimum. In addition, for the first time the whole of Spain was to
be made liable for military service, a measure that had the added virtue of striking a useful blow against provincial privilege. As a result of these reforms it was hoped that the ranks would henceforth be filled with ‘men of property and
probity* rather than ‘drunken mechanics and dissolute vagrants’. Military service would thus be rendered more respectable, leading to an improvement in both the number and the quality of volunteers. The need for conscription would in this
manner eventually be obviated altogether.31 In accordance with this thinking a new system of conscription was established in 1770. A quota was assigned to each province which the Intendant then apportioned amongst its various
corregimientos according to their population. Having compiled a register of all men who were eligible for service (essentially all those aged between seventeen and thirty-six, who were single, of good health, and over five feet tall, and
who could not prove their entitlement to exemption), the local magistrates selected the requisite number of conscripts by means of a ballot known as the sorteo. The whole process was strictly codified and many safeguards were built into it
to ensure that justice was seen to be done.32 But the hopes placed upon the new system were not to be fulfilled, military service remaining as unpopular as ever. At the announcement of a sorteo, young men would flee from their homes to the
haven provided by areas that were still free of conscription, such as Madrid. Alterna­ tively, .they would hastily get married in order to qualify for Under the ancien régime 11 exemption. Those unfortunates who were finally chosen had to
be dragged away from their distraught families by armed guards.33 Popular hostility to military service was a natural reflection of general perceptions of the army. Reputedly moral, sober and ‘seldom given to inebriety’, ordinary Spaniards
despised soldiers as drunken, evil brutes. Their prejudices were confirmed by the fate of ex-soldiers in civil life, who invariably became characterised by ‘misery and men­ dacity ... idleness and vice’.34 The miserable conditions endured
by the rank and file were equally discouraging as an advertisement for the army. Some reforms had been effected in this area by Carlos III, who had attempted to house all his troops in modern barracks as well as to guarantee them certain
basic necessities.35 These improvements were only relative, however. After paying for their food, soldiers were left with a mere two cuartos, or enough for a little tobacco or a glass of wine.36 Described by one observer as ‘dirty,
melancholy dwarfs’, they were forced to endure appalling conditions in their barracks and hospitals.37 To add to their troubles, they were also subjected to a host of petty regulations that were designed to uphold the decorum of the
military estate, and to exclude the soldiery from polite society: soldiers had to wear full uniform and to keep their hair properly powdered and curled at all times; they were forbidden to smoke, or even to sit down, in the streets; and
they were banned from areas that were fashionable venues for the paseo.39 Finally, in line with common practice elsewhere, they were subjected to a brutal code of discipline, all NCOs carrying canes the thickness of a finger with which to
‘encourage’ their men.39 The manner in which the new system was introduced did nothing to increase its popularity. Although it had originally been intended that there should be as few exemptions to the sorteo as possible, in the event the
government could not bring itself to allow the energies of the ‘useful’ classes to be squandered in so unproductive an activity as military service. Nor could it afford to abrogate the privileges of either the Church or the nobility. The
regulations for the sorteo therefore exempted hijosdalgo, clerics, officials of all sorts, members of the liberal professions, skilled industrial workers and artisans, stock breeders, tenant farmers who worked their own land, mer­ chants,
entrepreneurs and master craftsmen. In addition, the number of exemptions was steadily increased thereafter, whilst it was also stipulated that commoners could not hold positions that normally 12 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War
conferred freedom from the sorteo.40 The main burden of conscrip­ tion was therefore certain to fall upon the poorer classes of society, whose only protection lay in a few humanitarian clauses which laid down that sole breadwinners should
should never be liable for service. Nor was the burden especially equitable even then: many towns and cities and the forai provinces continued to be exempted from the sorteo altogether. Carlos III had certainly not intended to allow these
privileges to remain intact, but his attempts to extend the system for the most part proved a failure. Only Navarre submitted to this further erosion of its fueros, in the Basque provinces the local magistrates refused to co-operate,
whilst in Barcelona the announcement of a sorteo in 1773 ied to a furious outbreak of rioting.41 Almost the entire weight of the sorteo had therefore to be borne by the rural poor of the Castiles, León, Asturias, Galicia and Andalucia, the
same provinces which already had to provide the 39,000 men required by the forty-three regiments of provincial militia (recruited by a very similar system of conscription that had been introduced in 1767).42 The introduction of the sorteo
in consequence tended to increase rather than diminish the unpopularity of military service. Instead of implementing measures designed to attract a better class of volun­ teer, improve the conditions of the rank and file, and lessen the
social stigma that was attached to soldiering, the régime responded to the problem by turning to repression. Draconian punishments were imposed on deserters and their accomplices.43 Marriages whose banns had not been read at least fifteen
days before the announcement of a sorteo were annulled, and attempts to seek safety in flight were frustrated by empowering magistrates to impress into the army all vagos - criminals, beggars, and the unemployed. Such a leva was supposed
to be implemented every time that a sorteo was decreed: as young men who fled to such cities as Madrid were unlikely to have been able to find work immediately, the chances were that they would be swept into the army after all. As well as
dealing with fugitives from the sorteo. the leva had other advantages for it served to reduce the hordes of beggars who infested all Spanish cities. In addition, although the conscription of vagos did nothing to improve the image of the
army, their presence in the ranks did at least reduce the number of soldiers who had to be provided by the rest of the population.44 Given the hostility of the general populace, it is clear that the Under the ancien régime 13 success of
the sorteo in the last resort depended upon the attitude of the local magistrates who were charged with its imposition. Yet it was almost as unpopular with the propertied classes as it was with its intended victims. So many young men were
supposed to have fled their villages that agricultural production fell dramatically, whilst the fugitives were also regarded as a threat to social stability, since they gave themselves over to ‘idleness and libertinage’.45 Much alarm was
also evinced at the sexual impact of conscription: on the one hand, the removal of so many healthy young men into the ranks of the army was held ‘to propagate celibacy more than is convenient for the good of the state’; on the other, the
sorteo was supposed to encourage early marriages, which were believed to result in the birth of handicapped children.46 Finally, it was felt that ‘the vices of the army’ would inevitably spread to civilian society, corrupting the ‘industry
and simple manners’ of the mass of the population.47 Numerous magistrates and clergymen therefore sought to frustrate the imposition of the sorteo and to abet the large numbers of fugi­ tives and deserters.48 With no means of overcoming
this hostility, the régime abandoned the sorteo in 1776, leaving the army to rely on voluntary enlistment and the leva. The latter does not seem to have been put to much use, however, for in 1801 the line infantry contained only 4,771 men
