independently of the commanders in the field. No attempt was made to use the Captain Generalcies as the basis for a system of permanent divisions, nor was there any general staff, despite the fact that both institutions had existed in
France since 1763. Instead, on the out­ break of hostilities the commander of each field army had to appoint an ad hoc temporary headquarters of his own, as well as to improvise the organisation of his fighting forces. The result was that
the opera­ tions of the Spanish army were certain to be marred by poor staf­ fwork, for there was no means to prevent a general from appointing his immediate subordinates from the ranks of his own relations and protégés. There was nothing
unique in these administrative problems; indeed, they were shared by many other European armies. In other respects the Bourbon armed forces were far less deficient. With the accession to the throne of the new dynasty in 1700, the
cumbersome Hapsburg tercios disappeared, to be replaced by a modern system of regiments. The army’s tactics were also brought into line with those Under the ancien régime 5 used in the rest of Europe. The original model for these changes
was the French army, with which the Spaniards were to retain close contacts throughout the eighteenth century. Not only were numerous Spanish officers trained in French military academies, but a number of them also saw service with the
French forces during the Seven Years’ War.5 These contacts were to some extent perpetuated by the Family Compact of 1761, but the victories of Frederick the Great increasingly made Prussia the chief focus of attention.6 When a military
commission was sent on a tour of Europe in 1787 to examine the state of military science, the report published on its return consisted of a treatise on the Prussian military system.7 By then, however, the Spanish army had already been
ruled by Prussian norms for almost twenty years: following the end of the Seven Years War, Carlos III had commissioned the Conde de O’Reilly to reform the Spanish army along Frederician lines; the result had been the publication of the
Ordenanzas of 1768, which were characterised by a slavish devotion to Prussian military practice.8 On the death of Carlos DI in 1788 there were twenty-seven Spanish and twelve foreign line infantry regiments, each of which was supposed to
consist of two battalions. Each battalion was divided into eight musketeer and one grenadier companies, but in wartime the grenadiers were drawn off to form separate elite battalions. As in Prussia, the three-deep line was adopted as the
standard tactical formation, its role being steadily to advance upon the enemy, firing successive volleys as it did so, before closing with the bayonet.9 Frederician tactics were also adopted by the twelve regiments of line cavalry, which
were henceforth trained to rely upon shock action rather than the French-style volleys of pistol and carbine fire that had been favoured in the first half of the century. Only the eight regi­ ments of dragoons stood out against the general
trend: whereas in Prussia the dragoons had increasingly been absorbed into the ordi­ nary cavalry, in Spain they were theoretically still expected to func­ tion in their original role as mounted infantry.10 As far as the quality of these
troops is concerned, although the infantry were comparable with most of their contemporaries, the cavalry were placed at a serious disadvantage by the quality of their horseflesh. Centuries of mule breeding had greatly reduced both the
size and the quality of Spain’s horseherds, so that it became increasingly difficult to provide for the cavalry’s requirements. Not only could few horses be obtained, but those that did become available were too small and 6 The Spanish
army in the Peninsular War weak to be suited to the use of shock tactics, even had their strength not been sapped still further by the army’s perennial shortage of fodder.11 Although the majority of the Spanish army was organised in
accordance with the requirements of the formal tactics of the Frederician era, by 1788 it also contained three regiments of light infantry and two of light cavalry.12 The origins of these troops were two-fold. In forming these units the
Spaniards were on the one hand responding to the contemporary vogue for chasseurs, jagers, hussars and light dragoons. Trained to fight in a more irregular fashion than ordinary troops, these forces were designed to harass the enemy at all
times, and were a response to the experience of colonial warfare and the campaigns against the Turks. In addition, however, Spain’s rugged terrain and the depredations of bandits, smugglers and Barbary pirates had given rise to a clear
need for forces of mobile troops who were able to carry out police duties, small units of light infantry and cavalry being formed for this purpose from the 1730s onwards.13 As a strong tradition also existed that in the event of invasion
the many regions exempt from conscription — Aragón, Catalonia and Valencia, Navarre, and the Basque señoríos — should provide bands of irregular somatenes and miqueletes, it was but a short step to the formation of regular units of light
troops.14 Another area in which the Spanish army kept pace with develop­ ments abroad was the artillery. The Seven Years’ War had seen considerable advances in the employment of this arm. The numbers of cannon had increased enormously,
horse artillery batteries had been introduced for the first time, and the guns had begun to be used in concentrated masses rather than being dispersed in support of the infantry. In line with these developments experiments with horse
artillery were carried out in South America, the strength of the artillery was increased, and an academy established at Segovia, whose director, Tomás de Moria, gained considerable renown through the publication of a comprehensive manual
on the gunner’s craft.15 The actual guns themselves were also improved in line with contemporary advances in the design and production of cannon. Various improvements in metallurgy had enabled guns to be cast lighter and to a more exact
calibre. The resulting improvements in mobility and accuracy, which had also benefited from the invention of tangential sights and the elevating screw, had been incorporated into the Gribeauval system of artillery equipment. Arguably the
best Under the ancien régime 7 in the world, this equipment was introduced into the Spanish army in 1792. Even before this date, however, Bourbon interest in science and industry had ensured that they paid much attention to the new
techniques. With the aid of foreign experts, in the 1780s the new methods of casting were introduced in foundries at Seville and Barcelona which between them were soon producing five hundred modern guns per year.16 Nevertheless, some
problems remained with both the artillery and the engineers. Even supposing that the provision of guns and artil­ lerymen had been sufficient, the absence of permanent train detach­ ments forced the army to hire all the necessary teamsters
and draught animals from the civilian populace at the start of each campaign. Although this system was very economical, amassing sufficient animals proved an exceptionally slow process even when the interior of Spain was at peace, as was
discovered when the army mobilised against Portugal in 1801.17 Once Spain had been plunged into a major war, the system became all but unworkable: suitable animals were few and far between, civilian contractors were able to charge
prohibitively high rates of hire for their beasts, and the teamsters were undisciplined and prone to desert with their animals at every possible opportunity. Further difficulties were caused by the fact that the mainstays of the
agricultural economy were the ox and the mule, both of which were notoriously slow moving and intractible.18 As for the engineers, the entire corps only consisted of 150 officers, there being no units of trained sappers or miners.19 The
Spanish army’s technical deficiencies were far less important than the problems afflicting its logistical system. The maintenance of the armed forces was the responsibility of the Intendance. Each wartime field army and each Captain
Generalcy had an Intendant who paid and supplied the troops, audited the military accounts, levied patriotic contributions, administered the hospitals and maga­ zines, and imposed the dues of bagajes, alojamiento y utensilios (whereby the
civilian population were theoretically responsible for providing the troops with transport and accommodation whenever it was required).20 However, curiously enough the state did not accept that it had the responsibility to feed its forces.
In normal circumstances the troops only received a minimum bread ration, which they were expected to supplement with the aid of their daily wage of nine cuartos. Every day each man paid seven cuartos over to a member of his squad whose
responsibility it was to purchase food 8 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War from the local populace.21 The army was equally dependant on the civilian population for its transport, which had to be hired at the start of each campaign. The
cost varied, but rates were supposed to average twenty to twenty-four reales per day for a draught mule, fourteen for a cart, and fourteen to fifteen for a pack mule. Carts being infrequent in Spain, the mainstay of the system was the pack
mule; since a single cart could transport as much as a dozen mules, the costs were thereby greatly increased.22 Although it was always open to abuse by civilian contractors, this system could be expected to function reasonably well in
peacetime so long as it was complemented by a regular supply of money and a prosperous agriculture. What it could not be expected to do was to operate successfully in the context of the sort of war that was to engulf Spain after 1808. Yet
such a conflict would have been impos­ sible to envisage in the latter half of the eighteenth century. In 1761 Spain signed a treaty with France known as the Family Compact which effectively ended the possibility of her army becoming
involved in a major European conflict in anything other than an auxiliary capacity. With the Pyrenean frontier secured by France’s friendship, the only tasks that faced the Spanish army were the defence of Spain’s coasts against British
raids, the blockade of Gib­ raltar, and the occasional punitive expedition against the Moors and the Portuguese. Because Spain’s strategic concerns were henceforth to be directed towards her colonies and the endless maritime rivalry with
Great Britain, the rest of the reign of Carlos III was marked by a heavy programme of naval building: between 1761 and 1778 the number of ships of the line was increased from thirty-seven to sixty-seven.23 The cost of this programme was
immense: in 1778 the navy consumed 100,000,000 reales out of a total expenditure of 489,000,000. At this point over twice as much money was still being spent on the army as the navy, but the outbreak of war with Britain in 1779 soon forced
the government to reduce the size of its land forces.24 Even before this date the damaging effect of excessive concentration on the navy had been made brutally apparent by the chaos that accompanied the Conde de O’Reilly’s abortive
expedition to Algiers in 1775. The arrangements for supplying the invasion force had totally broken down, there had been much muddle and confusion, and the number of troops which Spain could actually send into action had proved inadequate
to deal with their opponents. Brave though the individual soldiers may have been, the fact remains Under the ancien régime 9 that the army had been shown to be unable to carry out even the limited role assigned to it under the Family
