Spanish army in the Peninsular War substantial opportunities for financial peculation.75 As these perqui­ sites were effectively monopolised by the richer hijosdalgo, tension within the officer corps was certain to mount in proportion with
inflation. The advantages of the upper nobility were reinforced still further by their domination of the Royal Guards, which in 1788 consisted of the Guardias de Corps and Carabinieros Reales cavalry regiments, two regiments of Guardias de
Infantería, one of them Spanish and the other Walloon, and a company of halberdiers. Most of these units had been formed by Felipe V in 1702 as an exact replica of the French Guards, Louis XIV having warned his nephew that he would never
be a real king unless he possessed such troops.76 Designed to cement the hold of the new dynasty upon the throne, they had consequently been showered with honours and privileges, and their numbers increased until by 1788 they had reached
the enormous figure of 10,500 men.77 Most favoured of all were the Guardias de Corps, whose close attendance upon the royal family offered them many opportunities of gaining its patronage, as witness the spectacu­ lar rise of Manuel de
Godoy. Service in this regiment, of which membership was restricted to the nobility, may only be descibed as having been idyllic. Many of its wealthier troopers lived in private lodgings, whilst even those who were in barracks had servants
and rooms of their own. Their duties were confined to escorting the royal family on its periodic journeys between the various palaces around Madrid, and to accompanying the Bourbon monarchs on their daily hunting parties.78 These
excursions were not entirely free of danger, for Carlos IV in particular insisted in riding at such a pace that his escort were frequently injured in falls from their horses.79 Even this was not without its compensations, however, for it
was just such a fall that first brought Godoy to the attention of the Queen. For those who were less favoured, there was still plenty of feminine comfort: the guardsmen were much in demand as cortejos (see below), and were often supplied
by their ladies ‘with the means of their extrav­ agance’.80 The French Revolution led to an enhancement of the already privileged status of the Guardias de Corps. Alarmed by the wholesale defection of the Gardes Françaises, Carlos IV
sought to ensure the loyalty of his personal bodyguard by flattering its ego. The regi­ ment’s pay was increased, a fourth company was added to the existing three, and, most importantly, troopers and cadets were Under the ancien régime 19
given the right to be commissioned directly into the regiments of the line.81 Yet the privileged position of the Royal Guards was seemingly not merited by any outstanding military prowess. The Guardias de Corps had the reputation of being
a ‘pacific phalanx of pure osten­ tation*, and were slightingly referred to as ‘the chocolate soldiers’.82 As for the rest of the Guards, they were recruited from exactly the same unpromising material as the line regiments; not
surprisingly, contemporary observers found them to be ill-trained, dirty and slovenly.83 This failure to justify themselves did not increase the household troops’ popularity with their humbler colleagues, particu­ larly in view of the
aristocratic nature of their officers. Commoners were completely excluded from the officer corps, whilst the lower hidalguía were also effectively debarred by regulations requiring guards officers to maintain a decorous standard of living:
in the Guardias de Corps even simple guardsmen had to have an allowance of at least 240 reales per month.84 The triumph of what the eighteenth-century soldier and writer, José Cadalso, scathingly called el regimiento de la grandeza was
particularly galling to the under-privileged mass of regimental offi­ cers.85 In view of the difficulties experienced by these officers in obtaining promotion the decision to allow members of the Guardias de Corps to be commissioned
directly into the line regiments was most unwise. Such aristocratic queue jumping was not the only obstacle facing their advancement. Upward mobility within the offi­ cer corps was greatly reduced by the tendency of many brigadiers to
retain the command of their regiments even after they had been elevated to the generalato, whilst many officers were forced by the inadequacy of their pensions ‘to continue to serve ... till age or infirmities obliged them to retire*.86
The role that seniority played in recommendations for promotion also tended to work against the interests of officers without connections at the court, for men who had been promoted from the ranks had generally taken so long to achieve
their commissions that they were at a permanent disadvan­ tage uis à vis their hijodalgo rivals. Serious difficulties were also occasioned by the grado system whereby brevet ranks were con­ ferred on officers who were deemed worthy of
particular reward. Under this system a lieutenant who was given the grado oí captain would continue to serve in his former rank, but would take prece­ dence over his fellow lieutenants as soon as a vacant captaincy occurred. Needless to
say, like everything else, the benefits of this 20 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War system were gleaned by the better connected officers. Although firm evidence is lacking, it is likely that in the late eighteenth century an
increasing premium was being placed upon membership of the military estate, for a commission was of con­ siderable economic and social value. For the nobility in particular, service in the army provided a means by which they could reassert
their status in the face of its steady erosion by the monarchy. At the same time, the financial advantages which it offered, such as freedom from all ordinary taxation, were a safeguard against the onward march of inflation. In addition,
the fuero militar brought many judicial advantages. All those to whom it applied had the right to be tried by military tribunals, which were not only quicker in their proceedings than the civil courts, but also notoriously partial in their
judgements in any case where an officer was in conflict with a civilian. Furthermore, the fuero also secured a certain amount of protection against the Inquisition.87 A commission was also a valua­ ble social commodity, for, aside from
being entitled to the deference of their fellow citizens, officers enjoyed the right to wear uniform and bear arms. Although much valued by Spaniards for its own sake, the significance of this privilege only becomes apparent when it is
viewed in the context of the cortejo. This custom seems to have arisen as a response to the unhappiness engendered by arranged marriages. With the tacit consent of their husbands, married women would select some eligible young man to be
their cortejo, or champion, confidant and general escort.88 Thanks to their ability to cut a more dashing figure than any of their rivals, officers naturally enjoyed a considerable advantage.89 In the latter half of the eighteenth century
all these factors combined to produce a considerable revival of interest in a military career amongst the nobility.90 At the same time, however, member­ ship of the military estate was becoming equally attractive to that section of the
population which lacked hijodalgo status, but yet enjoyed a certain degree of prosperity and education. The ranks of this group had been swelled in the course of the eighteenth century by the emergence of the characteristic figure of the
cacique, rural nota­ bles who had rented the estates of absentee grandees, dipossessed their poorer neighbours, or acquired the lion’s share of the common lands in those towns where it was customary to share them out among the inhabitants.
Other factors favouring the domination of this incipient rural bourgeoisie was their de facto control of local Under the ancien régime 21 government, and their ability to exploit their poorer neighbours, and turn both inflation and harvest
failures to their own economic advantage.91 Nor were the caciques the only group that were emer­ ging to challenge the traditional division between the hidalguía and the estado llano. The multiplicity of councils and courts by which Spain
was governed had spawned a large class of bureaucrats and officials, whose ambitions had been inflated by the tendency of Carlos III to appoint many of his leading ministers from amongst their number. Finally, the rapid economic growth of
the late eighteenth century gave considerable stimulation to the commercial community. Given the perquisites enjoyed by the officer corps, it was only natural that the nascent middle classes should have looked upon it with eyes that were
increasingly covetous. The increasing pressure on the officer corps inevitably created serious tensions within its ranks. Although the Ordenanzas limited the number of cadets to a maximum of only two per regiment, many colonels allowed
themselves to be persuaded to ignore these restric­ tions.92 Yet the growing numbers of cadets could not be accommo­ dated by the limited opportunités for promotion offered by a peace­ time army. The only means by which surplus officers
could be found a niche was to attach them to regiments as supernumeraries. Known as agregados, these men drew full pay and were automatically entitled to any vacancy which occurred for an officer of their rank. Not surprisingly, they were
intensely disliked by the efectivos, one of whom wrote: ‘... the difference between an agregado and an efec­ tivo lies in the work: an efectivo has to take care of everything pertaining to his company and carry out his duty, whilst the
agre­ gado does no more than take the pay’.93 The only officers who could hope to cut their way through this accumulation of obstacles were those with influence at court, commoners and poor hijosdalgo for the most part being left to suffer
a life that was both harsh and frustrating. Few could hope to rise above the rank of captain; they had no say in the running of their regiments; and they were exposed to the jeers of their wealthier fellows, who referred scathingly to the
ex-rankers as los pinos in what was presumably a reference to the height requirements of the rank and file.94 To make matters worse, the life that they led was often ‘such as to benumb all their faculties’.95 They were over­ whelmed with
paperwork, their pay was inadequate, their garrisons were frequently ‘lonely places without resources either in respect to 22 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War instruction or genteel amusements’, they received little leave, and the
regulations of the army’s contributory pension fund, the Monte Pio Militar, forbade them to marry until they had obtained a captaincy. Even though they might not reach this rank before the age of sixty, officers without private means could
not afford to disobey, for to do so would be to forego the only income to which they could look forward in their old age.96 There were other possibilities, such as the grant of a señorío belonging to one of the four military orders, or
membership of the Order of Carlos III (which conveyed a substantial pension). Some officers were also able to find posts in the bureau­ cracy, the Resguardo (a heterogeneous collection of local police units), or one of the numerous
companies of invalids and urban militia. Yet the more worthwhile of these rewards were only open to the nobility, whilst all of them depended upon the royal favour. Many officers were therefore forced back upon the increasingly inadequate
payments of the Monte Pío Militar.97 If the social and economic divisions that characterised the officer corps were in the long term to be fatal to the army’s domination of civilian society, in the short term they could not but impair its
