efficiency. Although the officers promoted from the ranks were poorly educated, their conditions did not provide them with any incentive to improve themselves. On the contrary, as one observer noted, thanks to their ‘dull, monotonous round
of daily obscurity, they become stupefied, lose all their energy and activity, and contract habits of apathy and insociability which have an unhappy and permanent influence upon their minds’.98 The low rate of promotion at the same time
served to increase the average age of the officer corps: by 1806 this was sixty-one for colonels, fifty-nine for captains and fifty-eight for lieutenants, one cavalry regiment even having a squadron commander aged seventy-nine.99 If the
bulk of the officer corps was ignorant and aging, the quality of its more privileged members was little better. Carlos III had established a number of military academies for the training of officer cadets, but they were simply too small to
have had any real impact.100 In any case, in 1790 Carlos IV closed most of them down in the belief that they were potential foci of progressive thought.101 Most cadets were posted directly to their regiments and placed in the charge of an
experienced officer who was supposed to watch over their morals, teach them the basis of military science, and instil in them the principles of honour and subordination. The formal teaching of the academy was thus to Under the ancien
régime 23 be replaced by emulation, observation and experience.102 This system of instruction was never likely to produce outstanding results. On the contrary, it was liable to perpetuate all the evils from which the officer corps already
suffered, for military life was simply not conducive to the education of adolescent boys. The heart of the problem was the constant emphasis on personal honour. Although originally based upon the principles of chivalry, the need which it
imposed on each and every officer constantly to be mindful of his standing with his fellows had produced an atmosphere of pride, jealousy and rivalry. The ‘honour’ of many officers in fact became an exaggerated amour propre: duelling
became frequent, and repri­ mands from superiors came to be regarded by some officers as personal insults for which they were prone to demand instant satis­ faction.103 The cult of honour also inspired much womanising, encouraged of course
by the custom of the cortejo, and this in turn led to the adoption of ever more flamboyant styles of dress.104 As many officers simply did not have the money to live in the style which was required of them, gambling also became
widespread.105 Thanks in large part to their feeling of superiority with regard to the civilan population, many officers indulged in all sorts of daredevilry. In Madrid the guards officers spent their free time in obstructing the
authorities, picking fights with the swashbuckling majos, and disrupting balls and fiestas.106 The baiting of the civilian population often reached extreme limits. For example, one English traveller has an amusing story of how a group of
young officers decided to teach a notoriously licentious monastery a lesson by bringing a party of whores within its walls in the guise of society ladies. Knowing what the sequel was likely to be, they asked the monks to entertain the
ladies whilst they themselves went hunting. The result was exactly what they had intended - ‘The hot-livered monks ... smarted so severely for the favours which they obtained from the good humoured nymphs that for many months afterwards
the chief digni­ taries of the house were dispersed about in the neighbouring towns under the care of the barber surgeons.’107 Despite the existence of a minority of intellectual and cultivated officers, such as the ilustrados, Cadalso and
Aguirre, for the most part studying was looked upon with scorn, and promotion sought by toadying to superiors. If a certain interest was sometimes evinced in the ideas of the Enlightenment, this was generally merely the product of a desire
to appear fashionable.108 To expect the cadets to receive a 24 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War reasonable education whilst serving with their regiments was there­ fore naive in the extreme. As the Marqués de Casa Cagigal pointed out
in 1798, ‘As youths separated from their parents with full liberty at the age when this is most prejudicial to them, they acquire every vice, weaken their health with licentious disorders, and ruin their. .. families with exorbitant
expenses stemming from gambling and other expences.’109 Spain was to reap a bitter harvest from the mediocrity of so many of her officers in the War of Independence of 1808—14. In the meantime their vanity and egotism could not fail to
effect the army’s standing with the civilian population, particularly given the domi­ nant position enjoyed by the military in Spanish society. Thanks to the institution of the Captain Generalcy, the army had been elevated to a central
position in the governance of Bourbon Spain. As the personal representatives of the monarch, the Captains General stood at the head of the administrative and judicial machine in every part of the Kingdom, sitting as the ex oficio
presidents of the Audiencias and Chancillerias which handled the day-to-day business of government at a provincial level.110 Their civil functions were reinforced by the supervisory functions which had been allotted to the Supreme Council
of War with regard to the economy, particularly in matters relating to the production of armaments.111 The extent to which individual Captains General actually made use of these functions obviously varied according to their personality and
disposition, but numerous examples may be found of their involvement in massive programmes of public works such as those carried out by Mina, O’Reilly and Socorro in Cádiz and Barcelona. When the last of these officers invaded southern
Portugal in 1807, it was entirely in char­ acter that his first action should have been to plan a similar improve­ ment for the town of Elvas.112 The civil powers enjoyed by the Captains General were not simply a reflection of the
Bourbons’ complete dependence on the army in the first years of their reign, for this force was used as one more element in their efforts at etatist economic development. Just as artillery officers administered Spain’s arsenals, so the
corps of engineers superintended the construction of the never-to-be-finished Canals of Aragón and Castile, and the improvements that were made in the highway between Madrid and Andalucia in the 1780s. Furthermore, these projects were
carried out with the labour of thousands of common soldiers.113 The very organisation of the army was an Under the ancien régime 25 additional testimony to the determination of the régime that it should not constitute a complete drain on
the resources of the state, if it could not actually be made to augment them: men who could contribute to society in some more useful way were exempted from military service, soldiers were released from the service for several months in
every summer in order that they could help bring in the harvest in their home villages, and devices such as the leva employed to find occupation for the destitute. Above all, however, it was as much the responsibility of the Intendants to
promote agriculture, industry and trade as it was to provide for the upkeep of the army; indeed, they may safely be regarded as the lynchpins in the Bourbon policy of fomento,114 Finally, military influence was also strong in the
judiciary, and in matters relating to the protection of society. Although the Captains General did not preside over the Audiencias and Chancillerias when they were sitting as courts of law, the extension of the fuero militar to many cases
in which civilians were involved brought the army squarely into the judicial process.115 In addition, the army provided the only means by which the state could maintain law and order, or take action in cases of natural disaster. Soldiers
could be summoned by the civil magistrates to put down outbreaks of rioting, whilst in rural areas they also established a precedent for the later activities of the Guardia Civil, fighting numerous skirmishes against bands of smugglers and
bandits (to ensure that the troops remained reliable in such situations they were rotated in their garrisons every three years).116 Similarly, it was the army that was turned out to fight the huge fire that broke out in Madrid in September
of 1804, and to man the cordon sanitaire which prevented the spread of yellow fever from Andalucia to the rest of Spain between 1801 and 1804.117 The very ubiquity of the army’s presence was bound to inject civil-military relations with a
certain degree of tension. Such friction can be seen in most European countries in the latter half of the eighteenth century, but in Spain a number of factors coincided to ensure that it was particularly intense. The ordinary inhabitants
hated the imposition of military service and of the traditional dues of bagajes, alojamientos, y utensilios, whilst they also disliked the soldiers themselves, the Motin de Esquilache of 1766 being in large part the consequence of the
general hatred of the Guardias Walonas.118 Popular detestation of the army was shared by the more affluent classes of society, although this might not have been the case 26 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War had the increasingly
powerful rural bourgeoisie enjoyed freedom of access to the military estate and equality of promotion within its ranks. In theory, however, only hijosdalgos could enter the officer corps without first serving a painful apprenticeship in
the rank and file, whilst promotion was dominated by the aristocracy. Finally, for all the privileges with which it had been loaded by the Bourbons, perceptive observers could see that the army was suffering from serious defects. A letter
published in the Correo de Madrid in March 1788 is highly indicative of the manner in which the army was regarded by the rest of society. It was occasioned by a series of articles written by Lieutenant Colonel Manuel de Aguirre in support
of the Spanish Enlightenment against its traditionalist critics. The author confessed himself to be astonished that Aguirre had ventured to express an opinion on matters that were had nothing to do with ‘a profession that I... thought
barbarous, ignorant, unjust, libertine, arrogant, bloodthirsty’, and whose members consisted of ‘the worthless and criminal scum of the nation’. As some of the greatest republics and empires in history had been governed by the force of
arms, he was forced to conclude that this view might be unjust, but it was impos­ sible to deny that the army’s numerous failings had produced ‘the greatest scorn for the military profession, and all those who follow it’. Signing himself
as el medio convertido, he therefore challenged Aguirre to provide an explanation of the army’s organisation and the role that it should play in the civilian government.119 Aguirre’s response can hardly have been regarded as satisfactory.
After pointing out that to answer his critic’s challenge in full would require a complete treatise on the military art, he began by lamenting the manner in which the various professions had become separated up from one another. The dangers
of such a situation were shown by the example of ancient Rome. At first, all men had served in the army, and Rome had prospered, but then society had become corrupted by luxury, and the military profession had become looked upon as the
preserve of mercenaries and wrong-doers. Because the professional soldiers lacked the motivation of the citizens’ militia that they replaced, Rome had ultimately been overthrown. In the light of this experience later nations had always
