immeasurably worsened, as his allegations were universally rejected as a devious plot to destroy Fernando; although the Prince was ultimately pardoned, the favourite was henceforth regarded as a tyrant. Not only was the regime now totally
isolated at home, but for the first time Napoleon began seriously to consider the possibility of overthrowing the Bourbon monarchy. If his move against Portugal had had the useful side effect of allowing him to send troops into Spain,
until now his policy had been directed towards ensuring the continued loyalty of his Spanish allies with the promise of Lusitanian acquisitions. The revelation of serious dynastic feuding in the Spanish court led him to re-evaluate his
position. Ever suspicious of Great Britain, he was afraid that she might exploit the chaos with which Spain seemed threatened as a result of the Affair of El Escorial to wean her away from her alliance with France. Even if this did not
occur, conflict within Spain would negate her value as an ally and severely compromise the position of the French forces that had been sent to Portugal. Aside from these miltary pressures, other factors were also encouraging the Emperor to
intervene, including his interest in seizing control of the revenues of the Spanish empire and in annexing the area north of the river Ebro, and his desire to transform Spain into a reliable satellite state. Given the general detestation
of Godoy and Spain’s defenceless situation, the project seemed to offer every advantage.120 Though as yet undetermined as to the precise form his intervention should take, from November 1807 onwards Napoleon began to send large numbers of
French troops into northern Spain. Although increasingly perturbed, Godoy had no option but to maintain the fiction that the new arrivals were on their way to Portugal or had come to defend Spain against a British attack. The Emperor had
in the meantime been reviewing his options. Initially inclined to dethrone Carlos IV in favour of Fernando, he eventually came to the conclusion that the latter would be no more reliable as an ally than Godoy. The logical course of action
therefore seemed to be to overthrow the Bourbons altogether and to replace them with a puppet monarch drawn from Napoleon’s own family. After a short period of ever increasing tension, in February 1808 the French forces already in Spain
duly seized the vital border fortresses of Pamplona 64 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War and San Sebastian. Meanwhile, a new army marched into Catalonia, occupying Figueras and Barcelona. On 10 March Marshal Murat entered Spain as
Napoleon’s personal envoy and commander-inchief of all the 100,000 French troops in the Peninsula. He brought with him yet another army corps at whose head he immediately set out for Madrid. Only a few days before the French went into
action Godoy and Carlos IV had received a list of sweeping demands from Napoleon which included the cession of the left bank of the Ebro to France. As this demand could never have been met, it was clear that it was only being presented in
order to furnish a pretext for Napoleon to enforce a change of government in Madrid. Faced by the stark choice between war and surrender, Godoy decided to fight. He had already withdrawn the division of the Marqués del Socorro from
southern Portugal, and he now ordered these troops to join all the other forces in central Spain behind the line of the river Tagus. Protected by this rearguard, the Spanish royal family could then retire to Seville from whence they could
either preside over resistance to the French or join their Portuguese counterparts in fleeing to South America. Urgent messages were also dispatched to every military commander in the Peninsula, even in the occupied areas, to make ready
for war.121 Logical as this plan was, as Toreno noted, ‘proposed by the Príncipe de la Paz, it did not have a single supporter*.122 As it was universally believed that the French intended no more than ‘the regency of Fernando and the ruin
of Godoy’, the latter’s attempts at resistance were regarded as a desper­ ate shift to evade the retribution that was about to come down upon his head.123 The femandinos shared in this general conviction: believing that the arrival of
Murat’s army in Madrid would herald at the very least the downfall of Godoy, they had absolutely no interest in resisting the French. On the contrary, they now sought not only to prevent the outbreak of war, but to install a new regime in
Madrid that would be looked upon with favour by the Emperor. In order to achieve these aims, a two-pronged strategy was adopted. Whilst Fernando and his adherents in the court sought to dissuade Carlos IV from the idea of resistance,
Montijo and Infantado prepared an insurrection.124 Their aims were in the meantime being facilitated by a number of officers and officials who on their own initiative had already taken action to sabotage Godoy’s orders.125 Never a man to
relish decisive action, the King had been thoroughly confused by the fortuitous The era of Godoy 65 arrival of a number of flattering messages and gifts from Napoleon, and therefore agreed that the question should be referred to the
Council of Castile. Having long since been won over to the femandino cause, the Council ruled that there was no need to concentrate troops at Aranjuez because the court was in no danger. In a clear testimony to the aspirations of the
disaffected magnates, it also stated that before taking a decision on any matter that affected ‘the existing political and military system’, the King should in future always consult the opinion of his leading subjects. In short, the
governance of Spain should take full account of the views of the grandeza.126 Although he still ordered the Guards to concentrate at Aranjuez, on 16 March Carlos bowed before the mounting pressure and issued a proclamation renouncing the
idea of flight and reiterating his confidence in Napoleon.127 The conspirators nevertheless continued with their plans for an insurrection, a task in which they were aided by the excited state of public opinion. The wildest rumours were
circulating to explain the crisis, with Godoy being variously accused of trying to evade the just deserts that were being prepared for him by Napoleon, and of betraying Spain to the Emperor in return for an endorsement of his personal
power. There was also a strong belief that in an obvious moment of national danger, it was the duty of the King not to run away, but to protect his subjects.128 When the Conde de Montijo and some of his confederates began to preach the
need to go to Aranjuez to prevent the flight of the royal family in the villages around Madrid, they therefore met a ready response. Thousands of people began to pour into the real sitio, where they besieged the palace and set a watch on
all the roads leading out of the town.129 Aranjuez could produce its own mob even without their assistance, for the departure of the court would have represented economic disaster for its inhabitants as most of them were in some way
dependant upon the royal palace. As Blanco White noted, ‘Madrid and the real sitios would sink into insignificance were the court to be moved to a distance. The dissolution of the most wretched government fills its dependants with
consternation.’150 Important though the popular aspect of the Motin de Aranjuez undoubtedly was, it should not be allowed to obscure the fact that the spearhead of the revolt was wholly military. But for the desertion of the armed forces
to the rioters, there is no reason to suppose that the riots would have been any more dangerous than the Motin de 66 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War Esquiladle of 1766. However, the Guard had been subverted by its hatred of Godoy, as
had already been suggested at the time of the Affair of El Escorial: not only had Fernando’s escort of Guardias de Corps attempted to prevent the removal of incriminating documents from his apartments, but elements of the garrison of
Madrid had demonstrated in his favour.131 As the Guards were well aware that the departure of the royal family would lead to their being ‘levelled with the rest of the army’, the numerous femandinos amongst their officers, such as the
three Palafox brothers, had no difficulty in persuading their men that the monarchy was in danger.132 Their efforts soon bore fruit: all the Guard units already at Aranjuez ‘engaged to support the people’, and fraternised with the excited
crowd, cheering Fernando to the echo whenever he appeared in public. Meanwhile, still further exciement was caused by the orders issued on 16 March for the battalions of the Guardias de Infantería that were still in Madrid to march
immediately for Aranjuez.133 Although tempers were now at fever pitch, the necessary pretext for a rebellion - preparations for the immediate departure of the royal family - stubbornly refused to materialise. At the same time, it was known
that the arrival of the troops of the Marqués del Socorro was imminent, and that their support could not be guaranteed. With Murat’s army coming ever closer, the conspirators seem to have decided to precipitate a crisis. There is no
evidence to suggest that the royal family was going anywhere, but on the afternoon of 17 March a rumour suddenly spread that Fernando had told an officer of his bodyguard, ‘The journey is tonight and I do not want to go.’134 What happened
next is uncertain, but it seems likely that the conspirators laid plans to initiate the coup at midnight that same night.135 In the event, however, the final spark was almost certainly accidental. Late in the evening of 17 March a group of
Godoy’s hated Guardias de Honor were confronted by an angry crowd of guardsmen and civilians outside the royal palace. In the ensuing quarrel a shot was fired, whereupon the mob immediately poured into the streets and made straight for
Godoy’s residence in search of the favourite. The few loyal sentries were swept aside and the building was ransacked, but Godoy himself escaped by hiding in a roll of carpet.136 Two days of intermittent rioting followed in which the Guards
played a leading role. Of their officers, only Diego de Godoy attempted to restore order, and he was quickly arrested by Montijo. Throughout the disturbances events were orchestrated by the Count The era of Godoy 67 so as to bring growing
pressure on the terrified Carlos and Maria Luisa, whilst reassuring and encouraging Fernando, who by all accounts was nearly as frightened as his parents.137 The King and Queen were quickly persuaded firstly to dismiss Godoy, and then to
have him imprisoned when thirst drove him out of his refuge. The disturbances continued, however, for the femandinos were determined to show Carlos that his position had become untenable. The final blow was delivered on the morning of 19
March, when a delegation headed by the Principe de Castelfranco, the commander of the Guardias Walonas, warned the King that fresh violence was expected. Asked whether the troops could be relied upon, Castel­ franco replied that only
Fernando could answer for their loyalty. Weary and demoralised, Carlos IV could take no more, and finally abdicated his crown into the hands of the triumphant Fernando.138 In a development heavy with significance for the future, the fall
of the favourite had been brought about by the first pronunciamiento in Spanish history. In order to achieve their ends, the femandinos had had no option but to appeal to the discontent that had been occa­ sioned by Godoy’s rule in certain
elements of the armed forces. In response, the Royal Guards had duly 'pronounced’ against Godoy in favour of the alternative regime of Fernando VII. The rest of the army then went over to the rebellion en masse, soldiers being promi­ nent
