reform as essential if Spain was to have any chance of retaining her political independence. Together with a number of progressive offi­ cers, including Tomás de Moria, Benito Pardo de Figueroa and the Marqués de Casa Cagigal, he mapped
out a programme of reform which he laid before Carlos IV in a long manifesto dated 26 February 1796. Its main elements were that the army should be given an adequate system of recruitment, that the columnar tactics used by the French with
such success should be introduced, that training and discipline be improved through the establishment of ‘camps of The era of Godoy 41 instruction’ and new military açademies, that the army be pruned of corps such as the Royal Guards and
provincial militia whose dubious military value was far outweighed by their cost, and finally that significant changes be effected in the supply system, the officer corps, the cavalry, the artillery and the engineers. To achieve these
ends, Godoy urged the King to establish a special commission charged with the task of producing a specific plan of action.16 Still pleased with his favourite for ending the war, on 16 April 1796 Carlos IV duly appointed twenty-three senior
generals and bureaucrats to be members of the Junta de Constitución y Ordenan­ zas del Ejercito (more commonly known as the Junta de Generales y Ministros). Their task was to examine the size, composition, organi­ sation, recruitment,
training, tactics, provisioning, maintenance, privileges, and rewards of the army, the role of the provincial militia, the condition of Spain’s fortifications, armaments and munitions works, and, in short, ‘all matters concerning war’.17
The breadth of this purview seemed to presage the sort of root and branch reform of the military estate that was so desperately needed, but the chance was to be lost, thanks very largely to the controversy that was engendered by the
perennial problem of manpower. The very size of the forces that the French had shown themselves able to deploy made a solution to this problem a matter of the first importance, for it was clear that the army would not only have to be
brought up to strength but also increased in numbers. Added emphasis was given to the question by the manpower shortage that was revealed in the immediate aftermath of the war. Most of the soldiers who had volunteered during the war had to
be released in 1795 as they had only enlisted for the duration of hostilities. Godoy reported that 24,000 men had been killed in the course of the fighting and that at least as many had deserted. There were no means to replace these losses
nor even to fill the gap that would soon be left by the release of the wartime quintas}3 As experience had shown that there were never sufficient volunteers to keep the army up to strength, the Junta de Generales y Ministros was charged
with the design of a new system of conscription that would produce the requisite supply of manpower but at the same time cause ‘the least possible prejudice* to agriculture, industry and the population as a whole.19 Had they been able to
do so, the reformers would have preferred to forgo the use of conscription altogether because of the drain which it imposed on the national economy. Godoy in 42 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War particular always demonstrated
considerable awareness of the influ­ ence which military policy could have on both agriculture and manu­ factures. In 1795, for example, he had flirted with the idea of abolishing the system of exemptions, only to abandon it for fear of
the damage that would thus have been caused to the ‘productive’ classes of the population.20 In February 1796, he had told the King that the size of the army had to be governed by the proportion of the budget and the population that could
be mobilised in its service without prejudice to the navy, the merchant marine, and ‘industry and agriculture, the principal nerve of our strength and wealth’.21 Similarly, after the War of the Oranges had been brought to a close in 1801,
he showed himself to be most anxious to demobilise the provincial militia and to restore the army’s carts and mules to their original owners in the shortest possible time.22 So strong was the reformers’ dislike of conscription that they
even rejected the sorteo, which was condemned on the grounds that it ‘makes [military] service odious and leads to the depopulation of entire provinces’.23 They also expressed much interest in plans that would have obviated the need for
conscription altogether, such as the establishment of military orphanages from which foundlings could be drafted into the army, and improvements in the conditions of the rank and file designed to encourage voluntary enlistment and
discourage desertion.24 Forced to turn to conscription despite themselves, the reformers immediately demonstrated their refusal to recognise the realities of the new warfare by rejecting the idea of universal conscription. Unable to accept
the economic and political consequences of organising an army that was large enough to allow Spain to hold her own against the massive forces that could now be deployed by France, they cited a long series of historical precedents to demon­
strate the military superiority of a regular army.25 Rather than transforming Spain into a nation-in-arms, the reformers instead sought to reform her on the model of Frederician Prussia, to which their attention had been drawn by a visit
to that country in 1787 on the part of Tomás de Moria. Prussia had been divided into a series of cantons, each of which was assigned the task of supplying a specific regiment with an annual quota of recruits. In order to reduce the burden
on the economy to the greatest degree possible, after receiv­ ing their basic training the conscripts only served with their units for two months of each year, for the rest of the time being dismissed to The era of Godoy 43 their homes. In
accordance with this model, it was proposed that the Spanish army should be divided into two halves, the ejército per­ manente and the ejército de campaña. The former was to be com­ posed of all the foreign troops, the third battalions of
the line infantry regiments, the light infantry, the cavalry, and the artillery. Recruited from a mixture of foreigners, levas and volunteers, these troops would be permanently under arms and would perform all the duties required of a
standing army in peacetime. In contrast, the ejército de campaña^ which was to be composed of the first and second battalions of the Spanish line infantry regiments, would consist of conscripts who would be raised and trained according to
a copy of the Prussian system. Manifold advantages were claimed for this plan. The financial savings it entailed would enable Spain to maintain a much larger army. The agricultural labour force would not be denuded. The troops would be
healthier in mind and body because they would be spared the corrupting and slothful monotony of barrack life. The division of Spain into cantons would facilitate the organisation of a system of permanent divisions, just as the annual
‘camps of instruc­ tion’ which the conscripts would have to attend would provide an opportunity for the introduction of the tactical innovations of the Revolutionary Wars. Hostility to conscription would be reduced because the conscripts
could rely on serving in their home districts in the company of their friends and neighbours. They would only be away from their homes for a very short space of time, whilst they would no longer have to serve with the ‘scum of the earth’
who had hitherto constituted the bulk of the rank and file. Because of the reduced effect on the economy, the call-up could be made more equitable as it would be possible to reduce the number of exemptions. Reducing the unpopularity of the
sorteo would allow the government to impose it with greater frequency, thereby unleashing a further chain of advantages. An annual sorteo would allow a reduction in the number of men taken in each ballot. The authorities charged with its
imposition would become more familiar with their duties, and would in consequence be less likely to commit the abuses that had helped make the sorteo so unpopular in the past. The new-found ability to rely upon this measure for the
recruitment of the army would also have a favourable effect upon its quality: in future, the bulk of the soldiery would be drawn from the peasantry, the class which it was conventional to regard as that which was most 44 The Spanish army
in the Peninsular War imbued with the martial virtues. One last advantage of the new scheme concerned the provincial militia. Many of the reformers had expressed grave doubts as to the value of this force, and their plan offered the
opportunity of abolishing it altogether since its dudes could now be carried out by the ejército permanente. In this manner, both the cost of the armed forces and the burden of conscription would be reduced still further.26 Predictably
enough, the reformers’ enthusiastic support for the new scheme was not shared by the more conservative members of the commission, or by those whose special interests were threatened by the disappearance of such units as the provincial
militia. Some of the arguments that were advanced against the scheme were so specious as to suggest an absolute predisposition against any reform what­ soever, but the reformers’ ideas were nevertheless marred by serious flaws. Not only
could it justifiably be argued that the training received by the ejército permanente would be less than adequate, but previous experiments with the release of conscripts had been a complete failure as the men had simply deserted en
masse,17 As far as the conservatives were concerned, the solution was to disband the third battalions of the infantry regiments, which they had always regarded as being decidedly new-fangled, and to draft their members into the rest of the
army. Left intact, the provincial militia could then be used as a trained reserve.28 The reformers’ plans were therefore rejected, but not before Carlos IV had become thoroughly alarmed. Terrified of revolution and surrounded by
aristocratic courtiers who were all too anxious to denounce the favourite, the King allowed himself to be persuaded that Godoy’s plans consulted a dangerous threat to the stability of the régime. On 7 July 1796 he accordingly ordered the
commission to suspend its sittings, and two months later dissolved it altogether.29 Thus was lost Spain’s best opportunity for a comprehensive reform of the military estate, but, for all that reform was now certain to be piecemeal, Godoy
attempted to continue with his plans. Packing the administration of the army with his supporters, including several members of his own family, he sought to tackle the problem of recruitment with the tools that were already to hand. Fresh
sources of foreign recruits were found in the large numbers of prisoners who had been captured by the French in the Italian campaign of 1796, as well as in deserters from the four emigré regiments in the Portuguese service. Indeed, so many
of the former were sold by their captors to The era of Godoy 45 the Spaniards that one third of the rank and file of some regiments were said to be made up of Austrians.30 As these reinforcements could be little more than a palliative,
Godoy seized upon a suggestion originally put forward by his con­ servative opponents for the army to be kept up to strength by drafts from the provincial militia rather than by conscription.31 If this plan was to work, it was essential
that conscription for the militia should be extended to the forai regions. The favourite had always stated this to be one of his objectives, and had already attempted to make more use of their manpower by increasing the number of light
