infantry regiments traditionally recruited from them. As the war of 1793-95 had produced plans for a Valencian homeguard, it was logical that that province should be chosen for the formation of six new provin­ cial regiments of provincial
militia in 1798.32 In addition, Godoy sought to introduce many of the other reforms that had been lost by the collapse of the commission of 1796. ‘Camps of instruction’ were established at Cáceres, Algeciras and San Roque, where Pardo de
Figueroa and Casa Cagigal commenced the introduction of French tactics.33 At the same time a topographical bureau was added to the corps of engineers, and experiments were carried out with horse artillery batteries and pontoon bridge
companies.34 Yet for all the importance placed by Godoy upon military reform, all this activity amounted to little more than tinkering with details. The fundamental problems facing the army—the establishment of an adequate system of
recruitment and the logistical infrastructure necessary to support large scale military operations — were not addressed. Writing in 1798, the Marqués de Casa Cagigal could therefore complain, ‘At present our army is a weak skeleton, incap­
able of taking the field should this become necessary, small in numbers, lacking in training, and unprovided with everything that is necessary for its operations.’35 Given time Godoy might have been more successful, notwithstanding the
immense economic difficulties that had been occasioned by the Spanish involvement in the Revolu­ tionary Wars, but in March 1798 he was forced temporarily to retire from public life. Always regarded as an upstart who owed his posi­ tion
solely to his prowess in the Queen’s bedchamber, Godoy stood little chance of obtaining the support of the most respected figures of Spanish society, such as the famous ilustrado, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos. The favourite’s standing in
the political nation was also severely damaged by the shortcomings of his financial policy. In 46 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War order to finance Spain’s rearmament, the government had had recourse to the wholesale issue of
government bonds. The British naval blockade imposed after 1796 cut off the colonial revenue that was the sole guarantor of these vales reales. Inflation therefore soared and the government’s credit collapsed, leaving Godoy with no option
but to attempt to finance his activities by imposing a series of new taxes on the wealthier classes of Spanish society, from which even the Church was not exempt.36 The growing isolation experienced by Godoy left him extremely vulnerable
to the intrigues of his many enemies in the Spanish court. Led by a leading official of the Supreme Council of War, José Antonio Caballero, the growing anti-Godoyist clique sought to per­ suade the paranoid Carlos IV that all reform was
unwise in an age of revolution. Meanwhile, the King was also coming under pressure from the French Directory to renounce his favourite, for Godoy had persistently opposed every French attempt to draw Spain deeper into the war. In
particular, he had refused to agree to an invasion of Portugal (which officially remained at war with France until August 1797), and to send a Spanish fleet to take part in a descent on Great Britain. By early 1798 Franco-Spanish relations
were close to breaking point. Rather than risk a rupture with the Republic, on 28 March Godoy resigned from his post as Secretary of State.37 There immediately followed a purge of his supporters: accused of being 'dangerous innovators of
sinister intent’, they were replaced by generals such as Gonzalo O’Farrill and Antonio Cornel, who were later to prove themselves to be among the favourite’s most bitter « enemies. For all the criticism that its members had heaped upon
Godoy, the new government proved even less capable of meeting Spain’s prob­ lems. Whilst pursuing precisely the same foreign and domestic poli­ cies that had marked the regime of Godoy, they yet neglected the well-being of the army.
Meanwhile, the Queen was now showering her favours upon a pale substitute for the ousted Manuel in the figure of another young guardsman named Mallo.39 So serious did the situation in the army become that some officers were reduced to
begging for alms in the street.40 The extent of the problem was only revealed when Spain went to war against Portugal in 1801 thanks to the growing pressure that was being exerted by Napoleon to elimi­ nate British influence in that
country: several Spanish generals refused to accept the command on the grounds that the army was not The era of Godoy 47 in a fit state to take the field even against the weak opposition likely to be mounted by the Portuguese.41 Their
refusal cleared the way for Godoy’s rehabilitation. With his interest reawakened in military affairs, Carlos IV appointed the favourite to command the 60,000 men that had been mobilised against Portugal. There followed the brief War of the
Oranges (so-called because Godoy sent back to the Queen a branch of an orange tree plucked under fire at Elvas as a trophy). After a number of minor sieges and skirmishes, the Portu­ guese capitulated after only three weeks. Delighted with
Godoy’s achievements, and alerted to the problems of the army by the furious complaints the favourite had dispatched to him, Carlos IV rewarded him with the unprecedented rank of Generalísimo, and ordered him to undertake a comprehensive
reform of the military estate.42 It seemed that Godoy now had carte blanche for his programme of reform, but he almost immediately ran into fresh difficulties. In October 1800 new regulations had been issued for the sorteo, which had
sought to make this more effective and equitable by reducing the number of exemptions, ending the purchase of substitutes, and officially extending conscription to the forai provinces.43 The abolition of their privileges in this respect
had been already been presaged by the establishment of six regiments of provincial militia in Valencia in 1798. Amongst the propertied classes this measure had been relatively popular as commissions in the militia, which were in the gift
of the Ayuntamientos of the towns from which its regiments were drawn, brought considerable social prestige as well as access to the coveted fuero militar without at the same time incurring the hardships of active service.44 However, the
enthusiasm of the notables was not shared by the general public, whose deter­ mination to defend what little remained of the Valencian fuero after a century of Bourbon centralisation was reinforced by economic distress and the same
virulent opposition to military service that marked every other section of the Spanish people. In September 1801 the growing unrest burst into open rebellion.45 Fearing that the revolt would spread to Aragón and Catalonia, Godoy acted
quickly ‘to contain the evil and punish the insurgents’, dispatching troops to Valencia under the command of the Marqués de la Romana.46 When local magistrates subsequently complained that the repression was being conducted with
unnecessary savagery and demanded the arrest of troops who had fired on civilians, Godoy tartly replied, ‘Justice demands the punishment of the malcontents, and it is against them 48 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War and not the
troops that charges should be brought.’47 Order was duly restored, but it was nevertheless clear that the attempt to extend the militia system to Valencia was extremely impolitic. The offending regiments were therefore disbanded on the
face-saving pretext that the exempt provinces already provided their quota of troops through recruitment to the existing light infantry regiments.48 Despite this setback to his plans, in July 1802 Godoy issued new regulations for the
provincial militia. This force was now to consist of forty-three regiments, each consisting of one battalion with one grenadier and four fusilier companies. However, the grenadiers were permanently drawn off to serve in four élite
regiments, with two battalions apiece.49 The regulations also provided for the militia to be used as a source of manpower for the army, and in 1804 Godoy once more sought to extend it to the exempt provinces, this time choosing Vizcaya as
his target. Another severe outbreak of rioting forced the favourite to abandon the project, but in 1806 he revived the issue yet again, proposing that 30,000 militia should be raised from the exempt provinces. In practice, however, the
scheme was dead. Even where the militiamen had been drafted into the regular army, as in the lands of the Crown of Castile, all that had been achieved was to make the militia ballot as hated as the sorteo. As for the ex-militiamen
themselves, they were despised by the regular soldiers, who referred to them scathingly as ‘the innocents’.50 For all Godoy’s efforts, the army was consequently forced to rely upon its traditional sources of recruitment, to which recourse
conti­ nued to be had whilst the new measures were under consideration: for example, in 1805 a general leva of vagos was carried out in Madrid.51 Other than this, the best that Godoy could achieve was to introduce new regulations for the
line infantry that confirmed the existence of depot battalions in each regiment. Each of the thirty five Spanish and four foreign line regiments was now to consist of two field and one depot battalions. The first battalion was to have two
grenadier and two fusilier companies, and the other two four fusilier companies.52 However, useful though the depot battalions undoubtedly were, they could not act as a substitute for new recruits. Reliance on the traditional sources of
recruitment merely reinforced civilian hostility to military service, and thereby discouraged enlist­ ment. As desertion also continued to be as high as ever, in 1808 Spain could muster only 46,402 line infantrymen out of a theoretical
establishment of 87,984.53 The era of Godoy 49 Godoy proved equally unsuccessful in his attempt to improve the quality of the army. For example, the favourite had hoped to raise the standards of the officer corps through the establishment
of a network of military academies. Although his support for this measure had been one of the factors that had been instrumental in his temporary fall from grace in 1798, he had nevertheless continued to press it upon the King and Queen.54
Following his appointment as Generalísimo, Godoy was enabled to open general military academies at Alcalá de Henares, Valladolid and Granada. Access was still largely limited to the nobility (commoners were only admitted if their fathers
had attained the almost unheard of rank of lieutenant colonel), but some attempt was made to cater for the petty hidalguía: one hundred places at each school were subsidised and reserved for the sons of deceased hijodalgo officers and
officials.55 The value of these institutions was reduced by their small size — only 200 places apiece - and their excessively theoretical curriculum. In any case, in 1805 financial difficulties forced their amalgamation into a single
college at Zamora. The new institution had only sixty places, and even then it only catered for serving officers who were seconded to it from their regiments.56 With the opportunities for their instruction reduced still further by the
refusal of Carlos IV to permit the annual ‘camps of instruction’, the bulk of the officer corps remained as ill-educated as ever. In the absence of such diversions, military life continued in its usual dreary and monotonous fashion. Many
officers were too burdened with paperwork to be able to carry out their other duties; significantly, the reformers had proposed an increase in the staff of each regiment to relieve the pressure of administration.57 Meanwhile, discipline
