troops were soon fighting their way back into the city from their camps on the outskirts. Caught in the open streets and squares, the rioters were crushed without mercy. The only serious resistance came at the artillery park of Monteleón
which had been seized by a small party of troops headed by the artillery officers, Daoiz and Velarde. These officers are traditionally supposed already to have been attempting to organise resistance to the French before the Dos de Mayo.
Whether or not that was the case, they joined the madrileños with alacrity, and con­ ducted a desperate last stand in the artillery park until finally over­ whelmed by superior numbers.3 The Dos de Mayo totally discredited the Junta de
Gobierno. Even after receiving the news of the Ambuscade of Bayonne, it had sought to maintain order in the capital. As tension mounted, the garrison had therefore been confined to barracks and the sentries posted in public places
forbidden to carry ammunition. When fighting did break out, the Junta made repeated efforts to calm the populace, even lending Murat the services of the Guardias de Corps.4 Accord­ ing to the claims of members of the Junta, their apparent
collabor­ ation was merely a device that was designed to win time for the preparation of resistance in the provinces, but in the general view it was ascribed to treason. Even had this not been the case, the Junta was no longer in a
position to take effective action against the French, for its presidency had been assumed by Marshal Murat. The consequences were far reaching. With the way opened for extraofficial resistance, all the disaffected or discontented groups in
Spanish society were enabled to seize upon the organisation of an uprising as a means of realising their social and political aspirations. Furthermore, deprived of its only possible source of a central leader­ ship, the patriotic movement
was bound to be completely disunited. Although many cities witnessed anti-French disturbances in the period following the Dos de Mayo, there was an appreciable delay before any other risings took place. The degree of preparation which 78
The Spanish army in the Peninsular War this suggests is confirmed by the formation of conspiratorial cells in many cities in response to the news from Madrid and Bayonne. Examples include La Coruña, Oviedo, Valencia, Badajoz, Seville and
Zaragoza.5 The importance of these groups should not be over­ stated, however. Although they gave direction to the populace and orchestrated their demands, they did not create the popular sentiment which everywhere underlay the uprising.
The crowd in the Spanish revolution is a subject that cries out for serious analysis, but it is clear that much of Spain was suffused with an intense wave of social and political unrest. Notoriously proud and xenophobic, the Spaniards were
unlikely to have responded favourably to an attempt to impose regeneration upon them from the outside, and particularly not one which deprived them of the beloved Fernando VII. Their opposition was rendered all the more certain by the
manner in which their religious sensibilities had been outraged by the excesses of the French Revolution, not to mention France’s treatment of the Pope. Hostility to the French had also been stimulated by the war of 1793-95 and Spain’s
subsequent subordination to her powerful neighbour. In certain areas this had unleashed serious social tensions that were to find their outlet in the events of 1808. The clearest example is Valencia, where the important silk industry had
experi­ enced a severe depression in the course of the war. Furthermore, Hamnett has pointed out that seigneurial tensions in the province between the upper nobility and their tenants were particularly marked. It is therefore no surprise
to find that the Valencian uprising was among the bloodiest in Spain, being marred by the massacre of over 300 French residents, most of whom were members of the commercial community. Another area where social tension is clearly apparent
is Madrid, which had experienced a major growth in population in the latter years of the eighteenth century. As the newcomers could not be absorbed by the capital’s economy, they tended to become classic victims of urban marginalisation.
Hence the crowds of beggars complained of by Godoy. The extent to which the urban poor was affected by political considerations must be a matter of some doubt, but it is nevertheless clear that their hostility and resentment was always
open to exploitation by agitators of the likes of the Conde de Montijo.6 A number of problems surround the question of popular partici­ pation in the uprising. It may justly be maintained that in a country as poor as Spain, where the vast
majority of the population were The army and the revolution 79 illiterate, it is unwise to impart too strong a sense of national identity or political awareness to the common people. Furthermore, it is clear that the enthusiasm of May 1808
did not always produce wholehear­ ted support for the war effort. Yet the fact remains that even in those cities where there was a conspiracy, the risings retained a strong popular content. In a few cases, as in Seville, where the
conspirators were able to win over the garrison and launch a military coup, the crowd merely rallied to their leadership. However, other instances may be found, such as Valencia and Zaragoza where the conspira­ tors had to seize the
leadership of the revolt after the populace had taken to the streets. In Cartagena, too, the initial rising seems to have been a spontaneous response to the arrival of the definitive news of Fernando’s abdication. Finally, the crowd
undoubtedly took a lead­ ing role in the secondary insurrections that took place in response to the news of rebellion elsewhere: in town after town the arrival of emissaries from the nearest centre of revolt unleashed popular dis­
turbances which led to the creation of fresh patriotic juntas. As the conspiracies nevertheless played a vital role in fomenting resistance, they still deserve our attention. The French were later to allege that they were the work of
English agents, or of fanatical members of the Spanish clergy. However, the presence of the former is ruled out by the astonishment with which the news from Spain was received in London. As for the Church, as many ecclesiastics prea­ ched
submission to the French as placed themselves at the head of the patriots. Instead, the conspiracies drew their support from civilian notables, and subaltern officers of the army and navy. As the Duke of Wellington later wrote: It is my
opinion that the officers of the Spanish army and the employés of the government ... are the principal . . . supporters of the general sentiment which prevails among the people against the French. Excepting the grandees and a few men of
large estate . .. every person in Spain .. . above the class of the cultivators of the soil was in the civil, military or naval service of the government. All these consider themselves to be deprived of their profession by the
establishment of the government of Bonaparte, particularly the officers of the army . . ? The military was certainly in the forefront of many of the conspira­ cies. In Aragon the plot was headed by the dissident guards officer, José
Palafox, amongst whose confederates were numbered the com­ manders of the local Resguardo. In Asturias, army officers distri­ buted anti-French broadsheets and incited the populace to riot.8 In 2 The Spanish national uprising, May 1808 The
army and the revolution 81 Galicia the conspirators at La Coruña were largely drawn from the junior officers of the Navarra infantry regiment, whilst the rising at El Ferrol was led by retired naval officers, whose meagre pensions had not
been paid for the last two months.9 Subaltern officers were also important in Valencia and Cartagena, as well as in Andalucia where a plot was afoot to depose the Captain General, the Marqués del Socorro.10 The motivation for this activity
was more complicated than Wellington supposed, however. For most army officers, the change of régime did not imply any threat to their commissions. What was far more alarming was the prospect of being forcibly incorporated into the Grande
Armée and sent to serve in the ‘frozen north’ like the division of the Marqués de la Romana. Evidence that this was likely to be their fate was provided by the dispatch of the best troops of the Portuguese army to France early in 1808 as
the Légion Portugaise. Such fears were clearly instrumental in sparking off the rising at La Coruna, where an attempt on the part of the Captain General to defuse the tension, by sending the Navarra regiment out of the city, was
interpreted as the first stage of a supposed march into exile. Coupled with this hostility to entering the service of the Emperor, of course, was widespread devotion to the cause of Fernando VII, with which the army was just as strongly
permeated as the rest of society. Less altruistic motives also encouraged the subaltern officers to work for a rising. Not only might an opportunity be provided to remove unpopular superiors, but a war would guarantee the promotion which
so many of them had been denied. A similar mixture of motives can be found amongst the civilian notables. For many of them, patriotic opposition to the French was linked to a sincere belief that the supposed evils of the régime of Carlos
IV and Godoy had to be expurgated, as witness the wave of reformism that culminated in the famous Constitution of 1812. A considerable degree of opportunism is once again apparent, however. One of the chief preoccupations of the Cortes of
Cádiz was to be the abolition of seigneurial jurisdiction as well as of all restrictions on the sale and ownership of land. In doing so it was to be acting in accordance with the interests of those who had already benefited from the
considerable redistribution of property and sale of Church land that had taken place in the reign of Carlos IV - in other words the very urban professional, commercial and official groups that provided the personnel for many of the
conspiracies.11 82 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Finally, an uprising offered the notables the chance to settle many old scores with the army. Not only would it be possible to topple the generals from the exalted position which
they had hitherto enjoyed, but the notables would be able to share freely in the coveted fuero militar. In addition, all those men who held some grievance against Godoy would now be able to revenge themselves upon his protégés: a
considerable proportion of the various officers and officials mur­ dered in the course of the rising were either related to the favourite or known to be his partisans. The ability of both the subaltern officers and the civilian notables to
further their sectional interests under the guise of an uprising rested upon the manner in which the French had taken over the Junta de Gobierno in the wake of the Dos de Mayo. Under Murat’s presidency, this body was now ordering the
military authorities to oppose all resistance to the French. It was therefore possible for the conspirators to shelter behind the suspicion that the generals could not be trusted to support an insurrection. In addition, it could also be
argued that as 'almost all those who governed the provinces were the creatures of the Príncipe de la Paz ... they would sacrifice the people’s happiness to the vile and sordid interest of the infamous source of their fortune’.12 The
conspirators could therefore find good reason for organising the rising in such a manner as to exclude the legitimate authorities. By fomenting popular risings in which the military hierarchy had no share, they could force the generals to
