implemented immediately, there seems little doubt that Dupont could have got away, but a number of factors led him to delay his march until nightfall, thereby enabling Reding and Coupigny to get across his line of march. Even though the
French army had been split in two and a part of it trapped, all was not yet lost. On the one hand, Dupont had sufficient forces with him to stand a reasonable chance of breaking through had he launched them The army and the revolution 101
against the Spaniards in a concentrated mass. On the other, it was open to Vedel, who had now decided to return to Bailén, to take Reding and Coupigny in the rear. Yet neither occurred: whilst Dupont squandered his forces in a series of
piecemeal assaults that the Spaniards were easily able to beat off, Vedel was so dilatory in his return that he only arrived when the battle was already lost. With his artillery silenced, every unit in his army defeated, his troops
exhausted by the effects of a night march and then a day of battle without water in the full heat of an Andalucian summer, and Casta­ ños’ main body rapidly coming up in his rear, Dupont was forced to surrender. Even then, Vedel might
still have got away, for his troops were still intact and possessed a safe line of retreat to Madrid. However, the Spaniards secured his capitulation as well by promising that all the French forces would be returned to France by sea. As a
result, some 19,000 men fell into Spanish hands. In view of its immense repurcussions, it is important that the battle of Bailén should be placed in perspective. The troops of Reding and Coupigny had fought extremely well, but they had
only had to face around half the forces available to the French, Dupont having been accompanied by only 11,000 men. Dupont’s troops had been as mediocre as his conduct of the battle, whilst those of Castaños had largely consisted of
disciplined veterans. Disastrous though Bailén was, there was also no reason why the mass of French troops still in central and northern Spain could not have maintained their positions until such time as reinforcements had been sent by
Napoleon. Rather than standing their ground, however, on 1 August the French evacu­ ated Madrid, and retired behind the river Ebro. Not only had the campaign been lost by the French rather than won by the Spaniards, but tiie contribution
of the Spanish people was by no means so great as was later to be claimed by proponents of the Nation-in-Arms. Popular resistance had certainly helped demoralise the French, whilst armed civilians had fought with great courage in the
defence of beleaguered Spanish cities. In the field, however, the raw levies had proved to be a liability. Problems even occurred when they were employed in guerrilla operations. In Catalonia, for example, although the somatenes proved
adept at harassing the French columns, they could never be relied upon to appear at a given place and time, and were notoriously unwilling to serve outside their home districts.79 If the French were soon bottled up in Figueras and
Barcelona, the situation would undoubtedly have been different had 102 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War the invaders had more troops at their disposal, or the somatenes not been supported by regular troops brought from the Balearic
islands. Patriot Spain was blind to such nuances, however. Thanks in large part to the powerful undercurrent of anti-militarism which had accompanied the uprising, both the provincial juntas and the press represented the Spanish successes
as die fruit of popular heroism and magnified them beyond all reason. Just as Dupont’s half-trained conscripts were described as ‘the conquerors of the world*, so minor Spanish victories were compared to those of Jena and Auerstadt.80 The
press, in particular, became ever more euphoric, inventing victo­ ries were none had taken place, playing down the significance of Spain’s frequent defeats and giving credence to foolish rumours, of which perhaps the most absurd was that
the Spanish uprising had inspired the people of France to overthrow Napoleon.81 Whilst it could be argued that such propaganda was necessary to encourage popular resistance, its effects were to some extent counter-produc­ tive, for patriot
Spain became filled with increasing over-confidence and complacency.82 A further obstacle to the effective prosecution of military operations existed in the political struggle that now broke out over the establishment of a new central
government. At the beginning of the uprising, the fragmentation of Spain into its consti­ tuent regions had been a positive blessing, for the French had been denied the chance to decapitate the uprising at its very inception.83 A
consolidation of authority was now essential, however, for, as one British liaison officer wrote: No regular or combined system of action is to be expected from any of the armies, whose movements and operations have nothing to depend upon
but the caprices of the respective juntas, who are solely activated by narrow­ minded, short-sighted policy, never extending their views beyond the pre­ cincts of their respective districts.84 According to the general report, the
administration of the juntas left much to be desired owing to the incompetence, ambition and inexperience of many of their members.85 If such charges are perhaps too sweeping, their attitude to the common cause certainly left much to be
desired. For example, having first declared itself to be the supreme government of Spain and the Indies, the Junta of Seville embarked upon a blatant programme of empire building, sending out emissaries to take control of Cádiz, Granada
and Badajoz. Socorro’s murder brought Cádiz within its orbit almost immediately, but Badajoz and Granada both refused to accept its The army and the revolution 103 tutelage. A move on the part of the Conde de Tilly to bring the latter to
heel by the dispatch of an army was only scotched by General Castaños. Unable to overcome the resistance of its Spanish rivals, the Junta then switched its attention to the annexation of southern Portugal.86 In the meantime, it also sought
to make an alliance with the Juntas of Galicia and Catalonia by suggesting that the three of them should divide Spain between them, and rule in conjunction with one another.87 Similar aspirations were displayed elsewhere. The Junta of
Galicia attempted to establish its preponderance in the northwest through the establishment of a Cortes del Norte which would bring the Juntas of Asturias and Old Castile under its influence.88 The Junta of Extremadura attempted to seize
the Portuguese fortress of Elvas.89 In Aragón, José Palafox had been extending his power base by sending out officers, arms and supplies to many towns within a wide radius of his capital.90 From the very beginning of the uprising, he and
his supporters made repeated calls for the election of a single regent - who would presumably be none other than Palafox himself - to rule Spain in the absence of the monarch.91 These ambitions and jealousies inevitably had a severe impact
on the war effort. Often threatened by rival factions in their own districts, the various authorities attempted to retain as many troops under their direct control as possible. When the Junta of Seville refused to permit Castaños to march
on Madrid, the Juntas of Granada and Jaén demanded the return of the troops they had 'lent* him for the campaign of Bailén.92 The Junta of Asturias consistently refused to send more than a token force of troops beyond its borders on the
grounds that it needed the bulk of its forces to maintain order at home.93 Because they were the only regular troops that he had, Cuesta refused to send his cavalry to join the Army of Galicia, even though they were of no use to him on
their own and could greatly have facilitated the operations of General Blake.94 Thanks to the Junta of Extremadura’s designs on Elvas, a large part of its forces had still not reached the front when the French finally launched their
counterattack in November.95 With their British allies becoming increasingly restive, it was clear even to the most obstreperous of the new authorities that they would have to agree to the formation of a central government. Under what
auspices this should be done was unclear, however. The institutions of the ancien régime were both unrepresentative and 104 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War politically suspect. Nor were the provincial juntas prepared to toler­ ate a
military dictatorship camouflaged as a regency. As the Junta of Seville argued in a proclamation of 3 August 1808: ... the moment has arrived to establish a civil government of the entire nation... to which the military will be
subordinated. The confidence of the nation - and by implication its resources and wealth — will necessarily be given to the civil government. Without the civil government, the army would find itself in the indispensable necessity of having
to use violence to obtain support. It could never win the confidence of the public by such means, however, any more than it would be able to make use of the nation’s resources, so that it would end by destroying the general good ... which
is the sole aim of all government. Do not let us vainly flatter ourselves with talk of the dictators of Rome ... Very wise restrictions were placed upon them and... their powers limited to a very brief period. The risk of despotism...
forced the adoption of very strict precautions which the customs of our times no longer permit. Spain has learnt wisely from past centuries. She has never established a military dictator. Her military commanders ... have been the first to
embrace this state of affairs, which is as old as the monarchy itself.96 An interim solution to the problem was eventually found in a plan that had originally been put forward by the Junta of Murcia. Each provincial junta was to send two
representatives to a national con­ gress known as the Junta Central that would elect a new government.97 The Junta of Seville jibbed at these proposals, but threats from the British, popular unrest and its own fear of the military soon
convinced it of the need to give way. After some negotiation it was duly agreed that the congress should meet at the neutral site of Aranjuez.98 The revolutionary authorities were not alone in their contemplation of the formation of a new
government. In Madrid a legitimist faction had coalesced around the Council of Castile which had been attempting to promote its own claims in this area ever since the French had evacuated Madrid.99 Its president, the Duque del Infantado,
had accompanied Fernando to Bayonne, but had then joined the suite of Joseph Bonaparte. Returning to Madrid with el rey intruso, he had changed sides again on the arrival of the news of Bailen. Yet this display of opportunism had not been
suffi­ cient to deter the British liaison officer, Charles Doyle, from encou­ raging him to ‘crush private piques ... and pour the energies of the different provinces into one stream’.100 Why Doyle should have placed such confidence in the
Duke is unclear: not only had he been totally discredited by his defection to King Joseph, but the accounts of his vapidity are legion.101 At the same time, the Council of The army and the revolution 105 Castile’s unpopularity was shown by
the contemptuous reception given to its attempts to seize the leadership of patriot Spain.102 Doyle’s flattery was nevertheless sufficient to encourage Infantado to approach his fellow generals for support. Hardly surprisingly, Blake would
not co-operate, but Cuesta was delighted to join the plot.103 The dictator of Old Castile had never reconciled himself to the revolution, and had quickly become embroiled in a series of disputes with the civilian authorities. His relations
