chose to rationalise it by reference to the need The army and the revolution 87 to bring the rebellious multitude to military and political order. As he wrote to the insurgent Junta of León: Since I am unable to resist the torrent of
public opinion, it would appear necessary to give way before it and ... through the imposition of military discipline... direct its impulse towards the best order possible.27 Cuesta had been extremely lucky. A noted opponent of Godoy,
Fernando had rewarded him with the Captain Generalcy of Old Castile. As a result, he possessed sufficient prestige for the patriots to look upon him as the natural leader of the uprising, notwithstanding the fact that it had been the work
of ‘country gentlemen and various other persons of science and probity’ - or, in short, the civilian notables.28 Few other commanders shared his good fortune, as may be seen from the case of the Marqués del Socorro. Following the failure
of the call to arms that he had issued in the immediate aftermath of the Dos de Mayo, Socorro had come to the conclusion that the only sensible option was to collaborate with the French. He was confirmed in this belief by the sudden
appearance of a British fleet off Cádiz on 24 May. Unbeknown to Socorro, its presence was the work of General Castaños who had arranged for the Royal Navy to neutralise the French squadron that had been sheltering in Cádiz ever since the
battle of Trafalgar. Completely unaware of Castaños’ activities, Socorro immediately assumed that Cádiz was under attack. Rejecting the British admiral’s protestations of friendship, he strengthened the town’s seaward defences and appealed
to Marshal Murat for help. Amusingly enough, Socorro actually sent a message to Castaños warning him of the impending British assault, but even when he was informed of the true state of affairs, the Marquess still refused to co-operate,
apparently on the grounds that bringing in the British to eject the French would merely be to replace one foreign domination by another.29 Unrest was growing in Cádiz, however, and on 28 May it exploded into revolt. Whilst a large crowd
besieged Socorro’s palace, the Conde de Montijo presented him with the demands of the Junta of Seville that he join the uprising forthwith. Seeing that he had no option but to comply, Socorro gave way, but in so unenthusiastic a manner as
effectively to sign his own death warrant. As with Cuesta’s letter to the Ayuntamiento of León, the proclamation issued by the council of war which Socorro summoned to decide on what to do provides valuable evidence of the proccupations of
the generalato. After commencing by stating his pleasure 88 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War at the patriotism of the inhabitants of Cádiz, Socorro went on to point out that an uprising would nevertheless amount to the height of
folly. Cádiz would be left exposed to British treachery; the harvest would be lost for want of labour; the improvised levies who would constitute the bulk of Spain’s forces would be certain of defeat; and the French would be justified in
inflicting the most severe punishment upon the civilian population for having had the temerity to interfere in the conduct of war. In addition, Socorro maintained that resistance was not only futile but unnecessary, given that the Spanish
royal family had abdicated their rights to the throne of their own free will, and had never ceased to proclaim their friendship with Napoleon. If the population nevertheless insisted on going to war, then Socorro would agree to lead them,
but only if they would accept the need to accept military discipline and to form into regular units, for he would not be responsible for the masssacre that would other­ wise be certain to ensue. Above all, the people must realise that they
were on the brink of a long and bitter struggle that would require a major financial and economic, as well as military, effort.30 Realistic though these words were, they were hardly calculated to reassure the increasingly angry crowd of
Socorro’s enthusiasm for the cause. After a night of growing tension, rioting broke out, almost certainly at the instigation of the Conde de Montijo, whose very presence suggests the existence of a fernandino plot to remove Socorro from
power. The troops then went over to the mob, and the unfortunate Marquess was dragged out of his palace and murdered.31 Between them Cuesta and Socorro may stand as exemplars for the rest of the generalato. Their refusal to consider the
idea of a people’s war was mirrored by the Captain General of Aragón, who described the zaragozanos* desire to turn themselves into soldiers overnight as ‘a ridiculous pretension’.32 Their suspicions of the British were the reflection of a
widespread distrust of ‘perfidious Albion’, which the outbreak of war did nothing to relieve. Even the staunchly patriotic Castaños had refused to accept Dalrymple’s maladroit suggestions that British troops should garrison Cádiz, Ceuta
and Menorca, and that Britain should be granted ‘commercial advantages to enable her to sustain the contest in which she was engaged’.33 In the same way, the Captain General of Mallorca at first would not send troops to the mainland for
fear that the British would take advantage of their absence to seize the island, whilst the provincial juntas proved most unwilling to allow British troops to land at major ports such as Cádiz The army and the revolution 89 and La
Coruña.34 Finally, their fear of popular disorder was not only shared by generals who had opposed the uprising or only joined it under pressure. If Socorro’s successor, Tomás de Moria, who was one such officer, issued a series of
proclamations that were expressly calculated to suppress popular enthusiasm, similar fears were also expressed by such supporters of the patriot cause as Blake and Palafox.35 Opposition to the rising proved unavailing. In the last resort
the authority of the Captain General, like that of the absolute monarchy itself, rested on the bayonets of the standing army. That the rank and file and many junior officers were no longer to be trusted was clearly shown by events in the
French zone, Portugal and Denmark. Napoleon had assumed that the 28,000 Spanish troops whose garri­ sons had actually been occupied, or who were serving with his forces outside Spain, could simply be incorporated into the imperial war
machine. Nothing could have been further from the truth. The only units to accept their new masters with docility were the Swiss regi­ ments of Reding mayor and Preux, but both of them went over to the patriots as soon as they were
hazarded on the field of battle. As for the rest of the troops, many regiments chose either to disband themselves or to march to join the patriots en masse. Officers who refused to co-operate were attacked and deposed, or simply aban­
doned to their own devices. Those regiments which did not join the insurrection as a body experienced wholesale desertion and in some cases disintegrated altogether.36 The unrest even spread to the 13,000 Spanish troops cantoned in distant
Denmark. Although deeply unhappy at the turn which events had taken, their comman­ der, the Marqués de la Romana, could see no means by which he could take action, and therefore sought to temporise with the French. Even when he was
provided with the hope of rescue by the Royal Navy, the accounts of his subordinates suggest that his vacilla­ tions were only brought to an end by the threatening attitude adopted by the officers and men under his command.37 With their
troops in this temper, the generals had no hope of restoring order; indeed, to attempt to do so was often literally suicidal. In the first few days of the rising, aside from the Marqués del Socorro, the Conde del Torre del Fresno, the
Captain General of the Naval Department of Cartagena, and the military governors of Villafranca de Panades, Tortosa, Málaga and Ciudad Rodrigo were all murdered. Amongst the many officers who were deposed and 90 The Spanish army in the
Peninsular War imprisoned were the Captains General of Aragón and Catalonia, and the Commandant General of the Costa de Asturias y Santander.38 Those who succeeded in escaping the purge only did so by throwing in their lot with the
insurgents, albeit with varying degrees of enthusiasm. If some, like Cuesta, were to serve the patriot cause without reserve, others remained opposed to the rising, sending secret appeals to the French for help and attempting to sabotage
the insurgents’ operations. In a few cases, like that of Tomás de Moria, they merely bided their time until a suitable opportunity came for them to escape.39 The established order having thus been swept away, the way was open for the
creation of new organs of political authority. In most areas of Spain, these took the form of a network of local and provincial juntas. The membership of these committees generally consisted of the original leaders of the insurrection, to
whom was added an admixture of notables who were elected or co-opted from the local community. Often presided over by leading churchmen or even those generals who had survived the initial turmoil, these bodies may nevertheless be said to
have been dominated by the civilian notables. The spectre of military authority was still not laid to rest, however, for few generals followed the example of Francisco Xavier Castaños who had immediately placed his troops at the
disposition of the Junta of Seville.40 So strong was the habit of giving way to the claims of the army that the civilians found themselves unable to press home their advantage. In Catalonia the provincial junta had deposed the existing
Captain General, the Conde de Espeleta, in favour of the Marqués del Palacio. However, it first allowed itself to be beguiled into transferring itself from Lérida to Palacio’s headquarters at Tarragona, and was then overawed into offering
him not only the presidency of the Junta, but also supreme executive authority.41 Elsewhere, rather than seeking to insinuate themselve into the confi­ dence of the juntas as in the case of Palacio, the generals instead chose the path of
open confrontation through the formation of personal dictatorships. These attempts may be classified as having either been ‘legitimist’, in that they justified themselves by reference to the viceregal status enjoyed by the Captains General
before 1808, or ‘populist*, in that they based themselves upon an appeal to the crowd. Of the former, the best example is the régime established by Garcia de la Cuesta in Old Castile. Despite the fact that he had almost no regular troops
The army and the revolution 91 with which to back up his authority, Cuesta was able to browbeat his civilian rivals into accepting him as their master. A provincial junta was established at Valladolid, but its function was simply to
maintain order, enlist recruits and amass the sinews of war.42 Cuesta’s political survival was in part a tribute to the strength of his character, which by all accounts was particularly obdurate, but a number of other factors also
reinforced his position. Unlike Catalo­ nia or Valencia, for example, Old Castile did not have a recent tradition of resistance to the Bourbon monarchy or its representa­ tives. In addition, unlike most of his fellows, Cuesta carried with
him the seal of Fernando Vil’s personal approval. For the time being, therefore, no one sought openly to challenge his position. Yet as soon as this was done, the Captain General was found to be a ‘paper tiger’: in an era where power in
the last resort rested upon an appeal to the populace, the forms of the ancien régime could not survive unless backed up by the sort of military force that was no longer available to Cuesta or any of his fellows. The fragility of his
