position is demonstrated by the fate of the Conde de Conquista when he attempted to establish a similar regime in Valencia. Having initially agreed to accept the presidency of the provincial junta, he suddenly assumed supreme political and
military authority and ordered the arrest of all those who refused to obey him. Supported by the crowd, his civilian subordinates promptly threatened to put him on trial for treason. With his bluff having thus been called, Conquista had no
option but to relinquish his ambitions.43 The weakness of the legitimist position is underlined by the survival of the dictatorship established by José Palafox in Zaragoza. A similar example of populist militarism may be found in Córdoba
where the commander of the local Resguardo, Pedro Agustin Echávarri, briefly set himself up as dictator of the city. However, defeated by the French at Alcolea on 7 June 1808, Echávarri was soon forced to flee.44 Palafox proved far more
durable. Whereas Cuesta had essentially ruled in opposition to the notables and the mob, Palafox was from the very start careful to co-opt the former and to shelter behind the latter: as one, admittedly hostile, observer put it, ‘Palafox
governed Zaragoza in the midst of confusion; the agitators who acted as the instruments of his power made speeches in front of his lodging... demanding in the name of the people that which he wished to be done.’45 An examination of the
manner in which he gained power certainly reveals both a high degree of stage 92 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War management, and total reliance upon popular pressure. When the growing discontent spilled over into an uprising on 24
May 1808, Palafox was still in hiding outside the city. Guillelmi having been deposed following his refusal to arm the people, the conspirators incited the crowds to call for his replacement by Palafox. As soon as the cry had been taken
up, one of their members was immediately on hand to lead a delegation to fetch that officer from his hiding place. Palafox affected surprise and even terror at their appearance, and then adopted an attitude of the most exaggerated
reticence, refusing to accept the command unless it was offered him with proper form by the Audiencia. By the time that body had been assembled two days later, the mob had worked itself into a frenzy and was threaten­ ing the unfortunate
councillors with death. Yet Palafox still refused to give way and the ensuing delay gave rise to rumours that he was being detained against his will. The Audiencia’s palace was promptly invaded, and its terrified occupants had to beg
Palafox on bended knee to save them. Having thus created the impression of being a selfless patriot pushed to the fore by forces beyond his control, he at last agreed to accept the Captain Generalcy, though not without a further display of
reluctance.46 On taking power, the new Captain General’s first action was to rid himself of the godoyista Intendant, Ignacio Garciny. The rising had caught Garciny in Madrid where he had gone in an apparent attempt to ingratiate himself
with Fernando VII. As soon as he heard of events in Zaragoza, he wrote to Palafox to offer his services, but all his approaches were ignored and he was not even permitted to return. Instead, Palafox replaced him with one of his chief
confeder­ ates, a wealthy merchant named Lorenzo Calvo de Rozas.47 His dictatorship was now secure, but Palafox nevertheless felt the neces­ sity of providing it with a greater measure of legitimacy. To this end he convoked the long-since
defunct Cortes of Aragón. When it assembled on 9 June, Calvo de Rozas demanded that it should appoint the Captain General Jefe Político y Militar - or, in other words, Dictator - of Aragon, but the Cortes refused to agree to this proposal.
Instead, although quite prepared to confirm Palafox in the Captain Generalcy, it voted that a junta should be elected to exercise the sovereign power. Somewhat taken aback by this unexpected display of independence, Palafox responded by
postponing birther discussion of the issue until the next session. There was no other session, however: before it could be held, the French had attacked The army and the revolution 93 the city, and thus put an end to all political
discussion. In the meantime, Palafox's appointment as Jefe Político y Militar of Ara­ gón was brazenly published as fact, a lie that was thereafter consis­ tently to be maintained by all his numerous partisans.48 No civilian junta was ever
formed in Zaragoza, Palafox remaining in power until the city finally succumbed to a second French siege in February 1809. His success was due in part to the prestige which accrued to him from the French failure to take Zaragoza in the
siege of June—August 1808. At the same time, however, he was himself a part of the revolutionary movement. Ruling as a popular dema­ gogue, he was careful to retain the support of local society by showering his patronage upon all and
sundry, abolishing unpopular measures of taxation, fraternising with the crowds, and appealing to the vanity of the population, not only by issuing a series of bombastic proclamations, but also by rewarding the popular heroes of the
siege.49 In this manner, Palafox was able to escape from the onslaught experienced by many of his fellow officers even after they had joined the uprising. Had the purge of the high command solely been restricted to those generals who had
refused to join the insurrec­ tion, then its traditional explanation would have continued to be acceptable. The very fact that the killings and arrests continued stands testimony to the presence of other explanations for the violence
besides that of simple patriotism. In the Canaries, for example, the Captain General declared for the rising as soon as news of its outbreak had been received from the mainland, only to be overthrown by a group of his subordinates headed
by Colonel Carlos O’Donnell.50 Nor was joining the patriots sufficient to save the Captain General of Galicia firstly from being replaced by the more malleable Joaquín Blake, and then from being murdered by a mob of his own soldiers.51
More junior officers also found themselves under attack: in Ronda, for example, a mob stormed the house of Pedro Agustín Girón after being persuaded by a friar that a guillotine was hidden there.52 It is difficult to pinpoint the
responsibility for such attacks on particular individuals, but it is nevertheless apparent that the mood of anger and suspicion from which they sprang was in part the work of the army’s enemies. The clearest example of this process comes
from Asturias where the ardent liberal Alvaro Florez Estrada forged a letter purporting to come from Fernando, in which he made the most unfavourable comparisons between the heroism of the Spanish people and the pusillanimity shown by los
Castaños, Morias 94 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War y otros generales,53 The generals were also fettered by the provincial juntas’ efforts to ensure that the army would remain firmly under their control. Many of them placed their
armed forces in the hands of new commanders who owed their advancement entirely to the revolution, as in Murcia and Asturias where the command was given to retired officers of the provincial militia.54 Another example is Joaquin Blake whom
the Junta of Galicia promoted from the rank of Brigadier to that of Lieutenant General. Civilian commissioners were often sent to the various headquarters in the style of the répresentatives-en-mission of the French Revolution.55 The
juntas could also rely upon their control of the sinews of war: as each provincial army was ‘dependent on its own junta for bread’, the commanders could simply be blackmailed into submission.56 The Junta of Seville provides an excellent
example of how this control could be exerted. After the victory of Bailen (19 July 1808), in which the Spaniards forced an entire French army to surrender, the logical course would have been for General Castaños to have followed up his
success as fast as possible. Instead, he was forced to return to Seville and prevented from marching on Madrid until it was clear that only in this fashion could the Junta ‘settle the government of the country according to their will and
pleasure’. Despite the fact that the military situation demanded that he should now advance to the Ebro, he was not allowed to proceed a step further on pain of the pay and supply of his army being entirely cut off.57 The inability of the
generals to resist such pressures did not bode well for the success of the war which the uprising had brought in its train. At this stage, however, their greatest problem was not so much their freedom of operation as the quality of the
forces which they had at their disposal. The bulk of the old regular army had been deployed around the coast of Spain or in its maritime possessions so as to ward off potential British raids. A large part of it had therefore remained in
Spanish hands, for the French zone of control was still limited to a corridor connecting the area around Madrid with the frontier for­ tresses of San Sebastián and Pamplona. Outside this axis the invaders only held Figueras and Barcelona.
In all the patriots could reckon upon a little over 100,000 men, but, dispersed as they were, these troops were everywhere in need of reinforcement. Practically the first act of all the new authorities had therefore been to declare all men
to be eligible for military service, although the number of volunteers The army and the revolution 95 was at first great enough to allow them to leave such measures in abeyance.58 As far as the generals were concerned, the ideal course
would have been to channel the new levies into the units of the old army, as was actually done to some extent in both Galicia and Andalucia. In their eyes, any unit in which the proportion of raw recruits amounted to more than one third of
the whole was not to be trusted in the slightest.59 In some cases, of course, such a policy was rendered impossible by the total absence of regular troops, as in both Old Castile and Aragón where Cuesta and Palafox were forced to form
their levies into new regiments faut de mieux.60 The civilian notables had other ideas, however. Preferring to form ‘as many corps and companies as there were men of a certain influence desirous of a command*, they broke up such regular
units as they had, or at least contrived to starve them of recruits.61 Their motives were simple. The patronage engendered by the creation of large numbers of new regiments would allow the provincial juntas both to gratify their own
supporters, and to build up a substantial party in the officer corps whose interests would be bound up with the survival of the revolution. Should the juntas be so inclined, they would also be free to throw the military estate open to a
far wider spectrum of society than had been the case before 1808. Whether this was actually done is a moot point, however: in an edict of 14 June 1808 the Junta of Seville stipulated that aspirants to the post of officer cadet would have
to produce exactly the same documentation as they would have done before the revolution.62 At least two hundred new infantry regiments appeared in the course of 1808.63 Their organisation and strength varied enor­ mously, but the majority
consisted of no more than a single battalion — as each regiment had its own headquarters, the more regiments that were created, the greater the patronage. Of negligible fighting value at the best of times, many of the new regiments did not
even represent a notional addition to the army’s ranks. A number of them only existed on paper, notwithstanding the appointment of a full quota of officers. In Catalonia, for example, the provincial junta decreed the formation of forty
