appearance in the streets and gaming houses’.25 The problem of absenteeism was compounded by the cavalier fashion in which many generals appointed serving officers rather than supernumeraries to be their aides-de-camp.26 On the battlefield
many officers proved to be worse than useless, British observers accusing them of placing themselves in the rear of their regiments, so as to be ‘foremost in the front when running away’.27 So serious did the problem become that in 1809
the Junta Central attempted to deprive all infantry officers of their horses in order to prevent them from absconding so easily.28 The fact that they had horses at all is symptomatic of the indiscipline prevailing in the 120 The Spanish
army in the Peninsular War officer corps, for the Ordenanzas did not permit officers below the rank of captain to be mounted. In a similar breach of regulations, large numbers of common soldiers were employed as servants, a practice that
removed large numbers of troops from the fighting line (by 1811 it was estimated that at least ten per cent of the Cádiz garrison were so employed).29 Gambling and whoring were wide­ spread, whilst fanciful non-regulation uniforms and
extravagant moustaches were very much de rigeur.30 Equally essential were vast quantities of baggage that served merely to encumber the movements of the Spanish armies.31 Far from attempting to set a good example to their subordinates,
many senior officers were instead inclined to look upon their posts as ‘a recompense for the bad times they had endured in the lower ranks’.32 Corruption was common. On the one hand, generals commandeered much-needed military transport for
the use of their large personal entourages, which often included their mistresses as well as numerous servants, barbers, cooks and valets.33 On the other, regimental commanders exaggerated their returns of strength, permitted their men to
go sick on the slightest excuse, and connived at desertion so as ‘to receive to their own emolument the pay of those who shall fall short of the number’.34 With officers of this nature, it was impossible to expect that the Spanish levies
could possibly have been transformed into an ade­ quate fighting force in the few months of respite bought by the victory of Bailén. Sapped not only by their lack of training, but by material wants of every description, the Spanish armies
presented a sorry picture. Writing of the Army of Castile, for example, Whitting­ ham described it as ‘a complete mass of miserable peasantry, without clothing, without organization, and with few officers worthy of the name. The...
principal officers have not the least confidence in their troops, and, what is yet worse, the men have no confidence in themselves’.35 His pessimism was shared by Lord William Bentinck who informed Lord Castlereagh that in the event of a
French attack, ‘... the Spaniards could not much be counted upon. The ignorance and inexperience of their officers and men scarcely entitles them ... to the appellation of good and regular troops. In case of necessity... it would not be
reasonable to place much dependence on the stea­ diness and support of a Spanish army constituted as they are at present’.36 Such worries were only too well founded. The history of the Spanish War of Independence is replete with examples
of the fragility The war of the Junta Central 121 of armies such as those which faced the French along the Ebro in the autumn of 1808. In the first place, the reaction of raw troops to combat was quite unpredictable. Though sometimes
capable of the utmost heroism, particularly in the defence of fortified positions, they were also liable to sudden outbreaks of panic, of which the routs that took place on the eve of the battle of Talavera (28 July 1809), and at the
battle of Belchite (18 June 1809), provide excellent examples.37 Even when the Spaniards stood their ground, throughout the war the state of their drill was generally so poor that they were incapable of performing anything other than the
simplest manoeuvres on the battlefield. As the Duke of Wellington complained to Henry Wellesley after the battle of Albuera (16 May 1811): The Spanish troops, I understand, behaved admirably. They stood like stocks, both parties at times
firing upon them, but they were quite immovea­ ble, and this is the great cause of all our losses. After they had lost their position, the natural thing to do would have been to attack it with the nearest Spanish troops, but they could not
be moved. The ... Spaniards can do nothing but stand still, and we consider ourselves fortunate if they do not run away. In view of the vital role played by the Spaniards at Albuera, these words must be considered somewhat churlish. Yet
the fact remains that as late as 1812, Wellington was still being forced to complain that the Spaniards could ‘neither advance nor retreat in order’, all their movements being carried out ‘à la débandade9.39 In practical terms, therefore,
the Spanish armies could at best be expected either to march directly upon the enemy or to defend a position against attack. As long as no crisis intervened, they could generally be relied upon to to carry out either role with considerable
determination. Although both battles were ultimately lost, the attacks delivered by the Spaniards at the battles of Valls and Medellín (25 February and 29 March 1809) stand witness to the courage with which they were capable of pressing
home their assaults; indeed, at Medellín, a counter charge by two regiments of French dragoons was actually repulsed by Spanish infantry formed in line.40 As shown by the example of Albuera and their victories at Bailén, Alcañiz, Tamames
and San Marcial, the Spaniards could often show equal courage when on the defensive. Yet the Spanish infantry were always vulnerable to their oppo­ nents. Particular problems were caused in the early days of the war 122 The Spanish army in
the Peninsular War by their shortage of skirmishers. The heavy screen of tirailleurs who preceded the advance of the French columns were always able to drive back their Spanish counterparts, and then to direct a destruc­ tive fire upon the
immobile battle line behind them. As their casual­ ties mounted, particularly among their officers, and their own vol­ leys proved ineffective, so the Spaniards would sooner or later begin to waver, at which point the waiting French
columns would charge home to administer the coup de grace41 The vulnerability of the Spanish infantry was accentuated by the weakness of their cavalry. Because of their complete inability to manoeuvre in the face of the enemy, it was
essential for the Spaniards to protect the flanks of their defensive line with a powerful force of mounted troops, particularly in the perfect cavalry country constituted by the open plains of the Castiles. Throughout the war, however, the
Spanish cavalry was execrable. In the first place, suitable horses and trained horsemen were few and far between: hence the frequent appeals that were made in 1808 for substantial numbers of British cavalry to be attached to the Spanish
armies.42 Furthermore, the punishing condi­ tions of warfare in the Peninsula, which Wellington referred to aS ‘the grave of horses’, made such cavalry as could be collected the subject of constant erosion. Inferior saddlery and deliberate
neglect (occasioned by the ‘infamous practice of purposely giving the horse a sore back that the dragoon may be sent with the horse to Seville*) only accentuated the wastage.43 Even so, the Spaniards managed to field a substantial number
of cavalry during the campaigns of 1809, and on occasion had more mounted troops than did their opponents. The problem was there­ fore ultimately one of quality rather than quantity. As the Duke of Wellington had complained after the
battle of Talavera: The Spanish cavalry are ... in general well clothed, armed and accoutred, and remarkably well mounted, and their horses are in good condition ... But I have never heard anybody pretend that in any one instance they have
behaved as soldiers ought to do in the face of the enemy. They make no scruple of running off, and after an action are to be found in every village and every shady bottom within fifty miles of the field of battle.44 Although the Spanish
cavalry did score a few successes, many Spaniards would have agreed that on the whole the remark was fair comment.45 The cavalry had been thrown into even greater disorder by the uprising than the infantry, it being that much more
difficult to improvise a scratch force of mounted troops. Such new regiments as The war of the Junta Central 123 were formed lacked the training to do anything other than, at best, to gallop upon the enemy in wild, and extremely
vulnerable, disorder.46 With time, of course, the training of the cavalry did improve, but, despite Wellington’s comments, it seems certain that their horses were smaller than those of their opponents, as well as being severely
undernourished, with the result that they could neither deliver a successful charge of their own nor withstand one delivered by the enemy.47 The inferiority of their cavalry placed the Spaniards at a serious disadvantage in any action that
took place where the terrain was at all open. In battle after battle the course of the fighting would tend to assume a common pattern. Drawn up in linear order, the patriot armies would await the onslaught of their opponents, or alterna­
tively march against them in a frontal attack. If they were on the defensive, the infantry would generally stand their ground, and on the offensive they might sometimes even drive back their opponents. On the flanks, however, the Spanish
cavalry would be put to flight with monotonous regularity, thereby opening the way for a torrent of French horsemen to burst in upon the flanks and rear of the unfortunate infantry. Caught entirely by surprise, the infantry would not have
the time to form square, and could only flee for their lives, to be ridden down or captured in their thousands. The collapse would frequently be so rapid that there would be no time to evacuate either the baggage or the artillery; indeed,
when the moment came for the gunners to hitch up their pieces, they would frequently discover that their civilian drivers had absconded with the draught animals at the first sign of danger.48 The tactical inferiority of the Spanish armies
was exacerbated by the poor quality of their commanders. A few generals won renown for the skillful and determined defence of the fortresses entrusted to their charge, whilst others showed themselves to be competent subordinates when
placed in command of a division. With a number of exceptions, their courage and devotion was beyond question. For the most part, however, their personal bravery was not matched by their capacity to take command of a complete army. To be
fair to the Spaniards, it should be stressed that their generals were really not so very different in their quality from those of any other nation, even Wellington frequently being driven to distraction by the failings of his subordinates.
The difference was that the political and logistical conditions of warfare in Spain were much more complicated than 124 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War elsewhere in Europe. Furthermore, Spain did not possess a native Wellington or
Napoleon who could have led a collection of wellmeaning mediocrities to victory. Nor were the Spanish generals well served by their headquarters. In the absence of a permanent general staff, which was not formed until 1810, each general
appointed his own staff officers. The result was that the headquarters of the Spanish armies became filled with an ever-changing collection of well-connected young noblemen with little idea of how to fulfil their responsibilities.49 It was
