Tercios de Miqueletes, each of one thousand men, only to find that the population would not enlist, preferring to serve in their traditional capacity as somatenes.64 Several other units, such as the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz,
served no other purpose than to allow the notables to indulge in patriotic martial posturing and enjoy the fuero militar whilst yet 96 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War avoiding service in the field. Generally limited to those men who
could afford to pay for their own uniforms and equipment, the members of these units were not expected to serve outside their own cities. At best, they could be regarded as a civic militia, whose job was as much to protect the notables
from the mob as to protect Spain from the enemy.65 Spanish mobilisation in 1808 was also affected by the ingrained hostility to the army in general, and to military service in particular. Several officers who were engaged upon the
organisation of resistance found themselves under attack by mobs who were con­ vinced that they were actually French agents.66 In Vizcaya, for example, the provincial junta refused to form any regular units at all, and chose instead to
rely entirely upon bands of irregulars in the style of the Catalan somatenes.67 As for the general populace, they clearly preferred the picturesque and the novel to service in the ranks of the old army. When General Castaños* victorious
troops finally entered Madrid after the battle of Bailén, the inhabitants showed no interest in the regular soldiers who had actually borne the brunt of the fighting, and instead flocked to see the Lanceros de Jerez, a troop of Andalucian
horsemen dressed in bull fighting costume.68 An added inducement to enlist in the ranks of the new regiments was their high pay: whereas private soldiers in the regular army earned a meagre half a real per day, their counterparts in the
new regiments received from three to six.69 The result was that the regulars often found it impossible to gain the recruits which they needed; still worse, they also lost many deserters to their rivals.70 The mere creation of masses of new
regiments was not enough to prepare Spain for war against the French. As a later analysis put it: Victories are not won by large armies, but by those which are well organized and well constituted ... Experience has shown ... that the
reunion of considerable forces, far from being useful, is harmful and disadvantageous unless they are disciplined ... Such masses of men, which are improperly given the name of divisions and armies, do not provide more than an apparent
strength that, taken for real in moments of excitement and illusion, leads only to the most unfortunate disasters ... To create soldiers, it is not enough to issue uniforms to men whose individual courage is not matched by knowledge of
military service ... a truth which is all the more apparent in arms like the cavalry and horse artillery where at least four months is needed to make a soldier.71 The rising, in short, had given Spain not an army, but the raw material of
an army. Means had to be found by which the new levies The army and the revolution 97 could be armed and maintained, they had to provided with an adequate proportion of cavalry and artillery, and, above all, they had to be given the
solidity and reliability of regular troops through the imposition of military discipline. Otherwise patriot Spain could expect only to be over-run. The central problem which she faced was how this was to be achieved in the midst of war and
revolution. Aided by the financial and material assistance that began to pour in from Great Britain, the contents of Spain’s own arsenals, and the contributions of the population, the new authorities were at first able to dominate the
logistical question, albeit in a somewhat haphazard fashion: General Castaños’ Army of Andalucia was already going hungry as early as the battle of Bailén.72 A more immediate problem was posed by the question of discipline. Many of the
levies immediately deserted or simply dispersed to their homes, whilst others perpetrated serious disorders in the pursuit of rabid witch­ hunts against suspected traitors. Attempts to curb their exhorbitant pay were met by riots, and they
often proved a greater terror to the civilian population than the French.73 It was therefore not long before even the provincial juntas began to see the value of military discipline as means of controlling the popular disorder which they
had themselves unleashed.74 Yet the levies often refused to be disci­ plined. In Jaca, Santander and Oviedo officers who attempted to bring their troops to order were immediately accused by them of trying to stifle their patriotic
spirit.75 However, for all their refusal to allow themselves to be militarised, the patriot levies were as voci­ ferous in demanding that they be led against the French as they were prone to accuse their generals of treason if they proved
unwilling to do so.76 Given time there was no reason why the levies should not have been turned into soldiers, but time was not a commodity that was possessed by the insurgents. As the French responded to the uprising by sending out
punitive expeditions in all directions, fighting actually began almost immediately. The result was predictable. As a British liaison officer wrote in 1809: Crowds flocked to arms, but while untaught to bear them were from time to time
hazarded all at once in the field, creating confusion from the want of military knowledge of their leaders as well as their unsteadiness... Though in some instances I have observed that the ... peasantry have acted against the enemy with
peculiar resolution and resistance, it has always been in very particular actions, in strong passes, in woods, or where 98 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War the knowledge of the country has peculiarly favoured them. Almost in every
instance where reliance has been placed upon the favourable results of a general action in which the Spanish troops were employed, combined with the new militia and peasantry, a failure has been the consequence.77 Nobody could deny the
courage of the Spanish levies. Placed in a situation where they were not required to manoeuvre and where they were safe from the French cavalry, they displayed a ferocity that astonished even their own leaders. Hence the failure of the
French assaults on the cities of Valencia, Zaragoza and Gerona. In the open, however, they were absolutely helpless. The very men who put up such a desperate resistance at Zaragoza had only days before been scattered by the French with
almost no loss to themselves at Tudela, Mallén and Alagón. Moreover, however long it would have taken, even Zaragoza must ultimately have fallen had not the French aban­ doned the siege in the wake of the battle of Bailen. The civilian
defenders might have fought the French to a standstill in the streets of the city, but they could not forever have remained impervious to the establishment of a proper blockade: the most exalted patriotism is not proof against starvation.
The real salvation of Zaragoza may be regarded as the victory of Bailén. So influential were the myths generated by this battle that for once it is worth examining its campaign history in some detail. On 24 May a French column commanded by
General Dupont had set out from Madrid with orders to crush the Andalucian insurgents and secure the vital port of Cádiz. On 7 June Dunpont defeated Echávarri at Alcolea, and went on to sack the defenceless city of Córdoba. Alarmed at his
own isolation, he had then drawn back to Andujar to await reinforcements. His inactivity continued for some weeks, dur­ ing which time Castaños was able to prepare his army for action. Eventually forced to move against Dupont by popular
pressure, at least he was able to do so with the cohesion of his forces still intact: having been badly shaken by the fate of Echávarri’s levies at Alcolea, the Junta of Seville had permitted Castaños to fill up the ranks of the old
regiments and even to send home a mass of unwanted recruits.78 Profiting from Dupont’s continued inactivity, Castaños had decided to envelop his opponent. Pinning him down with a demon­ stration in his front, he dispatched the divisions of
Reding and Coupigny along the south bank of the Guadalquivir with orders to cross the river further east and then to strike northwards to cut the main road to Madrid. Unknown to the Spanish commander, The army and the revolution 99 •JAEN
French Farces: C2-» Spanish forces: 3 The campaign of Bailén however, Dupont had received the divisions of Gobert and Vedel from Madrid as reinforcements. Gobert’s troops were mostly eche­ loned along the high road to protect
communications with Madrid, but Vedel was stationed at the town of Bailén, sixteen miles to the east of Andujar, where he was well positioned to repel any thrust on the part of Reding and Coupigny: indeed, the mere news of his presence
proved sufficient to deter the former from attempting to cross the Guadalquivir on 15 July. Matters would now have remained at a stalemate, but for the fact that on the same day Castaños had demonstrated against Dupont’s position at
Andujar with such determination that the Frenchman had concluded that he was heavily outnumbered and had sent to General Vedel asking him for reinforcements. Vedel had in the meantime concluded that Reding, whose performance on 15 July can
only be described as lacklustre, was no threat to his position. Receiving Dupont’s mes­ sage, he marched to join his chief with his entire command, except 100 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War for a small detachment that was left to
watch the Guadalquivir. He arrived at Andujar on the afternoon of 16 July, only to discover that Castaños had never pressed his attack. Moreover, in Vedel’s absence from Bailén, on the morning of 16 July Reding had fallen upon his
rearguard at Mengibar. Although they were supported by a detach­ ment of Gobert’s division, the French were routed and forced to flee north-eastwards along the road to Madrid. Vexatious as this was, the French position was still very
strong. With 21,000 men concentrated at Andujar, Dupont could launch a sudden strike on either Castaños or Reding, and defeat them before they could come to each other’s aid. Instead of doing so, however, he chose to send Vedel back to
Bailén with orders to chase Reding back over the Guadalquivir. Meanwhile, Dupont himself would continue to watch Castaños at Andujar. On the morning of 17 July Vedel duly marched back to Bailén, but when he got there he could find no trace
of Reding. Hearing rumours that a Spanish force had seized the passes by which the road to Madrid crossed the Sierra Morena, Vedel immediately assumed that they must belong to Reding and set off in pursuit, continuing his march as far as
La Carolina where he picked up the troops who had been defeated at Mengibar. In reality, however, Reding had merely fallen back across the river in order to rest his troops. It was only after being joined by the division of General
Coupigny (which had spent the previous few days demonstrating against the ford of Villanueva midway between Andujar and Mengibar) on 18 July that Reding bestirred himself and marched to occupy Bailén. Bivouacking there that evening, he
planned to move on Andujar the next morning. To his astonishment, however, at dawn on 19 July he was himself attacked by Dupont. Although he had had no idea that Bailén was in danger, Dupont had still become alarmed at the gap which had
opened between himself and Vedel, especially as it had become clear that only a part of the Spanish army was facing him at Andujar. On the morning of 18 July the French general had therefore resolved to retreat. Had this deci­ sion been
