therefore hardly surprising that the Spanish army which took the field in the autumn of 1808 should have been poorly trained, organised, equipped and commanded. It is less apparent why there should have been so little improvement during
the course of the long struggle which followed. As the Duke of Wellington complained in 1809: ... it is extraordinary that when a nation has devoted itself to war... for the last two years, so little progress has been made in any one
branch of the military profession by any individual, and that the business of an army should be so little understood. They really are children in the art of war, and I cannot say that they do anything as it ought to be done, with the
exception of running away and assembling again in a state of nature.50 The explanation for this paradox may be found in the relentless nature of the war in which the Spaniards were engaged. Only in the autumn of 1808 between the retreat of
the French armies to the river Ebro and the subsequent counterattack that was launched by a furious Napoleon was there a lull in the fighting of the sort that the Junta Central needed to restore order to its armies. Whether enough could
ever have been achieved to forestall the Emperor’s revenge is a moot point, but contemporary observers were convinced that the Junta was not making the best use of its opportunities. As Lord William Bentinck alleged, ‘they are more
preoccupied with trifles and nonsense about their own rank and state than with great national measures’.51 The Junta’s concern with its own status was far from being entirely frivolous, however. Although it was essential that it should
impose its authority on patriot Spain, its rule was under attack from the very earliest days of its existence; indeed even some of its own members continued to demand that it form a regency and proceed to the election of a Cortes.52
Convinced that a regency would inevitably produce a military dictatorship, the dominant faction within the Junta instead attempted to defuse the unrest by The war of the Junta Central 125 issuing an ambitious manifesto öf social and
political reform, only for this to attract renewed criticism of its priorities.53 The Junta’s reformism was far from being irrelevant, for the pressure for reform generated in reaction to the rule of Godoy, Maria Luisa and Carlos IV had
been redoubled by a growing belief that Spain could only emerge victorious from the struggle against Napoleon if she was prepared to put an end to the abuses that had brought about her downfall in 1808. However, unless the government could
amass sufficient troops on the Ebro to hold off the counter-stroke that at that very moment was being made ready by Napoleon, there would be no time to implement the most apposite programme of reform. In this respect, all the patriot
authorities must be held to be gravely at fault. After the battle of Bailen, Spain had fallen into a paralysing ‘vertigo of triumph’, thanks to the general exaltation of the supposed victory of the heroic Spanish people over ‘the strongest
and most warlike tercios of the north’.54 Although not entirely proof against such excesses, the Junta Central did at least proclaim the need to raise a huge new army of 550,000 men.55 Its mean, of putting such declarations into effect
were extremely limited, however. All that it could do was to decree a reduction in the number of exemptions from the sorteo and the formation of an urban guard known as the Milicias Honradas.56 The actual process of recruitment had to be
left to the provincial juntas. At the begin­ ning of the war many of these bodies had decreed the introduction of universal conscription, but fear of popular unrest and lack of resources ensured that this never became a reality. The
precise situation varied from province to province, but most of the Spanish armies were initially composed of volunteers rather than conscripts. In May 1808, for example, the Junta of Seville had declared all male inhabitants ultimately to
be liable for military service, with the proviso that unmarried men would be taken before men with fami­ lies. However, it also decided that conscription should not actually be enforced until the supply of volunteers had been exhausted.
Although fifty thousand men came forward, this was still well short of the Junta’s stated target of 200,000. Yet rather than resorting to impressment, the authorities instead attempted to make good the shortfall by offering free pardons to
bandits, smugglers and deserters who would agree to enlist.57 Reliance on the voluntary principle may have been politically necessary, but it could not provide the army with an adequate supply 126 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War of
manpower, for the patriotic fervour of 1808 seems to have been insufficient to outweigh ingrained popular hostility to military service.58 Indeed, some British observers gained the impression that the Spanish people were not interested in
fighting the French at all: as Sir George Jackson put it, that there was ‘much froth, but little substance’.59 Events such as the defence of Zaragoza demonstrate that these remarks were over-harsh, but it is hard to escape from the
impression that the general desire to fight the French did not produce more than a limited number of recruits for the regular army: between May and November 1808 its strength only rose from 131,000 to 215,000 men.60 Even these forces could
not be deployed to the best possible advantage. Because the new government had been unable to wrest de facto control of the armed forces from the provincial juntas, it could not prevent them from keeping a part of their troops at home, or
at the very least from delaying their dispatch to the front.61 Not that the Junta Central was much better, however: the large numbers of troops belonging to the Army of Andalucia who were still in Madrid at the time of the French attack
make it difficult to contest the allegations later made by General Castaños that the Junta had attempted to reinforce its domestic position with the aid of troops purloined from his army.62 As many other units were still not ready to take
the field, the result was that only 150,000 men actually reached the front in time to meet the French counterattack.63 As Napoleon had amassed an army of over 230,000 men, the Spaniards were heavily outnumbered. They were also
qualitatively inferior: unlike its predecessor, the new French Army of Spain was largely composed of the disciplined veterans of the Grande Armée. Nor were the Spanish forces on the Ebro concentrated to receive the impending blow. The
council of war of 5 September 1808 had agreed to a joint plan of campaign which called for the bulk of the Spanish forces to mass in Old Castile. In the meantime, José Palafox was to attempt to turn the eastern flank of the French army
which was then concentrated in the area between Miranda de Ebro, Vitoria and Pamplona.64 However, in the absence of a commander-in-chief, the plan had little chance of being carried into effect, and was soon ruined by the actions of
General Blake. Blake had been extremely perturbed at the prospect of bringing the Army of Galicia, or, as it had now been renamed, of the Left, into the Castillian plains on account of his want of cavalry.65 Ignoring the agreed plan, he
therefore advanced along the skirts of the Cantabrian mountains and The war of the Junta Central 127 then struck northeastwards towards Bilbao. Since Palafox had sim­ ultaneously advanced on the right flank, the outnumbered and inferior
Spanish armies were now strung out along a very wide arc around their opponents, and were thus exposed to defeat in detail. As if that was not serious enough, there was a yawning gap in the centre of their line between Blake’s Army of the
Left and Castaños’ Army of the Centre - a clumsy amalgam of the Armies of Andalucia, Castile, and Valencia and Murcia—which had moved forward to the line of the Ebro between Logroño and Tudela. The gap should have been filled by the Army
of Extremadura, but this force had been badly delayed in reaching the front, and had only just begun to come up when the French offensive began in November. As a result, the main road to Madrid was almost undefended.66 Rather than
concentrating their armies whilst there was still time in the favourable defensive positions offered by the line of the river Ebro, the Spaniards instead chose to compound their errors. At a second council of war held on 20 October
Castaños and Palafox agreed that whilst they launched an offensive towards Pamplona, Blake should be requested to press eastwards along the coast towards Irun. The French would thereby be surrounded and forced to surrender in a gigantic
repetition of the battle of Bailén.67 Fool­ hardy though this plan may have been, it is but fair to point out that the generals were no longer free agents. Thanks to the bombastic outpourings of the patriotic press and pernicious influence
of the battle of Bailén, the civilian population had no conception either of the miserable state of the Spanish armies or of their dangerous strategic situation: not only were the people ‘exhibiting most happily the most perfect contempt
for French courage’, but it was widely believed that 300,000 Spaniards faced perhaps 80,000 starving and disease ridden Frenchmen.68 The chances of disaster were now increased still further by a renewed outbreak of political intrigue. The
advent of the Junta Central had not put an end to the political ambitions of José Palafox, who was still determined to purge all the partisans of Godoy who had survived the turmoil of May 1808. It was therefore inevitable that both
Castaños and Blake should have attracted his particular enmity. Not only were both of them potential regents, but Castaños was one of the last of the commanders appointed by Godoy and Carlos IV still to retain his position. Moreover, his
obvious patrio­ tism gave the lie to much of the black propaganda that had been French forces : Spanish forces : The war of the Junta Central 129 heaped upon the previous régime. In his own eyes Palafox therefore had good reason to remove
both generals, and he was now provided with what seemed to be an excellent opportunity for doing so. The wild excitement generated by the battle of Bailén and the retreat of the French had created an expectation of further successes, but
the expected victory had stubbornly failed to materialise. As the popu­ lation was completely unaware of the lack of men and supplies that had effectively paralysed the operations of the Spanish armies, it was an easy task for the
palafoxistas to portray Castaños and Blake as being at the best lukewarm in their support for the patriot cause. Trading on the renown José Palafox had won from his successful defence of Zaragoza in the first campaign of 1808, his
representa­ tives in the Junta Central, Francisco Palafox and Lorenzo Calvo de Rozas, began to poison the minds of their fellow deputies against the two generals. These intrigues soon bore fruit: Blake was sent a series of peremptory
orders to advance immediately, and a military com­ mission dispatched to Castaños’ headquarters with the task of speeding up his operations.69 The composition of this body, which consisted of Francisco Palafox, the Conde de Montijo, and
the Marqués de Coupigny, is significant. The vested interest of Francisco Palafox does not require further dilation, but it should be noted that both he and Montijo shared a common reputation as foolish and persistant troublemakers who
were ever given to intrigue for its own sake. Montijo, moreover, was related to the Palafox family, and had been one of the leaders of the aristocratic clique who had engineered the coup at Aranjuez. As far as this group was concerned, a
