the political power to which they had been accustomed, they could at least hope for some ame­ lioration in the military situation. With political and geographical unity restored to the Spanish nation, it would be possible to reunite the
various provincial forces into a single national army, to imple­ ment a common strategy, and to make full use of Spain’s resources in the struggle against Napoleon. Yet these hopes were never realised, the record of the Junta Central being
one of unbroken defeat. Indeed, by the time of its downfall in January 1810, Spain had been reduced to such a state of prostration that she could hope to do no more than to survive until such time as she could be liberated by the
Anglo-Por­ tuguese army of the Duke of Wellington. Spanish resistance did not come to an end, and was to play a major part in the defeat of the French, but it is nevertheless true to say that from 1810 onwards the Spaniards were
increasingly forced to take a secondary role in their own liberation. Contemporary observers had no hesitation in attributing the blame for Spain’s misfortunes to the shortcomings of the Junta Central, whose members were widely accused of
corruption, incompetence and megalomania. In April 1810, for example, El Español published a seering critique of its rule, remarking: It was not necessary to have had very close dealings with the Junta Central to know that it was a
collection of men for the most part intent on obtaining personal advantages, and that the few times that it was obliged to attend to public business, it did not take decisions, but rather shifts to avoid having to do so.2 116 The Spanish
army in the Peninsular War The Junta Central was certainly not without its faults. As the Conde de Toreno recognised, its leading members, Jovellanos and Floridablanca, were both ‘stricken with years and ills’; furthermore, ‘accustomed to
the regularity and pause of our government, they could not overcome the customs and habits in which they had been brought up and grown old’. As for the other deputies, Toreno remarked that they were mostly ‘men of probity, but lacking in
outstanding and noble attainment’.3 Their inexperience was also commented on by the British diplomat, Sir George Jackson, who described them as ‘men who, although probably for the most part persons of the first prominence in their
respective provinces, have been as little accustomed to deal with the great affairs of state as to see themselves invested with the means of patronage which they now enjoy’.4 Exactly as had been the case with the Bourbon court, the Junta
became surrounded with a crowd of place seekers who were eager to secure its patronage.5 Their activities not only brought the government into considerable disrepute, but also had a serious effect upon the conduct of the war, for plans of
campaign inevitably became one more weapon in the struggle for influence.6 The Junta also suffered from the inherent weaknesses of its own constitution. As the Marquess of Wellesley complained in September 1809: The... constitution of the
Supreme Central Junta is not founded on any well understood system of union among the provinces, and still less on any just or wise distribution of the elements or powers of government; the confederacy of the provinces yet exists; the
executive power is weakened and dispersed in the hands of an assembly too numerous for unity of council or promptitude of action, and too contracted for the purpose of representing the body of the Spanish nation. The Supreme Central Junta
is neither an adequate repre­ sentative of the Crown, nor of the aristocracy, nor of the people; nor does it comprise any useful quality either of an executive council or of a deliberative assembly, while it combines many objects which
tend to disturb both deliberation and action ... It is not an instrument of sufficient power to accomplish the purposes for which it was formed.. .7 The Junta Central also received some plaudits, however, such as that penned by A. Cochrane
Johnston in April 1809: I must do ... the Supreme Junta the justice to state that I never saw more activity, vigilance, and attention to business than exists in their administra­ tion of the government... At nine o’clock every morning...
the Supreme Junta assemble to transact business, and they remain until two o’clock ... They again assemble in the evening at seven o’clock and remain until eleven The war of the Junta Central 117 or twelve o’clock, agreeable to the
business on hand. All the Secretaries of State and other public officers are always ready to give audience even to the lowest peasant if he wishes it... and they dispatch business with a prompti­ tude and regularity which does them
infinite honour. There are no holidays on the different days, not even on Sundays .. . You hear of no turtle feasts, haunches of venison or country seats, no expense for messengers carrying the red box at an enormous expense as in England
from one watering place to another.8 The root of the problem was not so much the misdeeds of the Junta Central as the politico-military situation with which it was faced. As Spain’s fortunes continued to deteriorate, so the pressure, and,
indeed, the necessity for reform, became ever greater. Yet the Junta simply had no means of meeting the demands that were placed upon it and of translating its undoubted goodwill into effect. Every branch of the bureaucracy had been thrown
into complete confusion by the revolution. As with the officer corps, the Intendance had become filled with the placemen of the provincial juntas, many of whom were not only totally incompetent but also inclined to treat their posts
primarily as a source of personal gain.9 As for the Ministry of War, it was swamped under the immense amount of work that had been generated by the creation of large numbers of new regiments and the appointment of equally large numbers of
new officers.10 In addition, although the Junta Central had proclaimed itself to be the supreme government of Spain, the authority of the provincial juntas effectively remained untouched, especially as they continued to con­ trol almost
all the national revenue.11 An excellent illustration of the impotence of the Junta Central may be found in the situation relating to the supply of the Spanish armies on the Ebro in the autumn of 1808. Even before the campaign had actually
begun, the Spaniards found themselves in serious diffi­ culties: food was short, the men’s clothing was in rags, and, despite the wintry weather, there were hardly any tents, blankets or greatcoats.12 As usual, British observers were quick
to blame this situation on the inactivity of the government, of which Lord William Bentinck wrote, ‘The Central Junta have certainly not done and are not doing their duty. They have sacrificed the public interest to their own private views
of ambition and advantage.’13 Yet only twentyfour hours before Bentinck had written this letter the Junta had issued a decree in which it noted the sufferings of the troops and ordered the provincial juntas to open a public subscription
for the supply of clothing to the army, and to reward those citizens who 118 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War would make voluntary donations of clothing themselves. In addi­ tion, the juntas were authorised to place orders for
uniforms with civilian contractors.14 In the same way, it had authorised the Junta of Valencia to raise a loan of 2,000,000 reales from the propertied classes, as well as issuing orders to increase the production of saddles and muskets.15
However, the practical effect of these orders was almost non-existent, either because of the disruption caused by the French offensive of November-December 1808 or because of the neglect and incompetence of the provincial juntas. The only
remedy was for the Junta Central to have made its authority effective, but, in view of the widespread opposition to its rule, the only means of doing so would have been to achieve a dramatic military victory. Given the numerous defects of
the forces which it had been bequea­ thed by the revolution of 1808, such a policy was not only unlikely to bring success, but also liable to increase Spain’s difficulties. The Spanish armies which took the field in the autumn of 1808 had
by now begun to assume the aspect which they were essentially to retain for the rest of the war. On the one hand, the Bourbon veterans had been subsumed into the forces of the revolution, whilst on the other the raw levies of May 1808 had
had sufficient time to acquire some of the rudiments of drill and military discipline. Between a half and two thirds of the troops were still composed of men who were little better than armed civilians.16 Yet in theory there was no reason
why these men should not have been turned into good soldiers: during the campaign that followed British observers fre­ quently found occasion to praise ‘the patience and ... the cheerful­ ness of the Spanish soldier under the greatest
privations’.17 The problem was not so much the men as the officers. As the Duke of Wellington remarked long after the war had ended, ‘The Spaniards make excellent soldiers. What spoils them is that they have no confidence in their officers
— this would ruin any soldiers — and how should the Spaniards have confidence in such officers as theirs?’18 In much the same vein in May 1812 he had written to Henry Wellesley, ‘Subordination and habits of obedience ... can be acquired by
soldiers only in proportion as they have confidence in their officers: and they cannot have confidence in officers who have no knowledge of their profession, ... have no subordination among themselves, and never obey an order’.19
Wellington’s opinion of the Spanish officer corps was shared by many other British observers.20 It would be tempting to attribute the The war of the Junta Central 119 blame for this situation entirely to the influx of new officers who had
entered the army in 1808. Many of the insurgent authorities had certainly showered commissions upon their supporters without any regard for their suitability. When the Supreme Council of War was charged with the task of examining the
reasons for Spain’s defeats, it concluded that this rash of appointments had been amongst the most serious and proposed that every commission issued since 1808 should be annulled.21 By then, however, the damage had been done: because
dismissing the new officers was clearly a political impossibi­ lity, Spain was left encumbered with a mass of officers who were so incompetent that they attracted the ridicule even of their own men.22 Yet this is too simplistic an
explanation of the problem. There is considerable evidence to suggest that many of the men appointed to command the new regiments were actually drawn from the mass of retired and supernumerary officers that had existed before 1808. In some
units between one third and one half the officers had actually seen service before 1808, whilst, of the thirty infantry captains in the Fourth Army who were eligible for promotion to the rank of sargento mayor in February 1813, only four
had been civilians at the beginning of the war.23 To maintain that the revolution was solely responsible for the poor quality of the patriot officer corps would therefore appear to be wishful thinking. Reports of misconduct among the
officer corps are in any case so common that it is impossible to believe that the problem was confi­ ned to any one group within its ranks. Aside from the question of incompetence, absenteeism was widespread.24 Rather than enduring the
miseries of active service, many officers seized any available pretext to travel to such cities as Cádiz, Seville and La Coruna, in which sanctuaries they lived in the best style they could afford and served only ‘to make a military
