choose between resisting the mob or surrendering to force majeure. Should they resist, they could legitimately be overthrown as traitors, but should they surrender they would still have abdicated their authority. In both cases, the way
would then be open for the conspi­ rators to achieve their aspirations. Yet if many of those who were planning an insurrection had a vested interest in bringing down the established order, in most cases the conspiracies were genuine in
their patriotism. So far as can be established none of the individual groups had any knowledge that their activities were being duplicated elsewhere in Spain. Instead, they were motivated by the hope that, by raising the standard of
resistance in their own cities, they could inspire the rest of Spain to follow their example. Such was certainly the case in Aragon, where the driving force behind the revolt came from the femandinos. Fernando’s supporters had initially
opposed resistance on the grounds that it would endanger the King, and were therefore seen The army and the revolution 83 attempting to calm the crowd during the Dos de Mayo.13 However, the rising in Madrid left them with no option but to
place themselves at the head of the popular outburst, which they sought to turn to their own advantage as a means of purging the numerous nominees of Godoy who still enjoyed high rank. If testimony is needed to the existence of such aims,
it may be found in the activities of José Palafox, the charismatic leader of the revolt in Aragon. Palafox had been the commander of the party of Guardias de Corps which had escorted Godoy into exile in France, and at the time of the Dos
de Mayo was still in Iran. According to his own account, he there received a secret message from Fernando to rescue the Infante Don Antonio from the French and to take him to Zaragoza, of which city Palafox happened to be a native. Antonio
was then to be placed at the head of a council of regency which would captain a popular revolt against the French.14 Whether this story should be taken at face value is a moot point. All that can be said for certain is that the attempt to
rescue the Infante never came to fruition, and that Palafox instead determined to place himself at the head of the insurrection as the self-appointed Lugarteniente del Rey. Travelling to Zaragoza in disguise, he arrived to find that the
city already in turmoil as a result of the Dos de Mayo. Being well known in the city, he had no difficulty in forming a conspiratorial junta composed in part of friends and relatives of his family, and partly of representatives of the same
groups who composed the backbone of the conspiracy elsewhere. Ordered by the Captain General, Jorge Juan Guillelmi, to return to Madrid, Palafox pretended to do so, but actually went into hiding in a country house just outside the city. In
the meantime his followers stirred up unrest within the city, a task which was greatly facilitated by the obstinate refusal of the civil and military authorities to take any action in response to the ever more alarming reports that were
arriving from Madrid and Bayonne.15 In his preparation of the uprising in Zaragoza, Palafox at least had the excuse that the Captain General was an avowed enemy of a popular revolt. Examples may also be found of conspiracies from which the
legitimate authorities were excluded in the clear know­ ledge that the latter were actually in favour of resistance. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the chain of events surrounding the Captain General of Seville, the Marqués del
Socorro. Socorro had been the commander of the Spanish division sent to invade 84 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Portuguese Extremadura in October 1807, and was currently at Badajoz following his abortive march on Aranjuez. On 4
May 1808 in company with the acting Captain General of Extremadura, the Conde de Torre del Fresno, he received a copy of the famous Bando de los Alcaldes de Móstoles, a call to arms that had been penned in the village of Mostóles in the
wake of the Dos de Mayo and then distributed throughout southwestern Spain. A number of circumstances surrounding the Bando suggest that its authorities. Not only were all of its authors (an Intendant, an official of the Concejo Supremo
del Almirantazgo and two village alcaldes) of the Concejo Supremo del Almirantazgo and two village alcaldes) quintessential civilian notables, but it was addressed not to the Captains General or their representatives, but to the local
magis­ trates.16 Socorro and Torre del Fresno proved themselves worthy of greater faith, however. On 5 May they issued a proclamation stating that all good Spaniards should arm themselves, and ‘make ready to defend the fatherland’. In
addition, messages were sent to many of their fellow military commanders, including the Captain General of the Campo del Gibraltar, Francisco Xavier Castaños, asking them for support.17 The response to this appeal raises serious questions
with regard to the nature of the uprising. It was only to be expected that most of the generals contacted by Socorro and Torre del Fresno should have rebuffed their appeals, for many of them had already chosen the path of collaboration.
The only exception was Castaños, but for reasons best known to himself he chose to not to reveal his own plans for revolt. Yet the general turmoil should surely have produced an enthusiastic response from the civilian population and the
various interest groups who were implicated in the anti-French conspiracies. Nothing of the sort occurred, however: the proclama­ tion of 5 May was simply ignored. It would in consequence appear that the Spaniards were not prepared to
accept the leadership of the military hierarchy, even when the latter were prepared to take action. For their part, Socorro and Torre del Fresno seem now to have despaired of all hopes of resistance. Leaving the Count at Badajoz, Socorro
fled southwards to take refuge with the powerful garrison of Cádiz. Even as he did so, moves were already afoot to raise his Captain Generalcy in revolt against him. In Seville prepar­ ations for an uprising had been underway since the
arrival in that city of one Nicolas Tap y Núñez, a successful entrepreneur who had been imprisoned by Godoy some years earlier on charges which Tap The army and the revolution 85 claimed to have been unjust. Motivated by a typical mixture
of patriotism and revenge, he joined forces with a group of local patriots and discontented notables headed by the Conde de Tilly to subvert the garrison and and provoke an insurrection.18 The common theme that was shared by almost all the
individual foci of revolt was a desire to overthrow the established military authorities. This goal proved attainable on account of the attitude adopted by most of the generals towards the uprising. Aside from Socorro and Torre del Fresno,
the only senior officers prepared to do anything to instigate resistance to the French were Castaños and the Commandant General of Guipúzcoa, the Duque de Mahón. Even before the Dos de Mayo, Mahón had attempted to secure the border
fortress of San Sebastian from the French, and then to raise the Basque provinces in revolt.19 In Andalucia, meanwhile, Castaños had been negotiating with the governor of Gibraltar, Sir Hew Dalrymple, with a view to securing British
intervention in Spain. Fortified by Dalrymple’s promises of support, he eventually fixed upon Fernando’s santo — 30 May — as the day he would declare war on the French.20 These were very much the exceptions to the rule. Far from instigat­
ing resistance to the French, most generals attempted to calm the excited population in accordance with the instructions which they had received from from the French-controlled Junta de Gobierno in Madrid. In Valencia, Zaragoza, Granada
and La Coruña, the Captains General sought to suppress the conspiracies that emerged in their garrisons.21 As for those generals caught in the French zone of occupation, they almost unanimously offered their services to the invaders.22
When the uprising actually broke out, a few senior officers did rally wholeheartedly to the patriot cause, including the Captain General of Canarias, the Marqués de Casa Cagigal, and the commanders at Oporto, Segovia, and Alcala de
Henares.23 Such officers were in a minority, however: most commanders either opposed the rising or sought some means of temporising, only to find themselves assailed by charges of treason and cowardice.24 In the eyes of many generals,
there were powerful military and political reasons why a popular rising should be opposed. An illumi­ nating example of their thinking is provided by a letter that was dispatched by Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta, the Captain General of Old
Castile, to the Ayuntamiento of León on 29 May 1808: 86 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War My mode of thinking is, and always will be, to conform exactly with that of my government. It is to the government, and not to private citizens,
that the task of deliberating on the affairs of state corresponds. Anything else would be opposed to the first duties of a vassal and a Catholic, and would produce anarchy, that is, the destruction of the monarchy and the state ... All the
members of the royal family have solemnly renounced their rights to the crown of Spain, absolving their vassals of their oaths of loyalty... We must therefore attempt nothing against their express determination, nor against the provisions
of the Supreme Junta that governs us in the name of the Emperor of the French ... The Emperor will give us a King in these circumstances in which we neither have one nor know who has the right to act in this capacity. Thus, prudence and
the private... good demand that we await this choice with tranquility. The indications are that it will be favour­ able to us since 150 enlightened Spaniards of all classes have already been called to Bayonne to propose and discuss the
reforms necessary for the defence of this Kingdom. It is evident to me that all sensible and patriotic Spaniards think in the same manner, but as there are many among the masses who do not reason ... they are unfortunately being swept
towards an insurrection ... by the sort of malevolent and rebellious men who always hope to prosper from disorder ... In whose cause will they fight? Who will lead them? How will they be supplied with arms, munitions and supplies,
supposing that all prudent and sensible men will be on the opposing side in order to defend their existence and property? What successes could an undisciplined mob be sure of against veteran armies? ... if against all expectation they were
to prevail, do they not consider that their own leaders would be bound to dispute the supreme command, and finish up by completely destroying their liberty and existence?25 That Cuesta was no coward is obvious from his later record in the
War of Independence: until he was incapacitated by a stroke in August 1809, he fought a series of campaigns that showed him to be an implacable opponent of the French, albeit one without much military talent. Instead, he was bound by
legitimist thinking, and convinced that a rising would lead not only to revolution, but also to military catastrophe: in his memoirs he specifically points out the defenceless nature of Old Castile, which was virtually devoid of regular
troops and could easily be overrun by the French.26 When revolt broke out in his capital of Valladolid on 1 June 1808 in response to the news of the risings elsewhere, he at first refused to grant the demands of the crowd that he take
command of the insurrection, and is supposed eventually to have done so only when he was actually dragged out for execution. Self-preservation was undoubtedly the major reason for his capitulation, but it is still significant that he later
