palafoxista dictatorship was now the only means of achieving their ends. As for the Marqués de Coupigny, he had commanded one of the two Spanish divisions that had borne the brunt of the fighting at Bailén, and had ever since been bitterly
jealous of the fame which it had brought to Castaños.70 The disasterous effects of injecting political intrigue into the con­ duct of war soon made themselves apparent. During the second half of October substantial French forces had begun
to press in upon Blake’s isolated position in Vizcaya, and had forced him to evacuate Bilbao. Blake should have retreated immediately, especially as the French were already threatening his line of retreat, but at the crucial moment a
letter arrived from Francisco Palafox ordering him to attack the French.71 Paralysed by indecision, Blake wavered between the two alternatives, and was eventually defeated by the French at 130 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War
Espinosa de los Monteros on 10—11 November. Finally compelled to retreat, he then discovered that the invaders had blocked the road at Reinosa, leaving him with no option but to abandon all his guns and baggage, and to flee northwards into
the wilds of the Cantabrian mountains from where the survivors of his army eventually reached safety in León. By then, however, Blake was no longer at their head. Back at Aranjuez, as Lord William Bentinck reported, ‘the Junta here are
very impatient for the attack of [i.e. upon] the French, and are very angry both with Castaños and Blake for their apparent inactivity’.72 Even before the defeat of Espinosa it had therefore decided to replace the latter general with the
Marques de la Romana, who was newly arrived from Denmark.73 His disgrace was soon shared by Castaños who since the end of October had been locked in conflict with the commission sent to his headquarters by the Junta Central. Far from
aiding his operations, this body had been stirring up discontent among his subordinates and collaborating with José Palafox to make his task impossible.74 At the same time, mysterious rumours began to spread that Castaños was under the
influence of creatures of Godoy and even that he was in the pay of the French.75 As Sir George Jackson noted, the result was that: Castaños is at present very unpopular at Madrid, and such is the state of the public mind ... that I would
not answer for his life should he prove unsuccessful. Indeed, it appears to me that that he has no alternative but to conquer or fall gloriously on the field.76 With his erstwhile popularity reduced almost to nothing, the victor of Bailén
was unlikely to survive the growing discontent. On 14 November the Junta ‘yielded to the popular demand which has generally and loudly condemned the inactivity and supineness of General Castaños’ and agreed to his replacement by the
Marqués de la Romana.77 However, as La Romana was at that moment about to take the command of the Army of the Left in distant Cantabria, it was decided not to tell Castaños, but to leave him in situ until such time as his replacement could
actually take up his new appointment (how La Romana was actually to take command of two armies at once was never made clear: there was no suggestion that he should ever be appointed as a central commander-in-chief).78 The chaos that beset
the Spanish command could not have come at a worse time, for on 10 November the great offensive of the French The war of the Junta Central 131 army had finally begun under the command of Napoleon himself. Pouring through the gap in the
Spanish centre, the invaders had overwhelmed the newly arrived Army of Extremadura outside Burgos at Gamonal (10 November 1808), and had then fanned out across the plains of Old Castile. Whilst the Emperor led one column southwards towards
the capital, other forces struck out northwards and eastwards so as to surround the Armies of the Left and the Centre. Thanks to Blake’s break-neck flight across the Cantabrian mountains, the former managed to escape, but the paralysis
which reigned in the headquarters of the latter prevented it from either escaping the trap that had been set for it, or from launching an offensive that might have diverted the attention of the enemy from a march on Madrid. After a
fortnight of inconsequential manoeuv­ ring, quarrelling, confusion and intrigue, the combined forces of the Armies of the Centre and Aragón were beaten at Tudela on 23 November. Total disaster was only averted by the fact that the turning
column sent by Napoleon from Old Castile to block the Spanish retreat had not been able to reach its designated position in time.79 In consequence, the way was still clear for Castaños to adopt the only logical course of action left open
to him, which was to withdraw the Army of the Centre into central Spain, leaving José Palafox to defend Zaragoza as best he could. The Junta Central had belatedly sent orders for Castaños to do just that, taking with him two divi­ sions of
the Army of Aragón, but the Palafoxes could not contem­ plate such a move. Loudly proclaiming Zaragoza to be the ‘citadel of Spain’, they proposed that both armies should retreat within its walls. After every effort had failed to persuade
Castaños to accede to this futile plan, Francisco Palafox retaliated by instructing all the Army of the Centre’s stragglers to rally on Zaragoza, inciting its troops to desert, and seizing its military chest, which had been sent to the
city for safety. As for the order placing two Aragonese divisions under the command of General Castaños, who was by now in full flight with the French in hot pursuit, it was simply ignored.80 On reaching Sigüenza, Castaños received orders
to return to the capital to take up his position as the head of the Junta General de Guerra. On his journey, he was on several occasions attacked by angry mobs, and then was arrested as soon as he arrived in Seville, remaining in prison
until November of the following year. His downfall was the work of the palafoxistas, who were alleging that 132 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Castaños had betrayed the Army of Aragón at Tudela and was now proposing to abandon
Zaragoza to its fate—or, in short, that he was a traitor.81 Desperate for a scapegoat who could be blamed for Spain’s misfortunes, the Junta Central was only too happy to give credence to their insinuations, leaving the hero of Bailén to
become the villain of Tudela. Yet much of the responsibility for that defeat belonged to the palafoxistas, who showed a total lack of concern for the interests of the nation. Whilst they had been intrigueing against their rivals, Spain had
been beaten to her knees. As soon as he had heard the news of Tudela, Napoleon had launched an offensive against Madrid. Sweeping aside the few Spanish troops that were left to oppose him at the battle of Somosierra, the Emperor arrived
before the capital on 2 December. For a brief moment the population attempted to defend themselves, but their resistance was as inef­ fectual as it was disorderly, and the city surrendered two days later. The troops who had fought at
Somosierra in the meantime fled southwestwards in a state of total mutiny, murdering their comman­ der, General San Juan, and pillaging all the towns on route in the process.82 Nor were the Armies of the Left and the Centre in much better
condition. The former was described as having ‘the appear­ ance of a large body of peasants, driven from their homes, famished and in want of everything’.83 As for the Army of the Centre, the Duque del Infantado, who had taken it over
following the departure of Castaños, wrote: I saw a ruined army, and troops who presented a most distressing appear­ ance. Some were entirely barefoot, others almost naked, and all disfigured ... by the most ravenous hunger (there were
many who had had no bread for eight days, and misery and hunger had reached such a pitch that... many had died of hunger along the roads and in the mountains). They appeared more like walking corpses than men ready to defend their
fatherland ... Battalions had been formed from fractions of different regiments; the strength of the largest was less than 600 men, and some had only 100... The cavalry were in the same state... the greater part of the horses could hardly
bear the weight of their riders.84 The Army of Catalonia also having been badly beaten at Cardedeu and Molíns de Rey (16 and 21 December 1808), the only force left in any semblance of order was José Palafox’s Army of Aragón. However, on 20
December it had once more been besieged in Zara­ goza and was therefore incapable of doing anything to prevent the French from over-running the rest of Spain. Exactly two months The war of the Junta Central 133 later it was forced to
surrender after a defence that was marked as much by the ineptitude of José Palafox as the heroism of its defen­ ders. Spain therefore lay prostrate before Napoleon, and would doubtless have been overrun altogether had it not been for the
British army under Sir John Moore. This force had been assembling in the area of Salamanca and by sheer good fortune had escaped attack by the French. Striking eastwards against the French communica­ tions in Old Castile, Moore stung the
Emperor into sending almost the whole of his disposable field force against him. There followed the famous ‘Retreat to Corunna’ in which Moore was forced to run for the sea with an overwhelmingly superior French army in hot pursuit. After
a successful rearguard action at La Coruña, the British were evacuated (though Moore himself was killed), leaving the French in fruitless possession of the strategic cul-de-sac of Galicia. The effect of this campaign was to win a vital
respite for the Junta Central and its shattered armies, for it was impossible for the French to follow up their successes in central Spain whilst their armies were embroiled in the far north west. Furthermore, once conquered, Galicia could
not be abandoned, and instead had to be used as a base for fresh offensive operations. As a result, for months afterwards two whole army corps were tied down in a futile campaign in Galicia and northern Portugal that had no relevance
whatsoever to the real French objectives. Napoleon had left Spain early in January 1809 under the impres­ sion that the war in the Peninsula had been reduced to the status of a mere mopping up operation that could safely be left to his
lieuten­ ants. However, he could not have been more wrong. Moore’s offen­ sive had given the Junta Central a chance to reconstitute its battered armies south of the Tagus and to establish a new capital at Seville, from where it was to
continue to defy the invaders for the whole of the next year. Far from attacking the Spaniards, the French forces in central Spain were for a long period actually forced to surrender the initiative to their opponents. Yet the strategic
outlook had immeas­ urably worsened for the patriot cause. With the French once more in control of Madrid, the Spanish armies were condemned to fight a long series of operations on external lines in the wide plains of the Castiles. At the
same time, the Junta Central had suffered a shattering blow to its already tarnished reputation, with the result that the Spanish war effort was certain to be subjected to the same tensions that had sabotaged it in the campaign of
November—December 1808. 134 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Forced by the French offensive to flee to Seville, the Junta Central had responded to the shock of defeat by making a determined effort to restore its authority. Not only
could this be seen to be essential with respect to the war effort, but its political opponents had been seeking to capitalise upon its temporary eclipse: indeed,the irrepress­ ible Junta of Seville had even declared itself to be a new
