enjoyed local support from both the press and the crowd. Yet for all the fluctuat­ ing nature of their parliamentary majority, which was often seri­ ously reduced over particularly radical measures, they had little need of such assistance.
They had a coherent plan, their very lack of numbers allowed them to function as a tightly organized caucus, and their leaders numbered many of the most able figures in the Cortes. As a result they were enabled to exploit the vaguely
reformist lean­ ings of the bulk of their fellow deputies, whilst sweeping aside the very few outright reactionaries. Nicknamed.the serviles (the slavish ones), the conservatives’ very sobriquent stands witness to their initial
unpopularity.6 The liberals’ first objectives were to establish the sovereignty of the people, and to neutralise the highly conservative Regency. Since there was general agreement that the Cortes should hold absolute power in the absence
of the King, this was a simple task. When the assembly finally met on 24 September 1810 a motion was immediately introduced declaring the sovereign power to reside in the Cortes, and requiring all the authorities of the state, including
the Regency, to take an oath of allegiance. The resistance of certain of the regents to this demand provided a pretext for their replacement by a new ‘Regency of the Three*, whose members, Gen­ eral Blake and Admirals Ciscar and Agar, were
all noted for their docility. As far as the army was concerned, the only opposition came 158 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War from the notoriously traditionalistic Marques del Palacio, who refused to take the required oath of
allegiance and was promptly imprisoned. For the rest, even such noted frondeurs as La Romana and Infantado placed themselves unreservedly at the orders of the Cortes.7 However tempting it might be to suspect that such support was largely
the product of political opportunism, it is clear that many generals were genuinely delighted at the advent of the Cortes. As Manuel La Peña proclaimed, ‘The hope of saving the fatherland is reborn’.8 Their optimism rested on the hope that
the new régime would at last be able to put the Spanish war effort on a proper footing. Until 1810, in their own eyes at least, they had consistently been denied the means that they needed to fight the war whilst nevertheless being held
responsible for defeats whose real origin lay in the chaotic legacy of the national uprising of 1808. The ad hoc nature of Spain’s mobilisation had led to the army being swamped by large numbers of new regiments composed entirely of raw
recruits officered by men of neither talent nor experience. The resultant disruption had been magnified by the collapse of the supply system, the complete indiscipline of the guerrillas, the insubordination of the provincial juntas, and
the refusal of the Junta Central to appoint a commander-in-chief. Considering the superiority of the French for­ ces, defeat had been inevitable.9 With the greater prestige that had now accrued to the central government, it was possible to
hope that the Cortes would now address itself to a thorough reorganization of the army, the provision of an adequate system of recruitment and supply, the militarisation of the guerrillas, and the establishment of a mando único™ The
priorities of the liberals were entirely different, however, for they insisted that the Spanish people had gone to war with France, not simply to sustain the rights of an absolute monarch, but to regain their liberties.11 According to this
theory, the fervour which had thus inspired the insurgents of 1808 had enabled them to achieve great victories, but thereafter their ‘holy fury’ had been allowed to subside: political reforms had not been instigated and the revolution had
degenerated into a mere war. Once more upon familiar ground, the French had thereupon naturally gained the advantage.12 It followed that Spain could only be saved by ‘a true revolution in which the general effervescence would lend her the
strength to resist armies born of a similar upheaval’.13 The first task of the Cortes was thus to restore the liberty of the nation, for the best way of winning the war The army and the liberals, 1810-14 159 was not military reform but the
introduction of a constitution. After its promulgation El Redactor General could even go so far as to argue that the Constitution of 1812 ‘has been the most formidable army that the French have had to face, for it has transformed what they
regarded as a horde of savages into a nation of free men’.14 For the first eighteen months of the Cortes’ existence, its attention was therefore wholly absorbed by the formulation of the famous Constitution of 1812. However, far from
bringing about the liberation of Spain, the constitutional debate coincided with a further decline in Spain’s fortunes. Not only did Cádiz remain besieged, but the French armies occupied an ever greater area of patriot Spain. Following the
close of the Austrian campaign in 1809, Napoleon had determined to bring an end to the ‘Spanish ulcer’. Heavy reinforcements were therefore poured into the Peninsula so as to enable the French commanders to form a powerful striking force
with which to drive the British from their stronghold in Portugal. In the face of such a threat, Wellington could not but adopt a defensive strategy. Retaining his army within the Portuguese frontier, he remained a passive observer whilst
the French armies reduced the Spanish fortresses of Astorga and Ciudad Rodrigo. When the French finally invaded Portugal in August 1810, he withdrew before them to the impregnable lines of Torres Vedras outside Lisbon. There he remained
throughout the winter until starvation finally forced the French to retreat in March 1811. Wellington was soon back on the Portuguese frontier, but for the rest of the year the French remained sufficiently strong to frustrate any further
advances. For the best part of two years the French were therefore left free to concentrate upon reducing the remaining patriot enclaves. By January 1812 they had occupied Oviedo, Lérida, Tortosa, Badajoz, Tarragona and Valencia. Whilst it
is true that disaster was occa­ sionally precipitated by the ineptitude of certain generals, the Spaniards for the most part lacked the strength to make head against these offensives, for their troops remained as ragged, starving,
disease-ridden, ill-equipped and unpaid as ever. So desperate was the position in some areas that the soldiers actually had to be dismissed to their homes for want of food and clothing.15 Most of the armies could field only a small
proportion of their available strength (6,000 out of 23,000 in the case of the Army of Galicia in September 1810), and they were often only able to do so at all after their copious wants had been made up by the British.16 In short, for the
most part the The Spanish army in the Peninsular War 160 c) January 1812 d) December 7812 Territory occupied by the French 5 The Spanish War of Independence, 1808-14 Spanish armies remained ‘unfit for anything more than mere guer­ rilla
warfare’.17 In this capacity it has to be said that the Spanish army often performed with distinction. For example, for most of 1811 and 1812, General Francisco López Ballesteros’ division of the Army of the Left operated with considerable
success against the French forces in Andalucia. Originally based in the mountains of western Andalucia, in September 1811 his forces were sent round by sea to Algeciras, from where they launched repeated raids against the French positions
around Ronda and Malaga. Every time that the invaders concentrated a field force against him, Ballesteros would simply retreat under the guns of Gibraltar whence he could defy them with impunity. In the meantime he would have invariably
given The army and the liberals, 1810-14 161 considerable assistance to the guerrillas, for the French would have been forced to abandon their pursuit of the irregulars and strip their garrisons so as to provide a respectable field force.
Left to their own devices, the partidas would then swarm down from their mountain strongholds and attack the inadequately protected French bases, with the result that the invaders would have no option but to give up their operations
against Ballesteros. With their operations complemented in this fashion by those of the regular army, the guerrillas attained their maximum importance during this period. According to one Spanish estimate, by the end of 1812 they numbered
38,520 men organized into twenty-two different partidas.19 They may even have saved Spain from being overcome altogether, keeping resistance alive until Wellington’s army was at last able to break free of the stalemate on the Portuguese
frontier: thanks to the guerrillas, the conquest of Spain required a much larger army than that which Napoleon had been able to deploy there, but, as Wellington had pointed out in 1810, the invaders ‘cannot increase their force in the
Peninsula, even admitting that they possess the military means, without increasing their pecuniary and other difficulties and distress’.19 Yet for all the damage that these forces inflicted upon their opponents, they could not prevent the
French advance. As Sir Thomas Graham noted in 1810: There are points where it is of infinite consequence to the cause that there should be armies for, useful and important as the services of the guerrillas are, that is not enough, let them
be ever so much spread over the face of the country. They never can stop the march of a considerable body of the enemy and protect a country as Blake has done lately in Murcia, and O’Donnell has so successfully done in Catalonia.20
Although many guerrilla leaders formed their bands into disci­ plined military units, the irregulars were frequently just as poorly trained, officered and equipped as their colleagues in the rest of the army.21 Particularly towards the end
of the war, they were frequen­ tly able to get the better of small forces of the enemy, but a major French offensive left them with no choice but to take evasive action. Nor were the guerrillas any more able to reconquer territory that had
fallen to the invaders as the French had only to retreat within one of the fortified bases from which they held down the countryside to be entirely safe: until they had been supplied with artillery by the British after 1812, the guerrillas
had no means of conducting formal sieges.22 Yet another problem was presented by the guerrillas’ lack of 162 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War co-ordination. Many of their chieftains were as intent upon estab­ lishing themselves as
petty dictators in their own localities as they were upon fighting the French. Not only did they refuse to co-operate with one another militarily, but they ruthlessly suppressed any bands that emerged to challenge their predominance in
their home districts.23 Nor were most of the guerrilla leaders prepared to accept the authority of the military commanders (to whom they were offi­ cially subordinated).24 To have relied upon them as the chief instru­ ments of any
concerted plan of operations would therefore have been impossible. Yet even had the guerrillas been free of these deficiencies, they could not have taken the place of a regular army. As the Duke of Wellington pointed out: Independent small
bodies operating upon the enemy may be extremely useful when these operations are connected and carried on in concert with those of a large body of troops which ... occupy the whole of the enemy’s attention ... but when the enemy is
relieved from the pressure of the larger body, the smaller body must discontinue its operations or be destroyed. In short, it is impossible to believe that the guerrillas could ever have achieved ‘the considerable and lasting advantages .
