provisional government.85 The Junta Central had already enlisted the aid of the Marqués de la Romana to enforce its rule in the north west by appointing him Jefe Politico, or Viceroy, of Old Castile, León, Astu­ rias and Galicia.86 On
leaving Madrid it had also sent out twelve of its members to act as its representatives to the provincial juntas, whose authority it proceeded strictly to limit by a decree of 1 January 1809.87 Measures were also taken to end the disorder
which had raged in the army ever since the national uprising. Correctly identi­ fying one of the chief problems as the haphazard creation of large numbers of new regiments, it prohibited the formation of any more until all existing units
had been brought up to strength.88 An attempt was also made to bring spontaneous popular resistance under the control of the government by the establishment of rules for the organisation of guerrilla bands.89 Finally, an investigation was
begun of the officers’ commissions issued by the new authorities, which eventually ruled that many of them should be annulled.90 These decrees were by no means the end to the Junta’s efforts to reform the army. In May 1809, for example,
the office of Inspector General was re-established in both the infantry and the cavalry, whilst the strictest obedience to the Ordenanzas was enjoined at all times. A number of new military academies were also created in the hope that they
might do something to improve the quality of the officer corps.91 Yet these efforts were unavailing. Powerful vested interests had been thrown up by the rising of 1808 which the Junta Central simply lacked the strength to overcome: for
example, any attempt to disband even a single one of the new regiments caused a storm of protest that sometimes ended in mutiny.92 Against such opposition, the government could only have made headway had it possessed the support of the
provincial juntas. However, the latter were convinced that the Junta Central’s only object was to perpe­ tuate its rule, whilst they had also been enfuriated by the decree of 1 January 1809, which they regarded as a stratagem to deprive
them of all the perquisites of office. They were therefore less than co-opera­ tive, and actively sought to prevent any attempt to interfere with The war of the Junta Central 135 regiments which they identified as their own.93 In some
cases, they also refused to accept the authority of the commissioners sent out by the Junta Central, those sent to Valencia and Cádiz both being driven out by outbreaks of rioting.94 The numerous aristocratic generals who were opposed to
the Spanish revolution on principle, or who desired to see a resurrection in the power of the nobility, constituted a further source of resistance. It was, for example, suspected that the Conde de Montijo’s presence in Cádiz at the time of
the rioting there was anything but a coincidence.95 The chief members of the legitimist faction were Infantado, Cuesta and La Romana. Infantado was currently in Seville as President of the Council of Castile, but was very resentful of
having been relieved of the command of the Army of the Centre after it had been defeated at Uclés (13 January 1809). Cuesta, on the other hand, had been appointed to the command of the Army of Extremadura by the junta of that province, an
appointment which the Junta Central felt it had no option but to confirm. However, he was still furious at his removal from the command of the Army of Castile, and his anger had in no wise been assuaged when that force had been
incorporated into the Army of the Centre in October 1808. As a result he was only too happy to renew his intrigues of the previous summer with Infantado.96 The other wing of the military opposition to the Junta Central consisted of the
clique of noblemen who had been behind the Motin de Aranjuez, and who still hoped to translate its benefits into reality through the creation of a regency. Until the fall of Zaragoza the leading figure of this group had been José Palafox,
whereupon his place was taken by his younger brother, Francisco, aided and abetted as usual by the Conde de Montijo. It was axiomatic to these officers that the reputation of José Palafox should be defended as the founda­ tion of their
appeal to the public, for which reason they devoted much energy to claiming that his downfall was the result of trea­ son.97 At the same time, they sought actively to overthrow the Junta Central, to which end Montijo organised a revolt in
Granada in April 1809. Francisco Palafox travelled to join him from Aragón, but the rising had collapsed before he got there, leaving him unable to do more than make lame denunciations of the provincial authorities. Montijo, in the
meantime, was arrested and sent into internal exile in Badajoz.98 Nor was this the limit to the intrigues directed against the Junta Central in the early part of 1809, for the Junta of Seville had 136 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War
become involved in a scheme known as the ‘grand plot of the grandees*, whereby the Junta was supposed to seize power in the capital whilst a number of disaffected generals, including the Duque de Alburquerque and Francisco Palafox,
simultaneously took con­ trol of the armies in the provinces." The existence of these intrigues placed the Junta Central in an impossible position: it could not surrender to the demands of its opponents for fear of a military dictatorship,
but resisting their demands laid it open to charges that it merely wished to hang onto power for its own sake. After much deliberation, its members agreed that the only possible political solution was for the convocation of an entirely new
Cortes. On 22 May 1809 it accordingly issued a decree promising that such a body would meet within one year, and asking that all interested citizens should submit their ideas as to how it should be organized and the sort of reforms that it
should undertake. The task of producing a plan of action was placed in the charge of a special commission of the Junta, headed by the universally respected Jovellanos.100 In the meantime it sought to defuse the situation by by playing one
general off against another, and ensuring that armies that were commanded by men known to be hostile to the Junta were always counter-balanced by others which were commanded by its friends.101 In order to restore its battered credibility,
it also sought to achieve military victory, launching a series of offensives against the French positions in central and northern Spain. Although politically indispensable, such a strategy took little account of the military situation.
After their traumatic experiences in the autumn and winter of 1808, the Spanish armies were in desperate need of a period of rest and reorganization. As the decisive battles of the ensuing campaigns could not but be fought out in the open
terrain of the meseta, their glaring inadequacies were certain to be more exposed than ever. Finally, the French enjoyed a central posi­ tion, whilst the Spaniards would be operating on external lines. The continued parochialism of the
provincial juntas also constituted a serious obstacle to an offensive strategy, for in many cases they were still inclined to hoard their troops and military supplies within their own borders.102 In view of these difficulties, it would
have been far more appropriate to adopt a defensive strategy of the type later envisaged by the Memorial Militar y Patriótico del Ejército de la Izquierda whereby the regular armies would limit themselves to holding their positions in the
mountains surrounding the French The war of the Junta Central 137 zone. In the meantime, the French would be worn down by the guerrillas of the interior, supported if necessary by small bodies of regular troops, leaving the generals free
to train their forces for an eventual counter offensive.103 An embryonic form of this strategy was already being implemented in Galicia where the Marqués de la Romana had succeeded in stirring up a considerable outbreak of guerrilla
warfare. Whilst the French wore themselves out chasing the partisans, the Marquess kept his army hidden in the shelter of the mountains that ran along the northern frontier of Portugal, emerging only to launch the occasional raid on
isolated French positions. However, the mere presence of his army prevented the invaders from applying all their forces against the insurgents, just as the activities of the latter prevented a decisive blow from being launched against La
Romana. In this manner, the struggle might have been continued indefinitely. However, there was little chance that this strategy could have been adopted. Aside from the political need for a dramatic victory, few of the Spanish generals
shared La Romana’s caution, their ambitions having been greatly excited by the victory of Bailén.104 Further­ more,generals and government alike were limited in their freedom of action by the pressure of public opinion. Responsibility for
this situation ultimately lay with the civil and military authorities them­ selves. Rather than being honest about their defeats, many generals preferred to dress them up in their dispatches with exaggeration and half truths.105 Nor was
the Junta Central much better: desperate to retain the support of public opinion and to maintain popular enthusiasm for the war, its statements and proclamations often bore little resemblance to the actual military situation.106 The Gazeta
de Valencia's coverage of the campaign of November-December 1808 may be taken as a good example of the sort of distortion that could result. On 22 November, eleven days after Blake’s defeat at Espinosa de los Monteros, it reported that he
had beaten the French. On 16 December, twelve days after the fall of Madrid, it announced that the capital was defending itself heroically and added news of a wholly fictitious Spanish victory in Old Castile. On 30 December Madrid was
still holding out, and a non-existent army marching to its relief from Talavera. The loss of the capital was finally acknowledged on 3 January 1809, but two weeks later it was reported that Napoleon was now besieged there by a huge
Anglo-Spanish army.107 The outcome of this bombast, which unfortunately continued 138 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War throughout the war, was that ‘the minds of the people were filled .. .with the most determined belief of the
superiority of the Spanish army, which now in the public opinion neither admits of nor requires improvement, being already perfect’.108 So great was the general confidence in victory that any show of caution was ascribed to cowardice or to
a want of patriotic fervour, the Marqués de la Romana winning the scornful nickname ‘Marqués de las Romerías’ (Marquess of the Pilgrimages) on account of his constant marching and counter-marching in the mountains of Galicia.109 Many gen­
erals, who might otherwise have inclined to caution, were therefore forced into giving battle in the most unfavourable circumstances for fear of being lynched as traitors.110 If an offensive strategy was to be adopted, then it was
essential that the Spanish armies should strike hard and fast, for their only hope was to make use of the advantage of surprise conferred on them by the guerrillas to catch the French off balance. Yet speed and decision were precisely the
factors that were most often absent from the conduct of the Spanish generals. Not only did the armies tend to be encumbered by unnecessary quantities of baggage and swarms of non-combatants, but the half-trained soldiers rarely kept their
ranks and straggled along without any semblance of order.111 Even when they did manage to make reasonable time, they frequently had also to contend with the vacillation of their commanders. Realising that they were likely to be dismissed
