or even accused of treason if they were defeated, many generals lost their nerve at moments of crisis. Paralysed by indecision, they procrastinated until it was too late either to strike a telling blow or to save their armies by a timely
retreat. Alternatively, they would attempt to evade their responsibili­ ties by convening a council of war, a procedure that invariably tended only to increase the confusion.112 A further problem which beset the generals was the
possibility of intervention on the part of the Junta Central, which regarded its armies as much as pawns in the political game as instruments of military victory. At certain moments, it therefore became more important that they should be
conserved intact than that they should be committed against the enemy. Perhaps the most significant example of such a situation occurred during the crucial Talavera campaign of the summer of 1809. The success of this venture — a concentric
advance on the French forces occupying Madrid — depended on the actions of the Army of La Mancha, which was then The war of the Junta Central 139 commanded by a placeman of the Junta named Venegas. Whilst the British army of the then Sir
Arthur Wellesley and the Spanish Army of Extremadura under General Cuesta advanced against Madrid from the west, Venegas was supposed to push forward form the south. By pinning down the forces facing him, it was hoped that Venegas would
enable Wellesley and Cuesta to march on Madrid with overwhelming numbers. However, on 18 June 1809, the Army of the Levante had been destroyed at Belchite in Aragón. As its commander, Joaquin Blake, had been a loyal supporter of the Junta
Central, it became essential that the Army of La Mancha should remain in good order so as to provide a counterweight to Cuesta’s Army of Extremadura. Secret orders were therefore sent to Venegas ordering him on no account to allow any risk
to befall his army. Provided with an excellent pretext to pander to his natural caution, Venegas therefore stayed his hand and allowed the French to escape the trap that had been set for them.113 The tactical inferiority of the Spanish
army was thus compounded by the fumbling and hesitant manner in which it was committed to battle. Nor could its deficiencies ever be remedied, for every time that a Spanish force was beaten, which was generally every time that it took the
field, it had to be remade virtually from nothing. Not only were casualties frequently enormous, but the Spanish levies lacked the discipline and cohesion necessary to retreat in good order from the battlefield. Every defeat therefore
entailed the complete disinte­ gration of the army that had been involved, with the consequent loss of much of its equipment.114 Moreover, scattering all over the countryside, many of the survivors took the opportunity to slip away to
their homes or to join the guerrillas.115 In the light of the loss of so many men who might otherwise have gone on to form a cadre of veterans, it was to no avail that the Spanish armies should have sprung back to life again as quickly as
they were defeated. Each reincarnation merely duplicated the deficiencies of its predecessors, and inevitably went on to share their experiences. It is possible that something might have been done to arrest this cycle of defeat and
reconstruction had the Spanish army been placed under the command of British officers, as had been done with the Portuguese. However, even had this been politically possible, such a plan would have made little difference unless the
Spaniards were also properly maintained, a task that was quite beyond the capabilities of the Junta Central.116 Substantial aid was received from Great 140 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War Britain, including 155 artillery pieces,
42,800 rounds of artillery ammuntion, 200,277 muskets, 39,000 sets of belts, 6,660,000 musket balls, 15,400 barrels of powder, 23,477,955 cartridges, 61,391 swords, 79,000 pikes, 40,000 tents, 50,000 canteens, 54,000 packs, 92,100
uniforms, 343,900 pairs of shoes and boots, 39,100 shirts, 1,600 shakos and hats, 472,212 yards of linen, calico and wool, and £1,412,354 in cash and bills of exchange in the period May 1808-May 1809 alone?17 In addition, the end of the
war between Britain and Spain had reopened communications with the Spanish empire. As the Americans had initially responded to the war with a great upsurge of patriotic enthusiasm, the Junta Central had been bolstered by the arrival of
large consignments of bullion.118 Yet so great were the resources had been lost to the French that Toreno estimates that without the support it received from Britain and America the Junta would have been totally bankrupt.119 The logistical
problem was compounded by the the revolution of 1808, which had greatly increased the cost of Spain’s mobilisation whilst simultaneously disrupting the efficient utilisation of her resources.120 The defects of the army’s supply system were
also cruelly exposed. Much of the food and equipment that reached the unfortunate soldiery was rotten, or so badly made as to be completely useless.121 Although the armies were in effect expected to live off the country, much of the
interior of Spain was simply too poor to support them.122 Furthermore, when food was available the civilian population were frequently able to charge exhorbitant prices for their produce.123 Nor did the army possess an adequate system of
transport: aside from the difficulty and expense of hiring sufficient animals and carts, the drivers often went unpaid, and therefore displayed an understandable tendency to abscond with their charges at the first opportunity.124 Hence the
misery that was the perpetual lot of the Spanish armies throughout the Peninsular War. Its effect upon them could not have been more serious. It was clear, for example, that men who were starving and dressed in rags could hardly be
expected to bear themselves as disciplined veterans upon the battlefield.125 Furthermore, privation brought the death of thousands of soldiers, whilst many others deserted to avoid a similar fate. With its cadres of veterans subjected to
further erosion, the army was never able to reduce the proportion of raw recruits that filled its ranks. One of the reasons why the incidence of desertion was so high was The war of the Junta Central 141 that it was an easy option. The
lack of marching discipline off the battlefield and the frequent routs upon it made it simple for a soldier to slip away from the ranks. Once the deserter had gone, he was very often almost impossible to apprehend because the troops were
generally dressed in clothing that resembled that of the Spanish peasantry.126 Even if he was caught, he knew that he was unlikely to be shot, for there was a marked reluctance to execute men who had only run away to avoid starvation.127
It should be stressed that a great many deserters and dispersos simply returned to their homes, where they were generally allowed to remain in peace by the French.128 However, an indeterminable proportion of them chose instead to join one
of the numerous bands of guerrillas that had sprung up all over Spain in the wake of French occupation. Nor was this an end to the drain on the strength of the regular army which the guerrillas represented, for they were joined by many
young men who might otherwise have become soldiers, whilst some of their leaders went so far as to impose conscription themselves or to impress detachments of regular troops which fell into their hands.129 It was inevitable that service
with the guerrillas should have been more popular than service with the regular army, especially in view of the anti-militarism which had characterised Spanish society before 1808. They offered ‘more freedom and less discipline’; they did
not require men to leave their home districts; they had a reputa­ tion for success whereas the regular army could only offer defeat and starvation; and, above all, they offered substantial material benefits, the Junta Central having
decreed that all money and other personal effects seized from the French became the property of whoever had taken it.130 Whilst it would be a gross exaggeration to suggest that all of the guerrillas were mere bandits, they were often the
subject of bitter complaints and became firmly associated with the idea of personal gain; as a popular epigram had it: Viva Fernando y vamos robando?131 The men who joined the guerrillas were not entirely lost to the patriot cause, for the
partidas undoubtedly involved the French in enormous difficulties. Yet by sapping the strength of the regular army, they exacerbated the military crisis facing the Junta Central. The constant haemorrhage of trained troops could only be
borne if an equivalent number of recruits was sent to replace them. However, there were too few volunteers, and the provincial juntas were for the most part unwilling to enforce the decrees of conscription which they 142 The Spanish army
in the Peninsular War had promulgated in 1808. As for the few recruits that could be obtained, many of them had to be rejected on account of their poor physique, whilst others either deserted at once or had to be dismissed to their homes
because there was no means by which they could be paid or fed.132 As a result, the Spanish armies were very much a finite resource, which should have been husbanded with the utmost care. By the summer of 1809, this ought to have been fully
apparent to the Junta Central, but circumstances constrained it to ignore what was miltarily advisable and instead, as Wellington put it, to allow the conduct of operations to become determined by ‘political intrigue and the attainment of
trifling political objectives’.133 Despite, and in part because of, its efforts to consolidate its dom­ estic situation through the achievement of military victory, the posi­ tion of the Junta Central had continued to deteriorate. Although
the various conspiracies against its rule in the early part of 1809 had been quashed, its failures had kept alive a demand for political reform that the promise of a new Cortes had done nothing to ameliorate. This pressure was seconded by
the British government, which naturally expected the Spaniards to make a productive contri­ bution to the common cause. Matters came to a head following the campaign of Talavera of July 1809. Blaming its failure on Spanish bad faith and
incompetence, the Duke of Wellington withdrew the co-operation of his army from the Spaniards, advising the Junta Central henceforward to adopt a defensive strategy.134 To comply with such advice was impossible, however, for the Talavera
fiasco engendered a new wave of discontent.135 Furthermore, the opposi­ tion now had a new and potent leader in the person of the Marqués de la Romana. The quintessence of the military aristocracy, La Romana had been horrified by the
situation that he found on his return from Denmark in December 1808, confiding to Sir John Moore ‘that had he known how things were, he neither would have accepted the command nor have returned to Spain’.136 Appointed by the Junta to act
as its viceroy in the northwest, he had immediately shown his enmity by refusing to recognize the authority of the commissioner whom it had dispatched to his headquarters.137 Nor was he prepared to tolerate the pretensions of the
provincial juntas. On 2 May 1809 he accordingly descended on Oviedo and dissolved the Junta of Asturias, which he replaced by a new council dependent upon himself.138 He would have gone on to deal with the Junta of Galicia in similar
fashion, had not the Junta Central forestalled him The war of the Junta Central 143 by recalling him to Seville to take up a position as one of its members.139 Bringing La Romana to the capital brought him into contact with a natural ally,
