. . that would have provided the government with the means of raising armies’.26 So sharp a critique of the guerrillas may well appear incongruous in view of the undoubted successes which they scored in northern Spain in the course of 1812
and 1813. With the assistance of a British naval squadron, the Cantabrian partidas of Longa, Jaureghui and Porlier succeeded in temporarily clearing the French from most of the Basque coast, and in capturing the major port of Santander (3
August 1813). In Navarre, meanwhile, the redoubtable Francisco Espoz y Mina built up a force of nearly 10,000 men with which he bottled the French up in Pamplona. So complete was his domination that he established an effective provincial
administration, complete with its own hospitals and armament workshops. Finally, in Aragon, the garrisons of Marshal Suchet were faced by the partidas of Durán, Gayan and Villacampa, as well as by expeditions dispatched from the direction
of Catalonia. Moreover, the major Spanish formations were no longer mere bands of irregulars, but disciplined formations of veteran troops that were often stronger than the punitive columns that the French were able to dispatch against
them. They had even been supplied with a certain amount of artillery. Towards the end of 1812 their operations received a tremendous boost from the advance of the Duke of Wellington into the hinterland of Old Castile after the The army and
the liberals, 1810-14 163 battle of Salamanca. Forced to concentrate all their forces to repel his offensives, the French had no option but to bring forward the troops who had hitherto been fighting the guerrillas. In Aragón, whose
garrison was left more-or-less intact, the invaders managed to hold their own, but in Navarre and the Basque country the guerrillas were able to run amok. Communications with France were badly disrup­ ted, whilst in February 1813 Mina
forced the surrender of the French garrison of Tafalla, having first defeated a column of over 3,000 troops that had been sent to relieve it (11 February 1813). This exploit was followed in March by the storm of Fuenterrabia on the very
borders of France, and the annihilation of two battalions at Lerin (31 March 1813). Attacks on the towns of Huesca and Sos were both beaten off, but the French nevertheless decided to evacu­ ate the latter and almost suffered the
destruction of the column sent to its relief when Mina attacked it at Castiliscar (2 March 1813). In response to this activity, the French Army of the North launched a powerful offensive against the partidas. To ensure their defeat, its
commander was authorised to draw upon the Army of Portugal, five of whose six divisions were eventually to be sucked into the struggle. Although communications with France were placed on a more secure footing, and Mina forced to retreat
into Aragón, the guerrillas had not been destroyed. Furthermore, Mina’s arrival in Aragón coincided with the withdrawal of a significant proportion of its garrison in response to Suchet’s fears of an allied advance on Valencia from the
direction of Alicante. The French hold on Navarre and the Basque country had merely been strengthened at the expense of their control of Aragon. Still worse, the reverse inflicted on Mina and the Cantabrians had been achieved by detaching
troops from the forces whose task it was to contain Wellington. Though it is hard to see an alternative to this decision, it was one for which the French were to pay dearly.27 These campaigns clearly illustrate the limitations of guerrilla
war­ fare. Although Mina and his colleagues were able to score significant successes whenever the French were short of manpower or otherwise distracted, they could not hold their ground in the face of a determined counter-offensive. Unless
there was a serious failure of political will on the part of Napoleon - which still could not be foreseen even in the aftermath of the Retreat from Moscow - the French would therefore have to be forced to disgorge their conquests by
conventional means. In order to build an army that would be 164 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War capable of such a task, it was essential that ‘effectual measures should be adopted to feed, pay, clothe and discipline the Spanish
troops’.28 How this was to be achieved was by no means clear, for the Cádiz government was effectively bankrupt. Cut off from most of the territory that still remained free from French occupation, its resources were confined to such taxes
and patriotic contributions as it could raise in Cádiz itself, the shipments of bullion that were periodically received from Latin America, and the limited financial assistance that could be provided by Great Britain. These resources were
simply insufficient to meet the demands on the public treasury, which were calculated early in 1811 as a minimum of 1400,000,000 reales per year. Nor was it possible for the régime to raise additional revenue in the form of loans, for it
was hardly an attractive target for investment. Finally, the administration was in such disorder that the government could not make effective use of the limited resources that it still possessed.29 Matters were now to deteriorate still
further, for in 1810 revolution broke out in Latin America with effects that can only be described as devastating. In 1809 alone 344,000,000 reales had been received from the American colonies, but the figure was reduced by eighty per cent
in 1811, and ninety-three per cent in 1812. In 1810 overall revenue had amounted to 407,700,000 reales, in 1811 to 201,600,000, and in 1812 to 138,000,000?° Although the British repeatedly attempted to persuade the Spaniards that the best
means of solving the crisis was to grant the colonies a significant measure of self government, the Regency was in no position to make such concessions, for it was effectively in thrall to the commercial interests that dominated Cádiz. In
alliance with the liberals, who maintained that the Constitution of 1812 had freed the Americans from despotism by making them equal citizens of a united Spanish empire, they rejected all forms of compromise and demanded that the facciosos
should be put down by force. The result was that between November 1811 and October 1813 no fewer than 12,784 troops were sent to America in fourteen separate expeditions.31 Dispatched in small groups that never amounted to more than two
thousand men, these expeditions served only to exacerbate resentment in the colonies and to drain Spanish strength at home. Moreover, even when order was temporarily restored, as in Mexico, such was the disruption to the colonial economy
that there was no resumption in the flow of bullion.32 Had the British government not agreed to supply the Cádiz government with a subsidy of £600,000 The army and the liberals, 1810-14 165 in 1812, it is impossible to see how the
Spaniards could have conti­ nued the struggle at all.33 The pecuniary difficulties of the Regency placed the patriot cause in a quandary from which there was no easy escape. The only hope of restoring the Spanish army to a position in
which it could not only resist, but also turn back the tide of French conquest was for the government to regain control of the territory that had been lost between 1810 and 1812. However, this territory could not be regained except through
the very conventional operations that were beyond the capabilities of the patriot forces. In short, the Spaniards could only hope to maintain their resistance until such time as the Duke of Wellington was once more able to advance across
the Portuguese frontier. Yet however much they were powerless to effect their own liberation, it cannot be said that they did not earn their eventual deliverance. The sheer tenacity of Spanish resistance forced the French to garrison every
square mile of captured territory. With every step that they advanced, the invaders therefore became more and more over-stretched, and more and more vulnerable to Welling­ ton’s army. Until the end of 1811 the French commanders had found
it possible to deploy sufficient forces against the Duke to prevent him from advancing far into Spain, but the moment inevitably came when the forces facing him had to be drawn upon to provide reinfor­ cements for the operations that were
being carried on elsewhere. Seeing his chance, Wellington immediately pounced upon the inade­ quately protected border fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, and followed up their capture by the victory of Salamanca (22 July 1812).
Madrid was liberated on 12 August 1812, the siege of Cádiz was lifted, and the French forced to evacuate Andalucia. Having thus been forced to give up much of their conquests, the French were enabled to concentrate against Wellington in
such numbers as to drive him back to the Portuguese frontier. Although Andalucia remained free, its liberation did not put an end to Spain’s pros­ tration, it being left to the Duke of Wellington actually to defeat the French. Once again,
the simple fact that the French did not have enough troops in Spain to carry out all the tasks with which they were faced was to prove their downfall. Even on the defensive, they could not simultaneously contain the allied regular armies,
Spanish as well as Anglo-Portuguese, and put down the partidas. By sending the Army of Portugal to restore order in Navarre and the Basque country, Napoleon had presented the Duke of Wellington with a 166 The Spanish army in the Peninsula
War second opportunity to break the stalemate. Catching the French off balance, he struck into Old Castile and forced them into a precipitate retreat. Unlike in 1812, this time there was no mistake: following the decisive battle of Vitoria
(21 June 1813), the French were driven across the Pyrenees, leaving Suchet with no choice but to retreat from Valencia, and ultimately Catalonia as well. The Spanish armies only played an auxiliary role in this success. They fought well
enough when they actually came to grips with the enemy, but Wellington deliberately made as little use of them as possible. Even had he wanted to place more reliance upon them, it is clear that the government’s bankruptcy would have
prevented him from doing so. Far from providing the wherewithal for a revivified war effort, the liberated territories proved to be a ruined land: stripped of their resources by the French, they were also ravaged by bandits and bands of
sometime guerrillas, who preferred to prey upon the civilian population and the allied supply trains rather than the retreating enemy.34 The danger of such a situation had been revealed as early as 1809 when the French evacuation of
Galicia had been followed by an upsurge of banditry.35 With their villages burnt by the enemy, many of the erstwhile insurgents simply had no other means of support. In addition, they had acquired a taste for pillage that far outweighed
their desire to fight the French, let alone their willingness to be absorbed into the regular army.36 A certain propor­ tion of the guerrillas had never been anything more than bandits garbed in a cloak of patriotic fervour, and their
activities had often had to be repressed by the regular army.37 With the departure of the French more of them began to appear in their true colours. At the very same time that Mina was inflicting such havoc upon the French in Navarre, the
bands of Borbón, Puchas, Marquinez and Príncipe were turning to highway robbery en masse in the Castiles.38 Indivi­ dual members of other bands that had been incorporated into the regular army, such as Julian Sanchez’s Lanceros de
Castilla, regis­ tered their own protest by becoming renegades.39 Finally, even such guerrillas as remained loyal continued to oppress the civilian popu­ lation with their merciless requisitioning, and to act as an obstacle to the
