shipped across the Atlantic and thus had no reason to abandon Fernando. A period of stalemate ensued in which the rebel forces marched from one Andalucian city to the next in a desperate attempt to acquire popular support, whilst the
Madrid government attempted to put a field force together with which to quell the insurrection. Although this did not prove easy, for a time it appeared that the rebels were doomed. However, kept alive almost solely by the courage of
Rafael Riego, the flickering flame of the Andalucian revolt gave fresh heart to Fernando’s opponents in the rest of Spain. On 21 February a second military rebellion broke out in La Coruña, which was swiftly followed by other risings in
Zaragoza, Barcelona, Tarragona, Gerona and Pamplona. The final blow was delivered by Abisbal, who was now in command of the forces that had been sent against Riego. Sensing which way events were moving, he changed sides yet again and led
his army over to the rebels. Deserted on all sides, Fernando was left with no option but to surrender.16 By 1820 a large part of the officer corps may therefore be said to have been won over to the cause of liberalism, or at least to have
become so disillusioned with el rey deseado that they were no longer prepared to defend him. Yet that does not mean that most officers had become liberals. Whilst it is true that some of the conspirators had been motivated primarily by
ideological considerations, others were clearly influenced chiefly by their personal ambitions, or even by sheer opportunism. Still others, such as the Conde del Montijo (who - inevitably - was implicated in many of the intrigues of the
period 1815-19) were mere adventurers. Bored and frustrated by the realities of peacetime life, many young officers became addicted to 1814 and after 199 the gesto heroico for which the’ pronunciamiento offered so many opportunities.
Success — as in 1820 — brought instant advancement, and failure the prospect of a glorious death. Personal characteristics and considerations aside, however, what united these officers and enabled them to win the support of their fellows
was a growing sense that the aspirations of the army could be as safe in the hands of the liberals as of the absolutists. For a great many officers, the alliance with the forces of revolution had been no more than a marriage of convenience
designed to attain their professional ends. They were no more liberal in 1820 than they had been in 1814, as was suggested by their desertion of the constitutional regime in the face of the French invasion of 1823. Their experiences of the
years immediately following the trienio liberal, during which Fernando temporarily disbanded the army and instead relied upon a royalist popular militia, were more than sufficient to alienate them from the cause of absolutism. Most
officers therefore fought for the liberals during the Carlist War of 1833—39, but as the nineteenth century wore on so the general trend of military opinion was to become more and more reactionary. In part this was a reflection of the
increasing tendency of the bourgeoi­ sie — to whom most officers could trace their origins — to become conservative rather than revolutionary as it gained an ever greater stake in the political system. Yet it was also a reflection of the
perceptions acquired in the course of the War of Independence, whose humiliations the officer corps attributed to the breakdown of discipline and national unity.17 The chaos caused by the guerrillas, the collapse of the central government,
the parochialism of the provincial juntas, the failure to appoint a mando único, and the anti-militarism of the liberals were therefore regarded as evils that must never be repeated. The result was a strong belief in the need to uphold the
unity of Spain, to maintain a strong government, to protect the authority and integrity of the army, and to ensure the continuance of law and order. As the army regarded these interests as being synonymous with those of the nation as a
whole, it followed that it possessed the duty to overthrow any government whose actions militated against them. The chief legacy of the War of Independence was thus to afflict Spain with an army that not only possessed a tradition of
political interventionism, but equated its own interests with the national good. By burdening her with a swollen officer corps that far The Spanish army in the Peninsula War 200 outstripped her actual needs, it also made the military’s
aspirations in terms of employment, promotion, and conditions of service so much the harder to satisfy. With the proclivities of many officers towards caudillismo encouraged by the contempt for civilian authority that had been stimulated
by the events of 1808—14, a lasting obstacle had been erected to Spain’s emergence as a modem democracy. Yet at the same time change had become inevitable, for the politicisation of the Spanish army sounded the death knell of the ancien
régime. So long as the military had remained an unthinking tool of royal power, for all the changing structure of Spanish society and the emergence of revolutionary ideologies, absolutism might have hoped to emulate the survival of the
eastern European empires. In Spain as in so many other countries, war was indeed the midwife of revolution. Epilogue Notes 1 H. Wellesley, op. cit., p. 73. 2 M. Pintos Vieites, La política de Fernando VII entre 1814 y 1820 (Pamplona,
1958), 95-102. 3 Real Orden, 4 May 1814, cit. Toreno, op. cit., Ill, 400—5. 4 Wellesley, op. cit., p. 74; cf. also Whittingham, op. cit., p. 265. 5 Callahan, op. cit., 112-14. 6 E. Christiansen, The Origins of Military Power in Spain,
1800-1854 (Oxford, 1967), p. 18. 7 E.g. Alcala Galiano, op. cit., I, p. 410. 8 Busquets, op. cit., p. 14. 9 C. Seco Serrano, Militarismo y civilismo en la España contemporánea (Madrid, 1985), p. 38; Estados de la organización y fuerza de
los ejércitos españoles beligerantes en la península durante la guerra de España contra Napoleón Bonaparte (Barcelona, 1822), p. 218. 10 F. Guervos to his parents, 24 December 1814 and 17 January 1815, RAH. 11-5-7:9003, Nos. 58,60. 11 F.
Guervos to his parents, 9 May 1815, RAH. 11-5-7:9003, No. 62. 12 Death certificate of F. Guervos, RAH. 11-5-7:9003. 13 Remonstrance of El Empecinado to Fernando VII, cit. Wellesley, op. cit., 79-80; Girón, op. cit., II, 18,22—4. 14 Alcala
Galiano, op. cit., I, p. 424. 15 Girón, op. cit., II, 12-14; Whittingham, op. cit., p. 367. 16 Alonso, op. cit., 152—4; Seco Serrano, op. cit., 43-5. 17 Cf. J. Gómez de Arteche, ‘Juan Martín, El Empecinado: la Guerra de la Independencia
bajo su aspecto popular’, La España del Siglo XIX, I, 81-132. Appendix 1 Order of battle of the Spanish Army, 1788 (a) Royal Guard Guardias de Corps (three companies), Guardias de Alabarderos (one company), Guardias Españolas (six
battalions), Guardias Walonas (six battalions), Carabinieros Reales (four squadrons). (b) Infantry Twenty-seven Spanish line infantry regiments, each of two battalions: Rey, Galicia,1 Principe, Saboya, Corona, Africa, Zamora, Soria,
Córdoba, León, Guadalajara, Sevilla, Granada, Lisboa,2 España, Toledo, Mallorca, Burgos, Murcia, Cantabria, Asturias, Navarra, Aragón, América, Princesa, Extremadura, Vitoria.3 Eight foreign line infantry regiments, each of two battalions:
Irlanda, Hibernia, Ultonia, Milán,4 Ñápeles, Flándes,5 Brabante,6 Bruselas.7 Two garrison infantry regiments, each of two battalions: Fijo de Ceuta, Fijo de Oran.8 Four Swiss infantry regiments, each of two battalions: Schwaller, Rutiman,
Reding, Preux. Three light infantry regiments: 1er Voluntarios de Cataluña (two battalions), 2o Voluntarios de Cataluña (two battalions), Voluntarios de Aragón (one battalion). (c) Cavalry: Twelve line cavalry regiments, each of four
squadrons: Rey, Reina, Principe, Infante, Borbón, Farnesio, Alcantara, España, Algarve, Calatrava, Santiago, Montesa. Eight dragoon regiments, each of four squadrons: Rey, Reina, Almansa, Pavia, Villaviciosa, Sagunto, Numancia, Lusitania.
Two regiments of light cavalry, each of four squadrons: Costa de Granada,9 Voluntarios de España. The Spanish army in the Peninsular War 202 (d) Royal Regiment of Artillery: Staff, six battalions, each of eight companies, one company of
cadets. (e) Royal Corps of Engineers: Staff of 150 officers. (f) Provincial Militia: Forty-three regiments, each of one battalion: Jaén, Badajoz, Sevilla, Burgos, Lugo, León, Granada, Oviedo, Córdoba, Murcia, Trujillo, Tuy, Eci ja, Ciudad
Rodrigo, Logroño, Salamanca, Toro, Jerez, Sigüenza, Laredo, Santiago, Pontevedra, Soria, Orense, Betanzos, Malaga, Guadix, Ronda, Bujalance, Cuenca, Alcazar de San Juan, Toledo, Chinchilla, Ciudad Real, Valladolid, Mondoñedo, Lorca, Avila,
Plasencia, Segovia, Monterrey, Compostela, Mallorca. Grand total at full establishment strength Royal Guard Infantry Cavalry Artillery Engineers Provincial militia Notes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Renamed Reina, 1789(?). Renamed Zaragoza, 1791.
Renamed Valencia, 1791. Disbanded, 1792. Disbanded, 1792. Disbanded, 1792. Disbanded, 1792. Disbanded, 1788(?). Renamed Cazadores de Valencia, 1802. Officers Men 559 2,669 990 320 150 1,443 9,867 66,702 14,376 4,900 — 41,190 6,131 136,785
Appendix 2 Order of battle of the Spanish Army, 1808 (a) Royal Guard Guardias de Corps (three companies), Guardias de Alabarderos (one company), Guardias Españolas (three battalions), Guardias Walonas (three battalions), Carabinieros
Reales (six squadrons). (b) Infantry Thirty-nine line infantry regiments, each of three battalions: Rey, Reina, Principe, Saboya, Corona, Africa, Zamora, Soria, Córdoba, Guadalajara, Sevilla, Granada, Valencia, Zaragoza, España, Toledo,
Mallorca, Burgos, Murcia, León, Cantabria, Asturias, Fijo de Ceuta, Navarra, Aragón, América, Princesa, Extremadura, Malaga, Jaén, Ord­ enes Militares, Voluntarios de Castilla, Voluntarios de la Corona, Vol­ untarios del Estado, Irlanda,
Hibemia, Ultonia, Ñapóles, Borbón. Six Swiss infantry regiments, each of two battalions: Wimpffen, Reding mayor, Reding menor, Bertschart, Traxler, Preux. Twelve light infantry regiments, each of one battalion: Ier Voluntarios de Cataluña.
2o Voluntarios de Cataluña, 1er Voluntarios de Aragón, 2o Voluntarios de Aragón, 1er de Barcelona, 2o de Barcelona, Tarragona, Gerona, Cazadores de Barbastro, Voluntarios de Valencia, Campo Mayor, Navarra. (c) Cavalry Twelve line cavalry
regiments, each of five squadrons: Rey, Reina, Principe, Infante, Borbón, Famesio, Alcantara, España, Algarve, Calatrava, Santiago, Montesa. Eight dragoon regiments, each of five squadrons: Rey, Reina, Almansa, Pavia, Villaviciosa,
Sagunto, Numancia, Lusitania. Two regiments of chasseurs, each of five squadrons: Cazadores de Olivencia, Cazadores Voluntarios de España. Two regiments of hussars: The Spanish army in the Peninsular War 204 Húsares, de María Luisa,
Húsares Españoles. (d) Artillery Staff, four regiments, each of ten companies, nineteen garrison companies, five pioneer companies, one company of cadets. (e) Engineers Staff, Regimiento de Zapadores-Minadores. (f) Provincial militia Four
divisions of grenadiers, each of two battalions: Castilla la Vieja, Castilla la Nueva, Andalucía, Galicia. Forty-three regiments, each of one battalion: Jaén, Badajoz, Sevilla, Burgos, Lugo, León, Granada, Oviedo, Córdoba, Murria,
Trujillo, Tuy, Erija, Ciudad Rodrigo, Logroño, Salamanca, Toro, Jérez, Sigûenza, Laredo, Santiago, Pontevedra, Soria, Orense, Betanzos, Malaga, Guadix, Ronda, Bujalance, Cuenca, Alcazar de San Juan, Toledo, Chinchilla, Ciudad Real,
Valladolid, Mondoñedo, Lorca, Avila, Plasenria, Segovia, Monterrey, Compostela, Mallorca. Grand total Royal Guard Infantry Cavalry Artillery Engineers Provincial militia Establishment strength Officers Men 444 3,240 116,922 960 16,164 675
