advantage of the riots of 1809 to secure a guarantee that they would never have to serve outside the walls of the city; indeed, there is a strong possibility that its members had fomented the disorder with precisely this end in mind.98
Since Cádiz is situated upon a promontory that juts out into the sea from an island off the coast of southern Spain, such service as they per­ formed was anything but arduous: even during the siege of 1810-12, all that they had to endure
was an occasional bombardment. The other feature of the war effort on which the liberals looked with particular favour was the guerrillas. Yet the partidas could not take the place of the regular army, whilst popular resistance was not
nearly so all pervasive as the liberals inferred. In the first place, the urban population (in which number were included a considerable number of the peasantry and the agricultural proletariat) was 176 The Spanish army in the Peninsular
War generally noted to be indifferent or even openly sympathetic towards the French." Furthermore, as the war progressed the guerrillas became more and more separate from the civilian population. Rather than slipping back to their homes
after every operation, they coalesced into individual bands, adopted military forms, and estab­ lished semi-permanent bases. Thereafter they lived off the people as much as they lived among them. Although they might provide the guerrillas
with various degrees of support, most of the inhabitants remained aloof from their operations and ‘very lukewarm’ to the allied cause because the partidas could offer them no protection against French reprisals.100 They hated the French,
but as the British diplomat, Thomas Sydenham, complained: It is a passive feeling, which murmurs under the oppression and tyrranny which it suffers without exerting itself to remove or diminish what it complains of. The people pay their
contributions ... whenever they are demanded... by the enemy. Of course they complain of these exactions and are happy to see the English, who relieve them from the continuance of these exactions ... But if they complain in secret, or to
us when the French have left them, it does the enemy no harm, nor us any good.101 The Spanish people might have taken a leading role in precipitat­ ing the struggle against the French, but their participation in it had been considerably
less than the liberals imagined. The whole rationale underlying the programme of reform that had culminated in the Constitution of 1812 was therefore open to question. At all events, as the serviles gleefully pointed out, it had not saved
Spain from her prostration.102 So great was the liberal refusal to take account of reality that it is hard to escape from the conclusion that their military policy was motivated by factors other than than an objective consideration of the
strategic situation. In their drive to create a Nation-in-Arms and to ensure that the army could never again be used as a tool of despotism, they had simultaneously redressed many of the grievances which the civilian notables, from whose
ranks they sprang, had felt against the military estate before the outbreak of war. A satisfactory career in the officer corps was now open to all men of a reasonable degree of property and edu­ cation, the military courts had been
stripped of much of their competence over disputes between officers and civilians, and the army had been deprived of all share in the local administration. If only on a subconscious level, the liberals had allowed their sectional interests
to colour their thinking with regard to the war. Had they The army and the liberals, 1810-14 177 been able to bring about a significant change in the army’s fortunes, then it is possible that they might have been able to secure their
political objectives without too much difficulty. However, with the army utterly humiliated by its experiences during the campaigns of 1812 and 1813, a violent reaction was inevitable. It is possible to argue that the army could never have
been brought to accept the changes that had been effected in its relationship with the rest of society, particularly as the war does not seem to have caused the bourgeoisification of the officer corps with which it has often been
credited.103 Evidence has already been given to suggest that many of the officers who were employed in the new regiments that were raised in 1808 already possessed commissions. The same is true of the generalato', of the 458 new Spanish
generals appointed in the course of the War of Independence, at least 174 had already been officers before 1808, whereas only eight had definitely been civilians and another one a member of the rank and file. Furthermore, although the
percentage of titled noblemen had declined from twenty-three per cent to only fourteen, there were still complaints that the aristocracy continued to enjoy greater favour than their fellows.104 Several important changes had nevertheless
taken place. The decree of 17 August 1811 that abolished the privileges of the nobility had still not opened the officer corps to every Spaniard, as the military academies charged their cadets eight reales a day for their tuition.105
However, at least it was now possible for prosperous commoners to embark upon a military career. Only time would tell whether merit really would triumph over inherited privilege, but there were still numerous officers who knew that they
owed every­ thing to the revolution and therefore could not afford a return to the ancien régime. At the same time a desire to emulate the triumphs of the French armies led many others to espouse the cause of social and political reform
within the army itself. Self interest and conviction therefore coincided to produce a nucleus of liberal support within the officer corps, particularly in the Estado Mayor General.106 Yet the writings of liberal soldiers such as Sancho and
Albo often betray a residual belief that the army officer was not simply one more citizen, but rather a being set apart to whom society owed a special debt of gratitude. In their frequent emphasis on the need to abolish the privileges of
the Royal Guards and the nobility there is also a hint that their liberalism stemmed as much from professional frustration as it did from conviction. At all events, if most officers could agree on 178 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War
the need to place the internal dynamics of the military profession upon a more equitable basis, few of them were likely to be willing to abandon the privileges which it brought them, and particularly not if they had only just been able to
gain access to them. These privileges were still of great importance even among the guerrillas, who are often represented as an important source of liberal support within the army.107 In reality, there was no reason why this should have
been the case. Many of the guerrilla leaders, such as Villacampa, Duran, Gayán, Porlier and Longa, were actually regular officers whom the vicissitudes of war had separated from the colours. In one or two cases, of whom Villacampa is again
an example, they had actually become guerrillas on the instructions of their superiors.108 As for those who did not possess commissions, the privileges of the officer corps, the scorn with which they were often treated by regular soldiers,
and the hope of obtaining supplies and munirions from the government, all constituted excellent reasons for them to petition the authorities to regularise the ranks held by themselves or their subordinates.109 In short, the guerrillas had
just as much interest in defending military privilege as the rest of the officer corps. The later involvement of some of them in liberal pronunciamientos does not constitute proof of their liberalism in the War of Independence. Not only
were some of them, notably Duran and Merino, avowed serviles, but even those who did declare for the liberals after 1814 were often motivated by their injured pride as much as by their political convictions. This was certainly the case
with the leader of the first attempted coup against Fernando, Francisco Espoz y Mina. Although he later made a great show of his liberalism, he had initially welcomed the return of absolutism, only turning his back upon it when he was
snubbed at court and deprived of his command.110 The vested interest of the entire officer corps in defending its corporate privileges made it essential for the liberals to treat the army with caution. Yet as time progressed military
opinion became more and more alienated. To a certain extent this was inevitable, for the army could not possibly have remained immune from the powerful conservative reaction generated by the liberal attack upon the Church and the monarchy:
in the course of 1812 and 1813 servil elements in the officer corps on several occasions petitioned Welling­ ton for support against the liberals.111 In addition, there was no shortage of disaffected interest groups within the officer
corps who could be expected to oppose the liberals. Many pre-war officers were The army and the liberals, 1810-14 179 bitterly jealous of the newcomers who had gained commissions since 1808.112 The Royal Guards were incensed at the
hostility that had been shown towards them.113 Finally, the generals resented the manner in which they had been excluded from the control of strategy, as witness the frequent proposals for the establishment of a junta de generales that
would assume this role.114 These essentially sectional grievances might have been counter-balanced by the equally large numbers of officers who stood to gain from the breakdown of privilege within the military estate had it not been for
the liberals’ assault upon the privileged status of the army in relation to the rest of society. According to the numerous pamphlets that were published in response to this attack, by excluding the army from the civil administration,
subordinating the generals to the jefes politicos, and curtailing the fuero militar, the Constitution of 1812 had deprived Spain’s soldiers of all tangible reward for their services.115 Spain would thus be left without any defence against
her foreign enemies: because human beings would not risk their lives in the defence of their country without the promise of substantial material rewards and the respect of their fellow citizens, nobody would embark upon a military career.
She would also be deprived of all her grandeur, for history had shown that a country’s stature was solely dependant upon its military power, whose conservation in turn depended upon the army being showered with honours and rewards.116 Far
from being treated with the deference, let alone the gratitude, to which it believed it was entitled, the army felt humiliated and despised. Deserving generals were subordinated to civilian jefes politicos of inferior social status and no
reputation; deprived of their role in government, Captains General found them­ selves without any proper function; and officers with years of distin­ guished service had their characters ‘besmirched by some effeminate fop’, or were
harrassed by arrogant civilian officials, who constantly invoked ‘the sacred name of the Constitution ... as a safeguard for their egotism*.117 In short, in the eyes of many officers, it really seemed that ‘anybody now has the right to
insult us solely by calling themselves a citizen ... we are considered mercenaries, hired servants or paid assasins’.118 Much of this outrage was pure cant, however. Although for the most part camouflaged by a veneer of patriotic
disinterest, the real motive for the unrest was the liberals’ refusal to admit the officer corps’ pretensions to be regarded as ‘the first citizens of the state’.119 180 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War The blatant egotism that was
