ton, 10 and 30 November 1813, US. WP.1/382, f. 10; Abisbal to Wellington, 7 December 1813, US. WP.1/389; Morillo to Wellington, 19 December 1813, US. WP.1/389. Walker to Hill, 7 November 1813, US. WP.1/379, f. 1; Wellington to Wimpffen, 12
November 1813, US. WP.1/379, f. 5; O’Donoju to Freyre, 18 November 1813, US. WP.1/379, f. 5. Morillo to Freyre, 30 December 1813, US. WP.1/391. E.g. Abisbal to Wellington, 23 December 1813, US. WP.1/389. Abisbal to Wellington, 10 December
1813, US. WP.1/389. E.g. Diario Crítico y Erudito de Granada, 10 June 1813, 38—9, HMM. AH2-5(351); El Amante de la Libertad Civil, 1 December 1813,80—4, HMM. AH2-5(371). E.g. Liano, op. cit., 3-4; Finestra, op. cit., 7—8. Wellington to
Bathurst, 5 September 1813, US. WP.1/377, f. 1. Abisbal to Wellington, 31 January 1814, US. WP.1/394. H. Wellesley, op. cit., p. 76. Wellington to H. Wellesley, 16 August 1813, US. WP.1/375, f. 5. Toreno, op. cit., Ill, 343—4. Ibid., in,
357-61; Palafox, op. cit., 35-9, 91-7; Whittingham, op. cit., 257,269. Hamnett, op. cit., p. 185. Toreno, op. cit., Ill, p. 159. Whittingham to Moreno, 4 May 1814, AHN. Estado, 3566; Lavalle to Moreno, 5 May 1814, AHN. Estado, 3566.
Hamnett, op. cit., 187,197—98; Toreno, op. cit., Ill, p. 365. Epilogue 1814 and after The restoration of Fernando VII to absolute power in May 1814 did not equate to carte blanche for a restoration of the status quo ante. Instead, as Henry
Wellesley remarked, ‘Much will depend upon the King’s future proceedings being conducted with good sense and moderation.’1 For all the power of the servil rhetoric, and the isola­ tion of the liberals, nothing could alter the fact that
Spain had experienced a genuine revolution. The torrent of social and political change unleashed by the Motin de Aranjuez could not be reversed by royal decree. Although domestic opposition to the liberals had grown apace in proportion to
the attention which they had paid to the religious question, servilismo was not necessarily exclusive of a desire for reform. The small group of diehards who were opposed to all forms of progress had increasingly been joined by moderates
whose reformism did not extend to a willingness to countenance the wholesale transformation of society. Whilst opposing the liberals, they continued to desire the regeneration of Spain, and thus, by implication, an end to the abuses that
had characterised the ancien régime. What distinguished them from the liberals was the belief that these goals could be achieved in conjunction with an absolute monarchy. The clearest statement of these aims may be found in the so-called
Manifiesto de las Persas, an absolutist manifesto that had been signed by sixty-nine servil deputies to the Cortes in May 1814. Although this document denounced the liberals, it also called for an end to the incompetence, extravagance and
‘ministerial despotism’ that was held to have characterised the reign of Carlos IV, and for the convocation of Spain’s traditional Cortes.2 At first, Fernando seemed to be ready to meet these petitions, for he promised that he 1814 and
after 195 would neither be a despot himself, nor permit the return of ‘ministerial despotism’, and that he would rule in accordance with Spain’s ancient constitution in conjunction with the Spanish people. He also gave specific assurances
that he would summon the Cortes as quickly as possible, respect individual liberty, restore probity to the government, place the nation’s finances upon a respectable footing, and allow a certain degree of press freedom.3 Such a programme
might well have brought Fernando a temporary respite, but no attempt was made to put it into effect. The Cortes was not called, the liberal leaders remained under arrest, and Fernando surrounded himself with an aristocratic camarilla. As
early as 17 June 1814, Henry Wellesley noted that, ‘The delay in issuing the proclamation for assembling the Cortes, together with the prolonged confinement of the persons who have been arrested without any apparent cause have occasioned
great discontent.’4 Implicit in this discontent was the revitalisation of Spanish liberalism, for many of those who had initially rallied to the serviles would now come to see that reform was incompatible with absolute monarchy. Fernando’s
answer to the growing discontent was to rely on the one hand upon popular traditionalism, and on the other upon the influence of the Church, which he encouraged in a campaign of reaction.5 No safety was to be found in such measures,
however, for they took no account of the army, which had already become the true arbiter of Spain’s destiny. For example, even assuming that the populace was as fervently absolutist as is commonly supposed, a royalist militia would have
been as militarily ineffective as a liberal civic guard. As Christiansen has pointed out, for Fernando the voice of the army was very much the voice of God.6 In 1814 the officer corps had fallen solidly into line behind the absolutist
pronuncia­ miento because the bulk of its members could unite in a shared resentment of the liberals. Yet the army’s restoration of Fernando did not necessarily mean that it was wholeheartedly absolutist in its sympathies: most officers
had merely refused to defend the liberals rather than actively working for their overthrow. If a minority of aristocrats had a powerful vested interest in returning to the days before 1808, a large number of their fellows had actually
gained enormous benefits from the war and had only been alienated by the liberals’ dogmatic anti-militarism. Neither the pre-war subalterns, nor the bulk of those officers who had entered the officer corps in the course of the war could
have the slightest interest in the status quo 196 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War ante. Matters were further complicated by the return of the 4,000 officers who had been prisoners of war at the close of hostilities. Not only did
they come home expecting to enjoy some reward for their sacrifices, but many of them had been introduced to freemasonry and liberal ideals during their imprisonment.7 In order to maintain the support of the apolitical majority, it was
essential that Fernando should meet the army’s wants in terms of pay, food, uniforms and equipment, and restore it to its erstwhile pre-eminence. Furthermore, he would have to reward the officers for their wartime services and provide them
with employment, whilst eschewing the favouritism that had characterised his predecessors. Such aspirations had been implicit even in Elio’s crucial declaration of support for Fernando in Valencia, which Busquets has interpreted as an
attempt to put pressure on a king whose views were still very much an unknown quantity.8 These hopes were soon disappointed, however. If the Captains General were restored to their former glory, the army remained in the greatest disorder.
Satisfying the demands of every member of the officer corps would have been impossible as it now contained some 16,000 members, of whom only 8,200 could be accommodated even by the 184,000-strong army which Spain pos­ sessed in 1814.9
However, the burdens incumbent upon the reduc­ tion in its size necessitated by Spain’s desperate financial situation were not shared equally. The regiments that were disbanded were those formed in the course of the war, just as the
officers who were placed on half-pay were the commoners and petty hijosdalgo. As for those officers who were fortunate enough to retain some appointment, their material conditions remained as bad as ever. In December 1814 Francisco de
Paula Guervos complained of having gone unpaid for three months; when he did finally receive some wages, it was in the form of una porción de papel para irlo de cobrar Dios sabe donde. Left ‘without money or health’, he saw himself reduced
to the choice of ‘death or robbery*.10 Guervos’ regiment Soria - was reduced to such straits that in 1815 its commander refused to march against Napoleon unless his men were paid.11 As for Guervos himself, weak from old wounds as well as
imprisonment at the hands of the French, he fell ill and died on 30 November 1815.12 Meanwhile, as El Empecinado protested, Fernando conti­ nued to shower his favours upon young noblemen who had not even served in the war and ‘persons who
retired to Cádiz, Ceuta and other places of safety and looked down from the midst of their pleasures on 1814 and after 197 the massacre of their brethren’.11 In this atmosphere it was not long before the original nucleus of liberal
officers was joined by many others whose discontent stemmed from disappointed hopes of promotion or a sincere conviction that Fernando was betraying the army’s professional interests. The spread of liberalism was further aided by the
widespread penetration of freemasonry amongst the officer corps, for this provided conspi­ rators with a safe medium of communication.14 The first evidence of the growing military opposition came in September 1814 when Francisco Espoz y
Mina led an abortive coup at Pamplona. Although he was a noted servil, the famous guerrilla had been refused the viceroyalty of Navarre, and deprived of the command of his division of sometime guerrillas, which was disbanded. Furthermore,
when Mina travelled to the court, he was snubbed in public by Fernando. Furious at this treatment, he returned to Pamplona and attempted to raise the garrison in revolt. However, the rank and file refused to heed his appeals, and Mina was
left with no option but to flee across the Pyrenees.15 Mina’s coup was only the first in a series of military conspiracies and rebellions that beset Spain between 1814 and 1820. Aside from several more-or-less shadowy intrigues which were
uncovered before they could come to fruition, the chief revolts were those of Porlier in 1815 at La Coruña, and Lacy and Milans del Bosche in Catalonia in 1817. As in the case of Mina, however, the rebels came to grief on the refusal of
the rank and file to join a revolt against el rey deseado and the chief protagonists were shot. Yet in 1819 a new threat emerged to Fernando in the form of the unrest that began to take hold of the army that had been assembled in Andalucia
for dispatch against the American rebels. For want of ships to take them across the Atlantic, in some cases the troops had been waiting in their camps since 1815, where they had been forced to endure the usual privations commensurate with
service in the Spanish army. Many of them had been pressed into the ranks by force or were convicted criminals, and none of them had any enthusiasm for the war in America. Meanwhile, a group of liberal officers led by Rafael Riego,
Evaristo de San Miguel and Antonio Quiroga had begun to lay plans for revolt. They were initially able to persuade their commander, the Conde del Abisbal, to join them. For the first time they also won over the soldiery by promising them
that they would not be sent to America, and that they would be paid in full, given land and allowed 198 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War to go home. The coup was initially scheduled to take place in the summer of 1819, but had to be
postponed at the last minute when Abisbal suddenly defected from the plot, apparently because he had suddenly lost faith in its success. Yet for reasons which are unknown, the conspirators were allowed to remain undisturbed, and continued
to prepare for revolt. On 1 January 1820 Riego duly ‘pronounced’ in favour of the Constitution of 1812 at Las Cabezas de San Juan, assuring his troops that the mere promulgation of this document would be enough to bring the war in America
to an end. However, when the rebels attacked Cádiz they were driven off by a young absolutist officer named Luis Fernandez de Córdoba: unlike the troops of the expedi­ tionary army, the garrison was not faced with the prospect of being
