implicit in such protests enabled some liberals to argue that military opposition to their rule stemmed solely from ‘a few old men’ who could not reconcile themselves to the loss of their privileges. However, as at least one worried
liberal officer pointed out, many of his fellows genuinely believed that the Cortes had done nothing for the army, and therefore broke out in ‘imprecations which a lover of the Fatherland cannot hear without horror’.120 Considering that
the liberal idea of military reform offered no hope of an improvement in the army’s situation, this was hardly surprising, particularly as more conventional solutions were rejected as ‘seditious, insulting, alarmist and incendiary’.121 At
the same time, the attitude of many liberals towards the army was wounding and vindictive. Their plans were often needlessly provoca­ tive, whilst it was also particularly maladroit to accuse the army of being a danger to liberty when it
had been fighting since 1808 to sustain the very freedom that it was supposed to threaten. Most outrageous of all was the tendency of many civilians — not just liberals in this case - to hold the army responsible for Spain’s misfortunes.
Not only were defeats invariably blamed upon the generals, but they were followed by demands that ‘no commanders should be employed except those formed and almost born in the revolution’.122 Frequent calls were also heard for all generals
who lost a battle or surrendered a fortress to be shot.123 Incapable though some commanders may have been, such attacks were clearly pushed to unacceptable lengths. The same was true of the criticism attracted by the opulence of certain
officers. Whilst a minority certainly con­ trived to live a life of comparative luxury, blanket reductions in the perquisites allowed to the officer corps was not an appropriate solution to the problem.124 The effect of these attacks was
still further to inflame military opinion against the liberals in particular, and the constitutional system in general. It was bad enough to be lectured by ‘armchair generals’ who had sat out the war ensconced in the safety of Cádiz.125
However, at times the army’s critics seemed openly hypo­ critical. The problem was exemplified by the question of forced requisitioning. As far as most officers were concerned, the Cortes had manifestly failed to provide for the pay and
supply of the army. Although they had no option but to feed their men with whatever they could seize from the countryside, as soon as they did so they found that they were accused of military despotism.126 At the same The army and the
liberals, 1810-14 181 time, the Cortes would not do anything to remedy the defects of which it complained: officers were told that they could not expect the government to be able to remedy their wants when the entire country was
experiencing such extreme privation, and even that to strengthen the army would be positively dangerous because it might cause the British to reduce the size of their forces in the Peninsula.127 Mention of the British was unwise, for the
fact that they had become ‘rather first agents than auxiliaries’ in the struggle was a constant source of frustration to the Spanish officer corps.128 Although a few of the more reactionary generals had attracted the Duke of Wellington’s
favour, the relationship between the allied forces had never been particularly cordial, being marred by frequent storms of mutual recrimination such as that occasioned by the battle of Barrosa (5 March 1811).129 The Spaniards were bitterly
jealous of the glories won by the British army, and believed that their own efforts merited greater approbation than they had received. It must also be admitted that the British did nothing to assuage their irrita* tion, the repeated
proposals that the Spanish army should be pro­ vided with British officers being especially tactless in this respect. As Wellington himself remarked, ‘I am quite convinced that the major­ ity of officers in the Spanish army would prefer
submitting to the French to allowing us to have anything to say to their troops’.130 It is therefore somewhat surprising that Ballesteros should have received so little support when he ‘pronounced’ against the Duke’s appointment as
generalísimo. Instead, his actions were publicly repudiated by several officers, including so noted a servil as Franci­ sco Elió, the leader of the absolutist coup of 1814.131 Perhaps he was simply too vainglorious a figure to attract
anything but the jealousy of his fellow commanders. At the time, however, the conditions that Wellington was to place upon his acceptance of the command were still unknown, whilst the hopes aroused by the formation of the Comisión de
Constitución Militar had not yet been dispelled. Yet the gestures of support that Ballesteros received from various officers after his arrest suggest that had the coup come in October 1813 rather than October 1812, it might well have
succeeded.132 The armies that fought in the Pyrenees in the autumn of 1813 suffered privations that surpassed anything that the much-tried Spanish soldiery had yet had to endure.133 In protest at this situation, at least one regiment
mutinied, refusing to march against the enemy until its wants had been attended to, whilst the commander of the Fourth 182 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Army, General Freyre, attempted to resign.134 Insult was added to injury when
Wellington publicly disgraced Morillo’s division of the Fourth Army on account of its pillaging, which was, of course, the only means by which it could survive.135 The miserable state of their armies, and their consequent inability to play
a major role in the invasion of France was a source of considerable embarassment to the Spanish generals.136 Naturally enough they attributed their loss of face to the Spanish government, of whom the Conde del Abisbal wrote, ‘it appears
that our Regency has entirely forgotten the war’.137 Although liberal views continued to survive in the officer corps — as witness the numerous messages of congratulations received by the Cortes concerning the abolition of the Inquisition
and the overthrow of the Infantado Regency138 — many officers now began to turn to resistance. Whilst some of them urged their superiors to overthrow the Cortes, others physically attacked liberal journalists.139 The Duke of Wellington
refused to become involved in the unrest, but as he wrote to Lord Bathurst in September 1813, ‘It is quite impossible that such a system can last... If I was out of the way, there are plenty of generals who would overturn it. Ballesteros
positively intended it, and I am much mis­ taken if O’Donnell [i.e. the Conde del Abisbal] and even Castaños ... are not equally ready’.140 As if to prove the point, in January 1814 Abisbal had suggested to Wellington that he station a
division within striking distance of Madrid, whether the Cortes had moved at the end of 1813.141 Had matters carried on in the same vein, it is probable that the worsening state of civil-military relations would have made a coup
inevitable. In the event, however, a crisis was precipitated by the decision of Napoleon to release the imprisoned Fernando VII in a desperate attempt to put an end to the Peninsular War. Devout and autocratic, Fernando was unlikely to
accept the Constitution of 1812, but such was his personal timidity that he would not have opposed it unless he could be certain of widespread support.142 That he was likely to be assured of such support soon became apparent. Two of
Fernando’s fellow exiles, the Duque de San Carlos and José Palafox, were dispatched to Spain to ratify the Emperor’s terms for Fernando’s release, which were effectively that Spain should agree to expelí the Anglo-Portuguese army from the
Peninsula. In the course of their mission they discovered not only that the liberals were highly unpopular with all classes of society, but that elements of the army The army and the liberals, 1810-14 183 were ready to revolt against their
rule. Interestingly enough, one of the generals whom they contacted was the Conde del Abisbal, who at that very period was suggesting that preparations be made for a military coup. The Count’s disaffection stemmed from motives that were
personal as much as they were political, for he had always been regarded as a liberal. Eager to secure a more prominent role in the war for himself in particular and the Spaniards in general, in the summer of 1813 he had proposed that all
the Spanish armies in the Pyrenees should be united into a single force under his own command, only to be told by the Duke of Wellington that he ‘had not lately heard of any Spanish troops acting together as a one corps that had not been
destroyed and that the last that had so acted [i.e. that commanded by Abisbal’s brother, José O’Donnell, at Castalia in July 1812] had been destroyed by half their numbers’.143 Furious at this rebuff, Abisbal had ever since been searching
for revenge, to which end he had kept most of his troops in their cantonments in the interior of Spain so that they might be ready for whatever might 144 ensue. If anything was needed to confirm Fernando in his determination to overthrow
the Constitution, it was the rapturous welcome that he received from army and population alike as soon as he crossed the frontier of Catalonia on 24 March 1814. He was egged on by the same group of aristocratic conspirators who had
intrigued for the establishment of a puppet monarchy in 1808: among those who returned with him from exile or who flocked to join his suite once he had crossed the frontier were the Duque de Osuna, the Duque de San Carlos, the Duque del
Infantado, José Palafox, and the Conde de Montijo. After a series of discussions, Montijo was dispatched to Madrid in order to raise the mob against the Cortes by means of his usual weapons of rumour and innuendo: stories were soon abroad
that Fernando would have gone to the scaffold within six months of swearing to the Constitution. However, the final rising did not take the form of a popular tumult but of a pronunciamiento. As soon as the royal party arrived in the city
of Valencia on 16 April, the Captain General, Francisco Elió, paraded his troops before Fer­ nando and publicly swore to uphold the absolute power of the monarchy. He then knelt before the King and surrendered his baton of command, only
for it to be immediately restored by the royal hand.145 Elió’s gesture unleashed the whirlwind. The King’s return had 184 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War already provoked a number of demonstrations on the part of absolu­ tists in the
army, as in Cádiz where on 6 April a number of Guards officers had attacked the offices of the liberal newspaper, El Duende de los Cafés}46 Their behaviour was probably the exception rather than the rule, but even so few officers could be
found who would defend the liberals. The few exceptions knew that they were unlikely to be followed by their subordinates, and in any case received no encouragement from their superiors, most of whom seem to have been concerned only to
protect their own persons. Abisbal is even reputed to have sent a courier to Madrid with two messages, the first congratulating Fernando on the downfall of the Cortes, and the second congratulating the Cortes on the downfall of Femando.147
When troops from Elio’s Second Army and Whittingham’s División de Mallorca set out for Madrid on 5 May, there was therefore no resistance. On the contrary, joyful crowds greeted them en route, and rioted against the constitutional
authorities. The defencelessness of the liberals was underlined when the commander of the division from the Second Army refused to obey orders to return to his cantonments on the grounds that he was responsible only to General Elió. A
