

Like any good reporter, Maxwell has a nose for scandal and skulduggery, and like any good reporter, he does not pull his punches. One of the chapters in his Conflicts and Conspiracies is simply called “Skulduggery,” and is devoted to exposing the machinations in high places as the 1778 conspiracy against the Portuguese crown in Minas Gerais unraveled. In his accounts of the murder of Chico Mendes and of the inexorable twentieth-century advance of “civilization” into the Brazilian interior, he similarly exposes the machinations in high places, and has harsh things to say about the skulduggery of political bosses, rural landowners, bureaucrats, and speculators, who saw the opportunity for rich pickings in the building of roads and the clearing of forests, and displayed no compunction in getting rid of the people who stood in their way.

At the same time, however, he is acutely conscious of the ambiguities he finds at every turn in the past and present of Brazil, and he is not afraid to raise some awkward questions about the political career of Chico Mendes and his relations with the Federal Police. In particular, Maxwell mentions the strange relationship between Mendes and the Federal Police chief Mauro Sposito. Mendes appealed to Sposito for protection against the ranchers and landowners who were plotting his assassination, but received no help. In a letter written just two weeks before his death, Mendes blamed the Federal Police for harboring “the hired gunmen” who were plotting his murder. Yet after Mendes’s murder, Maxwell points out, Sposito announced publicly that Mendes had been a police informer. It is an incongruous claim that Maxwell, who neither accepts nor denies it, calls “the most perplexing aspect about Chico Mendes.” The same mixture of frankness and controlled indignation is to be found in his essay entitled “A Story of Slavery, Sex, and Mammon,” concerned with the exposure by three graduate students of Yale University in 2001 of the less than glorious record of their alma mater and its faculty in opposing the founding of a “negro college” in New Haven in 1831, and in honoring the slave traders and the apologists for slavery who contributed so handsomely to the university’s endowment.

But Maxwell is at his most withering in his powerful piece “Heroes and Traitors,” in which he excoriates the British liberal newspaper The Guardian for publishing in 2001 an article by Hywel Williams traducing the memory of Charles Boxer, who had died in the previous year at the age of ninety-six. Boxer was both a remarkable man and a remarkable historian. A professional soldier, he never went to a university, but he built up a formidable reputation as a scholar and only entered academic life in 1947 when, on the strength of his numerous publications, he was appointed to the chair of Portuguese at King’s College, London. Taken prisoner by the Japanese in Hong Kong, he spent the war in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp, where, Williams implied, his treachery led to the execution of fellow officers. Such charges and innuendoes were systematically refuted by Boxer’s biographer, the historian Dauril Alden, in a response in the Guardian, whose edi-tors admitted that he set “the record straight.” But the entire squalid episode gives Maxwell the opportunity to evoke the memory and career of a man whom friends and colleagues recall with admiration for his forthrightness and integrity, and as one who was always generous with advice and encouragement to other scholars, among them the young Maxwell.