

He still prefers to concentrate essentially on the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the age that begins with the enlightened reforms of the Marquês de Pombal, who effectively governed Portugal between 1750 and 1777 as the principal minister of King José I, and ends in 1822 with the proclamation of Brazilian independence by Dom Pedro, heir to the Portuguese crown, and soon to be the first emperor of the new empire of Brazil. The efforts of Pombal to modernize Portugal and its overseas empire so dominate the age as to make him unavoidable for any historian of the period, and in 1995 Maxwell published a shrewd and perceptive, if at times oblique, study of a man who combined in equal measure the progressive and dictatorial instincts of the Europe of the “enlightened despots.”4 In this book he depicted a pragmatic patriot who had no hesitation in borrowing foreign ideas—notably from Britain and Austria, where he had held diplomatic postings—in order to drag a deeply conservative country into the modern world. His Pombal is a ruthless operator, acutely conscious of the constraints within which the leaders of a small country were forced to work, but at the same time determined to make the most of the opportunities afforded by its possession of a Brazil which furnished Europe with its gold.

When Maxwell first went to Portugal in pursuit of his research, it was to a country again ruled by a ruthless pragmatist, although one who, in contrast to Pombal, looked not to the future but to the past for salvation. Dr. Salazar’s Portugal was designed to be an island of stability in a storm-tossed sea, a conservative, Catholic nation shielded by a paternalistic and authoritarian regime from the contaminating vices of the modern world. But already the days of the regime, and of its creator, were numbered, and in 1974 the old order would collapse. The events that followed were to grip the attention of the world, and Maxwell was to become the chronicler of a Portuguese “revolution” that somehow failed to conform to the notions of what a revolution should be. In a series of brilliant reports, which many readers of The New York Review of Books will still recall, he kept us abreast of the latest news from Lisbon, and explained for us the twists and turns of a nonrevolutionary revolution that defied all the norms. As Maxwell wrote in one of these articles,

After forty-six years of authoritarian rule, aborted coups, and quixotic gestures of opposition, a meticulously planned putsch by junior officers deposed the old regime in less than twelve hours.5

In these reports, which belatedly provided the material for a book, The Making of Portuguese Democracy,6 he showed himself to be as acute an observer of the present as of the past, with the capacity to use his historical knowledge to illuminate and interpret the rapid movement of events.

This ability to move with ease between the past and the present—an ability rarer than it should be among professional historians—is once again on display in Naked Tropics. The volume consists of sixteen articles or book reviews, five of them originally published in these pages. While most are concerned with the past—a past that begins with Columbus but is primarily centered on “the long eighteenth century,” a period that runs from the 1660s to 1807, the year of the Napoleonic invasion of Portugal—four of the sixteen are devoted to contemporary topics. Of these, three look at different aspects of modern Brazil, including the deforestation of the Amazon and the murder of Chico Mendes, a peasant leader of the movement to protect the forest. The fourth is a richly evocative depiction of the contemporary scene in the last outpost of Portugal’s overseas empire, its enclave of Macao, which was handed back to China in 1999. Macao, with its casinos, its concubines, and its shady underworld, provides the kind of setting that allows Maxwell to display his impressive gift for describing personalities and places. He is an observer who revels in paradoxes and ambiguities—in this instance the paradox that what the Portuguese liked to call the “City of God in China” could equally well have been called the City of Sin.