

In view of this, it is a pity that he appears never to have engaged with what might have seemed natural Maxwell territory, Portuguese Angola. During the seventeenth century the Portuguese effectively lost the Asian portion of their empire to their European rivals, retaining only enclaves like Goa and Macao as reminders of past glories. By way of compensation, however, they successfully fought off the Dutch assault on Brazil and Angola. This allowed them to construct a prosperous transatlantic empire built on the export of sugar produced on Brazilian plantations that were worked by African slaves. A Brazilian historian of the South Atlantic slave trade has recently traced in detail how Angola’s trading connection with central-southern Brazil over the best part of three centuries was integral both to the internal development of Brazil and to the working of the Luso-Brazilian Atlantic system that lies at the heart of Maxwell’s historical writing.11

These relations between Portugal and Brazil and their ramifications form the subject of perhaps the most intellectually ambitious of Maxwell’s essays, here called “Hegemonies Old and New.” In this important piece he sets the Luso-Brazilian system in the broad historical perspective of projects for imperial reform inspired by the ideas of the Enlightenment, the rivalries of the great European powers, and the democratic and republican revolutions that shook the world in the late eighteenth century—the North American and French Revolutions, together with the great slave revolt on Saint-Domingue in 1792, that gave the Brazilian elite, along with many others, cause to stop and think.

The theme is large and complex, and Maxwell’s treatment of it, while consistently lucid, makes its demands on the reader. But it suggests lines of inquiry that deserve to be followed up by historians not simply of Brazil but of the whole Atlantic world. It also shows that Maxwell is a historian who can master detail but is not afraid to ask large questions. This essay provides the setting for others on more specific aspects of Luso-Brazilian history of the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries—the Amazonian origins of Pombal’s dramatic decision to expel the Jesuits from Portugal and its overseas possessions, for example; the changing attitudes toward empire in Brazil and Portugal; and the unexpected and attractive friendship between Thomas Jefferson and a Portuguese abbot, Corrêa da Serra, for another.

Non-native historians of Portugal and Brazil understandably tend to think of themselves as an isolated group, working away on subjects persistently relegated to the sidelines by those working in the more populated fields of historical scholarship. One of Maxwell’s achievements in this volume of essays is to make his own and others’ work on Luso-Brazilian history and civilization both interesting and accessible to general readers. But he has done more than this. He has also shown why Luso-Brazilian history matters, and how it can and should be more effectively integrated into the broader picture of the history of Europe and the wider world. In the process, he raises a question which he seeks to address in one of the most provocative of his essays, “Why Was Brazil Different?,” which is focused on the achievement of Brazilian independence. Here we have a vast country that, unlike most of the Americas, both North and South, passed through the age of revolution without a revolution; a country that chose a monarchical form of government when those around it were transforming themselves into republics; a country that, in contrast to British and Spanish America, did not break up into separate parts in spite of its enormous size; and a country that, when it finally abolished slavery, avoided civil war.