

Boxer was a historian with a prodigious range of information who poured forth a stream of pioneering books and articles on different aspects of European overseas expansion, and in particular on the history of the Dutch and Portuguese colonial empires. Every historian of the Luso-Brazilian world is in his debt, and Maxwell repeatedly cites him in his footnotes to the essays on aspects of Brazilian history which constitute the core of the articles republished in Naked Tropics. In some respects, indeed, Maxwell closely reflects Boxer’s influence, and in particular in the internationalism of his approach to the history of Brazil.

### 2.

Over the past few decades a handful of Anglo-American historians have made a distinguished contribution to Brazilian history, approaching it in a variety of ways. Among them, John Russell-Wood has explored the activities of philanthropic lay brotherhoods in colonial society,7 Stuart B. Schwartz has illuminated the workings of the sugar plantations and Brazilian slave society,8 and John Hemming has examined in devastating detail the fate of Brazil’s Indians.9 Maxwell, for his part, has shown himself especially aware not only of the continuing interplay between Brazil and Portugal, but also of the importance of placing Brazilian history in a wide, international setting, and relating it to the broader European development of politics and ideas. In an age in which the tendency has been to explore the history of imperialism from the bottom upward, he has been resolute in his determination to ensure that an approach all too easily dismissed as “elitist,” because it is concerned with the exercise of political power, has a prominent place. In a key passage in these essays he writes:

The recent decades have seen an accumulation of more information about…the economic aspects of the Portuguese and Spanish Atlantic systems, than about…the policies and politics of empire. While much has been achieved by the emphasis on conjunctural economic analysis and social history, it has unquestionably also led to the almost total exclusion of detailed examinations of elites, institutions, and above all intellectual life and politics and policy.

Since these words were first written in 1993, much has changed, and the study of imperial institutions and ideologies is less unfashionable than it was a decade ago.10 But Maxwell has never been a historian easily swayed by fashion (as his original choice of subject indicates). He has no use for the strange intellectual convolutions produced by the international commemoration of 1492. As he puts it, with a pithiness worthy of Charles Boxer, in the opening sentence of a review in these pages: “Columbus was mugged on the way to his own party.” In that same piece, included in Naked Tropics, he draws attention to the inadequate recognition given in the literature of the quincentenary to the importance of the Portuguese voyages of exploration. While he himself has not been directly concerned with the Age of Discovery, his writing on Bra-zil has always placed these voyages firmly in the long chronological perspective of the creation, consolidation, and slow downfall of Portugal’s global empire.