

#### 1.3. The rise of rural France

The central state was the main winner from the institutional reforms of the period. Its rise created a change in the equilibrium between other social forces. Rural and small-city France benefited greatly from these changes. Under the Old Regime, French peasants tended to own or lease plots of farmland to cover their family’s needs. Between 1726-1750 and 1781-1787, rents had increased faster than agricultural wages but slower than wheat prices(Weir 1991, 934-935). Landowners and, perhaps even more so, owners of seigneurial privileges were thus the main beneficiaries of agricultural growth. 11 Most rents were transferred to a small elite. The Church owned 6.5 per cent of French soil, the nobility slightly less than a third, and members of urban bourgeoisie approximately a quarter – with enormous differences across provinces –, while the remainder (1/3) was owned by peasants (Sée 1925). As state taxation fell on peasants rather than on landowners, the state did not benefit from the enrichment of the latter. Peasants were caught between the royal state, eager to increase taxation to meet its growing financial needs, and the rising rents imposed by landlords. The nationalisation of Church estates was driven by fiscal urgency, due to the financial collapse of the monarchy. The nationalisation of ecclesiastical real estate in 1789 – followed by that of the

11 For a thorough discussion of the differences between rents linked to landowning and owning of seigneurial privileges and their evolution in the eighteenth-century, see Patrick K. O’Brien and David Heath (1994, p. 23-62).

property of the émigrés in 1792 – galvanised the market, and approximately 10% of the French farmland changed ownership. This shattered the social structure of the Old Regime beyond repair. The Church lost almost all its real estate and the share of land held by the nobility declined dramatically. At a micro level, the effects of the sale of nationalised estates are more difficult to assess. They were extremely diverse, and depended on the number and size of estates and on the varying ways (in time and space) in which they were sold. In some instances, transfers of land benefitted the urban bourgeois who received rents – a change that did not encourage innovation. At the same time, these changes benefitted manufacturers who needed space and real estate for their workshops, as well as peasants and farmers who worked the land they had bought (Béaur, Minard & Laclau 1997, 48-49; Bodinier & Teyssier 2000). These effects were compounded by the hyperinflation episode of the assignats (1791-1795), which redistributed wealth from creditors to debtors. For the agricultural sector, historians consider that inflation had a redistributive impact comparable in magnitude to that of the nationalisation of ecclesiastical estates (Béaur et al. 1997, 58). The transformation of the taxation system was also favourable to the peasantry. 12 The reform of the tax system was understandably one of the first priorities of the French National Assembly. A set of small, but key universal taxes were introduced. The new fiscal system made landowners liable for direct taxes. The new land tax was designed to be assessed on the basis of cadastral surveys, which were not completed until the 1840s. Other direct taxes were based on visible signs of wealth and on productive or commercial activities. This new system (which lasted with minor changes until World War I) significantly altered the distribution of wealth. Schnerb has computed that the land