

An additional difficulty in assessing the evolution of the French economy during this period stems from the fact that the historiographical debate on these issues has long been deeply affected by scholars’ ideological positions on the Revolution. 5 Historians have focused on the Revolution as such, rather than on warfare, as the key force driving the economic changes that occurred in France. French historians have acrimoniously debated the consequences of the Revolution upon the economy. Whereas Marxist historiography presented it as a fundamental momentum in the transition toward a capitalist economy – best illustrated by the end of the seigneurial system, the privatisation of land, and the dissolutions of guilds – others stressed its disruptive effects on France’s economic growth, and more particularly on its trade and urbanisation. Because the major political changes that occurred in France during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars cannot be separated from warfare, nor disentangled from intrinsic ideological biases, we decided to proceed by comparing the French economy before and after the Revolution. We propose to discuss the evolution of the French economy during the period that opened with the fall of the Bastille and closed with the final collapse of the French Empire in 1815, by prioritising a long-term view. We believe it is only by adopting this perspective that historians might provide a convincing analysis of the economic consequences of the 1789-1815 conjuncture. 6 This study therefore compares the situation and dynamics of the French economy in the decades preceding the Revolution and those following the Restoration.

5 For a general bibliography and a comprehensive assessment of this debate, see the special issue of leading 
French economic journal Revue économique on this subject (1989). 
6 This methodological stance should not be taken as a sign that we believe that political and military events did 
not affect the French economy. 

The first section discusses the institutional transformations that took place between 1789 and 1815. They reinforced the authority of the central state, the rural world and small cities. The second section adopts a disaggregated approach in order to establish that the French economy was structurally different after 1815. Finally, the last section presents the macroeconomic trends for the French economy from c.1715 to c.1848. Institutional and geographical changes during this period contributed to the opposition between ‘Paris and the French desert’ (Gravier 1947; Fox 1971) . Along with major social upheavals, these changes shaped the rural, small-city France of the nineteenth century, that took an original path into the twentieth century (O’Brien & Keyder, 2012). This was detrimental to Atlantic France, big cities (especially ports) and, almost certainly, to France’s overall macroeconomic dynamism.

#### 1. Institutions

This section of the paper looks at the long run institutional changes introduced during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras that impacted the evolution of the French economy. The Revolution initiated a profound reorganisation of French society and its foundations. It did away with privilege as the fundamental principle of political, social and economic structure. It abolished or marginalised feudal and ecclesiastical institutions and local rights, and simplified property rights through the generalisation of propriété libre (freehold). As a result, the general institutional framework changed, and a strong centralised state came into being. Historians argue that these reforms contributed to the modernisation of the French economy in the nineteenth century, and their diffusion into polities under French military occupation was a decisive factor in their modernisation (Dincecco 2011; Yun-Casalilla & O'Brien 2012; Dincecco & Katz 2014; on the role of Napoleonic rule in the modernisation of Continental Europe polities, see Acemoglu et al. 2011).