

12 For a very good synthesis of the situation in the fiscal situation in the 1780s and its evolution during the Revolution and the Empire, see Eugene White (1995, 227-255).

tax amounted on average to 15% of gross agricultural output in 1791, but to less than 10% in 1821. Moreover, rates were equalised between the different parts of France. 13

The abolition of seigneurial dues contributed to a geographical equalisation of land tax. During the Old Regime, these rights differed greatly between French provinces. For example, they deprived peasants of approximately 15 per cent of their revenues in the Toulouse region, but were consistently heavier in Bourgogne or Brittany: in these regions, before peasants paid taxes to the state and set aside seeds for the next sowing – which might require 20 to 25 per cent of the wheat harvest – they delivered up to a quarter of their crops to the Church and local seigneur (Gallet 1999). The suppression of both seigneurial dues and tithes not only contributed to improving fiscal uniformity across France, but also alleviated burdens on peasants. In addition, in the interval between the abolition of non-state taxes collected by the Church and nobility and the reorganisation of taxation by the state, Frenchmen enjoyed a few years of very low taxation in the early 1790s (see Figure 3.2). In the long run, the purchasing power of the French peasantry as a whole increased. Furthermore, more stable and clearly defined property right also provided stronger incentives to improve the land. Although the effects of this radical change in taxation were delayed by war-related fiscal burdens, it certainly contributed to the dynamism of French agriculture after 1815 (Rosenthal 1992). The creation of départements in 1790 also had a significant qualitative impact on the organisation of the French economic space. Départements were smaller administrative units than Old Regime provinces. The reforms created new ‘chefs-lieux’, or small administrative towns in the interior, in contrast to the large cities that played a central role in the Old Regime economy. Chefs-lieux

13 In 1791, the least taxed département had a seven times lower rate than the heavily taxed, but the ratio dropped to one to three by 1821, see Robert Schnerb (1972, 97).

provided a favourable institutional framework for the construction of new roads (and later railways), efficient public services, and a more geographically uniform allocation of state expenditures. Their populations grew at a faster pace than those of the largest cities, which also benefitted their agricultural hinterlands (Margadant 1992; Lepetit 1988, 238-322). In contrast with the Old Regime, the consumption levels in rural areas and small cities grew significantly after 1815.

#### 2. Structural change

The shift in economic dynamism suggested by the study of institutional reforms is confirmed when looking at the long-term evolution of the agricultural, industrial and trade sectors. This section examines how the trajectory of the French post-war economy became qualitatively different from that of the Old Regime.