

country. This argument is reinforced by the fact that cotton threads and fabrics moved from a deficit 
to a surplus sector. The Continental blockade had a positive and lasting impact on the French cotton 
industry (Juhász 2018, 3339-3376). 
The variance of the CTB also increased during this period. This was partly due to the evolution of 
the total value of trade and with the vanishing of colonial re-export trade, total trade was reduced. 
Thus, the CTB expressed in percentage of total trade increased. But even a 30% reduction of trade 
cannot account for the doubling of the CTB. Somewhat paradoxically, despite its lesser integration 
into world trade, France’s specialisation deepened after 1815, suggesting that France was then 
more able to exploit its comparative advantages. This might have been due to a deeper 
international division of labour encouraged by the Continental blockade and enforced by the 
Continental system 17, which systematically encouraged French industrial exports and raw material 
imports (Chabert 1949, 303). Alternatively, il might be correlated to the fact that the more 
‘superfluous’, intra-industrial trade, reliant on the consumers’ taste for diversity, was the first victim 
of decreasing trade volumes. 
To summarise, the analysis of the evolution of French foreign trade points to the disruptive effects 
of the warfare , and most notably on the Atlantic trade, causing a collapse that affected the 
trajectory of French economic growth. The increase of non-maritime trade suggests that the wars 
probably encouraged the unification of the Continental European market, which benefitted 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. This might have partly compensated for the loss of the first 
French colonial empire. Furthermore, the institutional construction of a unified market combined 

17 While the Continental Blockade aimed to shut British trade and manufactured goods from the continent, the Continental System – a system of power relations within the continent – imposed trade treaties and duties upon vassal states and allies that aimed to secure the economic pre-eminence and international protection of French interests. On the conceptual differences see Roger Dufraisse (1966, 518-534). The impacts on different parts of Europe have been recently discussed in Johan Joor and Katherine Aaslestad (2°14).

with the proactive role of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic state significantly increased the role of 
domestic demand for the French economy. Therefore, besides the mostly short-term negative 
macroeconomic effects that warfare had on the French economy and in particular on foreign trade, 
these wars also triggered a deep geographical reorientation of French trade toward domestic – and 
to a lesser extent continental – markets. 
Colonial markets lost their importance for French industrial products and the rise of continental 
markets only partially compensated for this loss. Domestically, the redistribution of spending power 
from declining urban centres to the countryside shifted demand away from semi-luxury industries 
and towards more basic goods. Since the demand for French luxury products did not decline, a 
dualism emerged in the French industry. The Revolution and warfare thus witnessed a change in 
the structure and dynamism of the French economy. This process certainly had detrimental 
consequences on specific regions (Brittany and the South-West) that were previously dependent 
on colonial trade. On the other hand, new industries (chemicals, cotton, iron) in other regions 
benefited from this reorganisation. 