

The consensus among economic historians is however that growth decelerated from 1789 to 1815. This was not because of material losses. Despite the seizure of ships, and the loss of private property in Haiti, war was not as destructive then as it was to become in the twentieth century, and moreover, it was fought on French soil only at its very beginning and end. For part of the Napoleonic period (1803-1812), Toutain calculated an annual GDP growth of 0.41%, which is barely more than

24 Daudin (2005) selects 0,24%, but he uses figures from Henry and Blayo (1975): this article uses reevaluated 
figures from Dupâquier (1988). 
25 See above for detail on external trade and agriculture production. 

the demographic growth rate. Evidence seems to indicate that, at best, the same GDP per capita rate prevailed during the Revolutionary years, but both the disruption in the state’s statistical apparatus and the hyperinflation render a precise evaluation impossible. According to Toutain, this trend continued for some time during the Restoration period with a mere 0.11% GDP growth per capita for the decade 1815-1824 (Toutain 1997, 18-19). This rate accelerated again in the subsequent decade and stayed at a high level until the political and economic crises of 1848. The overall trend is therefore very similar to what we found when analysing the evolution of the French population. The period provoked an important deviation from the French economy’s long-term trend, but this alteration was only temporary. However, compared to Britain, the important point is that French growth did not accelerate. The differential in income per head that increased from 1789 to 1815 persisted until the early twentieth century. French gdp per capita was 75% of the British one around 1789 and only reached the same level around 1900. (Bolt et al. 2018)

#### Conclusion

The Revolution and Napoleonic Empire altered French economic development in very significant ways. Whereas before the Revolution, the French economy was more and more open to external trade, by 1815 the picture had changed dramatically. External trade had been shattered by more than two decades of war and blockades, and most of the dynamism of the French economy had been transferred from coastal ports and regions to the interior, making way for what the historian Edward Fox has labelled the ‘Other France’ (Fox 1971; Crouzet 1964, 567-588). Structural change comes at a cost, and growth was slow 1789 to 1815. Furthermore, due to the redistribution of land and the transformation of the tax system, the foundations of French growth had changed. While in eighteenth-century France, industrial consumption was mostly driven by a combination of foreign trade and increasingly rich and numerous urban elites, both noble and non-noble – a model with

strong similarities to England. After 1815 the income and consumption of peasants was the main 
source of demand for French industrial products. In effect, the growth of the French economy 
throughout the nineteenth century was sustained by internal demand, and the main part of it 
stemmed from the rural population rather than the urban bourgeoisie. This made the slow 
demographic growth of France more of a handicap that it could have been. Due to the slow growth 
of the French population and urbanisation rate, absolute growth was less dynamic in France than 
in other European countries such as Belgium, England, Switzerland and Germany. This was a case 
of too much structural change rather than too little. 
That being said, we have found it difficult to devise a counterfactual. The Revolution and the Empire 
deeply shaped France, and it is difficult to imagine the country without these events. More 
fundamentally, devising a counterfactual requires to pass judgement on the political, social and 
economic sustainability of the Old Regime, which was based on internal privileges and on slavery in 
the colonies. Although the history of nineteenth century Central and Eastern Europe and that of the 
Southern United States show that its quick demise was not inevitable, it is doubtful that such a 
system was compatible with modern economic growth in the long run. Still, the geographical and 
structural break introduced by the Revolution and the Empire and its associated costs were not 
necessary to the transformation of France into a modern economy. One could imagine a more 
gradual process that would not have engulfed Europe in war. 