

#### 2.3. Industry

Throughout the eighteenth century, the significant growth of the French industry had been to a large extent driven by external trade. In such traditional textile sectors as cloth and linens, the rise was steady if limited (about 1% per year), and faster before 1750 than after. The cotton, silk and iron industries were much more dynamic. The production of calicoes imitated from Asian products took off spectacularly after the removal of a ban in 1759. This link between industrial output and foreign markets was severed during the wars. Many industries suffered from the demise of the first French colonial empire and the continued difficulties of maritime trade.

The volume of the French industrial output stagnated during the 1789-1815 period. The early 1790s were extremely disruptive for the French industry. From 1793 onwards, the maritime war combined with the effects of the revolt in Saint-Domingue hit export industries severely. Furthermore, the chaotic situation in Vendée, and the violent repression of the Federalist movement during the Terror generated negative shocks for the French industrial production, for example for the woolen industry (Chassagne 1978, 143-167). The situation improved and in the years before the crisis that spelled the end of the Napoleonic regime (1812-1815), French industry as a whole recovered. In the short term, protection from British competition was decisive, particularly for the cotton industry in Alsace and Northern France (Juhász 2018). Since the data is either incomplete or unreliable, it would be difficult to provide a comparison of the total French industrial output before 1789 and after 1815. Most economic historians posit either a very moderate growth, or stagnation. The composition of the industrial output was rather different in 1815 compared to 1789. At least two sectors – cotton and iron – experienced impressive growth as well as technological innovations. In cotton, from 1789 to 1814, the total number of mechanical mills in use in France rose from 6 to 272. This progression was not linear. From 1789 to 1799, there were few changes, but the industry changed rapidly from 1800 to 1806, although growth was negligible during the last years of the Empire. For example, the Languedoc textile industry shows that in most cases, the war-related demand sustained the production, but often at a lower level compared to the 1780s. In the iron industry, the total production increased from 600,000 tons in the late 1780s to 900,000 tons at the end of the Empire. The chemical industry also developed, but it remained a small sector. Traditional

sectors such as linen and hemp textiles were on the wane, while woollens did slightly better. Silk, however, fared much better, as did most luxury industries. 18

The geographical location of industries over the French territory changed considerably. The West 
of France (e.g. Brittany) began to de-industrialise. Northern and eastern France benefitted from the 
proximity of coal deposits and continental markets, while Paris gained from the increased 
centralisation of economic and political power and the revival of demand for its luxury industries 
(Juhász 2018; Chassagne 1978; Bergeron 1978). 
Without the Revolution and the wars, extra-European markets would have been kept open to the 
French industry, thus benefitting sectors such as the linen production in Western France. If the 1786 
free trade Eden-Rayneval Treaty with Great Britain had been upheld, there is little reason to believe 
that France could have developed an internationally competitive cotton industry. France’s cotton 
production would probably have been lower. This context would have been more favourable to 
merchants than to industrialists: this would perhaps have made France a bit more like the 
Netherlands which, historically, were richer but experienced their Industrial Revolution later than 
France or Belgium. 