28 P. E, TRTLOCK AND A. BELKIN

occurred.” One obvious form such reasoning takes is reliance on base rates
‘and patterns of covariation. For instance, we might justify the counterfac-
tual, “If Bill Clinton had lost the presidential election of 1992, he would
have been disappointed,” by observing in a two-by-two contingency table
that when people fail to achieve a goal for which they have worked long and
hard, the overwhelming majority experience disappointment, but when peo-
ple do achieve their goals, there is markedly less disappointment.

‘The “discovery” is hardly startling; more startling, however, is the strong,
stand that some scholars take on both the necessity and sufficiency of statisti
cal justification for assessing counterfactual claims. In his commentary,
Dawes, for instance, treats statistical evidence as trump when he declares
that counterfactual inferences are justified if and only if they are embedded
in a system of statistical contingency for which we have reasonable evi-
dence. He offers an intriguing example:

Suppose that someone is required to wager her entire wealth on a single roll of a
pair of fair dice. Her wealth will be doubled if she wins the bet; if she loses, she
will be bankrupt. Her choice is to bet either for or against a roll of snake eyes.
Being wise, she bets against snake eyes. The dice are rolled and they come up
snake eyes. She loses. She is bankrupt, Is it normatively valid to state that “if
‘only” she had bet on snake eyes, she would have won? Well, itis true that she bet
against snake eyes and that she lost, But does the “if only” add anything to the
analysis? I suggest the answer is no. But suppose she had bet on snake eyes and
lost. Here, I suggest that the regretful counterfactual inference that “if only” she
had bet against snake eyes she would have won is normatively justified. Why?
Because the odds are thirty-five to one against snake eyes, and those odds justify
the expectation that she would have won had she bet against snake eyes. It’s an
expectation; one can insert “probably won” if one wishes.

‘The plausibility of the snake-eyes counterfactual hinges on the aim of in-
quiry. From an historical point of view, the counterfactual is plausible. We
do not have to rewrite much history to reach a hypothetical world in which
the woman threw the dice slightly differently and won her bet. The bet
‘against snake eyes is an easily imagined and easily reversed cause of bank-
ruptcy. To statisticians of both the Bayesian and frequentist schools, how-
ever, the counterfactual is implausible because it posits so unlikely an out-
come. We certainly do not want people drawing the lesson from history that
it is a good idea to risk their fortunes on long-shot wagers.*

» Dawes's snake-eyes problem bears a deep resemblance to Neweomb’s paradox, which pits
statistical intuition against causal intuition through an ingenious thought experiment that calls
Upon us to imagine a being who has demonstrated a phenomenal capacity to make accurate
predictions (R® — 1.0) and who has asked us to make a choice involving two boxes, B1 and
BD. BI contains $1,000; 82 contains either $1,000,000 or nothing. Our choice is between 1wo
factions: (1) taking what is in both boxes; (2) taking only what isin the second box. Further-
more, we know, and the being knows we know, and so on, tha ifthe being predicts that we