

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 29

‘One need not, of course, accept the radical epistemological argument of
Dawes to agree with the more moderate mainstream view that canons of
sound statistical reasoning should constrain our judgments of counterfactuals
(King, Keohane, and Verba 1994) and, indeed, that we should be alert to the
psychological fact that people are flawed intuitive statisticians who fall prey
to various biases in detecting and using covariation data. The experimental
literature warns us that people often draw inappropriately strong conclusions
from observing only the cause-presenveffect-present cell of contingency ta-
bles and see strong relationships between variables that they expect to be
correlated but are in reality only weakly correlated (Nisbett and Ross 1980).
A good start in implementing our fifth criterion would be simply to improve
the accuracy of intuitive estimates of covariation, with special attention to
sensitizing people to the problem of missing counterfactual data, Accurate
‘covariation estimates would, however, be just the beginning and would not
protect us from accepting many false counterfactual claims (Type I errors)
and rejecting many true ones (Type II errors). We also need to beware of
biases produced by nonrandom selection, confounding variables, and omit-
ted variables, as well as a host of other familiar obstacles to meaningful
statistical inference (King, Keohane, and Verba 1994). These statistical is-
sues play an especially prominent role in Russett’s chapter, which grapples
with the controversial counterfactual that if all states in the twentieth century
had been democratic, there would have been markedly fewer wars. Skeptics
of the democratic-peace hypothesis challenge this counterfactual on various,
grounds, including the inadequacy of the available statistical samples (too
few democracies, too few wars, and too truncated a range of time), the
inadequacy of the operational definitions of democracy and war (the self-
serving suppleness of certain judgment calls), and—perhaps most impor-
tant—the collinearity problems created by confounding variables that, once
controlled for in regressions, may “explain away” the democracy effect.
Russett responds by rebutting these objections, in the process illustrating the
enormous overlap between traditional procedures for hypothesis testing and

‘will take what is in both boxes, he will ot put the $1 million inthe second box; if te being
predicts we will take only what is in the second box, he will put the $1 million in the second
box, The rules are straightforward. First the being makes his prediction; then he puts the SI
milion in the second box or not, according to his prediction; then we make our choice.

“The problem is paradoxical because powerful epistemic intuitions push us in opposite direc
tions (Nozick 1993), Statistical intuition tells us that if we take what is in both boxes, the being
almost certainly will have predicted this choice and will not have put the SI million in the
second bor, whereas if we take only what isin the second box we will almost certainly get
million. Therefore, we should take only what is in the second box. Causal intuition tells us,
‘however, thatthe being has made his prediction and has already either put the SI milion into
the second box of has not. That fact cannot be undone. Therefore, we will receive more money,
$1,000 more, by taking what is in both boxes.