uniform and accoutrements, formed into corps, and put under proper officers." l Pitt also suggested that gamekeepers and other holders of licences to shoot game A should be included. desperate onslaught against the latter proposition was made by Sheridan and others, which was withdrawn, but after some became laws alterations the other measures in 2 In the following July (1797) an Act December, i?96. was passed authorizing the formation of a militia in The Scotland. ballot was dispensed with where volunteers offered At in those places their services in sufficient num- the service was extremely unpopular, and from 3,000 regulars England were sent over the border to enforce order, but the discontent was short-lived, and very bers. first soon patriotism reigned supreme. It remained for Mr. William Clavell, High Sheriff of Dorset, to put into operation the ancient prerogative of He had little or no informaraising the Posse Comitatds. tion as to the exact purport of this old-time King Alfred's, but the right to call out the civil, force of the county was vested in the Sheriff Mr. Clavell succeeded in organizing the so efficient a manner that Acts were framed upon his in with the assistance of 1 Annual Register, 3 38 Geo. Ill, c. by common men law. of Dorset in 1798 and 1803 important 3 He issued a precept efforts. them to the justices of the peace ordering lists, measure of " to compile constables and other police 1797, p. 120. 2 Ibid. y p. 126. 27 (1798), and 43 Geo. Ill, c. 55 (1803). NAPOLEON AND THE 28 officers," of all persons between the ages of fifteen and sixty years capable of bearing arms. Those already acting in some military capacity, clergymen, and others engaged in any sacred excepted. An 1 Quakers, and was established calling, office invalids were alone at the King's for the transaction of business, Arms, "and where Dorchester, proper assistants will attend, and persons and horses be ready to be sent express when requisite." From the names returned the men were divided into regiments of about a five petty commanders were chosen, responsible to the chief commander of the for twenty or more men. Those who did not hundred, out of which who were body possess firearms were supplied with pikes some eight feet long. Intense rivalry, usually of a friendly nature, existed between these petty officers, and each little band of twenty strove hard for the blue ribbon of the company. The market cross or parish churchyard was often the place of assembly. Returns were also made of all persons owning vehicles and horses, so that there might be no difficulty in arranging for the removal of cattle, fodder, corn, or foodstuffs useful to the enemy, as well as for conveying soldiers and muni- tions of war. Directors of stock were appointed, each one being supplied with a complete list of vehicles in the and where they were to be found. Fifty waggons and sixty men comprised a director's full complement. As in the case of the commanders of armed men, subdirectors were duly appointed and held responsible for vicinity 1 This ancient hostelry, sketched by Rowlandson during the invasion still exists. His spirited picture has been reproduced in The Three Dorset Captains at Trafalgar, p. 56, in connection with Lord Nelson's stay days, there. INVASION OF ENGLAND ten waggons and their respective head-quarters were specified. On drivers, 29 and definite the removal of stock be given "to the proprietors of each so deposited, assuring them that they will be indemnified by Government for the actual loss which receipts were to article shall be sustained by obtained with those its who removal," and the lent horses and same vehicles. rule Smiths, and wheelwrights were enlisted as pioneers, as messengers and guides, while boys horsemen expert were to assist in the removal of women and children, in carpenters, which the clergy would also lend their A letter was sent to every aid. 1 officiating clergyman in Dorset, enclosing particulars of the method of organiza" In case the intention should be misunderstood," tion. it ran, "and alarms and jealousies raised, you will have your power to explain the plan, and reconcile such persons to that which is so much for the good of every individual, and so essential to the prosperity, and even it in the safety of the county." 2 In this way the peaceful farmer, the village cobbler, the clerk, the money-making merchant, even the schoolboy, were turned into soldiers. An enemy, bold, brave, and determined, stood on the door was a Briton equally It would brave, equally bold, and equally determined. threshold, but before the 1 In 1796 two Mr. Welds joined the Purbeck troop of Dorset Cavalry Volunteers : Thomas Weld as captain, and Thomas Weld, junior, as cornet. The latter, who was born on the 22nd January, 1773, married Lucy, daughter Hon. Thomas Clifford, and had an only child, Mary Lucy, who became the wife of Hugh Charles, Lord Clifford of Chudleigh. Thomas Weld, junior, succeeded to Lulworth Castle on the death of his father, 1810, and on the death of his wife he entered Holy Orders and became Bishop and Cardinal in 1829. He was the first Englishman to have a seat in the Conclave since the Pontificate of Clement IX. He died loth April, 1837, aged 2 Dated May 1st, 1797. sixty-four. of the INVASION OF ENGLAND 30 have been well had every county been so pared. efficiently pre- 1 The great volunteer movement, which began to transform the face of the country and make England for some years a vast camp, will be spoken of in greater detail in another chapter. Meanwhile it is essential to give a some- what detailed account of the descent of Tate's " Black Legion," acting under Hoche's instructions, on the Welsh Of the plans and schemes of our adversaries during the Great Terror, this was certainly the most extraordinary, both as regards its conception and execution. coast. all now a very great extent on the authority of hitherto unpublished documents. Its story is told to 1 In the Dorchester Museum may be seen a series of maps showing the county as practically subdivided in accordance with Mr. Clavell's plan of defence. These maps give in minute detail the working out of the High Sheriff's popular plan of a general defence of the county. CHAPTER II A THREE DAYS' WAR THE INVASION OF WALES BY HOCHE'S BLACK LEGION UNDER COLONEL TATE, FEBRUARY 22ND, 23RD AND 24TH, 1797. O Never shall a foreign foe, Brave thy Rights destroy Tho' men should meditate the blow, Isle of the And ! damned arts employ. " The War Whoop of Victory" fiends their Patriotic N ; Song of the Great Terror. 1 8th February, Bantry Bay, a Musical was one for the of first Piece time act, performed the at The Covent Garden. of this piece title sufficiently indicates the subject of the scene ; it is a slight effort, well and situation timed, well in- tended, and well executed, to create a laugh at the spirited conduct of the boys of Bantry Bay, when the French fleet lately made its appearance in the seas nearest on which occasion it is the southern coasts of Ireland ; notorious that the peasantry in that part of the sister kingdom displayed infinite loyalty and zeal, which the author has exhibited on the Stage, seasoned with some of the strong but simple humour that forms the marking features in the characters of the lower order of the Irish. It is said to be the first dramatic production of a Gentle- man whose name is Reynolds. Reeves." Mr. composed by 31 The Music is selected and NAPOLEON AND THE 32 The light-hearted chronicler of the European Magazine was probably unaware that before another week had passed by the public spirit of England was to be shocked by the simultaneous occurrence of the mutiny at Sheerness and the piratical attempt " a singular expedition of calls it of Colonel Tate and war on the wage unoffending peasantry of Pembrokeshire. Nine days later (February 27th) jail birds," Captain Desbriere his followers to and we learn under the heading of Par" a Member liamentary Intelligence, that on that evening was all rose to over, House the attention of the call to the late upon Wales. He said, that he saw something exceedingly portentous in the manner in which the enemy had effected a descent upon the coast of Wales with 1400 men with arms, but without tents or field-pieces. It was a matter very extraordinary, that such a number of men should land, form themselves into a attempt of the French body upon a hill ; and, without showing any disposition oppose the people, or the force that had marched against them, surrender themselves at discretion. Four- to teen hundred men, with arms have in their done hands, could un^ but from their something appeared clear to him that they had been landed for no other purpose than that of being made Under this consideration, he could not help prisoners. an alarm to the country and, as he did not sounding questionably conduct, ; it ; know how upon the occasion, he begged to be informed what measure was most proper to be adopted upon the occasion, and what Motion it would be right for him to propose to the House. " to act The Speaker informed him, that it remained for him some Motion to the House, in the form of an to propose INVASION OF ENGLAND Address to his Majesty, or in 33 any other manner that his discretion might suggest. moved an humble Address, but no person seconded it, and the Motion fell to the ground." 1 The natural sequel to the French disasters in Bantry Bay " He then was the melodrama enacted with an abundance of " " comic Welsh coast in the vicinity 2 of Fishguard variously known as Carregwastad, Carrig Gwastad, and Carn Gwastad. The contriver of these two relief at that portion of the equally futile efforts, to give effect to the popular refrain of the Paris mob Mettons De De fin a 1'ambition tous les rois tyrans du monde, ces pirates d Albion, } Qui prdtendoient regner sur 1'onde Nous avons tout ce qu'ils n'ont pas, Nous avons le cceur & les bras D'hommes libres & faits pour 1'etre Nous avons du fer, des soldats, Ce qu'il nous faut (bis] c'est (Ms) : ; du salptre (bis) was Lazare Hoche, 3 upon whom the shadow of an untimely death had already fallen. 4 Possibly he failed to appreciate the ludicrous side of the incident which his perverted ingenuity and frank hatred of England had provided for the dual prologue to the Great Terror, which contrasts so strikingly with the grim tragedy of its epilogue, to be enacted eight years later off Cape Trafalgar. 1 European Magazine, Vol. XXXI, p. 205. In 1797, and for a whole century afterwards, an obscure but picturesque Welsh fishing town, but now widely known to all travellers as the startingpoint of the splendid turbine steamers of the Great Western Railway, which 2 ply between the Pembrokeshire coast and that of Wexford, and in all probability one of our great English ports in the near future. 3 See ante, I. p. 5, note. D 4 See ante, p. 21. human NAPOLEON AND THE 34 Although the Annual Register invasion of Wales in a dozen 1797 disposes of the lines, the contemporary for on the subject is far more abundant than one would imagine. While the events of that memorable literature February were still fresh in men's minds were published A Brief Narrative of the French Invasion near Fishguard Bay, by J. Baker, author of the Picturesque Guide through Wales and the Marches (Worcester, 1797), another pamph- on the same subject printed for J. Wright, 169 Piccadilly, London (1798), Some Account of the Proceedings that let Landing of the French near Fishguard on the 22nd February 1797, and of the Enquiry afterwards held into Lieut.-Colonel Knox's conduct on that occasion etc., took place on the ', , by Thomas Knox, late Lieut-Colonel the Fishguard Volunteers (London, iSoi) 1 By Commandant 1 a strange coincidence, the inhabitants of Fishguard and first to join the volunteer neighbourhood were amongst the of and one or two its immediate movement of Colonel Knox claims for the Fishguard Fencibles the distinction of 1793. being t