pany . . .125 132 5,000 Kentish Volunteers at his seat near Maid- Volume King and Royal Family. August i, 1799 of Colour-plates designed and etched by Rowlandson, and published by the Angelos The French Invader Row- After in 1798. 118 . ........ Honourable stone in the presence of the Sir . . in Ireland. John Dalrymple. in 1799 . . ..... J 34 136 Caricature by Gillray, after a design by March, 1798 140 ILLUSTRATIONS xxxviii FACING PAGE Sir John Borlase Warren defeats the French Invaders off the Irish Coast, 1798 152 Floating Machine invented by the French for invading England, 17971801 . . . . . . . William A Pitt as a Volunteer. May, 1798 Popular Invasion Caricature of 1798 " Sayer's Caricature of the Own" Devil's 1799 . . ..... ..... . . in Hyde ....... ....... Rising, or the Republican Flotilla in Danger. February, 1798 England laughs at the combined John Bull says, " Hands off !" Malta, the Bone of Contention. The Political Situation of as a Patriot 12, May, . 1798 17, 1802 April 1 6, 1802 . June 14, 1803 . . . . . . . 1803. . . . . Addington alarmed. . . 246 248 248 after . . November Invasion Promissory Note. 244 Gillray. French and Dutch efforts of the November the Battle of the Nile. An By 2 40 Park, June 4, 1799. After J. Collyer French Sympathizers at Work. Gillray's caricature of 26 January, 1795 The Bristol Volunteers at Drill in Queen Square, 1797. From an original caricature drawing 224 (Inns of Court Volunteers) in George III reviewing the Armed Associations of London The Storm 184 .216 . 250 254 258 268 Sheridan 272 . Napoleon's Reception in the English Capital, a caricature of March, 1803 Bonaparte and Lord Whitworth. The Peace of Amiens in danger 274 Mutual Recriminations, July 10, 1803 England and Ireland defy Bonaparte. 278 . John Bull's Challenge to Bonaparte. . . 276 . 280 ..... 284 286 July 13, 1803 April 6, Frontispiece to the Anti-Gallican, 1803 . 1803 John Bull and the Shipbuilder. Early in 1803 George III and Bonaparte. An invasion forecast. . . . . . . July 20, 1803 . . 288 . 294 Boulogne during the early days of the Second Period of the Great Terror Bonaparte and Daniel Lambert a contrast. The Invasion postponed. 296 ' .May, 1806 correct Plan and Section of , A . . . . . . ..... Section of French Invasion Raft, 1797-1801 French Invasion Raft, 1797-1801 300 . the famous French Raft, 1797-1801 . . . 304 308 312 NAPOLEON AND THE INVASION OF ENGLAND VOL. \ \ I NAPOLEON AND THE INVASION OF ENGLAND CHAPTER I EARLY PROJECTS OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC FOR THE INVASION OF THE BRITISH ISLES, I793~7 ENGLAND ON THE DEFENSIVE " A He that would England win Must with Ireland first begin." OLD PROVERB. and exceeding bitter hatred of was for generations the legacy of England every son of France. It was the one connecting link between the ancien regime and its successor which was never severed. Napoleon Bonaparte, the apotheosis of the Revolution, in whose person was summed up that vague political creed which set human life at naught and regarded Europe as one great battleAnd yet to England the future field, was no exception. inveterate Emperor owed accidentally his first step to fame. At the siege of Toulon she gave him a golden opportunity which he grasped, but ever after she dogged his footsteps on land and sea. The genius of England always stood on his it palace or camp; she was always in the way. Given an island and a narrow sea separating it from a continent, the instinct of the soldier on the larger territory threshold, be prompts I. its B invasion. The precedent set 55 B.C. by Caesar, NAPOLEON AND THE 2 who embarked his legions at Portus Itius, supposed by be Calais, and by others Wissant, between that port and Boulogne, was followed down the some historians to by other enterprising individuals representing both official and private interests. Perhaps a modern centuries Froissart will yet pen the chronicles of the innumerable expeditions fitted out with the object of plundering the British Isles. Suffice to say that Louis XVI had contem- plated invasion, and that before the infant French Republic declared war against Holland and England in 1793, Monge, the Minister of Marine, sent a note to the Jacobins of all countries and to the inhabitants of the seaports of France urging them to a final effort. Ireland was grumbling over her numerous real or fancied grievances the storm which ended in the Rebellion of '98 was brew- ; " Already these free men show writes Monge on the last day of 1792. ing. to their succour. their discontent," " Well, we will fly We will make a descent on the island ; we lodge there fifty thousand caps of liberty we will plant there the sacred tree, and we will stretch out our arms to will ; our republican brethren will soon be destroyed. ; the tyranny of their government Let every one of us be strongly impressed with this idea." x Plant, plant the tree, fair freedom's tree, Midst dangers, wounds, and slaughter Each And 1 Quoted by ; patriot's breast its soil shall be, 2 tyrants' blood its water. Pitt in his speech in the House of Commons on February ist, 17932 Chorus of a song used by those who had republican tendencies, and which took the place of "God save the King." It will be found in the Appendix, No. XXVII, to the Report of the Committee of Secrecy of the Irish House of Commons, presented by Lord Castlereagh on the 2ist August, 1798. INVASION OF ENGLAND 3 Dumouriez, that impetuous, but able and far-sighted, soldier of fortune, who was in turn Constitutionalist, Girondist, Jacobin, and supporter of the British Ministry, having conquered Belgium after a was the man of the moment in brilliant Paris. He campaign, had already prepared plans for the invasion of England in the winter of 1777-8,* consequently his ideas on the proposed expeHe saw that by dition carried considerable weight. subjugating Holland her naval resources would be at the disposal of the Republic. So glittering a prospect could not be resisted. On January I3th, 1793, the Convention accordingly ordered the armament of thirty ships and the construction of twenty-five more, while the total number of troops was to be increased to half a million, 227,000 of whom, consisting of the armies of Belgium, the Moselle, the Rhine, and of " England," were to act on the offensive. 2 no plan for coast defence. Later some twenty thousand men were assigned for the purpose, for it was thought not unlikely that the British might turn the With tables on them and land soldiers on French soil. There was at first the breaking out of the 1 The objective was Vendean to be the Isle of rebellion faded away Wight, which was then in a all poor state of defence, the greater part of the English army being in America. Several thousands of French troops were to be concentrated at Cherbourg, and on a dark November night embark on two hundred chasse-martes, thirty of which were to be armed with 24-pounders. French or English smugglers would pilot them across the Channel. This expedition was but the beginning of a general campaign, for in 1779 the Spanish and French fleets were to join forces and proceed to Portsmouth with seventy thousand men, who would either land there and march on London, leaving the original force to attack the naval arsenal, or sail round to carry out the great plan of " a descent on Rye." The preparations for carrying out these schemes are said to have cost Dumouriez MS. , pp. 27-37. eighty million francs. 2 Projets et Tentatives de by Edouard Desbriere. p. 21, D$barquement aux lies Britanniques, Vol. I, NAPOLEON AND THE 4 chances of putting the idea to a practical test. The troops which had marched to the coasts for that purpose were promptly sent to the recalcitrant provinces. Hostilities between France and Great Britain had now begun, war being declared against the latter Power and Holland on the 1st February, 1793, closely followed by equally drastic measures against Spain on the 7th March. Pitt, who had just completed the tenth year of his un- broken spell of office, shortly afterwards entered into alliance with Russia, followed by an others with Sardinia, Spain, Naples, Prussia, the Empire, and Portugal. Revolutionary France had not a single friend, Denmark and Sweden remaining neutral. British Minister to set a seal It was the policy of the on the friendship of foreign subsidies when necessary, the the interior of Europe, aided by whatever troops the non-military Power could put in the field, and her navy narrowly watching the seas. At the beginning of countries by paying heavy allies fighting in the war which was to be a hundred and six 1 j Spain waged also< England had and France seventy- so relentlessly, fifteen sail-of-the-line had seventy-six, of which twenty were the worse for repair ; Holland boasted forty-nine ; Portugal 2 This array would appear very six, and Naples four. formidable and imposing, but the navies of Spain and Holland were in a condition of decay, both as regards seamen had and actual material strength. There was also an appalling lack of morale in the French service. Mutiny was frequent everything was in a deplorable state, men and ships, stores ; and administration. visions and clothing. Money was lacking as well as proChaos reigned supreme, the wages 1 The Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire, 2 Vol. I, p. 75, by Captain A. T. Mahan, U.S.N. Ibid., p. 78. INVASION OF ENGLAND of systematic neglect. The mad 5 frenzy of the people for equality had removed many of the best officers, and the opinion of the ordinary seaman carried almost as much weight as that of the commander. The dry rot which set was not entirely eradicated under the influence of in Napoleon, and for years the French navy continued to pay the price of a purely theoretical belief that patriotism was the alpha and The omega of statesmanship. defeat of the fearless Royalist peasants of La Vendee l encouraged the Convention to an expedition the Channel Islands, but the smoking flax of civil against war was not quenched, and soon broke into flame again. at Savenay English squadrons also appeared off the coasts and a It remained small engagement took place near Havre. 2 for General Hoche, Bonaparte's most formidable rival, to propose and organize a definite and infinitely more comprehensive plan of action. This was in 1796, by which time the Batavian Republic 3 [Holland], Prussia, Sweden, and Spain had come to terms with France, to be followed in October by Naples Pitt had also made overtures for Three years before, Hoche peace, but without success. had approached the Committee of Public Safety with an ; offer to carry 1 December over an army to England in trading vessels. 23rd, 1793. 2 Hoche, Lazare (1768-97), the son of the keeper of the royal staghounds at Montreuil. Having successfully pacified La Vendee and Brittany, and proved successful at Quiberon, he was appointed to the command of the expedition against Ireland (see post, p. 7) which left Brest on December I5th, His victories over the Austrians in the spring of the following year 1796. were only arrested by the peace of Leoben (April igth, 1797). Five months later he died at the age of twenty-nine. On the conquest of the United Provinces by France in 1795, tne Stadholder took refuge in England, and the country was constituted the Batavian Republic. The States-General at once formed a close alliance with 3 France. NAPOLEON AND THE 6 " want neither place nor rank I ! be the I'll " first to tread and of these political brigands saner effort the protection of the coasts by means of gunboats constantly cruising to and fro was to be his first care, the soil l ! In this later followed by an attack on Jersey and Guernsey, and a chouannerie carried on in England. Hoche's attention was again diverted, and it was not until he had earned for " himself the title of " the peacemaker of La Vendee that he was able to give further attention to the matter. By this time General Humbert 2 had taken up the cause of Irish cally