the winner of Marengo and Born at CamAusterlitz would have been inevitable. victor brai in 1739, Dumouriez endured tortures which in those days child. He was fell for some years the to the lot of a rickety released from the heavy metal frame used to support his emaciated limbs only just in time to save his life. Before he reached man's estate, however, he could bear any amount of fatigue, and he became as robust in body as he was alert in mind. He had won name and fame Seven Years' War, and had seen a whole decade of active service before in 1768, the year which in the immediately preceded Napoleon's birth, he went through campaign under Marshal de Vaux, whom he the Corsican regarded not only as his leader, but as his friend and In 1772 a suspicion of secret relations with patron. Poland and Hamburg entailed on Dumouriez a lengthy of in the Bastille. detention period During the years 1 an< 3 he was the head of an official mis1774, 77S> 1776 examine and report upon the Channel harbours In 1775 it was Dumouriez who selected Cherbourg in preference to Havre as the great naval centre of the future, and he was almost immediately entrusted with the superintendence of the necessary works In 1777 he was appointed Commandant of Cherthere. bourg, and in the following year entered on the active discharge of his functions in that capacity. It was at this sion to and their defences. juncture that he planned hostile expeditions against the INTRODUCTION xxii Channel Islands and the became an riez Isle of Wight. In 1790 Dumou- and joined the ranks of His published pamphlets were as belli- active politician, the Girondists. cose and highly flavoured as his speeches, but speedily led to promotion, and the dashing captain of the. Seven Years' then War became General en Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chef des Armies Franchises. Over first the death of the king Dumouriez political friends, fell who denounced him after the battle of Neerwinden out with his former as a traitor. his only defeat Shortly he went over to the Austrians, and never more set foot on French soil. In 1794 the Vie Privee et Politique du General Dumouries, Pour servir de suite a ses Mtmoires was published at Hamburg, where six years later he met Nelson England. Between 1793 and 1803 he wandered from Court to Court as the propagandist of Bourbon restoration. That he was a philosopher and on his way to deep thinker as well as a born general and one of the greatest military experts of the warlike age in which he abundantly evident from his numerous published and still more so from the MS. commenced late in works, In the pages of this 1803 and completed in May, 1804. lived is MS. the author frankly alludes to himself as a former Commander of Cherbourg," an " Overseer of the Harbour Works of Cherbourg," an officer of the French army " under Louis XV and XVI, a protegd of the Marshal de Vaux, an Assistant Q.M.G. under Marshal de Vaux in 1779, a refugee in England in 1803, and "a counsellor to the English Government and Adviser to the Staff." In no man alive in answered other to these 1804 any way and explicit indications but Charles Dumouriez. detailed Francis INTRODUCTION Some three years ago a thick octavo written MS., bound xxiii volume of carefully vellum and provided with a way into the shop of a well-known in stout metal clasp, found its London second-hand bookseller. The description given of and somewhat mis- catalogue was insufficient the present owner has no difficulty in identifybut leading, it with the work for the preparation of which the ing it in the author received for just twenty years a pension of at least 1000 per annum from the British Government. From the first word to the last the MS. is, without the shadow the peculiarly characteristic and easily recognizable handwriting of Dumouriez, which varied little during the last forty years of his life, and of which numerof a doubt, in ous specimens are available for the purpose of comparison. The calligraphy of the Memoirs, begun probably under the auspices of Addington and finished after the return to office of Pitt, is absolutely identical to that of a very Nelson by Dumouriez, in English, from Altona on the 2Oth April, 1801, which was sold by Messrs. Sotheby on the 8th July, 1905. Dumouriez remarkable was a letter written linguist of no mean to and the missive order, in ques- he possessed a very of our language before he began his knowledge of residence on British soil. continuous twenty years " My dear and glorious Nelson," wrote the illustrious exile, tion demonstrates the fact that sufficient " Victory is ever bounded friendship to your character. Northern Powers [sic] I your name, as my hope the Peace with the to another turn to your constant more Paul's successes, profitable for the public cause. foolish brain destroyed our hopes, they revive with the successor. we can will give you have the charge of the Mediterranean Sea, together deliver Italy and France of the democratic If xxiv INTRODUCTION *& a 0/uui. itatoty^ oKaei iifloL uuf INTRODUCTION xxv I desire nothing else. After that, take your and spend the remnant of your life in the calmness shadowed with the laurels you for yourself implant'd. Farewell, dear Nelson, and be constant in friendship as tyranny. leave, you are in triumphing of [over] internal foes and external enemys." Seven years before John Gillray had portrayed the " future friend of Nelson and " Counsellor of England as dining at St. James's Palace on May I5th, 1793, the plat de resistance being the head and battered crown of Louis XVIII served up by Fox and Sheridan, both wearing Phrygian caps adorned with tricolour cockades. The founder of Cherbourg had evidently been held responsible for one of the earliest post-French Revolution invasion panics. In 1803 and 1804 Dumouriez, Fox, and Sheridan three to be found amongst the most eloquent and stalwart champions of English national defence and war were all "democratic tyrant" now on the road to the high imperial throne. References will be frequently found in the text to the to the knife with the remarkable essay of Dumouriez, who during the time he was compiling it was constantly in communication with the Duke of York and Lords Melville and Camden. It is hoped, high character, position of is to the present work. ability, Dumouriez demands no other instance of one volume transcendent in it, and The exceptional and assuredly there history of the Foreign Minister country, and that within twelve years of his held the office, living to draw up in every detail having a scheme for the defence of the country of which he INTRODUCTION xxvi once planned the invasion. Sir John Bowring, who was Dumouriez's literary executor and the composer of the Latin epitaph in Henley Church, so unpardonably mis1 quoted by the General's German biographer, tells us that " Dumouriez died on 2nd March, 1823, at Turville Park, aged eighty-four, his last days having been made comfortable by an allowance from the Duke of Orleans, which enabled him to keep a carriage. The General had, I 1000 a year from the British believe, a pension of Government, with whom he was in intimate communication, and for whom he drew up a plan of defence against the menaced French invasion. At his death his papers were purchased by the Government from his executors" As far as can be ascertained, there is no trace of another copy of the whole or any portion of the MS., to which the author made and 1808, either in the Record or War Offices. Shrewdness and common sense are the characteristics of Dumouriez's deductions and additions in 1805, 1806, 2 observations. Much that he writes is prophetic, and, like Napoleon's attack on Austria, strangely by subsequent events. It was in May, 1804, that Dumouriez wrote " It is time for England to cut the his anticipation of verified : thread that holds the sword of Bonaparte above her head. Nothing is so demoralizing as an everlasting defensive. be thought that every year would add to the perfection of the measures taken, but it is in human nature It may to grow less and less energetic, seeing that the first enthu- 1 Autobiographical Recollections of Sir John Bowring, with a brief Memoir London, 1877of L. N. Bowring, pp. 307 et seq. 2 Fragments of Dumouriez's memoranda on the defence of England exist in the library of the Secretary of State for War. See Napoleonic Studies, by Holland Rose, Litt.D. London, George Bell, 1904. J. INTRODUCTION xxvii always calls forth the highest degree of that energy. Unless England proceeds to attack she will present the spectacle of a place beleaguered by a weaker force than siastic effort own This will be tantamount to cowardice, and could not inspire the continental powers with confidence. its The garrison. defensive power gerous. It will is unwieldy, costly, and even danabate one jot of his make Bonaparte not pretensions and projects it is out of proportion with the danger of the invasion, which 200,000 men could repel ; with the help of a Navy which alone can meet all the navies of the world collected together. No doubt England had to reach the offensive vid the defensive, but let it be clearly understood that if from this year [1804] an attack does not supersede defence, then his chances much will be very was to some purpose that Nelson strongly impressed on the British Government the wisdom of utilizing the knowledge of Dumouriez. increased." It In the Histoire de la V Empire et la Restauration, Caricature sous la Republique^ 1 by Champfleury, ample justice done to the powerful influence on English public opinion exercised by such artists as Gillray and Rowlandson is throughout the Great Terror, although, curiously enough, comparatively little notice is taken of the elder Cruikshank, Woodward, and the other who made the Corsican Ogre and artists, great and small, his flotilla the target of James Gillray that Napoleon owed the sobriquet Little Boney," which will be remembered when the innumerable abusive and depreciative epithets so freely bestowed on our redoubtable adversary are for" gotten. Gillray fut," observes the French historian of caricature, "un veritable excitateur, un remueur de fibres their satire. was It to " 1 Vol. IV, pp. 247-397. Paris, n.d. INTRODUCTION xxviii nom patriotiques, et son devrait etre donne a une des rues avoisinant la place ou se profile la statue de Wellington." The phrase is so particularly happy and appropriate that it would lose half its force by translation. places Gillray above Rowlandson, who Champfleury so frequently de- feated the object he had in view by gross exaggeration of form and features. There are comparatively few French invasion caricatures in existence, 1 but the German artists, more mercy Napoleon than Gillray and Rowlandson. For the last two decades of the eighteenth century and the first two of the nineteenth the caricature was a national institution in will it be showed seen, little Throughout the Great Terror the satiric prints exhibited in the shop windows of Humphrey in St. England. James's Street, Fores in Piccadilly, Ackermann in the Strand, and Holland's Museum in Oxford Street, and out for inspection at evening the general detestation of our foreign foe and stimulate the spirit of patriotism and dogged determination to resist a Foutrance which freely lent parties, served in to portfolios intensify animated every class of the community. If one learns much of the political side of the Great Terror from Pitt, Rose, Fox, Windham, and the rest of the statesmen of the period, for its side-lights and social aspect, one must go to the pages of Wright and Grego and private collections that to which the present writers have had The ballad and the broadside proved quite as like access. useful in the same direction as the caricature might be expected, the invasion had its books, and song writers, as well as its 1 One own own ; and, as songs, songjests, toasts, of these, however, not only foreshadows the invasion by tunn