t him. justly passed upon and on Christmas Day Bouvet sought the open sea, night, whither Nielly and Richery followed him, and made for Bedout's vessels, on board of which were some Brest. four thousand men, still military officers with remained. Not he and the until him had discussed the situation, and decided that a landing would serve no useful purpose, did they set sail for Brest, which was reached on January ist, The Trajan waited 1797. off the mouth of the Shannon hope of forming a junction with Hoche, and on her captain being told that the Fraternitt had been seen off in the December 26th, he made for Bantry once more. On the 7th January the solitary vessel Bay was sighted by two British sail-of-the-line and two frigates, the Irish coast on and a thirty-six hours' chase began, the Trajan to effect had left reached A division an escape. 1 On Bantry Bay the day before. home waters. managing under Commodore Linois Hoche landed at the I3th it La Rochelle on the I4th. Another solitary ship, the Droits de herself with honour, Edward and the stubborn VHomme, acquitted made with fight she and the Amazon^ both most noteworthy incident in Hoche's frigates, attempt to invade Ireland. The French ship did not set out on the homeward voyage till January 5th, and all went Sir is Pellew's Indefatigable the well until the I3th, A fierce when the conflict ensued, Britishers came up with which continued far her. into the night, heavy seas frequently dashing into the portholes and preventing the proper working of the guns. The men on both sides fought with the courage of desperation, and 1 Desbriere, Vol. I, pp. 193-212. NAPOLEON AND THE 14 the carnage on the Droits de VHomme was At dawn both due to overcrowding. Frenchman ran aground in the Audierne Bay, terrible, partly Amazon and the thirty-five miles eventually became total wrecks. peasants appeared on the beach, but were south of Brest, 1 and Many willing helpless to lend their aid owing the to tempestuous The waves broke over the ships, and many a wretch found a poor watery grave. There were a number of English prisoners on board the Droits de VHomme, and on the second day nine of them lowered a boat and weather. reached the shore in safety. Other attempts were made to launch small craft and rafts, but they were all swamped. Writes a British officer who was saved : "Weak, distracted, and wanting everything, we envied the fate of those whose lifeless corpses no longer needed sustenance. The sense of hunger was already parching thirst consumed our wine and vitals. lost, but a Recourse was had which only increased the want. Half a hogshead of vinegar floated up, and each had half a wineglass full. This gave a momentary relief, yet soon to left salt water, us again in the same Almost state of dreadful thirst. one was dying with misery; the ship, which was now one-third shattered away from the stern, at the last gasp, every by to the exhausted and helpless day brought with it a more serene sky, and the sea seemed to subside but to behold from fore and aft the dying in all directions was a sight too shocking for the feeling mind to endure. Almost lost to a sense of humanity, we no longer looked with pity on those who were the speedy forerunners of our own fate, and a consultation took place to sacrifice some scarcely afforded a grasp to hold The survivors. fourth ; 1 Mahan, Vol. I, p. 358. INVASION OF ENGLAND one to be food be cast, for the remainder. when the welcome The die 15 was going to sight of a man-of-war brig renewed our hopes. A cutter speedily followed, and both anchored at a short distance from the wreck. They then sent their boats to us, and, 150, of nearly 400 brig that evening ; by means of large rafts, about who attempted 380 were left it, were saved by the to endure another night's misery, when, dreadful to relate, above one-half were found dead next morning." 1 The British losses amounted to three killed and thirty-four wounded. The crew of the the exception of six men who attempted to get to shore in the ship's cutter, were saved and made prisoners. Of the 1750 men on board the doomed Amazon, with FHomme probably only a comparatively small proportion survived both the fight and the wreck, but as to this records are silent. 2 Suffice to say that General HumDroits de bert effected his escape, expedition a It God little later. and lived to command a similar 3 has been repeated again and again that an "act of alone prevented the invasion of Ireland in the " winter of 1796. The weather was certainly against the French part of the time, but Grouchy's dilatoriness was as conspicuous at Bantry as it was at Waterloo, and must be taken into account. Napoleon gave it as his opinion that had Hoche been able to land his "fine army" he would have been successful. 4 Where was the main British fleet fate of Ireland 1 2 4 had trembled in the balance ? James's Naval History, Ibid., pp. 8 1 -2. all this p. 81. time, while the The fifteen sail- Epitomized by Robert O'Byrne, F.R.G.S. 3 See/0tf, p. 140. Dumouriez says that Creasy's Invasions of England, Vol. II, p. 209. Admiral Bouvet sacrificed his ships and General Hoche not been parted from his army by a storm, the expedition would not have failed. MS., p. 267. NAPOLEON AND THE 16 of-the-line under Admiral Colpoys, which usually cruised had been blown thirty miles to the westward, and two or three frigates under Sir Edward Pellew alone remained to watch the enemy. Colpoys was not aware off Brest, that the expedition had sailed until the day after the majority of the ships had reached the mouth of Bantry made Bay, and then he mouth under Lord Bridport, which was the fleet off Brest, if he should 1 sail," for Spithead. The fleet at home " at Ports- to relieve necessary, or to pursue the enemy, got under weigh when nearly all the if scattered units of the French fleet were on homeward their voyage. This unsatisfactory method of watching an enemy contrasts strongly with Lord St. Vincent's (formerly Sir " " John Jervis) later injunction to hermetically seal up the French fleets in their harbours. Blockade duty at this time was almost entirely entrusted to a few ships, and occasionally to frigates only there was seldom a squadron ; before Brest in winter. 2 As to what would have happened had Hoche landed in Ireland can only be surmised, but that Earl Camden, the Lord Lieutenant, was satisfied with the precautions taken is shown in his letter to the Duke of Portland, dated January loth, 1797. that the best spirit and militia forces ; "I have the satisfaction to reflect was manifested by His Majesty's regular and I have every reason to believe that, a landing had taken place, they would have displayed the utmost fidelity." The regiments trudged many weary if miles in the snow, which was cleared away in some by the peasantry so as not to hinder the march. 1 " parts In the Speech by Dundasin House of Commons, 3rd March, 1797 ; Parliamentary History, Vol. XXXIII, p. 12. 2 The Great Campaigns of Nelson, p. 19, by William O'Connor Morris. INVASION OF ENGLAND town of Galway, which time was garrison, the zeal and very inadequate yeomanry was inhabitants and in for a short a manner to give me 17 left with a ardour of the peculiarly manifested, and the utmost satisfaction. In short, good disposition of the people through the south and west was so prevalent that, had the enemy the general landed, their hope of assistance from the inhabitants would have been totally disappointed. From the armed yeomanry Government derived the most honourable assistance. . The merchants of Dublin, many of them of the . . first eminence, marched sixteen Irish miles with a convoy of arms to the north, whither it was conducted by reliefs of The appearance in this metropolis has been meritorious. The corps have been formed of the yeomanry. highly most respectable barristers, attorneys, merchants, gentlemen, and citizens and their number is so considerable, and their zeal in mounting guard so useful, that I was ; enabled greatly to reduce the garrison with perfect safety to the town. The number of yeomanry fully appointed and disciplined, in Dublin, exceed 2000, above 400 of whom are horse. The whole number of corps approved Government amount to 440, exclusive of the Dublin by 1 The corps. gross number is nearly 25,ooo." The narrative of the Bantry handed down records in in conveys Bay invasion has been song and story, and the following verse what the latter part of the above despatch rhyme in prose : Joy and health TUNE. All ranks, The In one all to the Duchess wherever she goes. professions, shall greatly unite, lawyer, the student, the farmer, the trader, armed host for their country to fight, Their rights to preserve and repel the invader 1 I. C London Gazette^ January I7th, 1797. : NAPOLEON AND THE i8 By Long this valiant band Protected we'll stand, as the sea round the shores of Ireland shall flow To them let The due tribute of praise, ; us raise Success to our yeomen wherever they go. 1 No the effort of another minor poet, which also supports the view that the Irish were not afraid that the French might land, but rather that they would fail less interesting is to do so : Oh brother soldier, hear you the news, Twang 'em, we'll bang 'em, and hang 'em up all An army's arrived without breeches or shoes, Twang 'em, we'll bang 'em, and hang 'em up all. To arms, to arms ! ; ! Brave boys, to arms ! The French to invade us prepared a great fleet, Twang 'em, etc. And now since they're come, we shall very soon Twang 'em, etc. To arms, to arms ! meet. etc. They come Twang But what Twang the true cause, they say, to advance, 'em, etc. is more rare they bring freedom from France, 'em, etc. To A 1 arms, to arms ! etc. 2 ballad of sixteen verses, entitled, Popular Songs, illustrative, Ibid., part 3 Invasion," of the French Invasions of Ireland, part 2 p. 65. "The "This iii, 3 iii, p. 60. which was probably first printed in of Constitutional Songs, Vol. I, p. 80, published by A. Edwards, Cork, 1799, and is entitled 'The Invasion' (written in January, I797)" Ibid.) part iii, p. 47. ballad, a newspaper of the time, appears in A Collection INVASION OF ENGLAND calls to task 19 the British admirals for not having annihilated the French fleet : Nor skill nor courage aught avail Against high Heaven's decrees, The storm arose and closed our ports, A mist o'erspread the For not seas. to feeble, mortal man Did God His vengeance He raised trust ; His own tremendous arm, All powerful as all just. Now fair And and strong the south-east blew, high the billows rose The French fleet bounded Freighted with Erin's Oh ! ; o'er the main, foes. where was Hood, and where was Howe, And where Cornwallis then Where Colpoys, Bridport, or Pellew, And all their gallant men ? ; Several other effusions contain references to the same witness the following from the pen of O'Kelly, whose name is immortalized by Lockhart in his Life of Sir Walter Scott. The lesser light paid a personal visit to effect, as Marmion when the great Scottish writer The poem appears to have been " founded on one entitled General Wonder in our Land." * the author of was in Ireland in 1825. O'Kelly's rhyme runs thus : While Admiral Bridport lay at rest, And Colpoys everywhere was peeping, Admiral de Galle stole from Brest, And thought to catch the Irish sleeping. But a rare Admiral, General Gale, Oh may the gods give him a blessing Appeared in time with crowded sail, And gave to frog-eaters a dressing. 1 Ibid., part iii, p. 70. ! NAPOLEON AND THE 20 Then here's a health to General Gale, And to Momonia's friends another, Oh may their union never fail Invading foes to blast and smother. Although the French had escaped so lightly in the Bantry Bay expedition, British admirals had acquitted themselves with honour from the beginning of the war. In 1793 Hood burnt part of the Toulon fleet, but had to evacuate harbour through the skill of Napoleon Howe a young captain of artillery. then Bonaparte, 