el idea of 1883, but that by aeroplane as foreshadowed in 1907. INTRODUCTION and sentiments. 1 If it xxix has been reserved for the namesake of one of the sturdiest sailors of Trafalgar times to describe in dramatic form, but with true poetic feeling, the of the curtain on Napoleon's cherished dream of conquering England, most of the poets of the period made fall " use of the menaced invasion to improve the occasion," " " although the birthday and New Year odes of Poet Pye and the additional verses to the National Anthem and " Rule Britannia," thoughtfully provided by Miss Anna Seward and others, have long since lost their savour. These remarks will explain which the popular verse and the pictorial chapters in as in and later phases of the the raison d*etre of the literature in prose as well satire both of the earlier Great Terror are dealt with at length. The works of Creasy and Hozier on the subject of the invasion of England were each written at a time when the question of national defence was pre-eminently the topic of the hour, although we were neither in 1852 or in 1876 Who sea and land, once more singing Thou rul'st Stretch forth Thy guardian Potent to save Lead hand, ! forth our monarch's host And proud invasion's boast Crush on our warlike coast God save the King. 1 Account of Gillray's Caricatures , by Wright and Evans, London, 1851 the House of Hanover, by Wright, 1849 ; and Rowlandson the Caricaturist by Joseph Grego, 1880. The two elder Cruikshanks, both of them volunteers, were already hard at work in the early days of the Great Terror. George Cruikshank's earliest works appeared in 1803, but (see post, p. 244) he published in 1860 a crushing retort to General Sir W. Napier's " animadversions on the old as ; England under ', corps Mimic Soldiers." INTRODUCTION xxx The pamphlet of General Sir Charles Napier on The Defence of England by Corps of Volunteers and Militia, which appeared in the same year (1852) as Sir E. Creasy's book, was the signal for an avalanche of ephemeral brochures emphasizing in some shape or other Coleridge's " If men could learn from history, what lessons it saying : might teach us." Captain Hozier placed on the title page of his first volume the words, " The cry is still they come" ; while on that of the second he inscribes the lines England ! happy with a " : Happy special reference to the present subject in this, that the wise dispensation of has cut her off by that streak of silver sea." Providence If he had chosen he might have substituted Coleridge's charming lines And Ocean, 'mid his uproar wild, Speaks safety to his island child. Hence for many a fearless age Has social quiet loved thy shore Nor ever proud invader's rage Or sacked thy towers, or stained thy ; for the The fields with gore more prosaic prose of the Edinburgh Review. centre of menace may now have shifted itself from Paris to Berlin, but this has only been since the accession of King Edward VII. At the commencement of the century the invasion tradition of the Bourbons and the Bonapartes still held good at the Quai d'Orsay, along with certain other hereditary diplomatic dogmas which it may now be devoutly hoped have been finally cast aside. The immediate consequences of the revival of the Channel Tunnel abundantly show that the posof an invasion of England from the Continent are very much within the sphere of practical politics. The project, however, sibilities still reopening of the controversy laid to rest in 1883 is no INTRODUCTION xxxi sooner mooted than the war of words becomes fiercer than Sir ever. James Knowles once more unfurls the standard of uncompromising resistance, which, like William Pitt's " " map of Europe, has been rolled up these ten years ; and conditions of men and women, from Lord Wolseley to Dr. Sophia Jex-Blake, sound the shrill note of all sorts alarm ; and while the shareholders of one great railway the idea as a benefit to the company applaud those of another denounce One to England's safety. it as dangerous human race, and destructive has only to read the issue of The Nineteenth Century and After for February last to realize the extent and intensity of the interest centred in everything which relates to the inviolability of our territory. Indeed, if the cry about the unprotected condition of our northern and eastern coasts may be taken as an indication, it seems likely that the question of the sufficiency or otherwise of our home defences will arrest public attenit did in 1807 an ^ indeed in tion as urgently in 1907 as 1707. There is something strangely reminiscent of Naponow quoted from a poem which leonic times in the verses lately appeared in the Pall Mall Gazette. When men stood anxious at their posts, Whilst women sobbed alone When Fear gazed darkly o'er our Land, The Fear we dared not own ; : The windward sandbanks did their The shoals upon their lee Who They Loud task, saved us from the Corsican ! roars the and our sullen Sea Watcher of our ? ! shores, The Stiller of Alarm The narrow, sand-strewn, storm-swept That guard us from all harm ! ! Straits INTRODUCTION xxxii Spirit of sandbank, surf, and spume, And Save spindrift driven free us this day, from those, Who would betray our Sea we pray, ! During the Great Terror Charles Dibdin was the The important reate of the people. post now lau- held by Mr. Alfred Austin was occupied by Mr. Henry James Pye, who rarely failed to introduce the subject of the invasion into his official odes. The as a specimen of his art. Go forth, my following may fairly be taken " Quoth the British Muse" : sons, as nobler rights ye claim Than ever fann'd the Grecian patriot's flame, So let your breasts a fiercer ardour feel, Led by your Patriot King, to guard your country's weal. Her The heard voice is from wood, from thatch'd roof village vale, from down, and the busy town, th' indignant country swarms, yours a people clad in arms Num'rous as those whom Xerxes led, Eager And To crush devoted Freedom's head ; Freedom's cause who stood, And stained Thermopylee [sic] with Spartan blood Hear o'er their heads the exulting Goddess sing These are my fav'rite sons, and mine their warrior King. Firm as the band for ; : The rhyming inanities of those days have long since become things of the past. They have disappeared as completely as the flat-bottom boats and the rest of the complicated machinery which was intended to bring Napoleon and his army "Gallia's hosts," in the language of Mr. Pye across the Channel. Although there is no longer demand which taxed so severely the resources of Cibber, Whitehead, Warton, and Pye, and the a for the verses INTRODUCTION skill of the unfortunate composers who had effusions to music, the Poet Laureate called as far xxxiii is still to set their occasionally This has already happened as the Channel Tunnel is concerned, and Mr. Alfred upon to strike his lyre. Austin disposes of the whole matter by repeating three lines written by him just a quarter of a century ago : Nay, England, if thy citadel be sold For lucre thus, Tarpeia's doom be thine, And perish smothered in a grave of gold. Be the ultimate decision what the story the writers have to it tell may, it is evident that possesses an interest which regards the present and the future quite as much as it does the past. They prefer, however, to leave the reader to draw his own deductions from the facts which they new light not only on Napoleon's venture to think throw a projected invasions of England, but on the social and political life of the age to which they belong. The writers desire to express their gratitude to Sir George White, Bart, of Gotham House, Bristol, for per- mission to use a contemporary water-colour sketch and MS. song of the Bristol Volunteers of 1797 as well as a rare broadside relating to the military history of the city at that period ; to Dr. J. of Holland Rose, the latest and biographers, and Commander Napoleon's Robinson, R.N., the author of The British greatest Fleet, for many valuable suggestions; to Mr. H. H. Raphael, M.P., for access to the magnificent collection of engraved portraits formed by him in illustration of the Memoirs of Barras ; to Mr. Clement Shorter for placing at their disposal his interesting series of invasion handbills, carefully preserved more than a century ago by Madame Tussaud ; to Mr. INTRODUCTION xxxiv Edward Laws, the historian of Pembrokeshire, for the communication of several new facts concerning the Fish- guard episode of February, 1797; to Messrs. Spink for the loan of the cast of a very rare variety of Napoleon's famous invasion medal of 1804; to Monsieur L. Forrer for many interesting particulars as to the medals and tokens issued in France in connection with the projects of to Monsieur Godefroy Mayer of Paris, for a 1796-1805 ; note on the French iconography of the invasion, both serious and humorous to Mr. Sydney Sydenham, of ; Bath, for information as to the volunteer tokens and badges of the period dealt with and to Mr. John Lane for the care and taste he has bestowed on the effective ; reproduction from the scarce originals of the numerous characteristic illustrations now placed before the reader of these volumes. Valuable assistance has also been by Mr. G. L. de St. M. Watson in revising the proofs of these pages and preparing a care- given to the writers ful analysis of the voluminous information contained in Captain Desbriere's official treatise. CONTENTS PAGR INTRODUCTION vii CHAPTER I EARLY PROJECTS OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC FOR THE INVASION OF THE BRITISH ISLES, 1793-97 ENGLAND ON THE DEFENSIVE . CHAPTER A THREE DAYS' WAR THE i II INVASION OF WALES BY HOCHE'S BLACK LEGION UNDER COLONEL TATE, FEBRUARY 22ND, 23RD, AND 24TH, 1797 31 CHAPTER III FIRST PHASE OF NAPOLEON'S INVASION PROJECTS ON THE FRENCH COASTS, OCTOBER, CHAPTER ENGLAND ON GUARD AND 1799 1797, PREPARATIONS TO MAY, 1798 . 74 IV PLANS FOR THE NATIONAL DEFENCE IN 1798 104 CHAPTER V THE FRUSTRATED ATTEMPTS ON IRELAND, CHAPTER INVASION PROJECTS OF 1801 1798 . . . VI PLANS OF ATTACK AND DEFENCE CHAPTER .138 . 159 VII THE LITERARY AND ARTISTIC LANDMARKS OF THE GREAT TERROR, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE POPULAR PAMPHLETS, SONGS, BROADSIDES, AND CARICATURES PUBLISHED BETWEEN THE FIRST FRENCH EXPEDITION TO IRELAND AND THE CONCLUSION OF THE TREATY OF AMIENS [1796-1802] . . .195 CONTENTS xxxvi CHAPTER VIII I'.V ,v THE TRUCE OF AMIENS, 1802 256 CHAPTER THE LULL BEFORE THE STORM, IX 1803 271 CHAPTER X HISTORIC SIDELIGHTS ON NAPOLEON'S INTENTIONS AFTER THE RUPTURE OF THE PEACE OF AMIENS, 1803-1805 . CHAPTER FULTON AND HIS INVENTIONS INVASION SCHEMES IN . . 282 XI RELATION TO NAPOLEON'S 302 ILLUSTRATIONS George III and Napoleon Playing at Bubbles End Frontispiece FACING PAGE . . of the French Invasion of Ireland in 1797, as depicted by Gillray Caricature of the French 1797. Gillray. Invasion Projects against Ireland. . A Pitt aiming John Bull. The Posse Comitatus to resist Invasion, 1782 From Fishguard in February, 1797. 1797-8 . . "drawn from . . . . . . the original at Brest." England Invaded or Frenchmen Naturalized. 1798 Machine . . . . a contemporary print Raft for the Invasion of England, 1798 Invasion Raft, . to cover the 1798. . . . By Rowlandson. Landing of the French. 24 . . 28 -5 Fray. 1798-9 . . :. June . . . . 60 So March, . 86 . . 88 . . May 94 7, . . 98 . . 106 . . Facsimile of a Volunteer Officer's Commission. The . . . I79& By Thomas Rowlandson for the . . 68 1797-1801 of our Volunteer Defenders of 1798 (Highland Association) Arming 22 . . . . Raft for the Invasion of England. 1798 . Rehearsal of a French Invasion at the Island of St. Marcouf, One 14 J. Early invasion caricature etched by Isaac Cruik- Facing the Enemy. shank. . . . prophetic caricature of August, 1790 By . . 15, 1798 . .108 .116 Life of a Volunteer in 1798-9 as portrayed in a contemporary caricature . ..... . English Semaphore Telegraph Apparatus A Member of the landson Lord Rodney . > feasts over Artillery Frontispiece of the Rare Com