struck a more decisive blow on "the glorious first of June," 1794, the when seven ships of the French fleet, commanded by Villaret-Joyeuse, lowered their colours, six being taken The as prizes. following year Admiral Hotham pre- Corsica 1 and captured two of their ships, while Lord Bridport defeated the Brest fleet and secured three sail-of-the-line. On St. Valentine's vented the enemy from retaking Day, 1797, Jervis defeated the Spanish fleet, which was to have formed a junction with those of France and Holland purpose of taking over a large army to England. was a signal proof of the skill of the British whose efforts were ably seconded by Nelson. admiral, for the The victory His armament consisted of fifteen sail-of-the-line against the enemy's twenty-five. Not satisfied with the severe rebuffs which the French navy had so recently experienced, and perhaps encouraged by the fact that Austria, England's last ally, had recently 2 signed a preliminary treaty of peace at Leoben, thanks to Bonaparte's overwhelming victories, Truguet, the Minister 1 Corsica had become a British possession in 1793, but was evacuated in The French immediately took possession of the island. October, 1796. 2 April 1 8th, 1797. INVASION OF ENGLAND 21 of Marine, outlined in a letter to Hoche, dated 2ist June, 1797, the chief features of a plan of campaign for another attempt on Ireland. The Directory had decided to send six thousand Republican soldiers to Holland under General Humbert, who, it will be remembered, had taken part in the Bantry Bay fiasco, to swell the Dutch force of fifteen thousand men which had been held ready for some time The Batavian Government was so anxious to throw herself against her former ally that it by General Daendels. even offered to guarantee the courage of the troops. 1 Admiral de Winter's squadron of sixteen sail-of-the-line and twelve frigates then lying in the Texel was to take over the twenty-one thousand troops thus concentrated and land them in the At north of Ireland. twelve men-of-war and several same time a fleet of frigates was to leave Brest the with from six to eight thousand men, under the undaunted Hoche, and make for the south or west coast. The services of tioned, the Wolfe Tone and Lewens were again and the "peacemaker of La Vendee" requisi- set off for make final arrangements. Contrary to abandon his part in he to Truguet's instructions, proposed the project and join the Dutch expedition. The proffered Hague to Tone managed to curry favour Before the Dutch put to sea, Hoche, after serving for a short time as French Minister of Marine in succession to Truguet. was a dead man. 2 Had De help was refused, but Wolfe and was accepted. during the early months of 1797, when the 3 mutiny of the sailors at the Nore and elsewhere occupied the attention of Great Britain, success might have been Winter sailed 1 Desbriere, Vol. 2 Hoche died on September I, 3 April-June, 1797. p. 258. iQth, 1797. NAPOLEON AND THE 22 The chance offered by the naval troubles in England was unaccountably missed. De Winter still clung to the Texel, although General Daendels urged upon him the necessity for immediate action, even if he were compelled to fight Duncan, the British admiral, who was his. waiting for him to come out. He thought the Firth of Forth favourable for landing, and after Edinburgh and Glasgow had capitulated the troops would embark on the ships, which by that time would have rounded the north of Scotland, and sail for Ireland. With his dying breath Hoche dissuaded Daendels from so grandiose a plan of campaign, but it is significant that shortly before the following letter had appeared in one of the official or semi-official provocative Paris pamphlets widely circulated in : "Courageous Citizens, " England is the richest country in the world and up to you to be plundered. You shall march to give You shall plunder the capital of that haughty nation. You their National Bank of its immense heaps of Gold. shall seize upon all public and private property upon we it warehouses their magazines their stately mansions and gilded palaces and you shall return to your own their ; country loaded with the spoils of the enemy. This is the only method left to bring them to our terms. When they are humbled, then we shall dictate what terms we think proper, and they must accept them. "Behold what our brave army in Italy are doing. They are enriched with the plunder of that fine country and they will be more so, when Rome bestows, what, if she does not, will be taken by force. Your country, brave Citizens, will not demand a particle of the riches you shall ; INVASION OF ENGLAND 23 bring from Great Britain. Take what you please it shall be all your own. Arms and ammunition you shall have, Once and vessels find your to carry you over. way to London. landed, you " will soon HOCHE." On the loth October, 1797, the Dutch fleet weighed anchor and received so severe a handling off Camperdown at the hands of Admiral Duncan, who took nine ships out of a possible fifteen, 1 that the Irish expedition had of whose hand had been forced to go to war with France, was now the only one maintaining it, but there could be no turning back. It was well for Great Britain that she was supreme on the necessity to be abandoned. Pitt, bulwarks still protected her coasts, otherwise she must assuredly have perished. In maritime measures alone, so far as Europe was concerned, were her sea, that her floating efforts attended with success; but France found that in conquest her antagonist had lost none of her colonial prowess, for Tobago, Martinique, St. Lucia, and Grenada were captured one by one, as well as the Dutch possessions of Ceylon, Malacca, Cochin, The Spanish island of Trinidad also capitulated. army in Holland, under the Duke of York, Hope. The and the Cape of Good British met with nothing but disaster and although it served as a subsidiary defence of the British Isles, and the military measures taken for the protection of the kingdom itself cannot be regarded as adequate which England was placed. retreat, in the serious situa- tion in At the end of 1792 the militia was embodied, the statutory 1 Mahan, quota for Vol. 255. I, p. England and Wales standing The battle was fought on the nth October. at NAPOLEON AND THE 24 The regular army at by ballot. home consisted of not more than 15,000 troops,2 exclusive 30,740, 1 to be raised of the Irish establishment, 3 but the estimates for 1793 allowed for 17,344 regulars and 17,602 militia and fencibles Great Britain, and 12,000 in Ireland, including fencibles. in The were regular troops which enlisted to serve during the war only, and exclusively for home service. Scotland having no militia, was called upon to supply latter fencibles. A very wise precaution was taken. In order to defeat ulterior motives of foreigners arriving in England any an Alien Act was passed on January 8th, 1793, before war had been formally declared, whereby travellers from the Continent wishing to land at any British port had to give an account of themselves in writing and obtain a being allowed to step on shore. Passwere also ports necessary if they required to move from town to town. It was during a discussion on this Bill in certificate before 4 that Burke, whose Reflections on the Revolution in France did so much to stir up the national its earlier stages spirit, flung down a dagger, one of three thousand manufactured at Birmingham, as " a sample of the fruits to be obtained by an alliance with France." Republican and Corresponding societies were numerous, for revolutionary principles were by no means confined to the country which openly avowed them. As a consequence the Habeas Military Forces of the Crown, Vol. I, p. 283, by Charles M. Clode, Murray, 1869. 2 A History of the British Army, Vol. IV, part i, p. 77, by the Hon. 1 ed. J. W. 3 Fortescue. Until the Union in 1800 there was both a British and Irish establish- ment, each of which was kept quite distinct. 4 Lord Grenville introduced the Bill on the iQth December, 1792. INVASION OF ENGLAND Corpus Act was suspended, and the ment was 25 Irish military establish- On the 5th February, 1794, Pitt stated that "the interior strength of the kingdom largely increased. consisted of 140,000 effective men, and that of the navy near 90,000; the artillery had been placed on a footing of great improvement, and amounted to near 6000 the ; pay were almost 40,000 constituting a of little short of 276,000 men, in the best force altogether 1 condition and discipline." A month later a motion was foreign troops in our ; put before Parliament by the same minister for an augmentation of the militia " in order to provide for the better security of the kingdom against a menaced invasion by the French." A levy of horse and foot volunteers in every county, and by private persons, was proposed, the expenses to be met by public subscriptions in the case of the former until estimates could be prepared. Several counties strongly opposed this system of payment, which was declared by those who resented it as " unconstitutional." However, an Act was passed on April I7th, 1794, "for encouraging and disciplining such troops, or companies of men, as shall voluntarily enrol themselves for the defence of their counties, towns, or coasts, or for the general defence of the kingdom during the present war." 2 The command of the local reserve forces was, of course, vested in the Lord Lieutenant of each county. From henceforth drills, parades, and reviews became frequent all over the country, and Hyde Park was the scene of many a gathering of loyal citizens in warlike array. The premier corps of the metropolis, and the most exclusive, was the Loyal London and Middlesex Light Horse 1 Annual Register, 2 Ibid., 1794, 1794, Appendix p. 210. to the Chronicle, p. 135. NAPOLEON AND THE 26 Volunteers, a body which numbered amongst its one hundred and fifty men the scions of several noble families, Duke including the of Montrose, who served in it as a It had been formed so far back as 1779, but trooper. it was disbanded in 1783, and existed in name only until it was again called into being by the Act mentioned above. 1 As time went on and corps became more numerous, it was found necessary to consolidate some of the smaller of them. The merged in the Islington Volunteer Cavalry was therefore L.L. and M.L.H.V., and riflemen and horse found a place in the regiment. According to the statement put before the House on artillery the 23rd February, 1795, "the service necessary for the guards and garrisons of the kingdom was 120,000 regulars, 56,000 militia, 40,000 for Ireland and the colonies, exand volunteers, of foreign troops in British pay, and of embodied French emigrants." 2 The clusive of fencibles following year (1796) the first serious attempt to cope with the military requirements of the nation at home was made. Not only was a supplementary militia of 63,878 men be enrolled by ballot and trained for service at the slightest notice, but 20,000 men were to be to added that " to the irregular cavalry. Pitt therefore proposed every person who kept ten horses should be obliged to provide one horse and one horseman to serve in a corps of militia 1 ; that those who kept more than ten should The oldest volunteer corps was, and still is, the Honourable Artillery in 1537. The interesting proposal of the "Dovor Associa" tion in 1792 will be found in the Appendix. Company, formed z Annual Register, 1795, P- J 77' Fortescue draws attention to the fact that in February, 1795, the entire armed force of England and Scotland was in reality 65, 500 men only. See History of the British Army, Vol. IV, part i, pp. 406-7. INVASION OF ENGLAND 27 provide in the same proportion and that those who kept fewer than ten should form themselves into classes, in which it should be decided by ballot who, at the common ; expense, should provide the horse and the horseman. These troops were to be furnished with a 