. independence, which Hoche supported enthusiastiThey went apace with the preparations. Six small and a similar number of transports were placed at disposal, and arms were provided for several hundred vessels their at Brest. whom they proposed to release An " independent legion " of men was also recruited, but at the last jail birds from the prison fifteen hundred moment the newly elected Directory cancelled everything, and turned a more willing ear to the proposal of Lieutenant Muskeyn, whose experience in the navigation and strategy of small craft such as might be of service in crossing the Channel was considerable. By birth a Fleming, he had seen service as naval lieutenant with the Swedes in their war against the Russians. 3 He repaired to Dunkirk and set about forming a flotilla. 1 2 Yarmouth and Newcastle were to be the objec- Desbriere, I, p. 31. Jean Joseph Amable Humbert He became (b. 1767) was the son of a small farmer. a volunteer at the outbreak of the French Revolution, and eventually secured the command of his regiment. He was appointed General of Brigade in 1794. After considerable experience in La Vendee he became " " senior officer of the Legion of France which sailed with Hoche in the Bantry See Studies in Irish History 1796. pp. 257-8, by C. Litton Falkiner. Bay Expedition of 3 Desbriere, I, p. 71. and Biography , INVASION OF ENGLAND lives in this new plan, with the Humber x 7 as an alternative be more easy of access. Beginning with some likelihood of success so far as actually leaving port was should it concerned, it gradually dropped out like the two gunboats were rest. Twentyand eight troopships secured for thousand infantry, but so great was built, the transport of five the repugnance of the soldiers to the voyage in small boats that in two days no fewer than six hundred men An attempt to get under weigh was certainly but in such unpropitious weather that one of the made, vessels sank in sight of the shore. deserted. His Hoche preparations having ended so ignominiously, again came forward, and was able to enlist the rival's sympathies of Truguet, the new Minister of Marine. On June 23rd, 1796, the General was informed by the Directory it relied upon him to put the plans previously matured into execution. The despatch of a relief expedition to the Irish patriots was to be the signal for an that armed rising by them, the arrangements being in the hands of the Society of United Irishmen, the leaders of which, having formed themselves into a Junta (Directory), had entered into negotiations for French assistance to enable the thousands of men they represented to cast off the English yoke. 2 The communication averred that the independence of Ireland would cause England to lose her naval supremacy, but 1 it frankly admitted that the French " Rivers are difficult and dangerous for landing, because they can be easily The defended, and the land is less open and gives scope for more batteries. wind which brought a flotilla would also allow the defenders' squadron to sail Dumouriez MS., p. 8. The Society of United Irishmen was formed at Belfast in 1791. Junta consisted of five members, Lord Edward FitzGerald, O'Connor, Emmet, McNeven, and Bond. up." a The NAPOLEON AND THE 8 Marine was still under a cloud, and three small expeditions only could be fitted out. thousand picked men and A flotilla land was to take them on the five coast of Connaught, Galway Bay, and then proceed at once to the East Indies. This force was to sail in six weeks, and ten thousand muskets were to be stowed away if possible in By the 1st September, 1796, a second expedition was to be ready at Brest, with a complement of six thousand independent troops, including some ex-Chouans and a sprinkling of " undesirables " ; for the use of the Irish. while a third expedition from Holland, with a force of five thousand men, chiefly foreign deserters under French was to augment the former. So vague a method of warfare did not appeal to Hoche, who drew up a more business-like scheme after a conference with Wolfe Tone and E. J. Lewens, the accredited agents in Paris of the Irish Junta. Experiencing some officers, discouragement, the General finally went to Brest and found the ships there in a disgraceful condition. Lorient was and Admiral Villaret-Joyeuse, who had been appointed Naval Commander of the fleet, Hoche being in supreme authority, was forced to leave three ships little better, out of five in that port when he wished to take them to Villaret-Joyeuse still looked upon the Irish part of the cruise as a mere episode, and prepared for a voyage to Brest. Hoche most vigorously opposed, and he soon secured the Admiral's dismissal. He was succeeded by Admiral Morard de Galles, whose previous record would have fitted him well for the task had he not the East Indies, which been both aged and infirm. Almost on the eve of departure the Directory decided that as a British squadron of fifteen sail-of-the-line under Admiral Colpoys was cruising INVASION OF ENGLAND in the Channel, it 9 would be wise to make use of five ships which had recently returned to Rochefort from North America. These were brought to Brest under the com- mand of Admiral Richery, but were in so rickety a condi- two only were found to be serviceable, and even these needed repairs. Villeneuve was expected with five ships from Toulon, and Spanish help was also anticipated, but neither was utilized. 1 The total military force under tion that Hoche now some fourteen thousand men, consisted of forming a vanguard, a main body, a rearguard, and a supplementary body. With the vanguard sailed Admiral Bouvet in the frigate Nielly. Seventeen Immortality with Grouchy in military and included Hoche and command, Richery's two ships. Admiral Morard de Galles went with the main body in the The rearguard was under Admiral frigate Fraternity sail-of-the-line, thirteen fleet a notable five and two "flutes" comprised the corvettes, six transports, French frigates, armament had the crews been of strength and the officers well trained. before sailing Hoche issued a proclamation to his troops. 2 It contains less rodomontade than is to be full The day found in the addresses of most Republican generals, but it is " " worthy of note that he had previously circulated official statements to the effect that his troops were destined for Portugal, copies of which were in the hands of the British authorities was printed 1 and put them at Pau, nearly off their guard. The following two hundred miles from Brest. 3 Mahan, Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution, Vol. I, the Treaty of St. Ildefonso, signed on the iQth August, 1796, Spain concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with France. In the following October Spain declared war against Great Britain. p. 348. 2 By Popular Songs, Illustrative of the French Invasions of Ireland, part * Ibid., p. 7. by T. Crofton Croker (Percy Society, 1847). p. 13, edited iii, NAPOLEON AND THE io " To the French destined to Assist the Irish Army Revolution. " Republicans, " Proud of having made you victorious on many Government you is to be occasions, I have obtained permission from to lead you to fresh successes. To command assured of victory. to give back liberty to a people worthy of it, ripe for revolution, the Directory sends us to Ireland "Eager and with the object of assisting the revolution that some excellent republicans have just undertaken. " It will be a splendid task for us, who have conquered the myrmidons of the kings armed against the Republic, to break the fetters of a friendly nation, and to help it to recover the rights usurped by the odious English Government. " You will never forget, brave and faithful companions, that the people amongst whom we are going are the friends of our country, that we must treat them as such, and not as a conquered people. "On arriving in Ireland you will find hospitality and soon thousands of its inhabitants will come to fraternity increase our battalions. Take good care then never to treat any of them as an enemy. Like ourselves, they have to be avenged on the perfidious English; the latter are those alone on whom we have to wreak a striking revenge. Be sure that the Irish sigh no less than you for the ; moment when, recall to Pitt together, we shall to his friends and march to London to what they have done against our liberty. " By friendship, by duty, by the honour of the French name, you must respect the persons and the property of the country to which we are going. n INVASION OF ENGLAND effort I provide for your needs, be sure of that, jealous preserving the reputation of the army which I have the honour to command, I will severely punish whoever neglects that which he owes to his country. Laurels and glory will be the portion of the "If by constant Republican soldier of pillage. ; "You know me first time, I will duly warned you, death will be the price of rapine and sufficiently to believe that, word. fail in keeping my not fail BREST, the (blank A start have in text) GENERAL HOCHE. year of the Republic." was made on the I5th December, the following I not to remember. " " the for 1796, and by day the ships were moving towards the Fate dealt unkindly with the expedition, which open began and ended with disaster, for the Fougueux (74) and sea. the Indomptable (80) collided, while the Seduisant (74) struck a reef and foundered. It would have been well if the orders cancelling the whole plan which the Directory had sent to Hoche had been delivered, but they arrived too late. The bad weather caused the various divisions to part company at the very outset, and they were never was only by the merest luck that Bouvet, Richery, and Nielly came together on the iQth December. Hoche, with one sail-of-the-line and three frigates, on being informed that his scattered fleet had completely reunited. It preceded him in getting away from Brest, crowded on all sail, and missed Bouvet's division owing to a dense fog. On the morning of the 2ist, been reduced to one by which time his force sail-of-the-line, the Nestor, had and the NAPOLEON AND THE 12 the Commander-in-Chief gazed on the Irish coast with eager eyes, and drew near to Bantry Bay. Fraternite, During the night the lights of numerous vessels were observed, which he surmised were British, whereas they belonged to his own missing fleet. A storm arose and played havoc with the frigate, and two days after the Fraternite had lost her consort. The Romaine came in sight for a short time later and disappeared. On the 28th Bouvet's Immortality was reported, and on the following day Hoche knew much that the expedition which he had planned with so care had turned out a fiasco. Two ships remained to tell the tale, the Scevola, which was rapidly sinking, and the Revolution, which was engaged in rescuing the crew of the former, although she herself was in an almost disabled state owing to a collision. Meanwhile the other admirals had arrived off the Irish coast on the 2ist December with 1 thirty-five sail. Un- favourable weather again precluded them from keeping together, and on the 22nd Bouvet anchored at Bear Haven with eight sail-of-the-line and seven other vessels. The remainder were afterwards blown to sea. 2 The admiral and Grouchy held a council of war, the former being of opinion that a search should be made for Hoche ; but Grouchy, who as military commander-in-chief was supreme once the fleet was at anchor, gave orders that the 3 6500 troops under him should be landed at Bear Island, and then altered his plans, making Bantry his objective. Bouvet, however, made not the slightest attempt to carry out the command, and Grouchy did not enforce it as he 1 3 Mahan, Vol. I, p. 355. 2 Ibid., 356. In Bantry Bay, thirteen miles west of Bantry. The remains of several martello towers, erected after Hoche's expedition, may still be seen. INVASION OF ENGLAND 13 ought to have done, for which negligence censure has been Bad weather again set in tha