---
source_url: "https://epdf.tips/napoleon-and-the-invasion-in-england.html"
final_url: "https://epdf.tips/napoleon-and-the-invasion-in-england.html"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "2a334d8f08af19b5d821e0c2d9e69f198f9789a24350ac5c9d1edd0060ff65b2"
title: "Napoleon and the Invasion in England - PDF Free Download"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Napoleon and the Invasion in England - PDF Free Download

# Napoleon and the Invasion in England

NAPOLEON AND THE INVASION OF ENGLAND VOL. I LAYING GEORGE III tttIUBBT,ES AND NAPOLEON. THE HEROES OF THE GREAT ...

Author: J.Weeler Издательство: London

---

45 downloads 1557 Views 109MB Size Report

This content was uploaded by our users and we assume good faith they have the permission to share this book. If you own the copyright to this book and it is wrongfully on our website, we offer a simple DMCA procedure to remove your content from our site. Start by pressing the button below!

Report copyright / DMCA form

NAPOLEON AND THE INVASION OF ENGLAND VOL. I LAYING GEORGE III tttIUBBT,ES AND NAPOLEON. THE HEROES OF THE GREAT TERROR NAPOLEON KND THE INVASION OF ENGLAND THE STORY OF THE GREAT TERROR BROADLEY WHEELER & ;.Ar H. F A. B. H. WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS FROM CONTEMPORARY PRINTS, CARICATURES, ETC. TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I EIGHT IN COLOUR. LONDON JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD NEW YORK JOHN LANE COMPANY MCMVIII .5 i/J PLYMOUTH: WILLIAM BKENDON AND SON, LIMITED, PRINTERS TO SIR GEORGE WHITE, BART.; OF GOTHAM HOUSE, BRISTOL, THE ROYAL AND FREE CITY AGAINST WHICH THE ATTACK OF THE " BLACK LEGION " PLANNED BY HOCHE AND LED BY TATE IN FEBRUARY, 1797, WAS ORIGINALLY DIRECTED, THESE VOLUMES ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY THE AUTHORS LONDON JUNE l8TH 1907 INTRODUCTION f ""^HE probabilities experts, the possibilities of a success- If invasion of England Invincible called Armada, triver. and by sea have afforded abundant occupation for political and polemical writers, as well as naval and military ever since the first rumours of the approach of ful foreign by its vainglorious con- one takes the incursions of the two Stuart Pretenders in and 1745 out of the category of 1715 foreign invasions, very few of the many projected descents on our shores went further than the stage of preparation, while signal victories like that of La Hogue put an end lengthy period to what was looked on almost as a standing menace. During the first nine decades of the eighteenth century Louis XIV, XV, and XVI and for a their advisers were in turn, directly or indirectly, re- sponsible for the hostile designs of 1708, .1718, 1722, 1745, J 755> 1 7$6> I 759> 1 an d 779, Spain, and Holland were in 1782, although Sweden, some instances adroitly use of to further the aggressive policy of France. made Tradi- tion has, almost from time immemorial, played an impor- tant part in French diplomacy, and the invasion of England had come to be regarded in that light long before the birth of Napoleon or the first inception of those grandiose and elaborate plans of conquest which culminated in the Great Terror of 1796-1805. Defence associations, volunteering, vii INTRODUCTION viii the calling out of the posse comitattis, camps of observation, and stirring appeals to arms, both in prose and verse, are in an inheritance of the Great Terror of 1588. reality the history of the greater part of the eighteenth century. Ralph Allen of Bath, the friend of They figure in Pope, whose favourite niece Gertrude Tucker had married organized a local volunteer corps Bishop Warburton, when the menaces of Louis the Well-Beloved and his protege the Pretender took the place of the threats of Louis the Great. 1 Badges given by the commanding officers as rewards for efficiency are occasionally to be in the cabinets of collectors, and equally interesting are the medals of the loyal associations formed for the found 1 raise " We Widcomb near this City, intends to own Charge for the Service of his Majesty Juncture, when we are threatened with a hear that Ralph Allen Esq. of One Hundred Men, at his and the Nation, at this critical On powerful Invasion from abroad, and disturbed by a Rebellion at home. Wednesday last Sixty Men (for the Purpose above mention'd) were sworn before John Cogswell, Esq: our present Mayor; And we are credibly informed that several Young Men in the neighbourhood intend to offer themselves, Men the said Gentleman proposes to voluntarily, to compleat the body of raise : They will be cloath'd, arm'd, and maintain'd at Mr. Allen's own be Blue, turn'd up with, Red, and they are now learning their Exercise, a Person of Experience, being lately come from London for that purpose." [Bath Journal Monday, February 3, 174^.] Expence; their Cloath's to ', And again : On receiving the News Yesterday Morning of the precipitate Retreat of the Rebels from Stirling, on the Approach of the Army under his Royal ' ' Highness the Duke of Cumberland the Mayor order'd the Bells to be immediately rung ; about One-o-clock our Cannon were fir'd, and in the Evening some curious Fire Works were play'd off, on the Parade by order of Mr. Nash, amidst a very great Concourse of People. The Corporation assembl'd in the Evening at the Guildhall (which was illuminated) and drank several Loyal Healths. There was likewise a Ball at Mrs Wiltshire's for the Ladies and Gentlemen, and the Night concluded with great Joy Degrees of People. " Mr. Allen's House at Widcomb was finely was made near it and his Men, lately rats' d, ; above Occasion." [Bath Journal, February among all illuminat'd, a large Bonfire fir'd several Vollies on the 10, t74f.] INTRODUCTION ix defence of the country and the support of the House of Hanover at the critical epoch when France was actively aiding the Stuarts, and England and Austria the war occasioned by the dispute con" Where the to the imperial throne. succession cerning Hearts are right, let Hands unite," is the inscription on were allied in the reverse of those tokens, while on the obverse one The reads, "These banners spread are Gallia's dread." heraldic supporters and colours of Austria and England appear on either side of an oval charged with a figure of the act of slaying the dragon, surmounted " " by that of Britannia, with the words For our Country on a scroll below. Within the first device are full-length St. George in portraits of the two monarchs with clasped hands. superb enamel badge of this kind, elaborately set quisite paste, is still in existence, and was in A ex- in all probability worn by the president of the Association. We have, however, no present concern with the invasions of England attempted or projected prior to the Revolution, which, by the irony of fate, made the heirs of our would-be invaders our fast friends and allies, while their former subjects became our relentless foes. It is merely essential to correct the popular error which makes Napoleon the fons et origo of the invasion idea, which originated nearly two centuries before he saw the light, was rampant when he was still in the cradle, recurred in an acute form long after his death, and has a certain actuality at this very moment, when the revival of the Channel Tunnel scheme has already brought a new defence association into existence. The story of the Great Terror, which for a whole decade turned "Merry England," Scotland, and Ireland INTRODUCTION x into one vast camp, has found historical or military writers. favour with English Although dealt with incilittle dentally and superficially in a vast number of works, no book devoted entirely to the subject has ever appeared. In 1852 the excitement born of Louis Napoleon's coup d'ttat was evidently responsible Invasions and for Sir E. S. Creasy's the Projected Invasions of Saxon Times, with Remarks on England from The the the Present Emergencies. Of the 312 pages it contains, only 61 tell the story of those eventful years when the " Corsican Ogre " was our national bogey. In 1876 appeared two bulky volumes by Captain H. M. Hozier, entitled The Invasion of England; a History of the Past, with Lessons for the Future. Ninety pages were deemed sufficient to dispose of the protracted duel between Napoleon and Nelson for the mastery of the sea, and they include a narrative of the three abortive expeditions to Ireland, and the landing at Fishguard in 1797 of Colonel Tate at the head of a band of felons and " La Legion Noire." Both books wholly lack an index of any kind, and their self-confessed and transparent incompleteness presents a galley-slaves, dubbed by Wolfe Tone striking contrast to the monumental work a veritable magnum opus which Captain Edouard Desbriere has given to France and the world at large under the title 1793-1805 Projets et niques. Tentatives de Dtbarquement The five aux lies Britan- volumes from the pen of Captain Des- briere contain an aggregate of 2636 pages. tion under the direction of the " Their publica- Historic Section of the 1900 and ended in 1902. The illustrations are confined to a few plans and diagrams, and French Staff" began in notwithstanding the graceful lucidity of the author's style, the mastering of the contents of these five closely printed INTRODUCTION volumes a task is xi of considerable difficulty. Captain official archives both in Lon- Desbriere has had access to don and Paris, and his knowledge of English is supposed him for an undertaking which to have specially qualified was evidently a labour of love. must be confessed that It the text contains frequent and perplexing errors, many of which are doubtless attributable to the carelessness or but it is sometimes inexperience of the proof-reader evident that the author himself lacks system and clear; is much to be regretted in what is beyond a and valuable contribution to the history question great not only of France, but of Europe at large. Proper names ness, which and place-names are frequently mutilated beyond recognie.g. we have Frey-Harock for Grays-Thurrock and tion Green-hill for Greenhithe; totals of troops refuse to tally it is a half-brigade, on the next the half has on one page dropped out and the brigade paradoxically has become a whole one and dates are often wrongly given owing to the puzzling intermixing of the Gregorian and Revolutionary ; calendars. for each An index should certainly have been provided volume. As it is, Desbriere, like Creasy and Hozier, has committed the capital error of dispensing with altogether; but even this does not prevent our gratefully it acknowledging the colossal industry, the patient research, the sound judgment, and the shrewdness of observation displayed by him during his four years' toil. Captain Desbriere always writes of England in a spirit of courtesy and conciliation. The absence of English textbooks Terror more than atoned relating to the Great by the richness of other sources of information, many of them hitherto unknown and unexamined, from which the writers have endeavoured is for INTRODUCTION xii to reconstitute as it were the political, military, naval, and social history of the crises of 1797-8, as well as those 1 80 1 and 1803-5. of 1805 From the beginning of 1797 until (if we except the of the end brief respite given to men's minds on both sides of the Channel by the Peace of Amiens) the " " to be or not to be of the invasion was the all-absorbing and all-pervading topic of correspondence and conversaIt was an tions, and that from the palace to the cottage. age of letter-writing, diary-keeping, and pamphleteering, and Napoleon's projects are constantly mentioned in the women journals of Fanny Burney, then the wife of one of the French emigres, Mary Berry, Hannah More, Hester Lynch Piozzi, and others. Elizabeth Montagu was alive in 1797, but her reign as Queen of the Blue Stockings was over. like Bishops at their visitations ; judges on the bench; politicians in both Houses of Parliament; preachers in their pulpits dramatic authors in their plays poets in ; their verses ; ; actors on the stage Freemasons ; in their magis