ifferent quarters the towns, which will be terrified by these means, will soon even in that case effect. If they ; ; INVASION OF ENGLAND demand compose the columns the troops which who them from your 47 to protect thereby remain masters parties, of the field, and starve both the troops and the inhabitants. I doubt much whether the English know as yet the nature and use of mobiliary columns, but even if they do, you may find means to render them useless, because the government has not troops in number sufficient to guard all the points at once, and parties like yours may over-run the country in a thousand different directions. " Your will soldiers are to carry with them nothing but their arms, ammunition, and bread they will find everywhere the inhabitants must supply clothes, linen, and shoes of the gentry are to be your and the seats your wants, : ; magazines. " In case the country, being exhausted, should offer you no further resources, or that a strong body of troops should force you to quit the place where you had established yourself, you must depart with promptitude and expedition, make forced marches, and in the night, reposing if you are yourself by day in the woods and mountains in order to to halt, procure provisions, you must obliged first choose a strong position, from which you will send detachments into the neighbouring villages it is with your cavalry (for you must take care from the first to mount ; ; a sufficient number of your troops) that you are to make this kind of excursion you will also observe to re-mount as as often your cavalry necessity may require it. ; " in this manner, unencumbered with baggage, be overtaken by the enemy but if it cannot your troops should so happen that you are obliged to stand an engage- Marching ; ment, you must remember that you are now a Frenchman, inasmuch as you command Frenchmen, and let that incite you to attempt a brilliant stroke remember, however, that nothing but inevitable necessity should induce you to hazard the issue of a combat, and in that case you must supply by courage the defect of numbers. Should you be ; NAPOLEON AND THE 48 forced to clear your way through the enemy, you must commence the attack, but it must be always by night. About eleven o'clock, or midnight, send out two or three patrols of four or six men each, with orders to set fire to a dozen houses in different quarters the are will most you running away, probably pursue you, in which case you may lay an ambuscade, or you may avoid him, or you may fall on the in your rear, ; enemy, believing that rear of one of his columns, which you may cut off with the dark and the confusion of an unexpected facility, in If the attack. enemy should run to extinguish the fires, you have the same advantages you have your choice, either to avoid him, or which is still better, to beat him if he remains under arms, and sends out patrols to reconnoitre, you must interrupt them, and put them to the bayonet, without firing a shot, and then, after two or three hours, you must form the column, and advance rapidly, au pas de charge, on one of his wings, which you will certainly rout, and then, without pushing the affair further, you will pursue your route, and remember to make in that day two or three countermarches. " In this manner you may, by a brilliant action, surprise ; ; the night time and cut off a post which may be opposed you in the day light and open field you ought not, with the force under your command, to hesitate to attack in to : two thousand of the enemy, and in the night, four or even five thousand you ought to dislodge eight hundred from a post, not being intrenched but if intrenched, and : ; especially with cannon, you are not to attack them. " In order to pass a river, where the bridges are guarded or broken down, if you cannot procure boats, you must endeavour to re-mount towards the source, in order to find a passage by means of a ford, a mill dam, etc. If you are hard pressed, you must strain a stout rope from one bank to the other, and pass your troops those who do not know how to swim, holding fast by the rope, and carrying their ; INVASION OF ENGLAND 49 firelocks slung over their shoulders, with the muzzle downwards to avoid wetting the lock if trees can be found on the bank long enough to reach across, they are still better than ropes in which case you will fell several of them. If the river, though fordable, be so deep as to take the soldiers up to their necks, you must make the best swimmers pass first, and the others follow by ranks, each soldier holding the next man strongly with the left hand by the skirt of the coat, and carrying his firelock in the ; ; right : by these means those who reach the opposite bank sustain the others, and assist them in getting out first will of the water your horses will also be of use, but you must not reckon upon them. " In case your position should be at last no longer tenable, : or that superior forces should force you to quit the country bordering on the Channel, you must not lose an instant to two French parties sent into the counties of York, Durham, and Northumberland. In that case you must join send me notice into Ireland, that I may be enabled to execute a diversion in your favour. An officer in disguise may reach me, either by seizing a fishing boat on the coast of Wales, or else by route of Scotland. " count upon your firmness and your courage you may equally rely upon the gratitude of the French nation and my esteem and regard in particular. I ; "My intention in giving you these instructions is less you should attach yourself to the letter, than to the spirit of what they contain and I leave to your judgment that ; to make such modification therein as circumstances may render necessary. "(Signed) LE GEN. LE HOCHE. "[SECRETARY OF STATE'S OFFICE, WHITEHALL, " tfh May, 1798. " I. E Compared with the original F. KING.] " NAPOLEON AND THE 50 Captain Desbriere next gives an historical document of considerable interest, of which the following is only a summary. Journal of Commodore Castagnier commanding the fri- gate Vengeance, and having under his orders the corvette Constance and the lugger Vautour, which division was . commissioned to disembark in England the Second Legion of Irregulars. The 28th 1 at 7 a.m. to start for the anchorage in the Camaret Roads. Anchored at 9 a.m. On the morning of the 2Qth a soldier was subjected to summary punishment endeavouring to sell his coat. Signal to weigh anchor made at 3 p.m. on the 3Oth. Sighted the English on the for Ventose [February I9th]. Sighted fourteen heavily laden English ships and mistook the Dublin packet carryist ing numerous passengers of both sexes for a man-of-war. Hoisted the Russian flag. Tacked during the night so as At to enter the Bristol Channel. gave signal for the division 7 a.m. on the 2nd Ventose to prepare for anchoring. At 7 p.m. gave signal to get under sail and tack so as to continue our course up Channel. Having reached Parlock [Porlock] Bay, the state of the tide, the prevalence of an east wind, and the threatening weather induced me to make for Cardigan Bay, the second point designated for On the 4th Ventose [February 22nd] landing the troops. 4 p.m. anchored in Cardigan Bay close to the shore, and at 5 p.m. began the disembarkation of our forces, which was completed at 2 a.m. on the following morning. No at kind of resistance was offered to their landing. [February 23rd] at 4 p.m. Colonel Tate and his 1 Desbriere, Vol. February l6th, 1797. I, pp. 242-3. The 28th On that day officers said Pluviose corresponds with INVASION OF ENGLAND that they had no further need of my help. 51 In conformity with my instructions a proces-verbal was drawn up under my direction, 1 and I took the necessary steps for the execution of the other part of my mission. lugger Vautour to Brest with despatches I sent the informing General Morard de Galles of the result of the expedition. I then made sail for Dublin Roads, but was unable to remain there longer than 9 p.m. on the 8th Ventose consequence of the change of wind, the threatening weather, and our being encumbered by the number of prisoners from the fourteen vessels 2 we had [February 26th], in armed tenders. Moreover, we were informed by our prisoners that a naval force had left LiverI signalled that we should make pool in search of us. sunk, two of them for Sorlingues under all sail, by such a course obviate the possibility of our being sighted as would from the 3 English coast. 1 This was signed by Bremond, 2 Tate, and Captains Didier, Faucon, and Gavel, as well as the naval officers. Colonel Guilleret, Gueriel, Castagnier does not precise the exact time or details of these captures, cutter at his orders by the Vautour on the beyond the sinking of a small Ventdse (February iQth). The Vengeance encountered a hurricane, but eventually reached Brest on the iQth Ventose (March 9th, 1797). The Vautour had also reached the same port in safety. The Resistance and the Constance had failed to obey the 1st 3 signals of the chef de division, and were both captured by the English cruisers. despatch from Sir Henry Neale to Lord Bridport, dated March loth, A !797, gives the following details of the fate which overtook the French ships : ships taken are La Resistance, commanded by Monsieur Montague, "The mounting 48 guns, i8-pounders, on her main-deck, and manned with 345 men. She is only six months old, built upon a new construction, and is in every respect one of the finest frigates the French had, and certainly the largest, measuring 45 feet beam. The other frigate, La Constance, commanded by Monsieur Desauney, mounting 24 nine-pounders upon the main-deck, and manned with 189 men she is two years old, and a very fine These are two of the frigates which landed troops in Wales it is ship. a pleasing circumstance to have completed the failure of that expedition. I : : am particularly happy to inform your Lordships, that neither the St. Fiorenzo NAPOLEON AND THE 52 The St. We now Fiorenzo was appropriately rechristened the Fisgard (Fishguard), and in the latter part of the last century was still the receiving ship at Sheerness. and Wales. Colonel march of events return to the The Tate in first intimation our home we have waters in England of the arrival of was the following despatch from Lieutenant-Colonel Orchard, commanding the North Devon Volunteers, 1 Secretary of the Home to the Department. " Duke It of Portland, runs thus : HEARTLAND ABBEY, "February 2$rd. " I think it my duty to state to your Grace that I yesterday received an express from Ilfracombe mentioning that there were three French frigates off that place that they had scuttled several merchantmen, and were attempting to destroy the shipping in the harbour. They begged that I would immediately order the North Devon regiment of Volunteers under my command to march to their In consequence of this representation, I assistance. ordered the men to get ready to march as soon as possible. I have great satisfaction in saying that in 4 hours I found every officer and man that was ordered on the parade at Bideford (15 miles from home) ready and willing to march I to any place they should be commanded to go to. cannot express the satisfaction I feel on seeing the men so willing to defend their king and country, at the same ; nor La Nymphe have had any men killed or wounded, or the ships hurt Fiorenzo only having received two shot in her hull. had ten men killed, the first Lieutenant and eight men St. Constance had eight men killed and six wounded." Vol. XXXI (1797), p. 4331 La ; the Resistance wounded ; La European Magazine^ Nowhere during the Ten Years' Terror did volunteering " attain such note- Shire of the Sea Kings." In the returns of worthy proportions as in the 1804 Devon heads the list with a total of 16,395 5 Lancashire comes next with The gross total was 379,943. 14,856 ; and London third with 13,898. INVASION OF ENGLAND 53 time as silent, orde