he Gaul, When they attempted to land here With musket, sword, and ball. It was in February, The three-and-twentieth day, The French they came to Fishguard To 1 take our lives away. Fishguard in 1797, PP- 23-24. who for- INVASION OF ENGLAND Full fourteen hundred of them bold Did land on British shore, Such dreadful sight was ne'er behold In Pembrokeshire before. Lord Cawdor and his loyal men Rode bold to Fishguard town, And Major Ackland likewise, To keep the Frenchmen down. Lieutenant- Colonel Colby Rode like a valiant knight, And for his king and country Determined for to fight. And worthy Captain Ackland, To him praise is also due, He and his men proved loyal, Being willing and so And In Colonel full Knox true, together, career they went To face the bloody Frenchmen, Whose hearts did then relent. Esquire Chiles of Begelly, He mustered before day ; And being a loyal subject, He marched us all away. He rode himself before us, Upon his gallant steed, And so to Fishguard town we went To face the French with speed. The country folks they gathered To Fishguard from all parts, And like loyal men were willing To try their skill and hearts : With hooks and knives and To oppose the enemy, And for their king and Courageously would pitchforks country die. The Frenchmen they desired The British force to know ; Before they did surrender, They gave a fatal blow. 67 NAPOLEON AND THE 68 Two of our countrymen courageously did go. as their friends, They thought to meet them But met them as their foe. In answer to the Frenchmen, Lord Cawdor to them said, That they were four thousand On battle all were bent And hundreds more were coming, . ; Increasing from all parts, solemnly there did declare Who To fight with all their hearts. It was on Friday evening That they gave up the field It was a pleasant sight to see So many forced to yield. ; 'Tis not our men, or strength of arms, But Providence, we own, Did fight the battle for us And keep . the Frenchmen down. When they found out our forces, saw it was in vain They For them to stand engagement The case was made so plain. Twelve hours they did desire, And would surrender then. Lord Cawdor he allowed it, And so did all his men. God plenty, joy, And may all From Britain Likewise Bless For And and country and peace, French and Spanish bless our king With all ever cease. our noblemen them with counsel wise be loyal to their king face their enemies. to INVASION OF ENGLAND 69 ANOTHER BALLAD ON THE FRENCH LANDING ist. 1 Come all you loyal Welshmen, And thank the Lord with speed, It's late has been our Saviour In a great time of need. He saved us from invasion That happened in this land, His providence protected us From and. their avenging hand. 'Twas from fourteen hundred Frenchmen, They landed in full view, With arms and ammunitions For this country to subdue. If had not the great Almighty Had pity on us all, Before those cruel enemies We should been forced to fall. 3rd. They landed at Llanwnda In Pembrokeshire, I say, And thought that in this country They would make a desperate sway. They came into this harbour With glory and renown, And said unto each other, "We'll take the English crown." 4th. But thanks be to our Saviour That saved us from all harm, For certainly it was to us A 1 very great alarm. Sent by the present Earl Cawdor to Mr. Laws, with the following "STACKPOLE COURT, PEMBROKE, " December " Dear Laws, "I \>jth t '91. enclose a copy of an olApoem which was recited the Corston (in Castlemartin parish) carpenter's daughter down by word of mouth from her grandfather. " Yours ; it by Lizzie Davies, has been handed sincerely, "CAWDOR." NAPOLEON AND THE 70 So the time when they came in now I'll tell the year, One thousand seven hundred It's And 5th. ninety-seven is clear. In February month, The twenty-second day, murderers came And did no time delay. When the news went up to Fishguard, 'Twas with a dreadful sound, That there were fourteen hundred Those villain Upon Trehowel 6th. ground. For messengers so swift they sent And fetch \sic\ the very best, To send the news directly Straight on to Haverfordwest. From Haverfordwest to Pembroke In an instant without doubt, To give the soldiers warning They were 7th. to The soldiers And said, " have a rout. spoke together We are but few, appear before them of courage true " ; Then on they went a-marching Like men of fame and might, But we'll Like men And thought that with those Frenchmen They should have been 8th. Lord Cawdor's cavalry force to fight. before, A valiant troop indeed, And Did the Cardigan Malitia on with speed, [sic] follow One hundred more from Pembroke With Acklind 1 they did go, And Colonel Knox's soldiers Was ready for the 1 foe. Ackland. INVASION OF ENGLAND 9th. 71 The Volunteers from Haverford Did quickly march along, And all the jolly sailors From Hackin in a throng, So did the Tenby colliers, They rose and took their flight With hooks and scythes and pitchforks Those loth. ruffians for to fight. Then on they went a-marching, men Like They of valour true, did behold at Pencaer A very dismal view Those were together ruffians A marching all around, It was a horrid sight Upon nth. to see the British ground. Lord Cawdor took his horse unto them did go, And The very foremost man of us That face the daring foe. He bid them to prepare, They came at his command, And put their swords and muskets Down upon the Goodwick Sand. 1 2th. Then they were taken And Oh ! prisoners unto prison brought. when they were a-landing Such thing they never thought. The Lord had mercy on us And And saved us from their hand, never let such enemies For to invade our land. It is not astonishing to learn that while the ringleaders for London, one of the subordinate officers were en route was detected while on parole in the act of selling a silver chalice purloined from Llanwnda Church, and pleaded in INVASION OF ENGLAND 72 vain " that the half-defaced La Vendee." We comrade, Monsieur London, and as word upon it really will leave the filibuster le " Baron de Rochemure, meant Tate and alias his Le Brun, a fitting ending " to this singular expedition," planned in malice and carried out with folly. It is not surprising that a large-hearted in man and dirty as pigs." It is impartial writer like Captain Desbriere rejoices In any case its leader was not a Frenchman. to feel that Fishguard served as an appropriate text for one of the countless patriotic broadsides issued during the second period of the Great Terror, a facsimile of which is given on the opposite page. This day was published, AN ADDRESS to the PEOPLE OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF Great Britain and Ireland, ON THE THREATENED INVASI O N. EXTRACTS FROM THE ABOVE WORK. A:MONO the inexpressibly dreadful consequences which are sure to attend the conquest of your Island by the French, there is one of so horrible a nature, as to deserve distinct notice. This barbarous, but most artful people, when first they invade a country in the conquest of which they apprehend any difficulty, in order to obtain the confidence of the people, compel their troops to observe the strictest discipline, and often Like spiders put a soldier to death for stealing the most trifling article. they artfully weave a web round their victim, before they begin to prey upon it. But when their success is complete they then let loose their troops, with resistless fury, to commit the most horrible excesses, and to and desolate, without mercy, and without distinction. But pillage, burn, the practice to which I particularly allude will make your blood freeze in your veins. These wretches are accustomed, whenever they prevail, to subject the women to the most brutal violence, which they perpetrate with an insulting ferocity, of which the wildest savages would be incapable. To gratify their furious passions is not however their chief object in these atrocities. Their principal delight is to shock the feelings of fathers and and husbands ! Will you, my Countrymen, while you can draw a trigger, or handle a pike, suffer your daughters, your sisters, and wives, to fall into the power of such monsters ? brothers, Specimens of French Ferocity known and Brutality in Wales. War some French troops succeeded in effecting a landing in Wales. They were greatly superior to the regular force which happened to be in the part of the country where they landed : but, upon seeing, at a distance, a number of Welsh women with red cloaks, whom they mistook for soldiers, they surrendered The following proofs of their ferocity and brutality are well attested. A peasant whom they had compelled to assist them in landing their stores, presumed to ask for some compensation, upon which the commanding Officer drew a pistol, and It is well that in the last ! SHOT THE POOR FELLOW THROUGH THE HEART. Two Officers went to a house, in which was a woman in child-bed, attended by her mother, who was upwards of Seventy Years old. The French brutes tied the husband with cords, and, in his presence, defiled both the wife and the mother 1 1 1 LONDON The Address Printed by H. Bryer, Bridewell Hospital, Bridge Street. sold by J. DOWNKS, Temple Bar; J. SPRAGG, King Street Covent is Garden Price ; J. Two- pence each, ASPERNE, Cornhill and J. HATCHARD, Piccadilly. Twelve Shillings the Hundred, and Eighteen-penceper Dozen. ; or CHAPTER III FIRST PHASE OF NAPOLEON'S INVASION PROJECTS PARATIONS ON THE FRENCH COASTS, OCTOBER, TO MAY, 1798 " Crown so its PRE1797, a life, by a conquest which the Great Nation owes to BARRAS. illustrious outraged dignity." made me what has I am, and conquest alone can maintain me." In this sentence piquant Napoleon Bonaparte CONQUEST summed up both his career and his aspirations. At twenty-eight years of age, having crossed swords with imperious Austria to her disadvantage, his name caused no trepidation in the Courts of Europe, and politicians looked askance at each other when the little latest tidings of the little man with the big brain came to was while the youthful General was at the head of the Army of Italy, almost before the ink had dried on hand. It the Treaty of Campo Formio, 1 which pacified the Continent " for a time, that the Directory, that ridiculous government of lawyers," appointed him Commander of the Army of England. The Land of the Free alone refused to come to terms with France in the language of Pitt, its Govern; ment was our at war in order to own country and 1 2 " provide for the security of the general security of Europe." 2 Signed on the i;th October, 1797. See Pitt's speech of February I2th, 1793. 74 INVASION OF ENGLAND summer In the 75 of 1797, as has been already related, the Directory had formally agreed to an expedition against England, and now resolved to come to close quarters with as little delay as possible. Indeed, Monge gave it as his opinion that " the Government of England and the French Republic cannot both continue to exist," an axiom heartily endorsed by Bonaparte throughout his career. Probably English gold, rather than the subjugation of the country, was the object most desired in the present instance; the sacking of the Bank was infinitely more 1 The official important than the capture of the kingdom. order for giving actuality to the latest invasion scheme was issued on the 26th October, 1797: " The Executive Directory decrees what follows : There shall be assembled without delay, i. on the coasts of the ocean, an army which shall be called the Army of England. "Article "2. Citizen General Bonaparte is named Commander- in-Chief of that army. " " LA REVEILLIERE-LEPEAUX, LAGARDE, Sec. Pres. Gen" "The whole army wants to go to England. It is there that is found the golden fleece which lures on these eager Argonauts." Dumouriez MS., In his pamphlet, Tableau Speculatif de f Europe^ the General p. 276. " It is the interest of all the maritime Powers of also remarks : Europe 1 that the England should prove unsuccessful. by the same motives. The universal bankruptcy that must follow the s