guished themselves in Napoleon's fight for the sovereignty of the sea are to be found in the list of commisForfait Androssy was General sioners. was director, who had as Ganteaume, Decres, Dumanoir Le inspector - Bianca. 2 general, That a serious effort Bonaparte's demands of an English spy. 3 " director -general, M. and Rear-Admiral Lacrosse was is assistants Pelley, was being made shown in Captains and de Casa to meet the interesting diary " the road to Lisle," he notes, every useful tree cut down, and sawyers at work, cutting plank and other On and it to the coast in great " the I3th February, 1798, he met General Buonaparte between Furnes and Dunkirque, going to Ostend to inspect the port, and make contracts for build- scantling, numbers." carts transporting On ing flat-bottom boats for the descent." " formant gives twenty-one large boats, oars, and a mast to strike or number of The same inmade to row a lay down when on the stocks at Bergh, 4 " a small town on the side of the canal from Dunkirque to St. Omer"; eleven building at Rouen, at Havre "flat-bottom boats without number," sixty at Honfleur, and fifteen at Calais. The same eyeMilitary measures were no less active. witness states that on the I7th February 4000 troops needful," as being 1 Desbriere, Vol. 2 The Royal Navy, Vol. IV, p. 339, by W. Laird Clowes, etc. Memoirs and Correspondence of Viscount Castlereagh^ Vol. I, 8 4 Bergues. I, p. 323. pp. 165-8. NAPOLEON AND THE 90 arrived from Holland at Lisle ; Douay, Cambray, and of troops, horse and foot." In Paris, " a guard at every corner of the street, but all quiet." In Evreux there were 5000 troops "all ready for marching"; Peronne were at or near embark to of the "all full Havre 21,000 troops were stationed, "ready At Rouen, the head-quarters England, 25,000 men "are ready to at short notice." Army of an hour's notice, mounted and dismounted cavalry 3000, the rest are foot, but indifferent men, and march at On badly clothed." the 8th March, 1798, the spy left the " On the road, troops and waggons with arms, without number, moving in all directions." capital for Calais. The following day he arrived at Douay, where he found " ninety-one pieces of artillery in the churchyard, getting ready to set out next day for the coast, with a great " number of troops." At Gravelines " great preparations were also being made. He gives the total number of troops ordered " for the invasion as mounted and unmounted, cavalry infantry, all men 275,000 battalion [sic] t men, and to be within twenty-four hours' forced march of the coast." Having concluded his tour of inspection, returned to his Paris residence in the Bonaparte Rue Chantereine, and reported that the time had not yet arrived for a western expedition. " Make what efforts we will," he informed the Directory in an exceedingly lengthy report, " we sea. many years acquire the control of the a descent upon England, without being shall not for To make master of the sea, is tion ever attempted." the boldest and most difficult opera1 If it were possible at be by giving the English blockading 1 Dated February 23rd, 1798. No. 2419. all, it would and fleets the slip See Corrtspondance de Napol&n /, Letter INVASION OF ENGLAND 91 by night to the coast of Kent or Sussex, month after April was unfavourable. In his projects Bonaparte was of opinion that summer was crossing over therefore any later He expressed himself as very the best time for crossing. dissatisfied with the condition of the navy, but he deemed the expedition still feasible could be carried out if the following programme : Havre and Dunkirk all sloops and gunboats between Ostend and Bayonne. 2. Put an embargo upon, fit out, and charter all vessels destined to transport cavalry. 3. Charter and place an embargo upon the craft which Forfait and Andrdossy had catalogued as existing between Cherbourg and Antwerp. 4. Enjoin Equip and I. collect at the Batavian Republic to provide the vessels which Bona5. Commandeer the best corsairs of parte had asked for. less than 100 tons to be found between Bordeaux and Antwerp, and send them on to Havre or Dunkirk. If demands could not be met speedily, or if the navy these was not in a fit state, Bonaparte considered that the expedition had better be abandoned, but that appearances should be kept up, and the Rhine be made the objective as being near Hanover, which they should try to take from An expedition to threaten English trade in the Levant offered another alternative failing all King George III. ; make General suggested that France should with her neighbour across the Channel. peace these, the By after the end of March thirteen ships of the Brest being repaired, were ready for sea, a result fleet, not at propitious for the hoped-for completion of the thirtyThe Directory accordingly issued four by the 2Oth April. all a secret arrett dated March 3ist 1 x : European Magazine^ 1798, Foreign Intelligence, p. 278. NAPOLEON AND THE 92 " The Executive Directory, considering the accounts which have been laid before it by the Minister of Marine and the Colonies, during his late residence at Brest, and reflecting that the want of concert between the operations of the army and the fleet, intended to serve in the expedition against England, opposes obstacles to the necessary despatch, and may retard the success of it, issues the fol' lowing arreti : "Art General Buonaparte shall repair to Brest I. in the course of the present decade, 1 to take the " 2. command of the Army of England. He is invested with the control and all direction of the land and naval stores that are to be used in the expedition against England. " 3. The present arrttt shall not be printed. The Ministers of War and of the Marine are charged in their respective of departments with the execution it. "MERLIN, President. "LAGARDE, Secretary'' It is perfectly clear it that Bonaparte then realized would have been well for him had he realized it and in later power that the English navy was an impassable barrier between the two countries. He was also aware of the very considerable difference of opinion periods of his existing among the Directors as to the practicability of the plan of invasion then under consideration. The re- peated failure of previous efforts in the same direction certainly did not encourage too great a faith in the present expedition, nor did the unhealthy condition of the Funds favour the spending of " thirty million francs in ready money," asked for so peremptorily by Bonaparte. It is 1 The week of the Republican Calendar. INVASION OF ENGLAND no cause for 93 wonder that they hesitated between striking via the Channel, or effecting the same object via Egypt, with an ultimate prospect of attacking her in India, where they believed wealth was to be had " perfidious Albion " without running such obvious risks as the former plan Bonaparte's ardent temperament, tinged with the romance of the sunny South and intensified by the entailed. writings of Plutarch, lent itself readily to the glamour of the East. " Europe," he asserted, " is no field for glorious exploits no great empires or revolutions are to be found ; but in the East, where there are six hundred millions of men." His brother Lucien is authority for the statement that Napoleon once spoke of endeavouring to enter the British India. in order to take part in army " 1 If I ever choose that career," empire-making in he remarked, with that wonderful self-reliance which was evident even before he entered his teens, " I hope you will hear of me. In a few years I shall return a rich nabob, and bring fine dowries for our sisters." 2 How humble an ambition this the light of subsequent events Yet at the time his family considered it to be but the day-dream of a high-strung and imaginative youth. Had the suggestion seems in ! been acted upon, one wonders if the names of Wellington and Bonaparte would have both gone down to posterity as Helena Admiral Sir Pulteney Malcolm, then in command of the which included the island, had several conversations with the fallen Emperor, and asked him whether there was any truth in this statement. Napoleon replied that it was Paoli who had urged him to seek service in 1 At Cape St. station, the English army, his reason for not following the advice being, besides the obvious difficulties of language and religion (perhaps not so great a barrier), that he " thought the beginning of a revolution a fine time for an enterprising See A Diary of St. Helena: The Journal of Lady Malcolm, young man." p. 88. 2 Life of Napoleon Bonaparte, Vol. I, p. 123, by Professor W. M. Sloane. NAPOLEON AND THE 94 meritorious tagonists British generals instead of as lifelong an- ? Bonaparte soon flung himself into the scales for an Egyptian expedition, and after receiving the consent of the Directory, promptly but stealthily set about concealing the real object of his designs, continuing to sign himself " General-in-Chief of the Army in England," while pre- parations for the invasion were continued under General Hedouville. "The Directorate," says Barras, "believing that it should persist in its threatening attitude against England, decided that the fitting out of the expedition should be so hurried forward as to enable an army to land in that island in the following month of October." 1 A month before he set sail from Toulon Bonaparte outlined a plan which not only reveals his increasing aggressiveness and an astounding want of principle, but also his belief in the practicability of placing an army on English soil. "In our 1798, position," "we ought can do so. he says, writing on the I3th April, England with success, and we to fight Whether we have peace or war, we ought to spend forty or fifty millions in reorganizing our navy. Our land army be neither more nor less powerful consequence but, on the other hand, war England to make immense preparations which will force in will ; will ruin her finances, destroy her commercial spirit, and completely change the constitution and manners of her people. We ought to spend the whole summer Brest in fleet, in exercising our seamen finishing the vessels in getting in ready our the roadstead, and which are under construction at 1 Memoirs of Barras, Vol. Ill, p. 208. This expedition was undertaken, but the objective was altered to Ireland. See chap. iii. INVASION OF ENGLAND Rochefort, Lorient, and Brest. into the business, If we may hope 95 we put some energy to have, in September, thirty-five [ships-of-the-line] at Brest, including the four or five which can be built at Lorient and Rochefort. " Towards the end of this month we shall have in the various ports of the Channel nearly two hundred gunboats. These should be stationed at Cherbourg, Havre, Boulogne, Dunkirk, and Ostend, and should be utilized throughout the summer for training our soldiers. If we continue to grant to the Commission des Cotes de la Manche 300,000 francs every ten days, we can effect the construction of two hundred other boats, larger in size, and fit for the transport of horses. Thus we should have September four hundred gunboats at Boulogne and thirty-five ships of war at Brest. By that time the Dutch in should also have twelve ships of war in the Texel. In the Mediterranean we have ships of two kinds twelve ships : of French build which, between now and September, can be supplemented by two new ones, and nine of Venetian It would be possible, after the return of the construction. expedition which the Government is projecting in the Mediterranean, to send round the fourteen to Brest, and to retain in the Mediterranean only the nine Venetian ships we ; many " and October or November, men-of-war and nearly as thus, in the course of should have at Brest fifty frigates. would then be possible to transport to any desired spot in England 40,000 men, without even fighting a naval action if the enemy should be in stronger force It ; for while 40,000 gunboats and Dutch men would in as threaten to cross