ir ammunition, which is to be musquet cartridges. "Col. Tate is to have the command in chief of the the Admiral will give the necessary orders to the officer commanding the naval force, which will proceed up legion ; George's Channel, and the landing is to be effectuated, or near Cardigan Bay. " But should Col. Tate, on arriving opposite the mouth of the Severn, learn that the river is little or not at all St. if possible, in defended, and that the wind and tide allow him to sail up, he will endeavour to execute a coup de main on Bristol, INVASION OF ENGLAND 41 the second city in England for riches and comof Bristol is of the very last and importance, every possible effort should be made to which merce is ; the destruction accomplish it. "For this purpose, it will be proper to reconnoitre the mouth of the Severn, in the day time, and to sail up the Avon at night fall, within five miles of the town, where the landing should be made, on the right bank, in the greatest silence, and, the troops being supplied with combustible matter, Col. Tate is to advance rapidly in the dark, on that side of Bristol which may be to windward, and immediately to set fire to that quarter. prize be conducted with dexterity, it cannot If the enterfail to produce the total ruin of the town, the port, the docks, and the vessels, and to strike terror and amazement into the very heart of the capital of England. " This object being fulfilled, Col. Tate will immediately re-embark, cross the Severn, and land below Cardiff, which he will leave on his right, and proceed towards Chester and Liverpool, in the manner to be pointed out in these instructions. " During the passage, Col. Tate will take care that the troops observe the most exact discipline, and will recom- mend to the naval officers to carry a press of sail. "At the moment of the landing, each soldier is to be furnished with one hundred rounds of ammunition, provisions for four days, and a double ration of wine or brandy, to recruit them after the fatigues of the voyage. " Not a moment is to be lost in the debarkation, and the soldiers must carry their ammunition and provisions un^il they can secure bat horses; they are never to quit them, and are to take care to supply what may be expended on every possible occasion. For the first two days the legion is to keep in one body, observing not to suffer any to lag in the rear. " Col. Tate will feel the necessity of gaining a close and NAPOLEON AND THE 42 strong country with all possible speed, and before committing any act of hostility, he will take care to avoid the morasses, as well from regard to the health of the troops as to avoid being surrounded by the enemy, who would of course endeavour to profit of such a defect in his position. " The expedition under the command of Col. Tate has in view three principal objects the first is, if possible, to raise an insurrection in the country the second is to interrupt and embarrass the commerce of the enemy and : ; ; the third is and to prepare facilitate the way for a descent, by distracting the attention of the English government. " In all countries the poor are the class most prone to insurrection, and this disposition is to be forwarded by by inveighing against the distributing money and drink ; government as the cause of the public distress by recommending and facilitating a rising to plunder the public stores and magazines, and the property of the rich, whose ; the natural subject of envy to the poor. is, notwithstanding, to be observed, that however defective may be the morality of the English people, they affluence " is It have still in the a respect for the laws and their magistrates, even of insurrection it will be therefore advis- moment ; able to spare, as who may be much as possible, the property of those and even of the country should be laid on the peers, gentlemen impositions the men of rank and high fortune, the clergy, those who serve as officers, in the army, navy, and especially in the ; militia ; of in any civil function, all all such, the country seats, farms, woods, cattle, to be plundered by the and corn should be given up people ; different these predatory excursions should be made in and even distant quarters, by detachments of two or three hundred men each. " Extremities, such as these, rendered necessary by those of the Republic, and justified by the reflection that enemy has shewed the first example, will attract numbers of artizans and workmen, of vagabonds and our cruel INVASION OF ENGLAND 43 and even of malefactors but especial care must be taken not to incorporate them into the legion they are to be formed into new companies, commanded by French idlers ; ; and to the end that the natives may not be with the force employed, these companies are acquainted to be kept asunder, and in ignorance of the details as far as circumstances will permit it is principally by these officers, ; new formed companies that the insurrection is to be forwarded. " The commerce of interrupted and enemy in the country is to be down by breaking bridges, cutting of dykes, the causeways, ruining essentially necessary which is, at the same for the preservation of the time, army ; by plundering all convoys of subsistence, the public stages and waggons, and even private carriages the cutting off the supplies of provisions from the principal towns, burn; ing all vessels and boats in the rivers and canals, destroydocks and coal yards, rope fire to ing magazines, setting It is to be observed, walks, great manufactories, etc. etc. that these a of artizans will be means crowd likewise, by thrown out of employment, and of course ready to embark in any measure which holds out to them subsistence and plunder without labour or fatigue. "The of the expedition will likewise be forwarded materially by disarming the militia, by burning the arsenals in the seaports, by stopping the couriers of government, by seducing the enemy's troops to desert, and by the terror which the success of the legion and the progress of the insurrection will carry into the bosoms of the unwarlike citizens. The country most favourable for this system is that which is naturally strong, and in which there are forges and manufactures. " Subsistence is to be seized wherever it can be found success ; if any town or it is to be village refuse to supply it in the given up to immediate pillage. "In order moment, to spread the panic as generally as possible, NAPOLEON AND THE 44 the legion is to be divided into several columns, having settled a common rendezvous, where they are to assemble the inhabitants must be six, or eight days obliged to serve as guides, and any who refuse are to be punished on the spot the magistrates, or some of their families, are always to be employed in preference on this service, that they may not accuse or punish the every four, ; ; others. "All denunciations against those who join the legion are to be punished by death. Wherever the legion or any of its columns is posted, if the neighbouring parishes do not give instant notice of the approach of the enemy, whether by ringing of bells, or otherwise, they are to be given up to fire and sword. For the safety of the troops under his command, Colonel Tate will avoid, as much as possible, all engagements with regular forces, and will, instead thereof, attack detachments, beat up their quarters, He will encourage all deserters surprize their outposts, etc. and prisoners to enter into the new companies before mentioned should such prisoners refuse, he will shave their heads and eyebrows, and if they are again taken in arms they are to be shot. " Colonel Tate will not omit to observe, that there are in England numbers of French, who will be eager to join him, such as prisoners of war, soldiers and sailors, privates in the emigrant regiments, and a crowd of others, whom want and the desire of vengeance will draw to his standard he may admit such Frenchmen into the legion but he will observe to be on his guard that the newcomers ; ; may ; not raise cabals or factions ; especially if there should among them any nobles or priests, whose ambition is only to be exceeded by their cowardice should any such attempt be made, he will take care to punish it most be ; Should the militia or volunteers of any district severely. oppose the march of the legion, such district is to be severely punished, the militia or volunteers to be dis- INVASION OF ENGLAND armed, their arms to be distributed and all ammunition among 45 the insurgents, carefully preserved. " Finally, Colonel Tate will always remember to avail himself of the talents of the principal officers who surround him he will profit of all favourable circumstances ; to acquire for his party the force and confidence necessary to ensure success ; he will spare, and even sustain, the poor and the aged, the widow and the orphan, and will force the great, who are the cause of all our evils, to sustain the whole burden of the war. "(Signed) LE GEN. LB HOCHE." COPY OF THE INSTRUCTIONS TO COLONEL TATE, ON HIS MILITARY OPERATIONS AND MARCHES " It on the would be imprudent to remain any length of time coast, after having effectuated your landing you ; will doubtless see the necessity of penetrating into the country, and especially into the counties of Cheshire and Lancashire, not to speak of the opportunities which those counties afford you, by means of the mountains, to avoid the pursuit of the enemy, the field of your operations will be more extended with boldness and intelligence com: possess yourself of Chester or Liverpool, which you will ruin by burning the magazines, and filling up the ports, or at least you may cut off all bined, you may easily communication between those cities and the interior. There is another object which should likewise decide you to enter those counties, as you will be joined there by two other columns of French troops, to which you will unite that under your command, if the general commanding the expedition in chief shall desire it. " It is therefore of consequence that you direct your march, from the very moment of landing, upon the town of NAPOLEON AND THE 46 Chester, where you will pass the Dee, are to establish yourself. beyond which you " Your march should be rapid and bold you must not keep the main roads, but on the contrary proceed by bye ; paths and hollow ways, which are at a distance from the high road. Before you enter any village or town, you are to inform yourself whether there be any troops there, and what is their number whether there be a river, and if so, whether there be one or more bridges, whether it be enclosed with walls and barriers, etc., and you are to take your measures in consequence. " You should frequently change your guides, and in ; order to mislead the enemy as to your destination, you should not take a new one in presence of him whom you you should often make counter marches, and always mention to the guide you quit a road different from that which you mean to take, asking the way to the town or village on which you mean to turn your back, or at least whither you do not mean to go. "In order to spread the consternation and astonishment as wide as possible, after the destruction of Liverpool (for dismiss ; you must follow your blow, and seize or seaport on that coast, which you some small town upon this point is capital) will lay under contribution. You may be sure that im- the principal places will demand for their mediately protection troops from the government, which is in want of them, and will of course be obliged to separate those of all which it can dispose, by which means you will be able to destroy a great number, by beating in detail the detachments which may be sent against you. The mobiliary columns can alone be successfully opposed to you, but it will be easy for you to destroy their be weak, you will unite your forces and crush them if they be strong, by scattering yourselves, and committing hostilities in a hundred d