uccess of that measure, and the specie of Europe in the hands of a rapacious and unbridled nation, in possession also of every possible strength by land and sea, would leave no bounds to her ambition, which has always increased in proportion to her success. The subversion of every throne, and the annihilation of every Democpolitical, civil, and religious Constitution, would be the fatal result. Gentleman's racy would devour Europe, and terminate by devouring itself." projected descent The Continental Powers Magazine Vol. LXVIII, part > upon are actuated i, 1798 ; p. 418. NAPOLEON AND THE ;6 General Desaix, an officer a Bonaparte cherished of great talent, for warm regard, was whom placed in temporary command of the troops. Fifty-six thousand men were already massed on the western coasts of France, and to them was assigned the double role of menacing England and keeping order, but it was only with difficulty that they maintained peace in that part of the Republic, which was in a lawless and troubled condition. They were to be further strengthened by a portion of the Army of Italy which Bonaparte was authorized to send back to " form the nucleus of the armament which your name and your activity would render formidable to the France to English." On the I2th November he writes to the " Directory that he has given all the necessary orders for moving our columns to the ocean," and that he is sending Andreossy to Paris the following day for the " purpose of preparing artillery of the same calibre as the Citizen English field-pieces, so that, once in the country, be able to use their we may cannon-balls," an idea eminently worthy of the young captain of the artillery train at the As the total number of men supplied of Army Italy to that of England amounted to some thirty-six thousand only, exclusive of troops drafted siege of Toulon. by the from the Army of the Rhine under the dashing Augereau, the force at Bonaparte's disposal was none too strong if a serious effort was intended. Massena's division and several other regiments were to swell their ranks, but while on the march from Italy to the coasts they were suddenly diverted and sent to Switzerland, the independ- ence of which had been violated by the Directory. Bonaparte had already communicated to Talleyrand, Minister for Foreign Affairs, the policy which he the INVASION OF ENGLAND 77 thought France ought to follow in her attitude towards England. "Our Government," he writes, "must destroy the English Monarchy, or expect itself to be destroyed by The these intriguing and enterprising islanders. moment present Let us concentrate offers a capital opportunity. our efforts on the navy, and annihilate England. That 1 This is exactly what the done, Europe is at our feet." Conqueror of Italy did on his return to Paris, and for the all nonce the army was put in the background, and the navy clear that he was under became first favourite. It is no delusion as to the supreme difficulty of the task before He him. informed the Directory that " for an expedition I st, good naval officers ; against England we require commanded well a 2nd, 3rd, an intelligent great army, : ; and determined admiral thirty million adds " : refuse, francs I Although as far as 2 country." those of time think Truguet the best ; 4th, He discreetly ready money/' need repose, yet I shall not truly in possible, to sacrifice myself for my To these general principles, which were only common sense, he remained faithful when he elaborated his invasion. I later and more serious attempts at Although he endeavoured to resources in government were every direction in his hands, lack foster his mari- when the reins of of sea power was fall of the First indirectly the cause of the decline and Empire. Leaving Rastadt, where a congress had been opened for the purpose of concluding the details of a modus vivendi between France and the Empire and the ratification of 1 Bonaparte to Talleyrand, October I7th, 1797. 8 A Selection from and Dispatches of Hon. D. A. Bingham. the Letters Vol. I, p. 191, by Captain the the First Napoleon^ NAPOLEON AND THE 78 peace between France and Austria, Bonaparte travelled many leagues which separated him from Paris with the all fumed When the horses were changed he chafed and until the carriage was again careering over the speed. He rut-wrinkled ground designated by courtesy a road. arrived in the capital on the 5th December, 1797, after a tedious but triumphant journey. His welcome was stupendous, but at the time he paid scant attention to the acclamation of the multitude, and he distrusted the men in authority, who envied him his rapid rise to fame, and " to send a man to Italy to had actually gone so far as 1 keep an eye on Bonaparte." The stirring events of 1795, when he had poured grape-shot into the unruly rabble, had taught him that the mob is an uncertain quantity, applauding one day and denouncing the next. a student of human nature, and Always none too great a believer goodness, Bonaparte understood the canaille well enough to know that unless he continually dazzled them in its by brilliant exploits position, let he could never hope to maintain his alone put into operation the astound- present ing ideas which were germinating in his fertile brain. He had endeavoured to become one of the Directors without was against him, and he was dubbed but he knew that if triumph followed success, for his age " too ambitious triumph, and he " ; made himself indispensable to his adopted could prevent him from gaining the country, nothing the apt phraseology of Barras, To use he sought. power the President of the Directory, who, it must be admitted, was somewhat two-faced where the young General was " concerned, Bonaparte was in quest of an outlet for his ambition, and was going about seeking 1 Memoirs of Barras^ Vol. whom II, p. 513. he might INVASION OF ENGLAND devour." 1 Never in the history 79 of France had there been end was of the eighteenth century. A great mind-movement in process of development, but it was too complex, too so many diffuse, intellectual gladiators in the arena as at the to make influence felt as a concrete whole. its From the entangled threads of the Revolution was woven, not the sovereignty of the people, but the despotism of one man the very opposite effect the original cause was ; calculated to bring about. At the fete given in the magnificent palace of the Luxembourg on the formal presentation by Bonaparte to the Directory of the ratification of the treaty of peace by Emperor Francis II, Barras announced in pompous the phrases the task which the popular hero had been called " upon to undertake, declaring that Nature had exhausted her energies in the production of a Bonaparte." Turning in the direction of the sallow-faced young soldier, who, garbed simple costume of a civilian, contrasted oddly with the elaborately decorated officials about him, he cried in the : " Crown by a conquest which the Great outraged dignity. Go, and by the so illustrious a Nation owes to its life, punishment of the Cabinet of London strike terror into all who would miscalculate the powers of a free people. Let the conquerors of the Po, the Rhine, and the Tiber march under your banner. The ocean will be proud to bear you. It is a slave, still indignant, which blushes for its fetters. Hardly will the tricoloured standard wave on the blood-stained shores of the Thames ere an unanimous cry will bless your arrival, and that the hearts of generous nation will receive you as 1 2 Barras, Vol. Ill, p. its liberator." 2 205. "Napoleon's Memoirs," quoted in Thiers' Revolution (1881 edition), Vol. V, p. 217, note. History of the French NAPOLEON AND THE 8o Putting aside any ulterior object the Directory have contemplated England, the last may urging Bonaparte to set sail for sentence in this farrago of fulsome flatin tery exactly conveyed the opinion of Frenchmen at the time. They firmly believed that the General would be it only needed a spark to 1 At St. aflame with revolutionary principles. England Helena the Emperor stoutly maintained the same erro- received with open arms, that set Far from regarding Bonaparte as a neous impression. saviour and an envoy of Utopia, many of the country folk firmly believed that he ground the bones of his own maimed his groans of the dying in ; sheep's clothing. foster the dust beneath his chariot- soldiers in wheels, and found these beliefs; chief pleasure in listening to the in a word, that he was the devil The English it press did its best to represented him as a monster, an imbecile, a butcher, and a debauchee. It teemed with the most unsavoury libels about his person, his morals, and his methods. Stories about the " Corsican monster," especially those of an atrocious character, gained wide The whole country, individually and collectively, was led to believe that the idol of France was This phase of in very truth a fiend 2 in human shape. circulation. 1 London was infested at this time with emissaries engaged in feeling the how a foreign invasion with universal liberty as its watchwould be received. In a criminal trial arising out of these manoeuvres public pulse as to word Samuel Rogers, the banker named Stone, gave evidence. Dyce, pp. 146-51, 2 who had been approached by a person See Rogers's Table Talk, edited by Rev. A. poet, 2L\sopost, pp. 201, 202. Thackeray tells us in The Four Georges that when he was on his way to England to be educated the ship touched at St. Helena. Napoleon was " That's he," cried the dusky pointed out to him by his Indian servant. that's Bonaparte. He eats three sheep a day, and all the children worthy, he can lay hands on." ' ' INVASION OF ENGLAND 81 the subject will be further dealt with in the chapters devoted to the humour, poetry, pathos, and satire of the Great Terror. On the other hand, everything calculated to stir up hatred of John Bull in France was done. Talleyrand addressed a letter to all the diplomatic and consular agents them to foster this spirit of hatred and malevoYour first and leading object," he averred, " must be to show everywhere how little the English Cabinet is directing " lence. worthy of confidence. Exert all your endeavours, citizens, main object of your labours. You must doubtless meet with great difficulties, but you will know how to sur- in this mount them. Be not disheartened will the Army of England remove and smooth away the obstacles that oppose you." 1 The French public was told that a was number of huge rafts, each of Monge constructing which was to be 700 yards long, 350 yards wide, and eight gullible section of the stories high. A contemporary publication, entitled ReRadeaux pour une Descente^ by cherche sur L? Usage des M , Colonel in the Army of Conde", formerly member of the Royal Academy at Paris, deals fully with this chimerical means of transport, and gives elaborate statis- prove the absurdity of the plan, which was not, of course, ever seriously intended by those in authority. " One of them," says the writer, trees in length, 900 in breadth and eight in height, in all 216,000 trees; each a foot square, each containing sixty cubic feet, each foot weighing from fifty-two to fifty-five pounds, would make 3120 to 3300 feet, or three horse loads; and the whole would require 618,000 horses or 1 I. G Times, January 8th, 1798. NAPOLEON AND THE 82 108,000 carriages and as the forest to the sea. many them from carters to bring The weight of one raft would be 44,550 tons including the ramparts, the or and the masts citadel, machinery substituted for them, . . . . . total . men, horses, cannon, and ammunition, provisions, drawFour such rafts would carry 72,000 bridges, and boats. . men and 8000 . . horses." x French finances were now at a very low ebb, and two schemes, widely differing in detail, were put forward by Hundred for raising the necessary funds for the expedition. The first was introduced by Monnot, in the name of a committee, who proposed a the Co