he second oldest corps in the kingdom. In 1795 it consisted of four companies, with Thomas Knox, of Minwere Lodge, as Lieutenant-Colonel, 12 commissioned officers, 24 non-commissioned officers, 8 drummers, 4 There was a Newport as well as a Fishguard fifers, and 235 rank and file. On the night of February 22nd Colonel Knox first heard of the division. presence of the French ships at a ball given by Mrs. Harries, of Tregwynt. Fishguard, moreover, was defended by a fort to which "three invalid bombardiers had been sent down From in 1795 to instruct the volunteers in the exercise moment the Colonel became aware of what was happening he displayed a commendable amount of energy but the fort " did nothing more than fire one gun "in salute while Tate was flying the Union Jack, and the Colonel deemed it prudent that his fencibles should Lord Cawdor assumed the comretire in the direction of Haverfordwest. mand, with the approval of Lord Milford, and a good deal of ill-feeling ensued. Colonel Knox was accused of showing the white feather, and although Both he and his father, Mr. acquitted of all blame, was requested to resign. William Knox, strongly insisted on a further official inquiry. On the 23rd May he sent a challenge to Lord Cawdor, who had addressed him a somewhat acrimonious letter, and the latter agreed to meet him at noon on the following day upon the turnpike road, between Pembroke Ferry and the road that of the great guns." the ; ' ' INVASION OF ENGLAND 35 including a narrative by Mr. Williams, of Crachenllwyd, near St. David's, the farmer who sent his other tracts, servant to give the alarm. These were supplemented in 1842 by the printing by Mr. Joseph Polter, of Haverfordwest, of " An Authentic Account of the Invasion of the French Troops (under the command of General [sic] Tate) on Carrig Gwastad Point, near Fishguard, Wednesday, the 22nd day of February, 1797, and their Surrender to the Forces of His Britannic Majesty on Goodwick Sands, on Friday, the 24th of February likewise some occurrences connected therewith, never before published." The writer ; was H. L. ap Gwilym, and he appends to his statement an attestation of correctness by two eye-witnesses, both Fishguard Fencible men, Peter Davies and Owen Griffith. Most of these early publications are to be found in the Cardiff Free Library, where several interesting engravings of the landing of Tate and his motley following are preserved. There is one legend, however, connected with the Fishguard romance which has held its own for many years, and will probably continue to do so for all time, although it never even faintly alluded to in the first contemporary accounts. There is a charm about the story of Tate and is his army of "undesirable aliens" mistaking the red cloaks Welshwomen, old and young, who lined the Fish- of the guard the uniforms of advancing battalions of and that optical delusion very forcibly influencing hills, for soldiers, turns off to Williamston, with the ensued gentleman who accompanies me." What not revealed, but Mr. Knox, senior, bitterly laments the abandonment of certain libel actions which put an end to the opportunity "of a full display of Mr. Erskine's eloquence, in developing and exposing the malignity of the charge, and in vindicating my son's conduct while commanding the Fishguard Volunteers." is NAPOLEON AND THE 36 their disposition to surrender, even commends It itself to which is almost the practical and matter-of- mind of Captain Desbriere, who gives a fact on the subject, irresistible. which would lose much of its laconic note unconscious The last survivor of the alleged translation. of 1797 only died in 1891, six years before the centenary celebration, which revived for a moment the interest felt in Lord Cawdor's bloodless victory. Nelly 1 humour by Amazons Phillips was 103 at the time of her death, and ninety and odd years before she was driving cows from a field at Kilshawe when she espied the French frigates in the offing. must be confessed, however, that the romance of Fishguard rests upon very questionable grounds, and is It fiction by Mr. Edward Laws, a notable on the subject, who points out that the balladauthority writer of the period would assuredly have utilized so promising and picturesque a theme if the occurrence had regarded as any shadow of foundation Much found in in fact 2 information about the Fishguard incident will be Mr. Laws's Little England beyond Wales, a stan- dard history of one portion of Pembrokeshire,3 and part of it has been cleverly utilized in the introduction to an entertaining book published under the double title of The Fishguard Invasion by the French in /7p7 and The Fish- guard 1 "et Invasion, or Three Days As might be in /7p7. 4 "L'ouvrage cite" [The Fishguard Invasion, or Three Days in .d'autres auteurs anglais signalent aussi la 1797], curieuse version d'apres un rassemblement de femmes galloises venues pour assister au combat du traditionnel chale rouge, aurait, de loin, ete prises par Tate pour des troupes regulieres anglaises. De la part de ce filibustier et de ses laquelle et couvertes 2 bandits, tout est possible." 3 A Sons. See/0-tf, pp. 66-71. History of Little England beyond Wales. London George Bell and 4 London T. Fisher Unwin. 1892. 1888. : : INVASION OF ENGLAND 37 expected, this proves a great stumbling-block to Captain Desbriere, who has become acquainted with its contents through the good offices of M. Charles Legras, of the Journal des Debatsl The anonymous writer devotes thirtynine pages to a useful historical introduction, while the bulk of the volume is given up to the real or supposed diary of a Welsh divine, the name of whose benefice necessitates the use of nineteen letters in the spelling, who deals largely with the love affairs of two and Welsh maidens, Frances and Eleanor Martin, who ultimately bethe help of the Rev. Daniel Rowlands) Madame Lebrun and Madame Roux, by marrying two of come (mainly by the Tate jail-birds, whose escape, along with that of nearly five score of their fellow-prisoners, they very materially facilitate. With the thread of the fiction, or semi-fiction, is mixed up certain perfectly authentic documents, although no copy is given of the handbill said to have been placarded every town in the kingdom offering five hundred guineas apprehension of the two delinquents. in for the The story of the Fishguard episode can be best told by giving in order the various documents connected both with its inception and execution, the existence of one portion of which was unknown when the in 1892, and also in 1900, instalment of Captain Desbriere's book was published. In the introduction of The Fishguard Invasion^ or Three Days in 1797 copious quotations are first given in French, presumably from Emile de Bonnechose's life of Lazare Hoche, with the apparent object of throwing light on the line of reasoning which led "the able originator of the invasion to advocate 1 Projets et Tentatives de pp. 244-5. Dtbarquemcnt aux and lies justify methods Brittanniques t Vol. I, NAPOLEON AND THE 38 which comprised the burning of defenceless towns, the laying waste of crops, and the wholesale destruction of life at the Hoche hands of gens perdus, bandits credited Carnot 1 with the first et massacreurs" idea of organizing a chouannerie or system of guerilla warfare in England, for the purpose of giving the inhabitants freedom and in- ducing them to adopt a republican form of government. With this object in view, the invaders, recruited from the galleys and prisons, and promised booty, immunity from their enjoyment of their crimes, and a remission of all full " past sentences, were to proclaim themselves the avengers of liberty and enemies of tyrants." They were to swear destruction to the abodes of the wealthy, but protection to the cottage ; while, on the other hand, as they advanced they were to throw open the prisons and replenish their ranks by a fresh supply of indigenous malefactors. There was to be no quarter bridges should be broken down, roads destroyed, public conveyances pillaged, and naval stores burned as soon as captured. No plan was assuredly ever conceived more ; entirely calculated to defeat its own object. On the 2$th November, 1796, Directorate Hoche thus addresses the : " The American Colonel Tate in command of a thousand men should be landed on the coast of England somewhere in St. George's Channel. The men should have no other 1 Between 1793 and Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite (1753-1823). 1797 (when he was proscribed and fled to Germany) the "organizer of vic" tory was mainly responsible for the conduct of French military affairs, and was doubtless largely responsible for the successes which marked the early wars of the Republic. Proscribed by Louis XVIII after Waterloo, his genius he settled at Magdeburg, where he died. President of the French Republic. His grandson Sadi Carnot became INVASION OF ENGLAND 39 provisions than two hundred cartridges, and the two or three boats conveying them should then take up such a position in the Dublin roads as to be able to intercept vessel attempting to leave them." any Next day an order was given that the vessels required should be provided at Lorient. 1 On the nth December, 1796, Hoche again thus writes to the Directory from the frigate Fraternite " I 2 : have confided to a man of ability, an ex-soldier, the of the second legion of irregulars, which I have command raised as secretly as possible. It is composed of six hundred men from all the prisons in my district, and they are collected in two forts or islands to obviate the possiI associate with them six hundred bility of their escape. convicts from the picked galleys, still wearing their irons. are all well armed and dressed in their Quiberon They This has cost next to nothing, has which jackets. legion, on two frigates and a leaders. It must embark intrepid and land as near as corvette, possible to Bristol, upon which I am anxious to make a surprise attack, which will be the easier because it is unfortified, and the troops are stationed some distance from it. Castagnier, chef de will be in of the division^ charge expedition, and after the landing is effected I send him to cruise before Dublin, shall to effectually blockade those who, on our approach, wish to return to England. If the expedition succeeds I hope France the contributions I intend levying on and other commercial centres, by threatening Liverpool in case of them, refusal, with the same fate which will befall Bristol. It is certain that if Quantin had acted in the same way the Government would have wrung from our enemies the means of crushing them." to remit to 1 2 Desbriere, Vol. Desbriere, Vol. I, pp. 238-9. part Archives, A.F. III, 186 B. I, iv, p. 239. Preserved in the French National NAPOLEON AND THE 40 A month before Wolfe Tone had made the following note on the force described by Desbriere as "strange " "I have witnessed a review of the Black auxiliaries : Legion, about 1800 strong. These are the bandits destined England, and are unmitigated blackguards. They " Desbriere failed remind me of the Dublin green boys.' for ' apparently to find any trace amongst the French records of the instructions supposed to have been given by Hoche to Tate, and of which Mr. Edward Laws supplies a copy attested as having been the 4th May, ' "compared with the original on 1798, at the Secretary of State's Office, Whitehall." INSTRUCTIONS FOR COLONEL TATE " There will be placed under the command of Col. Tate, a body of troops, completely organized, to the number of one thousand and fifty, all resolute determined men, with whom he may undertake anything They are to be called La Seconde Legion des Francs.' : ' " The legion is completely armed ; he will be likewise furnished with fast-going vessels with which he is to proceed, before, with, or after the squadron ; the vessels will be victualled for the passage, but the legion will bring on shore nothing but the