 26th, j '97. Lord, In my last letter I informed your Grace that I had receiv'd an ace* from L d Cawdor, to whom I gave the " command surrender. of the troops, that the French were inclined to I have now the Pleasure of Informing your Grace that they have Capitulated, which, considering the very Inferior force that could be muster'd to send against them, I attribute to the very spirited answer his Lordship returned to the Proposals of Capitulation from the Commander of the French. His attention has been unremitI have seen ting and his exertions do him Infinite Credit. the Commander, who from the description given of him by the first Prisoners that were taken I had reason to believe him to have been Col. Wall, 1 whose Person I well know. There has been firing at sea heard this day, and I am in hopes Admiral Kingsmill, to whom I despatched a fast sailing lugger, may have met with the squadron that sail'd from hence on disembarking the troops. " I have the Honor " to be your Grace's most " Obedient and very Humble " Servant, etc. etc., " MILFORD." 1 Joseph Wall (1737-1802), Governor of Goree in 1782, where he caused Sergeant Benjamin Armstrong to be so severely flogged that he died from the effects of the injuries he received. From 1784 to 1797, when he returned to England, Wall wandered over the Continent under an assumed name. He was arrested in October, 1801, having offered to surrender ; was tried at the Old Bailey, convicted, and executed at Newgate on January 28th. The public feeling against him was so strong that the efforts of the Duke of Norfolk, his wife's relative, to save him proved fruitless. This fact throws light on the allusions to him in the letters of Lords Milford and Cawdor. INVASION OF ENGLAND 61 The state of public feeling in London hardly reflects that of Fishguard. News, even of an invasion, travelled slowly over the rut-riddled and almost impassable roads, but on the 25th February the Right Honourable W. Windham enters in his diary, " News of descent Wales," while on the 4th March he notes W. in 1 having gone "to examine prisoners from Wales, viz. Tate and Le Brun, alias Baron de Rochemure." There is much On the next day a M. de interest felt in Le Brun. Williamson seeks for Pitt's War Secretary more information about the " M. Rochemure (le Baron de) who has been in the Cadres, and was second in command of the Admiralty to the expedition to Wales." On that very date Lord Cawdor, Oxford Street, writes happened to the Home Lord Cawdor " My to the at his lodgings in an exhaustive report of Secretary " " now OXFORD Duke all that : ST., March $tk> '97. of Portland. Lord, "It being incumbent on me to explain to your the County of Pembroke, I shall recapitulate the outline of the late transaction, though not with sufficient Detail to do justice to the Grace the situation in which I left and general spirit, zeal, and loyalty of which burst forth and co-operated with every extraordinary individuals, expressed during the short period of my Command. a messenger from a private friend at Haverford on the 22nd of February at 1 1 at night with an West account of the enemy being off Fishguard. I was collecting the troops when it was confirmed by the circular letter wish I I received 1 The Diary of the Right Honourable W. W. Windham, 1784-1810, edited by Mrs. Henry Baring, London, 1866. NAPOLEON AND THE 62 from the Lord Lieutenant. As soon as the Troop of Pembroke Company, commanded by Capt. Ackland, had passed Pembroke Ferry, I proceeded to Haverford West and found it necessary after some conversation with Lord Milford to offer to Yeomanry, the Cardigan Militia and take the whole upon myself, if he engaged under his Hand not to interpose his authority. It was not a moment for compliments, and from the instant [he] transferred his authority, I peremptorily required every person to put himself under my Command. Lieut. Colby readily acquiesced, and during the whole time gave me his utmost assistance. Honb M I appointed Capt. Adams, Capt. Davis, the Edwards, John Philipps, and Owen Philipps, rs Esq my aides-de-camp they were selected for their activity and intelligence, and fully answered my sanguine r d I sent to expectations. Vaughan, the L Lieut, for Carmarthenshire, on whose co-operation I could le r , ; M depend, to order all the force of the County to support me. I appointed D r Francis Edwards, Mayor of H. West, to be commissary, and many gentlemen co-operated to avert confusion, and activity left no time for despondency. " All the Force of the lower District being collected I proceeded to reconnoitre as the enclosed return [shows] Enemy near Fishguard, and to animate the County. On my return to hasten the Troops I overtook Lieut. Col. Knox with his corps of Fishguard Volunteers re- the treating to H. West, and required him to put himself under my orders and to return towards the Enemy. I had found nothing to impede my making my own arrangements, and I derived very useful intelligence and inr formation from Nisbitt of Fishguard it was obvious M ; that the Fishguard Battery was as useless for land operation as it had been to impede the disembarkation. The position taken by the Enemy was upon the heights of 2 mls to the west of Fishguard. They Pencaern, about INVASION OF ENGLAND 63 their landing on the night of the 22nd and morning of the 23rd, immediately under Pencaern rocks on a spot so unfavourable for de-barkation that 50 men instructed and prepared to avail themselves of the natural advantages would have rendered a landing impracticable. It was not impossible to dislodge them from their Position, but it was easy to hem them in and cut off supply. It required every union of regular and irregular forces to oppose the desperate effort to be expected from an Enemy in such a position. I had full confidence in my friends and in the County People. "On the 24th the French laid down their arms on Goodick Sands, and were on their march at 4 p.m. o'clock for H. West. The distribution of Provisions as they filed off and every direction to expedite their March had been executed to my Wishes, yet it was I o'clock in the morning of the 25th before they had marched the 17 miles and it was 4 o'clock before they were secured in the Churches and Prisons, etc. etc., a service I was obliged personally to attend from the want of interpreters. I did not think it safe to resign my Command, so once more in the town with the Lord Lieutenant and I took on myself to direct effected the necessary measures. In the afternoon the officers were sent to Carmarthen under the escort of a Detachment of the Cavalry, and orders were issued to provide for the Prisoners afloat. of the sea officers The extra-ordinary efforts me on the and sea men enabled march 505 Prisoners from H. 20 minutes they were all on Board. On the 1st of March 200 more were embarked at the same place, and arrangements were taken for embarking the remainder together with 129 Prisoners from Pem27th in West the morning to to Milford, and in I deem necessary for the security of the that small number, owing to the insecurity of the County, men of the supplementary Militia to 60 Prison, requiring broke which guard them. NAPOLEON AND THE 64 " have expressed to Lord Spencer the obligation I Capt Longcroft, who put himself under my Command with officers and seamen who had marched to H. West with artillery and ammunition from Milford, Capt. Hopkins having left their revenue cutter under the charge of Capt. Shaw to act under the command of Capt. I have represented to his Longcroft. Royal Highness the Duke of York the merit of the officers on the half pay list I owe to who contributed to the service. approved the arrangements order the Persons in whom of occasional services, and upon your Grace my I I I Lieut. Gen Rook 1 having rl had made, I left under his had vested the responsibility judged late situation in the County, which left I shall I my until his Majesty's pleasure shall " " I await your Family in the Country be known. [desire] to explain to his Majesty. Grace's orders, and have duty to wait and to explain by your Grace my it to give full information have the honor to be Your Grace's Obedt. Humble Servant, " CAWDOR." Just a week later, and Lord Cawdor finds time to let his wife at Stackpole have the latest news from London in a letter now in the possession of " Mr. OXFORD " Laws ST., March " : Monday Morn, 13, 1797. I have at length the satisfaction of an hour's time free from interruption to give you a short account of our employment etc. since I quitted you, but shall reserve much of the detail for your amusement when we meet, a moment I ardently long for. Near Tavern Spite I met a messenger with the D. of Portland's despatches to me signifying the King's approbation of my conduct, which probably General Rooke has shown you, accompanied also 1 Rooke, vide post , p. 205. INVASION OF ENGLAND by a handsome and Duke. " private flattering letter 65 from the Carmarthen I immediately sent with messenger my letter, and finding the imof until the following night, horses procuring possibility was in expectation of getting a quiet night, having procured a bed at a private house but an alarm of fire in the town joined to confusion created by the report of a Upon my arrival at off the ; landing in great force in Glamorganshire, which I knew must have no foundation, prevented my obtaining sleep for one moment. Early in the morn we left Carmarthen, in the first, Joe Adams had charge of Tate and Captain Tyrell, the first alarmed and confused, I had Le Brun with me, as the second a stupid Paddy. as more a but intelligent and better manners dirty pig, in the last, Lord E. Somerset had the care of Captain Norris and Lieutenant St. Leger, both greatly frightened, they had but little conversation. The whole road we passed through great crowds of people at all the places were [sic] we changed horses, and thro' Wales tho' the indignation of the people was great, I found my influence would protect them without difficulty. The women were more clamorous than the men, making signs to cut their throats, and desiring I would not take the trouble of with three chaises ; ; them further. All the military assistance I could at as a guard for the night was a sergeant of Oxford get friend and landlord, and two recruits, but I had no your carrying apprehension of their escape as their remain [sic] with us was the only thing that assured their safety. At Uxbridge the rage of the mob was chiefly directed against Tate, who was supposed to be Wall, and he trembled almost to convulsions, by a little arrangement I contrived to bring them quiet through the parks, and lodged them in the Duke of Portland's before any crowd was assembled. My time since that moment has been taken up with attendance at the different offices, &c., and ministers are I. F NAPOLEON AND THE 66 so bewildered by the difficulties at the Bank, &c., that it more than usually difficult to get access to them for any time, but I have seen them all and stated to them plainly is and decidedly, the situation of Pembroke, &c., giving any in my power. The weather is extremely cold, the town I hear dull and unpleasant, everybody I have seen much interested about you. Mrs. Wodehouse and desires her love. Joe sends his respects." 1 testimony . The more minute . . days which immediately followed the invasion of Fishguard have now lost all interest, details of the but the recollection of the event kept green in itself has been Pembrokeshire by several ballads, of which the following (kindly furnished to the writers by Mr. Laws) are typical specimens : THE FRENCH INVASION [Ballad transcribed from the dictation of an old man who used to sing it, by the daughter of Mr. Olive, formerly of the Pear Tree Inn, Jeffreston, near Tenby, warded it to Mr. John Leach.] Ho, Britons, give attention I have to say, To what How Providence did favour us And mercy How we did display were saved From danger in : Pembrokeshire of t