uncil of Five loan of 80,000,000 livres (francs) by the issue of 80,000 shares of 1000 livres each. Twenty dividends were to be made, with an interest of twenty-five livres, payable every and one-tenth of the loan was to be repaid six months, " yearly by a lottery, the reimbursement of the capital of the loan, and the payment of the interest, to be further secured upon the produce of the Posts." The maritime prizes taken from England were to repay one-twentieth part of the sums advanced, and " the names of the lenders be honourably inscribed in the archives of the Legislative body." Lamarck's proposition was on a philanshall thropic as well as a patriotic basis, and was favourably received. country in names and Registers were opened which enthusiastic much more all over the citizens could inscribe their towards defraying the cost of the proposed expedition. The merchants of Paris and those who could afford to give did so generously, but the total amount received was insignificant, and recourse was had their contributions to plunder. 1 Berthier was sent to Rome to fill Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. LXVIII, parti, 1798, p. 315. the INVASION OF ENGLAND 83 Army of England, and after being appointed was named as Chief of the Staff, although he was not expected to fill this position until he had pacified 1 It is evident, therefore, that either the office was a Italy. coffers of the its treasurer purely nominal one, that the invasion was not to take place for some considerable time, or that Bonaparte had In any case, he did not show his hand until later, and turned his attention to the naval some other object in view. resources at his disposal, leaving Desaix to enjoy the sweets of power as ad interim head of the Army of England. At this juncture the Republic possessed fifty-seven all, thirty-four of which were at Brest, sail-of-the-line in two at Lorient, one at Rochefort, five at Toulon, six at To Corfu, and nine remnants of the Venetian navy. these must be added forty-six frigates and seventy-two smaller vessels many of them privateers. Unfortunately, not a single ship at Brest was armed, and ten were undergoing repairs; but fourteen sail-of-the-line, seventeen and three cutters were building in Channel and Atlantic ports. Seven frigates were on colonial service, and therefore could not be taken into account. As Brest frigates, was to be the head-quarters of the naval forces of the expedition, Bonaparte and the Minister of Marine put their heads together and drew up a plan for the concentration of the scattered units of the navy at that port. The six ships at Corfu, which were under Brueys, with the same number of frigates, were to take four months' and then set out for Brest, taking care to avoid rations 1 The cost of the Egyptian expedition was largely defrayed by plunder and forced contributions exacted from the Swiss. See Rose's Life of Napo- leon /, Vol. I, p. 1 80. NAPOLEON AND THE 84 Lord St. Vincent's squadron blockading Cadiz. The Venetian ships were to be equipped and then proceed Toulon to replace the vessels at that port, which, after being armed, were to unite with those at Brest. Spain and Holland were also called upon to furnish both ships to There was and troops. fleets, still a show of spirit in their they were undermanned, and there was a but lamentable dearth of stores. Truguet, formerly Minister of Marine, had been appointed ambassador at Madrid, and worked with commendable assiduity to bring about this international arrangement with the Spanish Court, The dogged blockade of Cadiz by the English was bitterly humiliating to a country which still retained a shred of respect for her which was inclined to be favourable. past glories and a ray of hope for the future, as the port in question held no less than twenty-two sail-of-the-line, and three or four smaller craft of repair under Admiral Mazaredo. six frigates, state the-line, one and seven frigate, and Two a fair sail-of- were at Ferrol, Carthagena completed the available frigates at Spanish naval five brigantines all in forces. 1 The Dutch General Daendels, whose invasion plans 2 was still undaunted and sought to revive his pet idea, and proposed that his squadron should make for the Forth and from thence threaten the English while the French were either 3 Wolfe Tone invading Ireland or the south of England. was sent by Daendels to Desaix to arouse his practical have been noticed sympathy in in the first chapter, the project, promising thirteen ships for 2 See ante, p. 21. suitable places for landing will be found on the east or southDumouriez MS., p. 7. east of England on the sandy or shingly beaches. 1 Desbriere, Vol. I, pp. 286-8. 3 The most INVASION OF ENGLAND 85 the expedition, on board of which he hoped to embark 25,000 men for Scotland. Tone, with an axe to grind on behalf of the United Irishmen, who were still bent on the emancipation of Ireland and were prepared to accept the assistance of the Great Nation, provided she came as an ally only, received a favourable reception. It is apparent from his diary that he was more interested in the French diversion outlined by Daendels than in the to programme be carried out in Scotland, for he apfor an appointment in the Armfe Desaix proached (?A ngleterre. On receiving an assurance that he should not be overlooked, Tone went skilfully to work to secure an interview with Bonaparte. He accomplished his pur- pose in the middle of December, 1797, and in company with his colleague, Lewens, the unofficial "ambassador" from Ireland, discussed the situation with the Commanderin-Chief. Although they had three interviews with him, Bonaparte does not appear to have shown particular interest in the cause, and, according to lamentable ignorance in Irish affairs. Tone, betrayed Eventually Tone received his commission as Adjutant-General in the Army of England a position which he had also held in Hoche's ill-fated At expedition. first Bonaparte seems to have been taken with Daendels's idea of striking a blow at two vulnerable points of the enemy's territory. Orders were issued for the construction of 170 flat-bottomed boats in the ports of the Batavian Republic, to be ready by March 22nd, 1798, a month than the date given for the completion of the Brest programme. Additional boats were put on the stocks earlier French ports on the Channel and means of transport were further in various the Atlantic, and the NAPOLEON AND THE 86 augmented by the addition of many small trading either hired, purchased, or "bespoken." vessels, Great activity was apparent at Brest. Sane, Ordnance Commissary, and Vice- Admiral Lelarge, who were in charge of the arrangements, exerted themselves to the utmost, although the lamentable dearth of men and money retarded their On Desaix paying a personal visit to Brest to matters were progressing, he found things not at to his liking. On the 23rd February, 1798, only ten ships efforts. see all how properly equipped, and all these lacked crews. Bonaparte also sent Forfait, then a rising Government engineer and later one of the most eminent naval con- were structors of France, to Havre invested with considerable There Forfait found nine large gunboats, authority. with the disarmed flotilla of Muskeyn, and antogether nounced that he would shortly have sufficient vessels for the transport of 25,800 men. Not content with this vague promise, the Commander-in-Chief sent a peremptory letter was to be in readiness Cherbourg, Granville, and St. Malo to the effect that the whole force by February 28th. were all called into requisition, over sixty gunboats being in the various yards, overhauled and and at St. Malo ten old ones were were enjoined to visit Boulogne and Dunkirk to report on the condition of the boats relics of former invasion experiments which still lay idle and Officers refitted. unarmed those places. Corsairs, with engineers on board, were ordered to reconnoitre the English coast from Folkestone to Rye, and to find out what batteries at would have to be taken or silenced by a landing expedition. Notwithstanding these preparations, we find Bonaparte writing to Berthier in the early days of the new year INVASION OF ENGLAND 87 (1798) thanking him for sending him observations on French naval establishments in the Ionian Sea. Bona" have you with me in but the previous reference shows which way England the wind of ambition was blowing, and that he only parte says should I : " much like to l ; opportunity to suggest the idea of an eastern and not a western expedition. He was awaited a favourable now apparently more inclined to follow in the footsteps of and told Talleyrand that the proper way to attack England was by seizing Malta, occupying Egypt, and afterwards invading India. Alexander than in those of Julius Caesar, " he said in a change the face of the world This burst of enthusiasm over so dazzling a prospect. did not, however, prevent Bonaparte from setting out on " We may February ! 8th, 1798, to explore the coast, ostensibly to select the best points for embarking a force should the Directory turn a deaf ear to his plans for Oriental con- He was accompanied by Lannes, Sulkowsky, and Bourrienne, the latter having known Bonaparte since he was nine years of age, and eventually becoming one of his secretaries. It is significant that no sooner had the quest. Commander-in-Chief left Paris than Talleyrand broached the question of an expedition to Egypt to the Directory, laying before them Bonaparte's own plans for such a However, the General gave his entire attention to design. the work on hand. Forfait and Androssy were examined and cross-examined. Holland was told to supply twenty or thirty gunboats and from two hundred to two hundred and fifty fishing-smacks. Bonaparte sought information from 1 To all and sundry, and would discuss matters with General Bingham, Vol. Berthier, I, p. 198. at Milan. Dated Paris, 6th January, 1798. NAPOLEON AND THE 88 smugglers and other seafaring men long after his subHe was in search of inforordinates had retired to rest. mation, and neglected no possible source of obtaining it. It was ever his policy to enter into minute details, and it mattered little him to to what class a man belonged so long as he could be utilized for this purpose. Plebeian and men of every degree bent, often unwittingly, to his irresistible and imperious will. The stirring up of dormant ambition in and aristocrat alike became his tools, was also a characteristic trait in Napoleon's scheme of leadership. He fostered their energy instead of curbing it, but he trained the tender plant in the direction it others should grow, namely, around himself and his interests. An aristocracy of brains was Bonaparte's ideal, and the Man of Destiny acted up to him to do so. men who were it so far as circumstances allowed Even now he was gathering about him the to be his marshals and the future pillars of his throne. His restless activity in urging forward the necessary preparations for the contemplated invasion of England was apparent in all directions, and astonished everybody whom he came in contact. Forfait remarked on it numerous reports. "General Bonaparte," he says, "reached Dunkirk on February nth. He spent the 1 2th there, and on the 13th left for Belgium. During his short stay he investigated all our preparations and with in one of his works, and drew up a plan of armaments to be executed by March 2ist. He ordered the construction of fifty large pinnaces, and I was enjoined to earth to get shipping accommodation thousand horses, fifty necessary supplies ; thousand move heaven and for men and to provide large four to guns, and five all and small gunboats INVASION OF ENGLAND 89 and so direct these the greatest possible number operations that in fifteen to twenty days everything should be ready to move off." 1 Contracts for the building to ; by the Commission The names of men who after- of these vessels were entered des Cotes de La Manche. into wards distin