rly, and sober as might be expected at a morning parade of an old regiment. The greatest exertions were made by all descriptions of people to assist, any service in their power. As I was preto march, I received an account from Ilfracombe paring that the French ships were gone from the coast, and that and to render How far the to the town. cannot possibly say; but, as this affair may be misrepresented and exaggerated, I trust your Grace will excuse my troubling you with this letter and I flatter myself it must give you pleasure to hear of the loyalty of this neighbourhood, and that the behaviour tranquillity was again restored report was well founded I ; of the volunteers and inhabitants will meet the approbation of his Majesty." 1 On same day (Thursday, February 23rd) the borough of Tenby show that " the modest sum of a shilling was paid to John Upcoat for going out to the Road for a skiff to go over to the English side [i.e. from the south coast of Wales to the the very overseer's accounts for the north coast of Somersetshire], to give information concerning the landing of about 1400 French troops at Fishguard, who on the next day surrendered themselves up to the Welsh who went to oppose them as prisoners of war [stc]" * From Somersetshire the news was transmitted to London, and the messenger probably came to Tenby from Stackpole, where Lord Cawdor was aroused in the middle of the night to hear the startling intelligence from Fishguard. Colonel Knox, called away from the festivities at Tregwynt by an urgent message from his subordinate, Ensign D. Bowen, gave the alarm in two letters to Major Bowen, commanding the Newport Division of Volunteers, late on 1 Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. 2 The Fishguard Invasion, LXVI pp. 12 (1797), part and 13. i, p. 243. NAPOLEON AND THE 54 the 22nd, and on the following day Lord Milford, the Lord Lieutenant of the County, wrote as follows : " Dear Sir, " I had ordered the Cardiganshire Militia, Capt. Ackland's corps, and Lord Cawdor's troop 1 to repair to Fishguard as soon as possible previous to the receipt of y urletten "I am, dear sir, " Yours, "2 etc., " " HAVERFORD WEST, MlLFORD. Thursday morning" o'clock On the same day, probably late in the evening, Colonel Knox wrote the following letter, evidently to the Duke of Portland : " "My " FISHGUARD, ^th February Lord, , have the honor to inform you, that I received on the afternoon of the 22nd instant, of two frigates, a sloop, and a cutter having made their appearance off this coast. Upon going to view them, I was further told they were French, and were landing troops I therefore hastened to this place, and was fortunate enough to meet a detachment of about seventy of the I intelligence ; corps of Fishguard Volunteers, commanded by Ensign D. Bowen, marching to attack the enemy. I thought it advisable to immediately order them to retire into the fort (where Gov. Vaughan soon joined us), until the whole of the corps could be collected and information gained of the number of the French. 1 The whole consisted of Cardiganshire Lord Cawdor's disposal amounted to 750 men. It belonging to the Castle Martin Yeomanry Cavalry, the force at men Militia, the Cardiff Militia, some fencible infantry (the Fishguard Volunteers), and a few sailors under Lieutenants Mears and Perkins. INVASION OF ENGLAND 55 " In the course of that night I was joined by many of the corps, who had come in upon the alarm, and by part of the Newport division under the command of Major Bowen. I learnt early in the morning the force of the necessary for me I accordingly evacuated the to retreat without delay. the fort, and bringing off the ammunition of the corps, took enemy was so considerable as to make it road to Haverfordwest, in order to fall in with the reinforcements which were on their march, having written to the Lord Lieutenant to inform him of our situation. We had retreated about nine miles, when we were joined by Lord 1 Cawdor, to whom Lord Milford had given the command. The success therefore put myself under his orders. which has attended his gallant exertions is not for me to I be permitted to express the gratitude this part of the county must feel with myself, in the zeal and alacrity with which the different corps and many gentlemen of the county came forward to our I received much assistance from Mr. Nisbitt, succour. residing in Fishguard, late an ensign in the army; and I have the pleasure to say the corps under my command conducted themselves in a manner which, I trust, has done them credit. I shall to-morrow detach parties in pursuit of any strangers which may not yet be come in there describe, but I hope I may ; John Campbell of Castle Martin, Pembrokeshire, born about 1753, was a descendant of John Campbell, younger son of Archibald, second Duke of Argyll, who had married, about 1510, Muriel, daughter and heiress of John Calder of Calder, or Cawdor, Nairn, representative of the old Thanes of Cawdor. Having represented Cardigan in Parliament, he was raised to the 1 He married in peerage of Great Britain as Baron Cawdor on June 2ist, 1796. 1789 the eldest daughter of the fifth Earl of Carlisle, and both his sons were born before the Fishguard invasion. His elder son and successor was granted an earldom. The present Earl Cawdor, for many years chairman of the Great Western Railway, is the great-grandson of the Commander of the He held cabinet rank as First Lord English forces in February, 1797. of the Admiralty for a brief period before the dissolution of Parliament in 1906. His son, Lord Emlyn, Thomas Hardy, is married to a great-granddaughter of Sir Nelson's captain at Trafalgar. NAPOLEON AND THE 56 are twenty-five sick near the place where the enemy I landed, whom Lord Cawdor has left in my charge. have the honour to be, with the greatest respect, " " "Lieut.-Col., By etc. etc. etc., Yours, THOMAS KNOX, Fishguard Volunteers" same post the Home Secretary must have Lord Cawdor's account of the events quorum pars the received magnafuit: "My " FISHGUARD, "February Lord, . ^h^^j. "In consequence of having received information on Wednesday night, at eleven o'clock, that three large ships of war and a lugger had anchored in a small roadstead upon the coast, in the neighbourhood of this town, I proceeded immediately with a detachment of the Cardiganshire Militia and all the provincial force I could collect soon gained positive intelligence they had disembarked about 1200 men, but no cannon. Upon night setting in, a French officer, whom I found to be second in command, came in with a letter (a copy of which I sent your Grace, together with my answer), in consequence of which they determined to surrender themto the place. I selves prisoners of war, and, accordingly, laid down their arms this day at two o'clock. I cannot, at this moment, inform your Grace the exact number of prisoners, but I believe it to be their whole force. It is my intention to march them make this night to Haverfordwest, where I shall the best distribution in my power. The frigates, and lugger got under weigh yesterday evening, this morning entirely out of sight. The fatigue we experienced will, I trust, excuse me to your Grace for not giving a more particular detail but my anxiety to do corvette, and were ; INVASION OF ENGLAND 57 justice to the officers and men I had the honour to command, will induce me to attend your Grace with as little delay as possible, to state their merits and, at the same time, to give you every information in power on this my The and loyalty which has pervaded all ranks throughout the country is infinitely beyond what I subject. spirit can express. " I am, etc., " CAWDOR." The correspondence enclosed by Lord Cawdor speaks for itself. Colonel Tate to Lord Cawdor. "CARDIGAN BAY, "5*>fc " $th c lV Oil, " Ventose, Year of the Republic {February 2$rd, 1797]. The circumstances under which the body of troops under my command were landed at this place render it unnecessary to attempt any military operations, would tend only to bloodshed and pillage. The of the whole corps have, therefore, intimated their desire of entering into a negotiation, upon principles of as they officers humanity, for a surrender. If you are influenced by you may signify the same to the the meantime hostilities shall cease, similar considerations, bearer, and in " Health and respect, "TATE, Chefde Brigade? Lord Cawdor " Q . oir, " which is The to Colonel Tate. FlSHGUARD, February 2$rd. superiority of the force under my command, hourly increasing, must prevent my treating upon NAPOLEON AND THE 58 any other terms short of your surrendering your whole I enter fully into your wish of an preventing unnecessary effusion of blood, which your speedy surrender can alone prevent, and which will entitle you to that consideration it is ever the wish of British troops to show an enemy whose numbers are inferior. My major will deliver you this letter, and I shall expect force prisoners of war. your determination by 10 o'clock, by your officer, whom I have furnished with an escort who will conduct him to me without molestation. " I am, etc., " CAWDOR." These dry as dust official letters give little idea of the consummate skill with which Lord Cawdor played his and the weird picturesqueness of the hastily council of war at the "Royal Oak," the readimprovised game of bluff, ing of the English ultimatum to the discomfited Frenchmen, the carrying of the flag of truce by M. Millingchamp, and the return of the hoodwinked emissaries. Lord Cawdor's victory was complete, and Lord Milford l writes with pardonable inexactness to the Duke of Portland from Haverfordwest, where he has been anxiously awaiting tidings from the front : From Lord Milford. " HAVERFORDWEST, "February 24^, 1797, Six o'clock A.M. "Since I had the honour of writing last to your Grace by express I received information of the French ships having sailed and left 300 men behind, who have surrendered themselves prisoners. The great spirit and 1 Sir Michael Phillips, Bart., of Picton Castle, Cambridgeshire, was created Baron Milford in 1776; appointed Lord Lieutenant of Pembrokeshire in 1 780, and held the post till his death at the age of eighty-five. INVASION OF ENGLAND 59 and peasantry has shown on exceeds occasion Many thousands of description. the latter assembled, armed with pikes and scythes, and attacked the enemy previous to the arrival of troops that were sent against them." loyalty that the gentlemen this " " HAVERFORDWEST, February 24th, Nine o'clock P.M. " I have the honour and pleasure to inform your Grace that the whole of the French troops, amounting to near fourteen hundred men, have surrendered, and are now on their " I march to Haverfordwest. have taken first news to your Grace, again to your Grace On opportunity of announcing the good and shall have the honour of writing to-morrow's by post." the following day (Saturday, February 25th) the to reassure the Lord Mayor Duke of Portland is able of London by the following " My " official communication : Lord, have the honour to acquaint your Lordship that intelligence has been received that two French frigates, a lugger, and a corvette appeared off the East of Pembrokeshire on the 22nd instant, and on the evening of that day disembarked some troops (reported by deserters to be about 1 200 men, but without field pieces). Every exertion had been made by the Lord Lieutenant and gentlemen of that county and its neighbourhood, for taking the proper steps on this occasion and the greatest zeal and Immeloyalty has been shown by all ranks of people. on account been received at diately Plymouth of having I ; this force having appeared in the Bristol Channel, frigates were despatched from Plymouth in quest of them. " I have the honor to be, etc., " PORTLAND." NAPOLEON AND THE 60 The next letter from Lord Milford to the Duke of Portland has only lately been discovered, and for reasons is exceedingly interesting " lt " n/r My T many : HAVERFORDWEST, "February