 in the 400 many Boulogne fishing-boats, the 10,000 men on board, would Squadron, with NAPOLEON AND THE 96 An threaten to land in Scotland. invasion of England, carried out in that way, and in the month of November or December, would be almost certainly successful. England would exhaust herself by an effort which, though immense, would not protect her against an invasion. The truth is that the expedition to the East will oblige the to send six additional ships of twice as many She would be five ships war to frigates to the mouth of the Red ; Sea. forced to have from twenty-two to twenty- at the entrance to the before Brest enemy India, and perhaps and twelve off the Mediterranean Texel ; ; sixty and these would make a total of a hundred and three ships of war, besides those already in America and India, and besides the ten or twelve 5O-gun ships and the score of frigates which she would have to keep ready to oppose the invasion from Boulogne. In the meantime we should always be masters of the Mediterranean, seeing that nine ships of Venetian build. " we should have there There would be yet another way of augmenting our that is, by making Spain cede three war and three frigates to the Ligurian Republic. That Republic can no longer be anything more than a French department; it possesses more than twenty forces in that sea ; vessels of It is excellent policy on the favour of to the France Ligurian Republic, and even part to see to it that she shall possess a few ships of war. Should difficulties be foreseen in inducing Spain to hand thousand excellent seamen. over to us or to the Ligurian Republic three vessels of war, I think that we ourselves might usefully sell to the Ligurian Republic the nine ships which we have taken from the Venetians, insisting that the Republic shall construct three more for itself. We should find that we had INVASION OF ENGLAND 97 thus gained a good squadron manned by good seamen. With money which we should have from the Ligurians we might cause three good vessels of our own construction to be built at Toulon for the ships of Venetian build as as sailors a fine 74 and sailors are our require many ; ; weak In future events which point. much may occur, it will be to our advantage that the three Italian Republics, which should balance the forces of the King of Naples and the Grand Duke of Tuscany, shall have a stronger l navy than that of the King of Naples." By the Qth May, 1798, the Army of England totalled 56,424 men, but it had lost its chief, and also its raison detre, and detachments were sent back to the Army of the Rhine at Mayence, whence they had partly come others ; Namur, Liege, and Belgium generally; and a further large contingent to the Upper Rhine and across it into Switzerland. The whole affair was carried out very quietly, so as not to attract undue attention. Thus Bonaparte's first Army of England was gradually disbanded. Massena's to which had been sent to Switzerland, and conwas now at Toulon, and a of the ill-fated General part Joubert's division joined them. At the end of the same month the muster roll of the division, sisted of the veterans of Italy, Armte cFAngleterre had sunk to 47,330 men, dispersed along an immense stretch of Channel seaboard, and the was invasion indefinitely "postponed." The ships in the various ports were held ready in case of emergencies, but armaments were not proceeded reduced all round. Many and expenses were and crews were taken with, vessels out of commission, and orders countermanded. 2 1 Victoires et Conq^tes, Vol. return from 2 X, p. 375. It is significant that on Bonaparte's Egypt he began the reorganizing of the navy. Desbriere, Vol. I. H I, p. 334. NAPOLEON AND THE 98 Early in 1798 Bonaparte had turned his attention to the two small islands of St. Marcouf, in the Channel, 1 whose possession by the English was a constant source of irritation to France. Andreossy was commissioned to make full inquiries as to the possibility of recapture, and At outlined three plans for that purpose. the moment nothing was done, although General Kleber was entrusted with the project, which he did not think would be successAfter-events proved the truth of his adverse report. ful. On the night of May 7th, Captain Muskeyn, having under him a number of gunboats and smaller vessels, mostly manned by deficient crews, He met set out on this hazardous with defeat, for the English offered undertaking. a stubborn resistance, and the French were obliged to retreat under a hail of fire, with five men killed and fourteen wounded. The " ubiquitous Wolfe Tone is constrained to 'What!' may the English well say, 'you note in his diary are going to conquer England, and you cannot conquer the Isles Marcouf! It is a bad business, take it any way. : ' I wonder will the Directory examine into it? If they do not seriously establish a rigid responsibility in the Marine, There it is in vain to think of opposing England by sea. is a bad spirit existing in that corps, and I neither see nor hear of any means taken to correct it." 2 and the English Cabinet knew of the hasty preparations now being made at Toulon, no definite information as to the ultimate destination of the French Although fleet Pitt could be obtained. his colleagues One day the Prime Minister and were informed that the troops now assem- 1 These islands are off the north coast of France, Manche, some six miles east of the coast of Cotentin. 2 Autobiography of Theobald Wolfe Tone, Vol. in the II, p. 314. department of INVASION OF ENGLAND 99 bling at that port, as well as at Genoa, Ajaccio, and Civita Vecchia, were to be landed on the south coast of England ; twenty-four hours later rumour whispered that ships and men were bound for Ireland, or to cut a canal through the Isthmus of Suez, which indeed was more than half a truth, and was one of three secret articles included in Bonaparte's instructions. armament which, from a mere numerical point of view, was more than sufficient to cope with France and her allies. The sea must ever be England had a floating the life-blood which nourishes the British Empire, and the moral force which recent successes had given to her was an added fighting weight tremendous struggle for supremacy which, begun in a half-hearted way, was to be carried on in real earnest under Bonaparte as First Consul in the and Emperor. Watching the ports of France in which there was any semblance of a fleet, as well as guarding the seas which beat against the white cliffs of the Motherland, were men of whom England had every right to be 1 Admiral Lord Bridport commanded a squadron proud. in the Channel 2 and often appeared off Brest ; in the North Sea was Admiral Lord Duncan Plymouth, the Downs, and the and Portsmouth, Nore were all strongly ; guarded. Vice-Admiral Robert Kingsmill commanded at Cork, while divisions cruised in the Bay of Biscay, off the Irish coast, and elsewhere. Lord 1 line, St. As we have already noted, Vincent was blockading Cadiz with the only In the year under review the British navy consisted of 120 sail-of-theand over 500 smaller vessels, requiring the services of 120,000 seamen and marines. Supplies amounting to ^13,449,388 were granted. 2 " The Channel is the key of the position, the vital spot to secure against surprise, and it must ever be the base of our naval operations throughout the world." Colomb's Essays on Naval Defence , p. 7. NAPOLEON AND THE ioo squadron we had Mediterranean at the time, and on in the hearing that preparations were going on at Toulon, he immediately detached Nelson to find out the true condition of things at that port. the 2ist April, 1798, of the new French 74-gun ship Hercule by the Mars (74-guns), under Captain Alexander Hood, who lost his life, and the abortive The capture on on the part of Captain Home Riggs Popham to blow up the lock-gates and sluices of the canal at Ostend which, although partially successful, attempt made did little in May to prevent the small craft from from Holland to France and lost the British 163 prisoners for the men making their way purpose of concentration, in addition to noo taken were the only naval measures of importance the early months of this eventful year. " Time is everything " was a precept Napoleon throughout followed in by meteoric career, and on the his I9th May, 1798, his fleet weighed anchor. Brueys was naval command, with Ganteaume, Villeneuve, and in Decres as his subordinates, while Kleber, Desaix, Mar- mont, Dumas, Leclerc, Murat, Davoust, and Lannes military men who had already distinguished themselves or were soon to write their names in the held responsible positions in the to use Bonaparte's of the Army St. Army own words, was of England." Rear -Admiral annals of France also of the East, which, " one of the wings 1 Nelson had been detached by Lord Vincent to reconnoitre at Toulon, as noted above, but a gale seriously disabled the Vanguard^ his flagship, and to a great extent dispersed his fleet, reducing him to "such distress that the meanest frigate out of France 1 Thiers' French Revolution^ Vol. V, p. 265. INVASION OF ENGLAND would have been an unwelcome guest." 101 The severe weather served Bonaparte in good stead, for he and his host were now on their way to the land of the Pharaohs. Thus began the long series of games of hide-and-seek which the fleets of the two nations were to play for some The island of Malta, which had been for centuries years. in the possession of the Knights of St. John, and was to play so prominent a part in the diplomatic history of 1803, " was " during Bonaparte's outward voyage, and found its ^200,000 way into the French coffers, every coin of which was sorely needed. The knights were expelled, reduced with the exception of fourteen who had either furnished Bonaparte with information or offered subscriptions for the invasion of England. 1 It is not within the province of this work to enter into particulars of the Egyptian expedition, but had not Nelson succeeded in destroying the greater part of the French fleet in Aboukir Bay, 2 Bonaparte might possibly have founded the great Eastern empire which so much appealed to him. In his own words, " If it had not been for you English, I should have been Emperor of the East but wherever there is water to float a ship, we are ; our way." we have examined, there can be doubt that Bonaparte believed the invasion of sure to find From little you in the evidence England to be perfectly feasible, but not with the slender means then at his command in other words, the psychological moment had not yet arrived. The army assigned to purpose was a mere handful of men compared with the vast force he congregated with a similar object in him for the 1803-5. The navy was 1 2 in a pitiable condition Bingham, Vol. I, p. 210. Battle of the Nile, ist August, 1798. ; the ships NAPOLEON AND THE 102 undermanned, and what crews there were at the lowest ebb of efficiency. As he told Lewens, England "was a Power of the first rank, and the Republic must never Money was threaten in vain." only supported him ambitious a man in a scarce, and the Directory That so way. half-hearted as Bonaparte should hesitate to place himself at the head of an expedition having but a slight chance of success and practically no opportunities for Miot de self-aggrandizement calls for little comment. Melito tells us that during a conversation with the young General at the close of 1797, the latter said " They were in a great hurry to make me General of the Army of : England so that they might get me out of Italy, where I am the master, and am more of a sovereign than commander of an army. They will see how things go on when I am not there. for the chief blunders. you, I As I am leaving Berthier, but he command, I and, my for myself, can no longer obey ; I predict, will dear Miot, I is not fit only make may inform have tasted command, and cannot give it up. I have made up my mind, if I cannot be master I shall leave France I do not 