assages should be made from house to house on the roofs. A " bell in the centre of each street, to 4th. the inhabitants to their posts. summon " Corner houses and barricadoes to be the general 5th. rendezvous in case of an alarm. " 6th. Artillery parks to be in the squares, and as many artillery as possible to be placed at the barricadoes of the main streets. " Night cellars in the city and St. Giles's, etc., to be examined, and every precaution to be taken, that they should not harbour improper persons. " 8th. All communications to be cut off from house to house underground. All obnoxious foreigners to be sent out of the "9th. 7th. country. " roth. No foreign servants, male or female, to be allowed. "nth. Prisoners to be put into prison ships, in the so that they may be destroyed instantly, in cases necessary for the defence of the country. most secure situations ; INVASION OF ENGLAND " 123 No quarter to be given the enemy when found attempt of invading the country, whether in transports, gun-boats, or otherwise. " 1 No Dutch boats to be allowed to supply the 3th. 1 2th. in the actual country with fish, as they carry back much useful informa- tion to the " I4th. lighters, enemy. Every company of watermen, lightermen, lampcoalheavers, hackney-coachmen, etc. etc., to be formed into corps for the defence of London they are to be called out, in case of actual danger to the town, and magazines of arms to be placed in the Companies' Halls for their use. " 1 " 5th. 6th. Fire-engines to be placed in proper stations. A large Corps-de-Garde to be placed to defend the water-works and pipes which supply the town. 1 " i ;th. Tetes-de-Pont to be erected for the Defence of the Bridges on the Thames, and casson works for the southern slope of the bridges. " 1 8th. All barges, vessels, and boats, to be taken from the Surrey-side of the Thames, in case of the enemy making good their landing." Towards the end of February, 1798, something like conLondon and several of the southern A number of ships had been seen off the isle counties. of Portland, and not having replied to the signals from the sternation reigned in shore, were taken to be the enemy's fleet. The intelligence was telegraphed to Weymouth, to the dismay of the inhabitants and visitors, and the Prince of Wales, who was at his seat at Crichel, 1 immediately sent off a messenger with letters to the King, and to Commander-in-Chief the 1 The Dorset seat of the Sturts, now occupied by Humphrey Napier Lord Alington. Mr. Charles Sturt of Crichel, M.P. for Bridport (1763-1812), was detained for many years as a prisoner by Napoleon, and His widow, a daughter of subsequently published his adventures in France. the fourth Lord Shaftesbury, survived till 1854. Sturt, NAPOLEON AND THE I2 4 of York, telling them of the rumour. On the latter receiving the intelligence, which had been expected daily, Duke and looked dismay for with enthusiasm in some quarters and in others, he sent to Nepean and Dundas, and way post-haste to the War Office. There the report was corroborated by an express from Dorchester. meeting was hastily summoned, and the Duke of York, made his Pitt, Lord Grenville, Earl Spencer, met at the then A taken to Admiralty Dundas, and Nepean what steps should be While they were discussing to consider resist the invaders. the matter a despatch was received stating that the enemy's had resolved itself into a number of homeward-bound fleet West Indiamen, By to the intense relief of all concerned. the middle of April, 1798, the beacon-masts, watch- houses, and semaphore telegraphs which had been in course of erection on the east coast were completed, and it was said that the approach of an enemy's fleet could be announced from Yarmouth to the Nore in less than five minutes. There was a telegraph station at the Admiralty, and a similar apparatus was placed on one of the towers of Westminster Abbey. In his speech of May 6th, which received applause from both sides of the House, Mr. Secretary Dundas again voiced the fears, not only of the Government, but of the whole country, as to the outcome of Bonaparte's preparations, and outlined a still greater movement on the part of the people. crisis are We it ; the which " The is truth," said he, " is undeniable, that the approaching must determine whether we any longer to be ranked as an independent nation. must take the steps which are best calculated to meet us provide for the safety of the infirm, the aged, women, the children, and put arms into the hands of let INVASION OF ENGLAND Wbn t !>t KJ5/V AJ& nefat Tehqrj/tfi tt J vori. tfttPvrij dyuarutf shut, vfuth u +Stf+4 fa *i **i ZMy^rf &>4/ TJxc AliAdbrt' cipl A iixA /A t Krtj tfttltttt* out. 125 '**+?*"* * ti*s#o*4'b. tktTtirJ <. \^.(M a, M*v &*ft>rballor*n.ti,nstiutLnf of*i*)ur. J.notts aL*ttr. o KUciui TtuTHird Coars* faTekfrryiA 4/tyugs/ os atlsttof /*/ a/vniny o*- r.tttir B Scntfncej erpLuii'd Hfun tftt Or<>,' it tt l t t,nl lofAe Port rfmiral in thiDonsnt tfieTelefrtM yi/ttarj tj *tl,tttr l/u tne t6tr fort/ & E h CommanAr /jf/i' v it QJtttnfarin*nJtr of t/tt Vort/tJutFlettaj at Utittjjo Mi fam.~ian M/ ThrCoursi Mtt, art to Jletr. /> Itktn/ire fo IfuJtbrtb narif. Jigntfyd ihtlltfoUenitnf manntr. h Jlttf 'Mfnr/iA ffut If'rfm^tt . Carious Jentateu tttna BootH. at trtirr irr Q. for S.tr a Call'in m/iere-f/ieOfficirj T/tt .Vu mter M ffte a Coarl HiflUf *sit feurt J&tfiat pile tri, Tt2eifr-a.nA a/tfiears a,lJ rtuition trii remain J/yJ3ij. rituty a Jiyuranutttd Litaknant. 2 T/> a fir The semaphore . accordingly, OH* tt l*U for eram/ilf fi. I, put IA. to rtteit/t OfJtfj Miulj/iyirrwn and d Jenitan 4 movinjTeleJcqu. Ttt Mi TttrfrafiA in OfftnJtr* . *, Jeamen/iu# Ihtro/itJ aceantinq to ei-dtr ntAiifi ftuis tfu Mohan telegraph erected on the Admiralty Office in 1796. Duplicates of this ingenious apparatus were placed on the east coast in 1798. NAPOLEON AND THE We must fortify the menaced points, accumu- 126 the people. late forces round the capital, affix on the church doors the names of those who have come forward as volunteers, and members of Parliament to hold commissions in authorise the army without vacating their seats. I am well aware of the danger of intrusting arms to the whole people without distinction. I am no stranger to the disaffection, albeit much know well that, under the reforms, and diminished, which still lingers amongst us I mask of pursuing only salutary ; many are still intent of bringing about a revolution, for that purpose are willing to enter into closest correspondence with the avowed enemies of their country. the danger of intrusting arms to a people embracing a considerable portion of such characters, it is nothing to the risk which we should run if, when invaded But, serious as is by the enemy, we were unprepared with any adequate means of defence. I trust to the good sense of the great body of the people to resist the factious designs of such enemies to their country. I trust that the patriotism by which the immense majority of them are animated will preclude them from ever using their arms but for worthy purposes I trust to the melancholy example which has : been afforded in a neighbouring kingdom of the conse- quences of engaging in popular insurrection, for a warning to all Britons who shall take up arms, never to use them but in defence of their country, or the support of our venerable constitution." On the same day General Sir Charles Grey, 1 who was in command of the Southern District, in which were so many " danger zones," issued 1 Afterwards 2 Annual first his General Orders 2 : Earl Grey. Register, 1728, p. 189 of Appendix to the Chronicle. INVASION OF ENGLAND 127 "BARHAM COURT, " May " General Sir Charles Grey, judging it 6th. necessary to announce to the troops he has the honour to command in the southern district, that, from the vicinity of the coasts of Essex, Kent, and Sussex, to that of France, and the very great preparations the enemy are said to be making to carry their long threatened invasion of this kingdom into execution, which though he cannot bring himself to from the impossibility of its success, yet it is not impossible but they may be mad and desperate enough to try the experiment, to make a little confusion without a hope he is therefore persuaded of being more successful, believe, : should the daring attempt be made on the coasts of the districts, namely, Essex, Kent, and Sussex, in which he is most immediately concerned and he does not hesitate to ; an event more desirable than not, from the reception he is convinced they will meet from the troops under his command, seconded by the loyalty, zeal, and spirit of all ranks of the community in defence of their king and country, their lives and properties, dearest interests and attachments and, whom he doubts not, will, with the usual spirit of Britons, unite hand and heart in repelling, and severely chastising the insolent foe, who say, that it is ; come for the declared rights and privileges, constitution. purpose of striking at their dearest by the overthrow of their happy " And although General Sir Charles Grey will pledge himself for the result being most brilliant, honourable and glorious, for England, yet it would be unwise not to be prepared at all points, as we are ; but, nevertheless, and to guard against accidents, the general apprizes the troops, that, in case a landing should be made by the enemy, and escaping the vigilance of our well-conducted and numerous NAPOLEON AND THE 128 navy, to the eastward in Essex, or to the westward in Kent or Sussex, and which are certainly more immediately threatened, it may be necessary to embark a part of the troops, to make a successful landing behind the enemy, whilst an army is acting on their front, in which situation communication would be cut off; and their flanks and rear being acted upon, it would not be a contest of many hours' duration, before the invaders would feel the their effects of their temerity, by being ignominiously driven back into the water, killed, or made prisoners. " In case of this event happening, and sudden orders fatal given for embarkation, General Sir Charles Grey positively orders, that every regiment and corps of all descriptions, included in the orders for embarkation, leave the whole of heavy baggage behind, under a proper guard, composed of the worst and the weakest men, commanded by an officer, the soldiers carrying only a change in necessaries, their blankets, haversacks, and canteens; and not one woman, on this occasion, must accompany the soldiers. The officers commanding regiments and corps will see them [the orders], and be responsible for their being their complied with. General Sir Charles Grey pledges himself that every attention shall be paid by him to the care of the soldiers' strictly " and having them conveyed to their respective regiments should their absence be of any length, and they not return to the quarters from whence they embarked, which is by no means likely to happen, but, on the contrary, they wives, quickly return. general is sure that every thinking good soldier will readily see the convenience to themselves, and propriety, of this order, and cheerfully submit to a short will " The separation, "(Signed) " JOHN VISCHER, A.D.C." INVASION OF ENGLAND If additional proof and 129 were necessary to show that Pitt his colleagues felt the grave responsibility resting upon them, even if their plans were not as efficient as they might have been, it is furnished by an official book of some three hundred pages which they caused to be It privately compiled and printed for their own use. " is a Report on the Arrangements which were made, for 1 the internal Defence of these Kingdoms, when Spain, by its Armada, projected the Invasion and Conquest of England ; and Application of the wise Proceedings of our Ancestors, to the Present Crisis of public Safety." John Bruce, to whom the task of obtaining the information from the musty tomes in the State Pape