choose to have I ; done so much for her and then hand her over to lawyers." 1 This does not seem to accord with Miot's remark that after Bonaparte's return to Paris from Rastadt he was " entirely absorbed in the idea of a descent upon England. The survey which we made of the Channel and Atlantic coasts, and the remarks of some able men whom he met on his way, induced him to abandon his project, the execution of which seemed to him, at any rate for the 2 That Miot should believe in the time, impossible." genuineness of this projected invasion of England, as 1 Memoirs of Miot de Melito, Vol. I, p. 226. 2 Ibid., p. 265. is INVASION OF ENGLAND 103 shown in the above quotation, is worthy of note, for he saw nothing but a pretext in the elaborate arrangements of 1803-5, which ended in the annihilation of the clearly allied fleets at Trafalgar. We shall have occasion to refer to this part of the question in a later chapter. To sum up the whole matter, a consensus of authority goes to prove that at this time in Bonaparte's mind Egypt opened a vista of glorious possibilities not to be found in a descent on the British coasts. trusted, arrived If Las Cases is to be he afterwards bitterly repented of the decision he " at. If instead of the expedition to Egypt," he " exclaimed, I had undertaken that against Ireland, what could England have done now ? On such chances do the destinies of empires depend 1 " l ! Memoirs of Las Cases. CHAPTER IV ENGLAND ON GUARD PLANS FOR THE NATIONAL DEFENCE IN 1798 AND 1799 "The spirit to the crisis." A and courage of the country has risen so as to be fairly equal PITT. THOUGH the national anxiety of England concerning the projected invasion was soon, for a time at least, laid to rest by Bonaparte's departure Egypt and the consequent gradual dispersal of the armaments on the northern coast of France, for many months the designs of the Directory for occasioned serious perturbation to the British Government, awakening the fear of the country at large. There can be no doubt that the existing means of defence was but totally inadequate to meet the approaching storm ; from a military point of view the figures on paper look brave enough. From the statistics published in January, 1 I798, the second year of the crisis which we venture to term the Great Terror, numbered it would appear that the regulars which there were sixty- 31,824, in addition to nine regiments of militia totalling 45,000; 13,104 fencible cavalry; 11,042 fencible infantry; 252 troops of gentle- men and yeomanry numbering 15,120; 856 companies of volunteers, 51,360 strong; and a supplementary militia of 60,000 making a total force of 227,450 men, cavalry, : 1 The Times, January 104 I5th, 1798. INVASION OF ENGLAND 105 exclusive of 117 companies of artillery; ten companies of invalids fifty-nine independent companies of invalids ; ; and the marines in garrison. The correspondence of eminent experts of the make it perfectly clear that England was on guard period theo- any rate. That is to say, although there were of volunteers, the methods of organization were plenty faulty, and the issue of weapons slow and inadequate. The Hon J. W. Fortescue, the greatest living authority' retically at on the British army, says " Setting aside coloured levies, it extremely doubtful whether in any one year from 1793 to 1802 the effective strength of the regular I : think army and auxiliary forces exceeded, even if it attained, 1 The voluminous docufigure of 200,000 men." the ments relating to internal defence at this period help little, and a lengthy search at the Record Office us but only confirms the opinion already voiced by Mr. Fortescue, that Henry Dundas, the Secretary of State for War, and Pitt's pet minister, was not only quite unfit to cope with the difficulties of the military situation in general, but was also "the very worst man that could possibly have been chosen to found the traditions of such an office." 2 Truth to tell, it was a case of too many cooks spoiling the broth, and the offices of the Secretary of State, the Under Secretary of State, and the Secretary at War continually clashed. The arrangements for internal defence were under the immediate supervision of the Deputy Secretary at War, and as no statistics apparently amongst the Home Office and War Office records respecting the number of men employed in this important exist 1 2 Fortescue's History of the British Vol IV, part i, p. 208. Ibid., Army, Vol. IV, part ii, p. 894. NAPOLEON AND THE io6 service from 1793 to 1 80 1, it is clear that there was a lament- It should be mentioned, however, able lack of system. that previous to July, 1794, the Home Office controlled The most able administrator was the all such matters. Duke of York, who was appointed Commander-in-Chief in Great Britain on the 3rd April, 1798. He proved himself worthy of the responsible post to which he was called, and the numerous when invasion circulars threatened he issued to those is sufficient in authority evidence of his keen interest in everything connected with the protection of the realm. The King's message to Parliament, read in both Houses on January nth, 1798, sounded a shrill note of alarm, and ten thousand men belonging to the Supplementary Militia were authorized by Parliament to volunteer into the regular army to the extent of not more than one-fifth No liability was of that force in any given county. attached to them to serve out of Europe. Half of this force was to be embodied before the loth March, and the remainder whenever necessary. Following quickly on " to enable His this an Act was passed, on the 5th April, Majesty more effectively to provide for the Defence and Realm during the present War, and for indemnifying persons who may suffer in their property, 1 by such measures as may be necessary for that purpose." The scheme was pioneered by Dundas, who admitted that "it is not in our regular forces alone that we rest with Security of the security. it now has exertions. ready to Never could to look Not up less country boast such a force as resting on the basis of voluntary this to, than fifty or sixty thousand be brought into the 1 38 Geo. Ill, field, c. 27. in men are support of the ONE OF OUR VOLUNTEER DEFENDERS OF 1798 INVASION OF ENGLAND 107 country against the enemy, upon the principle of voluntary service, actuated by zeal for the cause in which the country is engaged. . . two or three The purport . objects. It of the Bill is confined to does not go further than what has already been adopted in many of the larger counties. In the county of Dorset, in particular, individuals have come forward in a manner similar to what it is proposed they should by this Bill. Many means of defence against the enemy have been taken. The Sheriff of the county has come forward at the head of the Posse Comitatds! n As Dundas upon Mr. frankly stated, this latest plan was based admirable methods, 2 which were fully a little work published at the time by Clavell's described in William Morton 3 M.P. for Dorset, entitled Thoughts on the Defence of these Kingdoms, and the raising of the Posse Comitatds, which proved invaluable to those upon whom Pitt, the important duty of forming armed associations devolved. These were brought into being by the Act of the 5th April, 1798, and their members were to carry on a sort 1 Speech in the House of Commons, 27th March, 1798. See ante, p. 27. 3 William Morton Pitt, of Kingston Maurward, son of John Pitt, of Encombe, Dorset, M.P. for Wareham and Dorchester, by Marcia, daughter of 2 Mark Anthony Morgan, Born of Ireland (cousin of the first Lord Rivers). May, 1754; M.P. for Dorset; married (first) Margaret, daughter of John Gambier, (second) Grace Amelia, daughter of Henry Seymer, of Hanford. He died the 29th February, 1836. He was in advance of his age in the i6th his philanthropic efforts to Purbeck and Kingston. making improve the condition of the poor on his estates in He established manufactories for spinning twine and with a view to detaching the Purbeck sail-cloth at Corfe Castle, from their smuggling habits. Also on his estate at Fordington he began a bleaching, spinning, and weaving industry in 1795. Nor was Pitt unmindful of the religious condition of his tenants, for both in Wareham and Corfe Castle he established Sunday-schools, managed by a local committee and organized by a regular system of parochial visitors. In literary tastes he coasters was not deficient. The second edition of Hutchins' History of Dorset which he was a valued contributor was dedicated to him. to NAPOLEON AND THE io8 of guerilla warfare, and to make themselves useful in the way outlined by the High Sheriff of Dorset. The remuneration of the men was one shilling a week if requested ; own uniforms but they were obliged to provide their The following letter, hitherto unpublished, from the Marquis of Buckingham to John Penn of Portland, is specially interesting because it shows how unless the parish did so. methods and Morton Clavell's history of the time "Dear " Pitt's book influenced the : STOWE Sir, ^. 9 I 79 8. A work having been transmitted to me entitled m on the Defence of these Kingdoms by Mr. Thoughts Morton Pitt, containing Precepts Warrants & Schedules under which a plan was digested a few months since for W raising the Posse their very active communicated it & Comitatus of the County of Dorset by & excellent H yesterday to an M Sheriff Adjourned r Clavell Q r : I Sessions Gnrl meeting of the Lieut cy who all agreed with me wishing for a full discussion of a measure so interesting , so feasible & so essential at this period, & for this pur- have summoned the Magistrates & Dep y Lieut ts to pose meet me at Aylesbury on Friday the i6th to consider of a plan for obtaining such returns & information as may enable the H Sheriff to call out by his writ, & under his command the Civil force of the County as a Posse Comihave I tatus, in case of riot insurrection & invasion. directed Mr Chaplin to send you a copy of these papers, & I trust that (as your official appointment will have taken place) you will honour us with your attendance, & assistance in digesting measures which in your hands will I am persuaded be of the utmost advantage to the country in any of the unfortunate cases to which these precautions I ; look. I well and loyalty know how warmly your will constitutional zeal induce you to give your most serious INVASION OF ENGLAND 109 consideration to this subject, & I am anxious that you should be possessed as soon as may be of the several data necessary for you to obtain before you can exert (in the manner you would wish) the constitutional powers which will be vested in you & if any deviations from the plan ; in the pursued C y of Dorset should appear to you neces- am sary, persuaded that every attention will be given to wishes your by the Lieut cy & magistracy. I have written I to our friend Mr Sullivan to request him to favour us with his assistance, as I know he has turned his mind very much " I to this subject. am Dear " Sir with the truest regards Your very faithful & & esteem obed* Servant " BUCKINGHAM." 1 Three armies and a corps of reserve were formed for the defence of the capital two of 15,000 men, and one of 30,000 men stationed at Colchester, the low-lying Essex coast offering many advantages to an invading host. 2 That gallant old soldier Marquis Cornwallis, then Master- General of the Ordnance, saw that there were many weak " I have no doubt of the spots in the plan of defence. courage or fidelity of our system of David Dundas, 1 3 he writes, "but the and the total want of light militia," Mr. Broadley's collection of Dorset MSS. Mr. Penn was the lineal Lord Proprietor of the State of Pennsylvania. George III gave him the site on which he built Pennsylvania Castle, Portland, and there, while residing at Weymouth, the King more than once reviewed the corps of Dorset Yeomanry raised by Mr. Penn's exertions. descendant of the found