er and first 2 Gentleman's Magazine , Vol. LXVIII, parti, 1798, p. 76. David Dundas (1735-1820) was probably the best tactician in " Rules and England at the time. He drew up the Regulations for the 3 Sir " Formation, Field Exercises, and Movements of His Majesty's Forces, which were issued to the army in June, 1792. After seeing much active service he was made Lieutenant-General and Governor of Landguard Fort in 1797. Dundas was made a K.B. in 1804, and five years afterwards he became Commander-in-Chief. NAPOLEON AND THE no heavy on my mind, and point out the advanwhich the activity of the French will have in the tages 1 Neither country, which is for the most part inclosed." infantry, set was Cornwallis blind to the defects of the corps stationed which he avers is "a most difficult county to defend with inexperienced troops, unaccustomed to move against a most active enemy, who have derived confidence in Essex, from their extraordinary success against the most powerful and warlike countries of Europe." 2 Things were in no way improved in May, when the preparations at Toulon an advanced and invasion seemed imminent. Cornwallis thought either Portugal or Ireland was the were in state, destination of the expedition, " latter." The supply I should rather think the of arms was deficient, a serious fail- ing duplicated in 1803, and, as the Marquis says, "the only means by which the innumerable local corps in all parts of the country can be armed is by providing balls for fowling-pieces." 3 Brigadier-General John Moore, of Peninsular fame, and then but recently returned from the West Indies, who made a tour of the east coast in company with an officer of the Engineers acting under the orders of Sir William Howe, commanding the district including Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, has left on record that " the coast from the Thames to Harwich is fourteen miles of coast the most vulnerable," but that the known generally as Clacton Beach To the Hon. Col. Wesley. Dated from Whitehall, February 23rd, 1798. Correspondence of Charles, ist Marquis Cornwallis, Vol. II, p. 333, edited, with notes, by C. Ross. Cornwallis uses the original spelling of the name. 1 The connection between the Wellesleys and the Dorset Wesleys, the ancestors of John Wesley, is now generally admitted 2 To Sir William Howe, March 26th, 1798. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 334. 3 To Major-General Ross. Dated from Whitehall, May I9th, 1798. Ibid., . Vol. II, p. 337. INVASION OF ENGLAND in good anchorage and an opening to Colchester. Hollesley Bay, below Woodbridge, Aldborough, Southwold, Lowestoft, and Yarmouth are the most important affords Harwich to Yarmouth "Encampments have been little used points from for this purpose. in England during "Barracks have been substituted, and are erected wherever it has been thought proper to this war," he notes. station troops. districts are Yarmouth more than These stations in the Essex and Suffolk upon the great road leading from London to runs parallel to the coast, and is nowhere it ; thirteen or fourteen miles from Stations it. Romford, Colchester (head-quarters), and There is a small supply of provisions at each of Chelmsford, Ipswich. these stations, but the depots are in a rear line of BrainThe batteries at the tree, Indbury, and Thetford." entrance of the Yare "are completely inadequate," and can only " protect the town and shipping from the insults of privateers." Yarmouth he regards At Cromer, " a as " a desirable fishing town," a battery possession." was erected on the cliff " for the protection of trading vessels. Thirty of the inhabitants, formed into a company of artillery, man the battery." Of places below Harwich chosen as suitable little for the erection of batteries he mentions " Walton Gap, Holland Marsh, and Clacton Wick." 1 Mention has been made that the Isle of Wight had been looked upon with envious eyes by the French in 2 The following semi-official communication with I777. defenceless state twenty years after the note of warning had been sounded shows that England, reference to its then as now, was slow to move in putting her own house in order. 1 Diary of Sir John Moore, Vol. Sir J. F. Maurice. I, 2 pp. 261-7, edited by Major-General See ante, p. 3, note. NAPOLEON AND THE 112 " " " Private. CARISBROOKE CASTLE, " Dear My " I Sir, trouble 6th March, 1797. you with the charge of the enclosed to I am well persuaded, that you will the D. of Portland and r kindly give y aid to our sollicitations from hence for a When I little more attention than has been paid to us. was last here about Xtmas (since which my ill health has obliged me to be absent) I have succeeded in obtaining general resolutions for exertion in aid of Governr m Pitt ment, and at that time helped us materially that we might be of his assurance recommendation, by protected by a respectable regular force and a support M Our of Artillery. Cannon & W it Militia had been instructed in the use of was proposed, that two or more Field Pieces shd be supplied for the Corps. They are still without any, & indeed there are none of that description in the Island nor of any other, except those which are mounted in one or two of the Old Forts, and which w d afford a very limited protection. have said upon land ; & I this head in my You earnestly hope that this M W will see letter to the serious what I D. of Portdeficiency r m Pitt thinks that we sh d be soon remedied. immediately have some twelve pounders and indeed we are dreadfully exposed without them. Can you tell when ? " It is wonderful with what reluctance the People here are induced to be enrolled under the Cavalry and supplementary Militia Acts because of the little attention paid to us. But I have ventured to encourage better hopes may and notions, and all things at present promise well. I have engaged proper persons in separate districts throughout the Island to make returns of the stock &c. and we shall forthwith fix upon a proper place to which it may in case of necessity be removed. Associations are forming rapidly and of a real usefull kind, but we shall be able to do d nothing without arms. I sh hope that we may form INVASION OF ENGLAND 113 Companies to the amount of fifteen hundred or two thousand men, who will really give up a sufP portion of time for necessary exercise. Major Cooper, who is employed here under Col. Nesbit in attention to the Foreign Corps, and is a very active, intelligent officer, has hinted to me, that there are always a great many light Artillery Carbines at the Ordnance, which might suit some of these Companies and might well be spared. He has here upon the spot a few hundreds of heavier r Musquets, which are not wanted for any partic purpose w d answer well for other Companies, if we may obtain an order for them. But indeed we must have the number required from some quarter. We must not and suffer again this spirit to cool. " In regard to the Cavalry we shall then be complete, make my I and supplementary y trust, on Sat next, and Militia, I shall report according to directions, that we may be furnished with Cloaths and Arms. I have just rec d the patterns, which you was so good as to send, and We shall adopt them. " Excuse the intrusion of this scrawl, I thought it might be desirable for you to know how matters go in various quarters, and I therefore give you a sketch of I hope, that the ours. Enemy will not be in a condition to attack us, till we have obtained our Cannon &c. &c. " I congratulate you upon the glorious exploits of my friend S r J. Jervis. 1 The consequence must be admirable. Rule Britannia Huzza ! " ! Ever, my " dear Y r Sir, most truly humble Ser* faithfull " Thos. Orde-Powlett." 2 1 Battle of Cape 2 St. Vincent, fought on February I4th, 1797. Thomas Orde-Powlett was Secretary to the Treasury in 1782, and Secretary to the Duke of Rutland when the latter was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Through his wife Powlett inherited the estates of the Duke of Bolton and assumed the name of Powlett and was raised to the peerage. The above letter is from Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. I. I NAPOLEON AND THE 114 " " The diary of Weathercock Windham, the Secretaryat-War, contains many references to the subject which was then the chief topic of conversation in palace and cottage, and fully corroborates the criticisms passed Cornwallis on the subject of defence. be cited as examples The following by may : " nth (January, 1798). Saw Sir W. Howe. Much impressed with danger, he thought force insufficient in '95, when North threatened, by 12,000 men said so, and got ; rebuked for it. Could not, in his present district, who should land viz. at Essex, bring against an enemy Clayton, or Clacton (near Ipswich river as it would seem), more than 6000. River Lea ought to be provided with Thinks there should be much light infantry sluices. present arms as good as any much endeavour to teach use of bayonet. Great difficulty with light infantry to teach them to disperse. Only three positions Colchester, : ; Chelmsford, and Brentwood Lord Petre's, not Warley. former would require 25,000 men. .* Promised by Huskisson a sight of the plan "25th. prepared by the Adjutant-General for police of London, in case of invasion also copy of the paper of stations, 2 Sir Charles prepared by Grey. Nepean showed me scheme of distribution of gunboats three divisions, viz. Two . . ; ; Downs, Portsmouth, Plymouth." 3 "30th (March). Saw Duke of York. Talk about 1 The Diary of the Right Hon. William Windham, 1784-1810, p. 383, Henry Baring. 2 Sir Evan Nepean (1751-1822). In 1794 he was made Under Secretary for War, and in the following year he became Secretary of the Admiralty. edited by Mrs. Created a baronet, i6th July, 1802 j Chief Secretary for Ireland, 2Oth January, 1804. In September of the same year Nepean was appointed one of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. He purchased Loder's Court, Dorset, in 1799. 3 The Diary of the Right Hon. William Windham, 1784-1810, Henry Baring. edited by Mrs. p. 389, INVASION OF ENGLAND defence of country. Stated for Duke country cavalry. also the 115 my plan of opening the rather seemed to like it. Duke abolition of drafting. in of Cawsand about Bay. Had landing agreed danger House seen Delancey on same subject in morning. Committee on Mr. Dundas's Bill for Driving Country. Conversation with Rose, jun., who is full of apprehensions 1 ." about the Isle of Wight and the Needles. " six days me R. assured that Colonel 4th (April). Isle of the roth he left the when before, Wight, Regiment had not arrived there, nor, as I understood him, was there any other regular regiment but one of about two or three hundred men no guns but about four, nor any measure Recommended : . . . . . ; of defence taken. " 8th. Information by intentions of a descent." Windham Hammond confirming immediate also alludes frequently to the persistence with which the Cabinet evaded a definite settlement of the mode From November, 1797, to May, 1798, 2 abounds with such references as the following of defence. his diary : Much talk afterwards about measures Cabinet at Duke of Portland's. Understood question to be brought forward of measures of defence. Nothing said at Council about defence, as I learnt afterwards from Lord Spencer." ". Met Clinton, sen. talked about the state of defence of the country; full of apprehensions deeply impressed with the deficiency of our force in every respect, particularly in the total want of Light Infantry. Duke of York was to settle next day at the city about the regulations of London, so that hitherto, nothing seems to have been done but to " Council prepare loose plan that is at the reading-room." at eleven. Made attempt to bring on question about "Council. of war." . . . " . . . ; . 1 . . Ibid., p. 390. 2 Ibid., pp. 382-95. . . ; NAPOLEON AND THE Ii6 state of country, but could not succeed. and with some vexation, that Have seen since might and ought to have as to have made several of the so at succeeded, least, far, obser