vations that I wished. Dinner at Pitt's." " Council. I Again brought up question about defence begged moment, but promise that it should be taken "nth (May). Clear now that there is no soon." up general plan settled the whole idea, the bringing round all the troops possible. Notion that we did not want light troops, because our troops upon the Continent had been victorious whenever they had been tried against . . : . off for the ; the enemy by Many themselves." wealthy men came forward and organized their tenantry and others dependent upon them into volunteer The Prince of Wales set an excellent example by corps. enrolling his servants in the corps attached to the parish of St. James's, and among others the Duke of Northum- berland furnished clothing and other accoutrements to those of his tenants and labourers who cared to volunteer, paying them one shilling per day for each time of exercise. Both infantry and cavalry were included in this corps, in person. The firemen of the Phcenix Fire Office were trained as artillerymen at the expense of the proprietors, and the Governors of which the Duke commanded Bank of England raised a corps of employes to defend the building from the hands of potential French The men were divided into six battalion despoilers. the companies and two flank companies, one 'of grenadiers and one of light infantry quite a formidable little force. ; All contributions for the defence of the country were " as " thankfully received in England as they were for its invasion in France. 1 To 1 this See ante, end a fund was opened p. 82. at . 1 EORGE by the Grace of God, the Third, King of Great France and Ireland, Britain, To Xtefender of the Faith, &c. \. - ^**~-'. . GroHp We do, : conftitute and appoint you to be, rcfents, Our Pleafure, &&"< -~.-< of the ,~^ 1^/cs.a..-'. to ferve without Pay, % ;. the. ^ jf>^^> _ _ aflbciatcd Protection thereof, the Requifition of Power ; but not to take Rank Army, nor to for of any Emergency,' 7 the Civil during - County of in Cafe i by thefe ..,, ^- of the Inhabitants of the EfcpkiT of in the ^^ the faid . J?^/^ <: c ^ /^>^ to in Our be fubjeft Military Difcipline, or to ferve out of the faid l, Court except of their own Accord. at St. James's the Given at Our /fcK^wfc Day */ 17jf in the JZ^sZf f^f-tut Year of Our Reign. By His Majefty's Command, FACSIMILE OK A VOLUNTEER OFFICER'S COMMISSION. JUNE 15, 1798 INVASION OF ENGLAND 117 January, and although both cash and promises were slow in coming in at first, when once the ball was the Bank in did not stop until the very respectable sum of On the Qth February an 2,500,000 had been secured. rolling it " meeting was held in the square at the Royal 46,534. 33. 6d. was raised by 218 subExchange," and influential and at a previous gathering at the Mansion House the donations amounted to 20,000. During the 20,000 early months of the fund the King contributed scribers, ; the 5000 the Duke of York 5000 2000 each; the five Princesses Queen ; ; the Cabinet 100 a year Ministers each during the war the Bank of England 200,000 " the Marquis of Buckingham all fees and profits received ; ; in his office of Teller of the Exchequer, during the war sum of 2700 and the allowances to ; after reserving the the clerks," in other words, about Bishops gave the Duke 1000 each at of 10,000 per least, annum ; the some of them more ; of the 5000 University Marlborough 1000, that of Oxford 500, to which must Cambridge be added the donations of several individual Colleges. In Edinburgh a subscription of 19,000 was raised in two hours the boys of the Merchant Taylors School avoided the "tuck" shop and sent a cheque for 105, while ; ; 500 or more. The various in supporting a good never backward city companies, Nor were the contributions subscribed cause, liberally. practically every city voted confined many the citizen or public body, for a regiments gave up day's pay to help swell the to. private and Jack Tar was no less patriotic. and marines of H.M.S. Argonaut gave ten fund, The seamen shillings each out of their wages "to drive before us into the sea all French scoundrels, and other blackguards that would take ii8 NAPOLEON AND THE their parts." Many of the corporations throughout the and to send the money country agreed to abolish all feasts that would have been spent on them to the fund. Patriotic munificence was very much the order of the day, once the initial difficulty of overcoming public inertia had been surmounted. The corporation and citizens of Liverpool sought and obtained powers from Parliament for the purpose of erecting batteries and taking other measures of precaution against an invading force, half of the expense to be met by the corporation, and the remainder by means of a general rate. Pitt seized eagerly upon this commendable display of public and private spirit, and called it " a most useful suggestion, and might be made the groundwork of a most excellent general defence." The shipowners vessels, of Campbeltown, in Argyllshire, placed aggregating some three thousand tons in all, their at the The male inhabitants of the disposal of Government. various City wards were called upon to form themselves into armed associations, the able-bodied to learn the use of arms, the remainder to procure constables' staves and in as supernumerary constables. Each ward was commanded by its own alderman. The rallying point was to be the Mansion House on the appearance of Bonaparte's troops, and all the associations were to be united in one band, if necessary, under the direction of the Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen. It should be sworn be noted, however, that some corps were raised on the distinct understanding that they should not be required to leave their own parish unless by individual consent. Within a few months there were forty thousand members of the various associations of London and Westminster, INVASION OF ENGLAND 119 proof positive of the splendid spirit which animated the With few exceptions, such as the Christ Church nation. Association the St. Pancras Volunteers ; Hanover Square, Armed Association Volunteers ; and the Hans Town ; ; the St. George's, the Marylebone Association, blue as the colour of their uniforms, red who chose was the prevail- ing note, with blue, yellow, black, or white facings. Almost every conceivable design of head-dress was repre- helmet hats " with regulation feathers black bearskins, with red feather tipped white, and s'mall hair cockade and hats closely resembling those worn by sented, including " ; ; the C.I.V. in the late South African campaign. White pantaloons, with whole or half gaiters, usually completed a picturesque uniform which would contrast oddly with the more sombre ones of the present day. On a small breast-plate was inscribed the name or initials of the corps. Not the body of citizen soldiers was Sadler's Sharpshooters, who were armed with a patent gun and long cutting bayonet invented by the man who did so much to bring the force into being, and whose name it bore. Sadler lived in Pimlico, and was " a very ingenious machinist, inventor of the celebrated war chariot, in which two persons, advancing or retreating, can manage two pieces of ordnance (three-pounders) with alacrity and in safety, so as to do execution at the distance of two least interesting l furlongs." In a letter to Lord Mornington, Pitt admirably sums " The two great objects of our attention up the situation : and exertion now spirit 1 enough in are," he says, "to endeavour to raise the country to contribute voluntarily Description of plate in Loyal Volunteers of London and Environs. NAPOLEON AND THE 120 to the expense of the war, such a to the assessed taxes may bring sum as in addition our loan within a moderate shape, and next, to be prepared both by sea and land for the invasion which I have little doubt will be attempted in the course of the year, though the latter much the easier work of the two. And I hope we shall have to make the option between burning their ships before they set out, or sinking them either on their is passage or before their troops can land, or destroying as soon as they have landed, or starving them and them Indeed the scheme taking them prisoners afterwards. seems so romantic (without the prospect of any naval force to support it) not be credible and it the sake that at any other moment it would can hardly be attempted on any other notion but that it may be worth the enemy's while to devote two-thirds of an immense army to immediate destruction, remainder for ; of the mischief which the may they share the same fate. In the meantime, however (though on the whole I think the be made), there are two possible events which prevent it. One is if there should be fresh confusion attempt may effect before will in France, which seems not distant, and of which the issue cannot be even conjectured. The other is, if the new King of Prussia and the powers of the North should at is just now some appearance, not yet decided enough to rely upon. The new decree aimed at our commerce,1 but tending to annihilate a large part of the profit of neutral nations, may perhaps last awaken, of which there but it is 1 a law passed on the 8th January, 1798, the French Government all vessels that had touched at an English port should not be allowed to enter any French port. Ships with British goods on board were By decreed that also declared to be lawful prize. INVASION OF ENGLAND 121 (added to the danger of Hamburg and the North of Europe) bring Denmark at least, if not Sweden or Russia, to be ready to enter into an effectual concert with Prussia. And this prospect may tempt Prussia to take a decided which if it does, Europe will at last be saved." The Prime Minister adds, with reference to the voluntary " contribution, that tho' it has begun but languidly, I have part, now good hopes of success as I have been enabled today announce to the Bank, the King's intention of giving one-third of his privy purse. We in office have ; to . . . an ample fifth of our income." 1 thought Writing to the same friend three months later, Pitt it right to give is " more optimistic than ever. The voluntary contribution has succeeded to a great extent. The spirit and courage of the country has risen so as to be fairly equal to the The French go on, I believe in earnest, with and demonstrations of invasion but the effect here plans is only to produce all the efforts, and all the spirit we can crisis. . . . ; On wish." 2 the last day of May he forecasts to Lord Mornington another attempt on Ireland, in which matter he was correct, as subsequent events proved, although neither the port mentioned nor the anticipated surprise " successful prophecy. The French," he says, " will was a probably try a magnificent project of invading Ireland from Toulon but will be surprised at meeting Lord ; St. Vincent him. . . ." in the Mediterranean, where they least expect 3 Bonaparte's movements at Toulon were duly recorded 1 This letter is dated from Wimbledon, Pitt, p. 205, by Lord Rosebery. January 26th, 1798. 2 This letter is dated from Wimbledon, April 22nd, 1798, Ibid., p. 208. 9 p.m. 3 Dated from Downing Street, Thursday, May 3ist, 1798. Ibid., p. 210. NAPOLEON AND THE 122 in the British newspapers. It was believed at first that he contemplated invading Portugal by sea, but on April 24th The Times printed details of the expedition, followed three days later by the intelligence that in all probability The publifleet was destined for Portugal or Ireland. " cation of the following Hints to assist in the General the Defence of London, etc.," on the 25th shows that the fear of an immediate invasion of England was by no means over " ist. : Block Houses to be built in each square for the Corps-de- Garde. " Horse to Patrole the streets. 2nd. " 3rd. Barricadoes for each street, to be defended by the the corner houses to be supplied inhabitants of the street ; with hand-grenades, and for the more easy communication, p