 Their stature for the most part was low, their complexions pale and sallow, their clothes much the worse for wear: to a superficial INVASION OF ENGLAND 143 observer they would have appeared incapable of enduring These were the men, however, almost any hardship. of whom it was presently observed, that they could be on bread or potatoes, to drink water, the stones of the street their bed, and to sleep in well content to live to make no covering but the canopy of heaven. the leader of this singular body of men, was Humbert, their clothes, with " . . . himself as extraordinary a personage as any in his army. Of a good height and shape, in the full vigour of life, prompt to act, quick in execution, apparently master of his art, you could not refuse him the praise of a good officer, man. while his physiognomy forbad you to like him as a His eye, which was small and sleepy (the effect, probably, of much watching), cast a sidelong glance of insidiousness, and even of cruelty it was the eye of a cat, preparing to spring on her prey. His education and : manners were indicative of a person sprung from the knew how (as most of lowest orders of society, though he countrymen do) to assume, when it was convenient, the deportment of a gentleman. For learning, he scarcely had enough to enable him to write his name. His passions were furious, and all his behaviour seemed marked with his A the characters of roughness and violence. narrower observation of him, however, served to discover that much of this roughness was the result of art, being assumed with the view of extorting by terror a ready compliance with his commands. Of this truth the Bishop himself was one of the first who had occasion to be made sensible." 1 A 1 Narrative of what passed at Killalla^ in the County of Afayo, and the Parts Adjacent, during the French Invasion in the Summer of 1798 p. 34, by an Eye Witness [the Bishop], 1800. Dr. Stock afterwards became Bishop ', of Waterford. NAPOLEON AND THE 144 On the 1 2th September the Directory was informed by Savary, who had arrived safely at Royan, at the mouth of the Gironde, on the 7th, of the joyful news of Humbert's Its attitude landing. more towards invasion was now a little and orders were given to the captain to fit out expedition a small one it is true but made kind, a relief more formidable by the addition of a frigate, the Charente, and the lugger Renard, to his existing force. The two vessels which the parsimonious Batavian Republic had grudgingly contributed were now ready, and the soldiers on board, but they seemed as securely held in check by the enemy as ever. However, the Anacreon, a fast-sailing brig, managed to slip out of Dunkirk with a number of refugee United Irishmen on board, the chief of whom was Napper " Tandy, who had boasted that thirty thousand would rise arms on in his appearance." x Meanwhile the response of the Irish in rallying round Humbert was anything but encouraging, although the General was joined by a few hundred sons of the soil, and proceeded to Ballina, eight miles from Killala. There good fortune again attended them some yeomanry were worsted, and the place fell. On the 25th August the ; army marched in the direction of Castlebar, where was met by some seventeen hundred men 2 under little it General Lake, a name calculated to inspire fear by the of his previous measures, and the victor of Hill. His men held the most advantageous Vinegar sternness positions of the town, and it should be remarked in pass- ing that a numerous force had been set in motion 1 by Lord Autobiography of Wolfe Tone, Vol. II, p. 346. History of the British Army, Vol. IV, p. 592, by the Hon. J. W. Fortescue. In his report Humbert stated that 6000 men were opposed to him. 2 INVASION OF ENGLAND 145 1 Cornwallis, Viceroy and Commander-in-Chief in Ireland, and hurriedly marched to every point of importance. Humbert must have realized before a single shot was fired that nothing short of a miracle could wrest victory from the troops drawn up on the heights. It was not a question of fools rushing in where angels feared to tread when the French General gave the order to attack, but the man to inflict some kind of determination of a brave punishment on self. Had he been that it enemy, no matter at what cost to himfailed, the verdict of history would have his was a mad freak miracle happened, and The Irishmen who had show their to attempt an issue Humbert is ; but the deservedly praised. round him certainly did not native valour to advantage, for they beat an rallied ignoble retreat almost as soon as the English opened and apparently dispersed into thin further appearance that day. air, for they fire, made no The French troops fought with superb daring, but Sarrazin with his handful of soldiers, numbering some 480 in all, who had been held in reserve, decided the fortunes of the day. One of Humbert's battalions was holding out behind a stone wall, and another behind a ditch both were sorely pressed. Sarrazin led the whole force up the heights, carried the trenches, cap; tured the town and many guns, pursued the Royal troops and thus turned what seemed inevitable distance, defeat into certain victory, although the French lost more for some than the vanquished. The garrison of two hundred men which had been left at Killala also acquitted itself with honour by frustrating an attempt at landing on the part of the crews of two small English vessels. 1 Lord Cornwallis held 1801. I. L this post from June I3th, 1798, to March i;th, NAPOLEON AND THE 146 his During stay Castlebar at Humbert issued the Proclamation calling upon the Irish to rally following round him, but the measure was not attended with the success he anticipated : " Equality. Liberty. " " At the in Army of Ireland. the Head-Quarters at Castlebar, the I4th Fructidor, 6th Year of the French Republic, 1 one and indivisible. " General Humbert, Commander-in-Chief of the Army of Ireland, wishing to organise, as soon as possible, an administrative power for the province of Connaught, orders as follows " i. : The Government shall reside at Castlebar of the Province of till Connaught further orders. " The Government shall be composed of twelve 2. members, who will be nominated by the Commander-inChief of the French army. " Citizen John Moore is appointed President of the 3. Province of Connaught. He is particularly charged with the nomination and union of the members of the Government. "4. The Government shall immediately direct its atten- tion to the organisation of the militia of the Province of Connaught, and to securing the provisions necessary for the French and Irish armies. " There shall be formed eight regiments of infantry, 5. each of twelve hundred men and four of cavalry, each of six hundred men. ; " 6. The Government will declare rebels their country, all those who, clothing, shall not join the hours. 1 and traitors to having received arms and army within twenty -four 3 ist August, 1798. INVASION OF ENGLAND 147 " 7. Every individual, from sixteen to forty, inclusively, called upon, in the name of the Irish republic, to repair immediately to the French camp, to march in a mass is against the common enemy, the Government of Ireland the English whose destruction alone can secure the inde; pendence and happiness of ancient Hibernia. " The General Commanding in Chief, HUMBERT." 1 "(Signed) The document in question was seized upon with avidity a whose name does not transpire, and made by rhymester the subject of a witty little song entitled " Humbert's Mistake," the first three verses of which are reprinted below. It was sung From to the tune " 2 Moggy Lawder." Castlebar, the French declare, It is their sole intention, On Connaught Freedom of forthwith to confer their invention ; What freedom this You soon may guess By Humbert's proclamation " You dogs," said he, "You shall with me Go plunder your own nation." ; As Cooke, when on a savage shore He friends would make of boobies, So beads and trinkets they brought o'er, As presents for cropt boobies Of green surtouts, ; Three thousand suits, the rabble round them, on that night They gave Who Played least in sight, the Gauls since found them. Nor have 1 2 Annual A Register, 1798; State Papers; p. 235. Collection of Constitutional Songs t p. 118, Cork, A. Edwards, 1799. NAPOLEON AND THE 148 This novel " freedom " next " commands " That all men under forty Shall in a mass, with pikes in hands, Go fight the " Orange-party"; But when they hear Cornwallis near, These mighty boasters scamper And ; as they run From town to town Their front and rear we hamper. Humbert was now in a quandary, for he had no definite information as to the movements of the United Irishmen, upon whose help he was so largely relying. Of one thing only was he certain that Sligo and Leitrim were but ill defended, and he therefore determined on marching to Dublin. Fortune again favoured him, but at the same : time drew him nearer to his doom. He evaded meeting body of Cornwallis's and Lake's troops and he had several successful brushes with detachalthough ments of the enemy, Lake's cavalry harassed his rear- the main ; guard and disarmed two hundred of them. At Ballinamuck he found his retreat cut off by a body of regular troops under Cornwallis, and he was forced to surrender on September 8th. The French entered Dublin, not as conquerors, but as prisoners. They were sent to Liverpool better fate shortly after, and the officers to Lichfield. A awaited General Humbert, and he was allowed to return to la belle France, where he planned yet another attempt bound Ireland to England. Of the who had given Humbert the benefit of their Matthew Tone 1 and Teeling 2 the latter had to snap the link which Irish fugitives support, 1 Matthew Tone had almost as chequered a career as his brother. After having travelled in America and the West Indies, he crossed to France On being liberated from prison in 1794, and was arrested as an English spy. INVASION OF ENGLAND acted as his aide-de-camp 149 were court-martialled and was fortunate enough to make good his escape. It was not until the 23rd September that the rebel garrison at Killala, which numbered some 4000 men, was defeated by 1200 fencibles, yeomanry, and executed, while Sullivan militia, 3 under General Trench. with the exception of an officer All the French soldiers, named Charost and two subordinates, had joined their comrades at Castlebar. The defence of Killala was well maintained, but the town was retaken by the loyalists recalcitrants had been killed. after some hundreds of the Had the Directory supported Humbert's attempt by sending over Hardy's division, the rebels might have cooperated in sufficiently large numbers to offer a serious resistance to the Royal troops. Considering that the rebellion was no longer a flame, but smouldering ashes, that the French General's resources were hopelessly in- adequate, and that he did not receive the assistance from the native Irish that he had been led to expect, the result is Well may Lecky ask what would have hapduring the previous year or two 14,000 or 15,000 astonishing. " if pened men had landed of the same stamp as Humbert ? " 4 " It was not merely vainglory," says a more modern authority, in the following year he again went to America, returning to France at the end of 1797, and becoming a captain in the army. He was executed on September 29th, 1798. 2 Bartholomew Teeling was born in 1774. He became a United Irishman and later a captain in the French army under the name of Beron. Humbert wrote personally to Lord Cornwallis, praying for clemency on behalf of his young comrade (see Ireland in '98, p. 398) ; but although the jury commended him to mercy, he was executed. 3 Sullivan was the nephew of Madgett, Secretary at the French Foreign Office. 4 A History of England in the Eighteenth Century, Vol. VIII, by W. E. H. Lecky. p. 212, NAPOLEON AND THE 150 " when he wrote after his landing to the Directory that, if he