iew is immortalized in Sir Robert Ker Porter's picture representing George III raising his hat to a corps in the act of saluting. 1 Loyal Volunteers of London and Environs, pp. 520-1. NAPOLEON AND THE 136 On same month the volunteer corps "in and about the Metropolis" were inspected by His Majesty. the 2 ist of the Practically the whole of the circuitous route from West- minster Bridge to Islington was lined by armed citizens, and the scene in Finsbury Square was particularly brilliant. After dining with the Lord Chancellor at Islington, the monarch rode to the Foundling Hospital, where he walked through the children's apartments, and then proceeded to Hyde Park. He seemingly never wearied of encouraging the martial spirit of the nation, for the Surrey Volunteers were reviewed on the 4th July, 1799, and those of Kent on Wimbledon Common, and the grounds of Lord Romney's seat near Maidstone, where a wonderful dinner was given to the August ist, the former on latter in the lovely 5319 men thus brought together. Every point of vantage was taken up by the large concourse of people which gathered together to show their respect for the gallant sovereign and his citizen army. Fortunately the fever which had coursed so madly through the veins of every Frenchman since the beginning of the Great War was stayed, only to break out afresh under the consulate of Napoleon Bonaparte. The supplementary militia was disbanded, and the number of the militia, including the volunteers raised under the men Act of 1794, was fixed at 1 76,566 England and Wales. Two important contemporary works on the volunteers by T. Rowlandson warrant special mention here. Both of for them were issued in 1799. Loyal Volunteers of London and Environs was dedicated to the Duke of Gloucester, and numbered amongst its many subscribers the King, and several other members of the Royal Family, the Emperor 1 Clode, Vol. I, p. 285. INVASION OF ENGLAND 137 of Germany, the King of Prussia, and the Archduke Charles of Austria. In his preface, which is dated August 1 2th, 1799, R. Ackermann, the publisher, states that his " primary object is to raise a lasting monument to the credit of those Volunteer Corps, who, in the moments of alarm and of imminent dangers, so readily and honourably stood forward, at their own expense, to assist the Civil Magistrates, and to preserve the tranquility of this GREAT and COMMERCIAL EMPORIUM and to defend PROPERTY of their less qualified neighbours from ; the the hands of interested depredators, and from the malicious schemes of disloyalty." Rowlandson very ruffian clearly depicted the costumes of the various corps in his coloured plates, and made them of practical value by showing each representative in the act of performing a manual, platoon, or funeral exercise. For instance, beneath Mars belonging to the Bethnal Green Volunteer Light Infantry is the following "Support Arms, ist Motion. At the word Arms, the the figure of a clean-shaven son of : right hand seizes the Firelock at the small of the Butt, leaving room between it and the lock for the left Arm, which is at the same time brought across the Body holding the Firelock tight, with the cock resting on the Arm." second book, " designed and etched by T. Rowland- A son," was also published in 1799. and Highland Broad Sword, of its contents. Some The title, Hungarian sufficiently indicates the nature of the pictures are highly theatrical, and the colours have been laid on with charming inexactness and an utter disregard for detail. The artist evidently believed in picturing the worst side of war ; the dead and dying chiefly Frenchmen are much in evidence, and one plate a stately cathedral is in flames. in CHAPTER V THE FRUSTRATED ATTEMPTS ON IRELAND, Great warriors To welcome With all, obey the glad call, brave Humbert who's just come to land pike, scythe, And and hedge-stake, now prove to the world we can yet let make 1798 ; us the field take, a stand. TOPICAL SONG. ON the 23rd May, 1798, four days after Bonaparte sailed for Egypt, the Irish Rebellion broke had out. It was the far-off echo of the first phase The inhabitants of the Emerald Isle now determined to make a supreme effort to shake off the yoke of Saxon supremacy. The of the French Revolution. of revolt had possibly been fostered by the harsh acts of men in authority, who hoped by this means to nip spirit the insurrection in the bud before French help was forthThe momentary success achieved in County coming. Wexford was sufficient excuse for the Irish exiles in France to again approach the Directory with a demand for immediate assistance. 1 As usual, they were met with vague promises, much goodwill and graciousness on the surface, and the inevitable delays. Eventually a start was and the French Government made, expressed its willingness to send over one thousand men and four thousand " Ireland is not difficult to invade, the points of landing being many. But an invader can hardly hold out more than three months, even with the help of the natives." Dumouriez MS., p. 276. 1 138 INVASION OF ENGLAND 139 muskets to augment the resources of the insurgents, offering at the same time five frigates for the purpose of transport. This force, of course, was so hopelessly inadequate as to be of little practical value. But the Directory had been bitten and, with its greatest military commander on the high seas, was shy. Had it been seriously interested in the welfare of Ireland, it would have been quite possible to send over a formidable detach- ment of the Army of England, now doing nothing particular, and this in the Brest squadron, which was in a sufficiently advanced state of readiness to allow of its being Tone begged and prayed with utilized. all native eloquence and aggressiveness for a measure worthy of the Great Nation, but to no purpose. Directory preferred puny disposed to generosity. efforts, and was not in his more The at all Bruix, the Minister of Marine, determined to send over a number of French troops in vessels belonging to the Batavian Republic, but the Dutch threw cold water on the idea, protested that it was next to impossible to elude the vigilance of the British blockading and prophesied nothing but failure. trouble, however, General Daendels again championed the cause, and two small vessels and three hundred men were granted. force off the Texel, After much Bruix, not satisfied with what savoured of a practical joke more than of anything else, busied himself with the French expedition, perhaps for no better reason than that his non-success on with the Dutch might cast a reflection an organizer. He managed to secure his ability as an addition of one ship-of-the-line and a sixth frigate. Divisional -Commander Bompard was put at the head of the venture, and over two thousand soldiers were 140 NAPOLEON AND THE ordered to march to Brest for embarkation. Then followed a long pause, and it was not until the beginning of July that General Chrin was appointed Commander-in-Chief. The total strength of the force at his disposal was now increased to eight thousand men, including those stationed Rochefort under General Humbert, who, it will be remembered, had taken part in Hoche's attempt, and at those at Brest under General Hardy. They were to sail two divisions from these ports simultaneously and effect in a junction off the coast of Ireland body under Cherin was to have if its possible. The main head-quarters at Brest and to follow as quickly as possible. Humbert was given the frigates Concorde (44), Me"dee (38), and Franchise (44), on board of which had been stowed 3000 muskets and bayonets, 3000 pouches, 400 swords, 200,000 cartridges, and 1000 French uniforms, in addition to three field-guns and the necessary ammuniHe was ordered to use the utmost caution and to tion. 1 attempt nothing big until he had been joined by Hardy's division. Moderation was to be the golden key with which they hoped to unlock the gate which kept Ireland from despoilers. There were to be no harsh measures, no pillage, no breach of morals. By preserving own ranks Humbert hoped strict discipline in his to set a good example to the Irish insurrectionists. Special care was to be taken that national customs and religious observances were respected. This expedition, with its noble ideals, was to receive a further check before starting. General Cherin, the nominal Commander-in-Chief, fell ill, and was on bad terms with Scherer, the Minister of War, as Bonaparte had been before him. He complained that the main force was 1 Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 70. INVASION OF ENGLAND not sufficiently armed. entreaties Scherer turned a deaf ear to his and hardened Humbert more than 141 his heart, giving Hardy and proportionate share of the had been voted for the which livres 200,000 (francs) whole force. Cherin retaliated by appointing subordinates their Such petty spite served to and bickerings only pour contempt on the persons most concerned. Scherer held the trump card in his hand, at variance with those of the Minister. and Che>in was ordered to Italy. Humbert, an enterprising individual with a keen eye to the main chance, had been pushing forward his preparations at Rochefort, while his superior officers had been Captain Savary had been put in of the naval part of Humbert's division, and he hoisted his pennant on the Concorde on July I2th, his merely wasting time. command secret instructions being to sail at night in the hope that the British fleet might not observe his movements. was to steer for Achill Head, the Mullet, or He Cape Teelin, whichever circumstances favoured. After landing the troops he was to return to France; but should the 1 enemy make a "successful attack during the landing," he was to reinforce the soldiers by the crews of the frigates, and burn the latter, thereby cutting off all hope of retreat surely a quixotic way of waging warfare. These orders presumed that the junction with Hardy's division of one sail-of-the-line and six frigates had not been found possible. Should they join forces, as it was hoped, Bompard was to take charge of the combined fleet, being the superior officer in rank. At last Humbert's three 1 on August 6th, There had been much frigates set sail 1798, with 1019 troops on board. Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 78. NAPOLEON AND THE 142 trouble about the pay of the men, but funds having arrived, the question of wages ceased to trouble them. The sheer audacity of so hazardous an exploit was fully worthy of Humbert, who cared nothing for his skin and little for On the 2Oth land was sighted, and hoisting the British flag two days later, he stopped a brig, secured her pilot, and received on board a captain of the Prince of his life. Wales's Fencible Infantry, who had been sent out with despatches, the port surveyor, and two sons of the Bishop of Killala, all of into the trap. whom had rowed out Anchoring to meet him and in Killala Bay, in the fell county of Mayo, the troops were disembarked, and by the following day everything in the way of arms, ammunition, and stores necessary for the desperate campaign was on shore. Three companies of grenadiers under Adjutant-General Sarrazin marched on Killala, where a tiny garrison, variously estimated at from fifty to two hundred fencibles and yeomen, was routed, with a loss to the French of three wounded. Twenty-three prisoners were made, in addition to several prominent clerics, and two killed. Some of the prisoners were let out on parole or kept in the Bishop's house ; others were taken on board the frigates, which shortly afterwards made all sail for France. Dr. Joseph Stock, the Bishop of Killala, has tion of Humbert's men, whom left a descrip- he found very good fellows. He tells us that "intelligence, activity, temperance, patience, to a surprising degree, appeared to be combined in the came over with Humbert, together with exactest obedience to discipline. Yet, if you except soldiery that the the grenadiers, they had nothing to catch the eye.