 Directory entertained the proposal, and the resourceful Bruix heartily The of " wants " for the expedition drawn the Minister of Marine not up by only shows the practical side of the Admiral's character, but also his regard for de- concurred. tails which, at quence. ribbon to He number of the list first sight, might be thought of make little conse- of green and white 150,000 cockades for the Irish, but reduced the included sail-of-the-line ells asked for by Kilmaine to six, 700,000 francs, the guns to twelve, the money soldiers to 5000, and the muskets to i$,ooo. 1 The decrease to 1 Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 192. INVASION OF ENGLAND in the 157 armament was probably not from reasons of econbecause supplies were running low. Every- omy alone, but thing was approved of; the Directory was in an optimistic mood. Bruix was not daunted even when he heard that Humbert had surrendered, but went on steadily with the He urged upon the Dutch the necessity for preparations. energetic co-operation, asking shipping accommodation for 1 200 troops. At the end of October things were in a forward state, for Kilmaine had busied himself in gathering together his soldiers. But the inevitable happened funds were not forthcoming, and before the Commander-in-Chief had got the members of the Directory to fulfil their : financial obligations the disaster that pard and Hardy crushed out had overtaken Bom- all faith in the success of Operations were suspended, and Kilmaine, disappointed of his hopes, went back to his old command of the Army of England. To complete the disanother attempt. comfiture of all concerned, the two Dutch frigates managed Texel on October 24th, having on board some three hundred troops, with the intention of reaching Galway to leave the Bay by sailing British frigate round the northern coast of Scotland. The coming up with them, they were battle and although the former fought Sirius compelled to offer under great disadvantages, the Dutchmen were forced to ; surrender. Savary, apparently unaware of the non-success of Bompard and Hardy, had set sail with six vessels for their relief on October I2th. He had strict orders to return with his 1090 men if bad news awaited him in Ireland. Two of his frigates left the main body, but the re- mainder reached Killala Bay. By a strange coincidence Savary was met by several British officers and men, INVASION OF ENGLAND 158 whom he made prisoners, following the precedent set The captain then heard of the unhappy by Humbert. Adjutant-General Cortez, who of the troops, showed some spirit and endeavoured to win over Savary to land the troops. fate of his comrades, but was in command Although the latter was inflexible as to obeying his orders to the letter, he decided to anchor for a few hours, and barely managed to escape an encounter with four British ships the following day. He was chased for seventy-two hours, keeping up a running fight with two of them, but escaping by taking the desperate measure of throwing everything overboard except the specie, so as to lighten the frigates. Further attempts against the British Isles were mooted by General Andreossy, the still undaunted Humbert, and others, but the Directory wisely left members had by this them alone. Its time become convinced that the road to London, for the French invader, at any not practicable " by way of Ireland." rate, was CHAPTER VI PLANS OF ATTACK INVASION PROJECTS OF iSoi AND DEFENCE " In war men are nothing ; it is a man who is practical thoughts of aside until 1801, A,L everything." NAPOLEON an invasion were put when Bonaparte, now First Consul, and but recently returned from the brilliant campaign which had culminated in Marengo, again meditated a hand-to-hand grapple with A letter written by him to Talleyrand, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, shows how ambitious were his naval as well as his military designs. 1 This communication, an unusually elaborate one, states that the England. had received a very friendly communication from Paul, the half-witted Czar, who was destined two months writer after to alliance be the victim of a dastardly conspiracy. is not at all between Russia and France An so own time as many people believe. Bona" Russia ought always to make common parte said that cause with France." 2 Such an entente was evidently a peculiar to our favourite scheme with Napoleon at one point of his career, indeed this letter sketches a vast programme of naval expeditions to be undertaken by the allied fleets of France, 1 Correspondence de NapoUon /, Vol. dated from Paris, January 27th, 1801. 2 VI, Talks of Napoleon at St. Helena, p. 157. 159 p. 746. Letter No. 5327, NAPOLEON AND THE 160 Spain, and Holland, supported by the Northern Powers of Russia and Denmark. Powerful armaments were to be organized for the following purposes (3) An expeAgainst Brazil and India Against Surinam, Trinidad, and the West Indies dition against Ireland (2) ; : (i) ; ; operations with similar objects in the Mediterranean. The First Consul proceeds to unfold (4) Hostile minute details of these comprehensive schemes. Everything was to be organized on the principle of first decoying the main naval force of Great Britain to Egypt. It is remarkable, however, that while he apparently designed to conquer England's sovereign possessions and to annex the most commanding strategic positions both East and West, no mention is made of invading the Mother- Ireland entered into his calculations, although no attempt was made to put the matter into execution until land. 1803, and then Channel was it was dismissed while the crossing of the ; certainly contemplated in 1801, but without The flat-bottomed boats built now defunct Directory, with new be used for this purpose. The idea of the aid of sail-of-the-line. during the regime of the additions, were to some of the European nations as his feudatory and making Russia his tool par excellence is quite treating vassals worthy of this The human and the ports were busy fitting out expeEgypt and India. Not until March 7th, 1801, machine going ditions to phase of Napoleonic statesmanship. dynamo soon set the wheels of his mighty ; did Bonaparte betray the fact that he entertained any notion of crossing the Channel, and then it was only by inference. Writing to Forfait, now Minister of Marine, he requests him to say how long it would take to collect at Boulogne one hundred gunboats, and also to state where INVASION OF ENGLAND 161 these craft are at present situated and in what condition they are in. The despatch is interrogative almost throughout. many many " How many men would they accommodate? could leave Boulogne at a single tide " harbour contain ? ? at a time could the How And how A fortnight afterwards Bonaparte writes impatiently to the same official respecting his report of the condition of things on the coasts. The Minister had failed to render anything like the good account which his exacting master had ex- pected, although of gunboats proper, large and small, and pinnaces, there were 276 in the ports of St. Malo, Cherbourg, Havre, Dunkirk, Ostend, Flushing, Brest, and Lorient. The First Consul determined that this scattered fleet, which was sadly lacking in organization and served no useful purpose, should be placed under the charge of La Touche an the only French admiral approaching Nelson in genius, and certainly the best naval officer Bonaparte ever had, was chosen for the efficient commander. Tre"ville, A man of less abundant energy or unfailing optimism would have declined the post as offering the maximum task. of work with the minimum failure of previous attempts to use the vessels augured for the future. 1 of reward, for the repeated ill In Bonaparte's decree of March I3th, flotilla of gunboats, its possible objective 80 1, instituting a only remotely hinted at, but the officers were advised to keep their crews efficient by constant exercise at sea. The is Admiral himself was told that the tection of the coasts and coasting flotilla trade, was for the pro- and the addition of another powerful means of offence when opportunity presented itself. The crews were always to be on board and ready a sufficient indication that there was a probability of an expedition being undertaken in the future, I. M NAPOLEON AND THE 162 although at the denuded of moment the sea-board departments were troops. La Touche innate hatred of the English on his part, and it is clear labour prompted unremitting that he had great faith in the utility of the means which Treville's at his disposal before many months had were put on the stocks and old ones boats passed. In April he was able to for in repairs. placed dry-dock report that good progress was being made, although the he hoped to have New First Consul's ambitious naval plans received a serious The check. a close previous year (1800) he had entered into alliance Sweden, with supremacy Russia, Prussia, Denmark, and avowed object of resisting British This was practically a revival of the with the at sea. Armed Neutrality of 1780 but the battle of Copenhagen, on the 2nd April, 1801, brought the power of the fought Maritime Confederacy to an untimely end, and showed ; that Nelson was more than a match for his foreign rivals. encouraging for an attempt to and cross the Channel, Bonaparte certainly did not give This set-back was not at much attention to the Touche all flotilla. On the other hand, La Treville visited the maritime ports, took stock of and was with their general fitness for his own special purpose, with the noteworthy exception of Boulogne, which was in a destitute state, with no defences, resources, satisfied and a single weak battery. These numerous disadvantages did not deter him from deciding upon it as the best place for collecting the vessels. The Admiral was no soldiers, already anxious to head an expedition, and told Bonaparte that from Calais alone he could embark twenty-five thou- sand troops, who would form the right wing of an army, the centre being at Boulogne and the left at Etaples. The INVASION OF ENGLAND First Consul's reply was not favourable, and discounten- Not in the least disconLa Touche Treville anced the idea of concentration. certed by this 163 ill-concealed rebuff, frankly disobeyed orders and began to collect as many boats at Boulogne as possible. Eventually he succeeded winning over Bonaparte to his own opinion, and on the ist June, 1801, an order was issued for an extra- in ordinary fund of 305,000 francs to be applied to the repair jetties and quays of the port, and reconstruction of the which were to be adapted to the accommodation of vessels drawing more water than could hitherto be admitted into This, of course, presaged the deepening of the harbour at some future time, which was done. 1 the harbour. La Touche built after was anxious to have fifty gunboats the Spanish model, which he purposed to use as Treville the vanguard of the invasion flotilla, the vessels being larger and more heavily armed than the French type. He had early recognized that the light-draught boats of the Dutch would be of great service for the transport of cavalry horses, and would make a valuable addition to the fleet of fishing-smacks which had been fitted up for that The Admiral made repeated experiments with purpose. the various kinds of vessels, and his men were frequently manoeuvring within gunshot of the English cruisers. He exacted a high standard of efficiency in the comparatively few sailors he had at his disposal, and even went so far as to offer to molest the Kent and Sussex coasts "every 2 his night, with a thousand or twelve hundred braves," retreat being assured by the Boulogne flotilla. For a really serious attempt on England he estimated that seventy-five thousand men would be , Vol. II, p. 20. > required. 2 It is evident from Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 316. NAPOLEON AND THE 164 Bonaparte's note of June 23rd, i8oi,to Augereau, in command of the Army of Batavia, that whatever the First concerning the 