r Office was entrusted, evidently did his work conscientiously and well, for minute details are entered into regarding the military and naval arrangements made in the days of good Queen Bess. Not the least instructive feature of the book is a chart of the " Thames, reproduced from Expeditionis Hispanoram in Angliam vera descriptio, A.D. 1588, Roberto Adams Authore," and according to the inscription said to have suggested the designs of the tapestry in the House of Lords. Chains and forts protected the river at various first points, and batteries were erected for the defence of many of the creeks. evident that certain plans outlined in the Report were incorporated in later Acts of George III, and it It is would almost appear as if High Sheriff Clavell had some of them. Dorsetshire seems ever to have adapted been a county looked upon with favour by an enemy, and 1 It The copy in Mr. Broadley's collection belonged to Mr. Secretary Dundas. has autograph corrections throughout by the author, together with inscrip- tion and signature. I. K The appendixes number sixty-nine. I NAPOLEON AND THE 3o inhabitants equally ready to defend every inch of their " " every measure of precaution was taken territory, for its when threatened. of Spain Philip Pioneers, carpenters, smiths, and wheelwrights play in its defence. all had artificers, their part to 1 contrasts the forces disposable in 1588 and 1798 as follows: "The army of Elizabeth consisted only of a few regiments, or such bands, as the nobility, counties, The Report and towns could summon together, to support the Crown and yet these, almost irregulars, had not only to guard the ; coasts against the Armada, but to watch over the northern 2 The army of temporary ally, the Scots. Britain, at this time [1798], besides a large body of regulars, consists of numerous and disciplined militia and fencibles, and of a great part of its respectable yeomanry frontier of its and inhabitants, in and and lives, their families, their property, their envied constitution." The only 1 embodied, voluntarily array, zealous to defend their portion of the Report which concerns us In General Dumouriez's elaborate MS. volume on British Isles (see Introduction, p. xxiv) he says the defence of the west of England turns, and : " Dorset is the defence of the is the pivot on which should be strongly guarded descent in Dorset threatens Portsmouth it according to the rules of the art. A and Plymouth equally, but it would be by way of a diversion and its temerity would meet with its due punishment. The coast abounds with stations and harbours of considerable strength, as Poole, Weymouth, and Lyme, etc. The and the Stour, hilly nature of the county gives it great strategical advantages, Puddle, and Frome, backed as they are by heights in amphitheatre, are excellent lines of defence." MS., p. 174. 2 According to the Report, "the total of the foot and horse, to be furnished by England, were 87,281 ; and by Wales, North and South, 45,408, making together, 132,689." As in 1798, the City of London acquitted itself with honour, and provided 20,696 men, not included in the above Although no voluntary contributions were sought, a loan was asked figures. from the Queen's "loving subjects," which amounted of 74,462. to the substantial sum INVASION OF ENGLAND that dealing with the arrangements made 131 and to organize arm the people. These are summed up by the author when dealing with the measures as " applied to the present He Crisis of public Safety." that the draws attention to the fact Lord Lieutenant, exercised, Crown, "by during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the power of calling on Counties, Towns, Bodies corporate, beneficed Ecclesiastics its and others, to furnish, in cases of menaced invasion, quotas of arms, ammunition, military stores, pioneers, artificers, &c., necessary for the mariners, and a proportion of in repelling the army ; and armed victuals, for common enemy vessels, them, to assist making the Lord ; Lieutenant, his Deputies, and the Justices, judges of such exemptions, as might be pleaded, from any of these services. the Lord That the Crown, by the Lieutenants, could power delegated to on all landowners, like call farmers, &c., to furnish carriages, posts to convey information of the approach, or actual landing of the enemy and ; himself, or his Deputies, to issue orders, for driving by by away the cattle and horses from the coasts, inland for burning and destroying the corn, or whatever might be ; of use to the enemy ; for breaking down bridges, cutting up roads, and, in general, for doing everything which might prevent, or might check, if he actually landed, his progress in conquest measures which the recited acts of the legislature have in part adopted, and in which the ; general loyalty of the subject in the present crisis has happily co-operated." Bruce then refers to the oath of supremacy administered to all the forces in Queen Elizabeth's service owing to her having received information that " Philip, Catholic party, had sent emissaries into her and the Kingdom, to NAPOLEON AND THE 132 undermine the allegiance of her subjects." He adds: "As the law authorizes a similar measure, or the taking and renewing the oath of allegiance to the Sovereign, would it not, in the present crisis, be a test, which would detect those reformers who seek for revolution^ or those rebels who have entered into a foul conspiracy to assist the enemy Should in bringing humiliation and ruin on their country ? should hypocrisy, induce men of either of fear, or these descriptions, to take, or to renew the oath of allegiance to their lawful Sovereign, such men must forfeit the confidence of those associates of sedition, or rebellion, and render themselves publicly infamous and criminal." Steps were certainly taken by Parliament to prevent foreign emissaries from spreading revolutionary notions in the British Isles. The Alien Bill was revived and amended. Those letting lodgings were obliged to send returns to Government of all foreigners living in their houses, and no aliens were allowed to set foot in England until the master of the vessel had received permits authorizing them to land. " The secret considerable encouragement held out (to the French) by a number of domestic enemies" led to the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act for a time. The number of armed citizens was growing daily. are told by the Bath Chronicle of May We " the 3rd, 1798, that of the Bath Volunteers met this day and elected for their Captain, Mr. Bossier first Lieutenant, first Company ; Captain Young ; Second Lieutenant, Mr. Redwood. They same time for their uniform, a scarlet collar and lappels, white waistcoat, and with black jacket red." with Such items were of blue pantaloons edged likewise chose at the frequent occurrence in the contemporary Press, and the advertisements of enterprising tradesmen who sought the ARTILLERY COMPANY ORDER A MEMBER OF THE HONOURABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY IN 1798. AFTER ROWLANDSON INVASION OF ENGLAND patronage of volunteers were no is following a specimen 133 less evident, of which the l : BATH THE MEMBERS may be 2 of the supplied with each at BATH ARMED ASSOCIATION WARRANTED FIRELOCKS at STOTHERT & Go's warehouse, No. 15 Street. Northgate Likewise PISTOLS and factory SWORDS from the first manu- BELTS and CARTOUCH BOXES. On June the 4th, 1799, the anniversary of the King's a birthday, grand review of over eight thousand London and Westminster volunteers was held in Hyde Park. The corps were headed by General Dundas, and His Majesty was attended by the Prince of Wales and the Dukes of York and Cumberland. The scene was witnessed by the Queen and the Princesses from a house in Park Lane, and although the weather was unfavourable, no fewer than 150,000 spectators assembled, many of whom took up positions of vantage on roofs, walls, and trees, to watch " The firing was, with some few exthe corps manoeuvre. with executed ceptions, great regularity. The exceptions a of to few the newly-formed corps and to others, apply which, originally small in numbers, had been incorporated with each a small time previously to the review." 2 Among the associations present were the Hon. Artillery Corps, St. George's Regiment, Loyal Hackney, Royal West- minster, Loyal Islington, Bloomsbury, St. James's, North- East London Volunteers, Loyal Hampstead, Temple, Loyal Pimlico, Finsbury Square, Somerset Place, Knight Marshall, the Ward Associations of Farringdon Without 1 Bath Chronicle, 2 Gentlemaris Magazine^ Vol. May xyth, 1798. LXIX, part i, p. 519. NAPOLEON AND THE 134 and Within, Castle Baynard, Stoke Newington, Tottenham, Enfield, Edmonton, St. Andrew and St. George, St. Clement Danes, Clerkenwell, St. Sepulchre, St. George Loyal London Volunteers, St. Luke's St. Margaret and St. John, St. MaryBrentford, (Chelsea), St. Martin's, Union, Chiswick, St. Paul's (Covent le-bone, (Bloomsbury), St. George (Hanover Square), SouthEast London Volunteers, Streatham, Limehouse, Ratcliffe, Clapham, Battersea, St. Catherine's, Poplar and Blackwall, Garden), Fulham, Whitechapel, Highgate, Lambeth, Hendon, ditch. sea, St. The Olave, eight Ward St. Pancras, Wapping, Associations, and Shore- cavalry corps of Islington, Clerkenwell, Batter- Clapham, Wimbledon, Lambeth, and Deptford were also present. A return of the London volunteers at this time gives their strength as 12,20s. 1 " After the firing," we are told, " the whole line waved and gave three hearty huzzas which, sound of military music striking up at the same moment, and the various expressions of joy from their caps in the air, ; joined to the the spectators, even the female part' of them joining by waving of handkerchiefs, is said to have drawn tears of joy An from their gracious Sovereign. aide-de-camp from the Commander-in-Chief, by his special command, went round to the commanding officers of corps, to say that His Majesty's sentiments of the general appearance and military proficiency of the Volunteers assembled should be more 2 expressed hereafter." After the review the Queen held a Drawing Room at " " St. James's. Hitherto," continues the chronicler, the war fully has certainly not diminished the spirits nor the wealth of 1 2 Loyal Volunteers of London and Environs, Introduction, p. vi. The King expressed his thanks in the London Gazette Ibid., p. 519. of June 4th, 1799. INVASION OF ENGLAND 135 the country, which are no more than fairly represented by the gaiety and magnificence of the first Drawing Room in Europe. About half past two the Ode was performed in the anti-chamber leading to the Drawing-room and his ; Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury delivered a congratulatory oration on the happy event. The noble personages present, exclusive of their Majesties and the Princesses, were the Prince and Princess of Wales, Duke and Duchess of York, Dukes of Clarence, Kent, Cumberland, and Gloucester, Princess Sophia, the Prince and Princess of Orange, the Imperial, Hanoverian, Danish, Neapolitan, Portuguese, Turkish, Russian, and American Ministers; the Archbishops of Canterbury and York ; Bishops of Norwich, Lichfield, London, Durham, Chichester, and the Lord Chancellor, Meath, and the Dean of Wells Salisbury, Winchester, ; Exchequer, Speaker of the House of the Rolls, Attorney and Solicitor Master Commons, General, Lord Chief Justice Eyre, and Baron Macdonald, Chancellor of the of Sir William Scott, the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of Lon- don, a number of officers present at the review, and an amazing show of nobility and gentry. The Court did not close till six o'clock, pany had left and it the palace. was past seven before the comThe Royal family went to the apartments to see the procession of the mail-coaches. The Prince of Wales appeared at one of the windows with the young Princess, his daughter, in his arms, and afterwards handed her to the King, amidst the applauding shouts of the populace. The Royal family then sat down to dinner." 1 The Great Rev