 were reinforced by two thousand men, Ireland would be free." 1 As it was, Napper Tandy's miniature army reached the coast of Donegal after Humbert had sur- Hearing that their comrades had met with the Anacreon was headed for the Shetlands. disaster, rendered. After having made a desperate brig and captured a merchant fight with an English naval ship, the refugees steered for Norway, being closely followed by a British man-of-war. Tandy was arrested at Hamburg, and after having been handed over to the British authorities, was tried and 2 acquitted on a point of law. General (afterwards Sir) John Moore's diary shows that the means placed at his disposal during his term of service (December, 1797-June, 1799) were quite inade"Should an invasion be attempted," he notes on in Ireland quate. the 1 6th April, 1798, "there will be no head to direct, and no previous arrangements made the scene will be dis" 3 The batteries graceful, and I wish to retire from it." ; erected at Bantry since the French were there would throw some impediments in the way of an enemy, but nothing but a considerable corps of troops could possibly prevent The way is too extensive to be defended by his landing. 4 Again, writing after Humbert had landed, General Lake was particularly warned not to risk an batteries." " action until a sufficient force had been assembled to ensure 1 Fortescue, History of the British 2 A Army, Vol. IV, p. 594. took place in 1801, and he was condemned to death ; but both Bonaparte and Cornwallis exerted themselves on his behalf, and he was released. He died in 1803. See Autobiography of Theobald Wolfe Tone, Vol. 3 second I, p. 54, trial note. The Diary of Sir John Moore, Vol. Sir J. F. Maurice, K.C.B. I, p. 4 288, edited by Major-General Ibid., p. 272. INVASION OF ENGLAND success, as in the state of Ireland ning might prove fatal in its any check 151 in the begin- consequences." * After the French army had been defeated, he acknowledges that Cornwallis's troops were "bad and undisciplined, little and if gone." It he had met with the least check the country was 2 now remains division of the to follow the operations of the second French expeditionary force. The hesita- and indecision of the Directory in sending aid was largely a question of funds, one of the causes of the tion The crews refused to delay in sending off Humbert. work the ships until they had been paid their wages, which were not forthcoming, and the troops were equally So clamorous. early as July 2ist the one sail-of-the-line and six frigates at Brest were waiting for their compleand General Hardy had received his instructions, ments, which were almost identical with those of his colleague, before Humbert had sailed. The course Bompard was to steer and the precautions were similar to those enjoined upon Savary. Commander to be taken mutiny there was seething discontent, much growling, and little done, although the men were full of enthusiasm as to the ultimate success of the If there was not actual expedition. Not until some 70,000 francs had been received and distributed did serious work begin, although the six field guns they were to take were already on Six thousand muskets and bayonets, 1,000,000 cartridges, 6000 pouches, 1200 swords, 2000 French board. uniforms, and equipment for 150 dragoons were hastily stowed away. On the evening of the 2Oth August, the day on which Humbert sighted the 1 Ibid., p. 312. 2 Irish coast, Ibid., p. 324. Bompard NAPOLEON AND THE 152 slipped his cables, his naval force having been augmented, and was composed of the Hoche, a. 74-gun sail-of-the-line, and the frigates Immortalite (40), Coquille (36), Embuscade (36), Semillante (36), Resolu (36), Romaine (40), Bellone (36), Loire (40), Biche (36), and Fraternity having on board some 3000 men, including Wolfe Tone, who sailed in Ill fate dogged Bompard from the the flagship Hoche. very start, for on his trying to pass Ushant he found a British squadron on guard, and two of his frigates collided. There was nothing for him the roads until an opportunity should enemy, which was not month do but anchor come in to elude the September i6th, almost a and a brig of the until after his first start. to Two frigates Brest blockading squadron pursued him from the following day until October 3rd, when Bompard shook them off. They therefore made for the North of Ireland, and on the nth joined Commodore Sir John Borlase Warren's fleet, which had been sent to intercept Bompard's ships. Off Tory Island the Frenchman found three sail-of-theline and six frigates, including the two which had given The reports of the contestants do not agree in several particulars. Bompard makes the battle begin at 7.30 a.m. on October nth, 2 while 1 chase, quietly awaiting his coming. James gives the date 3 8.30 a.m. The and the time of opening Magnanime (44 guns) and as the I2th, British frigate the sail-of-the-line Robust (74 guns) closed with the Hoche, which was supported by the Embuscade^ Coquille^ and Bellone. 1 The Amelia (38 guns) also attacked the French Epitome of James's Naval History r , p. 141. 2 Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 169. 3 There is a curious mistake in the epitomized edition of James's Naval History, edited by Robert O'Byrne (1888): on p. 140 the date of the battle is given as October I2th, and on the following page as the I3th. BHBBHHBHBBBHHI OHN BORLASE WARREN DEFEATS THE FRENCH INVADER OFF THE IRISH COAST, 1798 INVASION OF ENGLAND flagship, and the in damage on her as she and the Canada " took a distant The French vessels offered a inflicted considerable passed under her part 153 stern, action." 1 gallant resistance, although the crowded state of their decks impeded the efficient working of the guns. In two hours the Hoche was little more than a hulk, with five feet of water in her hold. Tone's son says that she was surrounded by four British sail-of-the-line and one frigate, which is misleading, seeing that the Robust and the Magnanime vessels really bore the brunt of the fight, the other being engaged with the French instance, the Melampus, after turned attention to her frigates. For opening fire on the Hoche, Embuscade, which she the handled severely, and, the Foudroyant coming up, she was forced to surrender. The Coquille attempted to escape with the remaining frigates, but was overtaken and captured. Not until the next day did the Bellone strike her flag to the Ethalion, which carried a heavier armament and sustained severe damage. The remaining ships of Bompard's division, with the exceptions of the Romaine, Semillante, and Biche, which escaped to French ports, were captured. The honours at sea on the French side were well won by the Immortality which managed to get away, and was making for Brest when she was sighted on the 2Oth by the British Fisgard* (38 guns). From 1 1 a.m. till 3 p.m. a fearful struggle ensued, and at first the Immortalite had the advantage, the Fisgard being rendered almost unworkable. It was a sorry ship that towed a sorry Plymouth harbour, and the most famous contemporary naval historian admits that the action was prize into 1 Epitome of James's Naval History^ 2 p. 142. See ante y p. 52. NAPOLEON AND THE 154 "ably contested on both sides, doing credit to the van- quished as well as to the victor. became a spectator of, much long and arduous struggle. cruisers, No obtrusive vessel less a participator in, the Considering the numerous British in particular, that are usually roaming about the chops of the Channel, a fair single combat, from first to last, is rare, and, therefore, deserves to be prized." 1 The total British casualties are returned at 24 and 100 wounded, and those of the French at over 350 killed and wounded, although no official records of the latter seem to be extant. Wolfe Tone, who had fought killed mistaken cause like a hero, was arrested and but escaped execution by committing suicide. for his tried, Whatever else might be forgotten, it would seem as if the French never by any chance left their native land without taking a generous supply of more or less flamboyant Proclamations with them. Copies of the following address were found on board the Hoche by her captors, and incidentally shows that Hardy thought the illustrious name borne by " " LIBERTY (Device. ! one to conjure with. his flagship EQUALITY ! FRATERNITY A cap of liberty. Two ! UNION ! hands united, and the rising-sun.) " THE GENERAL COMMANDING THE FRENCH ARMY IN IRELAND, TO THE UNITED IRISHMEN. " United Irishmen, The persecution which you experience on the part of a Government atrociously perfidious, has excited sentiments of indignation and horror in the breast of every friend of humanity. The lovers of liberty, while they admire your fortitude, deplore the situation to 1 Epitome of James's Naval History , p. 147. INVASION OF ENGLAND 155 The complaints of your suffering the of world, but your cause parts has become more particularly that of the French people. It is to give you new proofs of their affection, it is to second your generous efforts, that the Executive Directory I do of the French Republic has sent me among you. which you are reduced. country are heard in all not enter your country with hostile views, to spread terror I come not to dictate the law. or desolation around me. and friend of the gallant Hoche, I follow Companion I scrupulously the line of conduct which he marked out. to fulfil his engagements to offer you friendship and assistance to bring you arms, ammunition, and all the come ; ; means necessary to break the barbarous yoke under which you groan I present to you my brave companions they ; ; know no other road but that of honour and victory. Long trained in the art of humbling tyrants, under whatever form they may present themselves, they will join their they will mix their bayonets with courage with yours shall be free for ever and Ireland your pikes, " victims of the most execrable despotism, you Unhappy who groan in hideous dungeons, where at every moment ; ! you are plunged by the ferocious cruelty of your English your tyrants, let hope once more revisit your hearts ; chains shall be broken. Unfortunate inhabitants, who have seen your houses, your property, wrapped in flames by your pitiless enemies, your losses shall be repaired. " Rest in peace, gallant and unspotted spirits of Fitz2 1 Gerald, of Crosbie, of Coigley, of Orr, of Harvey your blood, shed for the sacred cause of liberty, shall cement the ; independence of Ireland ; it circulates in the veins of all your countrymen, and the United Republicans swear to punish your assassins. HARDY." 3 "(Signed) 1 Or 2 Quigley. Rebels FitzGerald, 3 who had been hanged, with the exception who died in prison on the iQth May, 1798. Popular Songs, etc., part iii, pp. 109-11. of Lord Edward NAPOLEON AND THE 156 Shortly after the return of Savary with the frigates which had conveyed Humbert and his men, and before it was known that they had sustained defeat, General Kilmaine, who was still in command of the so-called " Army of England," expressed his willingness to go to the relief of Being of Irish extraction, he flattered himself the rebels. that he round knew how his standard He was not to handle the once he had men he set foot felt would rally on Hibernian soil. content with a fugitive experiment such as had characterized the policy of the Directory since Hoche's asked for seven thousand men. disaster, but boldly was he satisfied with mere frigates ; Nor he wished to use seven of the ships-of-the-line lying idle at Brest, as well as eight frigates, and to take over with him twenty-five thousand muskets, so that he could make sure of having a present- when the peasants were armed, for four or five thousand of whom he intended to take over French uni- able force forms. He also realized that the possession of a plentiful supply of ready money was necessary to successful warfare, and asked for a million francs. Contrary to what one might expect in the light of past events, the