Channel armaments, he had again abandoned the thought of striking " You will receive instructions," a blow in England herself. Consul's initial ideas he writes, " may have been formation at Flushing of five divisions of gunboats, which, added to the sixteen divisions in for the La Touche impose on England." there was no TreVille probably surmised from the fact that artillery at Boulogne, and no soldiers at Dunkirk, that the Channel 1 ports, will project had been postponed, but that did riot prevent him from announcing in July that he had sufficient transports for thirty thousand troops, should they be forthcoming. In the middle of the same month Bonaparte gave a tardy order for a reinforcement of 3870 soldiers to help man the boats, so great was the dearth of that the plan, paradoxical as The utmost difficulty it sailors. Time showed seemed, was a sound one. was experienced by divisions of way to the port of concentration, making for the British cruisers continually harassed their movethe flotilla their ments. This trouble was partly overcome by the erection of a powerful battery near Cape Gris-Nez. Repeated applications for the Spanish gunboats failed to meet with any response, and as La Touche Treville believed them to be the key of the situation, this is additional evidence against the reality of Bonaparte's intentions. Eventually 150 boats had been gathered together at Boulogne, Calais, and Dunkirk before the belligerents decided to lay down The number of craft actually their arms for a season. built totalled 250, which would have accommodated about 2 25,000 of the 75,000 troops available for the expedition. 1 Desbri&re, Vol. II, p. 314. 2 Ibid., p. 411. INVASION OF ENGLAND The cry 165 of "Wolf! wolf!" had been heard so often that showed a disposition to wait In January, 1801, see, rather than to go and prepare. there were not more than 198,000 armed men in the British Isles, including volunteers, and although their ranks were augmented from time to time, England was at British statesmen first and ill prepared for a really serious attack. still It is true that her kept the French fleets in their harbours, squadrons with one or two exceptions, but previous expeditions had effected an escape, and it will be remembered that the flotilla was to be protected in crossing by its own gun- The British ships in actual boats, not by men-of-war. commission included no fewer than 127 sail-of-the-line ; France had only forty-nine, and many of these were in a bad state of repair. The following circular reveals the mode of internal clearly that it is defence for the United given in extenso Kingdom so : February 1801. ', Information and Instructions FOR COMMANDING GENERALS AND OTHERS. " His Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief thinks it necessary on the present occasion to point out the following circumstances and instructions for the guidance of the commanding generals and others, that they may be acquainted with the leading principles of defence of the country, and be the better enabled to apply them to the peculiar situation of their district. " We must naturally suppose, from the host of us, and from the advantages our insular surround foes that situation gives us while they can be kept at a distance, that their 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 66 great object must be an invasion of these countries. The consequences of success would be to them so great, that they be may led to attempt it, notwithstanding the superiority and exertions of our navy, and the vigilance and gallantry of our seamen, who have hitherto ensured our safety and from circumstances of wind and weather not impossible for them to accomplish on some one or more points of our very extensive coasts, a partial but considerable landing. Under this idea and expectation we must therefore be prepared, and in readiness to repel such an attempt, whether proceeding from the coasts of our inveterate and implacable enemy which more immediately threaten the capital and centre of the country or from those of our more distant ones, who have such great preparations to make, such probable difficulties to encounter, and so many perils to escape, that invasion from that quarter, though not beyond the chance of possibility, may be considered as less imminent than the former. " Before the descent of the enemy is undoubtedly expected, or the particular object of it is known, the troops will be cantoned or encamped in the manner that appears the most advantageous. The various lines of defence will in general have been ascertained. The combinations of the troops and their marches upon their several points of rendezvous, in consequence of the part of the country the enemy shall attempt, will be well understood and known to such as have an active part depending on them. The troops will be in a state of field preparation, and apprized of the general nature of the service that is to take place. Their subsistence will have been arranged and secured on their lines of march and probable operation. All the civil arrangements of Government will have been made and ready to carry into execution. Measures for reinforcing the army, for internal security, and for forming strong reserves will have been taken. Dispositions will have been made for breaking up roads, driving ; it is ; INVASION OF ENGLAND 167 and abandoning the country on the enemy's route, &c. Though our stake would be great, our advantages in defending it would be many, our principal ones ought to arise from our supplies, our certainty of subsistence, and our constant increasing force. "When an enemy lands, the difficulties of all civil Government and the restraint of forms cease, everything must give way to the supplying and strengthening the army, repelling the enemy, and preserving as much as possible the quiet of the country the strongest and most ; effectual measures are necessary for these indispensable purposes. "On the first landing of an enemy, if he cannot be prevented in the attempt, not a moment must be lost in assembling the troops, and pushing on the most advanced, however few in number, till more can be collected. The great object must be constantly to harass, alarm, and tire an enemy, and to impede his progress, till a sufficient force assembles to attack him the nature of the country ; affords every advantage for that purpose intricate ; and exceeding difficult for an enemy to advance, he is never to be lost sight of by the light troops, every inch of ground, every field may to a degree be disputed, even by inferior numbers. " As soon as ever he has quitted the coast, he must be surrounded in front, flank, and rear a knowledge of the inclosed, it is ; country, and a superiority of cavalry gives that advantage. He must be obliged to fight for every article of sustenance. within The country must be his reach driven, destroyed and everything useful mercy; this the without necessity of the case, and the infinite consequence of cattle and giving him an immediate check demand horses must at all events be removed. ; " On the side of the enemy, the difficulties of advancing through an inclosed country where there is an active opponent in front, flank, and rear, seem almost insur- NAPOLEON AND THE i68 mountable such as routes to be opened for the columns under an adversary's fire, unless the march is made along the high road, on a narrow front, and therefore the easier opposed. The means of connecting these columns and making them act and move in concert the disability of protecting and communicating with the flank ones, which the unare always exposed, and liable to an attack certainty of where is the principal danger, and from what ; ; ; quarter to expect the greatest effort of his adversary, the want of every comfort, of every necessary but what the individual can himself carry. " The combination of these circumstances when opposed with vigour, seem to render it impossible for an enemy to make much progress forward for as he must have landed with a very moderate proportion of artillery, ammunition, and provisions, or at least without the effectual means of transporting them, fatigue, and the want of nourishment will soon exhaust him, despondency will begin to take ; place, and despair will soon follow, if unable to advance in front, a retreat must be resolved on, or a desperate and unequal action hazarded. No such retreat can be made in a very regular manner confusion will arise, a re-embarkation with great loss will be attempted if there is any possibility of getting off, perhaps the scene may terminate in a total surrender. ; supposes in the defendant the most indeand fatigable unremitting activity and valour, every circumstance should induce him to this conduct, to allow time for putting in motion each spring, and applying every resource. Each day decreases the ardour, spirit, and numbers of the attacker, and increases in a much greater proportion the confidence and strength of the attacked, not only of the soldier and the militia-man, but "All this of the very peasant; a sure retreat is always open; plenty, and refreshment of every kind await them, and the support of increasing numbers. INVASION OF ENGLAND 169 " the enemy should If, notwithstanding every effort, advance within reach of the capital, a great action must take place, but at such a distance as to allow of the prospect of rallying and making a second stand in case of a In this situation, the advantage of artillery, in some degree the choice of the ground and cavalry, ought to decide against an enemy who would want these, and who would be encompassed on every side by superior repulse. when numbers, though perhaps not of regular troops things are brought to this point, determined valour, with these advantages must ensure success. : " After taking possession of one of the coast towns, certain district of country, should he not advance towards the capital, or towards some other material point, and of a but endeavour to establish himself and protract the war, a new scene would arise these previous arrangements would enable us to act with advantage, and the sequel would depend on the circumstances of the moment. " From the moment that an enemy is discovered from the coast and pointing to a place of landing, the driving of ; the country must begin, be strongly enforced, and made if possible by other routes than those of probable operation of the troops, rupted, and whose movements must not be inter- when the acting direction of the enemy is sufficiently ascertained, nothing within the probability of his reach should be suffered to remain nor would this ; incommode the advanced troops, for their readily come up from their rear, and above supplies would all the removal of horses of every description must be accomplished, if is rigidly executed, his future movements will become exceedingly slow and fatiguing, perhaps impossible. The this mode prescribed, and will be arranged every county and district of the exposed coast, the execution allotted to the yeomen cavalry, and every reasonable hope may be entertained of its being carried of doing in into effect. all this is i;o NAPOLEON AND THE " Nothing will more effectually disappoint and disconcert the project of an invading enemy than the driving and abandonment of the country, and the total destruction of the roads for miles round whatever point he made his landing at, or at least for several miles on each side of the route he meant to pursue. Could this be accomplished as easily as imagined, he would find himself in a desert, unable to advance, or to give the time necessary to free himself from the first embarrassments thrown in his way, and which would only be a prelude to more considerable opposition. This alone persevered in, would stop all progress, his distresses and wants would increase in proportion to his numbers, and if his communication was by a superior naval force, he must soon be reduced to the greatest difficulties. But as this cannot be expected to the desired amount, 