RSICAN BoNAPARTE'S HAND-BILLS; or a Charming Prospect for Britons And & John Bull AWAKE his Family. ! though it be galling to your feelings, and make your blood boil with indignation, to read that which is to follow, it is surely far better INVASION OF ENGLAND 231 you should experience this, than the direful effects of that ruin and which you are now menaced, and which must inevitably be your lot, should you not rouse and meet the danger with one hand and one heart. that destruction with KNoW THEN the Corsican Buonaparte, the Grand Subjugator of the French This relentless Tyrant, Nation, has at length thrown off the mask. to this insatiable monster of cruelty and ambition, this eternal enemy That the repose and happiness of all mankind, no longer conceals his long buried rancorous designs of annihilating this truly happy country, the This atrocious intention he has not only made envy of all Europe. to M. Marcoff, the Russian Ambassador at Paris in an affected of merriment but he has proclaimed it by handbills in every hole and corner of France. known fit is not a Town or Village, between Paris and Calais where not be read hand-bills to the following effect : There may ROAD But now mark my to England. brave countrymen what follows. tion to every dastardly Frenchman whose courage is an invita- It is only to be roused by the hopes of plunder, to enlist for the Army of England ; which country, the haughty Tyrant boastingly tells them, shall be devoted to Behold says this rapacious Conquerers as their just reward. the richest and Plunderer and Assassin, the Paradise of the World its ! ! Nature most flourishing Nation the Sun ever blessed with its beams and art seem here to have combined to leave nothing wanting to it's ! happiness. Observe the riches of her plains covered with grain and matchless cattle. : not an acre but what Towns, villages, mansions, beautiful country seats, villas, gardens, orchards. ever beheld so enchanting, so lovely a scene Brave ! is stately Was there Frenchmen ! Could you but see the interior of these invaluable towns and happy dwellings, you would find there not only every desirable comfort of life, even among the very lowest classes of the people, (I mean compared with your own wretched hovels) but go but one or two steps higher, and there you would discover almost every article that industry can produce, or luxury ever thought of. But from whence flow all these superabundant riches and their commerce ; 'tis The answer is plain 'tis their industry their manufacturing towns that are her in- ? NAPOLEON AND THE 232 exhaustible mines Oak, and these are the true seed of her boasted British ; that insolent and inconquerable navy, which has set all Europe at defiance for ages past. But England boast her let Sheffield and her Birmingham her ; Liverpool and her Bristol ; her Newcastle and her other numberless rich towns and cities All these brave Frenchmen shall be your's Aye I repeat it, they shall be your's Nay, your reward shall not end ! here for though the haughty Britons must bite the dust, their wives ; and daughters must he spared for what purpose I need not tell you. Rouse, rouse then, brave and heroic Frenchmen ; brave all dangers and look to your reward ; for, spite of that ridiculous lying song, Rule Britannia, I now announce to you, that Britains shall be slaves ; and what is more, they shall be most abject slaves, to all powerful, and all- conquering France. Such, Britons, is the boast of the Corsican Tyrant, the grand Subjugator of the great French Nation; and such are the Hand-bills I do not say that the above are the very spread throughout France. words ; What but I say such are their true sense and meaning. answer my Gallant Countrymen shall we give to this ? Surely there can be but one ; and that thank Heaven ! will be found " Or Death or Freedom engraven on the bottom of your hearts. ; or in other words, Annihilation to every Frenchman who shall dare to set his cloven-foot on these happy and matchless shores. Let this bloody-minded Corsican then dare to land on British ground, with his thousands and hundreds of thousands of hell-hounds at his back, and he shall find that that same spirit and bravery that enabled our gallant Army Egyptian to compel double its numbers of French to lay down now again, with the blessing of the Almighty, drive our enemies into the Sea, whenever their rapacity or temerity may their arms, shall tempt them to reach our shores. A N.B. true Friend to It is earnestly Old England. recommended to the Editors of the Sunday Papers to insert the above Hand-bill. The invasion pamphlets were, as a rule, serious character than the invasion broadsheets of a and more ballads. a good deal of common sense in Thoughts on a French Invasion with Reference to its Success and the There is INVASION OF ENGLAND Proper Means of Resisting it, by Havilland Le Mesurier, Commissary-General of the southern The in 233 district of tract earlier of Mr. published 1798. Pitt has already been dealt with, and Mr. England, Morton Le Mesurier advocates a very similar policy as regards the attitude of the rural population. "After distressing the enemy," he writes, "the next point for every individual to consider, is how best to assist the armed force and join in the common defence. When- ever troops are on their march towards the enemy, every hand will surely be active in procuring bread for them. There our generous countrywomen will be found to share in the laurels, which their husbands, their brothers, and they will be ready to refreshment and every necessary support on the march, and at every halt; the farmers will assist with their teams and waggons in transporting artillery and their friends, are seeking to gather ; provide for their and every one will be careful to keep the roads as clear of incumbrances as possible for, that is a point of forage, ; the utmost importance, which they, who have never seen great movements, are not sufficiently aware of. "That the French army, if ever it should land, will come with erroneous opinions of the people, and that it will meet with confusion and dismay sequence of that error, is at landing, in conevident from the declaration of their boastings must to every firm mind appear ridiculous, and, but for the wickedness of degenerate men in our own country, would be perfectly detheir rulers ; spicable." Another poet scarcely less famous than Burns was now to take the field with the invasion as his theme. In the spring of 1798 (while The Raft and The Mouth of the NAPOLEON AND THE 234 Nile occupied the boards at Covent Garden) Samuel Taylor Coleridge, in the inspiring quietude of Nether Stowey, penned Fears in Solitude, dated 28th April, 1798, and stated vasion." 1 to be written "during the alarm of an in- too lengthy for quotation in its entirety, but the following lines give a good idea of the poet's feelings on the now all-pervading topic It is far : God My a melancholy thing it is ! For such a man, who would full fain preserve His soul in calmness, yet perforce must feel For human all his brethren O my God ! weighs upon the heart, that he must think What uproar and what strife may now be stirring This way or that way o'er these silent hills Invasion, and the thunder and the shout, It And all the crash of onset And undetermined conflict Even now, perchance, and Richard Cumberland at writer of the this ; fear and rage, even now, in his native isle. time entered the now eagerly sought for martial he as follows to a friend later wrote years lists lyrics. as a Some 2 : " igth September, (1804?) " My dear " Sir, "When your Ramsgate, whence I letter am TUNBRIDGE WELLS. reach'd this just return'd, place and I was at at present too much occupied with a variety of affairs to solicit Invention any thing new but that I may show my obedience to every wish of your's, I have rummag'd my old MSS. for for ; what I mark of can my find, good and send you y e following rather as a will, than as flattering myself it will e worthy y genius of your friend to set to music. 1 2 The Poetical Works of S. T. Coleridge (Warne's edition), pp. 139-40. Mr. Broadley's Invasion MSS. be INVASION OF ENGLAND 235 THE VOLUNTEERS' SONG " " " Dauntless souls, that " " " death flout at : We are stout and we are steady, " " Captain, Captain, see before you Phalanx firm, that pants for glory, Give the word and we are ready, 1 / Loyal to our latest breath. Thund'ring blasts around us roaring, Fiery floods of sulphur pouring, " Firm amidst y6 storm we stand " Truth and Honour thus combining, " now be joining Steady, steady : \ / ! " Heart to Heart and Hand Hand to ! Chorus. " Steady Steady ! THE &c. &c." ! RIFLE-CORPS' SONG (GLEE) " arms, to arms Now give the bugle breath " e Sound, sound y note of victory or death " To the echoing woods, " To the mountainous floods To ! ; ! " Around let " Down " To it go, and around the terrible Steep : the bellowing Deep, the Host of Invaders are drown'd, " Around let it go, and around " When ! Solo. " Hark, hark I hear the hollow blast, " Sighing it comes, as 'twere the last ; " I hear the wounded victims groan, " The sympathetic echoes moan " ! And now it sinks, and now 'tis past. Full. " See, see " Their the vaunting braggarts fly, wreckt, their hopes are " Their floating bodies strew ye coast, ! fleet is " " lost, Now raise your voices high ; Let notes of triumph rend the sky " ! "RiCHD. CUMBERLAND." NAPOLEON AND THE 236 " Ever- Faithful Exeter," true to her great traditions, was, as might be anticipated, a foremost centre of re- The Exeter Volunteers sistance. their theatre (1797) "bespoke" at a performance of the historical drama of Arviragus, or the Roman Invasion, and insisted on encoring more than once with deafening cheers the war-song of Clewillin l : If to the battle ye shall go, All rush upon Rush on the foe without dismay, th' invading foe : Like roaring lions on their prey ; Or wolves, that from the mountain rock, Descend upon the fleecy flock. Let your arrows' numerous flight Intercept the rays of light Sling the javelins, hurl the darts Infix them in the Roman hearts ; : And advanc'd to nearer Britons fight, exert your steadfast might meet his Roman in the field, ! Each With spear to spear, And and : shield to shield, in scythed car, thou, Arviragus Break through the firmest ranks of war ! : Vengeance and terror at thy side, O'er warriors, shields and helmets, ride ; Increase the torrent of the crimson flood, And As bathe thy horses' hoofs and rapid wheels in blood. be seen by the illustration reproduced from Sir White's collection in these volumes, "Royal and George " Free Bristol (the objective of Hoche's Black Legion exwill 2 pedition ) proved herself worthy of the occasion. Below the picture of her volunteers are the following MS. lines : J 2 Gentleman's Magazine , Vol. See ante t p. 39. LXVI, part i, 1797. INVASION OF ENGLAND Oh ! Alia, or what remains of 237 thee, Thou darling of posterity, Whether to curb the Warhorse be thy guide, Or draw the falchion glitt'ring from thy side, To check the daring foe. Let Bristow's Fifty be thy care, Whose Volunteers in sweet Queen Square Go forth to taste the morning air And deal destruction mid the fair, Whose charms before had laid them low. Let other Laurels grace their brows, Laurels obtained by good hard blows, To show us that an ardour glows Within their breast to check their foes Who dare to soil their fame. So shall the blood-stained Frenchmen know Such sprigs of Liberty as his won't grow, Where native freedom's lovely blossoms blow Bright as a star and purer than the snow To gild a freeborn Briton's name. (I797-) This was in 1797, and it was in the month of February of the same year that the following effusion appeared, which may be taken as a type of hundreds of similar productions : Sweet is the talk to strike the loyal string gallant Rodney's well earn'd praise, Round him shall Fame eternal garlands fling, To Whose And till time decays our living 