nd all fell thus it still came under the merciless Gillray, the Juvenal of eighteenth-century who, as an ardent Whig, had once regarded James caricaturists, the many peace with France, and proceedings universal Coleridge, of the freedom, but Paris mob who now, the as like dawn of Burns, Southey, and Wordsworth 1 amongst the 1 poets, and It was the French invasion of Switzerland in 1798 which inspired Wordsworth's sublime sonnet, commonly known as "The Two Voices." There is an echo of the Great Terror in its last lines " For high-souled maid, what sorrow would it be That mountain floods should thunder as before, And ocean bellow from his rocky shore, And neither awful voice be heard by thee?" : INVASION OF ENGLAND 197 Mackintosh amongst the politicians, frankly acknowledged his mistake and embraced, to some extent at least, the From the commencement of the Great opinions of Pitt. Terror the pencil of Gillray was at the service of George Canning and the Anti-Jacobin. As we shall presently see, the and however, some English Premier had no more powerful ally, Bonaparte no more relentless foe. time to bring about that absolute unanimity of public It took, on aggression which characterized the popular movements of 1803, 1804, and The prevailing feelings of 1796 and 1797 were 1805. opinion the subject of French half-hearted and lukewarm, compared to those which took complete possession of the British mind at the sudden termination of the "experimental" peace which no man believed in less than George III. 1 In 1796 the office of Poet Laureate was by no means was then held by a worthy Berkshire gentleman who rejoiced in the name of Pye, and is now described on high authority as "Poetaster and Poet a sinecure. It was the duty of Henry James Pye, as it had been that of Thomas Warton, William Whitehead, and Colley Gibber before him, to compose odes for New Laureate." It Year's Day, the King's birthday, and other occasions, which, being duly set to music by the Court bandconductor, were performed in the presence of the Royal Family and I their guests. 2 As far back as January 1st, 795> the fear of foreign invasion took possession of the mind of Pye, and we of the ode " find it reflected in the last verse performed that day at 1 See p. 266. 2 At Sir William St. " James's : Eraser's sale a volume was sold containing copies of these effusions from 1715, when Nahum Tate was Laureate, culled from contemporary sources and entitled Laureated Leaves and Rhymes for Royalty. NAPOLEON AND THE 198 Yet if the stern vindictive foe, Insulting aim the hostile blow; Britain in martial terrors dight, high th' avenging sword, and courts the fight ; every side, behold her swains, Crowd eager from her fertile plains ; Lifts On With breasts undaunted, lo they stand, Firm bulwarks of their native land ! ; And The proud, her floating castles round, guardians of her happy coast, Bid their terrific thunder sound Dismay, to Gallia's scattered host While still Britannia's navies reign ; Triumphant o'er the subject x main. George III was a "stalwart" from the first. He had celebrated his fifty-sixth birthday some months before he " " applauded Pye's first invasion ode (harmonized by Sir W. Parsons), and several years afterwards was still anxious " Corsican hand, against the 1 verse was not task But yet complete. Pye's Usurper." was promptly added to the National Anthem. sword to lead his troops, in A Thou who rul'st sea and land, Stretch forth thy guardian hand, Potent to save ; Lead forth our Monarch's Host, Check proud Invasion's boast Crush'd on our warlike Coast, 'Whelm'd by our wave. Pye did but his best also to "invasionize" "Rule, Britannia"; Anna Maria Seward lines took the public fancy with the Thee, haughty tyrants ne'er shall tame, All their attempts to bend thee down, Shall but arouse thy gen'rous flame, And work their woe, and thy renown. Rule, Britannia, etc. 1 See Introduction, p. xvii. INVASION OF ENGLAND 199 Before the close of the year (1796) the volunteers were arming for the coming struggle, and the first abortive London by way of Ireland " had brought ridicule on its contrivers. Amongst the early recruits was Robert Burns, who penned the Song of the Dumfries Volunteers when the shadow of death had attempt " to get to already fallen upon him. It was early in 1795 that Burns donned the blue coat and nankeen breeches of his com- pany, and just three months after the performance of Pye's first invasion ode his comrades-in-arms were singing to the heart-stirring tune of " Push about the jorum " : Does haughty Gaul invasion threat ? Then let the louns beware, Sir. There's wooden walls upon the seas, And volunteers on shore, Sir. The Nith And Ere we On run to Corsincon, sink to Solway, permit a foreign foe shall Criffel British 1 2 ground to rally. Fal de lal, etc. O 3 let us not like snarling tykes In wrangling be divided Till slap come in an unco loon* ; And Be with a rung 5 decide Britain Amang still it. to Britain true, ourselves united ; But never but by British hands Maun British wrangs be righted. Fal de lal, etc. The kettle o' the kirk and state, Perhaps a claut may fail in't But deil a foreign tinkler loon Shall ever ca 6 a nail in't ; ; } 1 2 A high hill at the source of the Nith. A mountain at the mouth of the same river. Dogs. 4 Ragamuffin. 6 Cudgel. 6 Drive. NAPOLEON AND THE 200 Our fathers' bluid the kettle bought, And wha wad dare to spoil it By heaven, the sacrilegious dog ; Shall fuel be to boil it. Fal de lal, etc. that wad a tyrant own, the wretch, his true-born brother, would set the mob aboon the throne, The wretch And Who d together they be d not sing " God save the King," Shall hang as high's the steeple ; May ! Who will But while we sing " God save the King," We'll ne'er forget the People. 1 Fal de We lal, etc. have more to learn of the machinations of the "foreign tinklers" and their English friends in 1795-6. Playing at treason was not then quite so unfashionable as it became seven years later, and Burns was evidently a keen politician as well as a true poet. He for one had, at any rate, no sympathy with the specious pretexts for foreign invasion which found a few advocates in the early days of the Great Terror. It is sad to relate that the last days of Burns were harassed by pressing applications for the settlement of a debt of 7. 4.3. incurred for his volunAllan Cunningham tells us that when the singer of this wonderful swan-song was brought home to " dressed in a blue coat with the undress nandie, he was teer uniform. keen pantaloons of the volunteers, and that his neck, 1 The war-song does not appear in the Anti- Galilean of 1803-4, but another martial hymn written by Burns is published. The last verse runs In the field of proud honour our swords in our hands, Our King and our Country to save While victory shines on life's last ebbing sands, Oh who ! would not rest with the brave ? INVASION OF ENGLAND 201 which was inclining to be short, caused his hat to turn up manner of the shovel hats of the episcopal Truth obliges me to add, that he was not fasticlergy. dious about his dress and that an officer, curious in the personal appearance and equipments of his company, might behind in the ; have questioned the military nicety of the poet's clothes and arms." 1 Cunningham also relates that when one of comrades came to his Burns smiled and fire over me." said, visit him during his last illness, "John, don't let the awkward squad this was a jest or a request will Whether never be known, but the national poet of Scotland was buried with military honours. On the 25th July, 1796, the Dumfries warriors fired three volleys over his grave. The Invasion Parnassus is, it must be confessed, distin- guished by quantity rather than quality, although Burns, Scott, Coleridge, and Wordsworth all contributed to it. The year 1796 had begun with a remarkable but now entirely forgotten trial which threw considerable light on the state of public opinion concerning the all-absorbing question of the threatened invasion. On the 28th January a certain Mr. William Stone, a gentleman both by birth and education, appeared before Lord Kenyon and the full Court of King's Bench at Westminster Hall to answer an indictment for high treason. He was also charged with conspiring with his brother, John Henry Stone ("a domi- Frenchman"), and William Jackson, an Irish American, to commit that crime. It was clear that under ciliated names of Benjamin Beresford, Thomas Popkins, and William Knots they had carried on an extensive cor- the feigned respondence with the object of gaining such reliable intelligence as would enable them to judge of the expediency 1 The Casket of Literature , Vol. I, p. 40, edited by Charles Gibbon. NAPOLEON AND THE 202 or otherwise of a descent on these shores. Lord Lauder- Mr. Sheridan, Samuel Rogers, the banker-poet, and others gave evidence. In the course of his examination dale, Mr. Sheridan said that the accused had been " introduced him by a Mr. Wilson, who said, that he (Mr. Stone) wanted to communicate to him what might be of advantage to the country and then (the prisoner) said, that he had had frequent communications with his brother at Paris, to ; and he understood, from communication, that the idea of attempting an invasion of this country was a plan seriously this and peremptorily resolved upon by the government of France that this idea was adopted, and likely to be pur; upon an opinion, which was very ill formed, of the general state of the public mind, and the prevalence of sued, He then stated, that general discontent in this country. the service he thought he could effect, would be the means, through this circuitous channel of communication, to undeceive the government of France upon this subject, and by giving them the real state of the country, and convincing them how little could be expected from anything like assistance, or co-operation, from any description of men in this country, he conceived and hoped the con- sequence might be, their abandoning a project evidently taken up upon false information." The whole question turned on the real object of Mr. Stone's inquiries, and after three hours' deliberation the jury acquitted him but there can be no doubt that foreign emissaries were endeavouring to assist the would-be invaders of England ; by sowing the seed of sedition throughout the country and exciting discontent amongst our soldiers and sailors. In April and May of the following year (1797) dangerous mutinies declared themselves on board the King's ships at INVASION OF ENGLAND 203 Portsmouth and the Nore, and notwithstanding the victory off Cape St. Vincent on the I4th February, and the discomfiture of Tate's banditti at spread anxiety prevailed. Fishguard ten days 1 In was distributed broadcast England in May wide- later, the following handbill every barrack throughout : TO THE BRITISH ARMY. COMRADES, Are we not men ourselves to be such Are we anywhere respected Is high time Is it not ? we should prove that men, and why are we not as Have not wrong notions of discipline led us to our there a man among us, who does not wish to defend not willingly do puppies we know ? ? present despised condition his country and ? who would without being subject to the insolence and cruelty of effeminite it ? Were not the sailors, like despised for poverty as we mocked for want of thought, though not so much Have they not proved that they can think and act us are ? and preserve every useful point of discipline, than when under the tyranny of their officers ? for themselves What makes this difference non-commissioned Are they between a commissioned full as well, officer or better and a private or ? better men ? You must laugh at the thought ! Do they know Don't they owe their promotions to their connections with placemen and pensioners, and a mock parliament which pretends discipline half so well as our Serjeants to represent the people ? ? When we brother, as brothers, think of 