s of " " Fox and " Billy " Pitt. It was, however, now Charlie deemed advisable to counteract the poisonous doctrines and pernicious practices of our Gallic neighbours which culminated in the tragic death of their King and Queen, and to a woman, Hannah More, 2 belongs, to a great extent, the credit of supplanting the forms of popular above alluded to by scattering broadcast throughout the land a myriad of small tracts (of which Village Politics by Will Chip may be taken as an example) literature that, principally through the itinerant vendors, reached and influenced an immense public of all classes. It was 1794, when the earlier threats of invasion began to make themselves heard, that she wrote thus to her friend in 1 The scene is depicted in a very scarce illustrated sheet printed and pub- by M. Moore in Paternoster Row, 1746. Hannah More, b. 1745; d l8 33- lished 2 - I. P NAPOLEON AND THE 210 Elizabeth Montagu, 1 whose career was now nearing its end " I have been so long accustomed to receive favour, : kindness, and that am I assistance encouraged to from you on every occasion, recommend the enclosed little plan to your patronage. theories for which this age of real experience. I It is is not one of the wild so famous, but the fruit have long seen and lamented the In all the villages proposed to counteract. I know, it is surprising to see with what impatience the periodical visit of the hawker is expected, and with evil is it was swallowed. You would be the immense quantity of trash I have col- what avidity diverted at lected ; his poison even those papers which are written with better in general calculated to do more harm than good, consisting chiefly of ghosts, dreams, visions, When we consider the zeal with witches, and devils. intentions are which the writings of Priestley, etc., are now brought within the compass of penny books, circulated with great industry, and even translated into Welsh, I begin to fear workmen and become philosophers the morals and the is the most of the probable method to poor principles In preserve us from the crimes and calamities of France. this view, I am not above becoming the compiler and that our too, porters will and that an endeavour to composer of halfpenny papers. amend If, my dear Madam, any impressive story falls in your way, pray treasure it up for me." Thus originated Hannah More's Cheap Repository of popular anti-revolutionary literature, which paved the way for the wholesale dissemination of those pamphlets, tracts, broadsheets, songs, and caricatures which, between spirit, and 1796 and 1805, did so much to rouse public 1 Mr. Broadley's MSS. INVASION OF ENGLAND make every man, woman, and 211 child in Great Britain a personal hater of the Corsican invader, as well as to facilitate the carrying out of the defensive measures of which George III, quite as much as his ministers, generals, and admirals, was the life and soul. The literature and iconography 1 of the first period of the Great Terror is 1803 and 1805 the all- abundant enough, but between important question of resistance-to-death seems almost to have absorbed The all contemporary beautiful colour-plate topics. books dealing with the uniforms and drill of every arm represented amongst the volunteers of 1796-8 have already been described, 2 and much has been said of the liberality and enthusiasm with which the national defence funds were augmented by The unanimity with which the appeal private donations. for pecuniary help was met is the more remarkable, when remembered that the second year of the Great is it Terror witnessed the mutinies at Portsmouth and the Nore, and other visible signs of general unrest. Help came many unexpected quarters. In the minutes of our from English Masonic Lodges, both for 1797 and 1798, frequent reference is made to contributions in aid of national defence. Goodly sums came from the brethren of Bristol and Bath, while a certain Dr. Richard Linnecar, who presided over " the still-existing Lodge of " Unanimity at Wakefield, now the number Yorkshire, 154, appears to have bearing sent an appeal for aid to other Masonic bodies all over the 3 country. The following record of the proceedings at the Bull Inn, Wakefield, on the 2nd April, 1798, istic of the times is character- : 1 By this convenient term portraits, views, caricatures, and every species of pictorial illustration dealing with a given subject are denoted. 2 See ante t pp. 135-6. 3 Mr. Broadley's MSS. NAPOLEON AND THE 212 " Notice having been previously given to the Brethren of the Master's Intentions " The Right Worshipful Master LlNNECAR " " Moved To In the Chair, take into Consideration the Expediency of a Masonic Contribution in aid of Government at the present alarming Crisis, when the following Resolutions were severally put, and unanimously agreed to. "Resolved, " That it is the grand and leading Characteristic of Free and Accepted Masons, in every Clime and under every Form of Government, to be obedient to the Powers that are, and grateful to the laws by which they are i. protected. " That, accustomed as they everywhere are to the Study of whatever is most perfect in the sublime Science of Architecture, they are led to admire Beauty under all its forms and various Appearances. And that We the inhabitants of this happy Isle do most especially contemplate 2. with enthusiastic Fondness and Admiration the nice Sym- metry and Proportion of that Glorious Structure, the British Constitution ; consisting of King, Lords, and Commons. " 3. That the Cause and Interests of our most ancient Institution are more particularly maintained by, and have ever been most prosperous under the Monarchical Form of Government : That this, and other weighty Reasons and Considerations moving us, We do avow an unfeigned love of the King, our Sovereign the Friend and Father of his and look upon no Sacrifices to be too great, People which have for their Object the Dignity of his Crown, the Safety of his Person, and the Stability of our incomparable Constitution and Laws. " 4. That we are decidedly amongst the foremost of our ; patriotic Fellow-Subjects to approve and adopt any Measure, INVASION OF ENGLAND 213 that may (by our competent Rulers) be thought most conducive to the general Welfare, and the Prosperity of the State. " our exclusive Capacity of Free and Accepted do now gladly embrace the Opportunity of Masons, in the proposed Expediency of A Masonic acquiescing Donation to Government in Support of its vigorous Exer5. That in We tions to confound the Enemies of the Land we live in : to ourselves, at the same Time such other Portion of pecuniary Assistance as may be reasonably Expected in a more general Parochial Contribution. and that we reserve " 6. That the Secretary be empowered immediately to receive the Donations of the Brethren present, and without Loss of Time to collect the Contributions of absent Brethren : that their the respective Society, Sums together with the Amount of entered in the Books of their Names be. and carefully preserved as a lasting Memorial of and Patriotism and that the whole Sum thus their Spirit contributed (together with a Copy of these Resolutions) be transmitted in the Name of the Wakefield Brethren Lodge of Unanimity (under cover to Francis Freeling, Esq.) to the Mansion polis for the " 7. House Committee now sitting in the Metro- Receipt of Voluntary Patriotic Contributions. That do most Sincerely hope and believe that We these our Proceedings will not long be permitted to appear a Solitary Instance of Masonic Love of their King, Consti- and Country. That a Copy of these Resolutions together with an Account of the Sum voluntarily contributed be respectfully presented to the Grand Lodge of England, and that the Resolutions be twice inserted in the Leeds Intelligencer. " That lastly, most emphatically and unreservedly We do desire to be understood as 'hating with a perfect Hatred all treasonable and revolutionary Practices and to solemnly deprecate that impious and atheistic System which now desolates the Continent of Europe, and which tution " 8. ' ; NAPOLEON AND THE 214 continue to gain Ground, not only disappoint the exalted Ends and benevolent Purposes of the Cross, but also do away the Fear and Love of the Supreme Being, and will, if it and root out the moral social Virtues from the Hearts and Souls of Men. "MAY THE GRAND ARCHITECT OF THE UNIVERSE PRESIDE OVER THIS AND ALL OTHER LODGES ROUND THE GLOBE So mote it be ! " ! Copies of these resolutions were extensively circulated with the accompanying commendatory letter : " WAKEFIELD, ijth May, 1798. " These Resolutions, which we are extremely anxious should meet your approbation and support, we are now busied in circulating throughout the dominions of George the Third, " whom God May every good preserve. "(Signed) The ! RICHARD LINNECAR." activity displayed in the collection of contributions to the Defence Fund was by no means confined to the In his History of Caricature under the Repuband the Restoration? Champfleury gives a sterner sex. lic, Praise attend your Lodge. the Empire, very amusing plate, described as of English origin, but which has eluded the diligent search of the writers, in which an and obese elderly lady, pointing to a huge subscription portrayed as addressing a crowd of her female " Ladies, let friends, and in the act of uttering the words, us show our patriotism. If the Bonapartes and the Sansbook, is Culottes come we which there " Let our Bonaparte shall be all carried off and sacrificed " ; to " a general response of They will kill us," " I have seen liberality equal our patriotism," is in my 1 tea," and other Champfleury, Vol. IV, lines scarcely translatp. 272. INVASION OF ENGLAND The able. idea rather is 215 French than English, but the costumes belong to the early days of the Great Terror. The ardour of the mothers communicated itself to the sons, in 1797 we are informed that a gentleman of Exeter, Michael Dicker Sanders by name, residing in Magdalen " enrolled a troop of sixty boys, trained in military Street, manners. They wore a blue uniform with yellow facings. and were mounted with Their muskets at first quently changed to small light fusils. A employed, and they had the usual officers as in the regular regiments. and It fifes. was not under a schoolmaster Black Lion Inn on Sundays in in all tin barrels, subse- drill-sergeant was non-commissioned They had also drums pastime, as they were placed a room somewhere adjacent to the South Street, from which they marched morning and afternoon, to the gallery. If any boy behaved in full uniform, Trinity Church, sitting in badly in church he was reported and confined in the schoolroom, with a sentry at the door. On one occasion the corps was reviewed in the Castle Yard by the officers of a regiment stationed here at the time, and in this special inspection the boys' heads were powdered and queued, as was the military fashion of the day. After the review the boys were entertained at dinner at the Queen's Head, outside Southgate. Mr. Sanders married subsequently, and his lady not disbanded ; his clothes young approving of these young soldiers, they were each boy was presented with a gratuity, and all The complete uniform of and books. soldiers these was a blue jacket trimmed with yellow, breeches and leggings, cap (probably mitre shape), with a tin plate on which was painted a star, and a bit of horsehair 1 hung from the 1 top." The " Boys Brigade " is in 1907 one of Exeter's most popular institutions. NAPOLEON AND THE 216 The period of the Great Terror, as might be ex" " pected, had also its echo in the pulpit utterances of the On Trinity Monday, May 23rd, 1796, the Rt. period. first Honble. William the Trinity Pitt, Master, and the Elder Brethren of House went Nicholas Church, Rennell preach a sermon in state to St. Deptford, to hear Dr. Thomas " Great Britain's Insular Situation, Naval Strength, and Commercial Opulence, a source of gratitude to