 God, loyalty on to the King, and concord solved to print it among ourselves." It was re- on the very day the loyal address 1 to the The "invasion" King, already described, was voted. charges of Richard Watson, Bishop of Llandaff (June, 1798), were printed and disseminated by order of the local Court of Quarter Sessions, and attained almost as much "Address to the People of England." While the Volunteers of South London went to hear the Rev. Rowland Hill discourse eloquently on the iniquities popularity as his of Bonaparte and his followers, the Fawley "Fencibles" crowded St. Thomas's Church, Winchester, where the Warden of St. Mary's, Dr. George Isaac Huntingford, " preached from the text Remember the Lord, which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses." 2 The Irish divines were commendably active in " improving the occasion" of the attempted invasions of their country, both in the form of supplication and thanksgiving, and for a was preached about but " Reflections in this Season of Danger," " The Duty of Loving our Country," and "Christian Patriotism." One can understand the time little else stentorian tones in which the assembled Armed Associations of Middlesex 1 See ante, p. 207. 2 made members of the the walls of the Nehemiah IV. 14. *A&lCU joictisr MiJUry .. ^m-T Wtff* [MAY, 1798] "/'! INVASION OF ENGLAND old parish church at Stoke hymn :- Newington 1 217 re-echo with the The Sword of Gideon and the Lord) The Shield of Righteousness, Aid to the Cause And crown it that's just afford, with success. The Sons of Peace in such a cause Assume the port of war, Arm for their Liberties And Was the lust of pow'r or pride it That rous'd the No wrong ; and Laws, every danger dare. And band ? and right deny'd, patriot received, Justice arm'd their hand. was Jehovah's name reviled, His altars overthrown, His Holy Place with Blood defil'd, His Vineyard trodden down. It The enemies of God are ours, O may His help abound To quell the foe, and all the pow'rs to confound. Of Darkness Behold 'tis done, and Egypt's shore Scoffs at the vanquished Host, Sees his proud banners wave no more, Sees all If distant O Lord, his triumphs lost. Realms, and distant Seas, Thy mercies prove, GIVE US ONE HEART AT HOME, AND CHARITY, AND LOVE. AND PEACE On April 28th, 1798, the following resolutions were 2 passed unanimously at a meeting of the two Archbishops and eleven Bishops : 1 The Stoke Newington sermon was preached by Dr. Gaskin, Rector the parish, on October 2ist, 1798. 2 Dr. John Moore and Dr. William Markham. of NAPOLEON AND THE 2i8 ist. "That it would not conduce in any considerable degree to the Defence and Safety of the Kingdom, and would interfere with the proper Duties of the Profession, if the Clergy were to accept Commissions in the Army, be enrolled in any Military Corps, or be trained to the Use of Arms." " 2nd. That, in the Case of actual Invasion or dangerous Insurrection, it will be the duty of every Clergyman, to give his assistance in repelling both, in any way that the urgency of the case On the may following require." day (April 2Qth) a circular was addressed " To the Reverend the Clergy of the Diocese, and the Peculiars of the See of Canterbury. " Reverend Brother, " In the present situation of the Country expecting without undue alarm, but not without just anxiety, the appearance of a desperate and malignant enemy on our coasts, there is perhaps no circumstance, singly taken, on which more may depend, with Regard to the interests of Religion, the credit of our order, and the public safety, than the discretion with which the conduct of the Clergy ought to be distinguished in these moments of general and necessary exertion when all good men are called upon to come forward and to repel the attempts of an enemy, breathing revenge against this Kingdom in general revenge not for wrongs on our part done, but for wrongs on their part by us resisted, and fraught with particular Malice ; ; against our Holy Religion and its Ministers. Under this pursuasion [sic], I have thought it my duty to call a Meeting of the Bishops in order to consider in what way the Parochial Clergy may most effectually promote the common cause without neglecting the proper Duties of our INVASION OF ENGLAND 219 which we must never lose sight, and least times of public danger. "The Meeting consisted of the two Archbishops and eleven other Bishops, the occasion being thought too pressing to await the arrival of others from the remote Holy Calling, of of in all, dioceses. The two resolutions which I now transmit to you were agreed upon unanimously. In them we warn you not to abandon the proper business of your profession in order to take up the soldier's occupation, in which your actual service can be but very limited, and at last may not We be wanted. assure ourselves you will in all circummake your exertions in those stances naturally wish to services in and those which you feel yourselves the most capable ; generally be such as will least interfere with your sacred functions. But, if the danger should be realized, and the enemy set his foot upon our shores, our will hand with that of every man, must in every way be against those who come for purposes of rapine and desolation, the vowed champions of anarchy and irreligion, defy- ing the Living God. " are servants of We God and God's servants in God's cause must take an equal share with their fellow subjects, in such an emergency against the blasphemers of His ; Holy Name. But one service in particular amongst many which the country amidst the din of arms will naturally look to the wisdom and piety of the Clergy, will be, that by your pursuasion, your exhortations and your good example, you will be the instruments of maintaining internal harmony and subordination, in a crisis when harmony and subordination, even with the best general disposition of the people, are most difficult to be maintained. " I commend you to God's high and holy protection, with good hope and confidence of your discretion and zeal others, for in this time of trial. " I am your affectionate brother, "(Sd.) J. CANTUAR." NAPOLEON AND THE 220 Three days later the Bishop of Rochester (Dr. Samuel Horsley) thus addresses the clerical brethren " Revd " : Brother, have observed with much satisfaction the zeal displayed by the Clergy of my Diocese in common with our Brethren in all parts of the Kingdom, to take an active part in the Defence of the Country against an Enemy, who threatens to come with a prodigious army, to depose our King, to plunder our Property, to enslave our Persons, and to overturn our Altars instigated in addition to the common motives of Ambition and Revenge which have ordinarily inflamed the animosities of contending nations, by that desperate Malignity against the Faith he has abandoned, which in all ages has marked the charac- which I is ; ter of the vile Apostate. The readiness of the Clergy, to unite in the defence of objects so dear to all, against such a foe, is highly laudable and consistent with that character of rational Piety which hath ever distinguished the tried sons of the Church of England. " Gird yourself therefore without scruple for the Battle, holy cause, when the occasion shall call, nothing doubting, but that the God whom we serve and our Enemies defy, will teach the hands of his servants to war, and their ringers to fight. Offering our earnest prayers to God to give us all grace in the hour of trial which seems to be coming upon the Christian World, to hold in this fast the profession of and and our faith without wavering and to do we may be ordained to do suffer valiantly whatever suffer for his sake ; " We remain, your loving Brother, "SAMUEL ROFFEN." INVASION OF ENGLAND Ecclesiastical figured largely carried on the set admonitions and 221 sermons undoubtedly amongst the wares of the colporteurs who work of patriotic excitation and enthusing on foot by Hannah More. The stage aided the patriotic trend of public opinion Old pieces which appealed to the rallying cry of national defence were revived and new ones written ad hoc. The same thing had quite as systematically as the pulpit. of the eighteenth century. three Dibdins each did yeoman work for the good happened The in the earlier crises In 1796 Charles Dibdin the elder was fifty-one; sons, Charles and Thomas John, were respectively cause. his twenty-eight and twenty-five. wrights As song-writers and play- they helped to stir the heart of the nation as effectually as Gillray, Rowlandson, and Woodward did with and illustrated broadsides. In the spring of 1797 the word "invasion" was on everybody's lips. The news of Fishguard and the naval victory of the same their caricatures eventful February had not lost its savour when Thomas The British Raft, ridiculing the John threatened descent on our shores, and its one song, " The Dibdin Snug Little wrote Island," attained astonishing popularity throughout the length and breadth of the United Kingdom and for years occupied a prominent position in all patriotic anthologies. It was first sung by " " Jew Davis at Sadler's Wells on Easter Monday, 1797, while Dibdin himself was acting at Maidstone, where he himself sang it before Lord 1 Romney and it won him the friendship of the Duke of Leeds. 1 ment It ran as follows : Lord Romney took a prominent part in organizing the defence movein Kent. See ante, p. 136, and illustration. NAPOLEON AND THE 222 THE SNUG LITTLE ISLAND OR THE MARCH OF INVASION. TUNE "The Rogue's March." Daddy Neptune one day If ever The to Freedom did say, live I spot I upon dry land, should hit on wou'd be little Britain, " Says Freedom, Why that's my own island it's a O, snug little island " ! ! A right little, tight little island, Search the globe round, none can be found So happy as this little island. Roman, who yielded to no man, Came by water, he couldn't come by land And Dane, Pict and Saxon, their homes turn'd their backs And all for the sake of our island. Julius Caesar the ; O what a snug little island They'd all have a touch at the island Some were shot dead, some of them fled, And some staid to live on the island. ! ! ; Then a very Cried d It great n it, I man, call'd Billy the never lik'd my land Norman, ; would be much more handy to leave this Normandy, live on yon beautiful island. Says he, 'tis a snug little island Shan't us go visit the island, Hop, skip and jump, there he was plump, And he kicked up a dust in the island. And ; But party-deceit help'd the Norman to beat, Of the traitors they managed to buy land By Dane, Saxon or Pict, Britons ne'er had been Had they stuck to the King of their island. Poor Harold, the King of the island He lost both his life and his island, That's very true, what more could he do ? Like a Briton he died for his island ; ! ! licked, on, INVASION OF ENGLAND The SPANISH ARMADA Quite sure, They And if couldn't 223 set out to invade her, they ever came nigh land, do less than tuck up QUEEN BESS, take their full swing in the island. Queen of the island The Dons came to plunder the island Oh, the poor ! ; But, snug in the hive, the QUEEN was alive And buz was the word in the island. These proud puffd up cakes thought Of our wealth When And to make ducks and drakes but they hardly could spy land, our DRAKE had the luck to make their pride duck ; stoop to the lads of the island The good wooden walls of the island ! Devil or Don, And would let they 'em come on come ! ; off at the island ? Since Freedom and Neptune have hitherto kept time, " " In each saying this shall be my land Should the army of ENGLAND, or all they could bring land, We'd show 'em some play for the island. ; We'll fight for our right to the island, We'll give them enough of the island, Invaders should But not a bit just, bite at the dust, more of the island ! l 798-9 Thomas John Dibdin contrived in the space of a few hours to elaborate a pantomimic entertainment of so