the people ought not each of us to think of a father, or a a part of them ? Can you think a parliament speaking like fathers and would Would treat us as we are treated ? mock us with a pretended addition to our pay, and then lock us up in barracks, to cheat us and keep us in ignorance ? Would they not rather considering the price of every thing wanting for our families at least double our pay ? Why they is every regiment harrassed with long marches, from one end of the country them strangers to the people and to each other ? to the other, but to keep Are we Ask the old pensioners at Chelsea ? Ask them too, if it was usual when there were make a profit out of soldiers cloathes ? Don't income from what we ought to have, but of which so well cloathed as soldiers used to be College, whether horse or foot ? fewer regiments, for colonels to colonels we now draw are robbed half their ? 1 See ante, pp. 31-66. INVASION OF ENGLAND 204 THESE COMRADES, are a few of our Grievances and but a few WHAT SHALL WE DO The tyranny of what is falsely called discipline, prevents us from acting like other men. We cannot even join in petition for that which ; ? common honesty would freely have CHOICES, either to submit TWO given us long ago. WE HAVE ONLY to the present impositions, or demand the treatment proper for men. OUR OWN THE POWER IS ALL The regiments which send you do their part. They will shew their countrymen, they can be soldiers without being slaves, and will make their demands as soon as they know you will not draw the trigger against them. Of this we will judge, when we know ! this, arc willing to you have distributed this whom you know in Bill, not only among your comrades, but to every soldier any part of the country. BE SOBER, BE READY. The was reply of the soldiers in every branch of the service another in their Regulars and volunteers vied with one the force and energy with which they expressed reassuring. hatred of treason and loathing for traitors. The men of the various corps, gener- broadsides issued by the ally offering rewards at their own expense for the detection of the author or authors of this detestable incitation to rebellion, time relics now were placarded ago a complete every garrison town. A short series l of these characteristic in of the events of 1797 was in existence, but it has been dispersed, several of them having been pur- chased for regimental collections. The broadside reproduced from Sir George White's Bristol collection now may be regarded as typical of the ideas expressed in nearly of them all : 1 Thirty-three of the originals and all the correspondence as to the dispersal of this interesting series of military broadsides are in Mr. Broadley's collection of Invasion MSS. ANSWER AN" TO THE INFAMOUS HAND-BILL WHICH WAS READ BY ROOK& LIEUT. GEN. On MONDAY* the aad of MAY 1797, TO THE TROOPS UNDER HIS COMMAND AT BRISTOL. ROOKE having had the Goodnefs to read* to us an infamous Hand-bill, pretended to be an Addrefs from our Brother Soldiers, LIEUTENANT-GENERAL but which we are convinced the Production of fome defigning Villains, is under which we have to overturn our excellent Conftitution, who wifh fo long lived happily ; and having heard the Anfwer of the Marines at Chatham to a fimilar Hand-bill found in the Barracks there, we moil certainly approve of the fame; but cannot pafs over in Silence fuch atrocious Endeavours to fubvcrt Order and Difcipline, which none but Mankind Would ever Attempt. WE, THE NONCOMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND PRIVATES OF THE ROYAL BUCKS OR KING'S OWN REGIMENT or MILITIA, do moft folemhly promife our Fellow-citizens and Soldiers, that we will ufc our utmoft Endeavours to find out fome of thofe Villains who, under the weakeft and moft profligate of Pretence of efpouung our Caufe and pointing out Grievances that never have exifted and Oppreflions that we never have laboured under, endeavour to withdraw us from our Allegiance to the beft of Kings, our Duty to our Officers, and to throw the Country into Confufion we will deliver We Punifliment. ; them over and fliould that, we meet with any fuch wicked Wretches, may be brought to condign to the Magiftrates that they further take this Opportunity of declaring, that, fo far from we have had it increased without being petitioned for; complaining of our Pay, are perfectly fatisfied and moft grateful for His Majefty's paternal Goodnefs in has. been gracioufly pleafed to do fmce we have been ordering us fuch Addition as he and we called out in our Country's Enemies at home, amongft Defence againft its foreign 2nd ftill more dangerous look on the infamous Writer and Diftri- whom we butors of the above Hand-bill. With Sentiments of the now commands us, and to higheft Veneration and Efteem for the General whom we beg to offer our fincereft Thank* who for the Confidence he and alfo (hewed he had in our Loyalty, by reading the Hand-bill to u$, for our own Officers, we do moft (blemnly declare, that we will always be ready and willing to Country On fervc when commanded, Enemies to the againft all its Behalf of ourfelves and the Thomas Newbery, Acting Serjeant Major John Dyos, Ouar. Thomas Meehan, Maft. Serj. Serj. Jofeph Thompfon, Serj. John Knapper, Serj. Abraham Lines, Serj. Wm. Heath, Serj. and Reg.CL Wm; Davis, Dram Major. SERJEANTS. John Loveredge John Perkins James Hill M. Weftley William Treacher John Roberts George Vickers Thomas Harmon William Carter William WagesfieU William Winter Edward Goodfon laft Men and that we will Drop of our profccl: our Blood. of our refpedive Companies, Robert Gudgeon William Chapman Charles Warren William Hamp John Moore Robert Simmons Charles Walhington Henry Perry Daniel Aldrage George Hardwell John Humphreys Thomas Fofter Francis Perkins John Chantrill w. Toms Thomas Hencher Thomas Collingwood William Goodwin William Arifc James Webb James Fawcett John Fi eW Thomas Griffiths Nathaniel Safwell CORPORALS. John I Jnes Samuel Wright William Sherwin Jofeph Baldwin John Phillips Jofeph Peyton George Sanders Jonas Wife James Wingrove Daniel Pearce William Bifhop Richard Leufley Richard Brown Thomas Garrett James Jones Jofeph Rane Stephen Hatdi Robert Goadyef Robert Lodge NAPOLEON AND THE 206 The deep interest felt by George III in made to shake the fidelity of the " Gunners " the attempt at Woolwich has been mentioned in the Introduction to these volumes (see page xviii), letters written which contains several hitherto unknown by the King to the Duke of York on the subject of the prevailing "unrest." Two days before the first of these communications was penned the following hand-bill had been circulated : Reward 100 Guineas Woolwich, May 26, 1797. IT being believed that some disaffected Persons are endeavouring to corrupt the Loyalty of the Soldiers of the Royal Artillery in this Garrison by distributing Seditious Writings, and other improper Means : WE, the non-commissioned Officers of the Regiment, quartered at Woolwich, from our Loyalty to His Majesty, and Zeal for the internal Peace and Happiness of the Country, do hereby offer a Reward of ONE GUINEAS out of our Subsistence, HUNDRED to any Soldier of the Regiment, who will give Information of such seditious Attempts, so that the Person offending any may be brought to Justice. Signed on behalf of I $& non-commissioned Officers, ALEXANDER JAMES, JAMES NIVEN, JAMES WILSON, THOMAS ATKINSON, JOHN HAY, ANDREW BRAID, THOMAS FORTUNE, ANTHONY HAIG, GEORGE LIDDLE, GOD SAVE THE Printed by DELAHOY, at the Kent KING. Printing-Office, Deptford Bridge. Serjeant Majors. INVASION OF ENGLAND 207 In June, 1797, the June before Camperdown, the state of things on board the King's ships at Portsmouth and the Nore caused numerous loyal addresses to be presented to the King, Here is Trinity of which were placarded in public places many and circulated as hand-bills to influence popular opinion. a broadside reproducing the loyal address from the House : To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY The humble address of the Master, Wardens, Assistants and Elder Brethren of the Corporation of the Trinity House of Deptford-Strond. Most Gracious Sovereign, Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects, the antient Corporate of the Seamen of England, humbly beg Leave to We, your Body approach your Majesty, to express the deep Concern, which, in common with all your Majesty's faithful Subjects, We feel at the present disgraceful conduct of some of the Seamen of your Majesty's Fleet, who, instigated, no Doubt, by the wicked Insinuations of evil-disposed Persons, Enemies alike of your Majesty's Royal Person, and to their Country, have been betrayed into Acts of Insubordination and Outrage, degrading to the Character of British Seamen, hitherto so highly distinguished for Loyalty and some good Conduct, vanquishing their Enemies as for Intrepidity in : Impelled therefore by the Duty We owe to your Majesty, and to our Country, We step forward at this alarming Crisis to declare our Readiness to support with our Lives, such Measures as your Majesty in your Wisdom may think most expedient to adopt for the Restoration of good Order and Subordination among the Seamen of your Majesty's Given under our Fleet. Common Seal this The newspapers of 1796-1805 ing, few and dear. A Second Day of June, 1797. were, comparatively speak- heavy stamp-tax rendered their NAPOLEON AND THE 208 price prohibitive as far as the great majority of the King's subjects were concerned, restricted of all by means and their circulation to-day by the Press (using the term in was then shared by the pedlars and other who brought was seriously the slowness of the post and the inadequacy of communication. The influence exercised its widest sense) itinerant vendors, to the doors of the tavern-keeper, the farmer, the tradesman, and the cottager a selection of broadsides and and ballads, pamphlets, primers, caricatures, song-books and sermons, portraits and story-books, together with the latest issues of a formidable array of monthly magazines like the Gentleman's, the Universal, the London, the Town and Country, and many others, all of them dealing with the topical questions of the day, and reproducing the New Year's and birthday odes, together with other popular and patriotic effusions. The age of steam and electricity, destined to effect such remarkable changes, was as yet undreamt of by the mass of the people, although Lord Stanhope, Fulton, and a small body of scientific 1 possibly have foreseen its advent. The word telegraph was used to indicate a complicated apparatus of wooden arms and shutters which by certain concerted students may movements communicated news from hill-top to hill-top it reached Portsmouth, and later on other more dis- until tant parts of the country. The roof of the Admiralty Whitehall was utilized as a point de depart for all 2 messages, and the extension of this primitive sys- office at official tem of news-conveyance to Weymouth, when the visits of the King and Royal Family to that delightful Dorset watering-place became frequent, was regarded as an event of no small importance. 1 See ante, The French used p. 196, and/0-rf, p. 302. 2 See a very similar illustration, p. 125. INVASION OF ENGLAND machine for the 209 purpose of conveying intelligence between the coast and the capital. Invasion broadsides and songs go back to the stormy days of 1715 and 1745, if not still further, and Peg Woffington won the plaudits of the town the garb of a volunteer and singing by appearing in : In Freedom's cause, ye Patriot Fair, arise, Exert the sacred Influence of your Eyes, On Valiant Merit deign alone to smile, And Vindicate the Glory of our Isle ; To no base coward prostitute your charms, Disband the Lover who deserts his Arms So shall you fire each Hero to his Duty And British Rights be Sav'd by British Beauty. 1 : But up till 1790 ghost stories, fairy tales, love songs, murder trials, and dying speeches and confessions proved more saleable than political pamphlets or caricature