dezvous assigned him. If the necessary horses for the artillery are not provided, to keep a sufficient look-out that they may be immediately procured on any emergency, and for the regiments to furnish such men and to train them, as are wanted for the artillery service. " That the orders and instructions, as published concerning the Baggage and Marches of the Army in case of assembly, are strictly observed, and to take the first opportunity of punishing offenders and destroying improper baggage on the spot. Of using every means of circulating intelligence, and orders quickly, but without Of attacking the enemy in the harassing the cavalry. critical instant of landing, if there is the least chance of success and if obliged to recede, to fall back as short a ; space as possible, and never to lose sight of him in front. Of detaching bodies, though ever so small, to confine him on his flanks, and of increasing those in proportion as he INVASION OF ENGLAND 177 Of exerting every means to create delay, and time for assistance to come in. Of hastening the give advances. inhabitants in the neighbourhood of the enemy to withtheir cattle and horses, to enforce this by every draw with means, and to destroy without compunction whatever prois tardy in its removal, or can be of use to him such removals will be made to a sufficient distance, vision ; according to the district plan ascertained, and the routes in it ordered and pointed out. Such arrangements in consequence of the general plan laid down must be made with the Lord-Lieutenants and Magistrates of the different counties, as may ensure the punctual execution of these most " essential services. To take particular care that horses do not fall into the hands of the enemy, and also that no loss of artillery is Wherever he makes good a landing, such endangered. adjoining batteries as can no longer be preserved must be relinquished in time, the guns damaged, and ammunition and carriages destroyed. This requires discretion and no hurry, for in many situations they to the flank corps. " may still afford support To provide for the removal of such sick, horses and baggage as may be near to, or in the probable route of the enemy. To keep an especial look-out to the providing his own troops with bread and forage, with as much regularity no perfect and undoubted mode of supply- as possible, if ing them then established. " The is farther the enemy gets from the coast, the more to get on his flanks and must the cavalry be ordered to give night-alarms to the enemy, however small the parties may be that do so. To destroy roads on his flanks the more to circumscribe him in an inclosed and rear ; and at whatever point he lands, to have such a disposition ready for breaking up roads, and to be immediately executed, as will tend to prevent his extending, and force him to move in a particular line and on a difficult country, I. N 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 78 Wherever the enemy enters the woodland counties, if trees are felled on all the strong roads for miles around him, he will find it very difficult to small front of operation. advance. " During all this possible service, small corps cannot depend on encamping. On the contrary they must trust to their own ingenuity for hutting and covering themselves, and will be provided with axes, hatchets, and billhooks accordingly. "The general officers will see, and are instructed, that the infantry of all kinds in their exercises practise more than has been usual the use of their bayonets, and charge frequently with them in different situations, and under various circumstances also that not only the light com: panies are adroit at their peculiar exercise, but that and divisions of other companies are occasiondetached, and understand how to act as flankers and individuals, ally as skirmishers, in attacking or repelling those of the also to be provident of their ammunition, and enemy ; that they ought never to fire but when they have a good mark, and a good aim. All these are points and objects that should be strongly recommended to, and form the principal part of the exercise of small corps and volunteer companies, to enable them to perform the most effectual service that can possibly arise. part of the force of each district, as shall be particularly named, will be established as a district reserve, and "A being provided with camp equipage, &c. will be held as the first to be called upon, ready to move at a moment's warning, and to unite as a body on the point attached, whether of their own, or of any adjoining district. The whole will form the general reserve and orders will be in readiness for the march of the distant parts of it, on whatever point the enemy may land. The commanding generals of districts will be acquainted before-hand with such dispositions, and know when and from whence they ; INVASION OF ENGLAND 179 expect assistance. They are also empowered, on the appearance of an enemy, to call out the yeomen and volunteer corps of their respective districts, with whom (having obtained a previous knowledge of their numbers, state of discipline, limitation of service and other essential circumstances) they will have made such arrangements as may ensure their speedy assembly, and the due performance of the duties allotted to them. They will also be empowered to call upon certain specified corps (according to situation) of the reserve, and of the adjoining may districts. " In consequence of all these circumstances, and of such other local ones as present themselves the commanding generals of districts will take their measures, give their ; make the previous preparations, and communicate such material matters as they have not already done to his Royal Highness the Commander in Chief. orders, " By Command of His Royal Highness, " " The COMMANDER-Ztf-CHIEF, HARRY CALVERT, 1 Adjutant-General." The outlook was not improved by Pitt's resignation in February, 1801, but the news that the army which he had sent to Egypt under Sir Ralph Abercromby in the previous January had routed the French was at once a and a sedative to the nation. Some people thought it should be an incentive to further effort to crush the man tonic who was rapidly becoming the military dictator of others saw in 1 it a prospect of peace. The Europe ; following Harry Calvert succeeded Sir W. Fawcett as Adjutant-General of trie an active military career, in which he had been frequently on active service. He eventually became Lieutenant-Governor of Chelsea Hospital, and died in 1826, by which time he had been promoted to the rank of General. The above instructions were first issued in 1800, and again in 1 80 1 and 1803. Sir forces in 1799, after NAPOLEON AND THE i8o hitherto unpublished letter 1 from Charles his brother, General Fox, affairs at the " My dear " time James Fox to shows the uncertain state of : Brother, have written seldomer than I should have done from doubting whether you ever received my letters, but from yours of the 6th of last month I find that you had received one, and so, of course, I suppose the others. I am much obliged to you for enquiring about the language. I I guessed, of course, that there was Greek, Latin, Spanish, Italian and probably some Moorish, but I still doubt about the Irish very much. You don't say anything of Mrs. Fox and the children, so I conclude they are well. Indeed I hear with great pleasure from Caroline that Mrs. Fox was remarkably so and much better than when in England. You have probably long before this heard the Here we are all in a state of uncertainty about it and unfortunately all we know about it is that our killed and wounded amounted to near 2000 before the famous action of the 2ist, 22nd and 23rd, 2 over all these three days which is given by various reports. Every report is in itself unauthentic, but yet there have been so many reports of an action and a victory of the English about that time makes one think something has happened, which is at least called a victory. Why Egypt should be of such importance to either the French or to us I never could discover, and I have always thought the expedition fate of Egypt. there the foolishest part perhaps the only foolish part, of Napoleon's conduct, unless he had some views connected with it in connection with the internal politics of France of which we are not informed, or (which I have always suspected) that he had a desire to be out of the way of 1 a Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. Battle of Alexandria, March, 1801. wounded, and died on the 28th inst. Purchased Sir at the Bunbury Sale. Ralph Abercromby was mortally INVASION OF ENGLAND 181 accepting or refusing the command of an army destined I hope we shall soon hear that it is to invade England. and as with little over, slaughter as possible whichever way ends. Both armies have what we used to call at Newmarket a good hedge/ since the vanquished will probably it ' be able to return to their own country while the conquerors must remain in Egypt. "As to the state of things here I believe almost everybody is as much in the dark as I am. The K[ing] is certainly not quite well, nor do I believe he ever will be. When I was in Town last week he was not allowed to see any of his family. I now read in the newspaper that he walked in Kew Garden with the Queen and Princesses and that he is going very soon to Wey mouth. If they allow him to go there where he is in public all day it seems very inconsistent with what has generally been given out, that he is indeed well, but that great quiet and retirement In short I are necessary to his perfect re-establishment. cannot believe that he will go, but how long things are to go on in this state nobody knowing in fact whether we have a K. or not I have no guess. The exact state of out situation as regards the Baltic is as little known as anything else, and if you ask me as to peace the same answer must be given. Nobody knows what steps have been taken towards negociations, nor even what degree of hope is entertained of success. In short I have nothing to tell you of public affairs. "With regard to myself I am here well and happy and should be truly sorry if anything should make it necessary for me to enter again into public business. The P[rince]and D[uke]of Y[ork]are supposed to be ill together. The Dukes of Clarence and Kent are supposed to side with the former. The D[uke] of Cumberland with the latter. are. have not heard which way the other two Princes best news here is that wheat has fallen, and is in price, for the misery endured by the poor, and I The falling, 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 82 indeed by those a little above the poor and who are obliged to give charity when they are in a position rather to ask it themselves has for the last twelve months been Your mare is very well, but as I ride her so dreadful. little I have had her used in the cart and at plough, which I should not have done if I had thought there was any chance of her lasting as a riding horse till Mrs. Fox I have also had her covered, and I expect a returned. I hope this is not wrong. fine foal from her. Mrs. A. desires to be kindly remembered to you. Pray give my love to Mrs. F. and the children. You say nothing of William Dixon, who has, I fear, behaved very improperly. His father is, as you may suppose, very anxious about " Yours affectionately, " "Sx. ANNE'S HILL, 15 C. J. Fox. May, 1801." Addington, the new Prime Minister, while determined upon peace at any made some show price, discreetly of continuing the preparations made by Pitt. He largely relied upon the genius of Nelson, who was appointed to a command extending from Orfordness, in Suffolk, to circumvent Bonaparte's plans should his hopes of a cessation of hostilities be dashed to the ground. At first Nelson was not inclined to take the Beachy Head, in Sussex, to when he own eye the preparations being made First Consul's preparations at all seriously, but had seen with his by La Touche it Treville, his views changed. He gave had determine