d upon as his opinion that the French putting their threat into execution, but was convinced flotilla was not the only force he would have " This boat business," he says, " may be contend with. to that the a part of a great plan of invasion ; it can never be the INVASION OF ENGLAND l only one." The Admiral felt 183 sure that the wily ruler of France would play him a trick, and came to the conclusion navy would be utilized to put him off the that the French " proper scent. Although I feel confident that the fleets of the enemy will meet the same fate which has always attended them, yet their sailing will facilitate the coming over of the flotilla, as they will naturally suppose our attention will be called on to the fleets." On the 2 5th Nelson addressed an important Memorandum Admiralty on the defence of the Thames. In it he July, 1801, to the stated that the coast of Sussex and of Kent to the westward of Dover should be well protected. It was his opinion that London was the chief point aimed at by the French. "From Boulogne, Calais, and even Havre," the communication runs, " the enemy will try and land in Sussex, or the lower part of Kent and from Dunkirk, Ostend, and the other ports of Flanders, to land on the coast ; of Essex or Suffolk . . . added to this, the enemy will create a powerful diversion by the sailing of the combined fleet, and the either sailing, or creating of such an appearance of sailing, of the Dutch fleet, as will prevent Admiral Dickson Dutch flotilla." 2 from The Admiral's men would seventy sending ports, whilst the anything from smaller off the great spew forth its idea was that twenty thousand ports land on the west side of Dover, sixty or from London, and the same number miles " on the east side they are too knowing to let us have but one point of alarm for London." He calculated that in calm weather the flotilla, with forty thousand men on board, could cover the distance from the ; 1 2 Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. IV, p. 500. Commander-m-Chief in the North Sea. 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 84 French coast to the English shores in twelve hours. If happened the British fleet and boats were to "get this into the Channel and meet them as soon as possible : if not strong enough for the attack they must watch, and keep them company till a favourable opportunity offers. If a breeze springs up, our Ships are to deal destruction : no delicacy can be observed on this occasion. remain calm, and our flotilla not fancy it enough to attack the enemy on But should itself their passage, the strong moment that they begin to touch our shore, strong or weak, our Flotilla of boats l must attack as much of the enemy's Flotilla as say only one-half or two-thirds they are able ; most powerful diversion, for the bows of our Flotilla will be opposed to their unarmed sterns, and the courage of Britons will never, I believe, allow one French- it will create a " thought Solebay not an improbable place" for the landing, and conceived the notion of having " a great number of Deal and Dover man He to leave the beach." boats to be on board our vessels off the Port of Boulogne, by the enemy. If to give notice of the direction taken is it calm, vessels in the Channel can make signals of Gunboats and flat-boats were to be kept near Margate and Ramsgate, a squadron was to lie between Orfordness and the North Foreland, and another in Hollesley Bay. After giving directions intelligence to our shores. . . ." movements of these divisions, Nelson goes on " say that the more fast Rowing boats, called Thames as to the to Galleys, which can be secured the better, to carry orders, Stationary Floating Batteries are not, from any apparent advantage, to be moved. ." information, etc., etc. . . . . 1 ment "The Admiralty cannot build too many small craft, even interferes with that of the ships-of-the-line." if their Dumouriez MS., . arma- p. 74. s|2;<. Sp SfeWl 2*#? & g^VI w w ^:^ g-df s as., g ee ra>5^> INVASION OF ENGLAND 185 "Whatever plans may be adopted," he adds, "the moment the Enemy touch our Coast, be it where it may, they are to be attacked by every man afloat and on shore Never fear the event. this must be perfectly understood. : The Flat boats can probably be manned (partly, at least) with the Sea Fencibles 1 ... but the Flat Boats they may man own to be in grand and sub-divisions, commanded by their Captains and Lieutenants, as far as is possible. These are offered as merely the rude ideas of the moment," . . . he concludes, "and are only meant as a Sea plan of defence for the City of London ; but I believe other parts may the Brest Fleet, and those from Rochefort and Holland put to sea although I feel con- likewise be menaced, if ; fident that the Fleets of the fate Enemy will meet the same which has always attended them, yet will facilitate the coming over of their their sailing Flotilla, as they will naturally suppose our attention will be called only to the Fleets." Lord 2 St. Vincent was then at the head of the Admiralty, and he found himself unable to agree with sitions put forward by Nelson. " Our all the propo- great reliance is on the vigilance and activity of our cruisers at sea, any reduction in the number of which, by applying them to guard our ports, inlets, and beaches, would in tend to our destruction/' 3 my judgment While Addington thought of nothing but peace, Commander-in-Chief the Duke of York evidently regarded 1 sea, A volunteer force consisting of fishermen and others connected with the to lend their aid in repelling the enemy. who had sworn 2 The Dispatches and Letters of Vice- Admiral Lord Viscount Nelson, with Notes by Sir Nicholas Harris Nicholas, G.C.M.G., Vol. IV, pp. 425-8. 3 Mahan's Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution, Vol. II, p. 121. 1 NAPOLEON AND THE A secret circular was stern reality. 86 war as a issued on July 2 ist, 1 80 1, by Colonel Brownrigg, Adjutant-General, to those in command of districts throughout the country. " have the Commander-in-Chief's commands," it runs, "to acquaint you that from unquestionable intelligence I the strongest reason that an immediate descent upon the coasts of the Channel is intended by the enemy. there I am is therefore to recommend you from His Royal High- ness that you give orders for the utmost vigilance to be observed throughout your district, particularly by the troops stationed immediately upon the coast, and that in general they may be held in readiness to act with the greatest promptitude and effect against the enemy. The same General officer also in upon him 2 troops. ."* informed Colonel Hope, Adjutant- the enemy "gain a This was a country." of readiness, 3 . Ireland, of the apparent danger, and called to be prepared to send reinforcements to should England, . Had for Ireland the acknowledgment of lack was not overburdened with rebellion broken out as and a diversion made in footing tacit in that quarter was anticipated, by the French, as well as a landing effected in England, the consequences must have proved disastrous. But such urgent positive orders could not be disregarded, and Lord Gardner, commanding the fleet guarding the west of Ireland, was told that if the west of England was invaded, nearly 5000 men " If Scotland from Cork would have to be taken across. 1 Diary and Correspondence of Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester edited by z Lord Colchester, Vol. I, p. 366. Ibid., p. 367. , Charles, 3 "The regular forces in Ireland, including fencibles, during this period was about 30,000, and the militia 30,000 more ; the yeomanry corps of infantry and cavalry were about 60,000 ; the cavalry part being about 12,000." Ibid., p. 276. INVASION OF ENGLAND 187 or the side of Liverpool was the point, a similar force might be sent from the North and Dublin. In this latter instance perhaps shipping for the purpose might be seized M1 in Belfast and Dublin. . . , Perhaps nothing did more to inspire Londoners with a sense of their responsibility to the nation than the frequent inspections and reviews of the volunteer and associated corps by the King or Commander-in-Chief the Duke of One of the most satisfactory of these was held in Park on the 22nd July, 1801, when 4,734 armed York. Hyde assembled and went through various exercises and citizens " was computed that, independent of the volunteers, upwards of 30,000 spectators attended. Innumerable fair forms, sheltered from the scorching rays evolutions. It . . . of the sun by the protecting parasol, were seen, escorted by their beaux, tripping over the turf. The surrounding walls were covered with men, women, and children. Every eye sparkled with animation, every heart beat with loyal fervour the proud name of Briton was vaunted with self; and if the chimerical idea of invasion congratulation occurred, not a man present but, contemplating this ; brilliant display of the eager to exclaim * And We ' Amor Patriae,' was enthusiastically : their fiat bottoms in darkness get o'er, soon shall find means to receive them on shore." if 2 Nelson issued a Proclamation to the Sea Fencibles, man the coast-defence vessels, but few urging them to responded to his appeal. They were half-hearted, lacked spirit and vim, and thought more of keeping their jobs than of defending 1 ibid., 2 their " country. Of the 2600 Sea- P 367. . Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. LXXI, part ii, p. 662. NAPOLEON AND THE i88 Fencibles enrolled between Orfordness and Beachy Head," the Admiral complains to St. Vincent, "only 385 have offered themselves to go on board a Ship, and serve at the &c. Sand-heads, ; of Sea- Fencibles the Margate, for instance consist of 118 men, their occupation is pier-men belonging to the Margate hoys, and some few who assist Ships up and down the River. These men say, 'our employment go from our homes beyond a day or two, and for actual service but they profess their readiness to fly on board, or any other duty ordered, will not allow us to ' : when are announced as actually coming on the Dear This, my Lord, we must take for granted is the situation of all other Sea- Fencibles when we cannot do all we wish, we must do as well as we can. Our Ships fitted for the service, on both shores, between Orfordness and the North Foreland, want 1900 men, the River-barges two or three hundred. ... I am sure that the French are the Enemy sea. : trying to get from Boulogne; yet the least wind at W.N.W. and they are lost. I pronounce that no embarkation can take place at Boulogne whenever it comes forth, it will be from Flanders, and what a forlorn undertaking consider ; ! cross tides, &c. &c. As for rowing, that is impossible. It perfectly right to be prepared against a mad Government but with the active force your Lordship has given is ; almost impracticable." x On the 4th August, 1801, Nelson relentlessly bombarded the French flotilla, which was outside the harbour, for me, I may pronounce it The hills near Boulogne and the heights around Dover were almost black with a swarming mass of sixteen hours. To Admiral the Earl of St. Vincent, K.B., dated from Margate Roads, 7th August, 1 80 1. The Dispatches and Letters of Vice- Admiral Lord Viscount Nelson, Vol. IV, p. 446. 1 INVASION OF ENGLAND 189 was a particularly clear day they were able to watch the conflict whenever the smoke from the guns and batteries cleared off a little. The action, however, was not a success, and comparatively slight damage was spectators, and as it done to Bonaparte's miniature fleet. be daunted, and he wrote on the " Addington that : find I Nelson was not to I2th inst. to Mr. my command I can tell you with truth, much zeal and good humour and should In ; Mr. Bonaparte put himself in our way, I believe he will wish himself even in Corsica. I only hope, if he means to come, that it will be before the I4th of September, for my stamina weather." but is ill-suited for equinoctial gales and cold * Eleven days after the attack narrated above Nelson newed the struggle, his fleet consisting of thirty sail many small boats. He det