ermined to attack flotilla at night, and French profited by all re- and the crews of the would have been well had not the and been on their recent experience A the alert as a consequence. number of boats were let the English men-of-war, filled with tried and down from With muffled trusty sailors, and formed in four divisions. oars the seamen drew near to the ships lying off Boulogne. These were defended by long poles, at the head of which were sharp spikes of iron, while strong netting had been placed round the hulls, very similar to the torpedo netting used in modern naval warfare. contained from Each of the enemy's vessels has been repeatedly stated that the clever scheme had been conceived of fasten1 50 to 200 soldiers. It ing the ships to the shore by means of iron chains, so that no prizes could be taken; but La Touche Trdville denies that 1 Dispatches p. 456- and Letters of Vice-Admiral Lord Viscount Nelson, Vol. IV, NAPOLEON AND THE IQO such was the case, 1 although in the week and a half which had elapsed since the last engagement the French had placed batteries and cannon wherever it was thought they could be used to advantage. On the heights of line of soldiers fired ceaselessly Boulogne a British bluejackets, on the intrepid whose firearms had been left behind for reasons of prudence Nelson knowing full well that one shot fired at the wrong moment would bring down a veritable ; from the men on shore. hail of bullets Jack Tar suffered severely as a result, although the howitzer-boats did some damage. The second division of boats, under the Captain Parker, was the first command of to close with the enemy. The men to fire until French commander refused to order his he had given the crews of the approaching boats an opporGoing to the side of his vessel, he tunity to withdraw. shouted in the best English he could muster "Let me to keep your distance. You can do nothing : advise you here, and . . . it is only useless shedding the blood of brave men to make the attempt." 2 The British tars, however, did not flinch in the face of duty, and so the unequal contest began. One hundred and seventy-two were either killed or placed hors de combat, while Parker lost a leg and thigh. The French casualties were comparatively slight, being returned at ten killed and thirty Marks of wounded. twenty-two action, and from seriously of and distinction were conferred on bravery during the this date the First Consul began to think soldiers sailors for their Boulogne as the most suitable place gregating the flotilla. 1 Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 344. 2 Annual Register ', 1801, p. 269. for con- INVASION OF ENGLAND 191 Mr. Evan Nepean, Secretary of the dated Admiralty, August i6th, 1801, Nelson states that the darkness of the night, with the tide and half-tide, In a letter to separated the divisions and to ; same happy moment was all not arriving at the to be attributed the failure of It is the attack, which Nelson put on his own shoulders. " more determined, characteristic of the writer that he adds, persevering courage I never witnessed." Captain Parker died at Deal on the 28th of the following month. 1 Deeply attached as he was to his senior officer, the latter showed was even more deeply reciprocated, for he paid the dead commander's creditors in full when he heard that he had involved himself in debt. Parker's opinion of that the feeling Nelson is summed up in his own words " : He is the and quickest man and the most zealous in the " that is, In the short time we were in Sheerness cleverest world. "he regulated and gave orders for under his command, made everyone them with emulation, and set them all on before embarking thirty of the ships pleased, filled the qui vive." The Admiral's correspondence about this time shows very clearly the indomitable courage of the man who was destined to put an end at Trafalgar to Napoleon's attempt to make France a great maritime Power. His letters and despatches are full of witty remarks and brilliant metaphor, as spontaneous as the genius of the writer, and they show the soul of a hero. Thus on the i;th August he tells Lord St. Vincent, "I 1 The death of Parker was Hardy speaks feelingly on the a cause of deep grief throughout the fleet. subject in his letters (see The Three Dorset Captains at Trafalgar, p. 114, by A. M. Broadley and R. G. Bartelot, M.A.). Since the publication of that book the tomb of Parker, a somewhat ponderous structure of stone, has been discovered in one of the disused cemeteries at Deal. It bears a lengthy See II. inscription. Appendix NAPOLEON AND THE 192 own never bring myself to allow any attack to go I am not personally concerned when forward, my mind suffers much more than if I had a leg shot off in this late I shall ; business. Had our force arrived as I intended, 'twas not France that could have prevented our l folks from bringing off the whole of the vessels. ." the chains all in . The French stated that their repulse of the Boulogne was . enemy as glorious a victory as the English at triumph Aboukir. at Shortly afterwards Nelson proposed an expedition to Flushing with between four and five thousand troops. He sure that felt quarter, to give if he were able to strike a blow would, at Napoleon up his projected any in that rate for a time, be forced The invasion. First Lord of the Admiralty, however, vetoed the idea, and thereby aroused Nelson's ire. " Lord St. Vincent is for keeping the Enemy closely blockaded," he complains to Addington, " but I see they get alongshore inside their sand banks, and under Lord Hood is their guns, which line the coast of France. keeping our squadrons of defence stationary on our for own shore (except light cutters to give information of When men of such every movement of the enemy). . good . . sense, such great sea-officers, differ so widely, is it not mode of Defence to be well of men of judgment ?" the mature consideration arranged by The last sentence was a sarcastic reference to Lord St. Vincent, who had refused a consultation with Nelson on the subject. The letter concludes with a defence of his own mode of conducting operations " I mean not to detract from my judgment even as it is, it is well known but I natural that I should wish the : : ; 1 Dispatches p. 470. and Letters of Vice- Admiral Lord Viscount Nelson^ Vol. IV, INVASION OF ENGLAND boast of nothing but my zeal; in that will I 193 give way to no man upon earth." Nelson begged repeatedly to be relieved of his command l but the Admiralty only turned a deaf " No " to his applications. ear to his complaints and a owing to " None ill-health, of them he comments cares a d me n for and my sufferings," in vexation. Lord Howe, the " Father of the Navy," and the hero " of the victory off Ushant on the Glorious first of June," 1794, also differed with St. Vincent as to the wisdom of up the squadrons of the enemy tightly bottling home in their He Lord Melville 2 foresaw the difficulty which confronted on his succeeding to the head of affairs at the Admiralty, when ports. utterly inadequate to " he found a fleet of worn-out ships fleets of France meet the combined and Spain," 3 necessitating much patching-up of a more or less temporary nature to enable them to keep the sea. As regards the sailors themselves, they were then, as now, " there is nothing the British Navy cannot a certain but do," proportion of them were far from comFour months after the breaking out of the war petent. believers that in Collingwood had discerned that 1793, "we do not manage our ships with that alacrity and promptness that used to distinguish our navy. There is a tardiness everywhere in the preparation, and a sluggishness in the execution that is quite new. The effect is obvious to everybody, and the moment the ships are put in motion they feel it. After recording two disasters due to this lack of adequate training, 1 Ibid., 2 he adds P . " : This was not the fault of the weather, 475. Henry Dundas. May, 1804. He became 3 First Life of Lord of the Admiralty on the I5th Lord Howe, p. 217. I INVASION OF ENGLAND 94 but must ever be the case officers who have when young men are made neither skill nor attention, and there scarce a ship in the political interest is is navy that has not an instance that a better argument for promotion than ."* Writing from the Barfleur^ at Torbay, any skill. on April 8th, 1800, he shows that this disgraceful state of . . " The things in the fleet is scarcely, if at all, improved. " truth is," he says, in this great extensive navy, we find a great many indolent, half-qualified people, to which be attributed most of the accidents which happen." 2 if this was true of But remark applied the French fleets. British sailors, the with double force to those If history has may who manned proved anything, it is that fighting efficiency does not depend solely upon the heaviest armament, that the general morale of the men is of more importance. Sheer weight of metal never did nor never will counterbalance inefficiency in the working of a ship. It is as true in this age of steam and steel as it was in the days of the three-decker. What Trafalgar proved in 1805, the battle of the Sea of Japan seconded a century later. Discipline and courage are not analogous terms, but they ought to be in a country whose very existence depends upon the command of the sea, and whose boundaries time of war are the enemy's coasts. in 1 This letter is dated from Collingwood, p. 24, by W. Clark Russell. Spithead, July 22nd, 1793, and is to Sir Edward Blackett, Mrs. Colling - wood's uncle. 2 Ibid., p. 93. CHAPTER VII THE LITERARY AND ARTISTIC LANDMARKS OF THE GREAT TERROR, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE POPULAR PAMPHLETS, SONGS, BROADSIDES, AND CARICATURES PUBLISHED BETWEEN THE FIRST FRENCH EXPEDITION TO IRELAND AND THE CONCLUSION OF THE TREATY OF AMIENS (1796-1802) Does haughty Gaul invasion Then threat ? the louns beware, Sir. There's wooden walls upon our seas, And f ^HERE let ROBERT BURNS. volunteers on shore, Sir. a very marked divergence between the state of public opinion in England during is the two phases of the Great Terror, divided from each other by the Treaty of Amiens and the brief cessation of hostilities which ensued. In 1796, when the invasion projects of the French Directory began to assume a tangible shape, and the energy and ability Hoche were paving the way for the phenomenal and genius of Napoleon Bonaparte, the aftermath activity of the French Revolution still exercised an appreciable of Lazare Richard Price had died two influence in English politics. XVI, and Joseph had migrated to America; but Thomas Paine (who had only escaped the guillotine by the accident of Robes- years before the execution of Louis Priestley pierre's downfall) was of Reason, published in still active for evil, 1793, gave a i9S fillip and to the his Age waning NAPOLEON AND THE 196 enthusiasm of the habitues of the " Crown and Anchor." The Corresponding Society, the Constitutional Club, and other kindred associations had not as yet closed their " " " doors and the sentiments of The Democrats through" " out the World and The Friends of Freedom and may ; ; our Liberties never be swallowed in a Pitt toasts with one section of the community " were as popular as those of " May some plans be formed to save a sinking State " and " May " Britain never want sons to volunteer their services were with another. Edmund Burke was foe to from the days of his youth an Democracy and even to the uncompromising moderate measures of Parliamentary Reform advocated by Pitt, whose brother-in-law, the Earl of Stanhope, one of the mainsprings of the democratic associations of 1788, had now, in despair, turned his attention to the perfecting of steam vessels, stereotyping, and microscopic lenses, because his fellow-peers steadily refused to listen to his motions for non-interference in Continental complications. Fox, Sheridan, Grey, and in vain for pleaded to pass that they lash of of their friends one a