ng, dance, and dialogue, which was produced on October 25th, "in cele- At the commencement of the season of 1 Of this we bration of the glorious victory of the Nile." shall speak presently, but on February 8th of the same recorded that "the Manager of Covent Garden Theatre, with a laudable spirit of patriotism, devoted the year it is 2 1 H. Annals of Covent Garden Theatre from 1732 Wyndham, London, 1896. to 1897, Vol. S. 2 Gent. Mag., Vol. LXVIII, part i, 1798, pp. 165-6. I, p. 270, by NAPOLEON AND THE 224 profits of this night's entertainment the to voluntary subscription for the defence of the country. The dramatic piece represented on this occasion was the historical play of 'England Preserved,' brought forward three or four years ago, and written by Mr. Watson, first clerk of the After the Play, an interlude, Irish House of Commons. There consisting of loyal and patriotic songs, was given. was not a crowded house, but a large and elegant audience ; and as the price of admission to the boxes and pit was advanced, and all the performers and servants of the house played gratuitously, the profits must have been considerable." OCCASIONAL PROLOGUE " To at the Play of England Preserved," performed Covent Garden Theatre, Feb. 8th, 1798, in Aid of the Voluntary Contribution for the Defence of The Country. Oh ! then let each prepare with dauntless heart, At Britain's call, to act a Briton's part Ye gen'rous Youths, ! whom active vigour fires, emulate our glorious Sires Stand forth, and Like them, inspir'd your country's rights to shield, Remember Agincourt and Blenheim's field Ye titled Great, display your native worth Let valour vindicate the claims of birth Ye sons of Wealth with bounty cheer the train Who guard our shores or thunder on the main ! ! ! ! ! Ye Fair, for whom we toil, for whom we bleed, With smiles reward each bright heroic deed So shall one heart, one soul inspirit all, ! Bravely to conquer, or as bravely fall [with] glory may our perils cease, And reap their harvest, a Triumphant Peace. : So crown'd To revert to the later performance of the same year. INVASION OF ENGLAND 225 In The Times of October 24th, 1798, appeared the following advertisement : " " THEATRE ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN. To-morrow, Lover's Vows, with (ist time) a new SerioIntermezzo of Pantomime, Song, Dance and Comic Dialogue, called ' The Mouth of the Nile ' ; the Overture and Music composed by Mr. Attwood, with some favourite Selections from the Works of Dibdin and Mazzinghi. On Friday, Lover's Vows, after which, for the last time, Mrs. Mills will perform 'Little Pickle' in the 'Spoil'd Child.'" The Mouth of being played no the Nile proved an less enormous success, than thirty-five times, and earning command night from the King. On the previous evening (October 24th) there had evidently been a patriotic performance of some sort at Covent Garden, for we read in a The Times of October 25th : "Their Majesties and four Princesses went to Covent Garden for first time this season. They were received by the most brilliant and numerous audience we have ever witnessed at this House, with the liveliest effusions of The ardent loyalty displayed on the joy. occasion appeared to be animated by the late glorious heart-felt successes of our Navy, and expressed itself in reiterated and unanimous bursts of patriotic exultation. The free congratulations of a free people were never more zealously and more appropriately offered to the GUARDIAN of their civil and religious liberties. His MAJESTY seemed deeply affected by these testimonies of the fervent affection which Britons must ever entertain for his Royal person. The Play went off with repeated plaudits and the lines in the Epilogue, which allude to Lord NELSON'S victory, and Sir ; JOHN WARREN'S I. Q recent success, produced the happiest NAPOLEON AND THE 226 Every part of the House, except his MAJESTY'S box and the seats reserved for his suite, were filled in little more than a quarter of an hour after the doors were effects. opened." From The Times of October 26th, under the heading of Garden Covent Theatre, we learn that "a new Entertainment, composed of pantomime, song, dance, and dialogue, called The Mouth of the Nile, was performed for the first time at this Theatre tion is last night. As this motley composibrought forward from the most laudable motives, and on the spur of the occasion, we are inclined to treat It consists of two parts, the it in an indulgent manner. one entirely pantomimic, the other relates to the ever memorable Victory of the Gallant NELSON. Two parts so extremely dissimilar were perhaps never yet joined to form an entire theatrical exhibition. The Pantomime, or by the name of a Grand Ballet of Action, is altogether serious, and is founded on the trite, but inexhaustible subject of the disappointments and happiness what is dignified of lovers. It does not bear the least relation to the of the piece, and is title so tedious and unimportant in reprepatience of the audience, who sentation, as to tire the are naturally led to expect something analogous to the glorious event which suggested the entertainment. " The incidents in the second part are, for the most part, clumsily contrived, but the Dialogue and the Songs, written by Mr. DlBDIN, Jun. possess considerable merit. The latter in humour and epigrammatic point, and above the mediocrity which is generally abound the poetry is observed in hasty sketches of this kind. "The Songs given by FAWCETT and TOWNSEND, in INVASION OF ENGLAND the characters 227 of British Seamen, were deservedly en- cored. "The two representation of the engagement between the was well managed, and the explosion of the fleets French Admiral's U Orient, ship, proved the most satis- factory incident in the piece. " Several passages in the Overture were in the best style of Attwood, but he has not been happy in his selections. " Were the Ballet entirely omitted, the Mouth of the Nile might, with a few alterations, become a popular Interlude." Possibly the success of the Mouth of the Nile encouraged the management to put on The Raft and on March 3ist it was performed after Sheridan's School for Scandal. The ', was only a Times of April 2nd success qualified one, for one reads in The : " After the Comedy, a was performed for the new first After-piece called the Raft As a fugitive trifle, time. it possesses some merit, and abounds with loyal sentiments so well adapted to the circumstances and spirit of the times, that a few Blackheads in the Pit and Gallery showed A model of a every possible discountenance to the piece. raft was introduced, the folly of which caused a great deal of laughter. song by TOWNSEND was admirably sung, A and the composition does great hope it will credit to the author. not be lost to the public. The house was We not It was full, though very respectably attended." taken off a fortnight later, but " The Snug Little Island " lived throughout the Great Terror, and survived for many quite a long year afterwards. Victorian song-books. A It even figures in many of the early few months later we hear that a piece entitled Descent NAPOLEON AND THE 228 upon England: a Prophecy in two acts, is being played at The scene is laid at Frenchman who where a has escaped from Dover, young the Paris Theatre des Varietes. 1 prison takes refuge in the house of Fergusson, a tavernkeeper in the town, and is concealed and fed by his daughter Clementina, who, of course, falls in love with him. Fergusson is a "patriot," and in conjunction with some other " patriots," one of whom is the colonel of a regiment in the garrison at the Castle, forms a plan for emancipating his fellow-citizens assisting "a them by favouring the descent of the French and in getting possession of the port. Murai, traitor sold to the party of Pitt," has the profligacy to detect the conspiracy and to give Governor of the Castle ; intelligence of it to the the persons of the conspirators in secured and having been appreare, consequence, hended, tried, cast, and condemned, in the course of the ; evening they are ordered for execution in the night, but the French land apropos to rescue their friends from the The Castle is taken, the Governor blows out his gallows. brains, and the united determine to march " " to patriots London of France and England to complete the business so happily begun. So much for the fable, of which author, "Ah! "patriots" are " quel conteJ" The scene dialogue. Gordon. all My Now for friends, in I will it 1 employs ; not remind you of the has carried into the Colonies it to the a specimen of the the Fergusson's house at their head. Gordon met, is crimes of the English Government which it has exercised over the seas which we may say ; the long tyranny ; ; the disasters which the perfidious means war I will not for perpetuating the Anti-Jacobin Review and Magazine, ; Vol. Ill, p. 572. INVASION OF ENGLAND talk of Pitt. You 229 know that cunning is his instrument, delusion his element, and that his infernal policy would sacrifice all the belligerent nations to his ambition. all "Fergusson. Yes, 'tis time to put a stop to the homicidal plots of that destroyer of the human race. "A Conspirator. Philosophy has already devoted him to the execration of the people. " Gordon. You have all heard the thundering eloquence of Fox. English Patriots/ he calls on you to assert your ' Rights. We " shall know how to defend them. Fergusson. Gordon. His voice invokes liberty. will obtain it at the expense of our "Fergusson. " We lives. " Gordon. But let us not waste our time in idle words, but think of executing our plan. You are all resolved to favour the descent of the French, to burst your chains, and give liberty to your degraded country ? " The Conspirators. Yes Yes " Fergusson. We swear it. ! " ! of victory are Fox and his friends, and yours Courage, Buonaparte. The genius of liberty watches over the people, and will soon crush their tyrants. (He reads a paper.) In two hours the descent will be made. The regiment in garrison is commanded by the brave Houssey on him we may rely but we may have to of the Port he dread from the Commander everything is sold to Pitt and his infamous We must anticiagents. him and strike the first blow. pate " Is it yours ? Fergusson. That is my opinion. " Yes Yes Conspirators. Gordon. Our pledges ; ; ! ! " Gordon. At the very moment when we shall make our attack on Dover the conspiracy will break out in the heart of London. Let the Cabinet of St. James' tremble ; Fox His powerful hand has made Scotquite ready. land and Ireland rise and while the sea is covered with is a forest of masts, Republican phalanxes will come forth NAPOLEON AND THE 230 as out of the bowels of the earth, to exterminate at once the oppressors of my country. Friends, this day will decide our Fate," In the last scene the author gives a gentle hint to the merchants of Paris, which was very seasonable at a time when the Directory was raising a loan upon England. " Alphonse. followed you. How are happy my brave comrades ! They say, General, that all the people in to embark in the expedition and that the They France wished ; trading part of Paris, not being able to partake of glory, all the merchants hastened to contribute to success, " The its its offering their treasures to the Republic. French General. In that generous act I recognise by Now is your time to destroy Englishmen Government which has caused all your misfortunes, desolated your neighbours, and set Europe on fire. It is time that the fate of the people should no longer depend on the caprice of an individual." my nation. ! the British The army sets forth quick march au pas redouble for Canterbury, and the curtain falls. The author was neither a prophet nor a dramatist but his play, for a time at least, doubtless did the same work ; with the badauds of Paris as the following contemporary broadsheet accomplished a year or so later (1801) on the other side of the Channel : Substance of the CO