rcumstances remedies," was a Napo- we must apply extraordinary and the First Consul certainly put it in practice as soon as the British Ambassador had left Paris. He made the most gigantic and determined efforts leonic precept, to collect a formidable flotilla, revised the plans for organization a dozen times, built and when it its new docks and enlarged to him beyond the was proved existing ports, shadow of a doubt that a temporary command of the sea was indispensable, he worked towards that end with almost superhuman energy. Bonaparte was a good hater, and he loathed England with a fiercer intensity as each He wanted "ships, year found her still unconquered. and Britain Great commerce." colonies, destroyed the first, captured the second, and fought for the third with a doggedness unrivalled in the history of nations. 282 Although INVASION OF ENGLAND 283 Trafalgar crushed the navies of France and Spain, circumstances alone vetoed the Emperor's later plans for the subjugation of his rival by striking a blow at her very heart. To him London was more important for the greater includes the less. than Paris ; It is difficult therefore to understand the attitude taken by certain historians who have endeavoured to prove that Bonaparte's real object was not to invade England or Ireland, but to gather together an immense army to use against Austria and Russia. It seems highly improbable, however, that the First Consul ing the would have spent millions of francs in buildhad such been the case. He was not given flotilla to squandering money on castles in the air. The cost of the wars in which he had already engaged had told heavily on the resources of the French treasury, and the money could have been used for many other purposes than excaharbours and vating constructing flat-bottomed boats. At St. Helena the Emperor frequently and frankly discussed his plan of invasion, and always referred to it as a serious undertaking. Another weighty argument in favour of reality, as opposed to mere bluff, arises from the of his giving so much of his time to visiting the various ports and examining everything of importance personally, amazing those who were directly engaged in fact the work with his knowledge of apparently unimportant For three years he concentrated his mind and details. energies on the proposed expedition, perfecting designs, attending manoeuvres, and accepting or rejecting schemes by himself or submitted by others. His head of the Government was no sinecure. either originated position He was as already the Emperor Napoleon without the crown and the royal purple. His court was as brilliant NAPOLEON AND THE 284 monarch by " Divine Right," while he gathered round him the master-minds of the nation. Pressing business calling for the most careful statesmanship was for ever intruding itself upon his restless brain. that of any as It is therefore scarcely feasible to would his dissipate already think that such a overtaxed man energies on a gigantic policy of sham. During on his stay at Elba, and especially while he was voyage to St. Helena, the projected invasion of England was a favourite topic of conversation at the his dinner-table. The naturally appealed to naval never showed himself unwilling to subject men, and Napoleon their gratify Thomas The Diaries of Admiral Sir who conveyed the "King of Elba" to curiosity. Ussher, and of John Glover, secretary to RearAdmiral Cockburn, of the Northumberland, to which may be added that of Lady Malcolm at St. Helena, all bear his last possession, witness to the rigid cross-examinations voluntarily underwent on J. Holland Rose remarks the Emperor this particular subject. in his " As Dr. admirable introduction to those who note the enormous Napoleon's Last Voyages^ extent of his preparations on the northern coast in 1804-5, as set forth in his correspondence,' and the retentiveness of ' his memory, even of small details, as proved by the con- versation with Ussher, will find it difficult to believe that he did not really intend to strike at London" ! Although in details he sometimes when he failed to accurately state the case, as told Colonel Campbell that the arming of the 1 Napoleon's Last Voyages^ being the Diaries of Admiral Sir Thomas Ussher, R.N., K.C.B. (on board the Undaunted] , and John R. Glover, Secretary to Rear-Admiral Cockburn (on board the Northumberland)^ with Introduction and Notes by J. Holland Rose, LITT. D. (1906), p. 16. ' Jif tJt yo* you, my oyfr, < Ml amc & utS2 a- &t& J Jfurt Stta/vt yw throat Cij> JOHN BULL'S CHALLENGE TO BONAPARTE. APRIL 6, 1 803 INVASION OF ENGLAND flotilla was merely to deceive the 285 enemy, and that he never intended to cross without a superiority of fleet to protect 1 he it, a statement he reiterated to Admiral Cockburn, consistently maintained that A invade England. for the diarists. Bingham, error in asserting that ready at Boulogne in the sentence to was always his intention to must also be made it certain allowance " 2 makes a for instance, twenty thousand embark at a men moment's curious were [sic] notice," immediately following renders the and state- ment absurd by saying that Napoleon "could have debarked this army in twenty-four hours." 3 Referring to his plan of September, 1804, for the conquest of Ireland, the Emperor told Cockburn that "if he could have got safely over to it the force he intended sending, the party there was so strong in his favour that he had every reason to suppose they would have succeeded in possessing A themselves of the whole island." conversation which is briefly noted 4 in Glover's under dates September loth and nth, 1815, Diary narrated at is greater length by Bingham as having occurred on Tuesday, 1 2th (September). According to the latter, the Admiral had told Napoleon that many English people had regarded his invasion scheme as a feint. " Mr. Pitt never thought so,' was the reply I had well ' ' ; weighed the consequences, and I calculated that not succeed the demonstrations would do 1 2 ibid., pp. 89, 140. Sir George Bingham, K.C.B., me if I did great dis- was on board the Northumberland with Napoleon. During the first year of Napoleon's captivity he commanded the second battalion of the 53rd Regiment at St. Helena, when he was appointed Brigadier-General on the Staff of the island. 3 " More Light on St. Helena," in Cornhill Magazine^ 1901, p. 22. 4 Napoleon's Last Voyages^ p. 194. NAPOLEON AND THE 286 service, as it would make the English a military nation, and at the same time would give the ministers a command of money, since no other measure could authorise for so large a sum as in this case was was requisite. very well pleased to see the preparations the English made on the coast opposite Boulogne, at which place it was never my intention to have attempted them to call I a landing. I kept up this farce by frequent embarkations and by the exercise of my flotilla. My real point of attack would have been somewhere between Margate and Deal. calculated that I of the lines of Chatham I could have possessed myself I should as a point of retreat. then have pushed for London, and, had I arrived there, I should have offered very moderate terms of peace, taking care, however, so far to cripple you that you could have done no further mischief, nor have disturbed my future Whether I should have succeeded or not I can't plans. " The Emperor also say, but such were my objects.' alluded to to the divide Irish expedition " : My sole object was from England, and to have occupied the it attention of the English in reconquering or tranquillising it. Could the division once be effected, peace, and the ultimate ruin and subjugation of both countries, would have been the consequence." l O'Meara, one of Napoleon's physicians at St. Helena, asked his patient point-blank if he had really Dr. intended to invade England, and plans The ? headed it he added exiled Emperor if so, " replied : what were his / would have 2 After describing one of his projects, would have hastened over my flotilla myself'' " : I 1 Comhill Magazine, 1901, a A pp. 28-9. Voice from St. Helena, Vol. I, p. 349, by Dr. Barry O'Meara. INVASION OF ENGLAND Chatham with 200,000 men, landed as near and proceeded London, where direct to arrive in four days from the time of I as possible, calculated to my landing." l Las Cases, who was nothing more or " mouthpiece, quotes him as saying : 287 less It Again, than his master's was supposed that scheme was merely a vain threat, because it did not appear that I possessed any reasonable means of attempting its execution. But I had laid my plans deeply, and my without being observed I had dispersed all our French ships and the English were sailing after them in different parts of the world. Our ships were to return suddenly ; and at the same the French coast and to assemble in a mass along would have had seventy or eighty time, I French or Spanish vessels that I continue master should Three or four thousand a signal. in the A hundred little thousand Channel, and I calculated of it for two months. boats were to be ready at men were every day drilled embarking and landing, as a part of in their exercise. my troops, could calculate upon only one pitched battle, the result of which could not be doubtful and victory would have brought us to London." 2 After landing I ; Count Balmain, the Russian Commissioner at St. Helena, relates a conversation on the same subject between Admiral Malcolm and the Emperor. 3 " Malcolm What was the real made at Boulogne ? ' : parations you object of the great pre' 1 This statement exactly coincides with the details he gave Cockburn. See Napoleon's Last Voyages, pp. 140-1. a to Sir George Memorial de Sainte Hettne, Vol. I, Part II, p. 278 (English edition, by Las Cases. 3 " Napoleon's Imprisonment Memoirs of Count Balmain." Translated and edited by Alder Anderson. Published in the London Daily Mail, Nos. 1823), : 2000-2028. NAPOLEON AND THE 288 " ' Napoleon : To take my soldiers across the Channel, of course.' " to Did the conquest of England, then, appear you to be such an easy undertaking ? " No, but it was surely worth while attemptNapoleon Malcolm ' : ' ' : ing " it.' Malcolm Nobody was ' : plan was.' " ever able to guess what your It was quite simple. Napoleon My fleet was detowards as if for the America, spatched purpose of disI there was convinced that the bulk of embarking troops fleet would follow it. Villeneuve, taking advantage your ' : ; of the first favourable opportunity there are so was to suddenly turn about and make at sea many for the Channel, reaching there a fortnight before the English Admiral, and was to cruise about while my boats were " crossing.' A visitor to Elba in 1815 records an interview he had with the fallen Emperor, and adds " I regretted much it had not occurred to me to touch upon a point on which : there has always existed much diversity of opinion ; whether he had ever contemplated the invasion of England. However, I took an opportunity on the following day of introducing the subject to Count Bertrand, during a conversation I had with him. He reasoned for a considerable time, as if it had really been Bonaparte's intention to make the attempt the Emperor, he said, had of the line collected in the Mediterranean and forty sail at Cadiz ; it ; was intended that the ships in the different ports should form a junction, and then proceed to the Channel, where the fleet would have been joined by ten sail of the line kept in readiness for that purpose. force, This he remarked, would probably have given them the INVASION OF ENGLAND command 289 of the Channel for a fortnight or three weeks, which time would, it was calculated, have elapsed before Nelson could have discovered their real destination, and reached the scene of action. When the combined fleet had once obtained the command of the Channel, a force of 100,000 men, or more, could have been assembled on the French coast in forty-eight hours, and might have been p