er own coasts, and we had seen those ships which were ; destined for the invasion of this country moored and chained to their shores, and rinding protection only in their These were not only sources of justifiable batteries. pride, but grounds of solid security. What might future object of the Chief Consul of France he be the knew not, were to exercise a military despotism, he would venture to predict that he would not select this country for the first object of his attack and if we were true to our- but if it ; selves when we had little to fear from that attack, let it come But though he did not entertain apprehenhe could not concur with those who thought we sions, yet if such policy were ought to lay aside all caution would indeed be there adopted, ground for most serious it would. ; he hoped every measure would be adopted which prudence could suggest, to do away with animosity between the two countries, and to avoid every ground of apprehensions irritation by : sincerity on our part. This, however, on the NAPOLEON AND THE 268 other hand, was not to be done by paying abject court to France. must depend for security only upon our- We selves. If, however, the views of France were correspondent with our own, we had every prospect of enjoying a He saw some symptoms that they were, though long peace. upon this he had no certain knowledge ; but he would never rely upon personal character for the security of his country. He was inclined to but he was bound to act as if hope everything was good, he feared otherwise." This proves that although Pitt was willing to try the experiment of peace, he was far from sanguine as to the good intentions of Bonaparte. He confessed to Wilberthe terms were not force that all that he should have " wished, but that they were on the whole highly honourable to the country and very advantageous. The event is most fortunate both for Government and the public, and for the Pitt sake of both gives had a singularly character is evident dreamed of Ulm and me infinite satisfaction." 1 That clear conception of the First Consul's ; was though he had already and saw vaguely the comAusterlitz, it as pensations of Trafalgar and Waterloo. Lord Cornwallis, who was then over sixty years of age, was sent to Paris as Ambassador Plenipotentiary to represent Great Britain in the drawing-up of the definitive The First Consul gave orders that he was to treaty. " received with the greatest distinction. On his arrival at Calais a salute must be fired, and he must have a be guard of honour to escort him on his journey." 1 Private Papers of William Wilberforce, p. 30. addressed from Park Place, October ist, 1801. 2 To General P- 372. Berthier. 2 He had This communication Paris, I4th October, 1801. Bingham, Vol. is I, INVASION OF ENGLAND 269 a long interview with the First Consul. In his correspondence Cornwallis states that Bonaparte " affected a frank, liberal, and conciliatory spirit." The conferences were afterwards transferred to Amiens, a city which served the purpose of a half-way house between London and Paris. Talleyrand and Joseph Bonaparte represented France while the matter was being discussed, the Chevalier d'Azara looked after the interests of Spain, and M. Schimmelpennick attended on behalf of Holland. Lord Cornwallis, it is to be feared, was as clay in the hands of such skilful diplomatists. For some months the negotiations went on, both countries haggling over comparatively Eventually their differences were settled, and on the 2/th March, 1802, the Peace of Amiens was trivial details. signed. Great Britain agreed to give up Egypt to the ; Cape of Good Hope was handed over to Holland, along with Berbice, Demerara, Essequibo, and Surinam Malta was to be evacuated and restored to Sublime Porte the ; the Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem and all the French colonies taken in the war were to be given For these concessions Great Britain obtained back. ; Ceylon and Trinidad, France also agreeing to withdraw from Naples and the Roman States Portugal was to be an independent kingdom, and the Newfoundland fisheries ; were to be on exactly the same footing as before the outbreak of war. The Government lost no time in showing in a practical manner its satisfaction at the harmonious relations which now existed between England and France, and orders British were given for the disbanding of all the sea fencibles and the discharge of the press-gangs. The militia, which had been nine years under arms, was disembodied, but . INVASION OF ENGLAND 270 the services of certain of the volunteer were retained in large centres. yeomanry corps Shortly afterwards Nelson fleet quitted his station off Boulogne and anchored Downs. 1 The Peace of Amiens stood Bonaparte in good stead so far as personal ambition went, for the Tribunate and Legislative Body decided that he should have some mark of esteem paid to him. A further ten years was therefore added to his consulate on the expiration of his term of with his in the Shortly afterwards he was made Consul for the second step leading to the imperial throne. office. 1 At the end of the war Great Britain had than when sixty-seven more life, sail-of-the-line began, while in 1801 France had only thirty-nine sailSee Mahan, Influence of-the-line against the eighty she possessed in 1793. of Sea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire, Vol. II, p. 73. hostilities CHAPTER IX THE LULL BEFORE THE STORM, " England is not asleep, she is always on the watch." 1803 NAPOLEON. a time Bonaparte devoted himself to national reforms, such as reinstating religion, furthering FOR education, and encouraging direction. He commerce in every also paid particular attention to the construction of military roads and canals, and had a number of new ships put on the stocks. His aggressive schemes on the Continent were not, however, allowed to In an incredibly short period the First Consul became President of the Italian Republic, subdued lapse for long. Switzerland, seized Piedmont, occupied Parma and PiaHe cenza, and obtained Elba from the King of Naples. also desired a great colonial empire, and with this object view he endeavoured to reorganize the island of St. x Louisiana was ceded to France by Spain in Domingo in ; exchange for an extension of territory in Italy Guiana and India once more became the was also secured ; ; He again declared Europe was too small for him, and that the East and West contained vast tracts of land as yet unopened to the civilizing influobject of his solicitude. 1 In one of Napoleon's conversations with Gourgaud at St. Helena, he " the Saint Domingo business" as the "greatest error that in my government I ever committed." See Talks of Napoleon at St. Helena characterized all with General Baron Gourgaud ', p. 112. 271 NAPOLEON AND THE 272 Moderation was the one great attriit would have consolidated his bute Bonaparte lacked unfettered ambition interests and established his line ence of commerce. ; ; took away every shred of power, and him left at the mercy of the country he had vowed to conquer. Tronchet was right when he remarked to Cambaceres " This young man begins like Caesar I fear that he will end like : : him." 1 The Peace and of Amiens lasted one year and sixteen days, into a twelve years' war. its rupture plunged Europe Neither side kept strictly to the conditions set forth in the treaty, and it was evident that before long swords would leave their scabbards once more. In the words of " was a sponge to wipe out old scores and begin the game over again on new ground." 2 " You Hazlitt, the peace know how much under all the circumstances I wished for " peace," writes Pitt to Wilberforce, and my wishes remain the same, if Bonaparte can be made to feel that he is not on every nation in Europe. But little chance, and without it I see no to trample in succession of this I fear there is 3 prospect but war." On the 1 8th February, 1803, Lord Whitworth, the English Ambassador at Paris, had a long interview with the First Consul in his cabinet at the Tuileries. The First Consul asserted that his efforts to live on good terms He with England had met with no friendly response. also complained bitterly of the attacks which were continually 1 made upon him by the Press, and persisted in Cambaceres was Second Consul, and afterwards became Arch-Chancellor of the Empire. z Life of Napoleon Bonaparte, Vol. II, p. 486, by William Hazlitt. This letter is dated from Bath, October 3ist, 1802. Private Papers of William Wilberforce^ p. 34, collected and edited by A. M. Wilberforce. 3 INVASION OF ENGLAND 273 the statement that he had executed the Treaty of Amiens with scrupulous fidelity. "As a proof of his desire to 1 "he wished to know what he had to gain by going to war with England ? A descent was the only means of offence he had, and that he was determined to attempt, by putting himself at the head of the expedition. But how maintain peace," runs Lord Whitworth's report, it be supposed, that after having gained the height on which he stood, he would risk his life and reputation in such a hazardous attempt, unless forced to it by could when the chances were that he and the greater of the part expedition would go to the bottom of the He acknowledged that there were one hunsea? necessity, . . . dred chances to one against him but still he was determined to attempt it, if war should be the consequence of the present discussion and that such was the disposition ; ; of the troops, that army after army would be found for the enterprize. He then expatiated much on the force of the two countries. France, with an army of 480,000 men, for to this amount, it is, he said, to be immediately com- most desperate enterprize and with a fleet made her mistress of the seas, that England and which he did not think he should be able to equal in pleted, all ready for the ; than ten years." less King George III informed Parliament on the 8th of March, 1803, that though there was still a chance for the peace to continue, the "very considerable military pre" parations 1 going on in the ports of France and Holland, Lord Whitworth to Lord Hawkesbury, Paris, February 2ist, 1803. with France: Official Papers, presented by His Majesty's command to both Houses of Parliament, on Wednesday, the i8th of May, 1803, relative to the negociations between Great Britain and the French Government," "War p. 37, Dublin, 1803. I. T NAPOLEON AND THE 274 though " avowedly directed to colonial service," called for further precautions to be taken for the defence of Great Accordingly an addition of 10,000 men to the naval force of the country and the calling out of the Britain. was voted. In 1802, owing to Bonaparte's restlesshad sanctioned an addition of 20,000 men Parliament ness, to the navy, and 66,000 men to the army in order to promilitia vide for the safety of Ireland, which be invaded at the earliest would it seemed probable favourable oppor- 1 tunity. The French preparations in Holland were, in theory at for Louisiana. Some 6500 troops were intended any rate, in accordance with articles stationed at Helvoetsluis signed on February ist, 1803, and of these 3040 were for the expedition. 2 But by the Treaty of Luneville, which guaranteed the independence of the Batavian Republic, and also by the convention concluded at the Hague on the 29th August, 1801, five half-brigades and five companies of artillery were to be allowed to remain in Holland " only s peace with England." well to evacuate the country. until the final conclusion of Napoleon had not thought it The Cape of Good Hope had been but recently restored to the Dutch, and there was the probability that it might "at any time become the base of operations of French cruisers and privateers preying upon British East Indiamen," 4 thus menacing Britain's Eastern Empire. An expedition under Decaen had been already sent to India with the express purpose of finding exactly what discontent there was 1 2 8 4 Cambridge Modern History^ 