assed over before the arrival of the British fleet. The invading army, it was conceived, would have been overpower any opposition that could have been made to its progress before it had reached Lonsufficiently strong to don, and taken possession of the seat of Government. I replied, that supposing all these plans had succeeded according to their wishes, their army must inevitably have been destroyed, as they could not have obtained reinforcements. He observed, that they could have kept possession of ports, and could have smuggled men over some small for as the run ; so short, this could not have been wholly is prevented by any precautions on the part of the English. I said that the opinion in England was, that the threat of an invasion was a mere pretext for bringing a large force together in order to be prepared to pounce upon one or other of the Continental Powers, as in fact the had done in the case of Austria. He replied, possible' Here the conversation ended. . . . Emperor ' Cela est Some of the Imperial Guard, with whom I conversed at Elba, were decidedly of opinion that, had the invasion of Eng- land been attempted, the enterprise would have failed." x Thiers, the great French historian, who was probably 1 Minutes of a Conversation with Napoleon Bonaparte during his Residence January 1815, by J. H. Vivian. London Ridgway, Picca- in Elba, in dilly. , 1839. I. U : NAPOLEON AND THE 2QO the first writer to thoroughly peruse the State papers and other documents having reference to the invasion,1 dismisses the question of whether the First Consul really meant to descend upon England in a single sentence. He If the credulous who have questioned the his of reality [Napoleon's] project could read his private correspondence with the Minister of Marine, the infinite says :".... number of his his orders, and the secret communication of hopes to the Arch-Chancellor Cambaceres, they no longer entertain any doubt as to the would reality of that 2 Captain Mahan also most extraordinary resolution." the asserts that great commander certainly emphatically meant to attempt to cross the Straits; but Captain Edouard Desbriere, the most recent historian of this period, inclines to the belief that Napoleon was not serious, and largely bases his conclusions on the fact that there are strange discrepancies and oversights in his plan of maritime strategy. In other words, the organization is not worthy proves that he was of the Emperor's genius, because it sufficiently human to make mistakes. The campaign which ended at Trafalgar was a small affair when compared with the disasters which overtook the Moscow. The latter was a army and its head at colossal miscalculation on the part of the military man par excellence; the former, especially in the opening operations, was largely success- although planned by the same mind, which never thoroughly grasped the difference between manoeuvres on ful, land and those at sea. ties 1 There are few living naval authori- of equal eminence to Captain Mahan, Many of who avers that these letters are to be found in Correspondent de Napoleon /, thirty-two volumes, and also in Captain Desbriere's Projets. 2 Thiers' Consulate and Empire Vol. Ill, p. 241. ', INVASION OF ENGLAND the last phase of the invasion projects was 291 " profoundly conceived and laboriously prepared." 1 It seems to the present writers that the plan was right, but that the men who were charged with carrying out it were wrong. France had who, like no admiral equal in activity to Nelson, Napoleon, was without a compeer. Cornwallis, Colling wood, and Pellew were more than a match for Ganteaume, Villeneuve, and Missiessy. Coquelle sums up the bitterness of the blow to Napoleon's ambition in a single sentence " : The failure of his preparations for an invasion, and especially his defeat at Trafalgar, were wounds which never healed." z Without going so who summarily far as the late Judge O'Connor Morris, dismisses the matter useless to argue with those who have by saying " : It is denied, or doubted intention to invade England," we fully " in his conclusion that the Emperor hesi- real Napoleon's agree with him tated more than once ; but no one who has carefully read 3 correspondence can question his purpose." Captain A. Crawford, R.N., who served as a young his in the British frigate Immortality of the man Downs squadron, and not only watched the goings on in Boulogne, but had many an encounter with sections of the flotilla from the " I am of beginning of the war until Trafalgar, says of that intended the invasion opinion Bonaparte fully : England, which only the rupture with Austria, and the mismanagement of Admiral Villeneuve, his attempting. In this opinion learned from Admiral Lacrosse, 1 z am in 1805, fortified some years prevented by what I ago, at Bor- Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution^ Vol. II, p. 181. Napoleon and England\ 1803 1813 p. 273, by P. Coquelle. The Great Campaigns of Nelson, p. 106, by W. O'Connor Morris. > 3 I NAPOLEON AND THE 292 deaux. This Admiral was second Admiral Bruix, and in command under consequence of the latter's feeble state of health, had been nominated DirectorGeneral of the flotilla. In that situation, he had the entire at Boulogne, in management and arrangement of the naval force there and in the contiguous harbours and upon the death of Admiral Bruix, which took place in 1805, he succeeded to the chief command." l ; M6neval, who was one of his secretaries at the time, He equally positive as to Napoleon's intentions. adds is further : " His habits changed his genius, which had appeared to slumber, awoke, full of courage and daring. He raised himself to the height of the formidable circumstances : which our eternal enemies had created, and indeed rose His activity became prodigious, and superior to them. was all-sufficient. From that time forward a new life began for him, a life of action, of combat, a life given up to the hardest labours, to dangers of every kind, to the most fruitful and the most audacious of conceptions a from which no diversions of any kind were even for a moment allowed to turn him aside. Like an intrepid athlete, he entered upon this gigantic struggle, which was to produce such marvels to raise him so high, and to cast ; life him down But so low." 2 Memoirs of Napoleon a much-quoted and widely read work, it would for the fact that Bourrienne's Bonaparte is not be necessary to refer to the opinion of author as to the reality of Bonaparte's project. to the Emperor's visit its alleged Referring to Boulogne in 1804, the writer 1 Reminiscences of a Naval Officer during the Late by Captain A. Crawford, R.N. 8 Meneval's Memoirs of Napoleon /, Vol. I, p. 219. War t Vol. I, p. 192, INVASION OF ENGLAND 293 " At his departure, it was generally believed at Paris says that the distribution of the decorations of the Legion of : Honour was only a pretext, and that the grand object to be realized was the descent on England. It was indeed only a pretext. The Emperor wished to excite still more the enthusiasm of the army, and to show himself to the military invested with his new dignity ; to be present at some grand manoeuvres, and dispose the army to obey the signal he might give." Having strained at this gnat are asked to swallow a camel. " How, indeed, could it first we be supposed, after such extensive preparations so many transports and the whole army ready to embark that it really was never intended England ? But so it was to attempt a descent upon the blow was to be struck in another quarter." 1 There is abundant evidence that the book in question is not the work of a single individual, but of a number of collaborators, who were helped by a few incomplete notes of Bourrienne's, and much information culled from more or Me"neval gives the lie direct to sources. "If M. de Bourrienne had the "pretext" supposition. written these memoirs himself," he says, "he would not less accurate have said that Napoleon had confided to him in 1805 that he had never had any serious intentions of an expedition against England, and that the project of a landing, the preparations of which were made with so much noise, was 2 only a trick to amuse fools." Although Chancellor Pasquier does not deal with the matter at length in 1 Memoirs, he maintains that his Britain's rule of the sea " " compelled Napoleon to fall Bourrienne's Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte, p. 290 (Crosby Lock2 Meneval, Vol. I, p. 132. wood's edition, 1888). NAPOLEON AND THE 294 back on the old method of invading England by means He regards the former attempt of a flotilla in 1803. made "during the interval which elapsed between the of and that of Amiens" as pretence, Lune"ville Treaty " but this time it was taken up with far greater ardour. The set in motion." 1 whole of France's resources were 2 who certainly holds no brief for Napoleon, showing that Bonaparte did not hesitate to risk a war with the whole Continent, proceeds to call to task Lanfrey, after " several very sensible writers " who have concluded " that the project of the descent on England was only a feint, intended to mask his plans of conquest upon the continent. If this project less policy throw all was serious," he asks, "how can such reck- be explained ? Why did he, who was about to our available forces upon England, with the probability of being rounded there by the British fleets, set almost certain immediately all sur- the Continental Powers at defiance, and put them into such a state of irritation, that their first step would infallibly be to take advantage of his absence to rush down upon France unarmed? If the descent was anything else than a feint, If the policy was calthe policy was that of a madman. It is culated, the descent was only a false demonstration. impossible to escape this dilemma, and we can understand how historians, penetrated above all with the sublimity of Napoleon's genius, have preferred to solve the difficulty by denying the reality of the project of expedition, rather than suppose that this extraordinary genius wanted common sense, and could not see things that would have But it is impossible to struck the intelligence of a child. 1 Memoirs of Chancellor 3 History of Napoleon, Vol. II, Pasqtiier, Vol. p. 398, I, pp. 176-7. by P. Lanfrey (Eng. edition). INVASION OF ENGLAND 295 retain the slightest doubt in regard to this, when we see the thousands of orders, of projects and counter-projects, which Napoleon's correspondence has revealed when we ; see the interest, the passion, the obstinacy, the incredible resources that he employed in the realization of his favourite and breathless anxiety with which various phases and definite failure, and forced to admit the amazing contrast that is pre- enterprise, the profound he followed history is its sented to us in the same man, of marvellous faculties in action, associated with a weak and radically false judgment in the appreciation of general facts." Reference is very frequently made to the Emperor's remarks to the Council of State in January, 1805, that the Boulogne organization was nothing but a demonstration to deceive the Continental Powers as to his real intentions. " " the strongest I now have," he assured the Councillors, possible army, a complete military organization, and am moment on the footing which I generally have first to in of actual war. To raise such forces in time case secure this 20,000 artillery, horses and trains complete of peace there was need of a pretext in order to levy and bring them all together without rousing suspicion in the other Continental Powers. This pretext was afforded by the England. Two years ago I would not thus have spoken to you, but it was nevertheless my sole purpose. I am well awajre that to maintain such an project for landing in time of peace means throwing thirty millions out of the window. But in return I have the advantage equipment of all my many enemies by twenty days, and can take the field before Au