sslyn, Blackheath. The great majJ. H. Douglas, of William ority Henry Bunbury's military sketches relate to events invasion which happened before the acute stage of the and " Pitt's own Caricaturist," James threats, Sayers or Sayer, (1748-1823), preferred the otium cum 1 See England under the House of Hanover, Vol. II, pp. 269-425, by Thomas Wright, London, 1849. Account of Gillray* s Caricatures, pp. 84-255, Works of James Gillray, pp. 204-324, by Thomas Wright, London, 1851. by Thomas Wright, 4to, London, n.d. Rowlandson the Caricaturist, Vol. I, p. 327 to end, Vol. II, pp. 1-57, by Thomas Wright, 4to, London, 1880. English Satire on Napoleon I, Vol. I, p. 42 to end, Vol. II, pp. 1-48, by London, 1884. Histoire de la Caricature, Vol. IV, chap, v, pp. 236-307, by Champfleury, Paris, n.d. John Ashton, 2 vols., 2 The second name of Woodward is, curiously enough, given as " Moutard " in the Dictionary of National Biography. 3 The able author of The Works of George Cruikshank classified and arranged, London, 1903. NAPOLEON AND THE 246 dignitate of his well-earned marshalship in the Court of Exchequer to dealing with the misdoings of Bonaparte and the prowess or shortcomings of our national defenders. Almost the only exception he made was in favour of the " Devil's Own," gently satirized in the print amongst the illustrations. Below it one reads the lines now reproduced : Templars of old were valiant Knights, Defenders of their country's Rights, A consecrated Band ; one superior Merit Shew'd On him the general Voice bestow'd If A Leader's high With equal Zeal To guard command in Britain's : cause her Liberty and Laws, Our Volunteers unite. But who Shall head the Loyal Host ? Erskine steps forth and claims the Post And Mansfield dubs him Knight. Sleep Sleep in Peace ye Templars brave Nor cast a look beyond the Grave ! To mark our Inn's dishonour. Two Evils press upon our Ranks, Erskine's Command and Sherry's Thanks, Sworn friends of tried O'Connor. The Gillray plate "FRENCH TELEGRAPH making SIGNALS in the Dark" is dated 26th January, 1795,* and was published before the firm of H. Humphrey moved from 37 New Bond Street to 27 St. James's Street. 2 now given on account of the quaint illustration of the " telegraph," and the light it operation of the primitive It is 1 Accormt of the Caricatures of James Gillray, p. 59, by T. Wright. As far back as 1781 the firm of Humphrey was in existence at 227 Strand, and there published several caricatures on the invasion projects entrusted to the Count de Grasse. 2 INVASION OF ENGLAND throws on the reputed sympathy of friends idea of foreign the for invasion threats The politics. 247 Fox and his Whig intervention before the came within the sphere of earliest Gillray caricature practical on the subject of the invasion, in the strict sense of the term, appeared more than a year It is entitled later (2Oth October, 1796). " Promised Horrors of the French Invasion, or Forcible Reasons for negociating a Regicide Peace." l St. James's Palace is James's Club the victorious invaders throng St. a massacre of the members of White's flames in Street ; in progress is ; ; the dead bodies of the Princes who have taken refuge in the balcony are thrown down on the pavement below, and Pitt, stripped and prepared for instant execution, is bound to a pole crowned with the bonnet rouge, while Fox, a birch in either hand, soundly castigates his This may be regarded as the commencement fallen foe. of the system of influencing public opinion by satire and song which contributed so much to the universal enthu- A siasm of 1803 and the following years. fortnight after the Fishguard fiasco (March 4th, 1797) Gillray dealt with it, as well as with Jervis's victory of I4th Febru- very ary, in " The Tables turned. Billy Billy sending the Devil PackThe conception of this caricature is remarkably The Premier (Pitt) is held in the brawny the in felicitously, Devil's 2 ing." clever. Claws. " Ha, grasp of Fox, disguised as a Republican fiend. " traitor he cries, " there's the French landed in Wales ! ! What of think d'ye are quickly turned by the that, 1 The Works of James Ibid., p. 219, by Sir John Gillray, the Caricaturist by T. Wright. "The Tables" arrival of the Gazette the defeat of the Spanish fleet 2 traitor?" ', p. announcing Jervis. Pitt 204, by T. Wright. is NAPOLEON AND THE 248 who is escaping Pitt while chagrined, slyly exclaims, "Ah, Mr. Devil, we've beat the Spanish fleet What d'ye think of that, Mr. Devil?" Nearly a year later, ist February, 1798 released from the grasp of his grim captor, ! (H. Humphrey had now migrated to 27 St. James's Street, where, during the continuance of the Great Terror, the dense crowd before the window filled with patriotic prints made the pavement impassable), appeared one of Gill" The Storm rising or the ray's veritable masterpieces, often Republican FLOTILLA now given as an illustraFox, Sheridan, Tierney, and His Grace of Bedford are assisting the threatened French "descent" in danger," tion in facsimile. by turning a mammoth windlass which brings over a still more gigantic raft rilled with our foreign foes, an enormous tricolour flag surmounted by a cap of liberty at the prow. On the distant coast is seen the Evil One on the top of a " guillotine playing the tune (Fox) on a attempt parte, is who fiddle. made Over the water to Charley " In most of the earlier caricatures no to give anything like a portrait of Bona- very soon became the central figure and the The sobriquet of " Little him even when an exile at St. all-absorbing point of interest. Boney," which stuck to Helena, was the creation of James Gillray. It was at first considered sufficient to portray the arch-enemy as wearing a gigantic cocked hat, with boots and sword to match. This was not so in 1803, when there was at least an attempt at verisimilitude. It is curious to note this difference in the familiar series of Gillray's plates labelled " Consequences of a Successful Invasion (I to VI), published March 1st, 1798, and other satiric prints bearing a like " title which appeared in 1803 and 1804. belongs a superb caricature by To March, 1798, Thomas Rowlandson, en- THE BRISTOL VOLUNTEERS AT DRILL THE STORM RISING Pitt's OR IN QUEEN SQU THE REPUBLICAN FU naval armaments counteracting the sympathy (1797)- ,A IN x, l-'ROM DANGER. AN ORIGINAL CARICATURE DRAWING BY GILLRAY. Duke of Sheridan, Tierney and the FOX FEB., Bedford 1798 SHERIDAN TIERNEY DUKE OF BEDFORD INVASION OF ENGLAND 249 " England Invaded, or Frenchmen Naturalized," with a companion print published a little later, and known " as REHEARSAL of a FRENCH INVASION as performed titled before the Marcou on Rowlandson and Gill- INVALIDS at the Island's [sic] of St. the morning of ye 7 of May, 1798." ray were born in the same year but the artist ; Ackermann and Fores the fortune of both " Humphrey's lodger" for twelve years. who made survived Mrs. One of the most popular of Rowlandson's early invasion caricatures is that " entitled High Fun for John Bull, or the Republicans put was published by Ackermann, I2th November, I798. Grego thus describes it: "The victory gained by Nelson at Aboukir Bay, over the combined fleets, disconcerted the French enthusiasts, and to their last Shift." 1 It Mr. restored confidence at home ; it was recognized that while English admirals could sweep their enemies from the seas, neither the dangers of invasion, nor the difficulties of con- tending with France, need be ranked of much consequence. In the print John Bull is enjoying the High Fun of setting his opponents to equip fresh order that his sailors trophies. . . . may fleets (or rafts), in invading carry them off captives as are excited over their pros- The Frenchmen pects the head baker has a fine batch ready for the oven ; Sacredieu Citoyens, make a haste wit one autre fleet, den ; ' we will shew you how to make onegrande Invasion]" and so forth. Throughout the Great Terror the personality of only second 1798, Mr. S. in importance to that of Bonaparte. W. Fores, of 50 Piccadilly, with his cartoon of " The Royal made a Pitt great hit Soldier In His Majesty's Service." 1 Rowlandson^ the Caricaturist, Vol. was In May, I, p. 352, by Joseph Grego. NAPOLEON AND THE 250 He would The O be a Soldier, the sweet Willy of all Swains ! first That gladden'd the Plains him the sweet Willy ; All nature obey'd It O ! much more excited interest than the contemporary French Invasion, or the Fashionable "A plate labelled Dress of 1798." The French satirical means numerous, but in prints of this period are by no 1798 (An VI) M. Ruotte, of Paris, produced a highly finished caricature, which was sold at The Rolland's, No. 35 Rue Neuve des Petits-Champs. who figure in it are six, viz. Bonaparte, the Austrian George III, Emperor, the King of Spain, a Dutchman, and a Paris tavern waiter. The likenesses are personages admirable and entirely free from grotesque exaggeration. In the left-hand corner hangs a map of the Straits of Dover, showing the position of the Army of England, and the road from Paris to Calais, with the legend "It is but one step." George III in an arm-chair is fast asleep, an : empty punch-bowl, his side. little He and wine-bottles on a table at Ah, Pitt I should have put a glasses, " murmurs, water in my ! The Dutchman wine." is escaping through an open door; the Austrian and Spanish monarchs crouch behind Bonaparte. The waiter is importuning them violently for the settlement of the the score, gentlemen parte, gently " ? " pushing him, for everything " Who is to pay Bonaback, go back," says George wanted it, and will pay bill. Go " when he wakes " Yes," whispers the Emperor, it is he who will pay for all of us." Before letting the curtain fall on this brief account of . . . up." " the literary and artistic landmarks, the song and satire of first period of the Great Terror, we must return for a the INVASION OF ENGLAND 251 moment to the poet laureate whom we left, lyre in hand, on the Royal Birthday of 1797. Mr. Pye continued to display the same poetic activity in the years that followed, both at James's and in his native Berkshire. On January 1st, 1798, we must imagine the gentlemen and boys of the St. Chapel Royal singing lustily While treach'rous friends and daring Around in horrid compact close foes ; Their swarming barks' portentous shade With crowded sails the watery glade ; When imperial George commands to the waves Britannia's veteran bands lo ! Rush Unnumbered hosts usurp in vain Dominion o'er his briny reign. His Six months Monarch's right proclaim throat, with breath of flame. fleets their With brazen later (June 4th, 1798) they chanted While loud and near, round Britain's coasts low'ring storm of battle roars, In proud array while numerous hosts The Insulting threat her happy shores It was the year of In August it was the birthday of the heir-apparent, and the poet laureate must not be held responsible for the following effusion "by an officer and so forth. Mr. Pye was prophetic. the Battle of the Nile. and handed round amongst the upper circle " at Windsor With what firm grace he takes the lead, When mounted on his martial steed Not the Black Prince more graceful wav'd his sword, And with more thunder gave his troops the word. Mark When And For the lightning of his eye, squadrons charge, or squadrons Britons mark his country his tear, should and his Sire, fly ! one dismounted lie. : NAPOLEON AND THE 252 If he e'er meet the foe, Each Briton he'll fire With his true Patriot glow To send the invaders to Pluto below. like Great Edward, will hallow his Son, And cherish those laurels the hero has won. Great George, George III was mand to the far too wise to entrust man who a military com- a quarter of a century later firmly believed that his personal presence and prowess had mainly contributed to the winning of Waterloo. At Pye New the next Year's musical meeting wins fresh laurels with Henry James : Around her coast, fenc'd by her gua