Vol. IX, p. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 17. Coquelle's Napoleon 1 02. and England, 1803-1813, Ibid., Introduction, p. xviii. p. 16. INVASION OF ENGLAND 275 the rajahs and princes, and the probable number of No troops likely to be required to conquer the country. child crying for the moon was ever more eager than the among Bonaparte had done much the same kind of thing while he was at Cairo in 1799, when he had written to Tippoo Sahib announcing that he had First Consul was for India. " on the shores of the Red Sea, with a numerous and invincible army, animated with the desire of delivering arrived He then asked for you from the iron yoke of England." news regarding the political position there he was asking He suggested to Decaen for the same information now. l ; " the English are masters of the continent of India," there was no reason why they should continue as such, provided he carefully followed out his instructions. that although The First Consul action " in the went so far as to plan Decaen's course of event of war," which he anticipated would As to hostile naval not break out before September, i8o4. 2 preparations, Lord Whitworth clearly states in his despatch of March i/th, 1803, to Lord Hawkesbury, that no arma- ments of any consequence were being carried on in the French ports. A fortnight before, notice had been given " and the to equip what there was in the different ports ; absence of by far the greater part of the naval force renders such an order almost nugatory." 3 The army was sup- posed to be on a peace footing, but troops were concentrating in the north-east of France surely a warlike ; proceeding No commercial treaty existed between Great Britain and France, and Bonaparte had taken advantage of the ! 1 * 3 Bingham, Vol. I, p. 244. Cambridge Modern History, Vol. IX, p. 209. England and France in the Mediterranean, p. 190. NAPOLEON AND THE 276 truce to send over a number of so-called "agents" or consuls, ostensibly for the purpose of furthering more amicable relations in this respect, but really to spy out the In a declaration afterwards laid nakedness of the land. before both Houses of Parliament, this double-dealing was The suspicion that these agents had more fully exposed. than one object in view " was confirmed, not only by the circumstance that some of them were military men, but by the actual discovery that several of them were furnished with instructions to obtain the soundings of the harbours, and to procure military surveys of the places intended they should reside." French "consul" Office authorities, beyond doubt. It 1 A where letter sent to it was Mares, the Hull, was intercepted by the Post and proved the perfidy of Bonaparte contained a plan of Hull harbour and at The agents were simply secret service men, who spent their time in obtaining information likely to be of service in effecting a descent upon the details of its approaches. British Isles. 2 Sunday, March was the day fixed for a reception Bonaparte had been reading the desAmbassador at the Court of St. James's, and I3th, at the Tuileries. patches of his 3 also a verbatim copy of the King's message of March 8th. Entering the salon, 1 2 in which some two hundred people War with France : Official Papers, p. 81. See Corrcspondance de Napoleon, Letter No. 6475. 3 Napoleon's own statement of the 2ist of February, 1803, to the French Legislature was quite as capable of being turned into a declaration of war as was the message read in the British Parliament. "The Government," it ran, "guarantees to the nation peace on the Continent, and it may entertain hopes maintenance of peace on the high seas. The Government will make every effort to preserve it, compatible with the national honour, which is bound Five hundred thousand men to maintain the literal execution of treaties. for the . must be in arms ready to defend their country . . and to avenge her." INVASION OF ENGLAND 277 were assembled, he went straight up to Lord Whitworth and asked in an angry tone, " Why those preparations for war? Against whom are those precautionary measures taken? I of France ; have not a single ship-of-the-line in the ports but if you will arm I shall also arm. If you You may will fight I shall also fight. possibly be able to 1 destroy France but never to intimidate her." The prudent Ambassador made a bow, but did not venture to reply. The First Consul then went his round, and shortly afterwards withdrew to his cabinet. There was nothing of the violent " scene " mentioned in so many 2 histories, but Bonaparte was certainly agitated. Diplomatic notes were exchanged between the two Powers for some weeks. Great Britain ; Important concessions were proposed by " " of Sebastiani's report on explanations the situation in Egypt were given which were not exa but mere play upon words; finally Whitplanations, worth told Talleyrand that " to the state of suspense in which England, and indeed all actual war was preferable 3 Europe, had been kept for so long a space of time." On May i6th, 1803, England declared war, and an em- bargo was laid on French ships, and those of other Powers under her jurisdiction, which happened to be in British ports or fell in with our men-of-war. Although a number of seamen were taken prisoners, no French civilian was interfered with. Bonaparte retaliated by issuing the following order from St. Cloud on the 22nd May, which duly appeared in the official Moniteur : 1 Lord Whitworth to Lord Hawkesbury, with France: Official Papers^ 2 3 Paris, March I4th, 1803. p. 41. See England and Napoleon in 1803, by Oscar Browning. April 29th, 1803. War NAPOLEON AND THE 278 " The Government of the Republic, having heard read, by the Minister of Marine and Colonies, a despatch from the Maritime Prefect at Brest, announcing that two English frigates had taken two merchant vessels in the Bay of Audrieu, without any previous declaration of war, and in manifest violation of the law of nations : " All the English, from the ages of eighteen to sixty, or holding any commission from His Britannic Majesty, who are at present in France, shall immediately be constituted prisoners of war, to answer for those citizens of the Re- public who may have been arrested and made prisoners by the vessels or subjects of His Britannic Majesty previous to any declaration of hostilities. 1 " BONAPARTE." (Signed) Junot was then Governor of Paris, and long before arrived from the First Consul summon- dawn a messenger ing him latter to his study immediately. "Junot," said the as soon as the General entered the room, u you must, before an hour elapses, take measures so that all the English, without one single exception, shall be arrested. prisons will hold them they must be seized. measure must be executed at seven in the evening. The ; resolved that in the obscurest theatre, or This I am the lowest restaurant in Paris, not an Englishman shall this night " The result was that some thousands of British be seen ! subjects in France, Italy, Switzerland, and Holland were seized and confined within the gloomy walls of the prisons Bonaparte's act was absolutely unjustifiable, for he had instructed Louis Gold- of Lille, Valenciennes, and Verdun. 1 No prisoners were made previous to the declaration of war. The See/ two INVASION OF ENGLAND 279 besides being the editor of the Argus, a French journal issued in London, was also one of the smith, who, First Consul's confidential agents, to state in his paper that British tourists in France would have their rights respected, as that country, unlike its rival, respected the law of nations. The French prisoners in England were those legally taken in war. The French army was now being actively mobilized, a couple of weeks the tramp of armed feet was heard throughout the length and breadth of France. and in General Mortier, at the head of 25,000 French troops, Hanover, of which George III was Elector, invaded and on the I3th June, 1803, His Britannic Majesty received the tidings of the loss of his hereditary continental offered possessions. some The Hanoverian army certainly and the Duke of Cambridge, who resistance, was Viceroy, and General Walmoden, endeavoured to call some of the German States to their aid. The appeal was disregarded, and consequently Hanover was surrendered to France. The Duke of Cambridge agreed that his troops should retire behind the Elbe and not serve again till exchanged, while General Walmoden disbanded his army and left his pieces of cannon, assailants with 30,000 muskets, and 3500 horses. many Thus Bonaparte was himself with a considerable supply of munitions of war at little expense of blood and treasure. able to funish A contribution of 8,000,000 livres was imposed on the newly annexed territory, and the timber in its extensive began to fall before the woodman's axe, ready to be conveyed to France to be made into boats for the forests conveyance of the soldiers destined An for England. interesting description of the First Consul's personal NAPOLEON AND THE 28o appearance was published in the Moniteur 1 a while little previous to the events just recorded, and gives a fairly reliable pen-portrait of the man who sought to use England as a step-ladder to universal Napoleonism " The person of the First Consul ; small, below the The consular garb does not become he looks best in the plain uniform of the National ordinary size of him is : men. Guard, which he, at present, generally wears. His face is strongly marked with melancholy, reflection, and deep thought the lines of premature age are very visible upon He is said to be impenetrable even to his friends. His it. ; is remarkably large, and his eyes are well formed and well set, animating a countenance which has been seldom known to smile. His voice is the deepest toned, and seems to issue as from a tomb. His head is large and handsome and, in general, it may be asserted there is that harmony of features which denotes an entire character. The various likenesses of him are tolerably exact; though they by no means do him justice, nor give his look, which is extremely interesting and im- head ; pressive." Bonaparte's colonial projects were far from successful. The expedition, which had left France late in December, 1801, and consisted of thirty-two men-ofSt. Domingo war and thirty-one the seas, he sold developed, to the must have cost domain, so rich 1 Louisiana, 2 a colony then but United States him a bitter in promise. little for 60,000,000 francs. It to part with that vast pang For hours on the night of January 5th, 1803. France received Louisiana in 1800 " in return for the cession of Tuscany the heir of the Duke of Parma." See Rose's Napoleon /, Vol. I, p. 366. 2 to had met with disaster, and was not yet ripe for expansion across frigates, seeing that the time V/ ENGLAND AND IRELAND DEFY BONAPARTE. JULY 13, . 1803 INVASION OF ENGLAND 281 Easter Sunday, 1803, Napoleon pondered, and until dawn broke that he arrived at a decision. it was not The des- patches lying on his table told of England's preparations for a coming struggle. nounce Louisiana," he " His mind was made up. " I resaid to Talleyrand on April nth. 1 not only New Orleans I will cede it is the whole I know the price of what I colony, without reserve It is : ; abandon. ... I renounce it with the greatest regret to I direct it would be folly. : attempt obstinately to retain you to negotiate the affair." The treaty was signed and sealed May 4th, and much of the money received was spent on preparing for the execution of his third and greatest project for the long-talked-of invasion of 1 Ibid., p. 371. England. CHAPTER X HISTORIC SIDELIGHTS ON BONAPARTE'S INTENTIONS AFTER THE RUPTURE OF THE PEACE OF AMIENS, 1803-1805 " What battle ever promised the results that we may look for from a descent on England ? "NAPOLEON. had candidly confessed to Lord Whitworth that the invasion of England was a perilous undertaking and fraught with diffi- BONAPARTE but "to culties, extraordinary ci