rdian main, Around I erne's kindred shores, Hark loud Invasion to her bafiTd train ! In yells of desperation roars. Along the hostile deep they vainly try From Britain's thundering barks to fly ; Their Fleets, the Victor's trophy, captur'd In future battles doom'd to combat on our ride, side. Seas, where deathless bards of yore, Singing to the silver tide, Wafted loud from shore to shore Grecian Art and Roman Pride Say, To when Carthage ! learn'd to veil mightier foes her lofty sail ; when the Man of Athens broke Say, With daring prow the Medean Tyrant's yoke ; Saw ye so bold, so free a band, As NELSON led by Nilus' strand What time, at GEORGE'S high behest, ; Dread in terrific vengeance dress'd, Fierce as the whirlwind's stormy course, They pour'd on Gallia's guilty force ; And Egypt saw Britannia's flag unfurl'd Wave high its Victor Cross, Deliverer of the World ! INVASION OF ENGLAND 253 The King's next birthday (4th June, 1799) was not only the memorable review in Hyde Park, 1 but by signalized by the poet Pye producing, with Sir ode beginning with the lines W. Parsons' assistance, an : Still shall Drown the brazen tongue of every softer sound War : AMBITION'S iron Car Still shall crimson axles whirl around Shall the sweet Lyre and Flute no more It's With Pour And And ending The in ! gentle descant soothe the shore, melodious strain the votive Lay hail in notes of Peace our MONARCH'S Natal Day? : War shouts of the Gallic Plund'rers hear, Th' avenging arm of JUSTICE learn to fear And low his crest th' insulting Despot vails, ; While their collected Speeds o'er the Wave Navy's force its desultory course. For the harmonious ushering in of the year 1800 the of the moribund eighteenth century Mr. Pye, poet last laureate, varies his the National programme by adding Anthem of a singularly bellicose character. God of our Fathers, rise, And through the thundering Thy vengeance urge, skies In awful justice red, By thy dread arrows sped, But guard our Monarch's head, GOD Still three verses to Save Great GEORGE ! on our ALBION smile, Still o'er this favour'd Isle O spread thy wing ; To make each Blessing sure, To make our Fame endure, To make our Rights secure, GOD Save our KING ! 1 See ante, p. 133. NAPOLEON AND THE 254 To To the loud Trumpet's throat, the shrill Clarion's note, Now jocund sing From From ; every open Foe, every Traitor's blow, Virtue defend his brow, GOD guards our King ! Dr. Valpy's scholars at Reading subscribed for the and the poet laureate furnishes erection of a naval pillar, a prologue to King John, to be spoken by Mr. Valpy in the uniform of the Reading Association, " part of the Berkshire Volunteers reviewed by His Majesty on Bulmarsh Heath." It commences in the usual key : To-night our scene from British Annal's shews How British warriors brav'd their Country's foes their hardy bands with martial toil : Whether Dar'd the proud Gaul upon his native And by Led in his ravag'd plains soil, and prostrate towers triumphant march their conq'ring powers, own insulted fields, defied The whelming deluge of Invasion's tide. Or, oh his On the 4th June, 1800, the Court listened to the inspiring strains of: Yet far from ALBION'S tranquil Shores The storm And of Desolation roars, while o'er fair Liguria's Vales, Fann'd by FAVONIUS' tepid gales, O'er Alpine heights that proudly rise And shroud their summits in the skies, Or by the Rhine's majestic stream The hostile arms of GALLIA gleam. Fenc'd by her Naval Hosts that ride Triumphant o'er her circling tide BRITANNIA, jocund, pours the festive lay, And hails with duteous voice her GEORGE'S Natal Day. ; INVASION OF ENGLAND On the first terrupts for a 255 day of the nineteenth century the Union moment in- the thread of the invasion theme. Albion and Erin's kindred Race Long as your sister Isles the seas embrace Long as the circling Tides your shores that Waft your united Banners o'er the wave. lave Ten in generations of Pyes sleep in Farringdon Church, and August, 1 80 1, the Wantage Volunteers were favoured with : When loud Invasion's will infuriate roar With boastful threat'nings shakes Britannia's shore, Should Alfred turn his sainted eyes to earth And How view the hallow'd seats which gave him birth, would he praise the patriot worth that calls Their manly sons from Vinitagia's walls. For a time Mr. Pye's warlike notes are hushed. The Treaty of Amiens brings a temporary respite to both invaders and invaded. Mr. Pye is quite equal to the occasion, and the beginning of 1802 celebrated with: is Lo, from Bellona's crimson car At length the panting steeds unbound, At length the thunder of the War In festive shouts of Peace How short the dream of peace was in the following chapters. and artistic interrupted. is The drown'd. to last we shall see continuity of the literary landmarks of the Great Terror was scarcely CHAPTER VIII THE TRUCE OF AMIENS, ; 'An experimental "^HE ^"~ first peace." overtures l8O2 GEORGE for III. peace came through M. Otto, a French agent in London for the exchange of prisoners. The war had now dragged on for eight years at a fearful cost of blood and treasure, and the British National at no less than The Prime 537,000,000. Debt stood Minister certainly believed in the good faith of Bonaparte's pacific protestations, but how little Charles Yorke, the Secretary at War of Addington's administration, was able is revealed in a letter which he to support his Chiefs views wrote to Charles Abbot, then Chief Secretary for Ireland later Speaker of the House of Commons, on August and 1 8th, 1 80 1. He says : "... In the present state of France, I would not give a twelvemonths' purchase for any peace, however fair upon the face of it, that can be had with it. At the same time we certainly require breathing time, and the people will not be satisfied without the name of it. ... France on her part, I mean the military despots of France, may possibly incline to a truce, with a view to throwing us off our guard, and procuring the laying up of our navy, and disbanding the greater part of our army. When this is done, Ambassador Bernadotte or Joseph Buonaparte is instructed 256 INVASION OF ENGLAND 257 some insult, pick a quarrel, pass over to Calais, a week's time the garrisons of Flanders and the Netherlands embark on the Maese 1 and Scheldt, and are in the mouth of the Thames, perhaps on the coasts of Kent to offer and in and Essex. The substance of this idea should be embodied in a few words, and written in large letters over the doors of both Houses of Parliament, and on the canopy of the King's throne. " The question of our internal defence and preparation must indisputably be very different from what it was formerly, and a very serious and weighty question it will be. Every shilling that can be spared, or by any means scraped together, must be scrupulously and zealously devoted to this object. Libertas et anima nostra in dubio est. . . ." 2 At last Otto and Lord Hawkesbury, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, after much discussion and innumerable delays, were able to draw up the preliminaries of peace, which were signed in London on October 1st, 1801. At seven o'clock the following morning the joyful in- was communicated to the Lord Mayor of London, Sir W. Staines, who had risen from being an ordinary telligence labouring bricklayer to the proud position of Chief MagisThat evening a special courier left trate of the City. England with despatches for France, where he travelled with speed to Malmaison, Bonaparte's country seat, arriving there in the forenoon of the following day. Nobody outside those directly concerned with the matter all knew of the glad tidings until they were officially informed in a 1 Meuse. 2 Diary and Correspondence of Charles Abbot, Lord P. 363I. S Colchester, Vol. I, NAPOLEON AND THE 258 " London Gazette Extraordinary. " Friday, October 2nd. "Downing Street, October 2nd. "Preliminaries of Peace between French Republic were signed bury's Office, in Downing His Majesty and the Lord Hawkesby the Right Hon. Lord last night at Street, Hawkesbury, one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, on the part of His Majesty, and by M. Otto, on the part of the French Government." An inkling of what was passing the day before managed to leak through the official barriers of Downing Street, with The Times the result that stocks rose to a high figure. " in its issue of a day later noted that many persons were actually occasion remark duped by this rumour." The same journal saw on the following Saturday (October 3rd) to in its leader that, "contrary to the general expecta- tion and better than our hopes has it pleased Providence to order the issue of this great event. The fortitude of ministers has been crowned with success ; and in conse- quence of the accession of the Republican Government to their demands, and of full powers transmitted to M. Otto for that purpose, the Preliminaries of Peace were signed in Downing Street at seven o'clock in the evening of Thursday by that Minister and His Majesty's Secretary of State for the Foreign Department." When the official news became known, a wag had the and on a building near following rhyme printed pasted up the Stock Exchange : Peace Ratified Bulls Gratified; Bears Nation Mortified; Dissatisfied Alley Purified; All Electrified. ; "" JOHN BULL SAYS, "HANDS OFF!" APRIL l6, l8O2 INVASION OF ENGLAND 259 M. Otto's house was most elaborately illuminated, the " Concord " shining out in letters of fire above the heads of the people. A sailor misread the word, and " Not so by a immediately shouted out, Conquered That will not His do." created a disdeal. great cry the crowd turbance. were as as illiterate Among people word ! and soon a tumult ensued which brought the himself, Frenchman to the balcony. After vainly endeavouring to a his he told servants to take down the fixget hearing, ture at once, and substitute the word "Amity." This was done, and the hisses gave way to cheers. England was, on the surface at any rate, in an ecstasy of delight. Every mail coach was decorated with laurels, and on many of them labels were hung in a conspicuous place bearing the magic words, "Peace with France." Others carried banners on which the same pregnant sentence was Even the drivers decked themselves with a inscribed. sprig of laurel in their hats. vincial Many of the largest pro- and towns were informed by means of When the coach which brought the glad tid- cities circulars. ings of peace arrived at Ipswich, stationed at the barracks there wheels of the vehicle. In many some of the soldiers came and kissed the cases the horses were taken out of the shafts and citizens dragged the coaches At Hull, for along, often for a considerable distance. instance, the sailors drew the mail coach through the various thoroughfares of the port for three hours, eventually overturning it in the market place, fatally injuring one man, and wounding several others. " The unexpected news of peace, which we might have hoped would have cheered every heart, was not the case at Sheerness," The Times facetiously remarks. "To have seen the slop- NAPOLEON AND THE 260 sellers and the Jews put on their long faces was truly At Great Yarmouth the ships in the harbour as the houses were decorated with flags, the church as well ludicrous." bells were set a-ringing, and the vessels fired guns at At Brighton the Steine was brilliantly lighted up, while the inhabitants of Plymouth gave vent to their feelings by raising a general subscription for a bonfire. intervals. A sum of money was large the size of the structure that its collected, and some idea of be gathered from the fact base was two hundred and forty feet in circum- may and the height between seventy and eighty feet. it was well alight the flames were visible upwards of ference, When forty miles. The news of the signature of the preliminaries reached Paris at four o'clock on Saturday afternoon (3rd October). was immediately communicated by the