 telegraph to every point of the Republic, and all parts of the frontiers. It The Minister of the Interior forwarded the intelligence to Discharges of artillery from the quay of the theatres. the Tuileries, and on the esplanade of the National Hdtel des Invalides, announced it to other inhabitants, while a was arranged for the evening, in which the Commissaries of Police, escorted by detachments of light infantry and dragoons, took part. Many of torchlight procession the public bodies presented addresses to the First Consul, He congratulating him on the conclusion of hostilities. announced that the 9th November was to be observed as a general holiday. Wild rumours of a contradictory nature spread with alarming rapidity throughout the metropolis. Thus, on the 5th inst, reports were in circulation that the ratification had actually arrived from Bonaparte, with the result INVASION OF ENGLAND and Bond Street were 261 " exceedingly brilof a firm of tea dealers was the only exception in the latter thoroughfare, the inhabitants being that Piccadilly The house liant." prevented from illuminating by Lord Camelford, who lodged over the shop, and heartily disapproved of the Peace. lights door. An angry mob speedily collected, shouted for to appear, and began knocking violently at the Seizing a bludgeon which happened to be handy, lordship flung open the door and prepared to deBrickbats began to fend himself against all comers. so ably, and put himself he defended fly his way, but his on such a bold front, that many of the mob turned and fled. By this time the other people in the house thought fit to and forcibly dragged the irascible aristocrat out No sooner was the door shut than the crowd came back helter-skelter to the position they had evacuated. Seizing any missile they could put their hands on, interfere, of the way. they proceeded to fling stones, refuse, and windows. Enraged at finding his assailants mud at the still furious, Lord Camelford eluded the vigilance of his protectors, secured a pistol, and presented himself at one of the windows, fully intending to blow out the brains of at least a few of his enemies. For a second time his lordship's friends prevailed upon him to retire, and they then proceeded to light a few candles in the upper part of the house, the window-panes of which were too high to be Having satisfied their "righteous" anger the rowdy gang dispersed. When the ratifications were actually exchanged, it was remarked that Lord Camelford broken. had repented, the building. for a few lamps were hung out in front of NAPOLEON AND THE 262 was necessary for the treaty to be ratified by Bonaparte, and he attached his signature to it on the 5th inst. He had previously given orders for a superb gold to be made in which to place the parchment. It was box a beautiful piece of workmanship, most richly ornamented and enamelled, and secured with gold clasps, an appropriate inscription being engraved on the outside. General It Lauriston, Chef de Brigade in the artillery and first aidede-camp to Bonaparte, was sent to London with the valuable document. Owing to a delay in the making of the casket, he did not leave Paris until two days later, 1 and this postponement of his departure caused no little trepidation to the M. Otto's house in citizens of He London. arrived at Hereford Street at ten o'clock on the morning of the loth London earlier had not inst. He would his carriage have reached broken down on the The two representatives of the Republic took breakfast together and afterwards proceeded in company with M. St. Jean, brother-in-law of M. Otto and a perroad. sonal friend of the First Consul's, to Reddish's Hotel, in A James's Street. huge concourse of people had gathered to catch a sight of the two Frenchmen, and no sooner did they make their appearance than the horses St. were taken from the carriage and it was dragged along " Gentlemen Gentlemen " by the enthusiastic throng. ! ! shouted Lord St. Vincent from his garden gate, " let me request you to be as orderly as possible and, if you are determined to draw the gentleman accompanied by ; Monsieur Otto, I request of you to be careful, and not overturn the carriage." 2 General Lauriston expressed 1 October 7th, 1801. 2 Annual Register, 1801, Chronicle, p. 33. INVASION OF ENGLAND 263 himself as being delighted with his reception, and on he showed himself at a window arrival at his destination and bowed to the populace, who cheered to the echo. " After this the crowd shouted, " Long live Bonaparte till As soon as the ratifications they were voiceless. ! had been exchanged Lord Hawkesbury communicated with the Lord Mayor. The following interesting item in a Gazette appeared Extraordinary of the same date "While General Lauriston, M. Otto, and M. St. Jean were exchanging the ratifications at the Foreign Office, : such mob a collected in Downing Street, that those gentlemen were absolutely obliged to change their clothes and depart one by one through the back gate in the Park." The illuminations on this occasion, although very fine, were completely extinguished by a violent thunderstorm which broke over London during the evening. The super- saw catastrophe the forecast of a short peace. signing of the preliminary treaty, M. Otto's house was the cynosure of all eyes. large P stitious As in this at the A by a wreath was displayed on one side of the building while on the other side was a transparent inscription of "Peace and Universal Happiness," in the middle of which was a crown. An olive branch formed encircled ; hung underneath, with the initials G.R. and F.R. many-coloured star was also conspicuous. All the of lights A theatres were illuminated, and we are told that no fewer than six thousand lamps were found necessary for the Post Office buildings. Not a few people were attracted by a large Consul, transparency representing Pitt, the First Windham, and Joseph Bonaparte dancing a fandango to a tune played on the " union bagpipes." NAPOLEON AND THE 264 At length all treaty was A parties pleased to yield, in London sealed ; And Nap with pleasure had to say That England own'd his Cons'lar sway. The Royalists were vex'd at this, They took the treaty much amiss It seemed (as for a time it ; was) Destructive of the Bourbon cause. This Amiens treaty, as 'twas termed Was in October month confirm'd. And London, tho' so ill repaid, Illuminations grand display'd. 1 History was again repeating itself, and had Walpole been alive he would have assuredly once more uttered his oft-quoted remark, "They may ring the bells now; before be wringing their hands." On hearing of long they the extravagant terms used by certain high officials with will and the unseemly conduct of the " There is no person in the mob, Nelson waxed wroth. world rejoices more in the peace than I do," he averred, " but I would burst sooner than let a dd Frenchman reference to the peace, know it. We ism, and we have made peace with the French despotwill, I hope, adhere to it whilst the French continue in due bounds but whenever they overstep and usurp a power which would degrade Europe, that, then we ; Europe in crushing her ambition then I would with pleasure go forth and risk my life for to pull down the overgrown detestable power of France." 2 It would be impossible to exaggerate the feeling of intense relief which was evident in the navy. After months of unceasing watchfulness, officers and men would I trust shall join be able to see their loved ones again, and 1 2 ; " sleep in their The Porcupine, October I5th, 1801. The Life of Nelson, Vol. II, p. 144, by Captain A. T. Mahan. INVASION OF ENGLAND 265 beds with both eyes shut." Rear-Admiral Collingwood furnishes us with an excellent word-picture of what happened, in a letter written on board his ship the Barfleur, off Brest. follows " cannot I dated October i6th, 1801, and runs as It is : me tell you how much joy the news of peace my family, and living the hope of returning to in quiet and comfort among those gave ; I love, fills my heart with gladness. The moment the French in Brest heard the preliminaries were signed, they sent out a flag of truce with the information to Admiral Cornwallis, and . . . on the approaching amity of the two The British officer who was sent in with a their congratulations countries. was treated with the greatest hospitality and kindness, both by the French and Spanish. They feasted him all the time he stayed there, and carried him to the plays and places of entertainment. I hope now return of the compliment we have seen the end of the last war that will be in our days, and that I shall occupations. ... At going on England. in be able to turn present . . How mind to peaceful . glad will my of what ! Pitt offered little opposition to the terms is heart be I look on the day you all at my own home hand when I shall be very, very happy indeed." 1 to see be at my we know nothing to which Bona- parte dictated, although he strongly objected to eating humble pie, and said so in the speech quoted below. That they were humiliating terms, especially when our navy had proved itself so much in the ascendant, cannot be denied. The excesses of of the Bourbon exiles to the Revolution, the claims whom England had given sheltereven the aggressive policy of Bonaparte, were 1 Correspondence and Memoir of Lord Collingwood (third by G. L. Newnham Collingwood, F.R.S. edition), p. 87, NAPOLEON AND THE 266 forgotten for the time, and the "usurper" of yesterday became the acknowledged ruler of to-day. George III, for all his fits of insanity, was never more sane than when he remarked what I call the nothing else. do not give it to Lord Malmesbury " : Do you know An experimental peace for it is I am sure you think so and perhaps you so gentle a name but it was unavoidable. peace ? ; ; : was abandoned by everybody allies, and all." Sheridan put the matter even more forcibly when he declared in I : " This is a peace which can be proud of." Parliament that but no of, man Speaking on November 3rd, 1801, the all men are glad day on which the preliminaries of peace were laid before Parliament, Pitt emphasized " In times of peace proverb object which must naturally first his belief in the " : The prepare for war." " present itself to every minister," he said, must be to give additional vigour to our maritime strength, and security to our colonial possessions. It was to them we were indebted for the unparalleled exertions which we have been enabled to make in the course of this long and eventful contest ; it was by them that we were enabled, in the wreck of Europe, not only to effect our own security, but to hold out to our allies the means of safety, if they had been but true to themselves." His optimism, usually so overpowering, extended no hope everything that was good, but he further than "to if he feared otherwise." He spoke of cause which had united the people of Great Britain and Ireland, " and led to that happy union which was bound the to act as common adds more to the power and strength of the British Empire, all the conquests of one and indivisible France do to than that country." Pitt concluded with another reference to INVASION OF ENGLAND 267 the navy and an implied acknowledgment that it was the command of the sea which had alone enabled his country to dare and do " : any additional proofs were honour and gentlemen look to the last camIf to prove her ability to protect her wanting maintain her interests, let paign, and they would see Great Britain contending against a powerful confederacy in the North they would see her righting for those objects at once in Egypt and in ; We the Baltic, and they would see her successful in both. had shewn that we were ready to meet the threatened in- vasion at home, and could send troops to triumph over the French in the barren sands of Egypt, before a man could escape from Toulon, to reinforce their blocked-up army we had met the menaced invasion by attacking France on h