stria can even prepare the You now know the| explanation of a great month a whole artillery. in . . things . ; but we shall not have war, for I have just NAPOLEON AND THE 296 opened direct negotiations with the King of England with a view to conclude peace." 1 are inclined to think that the above statement We is many which Napoleon made to meet the exigencies of the moment. It served the double purpose of announcone of ing that peace with Great Britain was possible, and if it did not come about it would be through no fault of his, and warned the Council of a probable war with Austria. He tell, he was in a very awkward position. it Truth to knew and was being formed against him. he was always the last man to acknowledge the that a third coalition as failure of his own expedition was designs, the idea of pretending that the throw dust the eyes of his antagonists, to keep England on tenter-hooks while preparing for war against another Power, must have appealed solely to in very strongly to him. In referring to Bonaparte's plans of 1803 Miot de " He was making astonishingly active preMelito says : Yet it is doubtful a descent on England. whether he ever seriously intended to attempt this great He was too good a judge in matters of the enterprise. parations for . . . kind not to have recognized how small were the chances of success, and in any case I do not believe that he ever intended to undertake the invasion in person, to risk his fortune and his life on so slight a probability of victory." 2 Miot goes on to suggest that the people ; soldiers were at Boulogne the imagination of the " or to enable Austria to repair her losses, and to for spectacular purposes ; to fire avenge the insults she had recently endured, by a sudden aggression in which victory would seem certain to her. 1 2 Miot de Melito's Memoirs, Vol. Ibid., Vol. I, p. 580. II, p. 234. INVASION OF ENGLAND Thus war, the object of all 297 the First Consul's desires war, which only could save him from the critical position in which he stood would again break out on the Continent." These statements prove nothing, and are merely Miot's own criticisms. " It is doubtful," is not a fact, only a sup- Strangely enough, position, and a poor one at that. almost his next mention of the invasion is a report of a conversation between Bonaparte and his brother Joseph, whom the Count was on intimate terms. " I have with made up my mind," said the First Consul, a descent on England. out anything I wished fail, it matters Surely little I ; me what to happens afterwards own worthy of credence as Miot's this statement the Emperor had is " 1 ! as ideas on the subject, which they appear to contradict. The Count only begs the question when "Whether shall try Victory would enable me to carry while if, on the contrary, I should must be admitted that it " in he says for : an reality prepared expedition against England, with the sole design of concealing his military preparations from Continental Powers, or whether he had given it up on perceiving the extreme of the undertaking, the fact remains that for a long time past all his measures for a war on land had been taken." 2 This leaves the reader in blissful ignorance difficulty as to the real solution of the problem. parations for a land war, the missariat at the As to the pre- wretched state of the com- opening of the Austerlitz campaign was not prepared in this respect for proves that Bonaparte immediate stowed hostilities, in the referred to for boats of the Miot as an " most of the provisions were flotilla. imbecile," 2 1 Ibid., p. 589. In 1814 the Emperor it is worthy of note and Ibid., Vol. II, p. 115. NAPOLEON AND THE 298 that when any plan went amiss or failed, the Count, accord- ing to his Memoirs, appears to have always foretold, or at least foreseen, that such would be the case. The Emperor's remarks to Metternich, which have been such seized upon with avidity by those who hold the view that the invasion was nothing more than a threat, seem to come under the same category Miot de Melito. as those of " By far the greater part of the political prophets," says the Prince, "the camp at Boulogne was regarded as a preparation for a landing in England. Some better-instructed observers saw in this camp a French army held Rhine, and that was my opinion. conversations with Napoleon on the my longer journey to Cambrai, whither I accompanied the Emperor in 1810, the conversation turned upon the great military in readiness to cross the In one of m preparations which he had made in the years 1803-5 Boulogne. I frankly confessed to him that even at the time I not regard these offensive could directed against England. ' Emperor, smiling. * You Never would measures as are very right/ said the I have been such a fool make a descent upon England, unless, indeed, a revolution had taken place within the country. The army as to assembled at Boulogne was always an army against Austria. I could not place it anywhere else without giving offence ; and, being obliged to form logne, where I it somehow, I could, whilst collecting did so at Bou- it, also disquiet The very day of an insurrection in England I England. should have sent over a detachment of the army to support the insurrection. you, for you my saw, in 1805, 1 I should not the less have fallen on forces were echeloned for that purpose. how near Boulogne was Memoirs of Prince Metternich^ Vol. I, p. Thus to Vienna.'" 1 48, note. INVASION OF ENGLAND 299 How is does this passage support the contention which it supposed to prove ? Far from removing all doubts as to the unreality of a projected invasion, Napoleon admits " half the truth to the crafty Austrian the very day of an insurrection in England I should have sent over a detach: ment of the army support the insurrection." His a revolution in Ireland, that being provoke the most unsettled and therefore the most likely place for to agents tried to the planting of the seeds of sedition, and had the crop plentiful, a second harvest would probably have been been gathered in England. Of course " the army assembled at Boulogne was always an army against Austria" or any other country if it had served the Emperor's purpose. The time of this conversation must also be taken into Napoleon had only just married Marie Louise, more than probable that he wished to flatter the Austrian Minister by allowing him to think that what he had surmised was really what had been intended. Such cogent evidence as that furnished by the documents preserved in the French Archives, and which would account. and it is seem away irrefutable, cannot assuredly be explained the statement that Napoleon used the soldiers by to be he had concentrated at Boulogne for another purpose. Neither does it seem reasonable to suppose that the orders which he issued were prevarications and the two exceporal evidence, be it remembered the only tions cited occasions on which he told the truth regarding his real With half a million of men preparing to intentions. oppose him the armies of the alliance of Continental Powers which the skill of Pitt had brought about the movement of his soldiers necessity and not of choice. from the coast was one of Before Austerlitz had been NAPOLEON AND THE 300 won Trafalgar had been lost, thereby necessitating the abandonment, for the time, of all thoughts of invasion. Obviously the matter had to be shelved until the French navy was reconstituted, which could not be for several We shall see in a later chapter that he cherished a successful descent on the British coasts in of hope the year after his conversation 1807, and again in 1811 with Metternich when his dream of a Russian campaign years. this first took practical shape. Again, if the enormous armament which he called into being was meant only as a threat, why did he set so much store by the carefully considered combination of fleets ? There was certainly nothing to be gained by sending a number of vessels to the West Indies on what could be errand unless the great denouement of utilizing them to cover the passage of the flotilla was This was certainly not planned in the really intended. little else than a fool's hope that his admirals would destroy the British squadrons, for they carefully evaded action whenever they could possibly do so. Sir W. Laird Clowes holds that the "elaborate " mystification theory is " untenable." " It is absolutely " from the testimony of many of the naval and military chiefs who were engaged in the preparations, that Napoleon did intend to cross the Straits of Dover, clear," and he says, that, if his plans had not been rendered palpably hopeless by Cornwallis, Calder, Villeneuve, and Nelson, he would have actually made the attempt." l More convincing still is the fact that from 1801 till the autumn of 1805 Napoleon's sword was sheathed as far as the great Continental Powers were concerned. All his energy was concentrated in pushing forward his naval measures, and 1 The Royal Navy, Vol. V, p. 181, by W. Laird Clowes. BONAPARTE AND DANIEL LAMBERT A CONTRAST. MAY, 1806 THE INVASION POSTPONED. INVASION OF ENGLAND 301 preparing in other ways for the invasion of England. Napoleon's skill as a soldier reached its zenith almost at same moment as his ambitious efforts as a naval came to naught. Not until his hopes were shattered beyond possibility of revival by Villeneuve's retreat into Cadiz did Napoleon cross the Rhine on his Then it was that the dying victorious march to Vienna. the tactician Pitt with trembling ringer pointed to the map of Europe on the walls of Bowling Green House, Putney, with the memorable words, " Roll up that map it will not be ; wanted these ten l years." 1 1 2th January, 1806. CHAPTER XI FULTON AND HIS INVENTIONS RELATION TO NAPOLEON'S INVASION SCHEMES "The project of Citizen Fulton IN may change the face of the world." NAPOLEON. did not Napoleon utilize steam power WHY for his projected expeditions ? This ques- been often asked by modern writers. The answer is simple enough. The great tion has force of the near future to had not then been sufficiently be of any known practical use for the developed 1 Fulton's first purpose of propelling craft on the sea. complete steamboat was not in running order until the year 1807, and although the Emperor was then thinking of making yet another attempt at invading England, it would have taken far too long to build a sufficient number of these vessels to serve his purpose, even if he had been able to come to a working arrangement with the commented on Bonaparte's of Fulton's other inventions, namely apparent disregard his diving ship and submarine torpedo. That the ruler inventor. Writers have also of France took some interest in his 1 experiments is proved The Charlotte Dundas, a tug built by William Symington, was running on the Forth and Clyde canal in 1802. It towed two loaded vessels nineteen miles in six hours against a strong wind. 302 INVASION OF ENGLAND 303 he not only advanced ten thousand francs to aid the enterprising American, but authorized the by the fact that " Minister of Marine to give him certain sums by way of 1 It is foolish to suggest that the immense recompense." army at Channel Boulogne could have been conveyed across the diving boats. Fulton had only the germ in the of practicability in his contrivance. When one remembers that it is only within recent years that submarines have proved their seaworthiness, and that in none too satisfactory a manner, Bonaparte's judgment is shown not to have been at fault. 2 Nor were Fulton's torpedoes had such faith in them that he believed England would be compelled to surrender if they were placed in Torbay or outside Plymouth and Portsmouth. When they were perfected tried at the by the flotilla in time, although the inventor British Government against the Boulogne October, 1804, they did little damage, although Admiral Lord Keith recognized that under different circumstances there was " a reasonable prospect of a su