ccess- ful result." Fulton's plans were submitted to the Directory in 1797. Its members were disposed to take the matter up, and Bruix was called upon to form a Commission to report on their value. The following unique letter bears at the top a curious device symbolizing the liberty of the " " " " seas, and the words Liberty and Equality on either side. 1 30th March, 1801. According to Admiral Fournier, the French manoeuvres of 1906 in the Mediterranean showed that submarines were almost perfect for coast defence, and this would seem to imply that their services are necessarily restricted. Although the submarine is now a recognized engine of warfare, it is scarcely * more suitable for the purposes of transport than was Fulton's diving boat. NAPOLEON AND THE 304 " Eustace Bruix, 11 Vice- Admiral, to Citizen Adet, "810 RUE DU REGARD, PARIS. "PARIS, i^th Thermidor, Year F/(JULY " 31, 1798) of the Republic One and Indivisible. Citizen, " Citizen Robert Fulton having invented a machine enemy's marine forces, you are for the destruction of the I have appointed you one of the commisexamining the same. I invite you in consequence to the residence of Citizen Fulton, No. 515 Rue du Bacq on the I5th of this month at II a.m. The other commissioners will also attend, and you will come to an agreement with them as to the report which you will informed that sioners for make to me relative to Citizen Fulton's machine. "(Signed) " The Minister of Marine and the Colonies, "810 RUE DU REGARD, PARIS." The Commission seems to to Citizen E. BRUIX. 1 Adet, have reported favourably, it. Fulton, who was an but Bruix would have none of birth, had no patriotic scruples, and apDutch the Government with no better success. proached In France, however, he had one very good friend in American by Forfait, who seems Fulton's schemes. to have taken a special interest in He granted him a passport in 1801 " allowing him to carry on his experiments dans les divers ports de la Manche ou de 1'Ocean par terre ou par mer," a privilege which was made good use of by Fulton, who had now built the Nautilus. He had spent the previous summer at Havre, studying the intricate problems of 1 Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. [i797-i8oi] INVASION OF ENGLAND submarine navigation. His efforts with some success, for he writes great pleasure that my all " : 305 had been attended You experiments will learn in with submarine navigation have fully succeeded." The inventor had overcome the initial difficulties of lowering and ascending, but was unable to make the Nautilus go backwards. For this purpose he fixed an Archimedean screw to the stern, but finding this did not answer so well as he had hoped, he " applied two wings, similar to the four wings of a windmill. The wings are four feet in length, their angle is about thirty degrees, they describe a circle in the water of M1 His next four feet in diameter. difficulty was to so . . , balance the Nautilus when astern that it was submerged and going would neither ascend it to the surface nor sink the bottom, but maintain any desired level. This trouble was overcome by means of a pair of horizontal to wings which, when revolved, created a resistance and enabled the boat to keep at a depth of from four to six feet. Motive power was furnished by two men who, by turning the cranks attached to the wings, were able to proceed about seventy fathoms before the want of air necessitated the boat ascending to the surface. Fulton's third, and perhaps greatest problem had now to be faced. How could he keep the Nautilus in the same position in the midst of the strongest currents ? " For " he writes, I made a cone-shaped anchor of This anchor is attached to a lead, weighing 350 pounds. cable twenty fathoms long, which is wound on a capstan, this purpose," and passes from the sea. When this interior of the ship to the anchor is left at the bottom the Nautilus to the extent of 350 pounds. 1 I.- X Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 307. bed of the it lightens Therefore, NAPOLEON AND THE 306 when is necessary to sink in the Channel, where the does not exceed twenty fathoms, let go the anchor, depth fill the Nautilus with water to the weight of 100 pounds, it then turning the cable on the anchor it will have a strain of 250 pounds at the bottom, and the Nautilus will have a tendency of 100 pounds to rise. All danger is then The boat was taken away." 1 feet in so far successful that on descended to a depth of over twenty Brest Harbour without mishap. Fulton and three July 3rd, 1801, it friends remained below the surface for about there was no means of allowing an hour. As light to enter they were obliged to continue in darkness. Fulton subsequently " in the remedied this defect by inserting " bull's eyes tower. conning In 1803 Robert Fulton came under the notice of Bona- The inventor desired him to test his diving ship, parte. but the matter was referred to Forfait, and that expert reported on the subject to the First Consul on the 2nd September, 1803, as follows : "By your orders I M, Fulton, the American inventor of a plunging have seen boat. He seems very much disposed to try fresh experiments, and assures me that he is confident of success but he makes ; a condition without which he will not work ; it is to have a short interview with you. He has, says he, political views to impart of the greatest importance." St. Aubin, " In spoke well of the invention. " making his experiments," he said, M. Fulton not only remained a whole hour under water with three of his com- a French officer, also panions, but had the boat parallel to the horizon at any given distance. He proved that the compass points as correctly under water as on the surface, and that while 1 Desbri^re, Vol. Ill, p. 308. INVASION OF ENGLAND 307 under water the boat made way at the rate of half a league an hour by means contrived for that purpose." Fulton felt himself justified in again approaching the French Government, and francs. He 40,000 should have a certain to destroy offered to his sell ship for made the suggestion that he sum for every vessel he was able also by means of his torpedoes, but he received no Disheartened, but persevering, the inventor then prepared plans for a submarine boat on a This was to have a crew of eight men, and larger scale. further encouragement. to be big By means enough to carry provisions for twenty days. of an air reservoir he calculated that they could for at least eight hours. It was to be so solidly constructed that it would resist the pressure of the water at one hundred feet below the surface, and remain submerged could travel when at that depth. Although Fulton was now apparently concentrating " energy and resources on the perfection of his plunging boat," he had already made experiments in the appli- his cation of steam to navigation, and he designed a boiler which M. Calla, a mechanician living in the Rue du Faubourg Saint Denis, built under his directions. Unfortunately the hull of the boat on which the trials were made was not strong enough for the purpose ; the bottom fell and the engine found a resting-place in the soft mud of the Seine. In July, 1803, after the machine had been out, recovered and the boat of the Lusitania made a patched up, successful the trip. predecessor It attained little over two miles an hour. But it was and not until an it was more than nothing experiment, four years after, when Fulton had returned to America, that the Clarmont, his first practicable steamer, was a speed of a NAPOLEON AND THE 308 launched. It New York travelled from to Albany, a Bona- distance of about 150 miles, in thirty-two hours. 1 parte lost little time in showing his appreciation of Fulton's efforts, and appointed a commission to go into His faculty for seizing on the essential the question. a of novel idea was never better typified than in points How keenly alive this instance. he was to the possibilities shown by his wanting the whole matter of the invention is settled within a week " ! have just read the project of Citizen Fulton, engineer," writes the First Consul, "which you have sent me much too I late, since it is world. Be confide its it is the face of the may change it may, I desire that you immediately examination to a commission of members chosen by you There one that that as among the different classes of the Institute. that learned Europe would seek for judges to A solve the question under consideration. great truth, a physical, palpable truth, is before my eyes. It will be for these gentlemen to try and seize it and see it. As soon as their report is made, it will be sent to you, and you will forward it Try and to me. within eight days, as the Institute may or am may I let the whole be determined impatient." 2 The members of not have formally reported to but no mention of the fact is to be found in the Napoleon, Archives, although the letter is registered as having been received on 20 Thermidor (8th headed "Date des is The column August). decisions de rinstitut" is no other reference to Fulton's steamboat. blank, and there 3 In November, 1803, however, Bonaparte's attention was drawn to the invention of a Swiss, upon whose idea he commented to 1 2 3 The engines were designed by Boulton and Watt. 2ist July, 1804. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 312. Ibid., Vol. Ill, p. 313. INVASION OF ENGLAND " Talleyrand. For a great length of time," he 309 says, "people have occupied themselves with the means of propelling boats without men. The solution of this problem offers such immense advantages that it is improbable anything reasonable can have been imagined by a Swiss mountaineer." Napoleon severely to task for not having received Fulton and his steamboat with enthusiasm. 1 " Its value was not recognized," he avers, " and it was disdainPasquier calls he ultimately does Napoleon justice, never was he more badly served by his fully cast aside," but after stating that instinct," " by doubting whether the " almost insurmount- able difficulties" of manufacture could have been overcome at the time of his greatest The attempt at invasion. Government, on the other hand, viewed Fulton's experiments with alarm, and as the inventor was unable to obtain satisfaction from Bonaparte,he approached British the First Consul's rivals with a view to their taking the matter up in a more business-like way. 2 He appears to have abandoned and reverted to torpedo. 3 A his application of steam to navigation plunging boat and the audience was personal arranged with Pitt his old loves, the 1 Memoirs of Chancellor Pasquier Vol. I, p. 178. 8th May, 1794, Robert Fulton was granted an English patent, No. 1988, for "his new invented machine or engine for conveying boats and vessels, and their cargoes, to and from the different levels in and upon canals without the assistance of locks, or other means now known and used for that , 2 On purpose." This is the only patent recorded in the official series. 3 In the Life of Brigadier- General Sir Samuel Bentham, K.S.G., who was Inspector-General of British Naval Works at this period, his widow gives an instance of the prejudice against steam and machinery which obtained among dockyard hands during the closing years of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth : engine and the pumps worked by " In it the spring of the year [1799] the steam to use with all the success which were put On the 7th of June the Inspector-General had anticipated in planning them. Lord Hugh Seymour accompanied him to witness this novelty. To the surprise of all, the piston rod of the I. X 2 pump broke whilst at work. The millwright NAPOLEON AND THE 3io Both statesmen came to the conclusion that the inventions were capable of development, and Fulton was encouraged to perfect them. A commission, consisting of the two Ministers, Lord Mulgrave, Lord and Lord Melville. Castlereagh, Sir Joseph Banks, Mr. Cavendish, Major Congreve, Sir Charles Rennie, and Admiral Sir Home Popham, As was appointed. it representativ