boasts to view Warren and Pellew have fought, verdure shall increase But sweeter sing ! still, how The oft-repeated theme renew, And dwell on deeds immortal Howe has wrought. These fill with joy the ravish'd heart, These to each Briton's breast impart The glow of conscious pride ; NAPOLEON AND THE 238 Yet oft the tear is seen to flow, E'en amid Conquest's gorgeous show, For those who bravely fought and bravely died. But now no mortal hand repels alarms, In Britain's rightful cause e'en Heaven appears in arms. with her hundred tongues proclaims, Fame That France again will tempt the Ocean's rage That yet Invasion's hope her breast inflames, And sad experience Thee, Caledonia ! fails to make her ; sage. thee she vows to tear With harpy-talons, and thy sons destroy Or Albion must her ireful efforts bear, ; To dash with bitterness the cup of joy. And shall we fear ? Shall Britons know dismay ? Shall Christians from the godless Heathen flee Forbid it, Heaven Avert the direful day For still Then, And But our Hope supports itself on thee. come a larger navy bring Gallia, ; ; to Britannia's isle insulting haste ; know, one breath of Heaven's insulted Shall ? ! ! whelm thy King 1 pride and thee beneath the watery wave. (February 24^, 1797.) In the autumn of 1798 the Court, according to its wont, migrate to Weymouth. There was a "command" night at the theatre, and the following communication is sent to the Gentleman's Magazine : 2 "Mr. Urban, "The following stanzas from Tasker's Ode to the of Alfred, the Founder of the British Constitution, Spirit were lately recited at the Weymouth Theatre, by Mr. Sandford, before their Majesties and received with universal applause. 1 2 Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. LXVII, part ii, 783. Gentleman's Magazine,Vo\. LXIX, part ii, October I2th, 1798, p. 884. INVASION OF ENGLAND Stanza O Muse ! I. dispel the mists, Hath spread round glory's While to the mental vision Ethereal objects strike 239 my which Time lucid clime ; bright, sight, in poetic extasy, Rapt Alfred, thy princely form I see 'Mid heroes, sages, patriots old Who, (rising from their seats of gold,) To thee supreme their gratulations pay, While choral harps around attune the grateful lay. Stanza II. My humbler song, immortal Alfred hear, ! such weak strains may reach thy polish'd ear Restorer of the sacred fane If ; ! Expeller of the bloody Dane Hark with applause the distant regions ring Hail warrior, patriot King Hail legislator wise ! ! ! ! ! ! Stanza III. the glorious bulwark rise, By nations view'd with envious eyes The genius of thy favoured Isle, All clad in adamantine mail, Still shall (While storms of Anarchy ; assail, And Faction's tumults idly roar, Like waves against a rocky shore,) Shall with a flaming sword defend the pile, Preserve its strength entire, and pillar'd height, fades the dome of Heaven, and every orb of 'Till The deluge of patriotic verse continues, Howe's successes are greeted with and light. Lord : Let Gallia threaten with contemptuous smile To rear her Standard on our sea girt isle, To ravish, murder, and confusion spread, And rear her hellish democratic head : If Neptune here his feat of empire keep, And yield to us the Empire of the Deep, Britannia's navies shall triumphant reign, And Gallic foes know Howe to rule the main. DE WILLOWBY. NAPOLEON AND THE 240 The manifest loyalty of the next "invasion" song alone excuses the badness of the rhymes : SONG TUNE.-" To Anacreon in Heav'n" To learn Johnny Bull a la mode de Paris Some half-starv'd Republicans made declaration That they would instruct him like them to be free When this answer return'd from our loyal Old Nation ; " And mean " Ye ragged " Your freedom we pity, happy while frantic you sing " Your fav'rite Qa ira to live " " ; banditti And hymn Marseillois For the true Briton's song shall be God save the King.'" ' If we fall in the conflict how noble the cause, The stone will record it that stands on our grave Here lies one who defended his country and laws ; And ; died his religion and monarch to save. This and more shall be said But thank Heav'n we're not dead ; of us yet with one heart and voice sing ; We can all Not the Frenchman's Qa Or Hymn Marseillois ira But the true Briton's song, huzza, " God save the King." march or camp-song. The only existing in MS., was used by the Almost each corps had its following one, volunteers of Burton Bradstock, a picturesque coast-village near Bridport, in Dorset, where Sir T. M. Hardy's first Captain Roberts lived and resided many gallant sea-dogs also * : 1 See The Three Dorset Captains at Trafalgar, p. 3. SAVER'S CARICATURE OF THE "DEVIL'S OWN" [INNS OF COURT VOLUNTEERS] IN 1799 INVASION OF ENGLAND 241 THE SONG OF THE LOYAL VOLUNTEERS OF BURTON BRADSTOCK 1. Come my lads of courage true Ripe for martial glory See the standard waves for you ; And leads the way before ye. Chorus. To the field of Mars advance Join in bold alliance, Tell the blood-stain'd sons of France We bid them 2. all defiance. Burton's sons were always brave the land or ocean ; On Ready for to kill or save Where honour's the promotion. Chorus. 3. Burton long has had a boast And right well deserving ; For pretty maids a standing Of toast Nature's sweet preserving. Chorus. 4. Gallia's sons invasion plan, Threat'ning to destroy us ; Seize our maidens, houses, land, And as slaves employ us. Chorus. 5. We must fight or starve or fly, Hope, nought else remaining, Or wives may faint and children With no hand sustaining. die Chorus. 6. Lives are lent for laws and King, When that they may need 'em Let us then in chorus sing, Give us death or freedom ; ? Chorus. Even the proctors of the Ecclesiastical and Admiralty Courts appear to have loyally responded to the cry to I. R NAPOLEON AND THE 242 arms, and amongst the broadsides of 1799 lowing To is the fol- : HonWe SIR WILLIAM MAJOR COMMANDANT the Rt SCOTT 1 OF THE ASSOCIATED CORPS OF CIVILIANS Pro Aris et Focis. A Nation, great in Commerce, Arts and Arms Hears with disdain the insolence of Foes ; Firm in herself, She fears not War's Alarms, Nor seeks unwisely, all it's direful Woes. But when new Doctrines have Mankind misled, When When peaceful States in Anarchy are hurl'd, powerful Nations bend their mighty THEN ENGLAND RISES Head, AND PROTECTS THE WORLD. Then shall her FLEETS such glorious While dire disgrace the Foe infernal Victories gain, guides That Arabs shout astonish'd, and the Main Heaves its proud bosom, where a Nelson rides. And still by Wisdom led RELIGION'S Dome, On its firm Basis will unshaken stand, While CORPS of LOYALTY protect a Home The Blessings which enrich this happy Land. But one PECULIAR CORPS demands the Song Vers'd in the Law of NATIONS, well they know The Rights inherent that to all belong, When all OBEY the Law from which they flow. ASSOCIATES CIVIL Who ! Eloquent and Sage plead for Justice, and for Virtue fight, Or Law declare, from Learning's ancient Page, And soften Rigour, with maintaining Right. 1 William Scott, Lord Stowell, 1745-1836. Judge of the Consistory Court of London, 1788-1820; Judge of High Court of Admiralty, 1798-1820; Privy Councillor, 1798. INVASION OF ENGLAND While YOUNGER SONS of this distinguished 243 Band In vigour strong, with martial Genius soar Eager to take the honourable Stand Of active Soldiers in the CIVIL CORPS. (I799-) The colour-prints and aquatints relating to the first five years of the Great Terror are more numerous than one would have expected, and now fetch very high prices. Amongst them may be mentioned a pair of fine colourprints, engraved by L. J. and N. Schiavonetti after paintings by R. K. Porter, portraying colours to the Loyal Associated the presentation Ward and of Volunteer Corps of the City of London and those of the City of Westminster. They were published May 3Oth, 1799. " C. Stadler's aquatint of the J. exercising in their prized. It was executed was responsible figures. Ground A at Hans Town Association " Knightsbridge is also much after a design in for the landscape and J. which C. S. Woolley Barrow for the series of four interesting plates deals with Isle of Wight volunteer subjects. These aquatints, by J. Wells " after R. Livesay, depict the Grand Review at Sandown " " Bay (June 4th, 1798), the Grand Review near Freshwater " " Bay (June I7th, 1798), West Cowes with the Volunteers on the Parade," and " Volunteers receiving the Island Banner at Carisbrooke Castle" (June 24th, I798). 1 W. 1 The Wight has been a favourite objective of the foreign invader Henry VIII. A book of great interest to future was recently sold in London. It is thus described Isle of ever since the days of historians : "ISLE OF WIGHT. Worsley (Sir Richard), History of the Isle of Wight. London, 1781. 4to, with map and ^i plates. 1 Inserted in the volume is an Original Despatch from the Council of State to the Governor of the Isle of Wight respecting the designs of the Dutch on the Island, warning him to take all precautions for its safety, signed J. Thurlow, and endorsed by Col. Sydenham, dated Aug. 27, Also an autograph letter from the Author to Sir G. Savile, and 1652. 22 ADDITIONAL ENGRAVINGS, including a large folding view of the ' Camp in the Isle of Wight, 1741, Prospect of Portsmouth, 1740, etc." NAPOLEON AND THE 244 Alexander is responsible both for the drawing and engravof the view of Lord Romney's mammoth dinner to ing 5319 Kentish Volunteers/ reproduced in these volumes. One of the most remarkable of these invasion colour- prints J. Collyer's charming view of George III reviewing the Armed Associations in Hyde Park on his sixtysecond birthday (June 4th, 1799), now given in facsimile by is way of illustration. George Cruikshank gives an account " of this striking military spectacle in his " Pop Gun a crushing retort to General Sir W. Napier, who in 1859 had stigmatized the volunteers of 1797-8 as "unwieldy, un- During the march past he repeated over and over again Bonaparte's gibe at the "shopkeepers" in tones of undisguised exultation, and taught, ill-commanded mobs." was on this occasion he suggested for the Bloomsbury and Inns of Court Volunteers the nickname of " Devil's it Own," which bids after fair to be immortal. J. Wells's aquatint Guest of "The Situation of the Volunteer Corps at Portsmouth in commemoration of His assembled Majesty's Birthday on 4th June, 1799," relates to the events of the same memorable day. Another much-prized aquatint engraved by Pollard after a drawing by W. Mason perpetuates one of George Ill's numerous reviews of the troops volunteers as well as regulars on Blackheath, and picture of the aquatint from R. Livesay's " of Review the Guards in Hatfield Park C. Stadler's J. " belongs to the same period, although not published until January 1 8th, 1802. manifestly impossible within the necessary limits of the present work to deal with the pictorial satire of the It is Great Terror in the detail one would wish. 1 See ante, p. 136. Of the 3200 INVASION OF ENGLAND 245 about 300 refer directly or indirectly to the topic now under consideration. Napoleonic caricatures supposed to exist, them (especially those by anonymous artists of are foreign origin) exceedingly rare, but the better-known and comparatively familiar productions of James Gillray Many of and Thomas Rowlandson on the subject of the invasion, published between 1796 and 1805, have been chronicled and described by Mr. Thomas Wright and Mr. Joseph Grego. 1 Nothing like a complete list exists of the Invasion caricatures of Isaac Cruikshank (born in 1756) or of George Murgatroyd Woodward, At the commencement of 2 the four years his junior. Great Terror, George " " Cruikshank (the Glorious George of the Elba, Hundred Days, Waterloo, and St. Helena epoch of Napoleonic history) was four years As his senior. is old, unable to fall far and Robert only three years as the invasion period is concerned, one his brother back on the now quite unrivalled collection of George Cruikshank's works possessed by Captain R. 3 of Ro