e, named was the only naval be said that the Commission was cannot the last overburdened by the weight of expert advice. The report was as unfavourable as St. Vincent's view of the matter, which was one of contempt. He referred to Fulton as a " gimcrack," and endeavoured to dissuade Pitt from having " anything to do with him, for so he was laying the foundation for doing away with the Navy, on which depended the strength and prestige of Great Britain" surely an an of He went further, expressing opinion. illogical way and called Pitt " the greatest fool that ever existed to en- courage a mode of war which those who commanded the seas did not want, and which, if successful, would deprive them of it." Notwithstanding such ill-concealed aversion new invention, the Navy Board eventually to the trial of a consented to an experiment being made on Boulogne. James thus describes Fulton's torpedo who had charge of of the pump piston " the " : flotilla at l the machinery found a broken copper nail in the packing the master blacksmith, a working blacksmith, and ; . . . others present, attributed the breaking of the rod to this nail. ... It had been said by all, including the Navy Board, and perhaps some members of the all Superior Board risings of the itself, that the introduction of a steam engine would cause Such was not the case, however, for the (p. 155). workmen" Inspector-General was careful that the men who worked at the pumps should have other duties given to them, and "a murmur amongst them was no longer heard" 1 (p. 156). James's Naval History Vol. Ill, > p. 231. INVASION OF ENGLAND 311 "It consisted of a coffer of about twenty-one feet long and three and a quarter broad, resembling in appearance a log of mahogany, except that its extremities were formed like a wedge. Its covering was of thick plank, lined with lead, caulked and tarred. Outside this was a coat of canvas, laid over with hot pitch. The vessel weighed when filled (done, of course, before the covering was wholly put on) about two tons. The contents consisted, besides the apparatus, of as much ballast as would just keep the upper surface of the deck of the coffer even with the water's edge. Amidst a quantity of powder (about forty barrels) and other inflammable matter was a piece of clockwork, the mainspring of which, on the withdrawal of a peg placed on the outside, would at a given time (from six to ten minutes) draw the trigger of a block and explode the vessel. This " catamaran," as it was called, had no mast and was to be towed to the spot of its operation. On the opposite end to which the tow-rope was fixed was a line with a sort of grappling iron at its extremity, kept afloat by pieces of cork, and intended to hook itself to the cable of the object of destruction and swing the coffer alongside." A favourable opportunity was presented towards the end of September, 1804, when from 150 to 160 boats were anchored in a double line outside Boulogne Harbour. Lord who had already experimented with various types of fire-ships, tells the result of his attack by means of Fulton's catamarans on Bonaparte's flotilla in the followKeith, ing despatch to the Admiralty " : / ' MONARCH/ OFF BOULOGNE, " . oir, " for $rd Their Lordships are aware that some time past been October, 1804. my attention has directed to the object of ascer- 312 NAPOLEON AND THE mode taming the most effectual flotillas at their anchorage of annoying the enemy's in front of their ports under protection of their land-batteries. Having on the afternoon of the ist instant arrived at the anchorage, and finding the weather promising, and about 150 of the enemy's flotilla on the outside of the pier, I resolved to make an experiment on a limited scale of the means of attack which had been provided. " The first arrangements for this purpose were made on the morning of yesterday. The officers named on the other side were put in charge of the principal vessels which at this time were to be employed. Manned launches and other boats of the squadron were appointed to accompany and protect them. The Castor, Greyhound, and some smaller vessels were directed to take up an advanced and convenient anchorage for covering their retreat, giving protection to the men who might be wounded and boats that might be repelled, and for towing off the boats in general in the event of the wind freshening and blowing upon the coast. The operation commenced a quarter past nine o'clock last evening, and terminated a quarter past four this morning, during which time several vessels, prepared for the purpose, were exploded amongst or very close to the flotilla; but on account of the very great distance at which they lay from each other, no very extensive injury seems to have been sustained, although it is evident that there has been very considerable confusion among them, and that two of the brigs and several of the small vessels appear to have great satisfaction heavy discharge of shell, shot, and musketry was kept up by the enemy throughout the night, no casualty on our part has been The enemy made no attempt to oppose their sustained. rowing-boats to ours. Their lordships will not expect that be missing since yesterday. I in reporting that, notwithstanding a very at the present moment I am to enter much into details ; J 'APT fcir~trf INVASION OF . .-~*4 tiiiry J*'y ' I - (( VltHl (& **W*rJr..rr.,-'v-* -/fcm^o^afc JA^f****?* k -'-< -^ ^AWM*:^?' "*- / INVASION OF ENGLAND but think I it 313 duty to state to them my conviction any great accumulation of the enemy's roadsteads, an extensive and combined my that in the event of force in their operation of a similar nature will hold forth a reasonable l ." prospect of a successful result. . . Further light on the subject is given in a 2 by an officer of one of Keith's ships letter written : "We took on board, from Dungeness, several large something of the shape of Hambro' chests, only rather longer; they were filled with combustibles, and covered over with pitch about two inches thick. We also took on board a quantity of large casks filled up in the coffers, same manner, for the purpose of destroying the enemy's Different ships ships and gun boats in Boulogne roads. in the fleet had a number of these machines on board, on each one of which was affixed a machine somewhat of the nature of a clock out of it a pin was to be drawn, ; and at the expiration of ten minutes the machine would catch fire, when driven in by the tide. Last night being extremely dark, this scheme was attempted to be put in No we approached near the shore, and enemy spy'd us, began to fire upon us from when saw the explosion of our they every quarter, which nine o'clock, till four from machines, they kept up this morning, and we on our part, kept sending in the machines at every opportunity. Had one of the enemy's shells fallen on our ship, and set the infernals (as they are termed by the fleet) on fire, there would have been an end of us. I am happy to inform you, there were no lives lost on our side and we have some reason to think, the enemy sustained very little, if any injury, our machines not execution. sooner had than the ; 1 Memoir of Admiral Lord Keith) 2 This 8th inst. letter is p. 343, by Alexander Allardyce. dated October 3rd, 1804, and appeared in The Times of the NAPOLEON AND THE 314 We for which they were intended. could perceive this morning some of them were driven on shore, without having either taken fire or exploded, answering the purpose and unfortunately fell into the enemy's hands, some thousands of whom were assembled on the beach to look at them. We expect to go to the Downs tomorrow, to return the remainder of the machines into store, from which, as a true friend to the service, I heartily wish we had never taken them." Evan Nepean, then Irish Secretary, and formerly of the Admiralty, was no more disposed to Secretary welcome Fulton's invention than was Lord St. Vincent. Sir He writes * : "DUBLIN CASTLE, " "qtk October, 1804. My dear King, " I have received both your letters with the papers which accompany them containing the intelligence which has been obtained of the operations of the squadron employed against the enemy at Boulogne, and have communicated its contents with the Lord-Lieutenant, who has desired me to thank you. The news- papers of the same day, the 5th [October], represent much greater injury has been done to the enemy's flotilla than your letters represent. I hope your relation is correct, not from any desire that the enemy's craft should be spared, but because I think we had better taken our chances of getting them at sea than to have used the means we have taken for destroying them. If the plan which I am told has been resorted to should have been carried into execution with success, we may expect that the enemy will some time or another retaliate, that 1 Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. INVASION OF ENGLAND and we have much more In short retaliation. it 315 to lose than they have by such appears to me if navies are to be destroyed by such means as have been pursued, our naval strength can no longer be counted on. Believe me to be, my dear King, " Ever sincerely yours, " EVAN NEPEAN. "JOHN KING." The cause of the failure at Boulogne was partly due to a mistake in the construction of the torpedoes, and an attack against Fort Rouge, at Boulogne, by Sir Home Popham, acting under Keith's instructions, was decided upon fiasco, the December. The affair was again a and the frequent trials made did little damage to in the following indeed, Bonaparte referred to the explosions breaking the windows of the good citizens of Boulogne with English guineas." 1 as flotilla ; " The tenacity of the inventor is usually second only to In October, 1805, Fulton persuaded Pitt to allow him to experiment in blowing up an old brig, the his poverty. Dorothea, in the Downs. The vessel was anchored within Walmer Castle, and the Prime Minister, Sir General Don, and other military and naval Sidney Smith, officers were eye-witnesses. Two torpedoes were used on sight of occasion, each charged with 170 Ib. of gunpowder, by clockwork. The boat was completely shattered, but the Admiralty would allow no further this and fired experiments. This was apparently the inventor's last attempt in 1 Reminiscences of a Naval Officer during the Late War, Captain A. Crawford, R.N. (1851). p. 128, by INVASION OF ENGLAND 316 England, for Trafalgar was fought and won six days afterwards, and the pressing need for such a contrivance was no longer the question of the hour. Fulton returned where he survived until 1815, the year follow- to America, ing the successful trial of his new vessel, the Demologos, which was the first warship to be driven by steam. It remained for the elder Brunei to propose the use of the great force in the British navy which, in the words of Napoleon, "may change the face of the world." It was not until 1822 that the Comet, a wooden paddle-steamer of 80 horse-power was added to our " first line of defence," thereby ringing the knell of the stately three-decker that was the pride and glory of England in the days of Nelson and his captains. END OF VOL. I. DC 220 3 W5 v.l Wheeler, Harold Felix Baker Napoleon and the invasion of England PLEASE CARDS OR DO NOT REMOVE SLIPS UNIVERSITY FROM THIS OF TORONTO POCKET LIBRARY NAPOLEON THE INVASION AND OF ENGLAND VOL. II NAPOLEON AND THE INVASION OF ENGLAND THE STORY OF THE GREAT TERROR BROADLEY WHEELER & BY H. F. A. B. M. WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS FROM CONTEMPORARY PRINTS, CARICATURES, ETC. TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II EIGHT IN COLOUR. LONDON JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD NEW YORK JOHN LANE COMPANY MCMVIII 3.20 PLYMOUTH t WILLIAM BRBNDON AND SON, LIMITED, PRINTERS CONTENTS CHAPTER XII PAGE ACUTE STAGE OF THE FRENCH INVASION PLANS OF MAKING OF A NEW ARMADA CHAPTER ENGLAND THE 1803 i XIII IN ARMS, 1803 37 CHAPTER XIV THE ROLE OF THE FRENCH NAVY, 77 1803 CHAPTER XV FURTHER BRITISH PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENCE, 1803 AND 1804. 104 C