cluding those at Bayonne, and in the roads of Brest, Boulogne, and Havre. I think, therefore, it would be well to accept the offer of the Dutch and to give them a contract for thirty sloops, already rigged, to be delivered at Flushing between the 7th and the I2th November. gunboats these are ; 1 all 28th August, 1803. 2 Ibid., p. 95. There are more than 500 We are minus 200 that are wanted. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 94. INVASION OF ENGLAND 32 to 300 pinnaces. sloops. ... I . . . The Italian Republic has offered twelve think that the best places to build Paris and Compiegne." them are l On the 4th September Bonaparte tells Bruix that there were enough gunboats, but not enough sloops and pinnaces. " You have is it everything on your shoulders," he adds, your place to see that everything is " and carried out." 2 That the Admiral fully realized the responsibility of his position and the confidence placed in him by his Chief, subsequent events It will show. was only when the boats were at concentrating Boulogne that the First Consul began to realize the extreme difficulty of the operation. If they hugged the coasts in their passage from the port of construction to head-quarters they ran the risk of grounding on shoals, and if they put out to sea their capture by the enemy followed almost as a matter of course. The former plan was adopted as being less dangerous, and land batteries erected on every available headland afforded some protection to the little vessels. Two powerful stone forts were begun at once on the Pointe de Creche and the Pointe de 1'Heurt, which commanded the right and left of Boulogne respectively, and a third of wood, erected on piles, and mounted ten heavy and several mortars. guns Temporary batteries, which were submerged at high tide, and served to shelter the facing the entrance of the harbour, workmen engaged on the forts at low water, were also ployed. Corps of horse artillery, stationed points, gave their aid when occasion arose. em- at suitable It was the special duty of two generals of brigade to see that this was 1 Bonaparte to Decres, 2Qth August, 1803. p. 97. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 96. HET ELE G RAPHE. > EXPLANATION AA A beam .[ B.B A crof. bun. CC Pieces of. o TB PLATE. wood about 16 . feel feel high, 6 led upright on an eminence. made moveabl. u the tenter long and 10 broad, ' wood mlfo moTcabta by D joints. E E A (baft Obratory. Thu Machine rair be chinced to a great ineiy of I'ofuioni, (u above) by meiot of Cordf which rub Ihronfh Groo vei in the Main Al, and made eaGly manageable in the OUtrvMty. where ihrie Pcrfoni are employed, one to obfervi ihe Movements ot t ther to make eortefpDndmg Movememi. and a third to write them dow eared when Word] are ufed, a Flag is hoitted, ani half a Minute in one Foution. The Signs are either in Word) or Letters and the M the Alphabet may be altered a pleafure. the Signs unly onderftood by the Correipondemi at the two raott dittanl Machinesfimple ' I : When >' u given and .nlwtrrd, all the Machines are fel in Motion, and will convey B TtisMaehut convened InUltigenee of fome length, from Line to France, in Efty Minutes. a Signal nlence ICO Mills in The tin* live of conveyance Minutes. a according to thf nvmbcr of Seniencei eonuined in the Intelligence. W. LUBBQCK, PROO ED AND SOLD BY THE "PROPRIETOR. Bookfeller and Stationer, No. 23, RATHBONE PLACE. [CntereU at g>tattonec II. D i|aU.] NAPOLEON AND THE 34 One of these officers patrolled the coast from Calais to Dunkirk, the other being responsible faithfully carried out. for the stations In between the latter port some 60,000 men were all and the Scheldt. guarding the utilized in " Let piquets of cavalry be so disposed as to coasts. cross each other incessantly," Bonaparte writes to General Davoust, 1 " and of artillery, with horses, be so signal, they may be able to reach let pieces placed that, at the first in the least possible time the place where vessels have grounded." By the aid of Claude Chappe's ingenious machine pictured on the preceding page, news was con- veyed from point to point with wonderful From rapidity. the enemy's cruisers dogged the movements of the flotilla, setting at defiance these precautions. It the first was doubly unfortunate that, during the First Consul's to Boulogne, two gunboats making their way first visit from Flushing should have been captured by a British frigate and two sloops. He was an interested, if not a happy, spectator of this Even when the boats were incident. successful in eluding the vigilance of the were so painfully slow as to call enemy, the voyages the head of down upon command the full force Nor can we express surprise the officer in of Bruix's irascible at this in a man of temper. the Admiral's active disposition, acting under such a master, when we find that seven boats took over a fortnight to traverse the distance from Cherbourg to Havre. The first division of the Dunkirk consisting of flotilla, twenty-seven gunboats and a prame> all of which were old, was ready to sail on the I2th September but the in; October soth, 1803. Quoted in Thiers' Consulate and Empire, Vol. Ill, 72 (English edition, 1893), translated by D. Forbes Campbell and John 1 p. Stebbing. INVASION OF ENGLAND 35 1 and Admiral Saumarez with a frigate and several smaller vessels appeared on the horizon and evitable happened, prevented them from putting to sea. bombarded the The enemy gaily no damage, and nine without success, but on the port, causing little or canonnieres attacked the frigate morning of the I4th, no hostile sail being visible, a start was made. Captain Saint- Haouen, in charge of the division, although an able officer, erred on the side of over- prudence, and ran into Calais on the appearance of a single British cruiser, where he remained until the 28th. His report avers that the boats were not good sailers, being unable to tack properly. Bruix was furious when he heard of the Captain's timidity, whose motives he stigmatized as "very poor." Although he had been up all night at Boulogne, the Admiral at once hastened to Calais, and from thence to Dunkirk, to send off a second division, which was now ready, and thus strengthen the armament at Saint- Haouen's disposal. He tells the officer that he is " to take the offensive and board the enemy," and Rearin command at Boulogne, was advised to Admiral Magon, render every assistance he could by ordering the gunboats at his disposal to meet the divisions. On the 28th a start was made from Calais, the prame bringing up the rear and of the enemy. This time they doubled and Gris-Nez reached their destination, with the Cape exception of two boats which put in at Ambleteuse. The returning the fire second division, under Captain Pevrieux, was also on its way, but was becalmed off the cape. Magon and Saint- Haouen came up with it off Wimereux, and after offering considerable resistance for three hours, ably seconded 1 Admiral Sir James Saumarez, Bart., G.C.B., (1757-1836). was created Baron Saumarez of Saumarez, in Guernsey. by In 1831 he INVASION OF ENGLAND 36 the land batteries, the divisions succeeded in reaching Boulogne. They had faithfully fulfilled the peremptory " face the enemy." order of Bruix to Engagements of kind were frequently repeated sometimes the little boats ran aground and were captured, on other occasions they managed to reach the port for which they were this ; bound without any untoward incident marring their pasBut as Forfait facetiously remarks " It is better to sage. : 1 by fighting than by incompetency." Bonaparte was certainly not blind to the fact that even if the flotilla lose boats succeeded in crossing without opposition, it would meet with a warm reception when the English coast was reached. "Expedite as much as possible," he tells Bruix, "the Boulogne of a great supply of military stores of kinds, for much will be needed, seeing that more than arrival at all one fight is certain." 2 It is significant that the First Consul had already caused an analysis to be made of all the descents which the English had effected on the French coasts since 1700, " 3 mentioning the object proposed and the result obtained." wished to profit by the experience thus gained to find He ; how landings had been negotiated, for future imitation on the other side of the Channel, and also if there was out suitable anchorage for sections of his flotilla at the points selected 1 2 his enemies for disembarkation. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 235. Correspondence de Napolon> Letter No. 7126. September 3 by To General p. 28. Dated from St. Cloud, 2ist, 1803. Berthier, St. Cloud, 23rd August, 1803. Bingham, Vol. II, CHAPTER ENGLAND No We IN ARMS, parleying now all are with you In Britain ! Ye men of Kent, XIII now from 'tis 1803 is one breath shore to shore victory or death. ; ; WORDSWORTH. of the most remarkable facts in connection with the invasion scare of 1803 is that at first certain statesmen in high positions positively ONE refused to believe that Bonaparte entertained Lord Grenville shows and how little he shared what the idea of crossing the Channel. how he spent his time, he would probably have termed " alarmists' views," in a letter to his brother which he wrote from Dropmore, his country seat, "You will rolling my under date of April I2th, 1803. find me here," he notes, "very peaceably walks, and watering out any thought of the may dispose them." new my rhododendrons, with- possessor to whom Bonaparte The general public, on the other hand, felt equally positive that the attempt would be made, and aroused themselves for the defence of hearth and home. Shortly Treaty of Amiens the number was reduced by some 40,000 a most after the signing of the of armed men ; unwise policy in view of the fact that the First Consul still showed no disposition to curb his ambition. As a consequence, when a state of 37 war again existed between NAPOLEON AND THE 38 the two countries, there was hurry and scurry to get the army up to fighting strength. The lack of organization and of foresight was as evident then as it was at the beginning of the late South African War. It is a fortunate of the British that when once they are aroused they do not cease their vigilance or doggedness until affairs are put to rights, otherwise the Empire would characteristic long since have perished. It is true that a warning note in Parliament five months before the had been sounded declaration of war, but the majority of the Cabinet still preferred to turn a deaf ear to those who asserted that the France did not intend to keep his part of the ruler of The lack of confidence in the Government was voiced by a member of the House who remarked that, " However great are the horrors of war, yet the horrors of seeing Bonaparte's flag on the Tower of London, or his bargain. political principles current in this country, are still more In a notable speech Sheridan referred ruling ambition to conquer England. terrifying to me." to " Bonaparte's This is the first vision that breaks on the First Consul through the gleam of the morning this is his last prayer he may address it, whether to ; at night, to whatever deity Mahomet, to the Goddess of Battles or to the Goddess of Reason." Jupiter or to When it reviewing this period of our country's history must not be forgotten that superstition was rampant and education was almost entirely neglected. It follows as a matter of course that the lower classes were somewhat credulous enemy when they were informed deliberately poisoned his that their implacable sick at Jaffa, that he gloated over the sight of a corpse-strewn battlefield, and that he was a second Nero. They believed in the state- INVASION OF ENGLAND ments 39 and short-tempered nursemaids nearly implicitly, scared fractious children out of their wits dinning into their ears by continually : Baby, baby, naughty baby, Hush, you squalling Hush your thing, squalling, or Bonaparte may it I say ; may be pass this way. Baby, baby, he's a giant