, and black as Rouen steeple dines and sups, rely on't, Every day on naughty people. Tall ; And he Baby, baby, he will hear you As he passes by the house, And he, limb from limb, will tear you 1 Just as pussy tears a mouse. With a childlike faith they blindly followed Mistress Rumour when she spread abroad a canard^ however improbable it might be. One to the effect that the First Consul was about to erect a bridge from Calais to Dover was seized upon with avidity. The Army of Invasion was to cross over in this way, directed by officers in air-balloons stationed above the purely mythical structure. 2 A Channel tunnel was mooted and actually proposed by the mining engineer Mathieu. Many a time it was passed from mouth to mouth that the little Corsican masqueraded as a British seaman and was actually on board a south-coast 1 The Three Dorset Captains at Trafalgar, p, 148, by A. M. Broadley and R. C. Bartelot, M.A. 2 The Channel was first crossed by balloon on the 7th January, 1785, the M. Jean Pierre Blanchard and Dr. Jeffries, an Englishman. They landed safely in the forest of Guines after a voyage full of adventure. The aeronaut Garnerin ascended in a balloon at the time of Bonaparte's It is said that the relic is still coronation, and travelled as far as Rome. passengers being preserved at the Vatican. NAPOLEON AND THE 40 fishing smack, trolling at sea by night and spying on shore by day. Some one industriously spread a report that one of his brothers had crossed from France and been hospitably The received by the nuns of Marnhull, in Dorset supposed object of his was visit to ascertain the true A feeling of the English people towards France. large quantity of fire-arms and ammunition was believed to have been landed at night and smuggled into the nunnery in order to assist the enemy's army should it effect a landing. It was decided that the matter ought to be investigated immediately, and accordingly the Rev. Mr. Blackburne, a of the Justice Peace, was chosen to superintend operations. Nothing of a warlike character was found, although the reverend gentleman and his attendants minutely inspected the sacred building from garret to cellar. The lady abbess was amazed, not to say alarmed, at the proceedings, and " were not more surprised," gave vent to her indignation. We she said, " when, in the beginning of the reign of Tyranny France, a domiciliary visit had been paid us at our in convent, under the idea that Mr. Pitt, the English minister, was secreted there." 1 Nor was England the only place where the " " A Arch-tyrant was believed to be in hiding. Mr. James Neild, while on a tour through Wales in September, 1803, narrowly escaped being made a State prisoner near Radnor. The story is best told in his own language. " " They have got a strange notion in Wales," he writes, that Bonaparte has escaped from France, and among is lurking the mountains, so that they eye every stranger par1 Annual Register , 1803, p. 418. INVASION OF ENGLAND 41 and (would you believe it ?) absolutely took me for the First Consul, and challenged my guide. I observed a great buzz among the women, and being informed of the cause went up to them, and assured them I was old enough ticularly ; One of them fortunately observed, that she had taken particular notice on my first entrance into the town, of my eyes, and that Bonaparte squinted. They say he was born in Wales, and that two of his to be Bonaparte's father. brothers were transported." Mrs. Piozzi, the charming authoress and friend of Dr. Johnson, in writing to James Robson, of Bond Street, London, a few months earlier, from the same Principality, not only gives us a glimpse of her own affairs and shows that domestic servants were almost as difficult to obtain then as they are now, but compares the salary of a cook with that of a " Lieutenant of our Men of War that defend us against Buonaparte and his 400,000 men." " BRYNBELLA, NEAR DENBIGH "N: WALES. 21: May 1803 "Dear Mr. Robson You never come to See Your Country Friends, though I think every Spring when it renews other Matters renews our Hopes. At present indeed whatever Friends come to see us, are ill off in one Respect We have no Cook. Could you find me a neathanded Smart Woman who would willingly be under a Housekeeper to keep her own Kitchen clean &c ? " I do not want a fine Lady, nor would such a one come to Wales without a Great Salary larger than the King : gives his Lieutenants of our Men of War that defend us against Buonaparte and his 400,000 men. " I should think some Girl who has been Kitchen under the profess'd Men Cooks might suit me Maid nicely . . . NAPOLEON AND THE 42 our Housekeeper sees to the Desserts, 2 Mr Smith Your Neighbour to Articles in his for a Cook. . . the Perfumer for Way, but forgot to mention Will you let him know f It . some my Distress will be done very kindly indeed. " the way was never sent, & now do Annual Registers out since the year 1800? That is my latest, and we are here very hungry for I wish to be told likewise Intelligence and Amusement. what Publications attract Notice, and how the World stands towards the new War. We have a strange Antagonist it must be confess'd, and his Conduct wholly new so far as I tell The Perfumery by me are there no have been conversant in Historic Annals: but if Buonaparte shews more Sincerity than Discretion our King certainly shews Europe a true Model of Dignity temper'd with Moderation There is a wide Door^/ open for Peace. " I have not seen Mr. Robson yet, but We are expecting the Bishop down now very soon. Mr. Piozzi is so much and so often confined by Gout tis a great drawback on his comforts, but nobody can look better, or enjoy better General Health. Let me have a long Letter, & say how : you escaped the " It Influenza. bore exceedingly hard on Dear Sir " Your old friend " and Faithful Ser vt " H. L. P. me any Books let them go to May hew Warehouse Broad Street Carnaby Market They have Things coming down hither and yours might "If you send and Ince's : be sent with them." 1 * Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. INVASION OF ENGLAND 43 Invasion scares were very frequent at places on the Eastbourne was almost deserted during the south coast. month of August owing in templated landing rumour that the French conA barrack was that neighbourhood. to a hastily constructed on the beach capable of containing ten thousand men, and another was built near Pevensey Bay, but on a much The corn larger scale. were ordered to be set on fire crops in the district should the enemy effect a landing, and houses were to be subject to the ment deemed same treat- Tickets would be given to the owners and farmers which, on being returned to the if necessary. Government, would secure It was at incurred. their possessors against any very time that Charles the letter from St. Anne's Hill, Fox wrote following James Chertsey, to his brother, Lieutenant-General Fox, in losses this Ireland, giving his views as to the probability of parte's crossing the Channel " "CHERTSEY, August My " 8th, 1803. dear Brother, am very much obliged to you for your letter of think as you do all will be quiet for some time. Disaffected will probably wait until they hear of some- the 2nd. The Bona- : I I thing being attempted here by the French, and whether that will ever happen is very uncertain. I am very glad like your L L* so well, I fancy his general disposition with regard to Ireland will be right. I do not think highly of Lord Redesdale's 1 understanding in any way, but believe him to be an honest and good sort of man. It may be d you right to tell I wrote last, to the Irish 1 London, where I have been since say some blame is to be imputed Government, for not having been more ready you that in many People Baron Redesdale (1748-1830); Lord Chancellor of Ireland, 1802-6. NAPOLEON AND THE 44 for the insurrection of least some to Dublin. 1 of it till it which supposed they had at is it hours' notice from the country people flocking Your letter says positively Ld happened, but did the L* ? you knew nothing if he did not was some remissness in gaining intelligence? if he did, why did he not communicate it to you, in order that the there not military might be ready in time ? Upon looking over your see your expression is you knew nothing about letter I Saturday Morning, but perhaps you did hear something before the event happened and the military were preparing as fast as they could. Guess is that the Government My knew nothing of the matter, and may be, from many false alarms they had had before, did not pay attention to the rumours of a rising of any kind. Nothing has been said of the thing in this view in the H. of Com 8 but if in conversation one were able to explain how it happened , that the Surprise should have been so complete, it would not be amiss. I am very happy indeed to hear Mrs. F. was not much alarmed, for I was very much so for her, as her Nerves seem to be but weak. I had no doubt of Lady Lou and Ly Sarah bearing paragraph about the Duke I do not like your hope our cousin has not been getting himself into any scrape. We have just begun our harvest here, as some suppose for Bonaparte, but I am as stout as a Lyon. I st I believe he will not try, next that if he does he will be destroyed or at least driven back it of well, L r . but I 1 The insurrection planned by Robert Emmet (1778-1803), the central On June 23rd, 1803, idea being to seize the Castle and arsenals of Dublin. Emmet, accompanied by some eighty followers, a mere handful of the large number of men he had expected to come to his aid, marched on the capital, and in the melee which ensued Lord Kilwarden, the Chief Justice, his nephew, and Colonel Brown were killed. Russell at Belfast, and Quigley at Kildare, also attempted to stir up strife on the same day, but their efforts were but partial and failed. Emmet escaped to the Wicklow mountains, but he was afterwards captured, tried, and hanged at Newgate, with several His abortive plot has been aptly termed "the Irish of his accomplices. No-rising of 1803." INVASION OF ENGLAND 45 and lastly that even if he does land, he will frighten more than hurt us, though the arming of the People goes on much slower than it should do, and I think they have at Sea, by their alterations. At all events an an enemy's country, without any communication army with their own or any force at Sea, is in my judgment in a very bad situation. I fear the D. of Y. will be very much displeased at my motion for a military council, but I am sure some such thing is necessary. spoiled the plan in "Yours "ST. ANNE'S HILL, Monday {August " I send you back Urquhart's my own I papers. affecy C Fnv Sth, 1803]. letter, know no more of which I found him than you among do. "ADDRESS: RT. HONBLE. GENERAL Fox, "ROYAL HOSPITAL, KILMAINHAM, DUBLIN." not proposed to enter fully into every detail of the various laws passed for the security of the British Isles, It is but to give a general outline of the more important of them. As Major-General Sir J. F. Maurice has so pithily put it " : The scheme of home defence, at the time when war began again, was based on the notion of our attempting in England what Wellington carried out in Portugal. The idea was to ' drive the country,' as it was called, that is endeavour to leave the enemy without means of This was afterwards abandoned for the subsistence." 1 to say, to simple but all-sufficient reason that it was impracticable England was far too well stocked with everything likely ; to be of service to an measure being taken. passed enemy to admit of so The Act known as 38 Geo. in anticipation of the invasion of 1798, 1 The Diary of Sir John Moore, Vol. II, p. 70. drastic a Ill, c. 27, was but a NAPOLEON AND THE 46 temporary measure, and on the signing of the definitive Treaty of Amiens, the majority of volunteers and armed The Government, howassociations had been disbanded. 1 Bill to allow a certain introduced ever, corps to remain on the old footing,