en, as a guard to their bat horses. "The following number of men on the mentioned duties of the regiment, will several after- never exceed INVASION OF ENGLAND Infantry Non-com. colour-men Bat horse guard Bread carriage guard Heavy baggage Regimental carriages Allowed bat men Camp Men Cavalry Non-com. Men 22 28 13 12 14 13 08 50 6 2 10 I 6 14 14 14 o 53 28 " Each regiment of infantry will receive twenty pickaxes, twenty spades, twenty shovels, forty bill-hooks, ten axes, amounting in weight to about four hundred pounds. These be carried in the cart allotted for that and that cart will at all times, and in all march at the head of the regiment. tools will purpose ; situations, " Each regiment of cavalry will receive eight pick-axes, eight spades, eight shovels, sixteen bill-hooks, and eight axes. These tools will be carried on horseback, and on a horse with hampers allotted for that purpose, and will at all times march at the head of the regiment. These tools are meant to be ready at all times for making the openings so necessary in this embarrassed country, consequently [they] should be kept in the front of each regiment or column. Spare appointments and arms of each kind must of course remain with the heavy baggage. "The battalion guns will always march at the head of the regiment, whichever flank leads. waggons and of the column. carts The will The ammunition immediately follow the troops place of march of the artillery of the park and carriages will be specified in the order of march. " It is to be wished, that at all times each soldier be provided with four days' bread in his haversack, and four days' more carried in the regimental carriages. When this is delivered out, those carriages, under the guard of a NAPOLEON AND THE 54 Serjeant and 4 men per battalion, and a corporal and 2 men per regiment of cavalry, will be sent to the bakery to be again loaded. "Each infantry soldier will always carry 60 rounds. Each horseman his cartouch box full. The cavalry will always carry two days' corn if it can be got, and hay according to circumstances." l Further Acts for the defence of the country were brought before Parliament and passed in such rapid succession that they tended to overlap and create confusion, but the matter was one of extreme urgency to a country not steeped in militarism, and possessing relatively only a small standing army. Immediately after the rupture of the Peace of Amiens the militia was called out. Following that came the General Defence Act, the Army of Reserve " the boldest military measure that any British MinBill, ister had ever ventured to propose," 2 the Levy en masse Act, and others. for raising In explaining his views on the scheme citizens, Mr. Charles Yorke, bands of armed the Secretary -at -War, boldly stated that Government was not satisfied with the defence of the country. The First Consul's forces, which he erroneously computed at the same figure as the new Army of Reserve, "might come more or less disunited/' he suggested, " more or less in full vigour of health or in sickness, more or less provided with the means of able operation as soon as they should This country should be, therefore, prepared to meet land. their attacks. It should have its first and second line : it should have legion upon legion ready to meet and to repulse the invasion. 1 2 We must not, when so menaced, Anti- Gallican, Vol. IV, pp. 187-90. The Great War with France, p. 1 70, by Lieut. -General Bunbury. INVASION OF ENGLAND 55 look to ordinary means, nor even to the effect of a ballot. The King must needs resort to his prerogative of compelling all his subjects to take arms." The Minister appealed of history, "to the example of the " and The conduct of our the Tudors." Plantagenets ancestors, in those illustrious times, had defeated every to the precedent Would we again defeat such we must have recourse to similar means." 1 efforts, Both Pitt and Fox supported the Bill, the latter having been absent from the House for some weeks owing to effort of foreign enemies. disagreement with the policy of the Administration. This is the first measure/' he confessed, " which I could, consistently with my own opinion, come down to support, his " being a measure for the defence of the country." He did not look to "the regular army, but the mass of the country; acting, not in single regiments, but as a great mass of armed citizens, fighting for the them in life." He of their preservation country and their families, and everything that added that he regarded the is dear to militia and army of reserve "in the same light as the regular army and I cannot but believe, on that account, that this the ; measure the best calculated for the defence of the kingdom, and to defeat the daring efforts of an invading army." is Pitt expressed his surprise and concern that the measure had not been brought forward sooner. On the 24th July the Army of Reserve Act became law, but in the early days of August it was slightly modified. Men were to be levied by ballot, after the manner of the militia, 40,000 in Great Britain and 10,000 in Ireland, those between 1 8 and 40 years being liable to serve for five years. Parishes could be exempted, however, which furnished a 1 National Defence in Practice, p. 14, by Toulmin Smith. NAPOLEON AND THE 56 large number of ordinary for a man volunteers. Two ways were to escape should he be chosen open and not wish to by supplying a substitute, or paying a fine of 20 and submitting to a new ballot, in which case, of course, he serve : ran the risk of again being drawn. The Defence Act,1 which enabled the King " to accept the voluntary services of His Majesty's loyal subjects for the defence of the United Kingdom," was based on the methods of Mr. Clavell, referred to in the first chapter, 2 returns being made of all able-bodied males of from and capable of using arms. The month saw the following passing of the Levy en masse Act (43 Geo. Ill, c. 96), a much more vigorous measure, 15 to 60 years of age, calling for a census of youths 55, who were divided into 1. All men of the age and men between 17 and four classes, thus : of 17 and under 30, unmarried, or having no child living under the age of 10. 2. All men of the age of 30 and under the age of unmarried, or having no child living under the age 50, of 10. 3. 30, men All who of the age of 17 and under the age of who have not more are or have been married, and than two children living under the age of 10 years. 4. All men not included in the foregoing classes. In order to menaced make it as difficult as possible to escape this conscription, those giving a mulcted to the extent of false return were and 50 for attempting to bribe the official, usually a constable, charged with obtaining the necessary information. All persons drawn out and embodied were liable to be sent to any part of Great Britain, 1 and " 20, after the defeat 43 Geo. Ill, c. 55. and expulsion of the enemy 2 See ante, Vol. I, p. 27. INVASION OF ENGLAND 57 from our realm, or suppression of any rebellion or inwere entitled to an additional surrection," all volunteers sum of one guinea. In the event of death while on active service, the widow and children of the deceased were entitled to relief similar to that granted to those of the militia. His Majesty was authorized to direct parishes to provide, at their own expense, the necessary implements of warfare for the male inhabitants, to be kept in the parish church or other suitable building under the custodianship of a churchwarden or other parochial officer. If neces" sary, the men were to be trained and exercised two hours at least every Sunday, either before or after divine service, some other convenient day in the week, in Engon any convenient day in the week to be appointed, in Scotland, between the twenty-fifth day of March and the twenty-fifth day of December in every or on land, or and cause public notice of such times and places of exercise and training to be given in the churches and chapels of the respective parishes during divine service, and be affixed on the doors of such churches and year, chapels, and in the market-places, or other conspicuous places ; and it their in Deputy-lieutenants order and direct that such shall also respective men shall convenient and be lawful for the subdivisions, to be exercised on any other additional day or days in the week, so as to interfere as little as may be with their occupations." If necessary, men were to be drilled three or more days a week, but the total drilling was not to exceed twenty days. constable was charged to attend these meetings, for which the A service he was paid annum out of the poor rate. Neglect of duty, unless through illness, led to a fine $ per NAPOLEON AND THE 58 of i os. a day, which was double the amount forfeited by an absent volunteer, although the fine for neglecting to attend on any three successive days was 405. Badly behaved members of a corps surrendered 53. for each were sent to gaol " for any time not exceeding one week." If from conscientious scruples a volunteer offence, or to objected fulfilling his military obligations on the Sabbath, he was put through his paces on a week-day. If wished, out -pensioners of Chelsea and Kilmainham hospitals were allowed to drill the men, their remuneration " being fixed at a sum not exceeding 2s. 6d. per day," also derived from the poor rate. In this way many old veterans earned a few extra shillings, and "fought their " battles o'er again on the village green after the exercises were over, to the admiration of the younger sons of Mars. The Lieutenants and Deputy-lieutenants were, of course, in actual command of the men in their respective counties, and had the appointing of officers of the various companies. As it was not always practicable for a tiny village or hamlet to raise for this its contingency by own corps, provision allowing parishes to was made combine for this purpose. If at the end of twelve months a volunteer showed himself proficient in the use of arms, a certificate was granted securing him from further attendance at drills, but he was to hold himself enemy. When as regards in on active service pay and readiness to resist the officers and men ranked discipline with the regular army. While the Levy en masse Act was certainly more and straightforward than several of its pre- business-like decessors, it had one disadvantage in that if the of volunteers enrolled amounted to more than was number deemed INVASION OF ENGLAND " necessary, 59 not being less than three-fourths of men enof the first class/' 1 the Crown was at rolled for service " suspend the operation in the districts of such Volunteer Corps of the Act under consideration." This liberty to much inconvenience and annoyance, caused so August 1 1803, a circular was issued from 8th, that on Downing Street to the effect that His Majesty had determined " not to authorise at the present any additional Volunteer Corps in any County where the number of those corps, including amount of effective members of the yeomanry, shall exceed the six times the militia, inclusive of the supple- mentary quota." Thus, having worked up the enthusiasm of the nation to fever heat, cold water was poured upon further patriotic There was much wailing and gnashing of teeth on the part of the 280,000 men who had offered themselves as volunteers resolutions passed at meetings held all over efforts. ; the country began to pour into ministerial letter-boxes; and Addington's feeble hold on the people was by no means strengthened. The accompanying petition is a fair example of the kind of communication those in charge of z the internal defence of the kingdom continually received : " My " Lord, The Magistrates and Deputy Lieutenants acting for the County of Anglesea, deeply impressed with a sense of the common danger at this momentous crisis, and conceiving that the general safety of the British Empire depends on the relative security of all its comp