uns and baggage. five sailors and fifty-five Their soldiers. complement was These pinnaces cost full between 8000 and 9000 francs each. Many caiques of even more frail construction than a pinnace were also built, but subsequently abandoned. The command an exceedingly arduous post, was given to Admiral Eustache Bruix, and it is not surprising that the exacting nature of the work made such of the flotilla, inroads on a constitution never too robust, that he died before he had completed his difficult task. Born in 1759, he was perhaps the most brilliant sailor of the Revolutionary period, and was known chiefly for a dash and audacity which would certainly have carried him far but for his early death at forty-five. His first experience of actual warfare was during the American War of Independence, when he served on board the Fox, a frigate attached to one of the French squadrons sent to assist the rebellious colonists, and rose to the grade of ensign. As commander of the he devoted some time to making charts of St. Pivert, Domingo, and became a member of the Academy of The year 1791 found Bruix cruising in the and the next saw him sailing to the Windward Channel, Islands on the frigate Semillante. Some years of unMarine. due to popular suspicion of his and it was not till Truguet became nobiliary principles, Minister of Marine that he once more hoisted his pennant employment followed, on the Eole, and soon after joined Villaret-Joyeuse's NAPOLEON AND THE 6 squadron as Major-General. promoted found to an In course of time he was the position of Rear-Admiral, and outlet for his remarkable energies lastly at the 1 Ministry of Marine. His most notable exploit followed. Massena was besieged at Genoa and needed relief. Bruix hurried to Brest, where the French fleet was blockaded by the British, seized the opportunity offered by a gale to latter, revictualled Genoa, rallied the Spanish elude the fleet on his way home, and returned with This was a daring coup de main, though borne greater fruit had the Admiral sailed Genoa and wonders relieved Bonaparte, it into Brest. it would have for Egypt from whose army was doing in those distant climes. Admiral Denis Decres, Minister of Marine, was a man of greater resource than his colleague, and possessed an astounding capacity for hard work as well as a thorough grasp of details. His life is one long record of achievement, bravery, and intense application. Born in 1761, Decres first distinguished himself as a youth of nineteen by fixing a tow-line to the dismantled vessel under the enemy's promoted him fire. Le Glorieux This deed saved the ship, and After taking part in the capture of the English ship Argo in 1783, he was charged with a series of official secret missions for the space of three years, one being to discover the presence of lakes of bitumen in Trinidad. command to ensign. In 1792, as major of the division under the of M. de St. Felix in the Indian seas, he boarded a French merchant vessel that had been captured by the Mahrattas and brought it back in triumph to the fleet. On his return to France he found that he had been deprived of his grade as a noble, and went into the country in 1 See ante, Vol. I, p. 139. INVASION OF ENGLAND 7 till 1795. Under Admiral Brueys he served in the Mediterranean, and had a very sharp brush with the retirement galleys of Malta. At the battle of the Nile he was in the rear-guard and sustained for three hours a murderous fire from the enemy, and managed to reach Malta in the Here he was entrusted with the command frigate Diane. of the outposts. After seventeen months of repeated assaults the French were besieged in the city of Valetta, and Decres was ordered to leave for France in the Guillaume sick. with one thousand Tell, He had hardly set sail men and two hundred before the Lion and Foudroyant, and the frigate Penelope brought For eight hours he fought with stern and relentless courage. Covered with wounds, Decres finally surrendered to his antagonists, who could not refrain from two British him sail-of-the-line, into action. paying him an official tribute of praise. On his return to France the First Consul presented him with a sword of honour, and in 1801 made him Minister of Marine, a post he occupied during the whole course of the Empire. He aroused envy and criticism, but the work he did had great and lasting value. In 1801 the French navy totalled thirty-nine battleships and were empty and resources first Emperor's sail-of-the-line thirty-five nil. At abdication in 1814 he and fifty-five frigates, frigates the left ; arsenals time of the behind him 103 an astounding result and a further proof, if such were needed, that Napoleon had made no mistake in his choice of Minister of Marine. 1 The First Consul constantly sent for Bruix and Decres, and together they discussed the pros and cons of the organization. Bonaparte strengthened various weak points, and not infrequently abandoned schemes he had elaborated 1 Based on Hoefer's Nouvelle Biographie Generate. NAPOLEON AND THE 8 months, and this with the same nonchalance as a child flings away a toy he has grown tired of, and forthwith for drew up an new plan entirely he had decided was a By to take the place of the one failure. a decree dated March nth, 1803 that is, three days after King George Ill's message to Parliament the First Consul had already provided for the con- hundred struction of several all bourg, Dunkirk and Cher- craft at of which were to be kept at the former port It was not until a month later that he on completion. decided to make Boulogne the chief place of concentration, and he subsequently estimated that between 2200 and 2300 boats would be required for his purpose. The scheme now propounded detailed account. Two so far-reaching as to warrant a national flotillas, complete in every is were to be established at Dunkirk and Cherbourg. That at the former port was to be of 100 sloops and detail, " 320 gunboats, and artillery." fully equipped with rigging, anchors, masts, The Cherbourg be got ready simultaneously, was flotilla, much although it was to smaller in numerical and eighty gunboats Orders were also given for strength, consisting of twenty sloops similarly equipped and armed. a supply of material " sufficient to construct, arm, and rig 100 sloops and 500 gunboats." All existing craft were to be inspected forthwith, and if their condition warranted repair instructions were to be issued " effect, but he will only proceed to by Bruix to that do this when some of the newly constructed gunboats or sloops are ready to replace those ordered to be repaired." Thirty gunboats and fifteen sloops, after having been overhauled and placed " in the best possible order," were to be sent to Dunkirk, and sheds for one hundred sloops INVASION OF ENGLAND 9 five hundred gunboats were to be put up on the north bank of the Mardick Canal. In his usual business-like way the First Consul saw that the sheds would be ready and much sooner than the boats, and they were therefore to be when each vessel arrived at erected as needed, so that Dunkirk could be placed under cover without delay. In twenty other ports of the Channel seventeen new sloops and fifty-eight gunboats were required by the 24th September, it 1803. These had to and placed there disarmed were to be treated be sent to Dunkirk in sheds. also, and All the vessels of the way, the rigging, masts, and artillery being placed in stores from which they were not allowed to be taken without the express permission flotilla of Decres. The were to be given orders " in this for the building of the vessels without publicity, and by six different persons at intervals of seven days each." The above is an epitome of The ninth is to the arrete. the first eight articles of the effect that before the end of July, 1803, seventeen additional sloops and fifty-eight gunboats were to be put on the stocks at twenty different Channel at ports, Dunkirk at and assembled and placed in dry dock 22nd March, 1804. Article "Before the 1st January, 1804, the same latest before the 10 states that, orders will be given in a similar way for the construction in different ports of the same number of vessels of the same kind, to be assembled and disarmed at Dunkirk." The date for completion is the 23rd September, 1804. Before the i Qth July, 1804, the provisions of the ninth article were to be repeated ; consequently in the 1805 seventy-five new first three months of would be ready at Dunkirk. that before the end of January, 1805, Article 12 stipulates the same instructions vessels would be given for the fifth time, to NAPOLEON AND THE io be carried out due course eighty-five added and months of 1805. Thus in sloops and 290 gunboats would be in the first six to the force, making, with thirty bateaux canonniers ordered to be repaired, a grand total of 420 boats for the flotilla to be assembled at Dunkirk. The fleet to be built at Cherbourg, consisting of I fifteen chaloupes canonnieres oo vessels, following year. was to be started in 1805 an d finished the 1 Reports soon dispelled any hope the First Consul may have entertained of making extensive use of the flotillas Out of 193 gunboats still existing at Dunkirk, Cherbourg, and St. Malo, all, with the exception of twenty-seven, were "in the worst possible state," and of 1798 and 1801. ten of these were engaged in carrying stones for the repair of the breakwater at Cherbourg. twenty-eight sloops, six at Havre, two There were also at Cherbourg, four and six more or less unsatisfactory condition, and all unarmed. Those not actually in a derelict state were ordered to be overhauled at once, but there was a lamentable dearth of naval stores Brest was practi- at Brest, seven at Lorient, three at Rochefort, at Dunkirk, in a ; cally without number of Honfleur anything of the kind. Inquiry into the fishing boats at Havre, Dieppe, Fecamp, and were some 650 of these were requi- elicited the information that there of from one to eight tons. sitioned for the flotilla. Many On the 2$th March, 1803, Bonaparte issued his first orders regarding the defence of the coast from Calais to Ostend. He particularly requested that General Berthier would see that everything was carried out " without exciting alarm." Not until the middle of April did he order 1 Desbriere gives the arrett in full. See Vol. Ill, pp. 22-5. u INVASION OF ENGLAND the general armament of "all the coasts of France." In a despatch to Decres of the 3ist March he states that his most pressing requirements for the flotilla are oars and masts, and requests the Minister of Marine to inquire wood can be had for this purpose from the pine forest of Rouvray, near Rouen. He again enjoins secrecy, mentions the necessity for economy, and requests information about the fishing boats at Dunkirk likely to be of use if Special attention was to be given to the defences of Cherbourg, and the islands of Re, Oleron, for the invasion. Aix, and Yeu, the latter to be provided with a garrison At the same time three battalions were of 400 men. appointed to occupy Elba. No concentration of troops is 1 apparent, but on the 25th April Berthier is instructed to tell General Montrichard to send the whole of the 95th half-brigade for the defence of the isle of Walcheren, on account of the appearance of Sir Sidney Smith's squadron off the coast of Holland. Four battalions were also to be sent to Breda, as well as three squadrons of hussars and dragoons respectively. The invasion idea at once became exceedingly popular, for the lust of conquest was rampant in France. The consummation of so grand a project as the humbling of the island "over the way" appealed to all. As Madame De Remusat remarks " : The idea of a con- 2 quest of England fired the general imagination." Twenty millions of francs were loaned by bankers to the Govern- ment for the purpose of buying materials for what the " walnut shells." It was aptly termed satirists English eminently necessary 