able, for the King refused to succour the crews of the French battle-ships which had taken refuge at Corufia, and Cadiz. Augereau was appointed Commander-in-Chief, and under him were men whose names were to resound Cyr, Andre"ossy, Dumas, Donzelot, and the incompetent Grouchy. "Recruiting is the first great business of the State," Bonaparte had told through Europe, including Berthier. the army St. Conscription accordingly was put into force, and raised to 480,000 men. For the purpose of recruit- ing the standard height was reduced to five feet two inches. In course of time several of the camps were advanced to Boulogne, which thus became the nursery of the Grand Army, destined to fight its way from Austerlitz to Waterloo. No 50,000 veterans and recruits were eventu2 ally quartered at or near the point of concentration, commanded by the most able of the First Consul's lieutenants, fewer than 1 and Victor. Before long Boulogne, of now the head-quarters the expedition, was a hive of Huts of mud and sticks, ranged in long military activity. Soult, Ney, Davoust, streets named after a great victory or 1 2 an eminent general, Desbri&e, Vol. Ill, p. 85. Lettres intdites de Talleyrand^ p. 121. INVASION OF ENGLAND 19 were built for the troops now rapidly gathering. The houses of private citizens were bought and altered in such a way make them as to ammunition, and firearms, boats. Many suitable for storing provisions, they could be placed in the of the smaller residences were converted until whose duty it was to look after the business of the army and its equipment. The men who showed themselves quick and energetic speedily rose until they became head of the particular department in which they worked. Almost as much attention was beinto offices for the clerks stowed on the commercial as on the military side of the scheme, for Bonaparte knew that a good administration at home meant additional fighting weight in the field. on the 2Oth June, Decres, who had just arrived at Boulogne, tells him that "the greatest There are 2400 workmen and 400 activity reigns here. horses. Within three months all the quays will be finished." Writing to his Chief He adds that the breakwater and sluice, which had been ordered in 1801, must be proceeded with at once, and not allowed to wait until the building and uniting of the was nearer accomplishment. " Without this breakwater it seems impossible to me to get three hundred boats flotilla out of the port in a single tide." l He has to record a " regrettable incident," one of many that happened from time to time while boats of the flotilla were passing from one of the ports of concencanonnieres were feeling their way to Dunthey were met by British cruisers and forced to their place of construction to tration. kirk, Two when run aground. The boats were captured and afterwards The crews refloated, the captains being made prisoners. managed to escape. 1 Desbrire, Vol. Ill, p. 93. NAPOLEON AND THE 20 Although the First Consul decided that Boulogne was the best port for his purposes, it was certainly never intended by nature to shelter a fleet. But the man who had forced the passage of the Alps was not to be defeated by a sluggish stream. At low tide boats drawing only a few of water were feet left high and dry on the mud. Obviously the only way out of the difficulty was to excavate to a sufficient depth, and form an artificial basin by means of a dam, closed in the middle by a sluice. Even then sufficient anchorage could not be provided for the vast number of boats which had to be collected before the word was given to set sail. Soldiers laid down their arms, picked up shovels, and became navvies in the intervals betweensometimes working up to their waists in mire. Extra wages were paid to all those engaged in this arduous drills, When Bonaparte was not present personally, he exacted a strict account of the movements of those in labour. command. Messengers brought him the latest intelligence from Boulogne, and if things did not move with the rapidity he was able to secure himself, Bruix heard of it in no measured terms. Writing to Decres on the 29th May, the First Consul suggests that models of a flat boat costing not more than from 4000 to 5000 francs, arme.d with a howitzer at the bow and stern, and capable of carrying 100 men, should be made. "A great number of private people and corpora- tions wishing to build these boats at their it would be as well to have models, and at Paris." 1 Upon Cambace"res, 2 own expense, also to build one 3 Lebrun, and Talleyrand devolved the delicate duty of finding individuals sufficiently 1 2 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 83. Second Consul. 3 Third Consul. INVASION OF ENGLAND 21 wealthy and unselfish to provide the necessary funds for the building of a boat for the flotilla, "which would be named Towards the end of June, Chaptal, Minister of the Interior, took the bull by the horns and after them." boldly addressed a letter to the chief magistrate of all " In the departments of the Republic, begging for funds kind of the the present position of France and with : enemies with which we have to combat, the bravery of the French would remain fruitless on the shores of the the means of reaching their enemy were not them by numerous vessels. It is to the con- if ocean, furnished struction of vessels, therefore, that all our efforts ought to be directed ; commerce, agriculture, and industry more speedy the execution. A suffer the less, the bottomed boat of the kind first 1 will will flat- cost 30,000 francs 2 (1200); one of the second, from 18,000 to 20,000 francs and one of the third, 3 from 4000 to 6000 francs. Two feet ; of water are sufficient to carry a flat-bottomed boat not armed there are few towns, therefore, that cannot execute ; an enterprise of this nature. These boats will be dis- tinguished by the names of the towns and the departments The Government will which have constructed them. accept, with satisfaction, anything from a ship-of-the-line down If each department, and to the smallest transport. each large town, by a general and rapid movement, put vessels on the stocks, the French army will soon go and dictate laws to the British Government, and establish the repose of Europe and the liberty and prosperity of commerce, on the only basis by which their duration can be ensured." 4 1 2 Gun-sloops. Gunboats. 3 Pinnaces, which really cost from 8000 to 9000 francs. 4 Annual Register, 1803, Chronicle, p. 399. NAPOLEON AND THE 22 Their loyalty being appealed to in such a direct manner, meetings were held all over the country, and millions of francs were promptly voted for the purpose of adding to armament which was destined at once to be the the and the largest ever collected for invasion In 1760-3 plete failure known to history! in 1798 the public had subscribed most com- and again liberally for a similar 1 purpose, a proof of their willingness to spend money for First came the offensive as well as defensive measures. department of the Loiret with an offer to build a frigate of 30 guns to cost 300,000 francs, and Deux-Sevres, The de1'Oise, and 1'Ourthe contributed similar sums. partment of La Seine-Inferieure undertook to construct a ship -of -the -line of 74 guns, and Seine-et-Marne a three-decker. Towns and Cotes -du-Nord presented a 30 -gun ship. vied with one another tp furnish cities Lyons made herself responsible for a battleship of 100 guns, Bordeaux for one of 84 guns, and Even the gifts of departMarseilles for one of 74 guns. the finest vessel. ments did not prevent the principal commercial centres from opening their coffers to enrich the war-chests of the Republic. Gironde raised 1,600,000 francs for the purpose of building vessels as outlined in M. ChaptaPs communication, and Seine-et-Oise gave 200,000 francs, while the Italian Republic subscribed no less than 5,000,000 francs to be expended on two ships, one to be called the President and the other the Italian Republic. Many other depart- ments and towns besides those mentioned followed suit. France showed a splendid example of practical patriotism. Subscription lists were opened, and while the rich man donated his thousands of francs, the peasant added his 1 Mahan's Influence of Sea Power, p. 76. See also ante, Vol. I, p. 82. INVASION OF ENGLAND 23 Business houses presented money or material, while various regiments of the army gave up one day's pay in order to subscribe. The corps de mite in the form of a few sous. la garde raised 2O,ooo| francs towards a sloop. The gifts reached a total of some 30,000,000 francs. 1 The Capital voted a ship of 120 guns, and the Senate did the same, in this way setting a good example to the rest of the nation. " All kinds of contributions were " thankfully received by the Government. Thus the department of Cote d'Or made responsible for 100 pieces of ordnance, another department furnished sailcloth, followed by a third with an itself offering of provisions for the burdened taxpayer cared little Government were still further added levied in this money way The already overthat his obligations to the flotilla. to, for was not the to be spent in subjugating the richest country in the world ? The average citoyen regarded England under the a few months make every the increased taxes as an investment. rule of la belle Frenchman France would rich, in prosperous, and amply repay the present sacrifice. About this of having time the First Consul conceived the notion some of the flotilla constructed on the Seine at which boasted two shipbuilding yards. On the were accordingly given for the Paris, ist June. 1803, instructions laying down of twenty sloops, twenty the same number of pinnaces sixty in ; every gunboats, all, and complete in These were to be ready by the 23rd Septhey will be the finest ornaments of the fete detail. tember " ; of the foundation of the Republic." 2 In the same desthe for erecting First a scheme Consul outlines patch shipbuilding yards outside the gates of Paris. 1 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 112. 2 He Ibid., Vol. Ill, p. 85. thinks NAPOLEON AND THE 24 that a foundry for casting cannon ought to be established, and proposes to use the Pare de Vincennes, or the Champ de Mars for the At another of the purpose of putting the place the masts, flotilla sails, could be made. artillery together. and rigging for the boats His purpose was to so arrange every branch scheme that avoided. To banks of the of industry connected with the leakage of time and money would be all this end also rivers in the Seine-et-Oise, the Oise, all workmen employed on the departments of the Seine, the and Seine-et-Marne, were to be works at Paris. The First Consul again urges upon his subordinates the necessity for ceaseless energy: "as from now to the 2$rd September there is transferred to the only the necessary time for an operation of this kind, essential to bring the greatest activity possible to bear it is on the matter. These sixty vessels should take the names of the sixty principal quartiers of Paris." It may be inferred from this that he wished to enlist the active sympathies of the worthy citizens of the Ville Lumiere. Forfait was to choose in the ports along the coast from Antwerp to Jean-de-Luz the three hundred best merchant vessels capable of holding from ninety to one hundred men and St. above, but they must not draw more than seven feet of water. They were to take their armament on board immediately, and then proceed to Boulogne. were to be bought in the Mediterranean. Fifty more At the end of June Bonaparte set out on a tour of inspection, accompanied by Josephine, Duroc, and other important personages, and visited Calais, Dunkirk, Ostend, He at once realized the importance of the and Antwerp. latter as a naval base a cost of by having a dockyard constructed at 2,000,000, capable of holding a large number = ! / 5 mm INVASION OF ENGLAND 25 Almost of vessels, including twenty-five sail-of-the-line. wherever he broke his journey he was the