 and their members were, under certain exempt from either serving in the militia or conditions, having to provide a substitute. The laws governing the militia for both England and Scotland were also amended, and the total number fixed at 40,963 men and 7950 re2 spectively. The former Act was certain respects to afterwards altered in meet the more urgent needs of the Ill, c. 121, and the privileges men- moment by 43 Geo. tioned were withdrawn from on the returns required men not marked as efficient to be sent to Government. On the last day of March, 1803, Lord Hobart 3 addressed a letter to the Lord Lieutenant of each county accompanied " by a plan which was to be considered more with a reference to a permanent system than a situation of emergency the application of it in point of extent to depend upon and be regulated by circumstances." ; The following are the official regulations for the AND ALLOWANCE FOR CONTINGENT EXPENSES, "PAY, CLOATHING, "For Corps of Volunteer Infantry during War. " I. Every corps claiming pay, to engage to serve in the military district in which it is situated. " II. man, Every to take non-commissioned officer, and private the oath of allegiance and fidelity to his officer, Majesty. 1 3 42 Geo. Ill, c. 66. Baron Hobart (1760-1816) ; 2 Clode, Vol. I, p. 287. Secretary for War and the Colonies, 1801-4. INVASION OF ENGLAND 47 "III. To a battalion of ten companies, or a corps of from two hundred and fifty to five hundred private men and upwards, constant pay to be allowed for an adjutant and serjeant-major and to a corps of from one hundred and fifty to two hundred and fifty private men, constant ; Per diem, Adjutant 6s. serjeant-major. is. and 6d. 2s. 6d. Serjeant-major per day in addition. " IV. company claiming pay, to consist of not less pay a for A fifty, nor more than one hundred private men, with one captain, one lieutenant, one ensign, (two lieutenants to the flank companies, and to such as consist of eighty private than men,) together with three Serjeants (including the drill Serjeant,) two corporals, and two drummers per company. "V. Serjeants receiving constant daily pay, and all drummers receiving pay, either at a daily or weekly rate, to be attested, and to be subjected to military law. " VI. One officer in each company, not above the degree of captain, if taken from the half-pay, having served at least eighteen months on full pay as a commissioned officer in the regulars, marines, embodied militia, fencibles, or East India Company's service, to have the constant pay of his volunteer commission,during his service in a volunteer corps; or one officer in each company, not above the degree of not on half-pay, but having formerly served two years on full pay as a commissioned officer, in any of the above-mentioned military services, to have constant pay equal to the half-pay of his volunteer commission during his service in a volunteer corps the other captains, captain, if : lieutenants, and ensigns, to have pay for the like number of days as the men ; but no officer to receive pay for two commissions Captain (taken from half-pay) 93. 5d. Lieu2d Lieutenant or Ensign 45. Sd. Captain Lieutenant 2s. 3jd. 2d Lieu(not on half-pay) 43. lojd. tenant or Ensign is. 9jd. tenant 55. 8d. "VII. half-pay When is a charge of constant full pay, or constant for an officer, his former services must be made NAPOLEON AND THE 48 particularly stated in the pay-list wherein the charge is first made. "VIII. When not called out on actual service, constant pay to be allowed for one Serjeant and one drummer per company, at the same rates as in the disembodied militia the pay of the drummer to be distributed at the discretion of the commandant pay (as disembodied militia) for the and of the rest drummers, and for the corporals Serjeants and private men to be allowed for two days in the week, from 25th February to 24th October, and for one day in the week, from 25th October to 24th February, both inclusive, being eighty-five days' pay per annum, but for effectives only present under arms, on each respective day. Pay may, however, be charged for persons absent by sickness for a period not exceeding three months, on the commanding ; ; officer's certificates Corporals "IX. 2d. is. to that effect. Drummers and Serjeants Privates is. is. 6d. any part thereof, shall be called or the charge of constant riot of disturbance, upon be at the rates before for such must be made to services, pay a certificate be and from his by supported specified, If a corps, or in cases Majesty's lieutenant, or the sheriff of the county ; but if called out in case of actual invasion, the corps is to be paid and disciplined in all respects as the regular infantry, the artillery companies excepted, which are then to be paid as the royal artillery. " X. The whole to be clothed in red, with the exception of the corps of artillery, which may have blue cloathing, and rifle corps, which may have green with black ALLOWANCE FOR CLOATHING. s. Serjeant, each Corporal, do. Drummer, do. Man, do. Private d. 339 112 o 236 I ip o belts. INVASION OF ENGLAND and 49 end of three years the serjeantand one and one drummer per company, major, serjeant, to have cloathing annually. "XL An annual allowance to be made for each comto be repeated at the of ; expence heretofore defrayed by government, Twenty-five pounds for of an additional allowwith men, companies fifty private ance of five pounds for every ten private men beyond that number. "XII. Field-officers and adjutants to be allowed the tax for one horse each. "XIII. The pay-lists to be made up quarterly, viz. From the 25th December to the 24th March following from 25th March to 24th June; from 25th June to 24th September; and from 25th September to 24th December, and to be transmitted by post, under cover, addressed to the pany in lieu every contingent viz. : ; secretary at war. "XIV. A general agent will be immediately appointed to act for the whole of the volunteer by government and the necessary instructions on corps receiving pay that head will be circulated from the War-Office to the ; respective commandants. "All mounted soldiers that are lightly armed and acmay be considered as light coutred for desultory service Thus horse. light dragoons, fencibles, cavalry, mounted be considered as light horse while light infantry consists of an active strong body of men, selected from the aggregate of battalion companies, and made up of the most promising recruits that are occasion- yeomanry, &c. may ; ally enlisted. "Home Service. "The carriages allowed, if circumstances will permit, to be with each regiment of infantry, of ten companies of eighty each, are two bread waggons each to carry four ; II. E NAPOLEON AND THE 50 hundred men, or 2400 Ib. one two battalion guns one waggon one cart with entrenching tools one two sutler's carts or more be for sick as may waggon permitted. "The carriages allowed to be with each regiment of cavalry, of eight troops of seventy-five each, are two days' bread ammunition four for ditto ; ; ; ; ; ; ; bread waggons ; each to carry four days' bread for four hundred men, or 2400 Ib. one ammunition cart two sutler's carts two forge carts one carriage for sick. Regiments on lower establishments to be allowed carriages ; ; ; ; in proportion to their effective strength. "The carriages of the general officers near the column of the army will generals, one chaise and one chaise and one cart. two carts The be allowed with or : for lieutenant- for major-generals, carriages at head quarters be exceedingly limited by the Commander-in-Chief. All other private carriages whatever will be considered as belonging to the heavy baggage of the army, will be ordered to a great distance in the rear and if at any time found near the army, will be ordered to be destroyed by will ; the baggage-master general. All other baggage therefore, whether tents, blankets, or necessaries for the officers, is to be carried on bat horses. " The number may have in of horses which officers of each rank common But as by situations in the field, it is is specified impossible in the service that regulation. may occur, to calculate for the carriage or use of large tents, or other conveniences, it is recommended to each officer to manner make his arrangements for moving in the lightest possible. "The personal baggage of each officer must be contained in a small portmanteau. One small tent is all that the officers of each company or troop can calculate upon. To carry the above, blankets, provisions, three or four days' corn, and other useful necessary articles, two bat horses per troop or company will be sufficient. INVASION OF ENGLAND " 51 The bat horses of each battalion of infantry of ten companies, at eighty each, will therefore be, For the tents and poles of the regiment For the company officers ... Field officers and staff ... ... ... 20 20 ... 4 Surgeon's chest ... i ... ... ... "Regiments on a lower establishment, allowed bat horses in proportion. The bat horses of each regiment of cavalry of eight troops, of seventy-five each, will therefore be, and " For the tents and poles of the regiment For the troop officers ... ... Field officers and staff ... ... ... 16 ... 16 ... 4 Entrenching tools ... ... ... I Surgeon's chest ... ... ... i in proportion for regiments on a lower establishment. infantry will carry tents at the rate of sixteen The men per The tent, and the cavalry twelve men per tent. necessary outlying guards and detachments, and the readiness of hutting and other cover that a woody country The troops affords, will make this a sufficient number. and company bat horses can therefore easily carry the and pins. The blankets of the cavalry will be divided and carried under the men's saddles. The blankets of the infantry must be divided and carried tents, poles, by the men, unless some other provision is in future made. "The picket ropes of the cavalry will be carried on bat horses. Half the usual number of pickets must be considered sufficient, and be carried by the men. The camp kettles will be carried by the men, if horses are not provided for that purpose. "A reduction and critical inspection of what every NAPOLEON AND THE 52 baggage should be made in and time, every thing superfluous destined to be lodged with the heavy baggage, which will remain in the present soldier should carry as his quarters of the regiment, till otherwise ordered to be disposed of. Two shirts, a pair of shoes and stockings, combs, brushes (and a horseman what is necessary for the care of his horse) " is all The heavy baggage a soldier ought to carry. of the army, including everything not mentioned above, under a proper escort, will be ordered to some place of security. Each regiment of infantry will be allowed to send a serjeant and six men, and each regiment of cavalry one corporal and four dismounted men as a guard such men must be the least fit for marching duties, but should be fully adequate to the service, and by no means convalescents recovering from indisposition. Proper officers will be ordered to command the whole, and no part of this baggage will be allowed to join the army but by public orders. If at any time carriages not allowed in this regulation should be found in the army, they will be conducted to head-quarters, and there destroyed, or : confiscated to the advantage of those who make the discovery. " Two battalion guns with one waggon will be attached to each regiment of infantry. Should it be necessary, one bat horse will be allowed for the artillery detachment. Such artillery as remains in the park will be limited as to number of guns, carriages, and according to the specification given to the commanding officer of the artillery. The men allowed are two for each company and troop, also two for the surgeon and staff of each regiment. "Each battalion will give a non-commissioned officer each regiment of cavalry will give a and eight men bat ; non-commissioned officer and six m