 recipient of the most fulsome and laudatory addresses. Thus the Prefect Somme concluded his speech in the following bom- of the bastic manner : " Father of thy country, continue through our abundant fields, through our embellished cities, amidst universal joy, but let England thy pacific and triumphant march tremble. Let the English, abandoned to the feebleness and arrogance of their ministers, to the folly and audacity of their orators, contemplate with affright the hero of France, advancing to punish perjury, to impose on the pirates of the sea the yoke of peace, and to proclaim on the ruins " of Albion the commercial independence of France ; ! Bonaparte's love of the theatrical prompted him to allow the Bayeux tapestry, which, as every one knows, deals with the invasion headed by William the Con- whose footsteps the First Consul fondly hoped on tour. 1 It was shown in public queror, in to follow, to be taken places in order to stimulate patriotism in the breasts of Frenchmen, who might well be pardoned for having for- gotten the valorous feats of their forefathers over seven centuries before. The idea was no doubt a sound one in those days, when education in was France as well as in low ebb. At an England, dinner given by the Commissary of Calais three " toasts were drunk To the men who shall execute the for that matter at a very official : vast project of placing French and respective " positions." shall issue the first billets at To and English in their due the barrack-master who Dover." " To of the French troops in St. James's Park." 1 2 Memoirs of Madame De Rtmusat, Vol. St. James's Chronicle, July 5th, 1803. the first 2 I, p. 115. review NAPOLEON AND THE 26 own doings were occasionally reported in London newspapers by eye-witnesses, but more often than not by extracts from continental sheets. Considering that Bonaparte's daily journalism was then in its infancy and that the first John Walter was having a desperate struggle to establish his paper, it must be conceded that The Times kept its readers well informed on French matters, even if its remarks on the First Consul were not always discreet. The following is an example of how the " Thunderer " with the all-absorbing subject of the We read as follows 1803. dealt summer of : " The First Consul reached Calais at five o'clock on Friday afternoon (the ist of July). His entry, as might be expected, was in a grand style of parade. He rode on a small iron grey horse of great beauty. He was preceded by about three hundred Infantry, and about thirty Mamelukes formed a kind of semi-circle about him. Immediately after dinner he went, attended by M. Francy, Commissary of Marine, Mengaud, Commissary of Police, and other Municipal through the Calais gates, to As soon as he and his attendants had passed through the gates, he ordered them to be shut, to prevent their being incommoded by the populace. The execution of this order very much damped the ardour of the Corsican's admirers, who remained entirely silent, although the moment before the whole place resounded with Vive Buonaparte ! The same evening the General went on board the Josephine packet, Captain Lambert, and after examining everything there minutely, he took a short trip upon the water in a boat as far as the pier head to the Battery at the entrance of the harbour, where he himself fired one of the guns afterwards, he visited all the different Forts, and at night slept visit officers, the different batteries erected there. ; atQuillac's Hotel." 1 1 The Times, July 4th, 1803. INVASION OF ENGLAND Madame De Remusat, who was one 27 Madame Bona- of parte's suite, says that the tour "strongly resembled the " progress of a king," but that the enthusiasm cooled down when we got beyond the former boundaries of France. At Ghent especially, popular greeting. to stir up the we detected some coldness in the In vain did the authorities endeavour zeal of the inhabitants but not enthusiastic." On ; they were curious, the other hand, at Antwerp "we were received with a special ceremony," while Madame De Remusat goes into superlatives over their entry into Brussels, which, she declares, stay there " now made several was " magnificent," and their a succession of brilliant fetes." 1 Bonaparte amazing discoveries. The boats which had been constructed under the Directory were undergoing The repair, but no new vessels were yet laid down. harbour works were in a deplorable condition, and even the batteries were neglected. In a peremptory note to Berthier he says "It is very strange that four months after the message of the King of England I have found : the coasts without defence and commerce. without protection for This cannot be called administering the ar- 2 He fired tillery and answering the needs of the State." a gun, but found that its range was not what he had been led to believe. Shot was weighed and ascertained be wanting. Only by continually going into such details could Bonaparte ensure anything like efficiency. to While on the one hand men were relieved of their posts, on the other enterprise was rewarded. The energy of the First Consul being apparently inexhaustible, subordinates were obliged to follow his example whenever and wherever 1 Memoirs of Madame De Remusat Vol. , July ;th, 1803. I, pp. 121-7. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 118. NAPOLEON AND THE 28 He he showed himself. head and An hated idlers ; he wanted " more less tongue." incident which was duly corroborated at the time by an English lady residing at Boulogne shows at once the rigid discipline enforced by Bonaparte and his extreme The famous Immortality now a irritability. attacked seven vessels of the frigate, flotilla, fine British with the result that within half an hour of the beginning of the engagement two of them were forced to run aground. At first few of the shots from the land batteries found a billet, but men working the guns ascertained the correct range, a much more effective fire was kept up, and the Immortaliti was obliged to stand off. The First Consul immediately made his way to one of the batteries to as soon as the " He became they were so badly served. uttered a few sacr/s then examined the pointing ascertain why fidgety and elevation of the guns ; but upon further inquiry, finding cartridges were only filled with the quantity of powder used in saluting, his rage and indignation became uncontrollable he flew towards the unhappy that the upbraided him with his ignorance and neglect, and, with his own hands tearing the epaulettes from his shoulders, told him he was no longer an officer in the subaltern French army." 1 Bonaparte was not Still gave a new fillip satisfied. On to the undertaking 1400 additional boats the 5th July he by ordering over for the flotilla, including fifty 300 sloops, and 300 gunboats. pra mes, The prames were to be ones already at Dunkirk, and were to carry twelve 24-pounders, and sixty horses, with their similar to riders. 1 the These boats, as well as the sloops and gunboats, Crawford's Reminiscences of a Naval Officer, Vol. I, p. 112. INVASION OF ENGLAND were to be sloops fitted was to with lee-boards. The 29 rigging of the be simplified, and the sides heightened, although on no account was the working of the which they carried for use in case of a calm, to be Ten bomb-ketches were fered with. to oars, inter- be equipped at Boulogne, armed with two mortars each, or with one only should it be found more convenient. Seven hundred pinnaces were also provided for in this and one thousand small fishing boats of new programme, all sizes suitable purposes of transport were to be bought. Boulogne, Ambleteuse, and Etaples were to be the head -quarters of for the the flotilla and ; to these ports all the boats either bought or newly constructed were to be sent. 1 All might have been well had the shipbuilders been able to turn out the boats which had been ordered previous to the issue of the new programme. Only one chaloupe was building at Rouen and six at Havre, and the First Consul notes " it seems to me that this with apparent disgust that number could be made five times over, and that thirty chaloupes could be built at He sees Havre and six at Rouen." 2 no reason why boats should not be laid down and some of the smaller ports. In a later at Honfleur communication he says that he has "given orders at Dunkirk, Havre, Cherbourg, Brest, and Rochefort to hurry the repairs of twenty sloops which are there and the despatch of the same to Boulogne, where four gunboats and six chaloupes a Vespagnole are united. Out of one hundred gunboats at Dunkirk, sixty-five only seem fit to be repaired. These are to proceed to Boulogne, in addition to those at Cherbourg and thirty-three at St. Malo, fifteen of the latter being ready to start at once, but the remainder 1 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, pp. 87-9. 2 Ibid., p. 84. NAPOLEON AND THE 30 are still less in the vessels hands of the shipwrights. are also at of dilapidation that thing with them." The and it it Malo, but St. is Thirteen worth- such a state in well-nigh hopeless to do any- x physical side of was impossible man works slower than the mental, to keep pace with the orders which the First Consul issued with bewildering frequency. They tended to overlap, causing no end of confusion and waste of money, but a definite plan for the arrangement of the various sections was decided upon in July. The Dutch wing, with head-quarters at Flushing, was to consist of 100 sloops and 200 gunboats the Right wing, at Ostend ; and Nieuport, of 300 boats the Centre, at Dunkirk, Gravelines, and Calais, of at least 300 boats and the Left, ; ; at Wissant, Ambleteuse, Boulogne, and Staples, of 30 prames, 300 sloops, 300 gunboats, 50 caiques, 700 pinnaces, and 1000 transports. These 3000 odd vessels provided 2 transport for 100,000 men, 3000 horses, and 125 field guns. After a journey lasting six weeks Bonaparte returned to St. Cloud, but he had been grossly misled as to the real At Boulogne he had been shown a flotilla. state of the number of boats built for a previous project, but were now unseaworthy, and if which not actually rotten, certainly beyond repair. Appearances apparently deceived him for once, and relying upon the fidelity of those whose interests should have precluded them from stooping to deceit, he believed that the boats were really in the good condition they were made out to be. Decres, writing to Admiral Bruix, evidently under Bonaparte's orders, for the despatch dated from St. Cloud, the 22nd August, gives further is alterations in "the composition of the flotilla such as 1 Desbri^re, Vol. Ill, p. 86. * Ibid., p. 140. it INVASION OF ENGLAND me seems to to be definitely settled." 31 There were now to be twelve divisions of sloops, each division composed of three sections or battalions of nine boats each, making a total of 324. Each sloop was to be accompanied by a large and a small pinnace. Sixteen divisions of twenty-seven gunboats and large pinnaces added 864 vessels to the fleet, which was also to include 112 armed fishing boats, and 60 bateaux de grand echantillon ; in all over 2000 boats. " " Everything leads me to think," Decres concludes, that all these boats will be ready by the 22nd November, as is still a large number being built, and almost all of these are nearly half ready." * The real state of affairs, as disclosed by Forfait, was there this : there were either ready or under construction in five arrondissements, 43 prames, 241 sloops, 392 gunboats, and 393 pinnaces 1069 boats instead of the 2008 required. It was absolutely impossible to make up the deficit in the three months which remained before Bonaparte required ; that the whole organization should be complete. 2 Even these facts were put before him the First Consul apparently failed to recognize that his officers and the ship- when builders were not keeping faith with him, Forfait's figures in a letter to and misquoted Decres a week later. "It only reports 250 sloops," he says, "in