to push things forward in every way. If serious trouble were to occur on the Continent all would 1 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 17. 2 Memoirs of Madame De Rdmusat, Vol. I, p. 114. NAPOLEON AND THE 12 We have to be abandoned. shall soon see that these apprehensions were well grounded. The arsenals of France vomited fire and smoke day and night almost every port rang with the blows of the shipwright's hammer, and ; ammunition was turned out in thousands of tons. The dogs of war were about to be loosed from their leash, and the ceaseless activity everywhere apparent proclaimed the fact that it would be a struggle to the death. The greatest Land Power sought upon the domains of the time, and to wrench from to encroach mightiest Sea Power of all her grasp the sceptre of Father Neptune. The world had never before witnessed a more desperate duel than that waged by Napoleon on the one hand and Nelson on the other. For a time Bonaparte certainly cherished a vague hope that he might be able to cross the Channel without the assistance of a strong covering fleet, but he had taken the precaution to recall the various squadrons which had been sent to relieve the French colonies, including St. Domingo. With the exception of several vessels which had taken refuge in Spanish ports, his commands were Some of the smaller ships, howfaithfully carried out. ever, were intercepted by captains acting under Cornand either captured or sent to the bottom. Un- wallis, fortunately for the First Consul, no sooner had his squadrons entered the various harbours than a British or detachment took up its position outside and fleet To elude these ships and their lynx-eyed commanders was a complex problem which securely blockaded them. Chance helped Napoleon summer to solve. frequently happens that the Channel is comparatively calm for days together, and in winter dense In it INVASION OF ENGLAND 13 1 Bonaparte calculated to effect his gigantic movement under one of these conditions, when the sails of the British ships would be lying dank against fogs often envelop it. As time went on and he realized how remote the masts. underwent a change, chances of success would his ideas his be unless he gained at least a temporary command of the Channel, either by a skilful manoeuvre on the part of his " naval army," or by sheer force of numbers and superiority of seamanship. As over two thousand vessels were to concentrate and start at approximately the same time, it be seen that the mere task of sending them off required will a most perfect organization. If for some reason neither of these contingencies came to pass, a third chance offered itself. Just as there are periods when the Channel is almost as smooth as a mill-pond, so are there times of boisterous weather. The enemy's obliged to stand out to sea, fleet would then be and thus leave the coasts unguarded so far as large vessels were concerned. Immediately the storm subsided would be the psychological moment 1 to strike, and thus anticipate the return of the "A fog is a very good cloak to the approach of from six to sixty rowing which may be sent to perform some coup de main at no great distance, by surprise or to cover the approach of an unsuspected enemy to some shore, battery, town, or castle ; but to say that in an enterprise, in which probably 200,000 men may be employed, on an extent of coast of more than 200 miles, from Flushing to Cherbourg, in which everything ought to be seen, everything clear, and everything well regulated ; on the success of which, much will depend on the conjunction, compression, and co-operation of the different flotillas of which the hostile force may be composed ; to say, I again repeat, that a fog is favourable to such an enterprise, is the height of folly as well might it be averred, that a man can see better how to read in the pitchy darkboats, ; ; Fogs are favourable to some enterprises; to this they must be fatal." "A Letter published in The Courier of Thursday the Sixteenth of February, 1804" (signed "Nearchus"), published in pamphet form. London Printed by C. and R. Baldwin, New ness of the night than in the noontide glare of day. : Bridge Street. NAPOLEON AND THE 14 British forces. Needless to say, this proposition was fraught with more danger than the other combinations. Never was the First Consul more enthusiastic than after his rupture with England in the spring of 1803, when he Great interests definitely decided to "leap the ditch." were at stake, and he clearly perceived that although a mere twenty to thirty miles separated him and his army from the cliffs of Dover, they were not ordinary miles, nor were they to be traversed in an ordinary way. A narrow a selfstrip of sea kept him from the throne of the world ; reliant and patriotic people barred universal influence, him from achieving and the welding of nations into one cosmopolitan dominion, with himself as its dictator. Having founded a new order of things in Europe, and substituted progress for precedent, his imagination conjured up a yet more brilliant picture. He saw himself not only Emperor of the French, but Emperor of the World. Having pacified a continent, he would the destinies of two hemispheres. The become arbiter of had already taken a preliminary step efficient navy by foisting his unwelcome attentions upon Holland and Spain. The bad state of the French maritime forces was no doubt a valid First Consul towards obtaining a more excuse for stringent measures from Bonaparte's point of view, but the burden fell on shoulders that were already bowed beneath a multitude of cares. Napoleonic diplomacy never succeeded in making friends of conquered nations, which is, or ought to be, the real aim of statesmanship. Its guiding spirit was too keen a political bargain-hunter, and he overreached himself as a natural consequence. Having promptly put the screw on the Batavian Republic, Bonaparte next turned to Spain. He did not for an INVASION OF ENGLAND 15 instant minimize the difficulties of the struggle before him. To quote his own summing-up with the utmost exertions, united to ours, we if of the situation: their " It will be means and resources shall succeed in conquering those Isolated in our efforts, reduced each tyrants of the sea. of us to his own peculiar powers, we will prove unequal to the conflict, we Ambassador in will Semonville, the French a private note to Talleyrand, 1 be beaten." in Holland, the Dutch regarded their conquerors, and He hopes that " in the his remarks were not encouraging. pointed out how power in Holland, the First Consul not take advantage of this to cover our new departments with a line of fortified places." He wisely suggests exercise of our absolute will that the Dutch should military and naval direct the finances as well as the forces of the country, and sounds a note of alarm by warning Talleyrand that the Republic cannot support a numerous army on its territory, and that there is is already a debt of 33,000,000 florins. The Ambassador not wholly pessimistic, however, for he believes that the country can be of use to France, provided it is not reduced The army is with Bonaparte, indeed to a state of despair. "will take it as an honour to belong to France," and General Daendels will certainly support the First Consul's As to the navy, Semonville has reason to believe cause. it not so strong, " a portion of the officers adopt the sentiments entertained by the army. Moreover, the Catholics, who form a quarter of the population, can also be looked upon for support." that, although its sympathy is In June, 1803, a definitive treaty between Holland and France was signed, and duly ratified the following month. The Batavian Republic was made 1 Dated 6th April, 1803. responsible for the Desbri^re, Vol. Ill, pp. 46-8. NAPOLEON AND THE 16 upkeep of 18,000 French soldiers and 16,000 of its own troops, but what was even more important at the time, it undertook to supply or build by December, 1803, at latest, an equal number of frigates, fully five vessels-of-the-line, armed and equipped, together with a number sufficient of transports for the embarkation of 25,000 men, including 9000 Dutch, and 2500 horses for the purpose of "a descent on England." 1 One hundred chaloupes canonnieres and 250 flat-bottomed boats armed with from one to four guns and able to carry 36,000 men and 1 500 horses, were also requisitioned. This, it must be admitted, was a poor bargain for Holland. No Shylock ever exacted his pound of flesh with more certainty or less delicacy than BonaFrance on her part was to make an effort to parte. recover for Holland the island of Ceylon should peace be proclaimed, but no separate treaty with England was No Dutch European or to be made by either nation. colonial possessions were to be touched by France. Even before this agreement had been signed the First Consul had turned his attention to the valuable resources of Holland for furnishing material for the flotilla. 2 opportunity was to be taken way The first to purchase everything in the of naval stores, such as wood, rope, and masts, that to offer and to bring them together the country had at Flushing. Nor was was in working order, and the Belgium and on the Rhine utilized. " constructed on the Dutch model were also to be reorganized services of workmen Five vessels " this all, for the arsenal at that port and put in to be built. 1 2 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 67. Bonaparte to the Minister of Marine, Vol. Ill, p. 83. 29th May, 1803. Desbriere, Appiani pinxt. Chatargnier sculpt. PORTRAIT OF NAPOLEON PAINTED BY APPIANI IN 1803 THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE SECOND PERIOD OF THE INVASION PROJECTS INVASION OF ENGLAND 17 was appointed Inspector-General of the flotilla, subordinate only to Decres. The new office was to carry Forfait with it the same rank as an inspector-general in the army, much Everything connected his charge, and under him committees and entailed responsibility. with the boats was in representing each of the six arrondissements maritimes, and consisting of a naval officer, an engineer, and an administrates de la marine^ were to attend to the thousand making of the new armada. The most important duty of each committee was to purchase trading and other boats suited to the special and one details connected with the requirements for which they were needed. The vessels would be divided into three classes of 350 each three hundred from the ports of the North Sea, the Channel, and the Atlantic, and the remaining fifty from Mediterranean The committees were also to find the most suitable new craft, and see that all contracts made with private firms were kept, under penalty of a time limit. The individual commissioners were liable to ports. places for the building of be employed flotilla in the port would be where the scattered units of the collected, and the naval members had to armament, equipment, and movement. Charts purpose were to be prepared and given to the direct their for this captains. order. Everything was to be done decently and in The commissioners had their tasks before the 3Oth May, strict injunctions to 1803. begin Fifty sloops, ninety gunboats, and 170 pinnaces were ordered to be ready by the 23rd December, but on the 3Oth May Bonaparte writes to Decres that they must be finished three months earlier, it and adds can be done, in his it 1 II. C curt, imperious manner, must be done." 1 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 84. " Since He communicates NAPOLEON AND THE i8 with Forfait in the same asked for is the strain, there will be no lack of the hours are precious " and says that the 310 boats " minimum required. money are two " ; Try to get double and " Remember that ; characteristic phrases used in this note. 1 The commanding genius of this comprehensive plan issued instructions for the formation of camps at Utrecht, Ghent, St. Omer, Compiegne, and St. Malo, in addition to the one at Bayonne, which was ready to march into Spain should necessity arise. Such an event seemed very prob