, I can see no impossibility in the supposition of two armies not in much detail, landing in different places of from twenty to thirty thousand men each, of their beating, severally, the troops immediately opposed to them, and that having nothing seen to encounter but volunteers and yeomanry, and other troops of this description, in the midst of all the confusion and panick which would then advance to London, or wherever prevail, that they might else they pleased. What the further consequences might be, one has no pleasure in attempting to trace ; but I who would show me some should be obliged to anyone distinct limits to them. The persons to do this are, I am sure, not those who talk so glibly of crushing and overwhelming, and smothering, and I know not what all, without the least idea how any of these things are to be done, while the persons attacking us know how these things are, sometimes at least, not done, by the example of the numerous countries which they have over-run in spite of all such threatened opposition. from London, as soon as I have settled some necessary business, and see whether I can be of any use in Norfolk, though I do not perceive I shall go from here, that is how, with the aid of only a single regiment of militia (all our present force) we are to stop a body of even one thousand men, or how for the present, anything at all can be done, when there is not as yet a provision for even the All the firelocks which they have as yet got immediately about here have been sent down at my delivery of arms. own expense. parte may, for My chief hopes are, I confess, that some reason Bona- or another, not come, or at INVASION OF ENGLAND least for some time such hope on confess I but what foundation there ; I do not know. The importance at this rate. me 121 Forgive for is my any running of the subject would cer- had anything new to say." 1 Writing to Wilberforce, who seems to have been a sort of political father confessor, Lord Chatham, Pitt's elder brother and at that time Master-General of the Ordnance, tainly warrant if I takes up the cudgels in his own defence. He states that after the restoration of peace he endeavoured to replenish " the supply of the old Tower musquet, which our troops used to have," and of an improved pattern, but admits that owing to the "naked state of our arsenals" an inferior weapon had to be manufactured. No sooner had he " " " nearly surmounted this difficulty than this sudden and unprecedented demand for arms took place." But he is forced to admit a more humiliating fact. " Had it not improvement, and intending gradually still been with a view to to dispose of those of inferior quality through the of the India medium Company, we should not have been, previous any manufacture the war breaking out, carrying on to of arms, our arsenals being overflowing, calculating on the extended scale the Department had ever been called upon to furnish. ordinary I calls have, however, in consequence of the extraof the present crisis, determined to use every effort to meet it, and directions have been given to the Board of Ordnance to revert to the same arm as was made last war, and to manufacture to the utmost possible extent the musquets of the India pattern. You will easily believe I must have felt some reluctance in being obliged to take 1 this step after all the pains Private Papers of William VVilberforce., pp. 134-6. from Beaconsfield, August i8th, 1^03. The I letter is have dated NAPOLEON AND THE 122 bestowed, but hope I I have judged for the best. have I great satisfaction in thinking that the stock of arms we possess will enable us in the first instance to arm to a considerable extent perhaps all that is really useful, and as arms come in, which with the exertions of the manufacturers they will do quickly, and with the aid of what we expect from abroad, the remainder will be provided before We have already one hundred thousand pikes, and long. can increase them rapidly, but in general there is an I should like much to talk indisposition to take them. over with you not only the subject of arms, but the whole question of volunteering, which I contemplate as a most serious one. . . ." 1 One cannot of fate help speculating what would have been the England had the disciplined and well-armed soldiers of Bonaparte's legions landed in the autumn of 1803, when one- third of her volunteers were armed with obsolete weapons. The following hitherto unpublished letter from Lord Brougham to Charles Henry Parry, No. 27 Circus, Bath, while it minimizes this danger, supplements the evidence against Addington's Government : " <'EDIN., Septr. 8, 1803. Dear Parry, " I am the worst correspondent in the world, othershould have answer' d your kind letter, which made me happy by its appearance in course of post. The dullness of the life I am now leading, is admirably fitted to wise I me for another and a better world beyond the Tweed. The alarm of Invasion was extreme for a few weeks and tended to enliven this stupid place but it is prepare 1 from Private Papers of William Wilbcrforce t pp. 137-8. St. James' Square, September 2nd, 1803. The letter is dated INVASION OF ENGLAND 123 now quickly dispelling itself (how it should be otherwise driven away, I know not) so that Bonaparte will probably come when we are less prepared to receive him. The students here, as you may probably have heard, formed an association for a corps of sharpshooters, but like all the other plans of this description here, it has been received as coldly as possible, that is to say, no answer has been given, and there can be no doubt that a by Government is meant, unless the plans of the wisest of Ministers should be again changed. " You desire me to say what is become of Galiffe. You have probably heard before now that he has settled in London with a partner in trade. I saw a good deal more of him after you left Edin., for as ill luck would have it, he refusal was taken so very ill on board the smack that he was He wrote me a line to this effect and I (with Eyre) went out to see him. He recovered soon and arrived in London safe and well. forced to have himself sent ashore at Dunbar. He is in hearted my opinion a most excellent extremely clever very little fellow imprudent (I goodshould imagine) and, what Mrs. F. would call very interesting. Mr. Brudenell after taking a Highland wife and returning the most amusing creature in the world left Edin. with old Fletch [torn] (not in the marriage line) and he returned a few days ago, but I have not seen him. Mrs. F. remained here, but has been so much occupied with her little girl's illness that I have only seen her twice since your departure. Both times she asked particularly about you. " Of Percy, I Manchester, as have heard lately. you are He at Bath. is a volunteer at My plans are as uncertain as they were last time I saw you. I shall endeavour to keep the copy of Fuseli, but Jeffrey having been out of town constantly since I got your's, the chance is he I learn may have dq^troy'd the MS. with the rest. You have read No. IV of course and may easily guess the authors. NAPOLEON AND THE 124 Moore's Anacreon is by Eyre and does him in my opinion very great honor. It is in many respects reckoned capital and has had the KvSos of being taken for Jeffrey's more than once. " Pray write me can find time to a soon and speedy make " letter, and believe it, Very as long as you me sincerely your's, "H. BROUGHAM." 1 Circulars giving very explicit directions were issued by commanders of some of the corps as to the behaviour the of their men when enemy, but of the many examined by the present writers none deals more face to face with the thoroughly with every phase of the subject than that by Lieutenant-Colonel Hope, of the 1st Regiment issued of Royal Edinburgh Volunteers, of which the following an extract is : "EDINBURGH, i8/ October, 1803. In the view of the regiment being called into active service, the Lieutenant-Colonel thinks it necessary ". . . . to issue orders applicable to that event. As it is the first of a officer to attend to the health of duty commanding those under his charge, the Lieutenant-Colonel assures the regiment that he will not permit a single gentleman, officer or private, to march out of Edinburgh on service unless he is provided with a flannel under-dress. This is at all times the best clothing for a soldier but for a winter campaign, in such a climate as this, and with constitutions not ; accustomed to hardships, it is essentially necessary, and on no account will be dispensed with. " In this regiment the officers cannot be permitted to have any indulgencies or accommodation beyond the 1 Henry Peter, Lord Brougham (1770-1868), Lord Chancellor of England. Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. INVASION OF ENGLAND They must privates. 125 march with their whole which the Lieutenant-Colonel therefore baggage on their backs, of shall set the example, never mounting his horse but for the purpose of command. In camp or quarters no distinction of tents or rooms will be permitted. . officer "Every and . . private, therefore, will immediately provide himself with the following articles, and keep them constantly packed up in the neatest and most compact manner One worsted or flannel night-cap to tie under the : two flannel under-waistcoats, with sleeves, or at least half sleeves to the elbows, and to come well down over the loins two pair of flannel drawers two pair of thick chin ; ; ; worsted stockings or ankle socks two pair of strong shoes one of these to be on the body, and the other in the knapsack one pair of worsted gloves ; one good warm blanket one blanket easily covers two men, and to be so used if the cold requires it. Comb, brush, and implements for shaving, but as few as possible a piece of pipeclay, and blacking ball, a few needles, and worsted, and thread. Each gentleman may also bring with him his ordinary great-coat, as the blanket renders it less necessary to have ; ; ; proper watch-coats. " Each officer and private will also provide himself, and to the alarm post (on the north side of St. Andrew repair unless Square, differently ordered), with 4j Ib. of biscuit or bread. Haversacks, canteens, camp-kettles, and billhooks are to be issued to the regiment from the King's stores. Knapsacks will be furnished out of the regimental fund. " On halting for the day or night, the Lieutenant-Colonel earnestly recommends that no gentleman shall lie down to sleep while warm, or with wet feet, but however fatigued, always to take time to cool gradually, and to put on his dry In case of being very wet, it is stockings and shoes. highly useful to rub the body and limbs with spirits, warm if possible, taking at the same time a mouthful, and not more inwardly, diluted with warm water, if to be had. NAPOLEON AND THE 126 Gentlemen money will see the propriety of with them. One not taking too much or two guineas at most, partly in silver. " As to the field, the Lieutenant-Colonel has little to say. Much will be expected by their country from such a regiment. The Lieutenant-Colonel has no anxiety on the If the regiment subject, except from its impetuosity. were acting singly against another small body, this might produce no bad effect. But acting in combination with other troops, perhaps in the centre of a line or chain of posts, all movements must be relative, and by rushing forward prematurely the line may be broken, other regiments or posts exposed to be taken in flank, and the whole plans of the commander disconcerted by the necessity of sup- porting a body which has improperly rushed forward, or reinforcing the post it has quitted. The regiment, therefore, will recollect that true courage consists as much in suffering as in acting as much, or more, in coolly facing danger, as in furiously rushing on it. There is little probability that the general will allow young and high-spirited troops The regiment may be to be long galled by distant fire. assur