ers, General Sebastiani 2 .... must direct the practice of the four batteries every day, selecting some spot on the sea and there placing a white mark or other signal. If he himself is not sufficiently familiar with artillery practice he must take with him a captain residing at Havre, who will accompany him everywhere, and so the gunners will be well instructed. The 300 1 Dated September 3Oth, 1803. Correspondance de Napoleon, Letter No. 7144, Vol. IX, p. 10. 2 Sebastiani had previously been sent by Napoleon to inspect the condition See ante, Vol. I, p. 277. of Turkey and the Levant. INVASION OF ENGLAND 81 whom he has with him can also serve the horse They can rapidly be converted into horse artillery men, and General Sebastiani should see to He should take care this formation of the new service. that there are infantry cartridges for all the batteries, and that the hussars are always supplied with these so as to be able to protect with their carbines any forts that are disabled. He must remind the Hussars that a French soldier ought to be at one and the same time a horseman, a footsoldier, and an artilleryman ; that he must be competent to do everything. General Sebastiani should repair with hussars artillery batteries. haste to the points that the all enemy would courage the inhabitants, and to use The all attack, to en- needed means." 1 and winds, endeavourmeans to calculate how long it would take the First Consul studied the tides ing by this flotilla to reach England, but he failed to arrive at a definite conclusion, the time varying from six hours to three days. He did not blind himself to the fact that the experiment was a risky one, and he discerned that if the enemy's vessels were to come up with his own, a conflict in which many lives and ships would be lost must certainly ensue. The soldiers were therefore taught to board a ship in case hand-to-hand conflict such a contingency should occur. would decide the issue, provided the little boats were not A swept clear by British broadsides. Admiral Decres drew the attention of Bonaparte to this matter, but his chief had already made allowance for such an eventuality. " By sacrificing one hundred gunboats and ten thousand men," said the naval officer, "it is not impossible that we may squadron and close the 1 repel the assault of the Straits." Dated September 28th, 1803. 7137, Vol. IX, p. II. -G 5. " One loses that enemy's number Correspondance de Napoleon, Letter No. NAPOLEON AND THE 82 every day," the First Consul replied in his cold, "And what battle ever promised the calculating way. in battle results which a landing in England authorizes us to hope for?" Anxious to win the approval of his exacting master, Bruix published the following proclamation at Boulogne. It bears the date July 3Oth, 1803, and is written in the style much by Bonaparte himself. The Admiral calculated upon rousing the dormant powers of the laggards by his dramatic epistle, as well as encouraging those who had already entered heart and soul into the project so affected : " First Consul, when he signified to me your destihonoured me with the title of your Admiral. He nation, sends me to you to conduct your exertions in the career of What man, glory, which his genius has prepared for you. The at this distinguished proof of the confidence of a hero, would doubt of would not be raised above himself? Who own powers ? Brave seamen the choice of Bonaparte renders me worthy to march at your head. Your zeal and your bravery are pledges to me that we shall fulfil his his ! Already you hear the cry of vengeance. expectations. Our towns and districts bring in their voluntary gifts in Frenchmen are ready to march to punish a Government which is an enemy of the peace of the multitudes. All world and especially an enemy to the glory and welfare of our country. You are first called to this great enter; prise. To you your country satisfying her just vengeance. first commits the care of Be assured that you will Recollect that the victory your noble destiny. begins in your docks, and in your navy and military Let those ships which insolently cruise along exercises. our shores, at sight of your labours, return and say to their Government, A fearful day is preparing the winds of the fulfil ' ; sea, again favourable to the Conqueror of Egypt, may in a /. . oCZaSydJ ;v./'"'-r/,,,v' THE PROBABLE END OF THE INVASION ACCORDING TO GILLRAY. JULY 26, 1803 INVASION OF ENGLAND 83 few hours bring him to our coasts, and with him the innumerable companions of his glory.' To hasten this result, it is my first duty to establish a severe discipline in Subordination will regulate your to the activity of your labours. To lose a moment Sailors, we are on the scene of action would be criminal cowardice Redouble, therefore, your zeal multiply your services and the nation which opthe national efforts ; flotilla. that can alone add ! ! ; ; presses the seas will be conquered by terror, before it experiences the fate of arms, and sinks beneath the blows of our heroes. BRUIX." In printing the above, under the heading of " Foreign Intelligence," the editor of the European Magazine makes some pertinent comments which must have been He larly pleasing to his subscribers at the time. " The more storm, the particu- says : the First Consul and his agents rage and decisive proof they afford of their impotence. more The Manifesto of Admiral Bruix is, in our mind, a proclamation of British security. While he treats us with a shower of words, our brave seamen are treating him with a shower of balls. His thunders may be as loud, but they are more innocent. The French themselves must feel their degradation, when their Admiral-in-Chief is announced as of ships-of-the-line ; a flotilla, can assure him that he will be more happy in his effort to excite ridicule than to inspire We know not where the First Consul has ever terror. seen the terror of Englishmen. Perhaps at Acre Perhaps at the Nile Perhaps Menou can tell him how they were panic-struck at Alexandria at Cairo Perhaps he has lately heard of it from Boulogne and Dieppe. We can tell him, the only fear that Englishmen experience, is the commanding boats, instead instead of a navy. We ! ! fear that he will not venture out ofport'' 1 * European Magazine, September, 1803, p. 235. NAPOLEON AND THE 84 About this time the First Consul organized a corps of men who wrote and Guides -Interpretes, consisting of 117 spoke the English language. Not a few of them had lived in England, and Irishmen were specially welcome. was conjectured that they would be of the utmost value when the enemy's shore was reached. Shortly afterwards a It marine guard was formed of soldiers who had distinguished themselves in former campaigns. These veterans were to form the crew of the vessel on which Bonaparte would embark. Lannes, 1 the hero of a hundred fights, was to have the honour of first putting foot on English soil. Bonaparte was now wearying of the delays and mistakes which were continually reported to him, and a small chateau in a village called Pont-de-Briques, just outside 2 He wished to have Boulogne, was rented by his orders. a house in which to work and reside whenever possible for him to leave Paris. "The it Little Corporal" was was not unaware of the personal magnetism which he exercised on those about him, and he felt that flying visits to the scene of operations would be highly beneficial to all conThis chateau he made cerned, from conscript to general. his head-quarters, several members of his staff residing Pont-de-Briques was about half a league from Boulogne, and setting out in his carriage or on his horse, he frequently put in an appearance at the port. In the evening with him. he would return, usually accompanied by several men who Jean Lannes, Marshal in 1804, and created Duke of Montebello in 1808. was mortally wounded at Aspern, May 22nd, 1809, and died on the 3ist of that month. 2 This chateau is still in existence, and is used as an orphanage. The main parts of the building, including the privy apartments of the Emperor, have undergone no alterations. Communicated by M. H. Hiance, Town 1 He Archivist of Boulogne. INVASION OF ENGLAND 85 played important parts in the project. When the miniswished to communicate with him personally, ters in Paris they were obliged to make the tedious journey of one hundred and fifty-seven miles between the two places. He also had a wooden hut erected on the Tour d'Odre so that he might have a bird's-eye view of the town. Stand- ing at the door of his abode, he watched the movements of the British ships which guarded the Channel. Whenever the opportunity presented itself, they would fire in the hope of damaging a batch of boats as they stealthily made way to the point of much as they dared, their as concentration, hugging the shore occasionally grounding in their efforts to escape. With the aid of a telescope Bonaparte could discern the white cliffs of Albion, which were in very yet so far." While that squadron appeared on the horizon there was little hope of embarking the troops and horses on board the flotilla and truth "so near and making a start, but if he could only succeed in decoying the most important divisions of the enemy's fleet by making them chase one or more of the French squadrons, the matter might be very different. The time for such a movement was speedily drawing near. No sooner had he taken up his residence on the Tour d'Odre than Admiral Bruix was expected to do the same. A lean-to close to Bonaparte's hut was hastily con- took up his quarters there. Worn structed, out by over-exertion, exposed continually to inclement weather, walking, riding, or driving from one part of the and the camp officer to another, the " Admiral of the Flotilla destined to carry War to England" was wearing himself to death. But the ruler of France required ceaseless vigilance in all associated with him, and so it often happened that the two NAPOLEON AND THE 86 sat poring over As Decres documents and maps from sunset well said, activity, arid himself! "* " The much what an extraordinary example he A tiny house on a bleak cliff is not inviting when winter approached be wondered at that Bruix no to dawn. sets of the best of times, and forts till First Consul requires so little accommodated extent. wooden in felt it is it at not to the loss of ordinary com- Decres and Soult were also residences within a stone's- throw of the others. A number of large guns with long range, and capable of were fixed on the Tour d'Odre. hurling explosive shells, The glass in the windows of the First Consul's baraque was frequently broken, and the shock and noise made by the firing brought blood to the ears of the unfortunate whose duty it was to work these death-dealing which were the heaviest on the coast. The autumn of 1803 na-d set in, and the soldiers were anxious for a start to be made. By constant practice on board the gunboats and pinnaces they had become The " Instructions for the expert sailors and rowers. fellows batteries, Crews of Pinnaces," issued under Bonaparte's auspices, occupied seven printed pages, and dealt exhaustively with His despatches teem with references to his the art. " spent part of last night in making the troops perform night evolutions, a manoeuvre which wellpersonal work. I trained and well-disciplined troops may sometimes employ with advantage against levies en masse" he writes to Cambaceres on the Qth November, i8o3. 2 Mounted on his horse, he frequently rode along the sands point in fair P. weather and foul. " I from point to have passed these three 1 Dated 7th January, 1804. Thiers' Consulate and Empire" Vol. 2 Thiers, Vol. Ill, p. 79 (ed. 1893-4). 573 (ed. 1845). I, INVASION OF ENGLAND 87 days amidst the camp and the port. From the heights of Ambleteuse I have seen the coast of England, as one sees the Calvary from the Tuileries. the houses and the bustle. It is One could distinguish a ditch that shall be The Fi