er maritime districts." 3 The following day the recipient of the above, who knew he often "agreed to disagree" with his friend on political matters, confesses that he is Pitt intimately, although uneasy about equal or 1 2 3 Pitt's common command. " terms," he says, He " does not engage on and his spirit will lead Memoirs of Madame Vigte Lebrun, p. 195. was appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports Pitt Private Papers of William Wilberforce, p. 35. in 1791. NAPOLEON AND THE io8 him to be foremost in the battle ; yet, as it is his proper 1 one can say nothing against it." Nor was Pitt's activity confined to military measures, for the patriotic inhabitants of Deal made him an offer of post, fifty gunboats, which was not despised by the Government when he brought the matter to their attention. Fifty more were forthcoming from other places, and subsequently the number was increased to one hundred and For seventy, stationed between Margate and Hastings. the moment those in authority congratulated themselves on securing a small but valuable addition to the means little cost. Lord Hobart went so far as to communicate with the former Premier as to the privately of defence at probability of his being able to secure further additions, but when Pitt wrote to the Admiralty requesting them to up the second batch of vessels which he had already in fit hand, he was surprised to receive an answer to the effect that there were no carronades to spare, and that other arrangements were being made for the supply of gunboats. In other words, they were about to adopt Chaptal's plan of appealing for these ships to be fully equipped and complete in every respect. At a dinner given by the Elder Brethren of Trinity House, " The every one present enrolled himself as a volunteer. sight," notes Rose 2 in his Diary, " was really an extremely 1 Rose's Diaries, Vol. II, p. 68. 2 The Rt. Hon. George Rose (b. 1744) held several Government positions, which enabled him to follow with keen interest the political events of this He was appointed Keeper of the Records at Westminster in 1772; Secretary to the Board of Taxes, 1776; Secretary to the Treasury, He was in turn M.P. for Launceston (Cornwall), Lymington, and 1782. In Pitt's second ministry Rose became Joint PaymasterChrist Church. General of the Forces and Vice-President of the Board of Trade. On Pitt's death he was appointed Treasurer of the Navy, in which position he continued stirring time. until his decease in 1818. INVASION OF ENGLAND 109 one a number of gallant and exceedingly good old men, who had during the best part of their lives been beating the waves, now coming forward with the zeal and spirit affecting ; of lads, swearing allegiance to the King with a determined purpose to act manfully in his defence, and for the protection of the capital on the river." 1 heart and soul into the preparations and constantly Pitt threw himself made in his district, and inspected his various battalions. to whom he often corresponded, he with Rose, Writing " apologizes for not visiting him at Cuffnells, but I do not drilled go so far from my post, though we have no immediate indication of any intention from certainly like at present to the other side of the water to give us employment. Before we hope to be very well prepared to receive the long nights 2 them, both afloat and ashore." to the flotilla same correspondent, on the south coast which was prepared to do battle with that of the French. a little Writing a few weeks later shows his belief in the Pitt to giving the they think proper to He enemy visit us. thinks it " will contribute not a good reception whenever By the intelligence I collect, and by the orders for extraordinary preparations which are received from London by this post, I am much more inclined than I have ever been hitherto to believe that such an attempt will be made soon. In this situation I am likely to have my time very completely occupied by the my regiment and my district. ... I wish the arrangements for defence were as forward everywhere else as they are in Hythe Bay, under General various concerns of We begin now to have no other fear in that than that the enemy will not give us an opporquarter Moore. 1 Rose's Diaries, Vol. II, p. 64. 2 Walmer Castle, September 8th, 1803. Ibid. t p. 69. NAPOLEON AND THE no tunity of putting our preparations to the proof, and will select some other point which we should not be in reach of 1 in the. first instance." After another short interval Pitt is able to report further a certain hesitancy as to the ultimate issue. He speaks of the " unaccountable negligence and Of his own district he is inactivity" of the Government. " able to say that our state of defence is certainly (comprogress, but there is paratively speaking) very complete, though still, in many respects, very far short of what it ought to have been, and what it there is easily might have been. On the whole, to expect that we shall I think be able very good ground good account of any force that seems likely to reach any part of this coast, and shall be able to prevent to give, a very its we But if, by any accident, penetrating into the interior. were to be overpowered in the first instance, I am by no means satisfied that any adequate force could be col- lected in time to stop the enemy's further progress till they had arrived much nearer the capital than one should like, I have been turning my thoughts a good deal to the object of rendering the volunteer force throughout the country permanently more efficient than it seems likely to be (ex- cept in a few instances) under the present arrangements. " Till within these two days I had persevered in the intention of going to town for the 22d, 2 but the state of . . . the preparations on the opposite side, and the uncertainty may not be made from day to day whether the attempt immediately, makes me unwilling to leave the coast at have, therefore, nearly determined to give up present. the first day but I am still inclined to think attending I ; 1 Margate, October i8th, 1803. 2 The opening of Parliament. Ko^s Diaries, Vol. II, p. 70. WILLIAM PITT AS COLONEL OF THE CINQUE PORTS VOLUNTEER! INVASION OF ENGLAND that it may be right (if I in can find an interval of two or some opportunity before the recess to notice the principal omissions of Government in providing for our defence, and to suggest the measures which seem still necessary towards completing it." l Not until the three days) to take wrong quarter to allow the passage of the He even did he attempt to leave the coast. gave up going to Bath for fear of not being able to assist in the defeat of Bonaparte's army. wind was French A in a flotilla flood of oratory greater than that which submerges the country at the time of a general election followed in the wake of the volunteer movement. Politicians, soldiers, to and bishops vied with each other in their endeavour up the military ardour of their fellow patriots. a thousand platforms and pulpits the gospel of war stir From was extolled. were enrolled, colours. County people convened meetings, men and ladies of quality presented them with a gallant Many little speech is laid to the credit of noble British gentlewomen at this period. The veterans of the army were in great demand as chairmen and At a big meeting held at Leicester on Friday, the ist August, 1803, Lord Moira 2 delivered an animated speech of some length, but full of good points, during the speakers. course of which he said : " There was an hour when I thought danger (but even then danger of a limited nature) very possible it was whilst an erroneous belief appeared to be entertained that ; it was impossible for the enemy to make any landing at under which fallacious security it seemed to me very all, 1 Walmer 2 Earl of Moira Castle, November loth, 1803. Rose's Diaries^ Vol. II, pp. 71-2. Fought in American Civil War Commander-in-Chief in Scotland, 1803; Master of Ordnance, 1806-7; GovernorGeneral of Bengal, 1813-22; defeated Mahrattas, 1817-18; d. 1826. (b. 1754-1826). ; NAPOLEON AND THE ii2 French to throw ashore five or six thousand men, upon some part of the coast not remote from London, and by a forced march to push for the capital, in the hope of being joined by that profligate rabble, which must be found in greater or less number in every debauched metropolis, and which, having no real national attachment, must be ever ready to seize any opportunity for riot or pillage. That danger you perceive exists only on our refusing to believe invasion impracticable, and consequently our being feasible for the unprepared for it; now that we are upon our guard, the hazard is dispelled still, as some attempt will almost certainly be made, it is right to be prepared, not only to meet it, but so to meet it as that the foe shall be crushed before he can have had time to do much mischief. ; " Were Bonaparte (though the supposition is beyond the in of the heart of this country, at possibility realisation) the head of 40,000 men with all the stores, artillery, and should not have a moment's for, I should be confident that, before the end of the month, that army would be an- appendages he could wish, uneasiness as to the result I ; that confidence, however, is built upon the asthe enemy would be judiciously encountered that sumption, but to enable any General so to encounter them, you must nihilated : ; put yourselves into a state of discipline, such as would render you capable of comprehending and fulfilling the orders of your leader. Observe this too, that, although it appears to me impracticable for the enemy ever to have any very serious force united in this country, you must always in war provide against dangers that seem beyond ordinary calculation. ... It is not probable that it would ever be thought requisite to lead you in battalions against the enemy this I mention that the short time you have for discipline may not be unprofitably employed in learning evolutions, which you are not likely to be called upon : to practise in loading, and a the field facility ; a ready habit of priming and of understanding and obeying the INVASION OF ENGLAND 113 orders of your immediate officers, are the points which I deem the most essential for you to attain I should ; imagine that the General under whom you serve would wish to detach you in small bodies, to hang upon the flanks and rear of the enemy, bidding you avail yourselves of every little bank or inequality of ground behind which you would cover yourselves, whilst your shot would do execution at its utmost range in the columns of the enemy, unavoidably obliged to keep in a compact body, instructing you to retire whensoever the enemy should advance in considerable strength against you, and to return to harass them whensoever that detachment fell back to its main body; you must not think this is unworthy of your courage. If the safety of your country demanded the sacrifice of your lives, I should be the last to check the devotion which I know you would deliberately feel but if that necessity did not really exist, it would be absurdity to prefer even a dignified death to the honest ; triumph of consciously participating in the glory of having crushed the invader of your country were I to propose to you a principle for your conduct, it should be that which was held so praiseworthy by the Greeks of old, and which has been thus happily described : : They fought, but not as prodigal of blood, Or thinking death itself was simply good ; But And weal they plac'd their pride, l as that bade, they either liv'd or died." in their country's The Church was militant in thought, word, and deed. The clergy were exempted from bearing arms, but as the Bishop of Chester shows in a letter to a correspondent who asked him " how far it would be expedient for clergy- men to enrol themselves in volunteer associations, at the present crisis," there were 1 many and Anti-Gallican, Vol. varied I, p. 135. ways of helping NAPOLEO