e " had about twenty-eight per cent more sail-of-the-line, about thirty per cent more 4 than frigates, but 600 per cent more of small vessels," the enemy. Bonaparte, always inclined to underrate his Ferrol, Rochefort, 1 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, pp. 36-41. 3 The Cambridge Modern History, Vol. IX, p. 2IO. Essays on Naval Defence, by Vice-Admiral P. H. Colomb, 4 a Ibid., p. 43. p. 132. NAPOLEON AND THE 94 opponent's strength in maritime warfare, and to exaggerate his own, immediately wanted to make use of the navy. As early as August, 1803, his thoughts were directed towards Ireland, and Decres was told to offer to the agents of the United Irishmen then in Paris 25,000 men and 40,000 muskets, with artillery and ammunition, provided that 20,000 of their countrymen joined the French army on its The landing. First Consul was also willing that peace should only be concluded with England on condition of Irish independence. 1 The expedition was to be a diversion only, and could not be undertaken before the autumn or winter of 1803. Emmet's desperate attempt at revolution thought so 2 was little and Bonaparte continually endeavoured and a ill-timed of the men who failure, him to succour their country that he refused " any of them personally. They were divided in 3 opinion and constantly quarrelled amongst themselves." to persuade to see Twenty vessels were to be got ready at Brest by November 22nd, but by that date only eight sail-of-theline, four frigates, and four corvettes were in the roads, under Admiral Truguet, who had superseded Dordelin. At the end of October the First Consul decided that the Brest and Rochefort squadrons should be united, and everything was to be completed by January 22nd, 1804. Berthier was to make it known to the Irish leaders that "the General command of the expedition will be furnished with sealed orders, by which I shall declare that I shall not make peace with England until the indepen1 To in Rear- Admiral Decres. Sedan, 8th August, 1803. Bingham, Vol. p. 25. 2 3 See letter from C. J. Fox, ante> Napotiorfs Correspondence, Vol. p. 43, and footnote XXXII, p. 328. p. 44. II, INVASION OF ENGLAND dence of Ireland be recognized." 1 From its 95 very inception The French squadrons were the expedition was doomed. " too closely watched by the ravening wolves of the sea," to use Bonaparte's own expressive term for British seamen, and the Irish Legion in France, who were to constitute the major part of the army of invasion, consisted of but fortynine officers and thirteen soldiers. On December 2nd, the 1803, sixteen First Consul peremptory orders for and six frigates to be ready at sail-of-the-line issued Toulon by the middle of the following month. Even had it been possible with the scanty means at his disposal to out these vessels, the acknowledged superiority of the blockading squadrons made a serious attempt at invasion, fit if not actually impossible, at least exceedingly hazardous. Bonaparte's navy was as weak as his army was strong it was now his task to bring the former to the same ; standard of excellence as the latter. All the ship- carpenters and boat-builders from the age of fifteen to sixty were requisitioned, and boatswains of the navy were placed over them. The whole country became an arsenal, and on moonlight nights the men continued to hammer and saw while the blast from the foundries threw a lurid light less, about the yards. and The Activity reigned, ceaseless, relent- untiring. campaign on which the First Consul was so soon to enter centres upon the personalities of the admirals who conducted it. Those chief interest of the arduous naval who fought and won for Great Britain are dealt with in a later chapter, but at this stage it is well to deal with French contemporaries, La Touche Treville, Ganteaume, and Villeneuve. La Touche Tre" ville was appointed their 1 1 3th January, 1804. NAPOLEON AND THE 96 Commander-in-Chief of the Toulon fleet on the 3Oth Decem- He was ber, 1803. unquestionably one of the ablest and most daring commanders of his generation. Born in 1745, he saw action for the first time at the early age of twelve. After a short period of military service, he returned to the navy and never left it again, his life being spent chiefly in colonial and other expeditions. In 1780-2 this officer served with distinction in North American waters, but on the signing of peace in 1783 he returned to France and gave his attention to politics, his activity being crowned by In 1792 he was and led promoted to Rear- Admiral, expeditions to Cagliari, Nice, and Naples, exacting from the latter court a tardy a seat in the States- General of 1789. a slight put upon the French Ambassador. Disgrace and imprisonment followed in 1793-4, but with the advent of the Consulate he was restored to his rank apology for and entrusted with the command of the Brest Squadron. At the end of 1801, after serving as and position, naval commander at Boulogne, as we have already seen, West Indies, where he captured Port-auPrince, and managed his ships with the utmost ability in he set sail for the the face of great odds. La Touche Treville returned to and was shortly afterwards given the im1 portant post mentioned above. Honore" Joseph Antoine Ganteaume, the Maritime Prefect at Toulon, and who was to supersede Truguet at France in 1803, Brest in May, 1804, had also seen much active service. He came of naval stock, and when scarcely more than a boy sailed in a merchant vessel of which his father was captain. At twenty-two he had seven voyages to his credit, in the Levant and two in the West Indies. When 1 Hoefer's Nouvdle Biographic Gtntralc, Vol. XXIX, p. 815. five the INVASION OF ENGLAND American 97 War was waging he took part in the last fights and Apollon. During the Surveillante by frigates the peace Ganteaume sailed in one of the East India sustained and reached Suez via the Red Sea. Company's ships, When war broke out in 1793 he returned to the French him in com78-gun ship Trente-et-Mai, and under Villaret-Joyeuse he took part in the great engagement of navy as mand The lieutenant. following year saw of the June ist, 1794, in which he received three wounds. Ganteaume's chief sphere of activity after this was the Mediterranean, where, at the request of Bonaparte, he was appointed to the command of the naval forces off the and was present at Jaffa and Acre, Gaza Egyptian In 1799 he brought back the future and the Nile. Land of the Pyramids, but two years from the Emperor later he signally failed to relieve the French army there. coasts, 1802 In Ganteaume was successful in Domingo, and he seems to have curried a reinforcing certain St. amount of favour with his exacting master. 1 1 " "Personal To General Maritime of the 6th [Stamp, Minister of the Marine.] Ganteaume, Prefect Arrondissement at Toulon. " The " No date {August, 1803]. Consul has received your letter and will probably reply to it, I was yesterday with him for I believe he is extremely pleased with you. from one end of Paris to the other. He spoke of you during our peregrinations in the most flattering manner, he even made certain comparisons, and the pretensions of certain people would have been considerably shaken if they had heard him. Put quickly two other vessels on the stocks. Press on the He has a grand object in view. You shall know increase of the squadron. I embrace you and your wife, Tabelle, as well. it. D E CRS First " Villeneuve command of the Rochefort Squadron by the Hero. Your Captain Martin has come to me to cry You told me he was a smart fellow. He certainly is able to disguise misery. that fact. Madame B.P. informed me that you had strongly recommended him." 2 2 Mr. Broadley's collection of Napoleonic MSS. immediate is called to the will of the II. H NAPOLEON AND THE 98 Vice-Admiral Pierre Charles Jean Baptiste Silvestre de Villeneuve, who was to bear the brunt of the actual fighting when the British and Allied fleets met at Trafalgar, lacked than personal bravery. Born on the last day of the year 1763, he went to sea at an early age, and like the commanders of the Brest and Toulon squadrons, initiative rather took part in the American War, when he became acquainted with Decres, who, at a later period, shielded his friend from Napoleon's charge of incompetence. Villeneuve became Rear- Admiral in 1796, but adverse circumstances prevented him from taking part in the expedition to Ireland, which was then about to sail, and he and his ships were left behind. 1 He went with the conqueror of Italy to Egypt, however, and commanded the French rear at the battle of the Nile. Far from distinguishing himself on this occasion, he made no attempt to come to the aid of Brueys, and thinking only of his own skin, beat an ignominious retreat. In the words of Captain Mahan, he "culpably failed." 2 In August, 1803, Villeneuve was 3 appointed Commander-in-Chief at Rochefort, and twelve months later succeeded the far more able La Touche Treville at Toulon. 4 The same year that had seen the downfall of Holland 1 See ante Vol 2 Mahan's Influence of Sea Power upon t I, p. 9. the French Revolution^ Vol. I, p. 272, 3 Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 576. are told by the author of Seadrift (p. 253) that Villeneuve was " a tallish, thin man, a very tranquil, placid, English-looking Frenchman." 4 We When " he surrendered at Trafalgar he wore a long-tailed uniform coat, high corduroy pantaloons of a greenish colour, with stripes two inches wide, half-boots with sharp toes, and a watch-chain with long gold links." The Admiral died at Rennes in April, 1806. He was found dead in bed with several stabs in his chest. Foul play was suspected, but the facts and flat collar, of the case point rather to suicide. INVASION OF ENGLAND 99 had also witnessed the signature of an offensive and defensive alliance between France and Spain. By a secret Treaty of article in the igth, 1796, it come the other should signed on August were attacked St. Ildefonso, was agreed that if either ally her assistance within three to By the terms of this understanding Spain made herself responsible for the supply of a minimum of 18,000 months. infantry, was 6000 cavalry, and also to be made artillery in proportion. A call event of war upon the resources of the Spanish navy to the extent of fifteen sail-of-the-line, six frigates, in the and four provisioned for six manned Added to corvettes, months. was a clause with reference for commerce. to one year and these conditions The Prince of the Peace, the power behind the throne, showed a tendency to temporize. An armed threat in the nature of a camp more of 40,000 French soldiers at Bayonne probably did " " to make him reasonable than all the efforts of Beurnonville, the Ambassador matist though he was. at Madrid, skilful Truth to tell, diplo- the state of the Spanish armaments, both military and naval, was worse than bad it was disgraceful. There was scarcely a vessel ; that did not need repair, the arsenals were empty, and the number of men in the two services was considerably below normal strength. On paper the army stood at 130,600 men, but the actual force was between 60,000 and 70,000 men, including troops on duty in the colonies. Obviously the First Consul could not make a demand upon such scanty resources with any good results. pose as a neutral, to serve two masters dealing did not last for long. movement of Spanish A troops So Spain was ; to to but such double- Valladolid and Burgos disturbed the hitherto unruffled temper of Bona- NAPOLEON AND THE ioo parte, who ordered Beurnonville to leave the country unless The First Consul had now satisfaction was given. abandoned the idea of making use of the Spanish navy for the present, and would take nothing but cash for her withdrawal from actual participation in hostilities. The " " fettered freedom was 6,000,000 francs per price of her month, dating from the beginning of hostilities. In the Spanish ports of Cadiz and Corufia six French sail-of-the-line, two fri