 as soon as it became known that a neighbour was making strenuous efforts to improve himself in his by exercising privately, so others imitated Not a few accidents occurred in the streets drill example. through enthusiastic citizens handling guns about which they knew very little. One man fired a musket loaded INVASION OF ENGLAND with six cartridges, with results disastrous to several others. day even influenced dresses then much Dame in The fatal to 73 himself and military tendency of the One of the ladies' Fashion. vogue is described as " a short, round dress of white muslin, with a rifle dress of dark green velvet and a rifle hat to correspond." On one memorable occasion the volunteers showed their usefulness in peace in averting what would have been a truly national calamity. 1 Some repairing the roof of Westminster workmen engaged in Abbey carelessly left melting-pot unprotected while they were having dinner, and soon a portion of the venerable building was well alight. London was not then protected by a County their Council Fire Brigade, and before sufficient water could be pumped on the burning mass the roof of the tower fell in. Soldiers, volunteers, and others, encouraged by the Duke of York, formed a line to the river and passed buckets of water to the firemen, who succeeded in arresting the progress of the flames after damage to the extent of some ^"5000 had been done. Much information as to military and political affairs leaked out on both sides, but perhaps the most valuable capture in this respect was a mail-bag containing eightyfour letters found on the East India Company's ship the Admiral Aplin, bound Madras, which was taken by a French squadron under Linois. There were communications from Lord Grenville to Marquis Wellesley, from for Wellesley, Sir Lionel Darell, the Marquis of Titchand other more or less prominent men, all of which Henry field, Bonaparte caused to be translated and inserted in an enlarged edition of the Moniteur of the i6th September, 1 July 9th, 1803. NAPOLEON AND THE 74 The 1804. letters August, 1803, and themselves bear dates in July or reason are inserted here. The for this the invasion, followed by grumbles about Addington's lax administration, the bad state of business, the great increases in taxes, and the affairs of the is all-absorbing topic East India Company. Lord to Grenville, writing Marquis Wellesley, while admitting that his "difference with Addington becomes every day more marked, all the motives which made Pitt and me opinion and conduct, daily decrease," differ in and remarks " is will prevent hope nothing from having the pleasure of seeing you next year, supposing at that period that you have still a country to revisit. The papers, if you have them, will inform you pessimistic, : I me . . . our conversation at present turns on invasion, and that we at length begin to take measures for enabling us to face our enemies, if they should be able to effect that all a landing, which, though very improbable, is certainly not in any manner impossible." This is very different to the note already quoted. 1 Another correspondent says : " The preparations immense it : an enterprize body there is is to " is repel the projected invasion are to better to be always ready to oppose such by an become a ; such a act of parliament, therefore, everysoldier." demand A third writer avers that for military accoutrements, that bear-skins have risen from >i2 to 50 apiece, and some- times we wait above two months before we can have our musquets from the hands of the armourer it is thus com; paratively with all the rest. We exercise in the morning and afternoon, two hours at a time. Government has long had the intention of throwing up entrenchments round 1 See ante, p. 37. INVASION OF ENGLAND to London, commence 75 at the River Lea, near Blackwall, 1 pass through Hackney, Highgate, Wilden-green, and return behind Holland House to Battersea Bridge but I ; imagine there We will be no occasion to put and proceed are perfectly unanimous, really we desire nothing A French." much so this plan in force. heartily ; and as the arrival of the Mr. Taylor, the author of several political works upon Egypt and India, says that " the pen and the sword rival each other and military songs, defiances, ; proclamations of every kind, to animate the people in general in the good cause, would make a cargo for the To the largest ship that ever anchored in the Ganges." following letter the editor of the Moniteur added a note to the effect that " Mrs. seems to judge pretty well " You learn by the public we are subscriptions are the in which papers difficulty established for everything: all the articles of the first of the state of the country." ; necessity are at a higher price than ever. I fear the would join the French if they should endeavour to come all the world has become people, in their discontent, ; military out ; great preparations for defence are The times all England. optimistic is another writer the of ruin the made through- are sad indeed." No more " : No day passes without most opulent commercial witnessing houses judge then of the situation of those possessing ; less brilliant rible." " resources." When "The impending this reaches crisis is ter- you the grand blow will have been struck," prophesies one correspondent. "Two hundred thousand men upon the coast of Calais wait only for the orders of the conquering Bonaparte. My hope and my confidence are in the 1 ? arm of the Almighty. Willesden Green. Our 76 INVASION OF ENGLAND coasts are lined with soldiers, and the greatest conster" ." This terrible war comnation prevails throughout. has so given such a shock to the suddenly upon us, ing no one dares trust his neighbour, commercial world, that . not knowing what . may happen Less truthful but more amusing public papers of the niece of Bonaparte mouth." to-morrow," and so on. is the news that "the day announce that the nephew and are brought prisoners to Ports- CHAPTER XIV THE ROLE OF THE FRENCH NAVY, They want to make us the ditch, and jump we 1803 will jump it." NAPOLEON. bewildering array of statistics dealing with the means of transporting his huge army and its necessary impedimenta to the fertile shores of England which the First Consul prepared would only tend to confuse the reader if quoted in extenso. Suffice it to say that on the loth September, 1803, Bonaparte drew up a complete schedule of the flotilla which, while following in its general details his plan of the 22nd August, is infinitely more comprehensive, and abounds in that wealth of minutiae which is the leading characteristic of all his military and naval correspondence. Fifty-four prames in two divisions were to form ^flottille de grande espece. Each boat was capable of carrying three officers, twenty-five infantry, fifty cavalry, and two non- combatants, making a total of eighty men. The cargo would consist of a formidable array of munitions of war : twenty-seven muskets, twenty bayonets, 200 tools, 12,000 cartridges, 1200 rations of biscuit, 500 rations of oats and the same of bran, fifty horses, In the fifty-four vessels 4320 1 September loth, 1803. sixty saddles, and six sheep. men were disposed of. Desbriere, Vol. Ill, p. 101. 77 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 78 of sloops was to remain at 324 vessels, as already planned, and each was to be accompanied by a small pinnace. Three officers of a company, ninety-one The flotilla officers officer and soldiers, two of the general officers staff, of the battalion staff, one three gunners, three waggoners, total of in men, was the and eight surgeons, making a complement of each bateau, or 35,964 in all. Twenty- seven muskets, twenty bayonets, twenty-seven pioneers' tools, 1 200 flints, 12,000 cartridges, 1200 rations of biscuit, 150 pints of brandy, and four sheep were also to be stowed away in each sloop. The gunboats, of which there were to be 432, were each men, making a total of 56,160 men, including 3456 surgeons, formed a third flotilla. piece of field in with which they addition to the 24-pounder artillery to carry 130 A were armed was to be carried, and a cargo similar to a sloop, plus two horses, ten bushels each of oats and bran, and 200 rounds of shot. As in the case of the sloops, a pinnace was to go with each gunboat. A further 2160 were to cross the Channel in 540 caiques, loaded with 216,000 cartridges, 21,600 rations of biscuit, 1080 rations of brandy, and 108 sheep. soldiers A fifth flotilla of eighty-one corvettes, each holding forty soldiers, added 3240 men to the number already These also carried the same kind of cargo as the noted. bateaux canonniers, but without the artillery and ammuniFishing boats to the number of 108 were to trans- tion. port 2160 horses and riders, with a double supply of saddles and bridles. Biscuits, brandy, sheep, and fodder also found a place in the hold. The figures quoted above can only convey a crude amount of munitions of war it was idea of the enormous INVASION OF ENGLAND 79 England. The transport flotilla be composed of six distinct classes of fishing 464 of which were calculated to carry no fewer necessary to carry to was to vessels, than nearly three million cartridges and 1208 horses, as well as food, guns, bridles, and the thousand and one things to the Canteen women indispensable to a campaign. number of 1760, and 3560 men and officers, in addition to the crews, were also to be accommodated. Moreover, from 100 to 150 large armed fishing vessels disposed of a further 200 horses, 1000 men, 10,000 biscuits, and 1000 rations of brandy, oats, and bran respectively, and 200 sheep. was to have a The army total of invasion as then planned strength of 114,554 men, including 76,798 infantry, 11,640 cavalry, 3780 artillery men, 3780 waggoners, and 17,467 non-combatants. It may be noticed that there were several thousand troops in excess of the number allowed for in the boats, but it was found that each vessel was able to accommodate from twelve to fourteen men in excess of their official The two months following his 1 complement. return from Boulogne were spent by the First Consul on the project which was now the darling of his heart. So anxious was he to comhis armada that messengers bringing despatches progress arrived at all times of the day and night from the various ports of concentration. In some cases he sent half a dozen different orders under plete relating to its separate covers to the same man within twenty-four hours. His sea of correspondence was always at high tide, and additional secretarial assistance became necessary. But work grew more arduous, so his powers of He wore out the men adaptability seemed to increase. just as his 1 These figures are based on Desbriere, Vol. Ill, pp. 98-105. NAPOLEON AND THE 8o under him and replaced them by others. From a thousand different sources he gathered information as to the progress of the work in hand. mention What one commander omitted to Bonaparte found detailed in a communication from another officer. The soldier always in his despatch his well-being was his first claim on his sympathy constant anxiety. An ill-clad, half-starved army is not a good fighting machine. The First Consul complains to had ; Soult that he is told the provisions and especially the biscuits, " be informed as to the truth of "We on the flotilla which make war." this report, are bad, He asks to and remarks, have quite enough cold weather, and other inconveniences to combat, without making things worse by bad food." " Money shall not be lacking," he adds. " Let shall me know if you have received the 160,000 francs asked for. The 50,000 francs which you still request shall also be paid. All measures shall be taken to prevent any delay in the operations." A 1 he had written to Berthier, the Minister of War, two days previously, is particularly interesting because it shows the high state of efficiency he required of every letter soldier of France : "As to the instruction of the gunn