rst leaped when one is daring enough to try." Consul's latest campaign had become more popular than ever with the soldiers and the people. The clergy did 1 up the feeling and patriotism of the Choose men of good courage," wrote the Bishop of Arras, " and go forth to fight Amalek." 2 their utmost to Church stir militant. " The excitement even spread to the Jewish portion of the the Rabbi Chief population, giving instructions that prayers for the success of the Army of Invasion should be said for forty days. As soon possible to as Bonaparte concentrate had discerned that the whole of his it was im- armada at Boulogne, notwithstanding the enlargement of that port, he decided that several smaller harbours should be used for the little boats. Wimereux and Ambleteuse, some made over to miles north of Boulogne, were therefore five the engineers under M. Sganzin. Etaples, twelve miles distant, was not forgotten, and the three ports together eventually Each one became a miniature Boulogne, and Dieppe, Havre, St. Valery, Caen, Gravelines, Dunkirk, Calais, and Ostend contained no fewer than seven hundred vessels. were filled with shipping. The two latter, with the Dunkirk flotilla, were to provide a reserve. This scheme was afterwards abandoned, and the ships helped to swell the continually growing number of gun-brigs and transports at Beulogne, 1 2 Wimereux, Ambleteuse, and i6th November, 1803. Ibid., p. 80. Memoirs of Madame De Remusat (London, 1880), Vol. Etaples. I, p. 159. NAPOLEON AND THE 88 Holland, although a Republic in name, was scarcely more than a province of France. The work on the flotilla which was being built at Flushing and Ostend did not proceed with the celerity desired by the First Consul. On September 28th we find him writing from Paris to General Berthier complaining that General Davoust reports to him that the commander of the artillery division of the corps d'armee has not yet appeared. " Says Bonaparte cannot conceive whence this negligence arises I : owing : to which the artillery is in the greatest disorder. Six pieces of 36 have arrived from Luxembourg, but without carriages or ammunition you yourself have ordered the latter to be made at Bruges where are neither workmen nor an arsenal. These pieces of 36 will therefore be useless. The mortars which have been sent from Strasbourg to ; . Ostend will only carry 21 Ibs. of powder. are of the worst possible manufacture. Ostend has no fuses for shells, indeed I . am The is . told they artillery at without every needful accessory. Ten mortars have been sent to Ostend, but the carriages which accompany them do not fit and are much useless." too light ; consequently they are rendered l At this period he was exacting the utmost amount of work from himself and his secretaries, and it is evident was concentrating the whole force of mind on this gigantic effort. He demanded that he formation on every detail connected with the letter quoted above shows in his master precise in- flotilla. The no mean manner that he required the highest state of efficiency in his generals, and that he would allow no instance of mismanagement to pass unnoticed. 1 Dated 28th September, 1803. 7138, Vol. IX, p. 6. Correspondence de NapoUon. Letter No. INVASION OF ENGLAND " 89 Get your information so that when you do answer me, " was buts,' no ifs/ and no becauses,' there shall be no ' ' * down guidance of correThe First Consul followed it himself in cabinet the exacting rule laid spondents. for the He and camp. had no precious minutes to squander in pandering to the insipid conventionalities of society, and he seldom did so unless it was to serve his own ends. After the and it is of battle his favourite place was the study, absolutely impossible to assume that he could field have achieved what he did had he not spent practically the whole of the day and frequently the greater part of the night in plotting and planning, scheming and thinking. energy under restraint, for fogs often covered the Channel at this time of the year, and would afford him an opportunity of crossing Bonaparte could not keep to England. He the Even project. his fierce urged zeal in everybody connected with the ordinary soldiers received en- he made minute personal him, investigations, stopping at every place where work was couragement from in progress, for and speaking to the men in those piquant sentences which thrilled his hearers whenever they were uttered. born actor, he gave sufficient of the dramatic A touch to his speeches, letters, and actions, without betraying too obvious an appearance of striving after effect. As an instance of the true Napoleonic following, example taken from the Moniteur, is " touch," the a good very; : "BOULOGNE, 1 8 Brumaire, an XII \\Qth November, 1803]. " On Tuesday and put it last, the First Consul reviewed the through several manoeuvres. . . . army NAPOLEON AND THE 90 " has been remarked, as a happy omen, that in digthe ging ground for the First Consul's camp, a battle axe was found, which belonged' to the Roman Army which In pitching the First Consul's tent invaded England. It Ambleteuse, medals of William the Conqueror were found. It will be admitted that these coincidences but they will appear much are at least extraordinary also, at ; more singular if we recollect that GENERAL BONAPARTE on visiting the ruins of Pelusium in Egypt, found an engraved head of Julius Caesar." Work on the enlargement and deepening of the harbour Boulogne had been deferred, but now began in earnest. Bonaparte was in feverish haste to provide sufficient ac- at commodation for the flotilla. While one battalion of soldiers was excavating, another was carting the refuse away, and a third unloading stone for the strengthening of the banks, sawing timber, or driving piles for the quays, but the task was of such magnitude that progress was both slow and discouraging. A man less resolute than the First Consul would not have proceeded with the under- had yet to meet any obstacle, either human or material, which could bar his way. With an extrataking, but he ordinary tenacity of purpose he ordered the enlargement of the harbours of Staples, Wimereux, and Ambleteuse in his frantic effort to provide sufficient miniature anchorage for his fleets. The already complex scheme became Not until the extreme difficulty plex. the scattered units of the obvious that it conclusion that flotilla daily of concentrating was so at these ports could not be evaded did he little more com- come to the could be expected from it unless the Ganteaume, the Maritime regular navy was also used. INVASION OF ENGLAND 91 1 Prefect at Toulon, early realized the futility of the under- present basis, but both Forfait and Admiral Verhuell, who was in command of the Batavian section taking on its and the most able man in opposite view, and were in their way gain temporary command " the Dutch service, held the favour of the boats righting across the Channel. If only Bonaparte could " of the sea ! This was the and he straightway set to of the idea a daring combination of fleets by means of which he hoped not only to out-manceuvre Nelson and evade his colleagues, but to biggest work to if of his only remove life, The germ it. cover the passage of the ing in his fertile brain also was gradually growsoon the time would come for flotilla ; him to make known it responsible for carrying A 1 to the it persons long series of defeats sustained at The who would be out. the hands of following hitherto unpublished letter from the Minister of Marine to that the First Consul had appointed the latter to the Ganteaume announcing important post of Maritime Prefect at Toulon, is of special interest. It is from Mr. Broadley's collection of Napoleonic MSS., and was purchased in November, 1906 Paris, : " " The Minister PARIS, 5 Thermidor, Rear-Admiral Ganteaume " An XI [2$thjuly, 1803]. of the Marine and Colonies to at Aubagne. inform you with the greatest pleasure Citizen General, that the First Consul has nominated you Maritime Prefect of the sixth arrondisstment. I is the more flattering to you because you owe it to your excellent services, to your long experience, to your energy of character, and to your devotion to the Republic. The First Consul does not ignore This proof of confidence the fact that after the arduous campaigns which you have undergone during the last war you have need of some rest ; but he expects on your part a fresh proof of your zeal, and in appointing you to an administrative post he wishes you an opportunity of being useful to the Government under condiwhich will allow of your restoration to health. I beg you Citizen General to proceed to Toulon as quickly as possible to take charge of the Prefecture. to afford tions " I salute you. " DECRES." NAPOLEON AND THE 92 British admirals had left the French navy lamentably weak in both vessels and seamen. At the outbreak of war in May, 1803, the First Consul found that the naval force at his disposal was hopelessly inadequate to the situation. There were only five line-of-battle ships and ten frigates ready for sea in French ports, and the fleets in being totalled but twenty-three men-of-war, twentyseven frigates, thirty-three corvettes, and twenty-four gun- boats, advice-boats, brigs, etc. may ; in all, 107 craft, to which be added some forty transports scattered round the Bonaparte's finest vessels were thousands of coasts. miles away, either at or about to leave St. Domingo, Martinique, French Guiana, Senegal, and the Indian Ocean. They ran the grave risk of being captured or destroyed by any at British squadron which might make appearance With a single exception to leave the West Indies for an inopportune moment. the nine vessels ordered its France made a safe voyage, for two reached Rochefort, five put in at Coruna, and another at Cadiz. Such an escape from the hands of the enemy was looked upon as a happy omen. In addition to the three ships in the roads 74-gun ships, and four either or were dismantled in the under frigates repair harbour. A number of new vessels were on the stocks at Brest, four three-deckers, sixteen and would help to swell Bonaparte's disposable forces in the course of a few months, and he gave explicit directions Nord of ten vessels should be proceeded with at once in the yards at Flushing, Ostend, Nantes, As to the Batavian navy of Bordeaux, and Marseilles. that an Escadre du sixteen line-of-battle ships, six only were of six modern con- and had neither ammunition nor stores on board, were in India or on the high seas, and the remaining struction, INVASION OF ENGLAND four required urgent repairs. Out of twelve 93 frigates two only were available, three were building, and seven were in the colonies. Not until Midsummer, 1803, was Bonaparte able to get together anything like an efficient navy in French ports, by which time he had thirty- two sail-of-the- and twenty-six frigates. 1 At Brest, the most important western naval line station, the three ships under the command of Rear-Admiral Dordelin were of little immediate use, for each had at full complement. Dormust not allow the port to be blockaded by inferior forces a remote contingency, seeing that Cornwallis had more than three times the number of least 100 sailors short of their delin was told that he vessels at his disposal. make The Rear-Admiral's trio were to frequent cruises, the sailors were to be exercised, and protection afforded to vessels making for the harbour, but on no account was he to engage the enemy. It is not a matter for astonishment that Dordelin replied that his " 2 outings would be much too dangerous." The Admiralty had immediately commissioned an adequate number of men-of-war to hold the actual and potential French fleets in check. In May, 1803, there were no fewer than fifty-two sail-of-the-line in service, 3 a force British augmented from time to time as necessity arose. So great was England's superiority at sea that at Toulon, Cadiz, and Brest sh