ders of Sussex. of the enemy must have been made good in face of time. the numerous batteries which lined our shores, and of about eighteen strong battalions of infantry (some of them militia) and twenty squadrons of cavalry which lay close at hand. 1 But carriages and fish-carts would have brought several thousands from the rear within a very few hours ; and of volunteers and yeomanry there would have been considerable numbers. " Sir David Dundas held the chief command in Kent and Sussex. It was his intention, if he should be beaten on the shore, to withdraw his troops, not in the direction of London, but throwing back his right and centre to retreat upon the intrenched camp at Dover. In that strong position he could have brought the enemy, to bay, and gained time for the gathering of the strength of Britain around the metropolis. Or, if the general had found that Napoleon disregarded him, and was marching straight upon London, then Dundas would have sallied forth and pressed close upon the rear and right flank of The direct road from Canterbury the enemy's columns. of the lower and the passage Medway were barred by the 1 The number of the infantry the cavalry at about 2800 sabres. have been present. Bunbury. may be taken About fifty at fully 12,000 rank and file, would pieces of field artillery INVASION OF ENGLAND intrenched camp at Chatham. 67 The French must have etc., through a more would have been where their columns country, roads. the of the Sir James delayed by breaking up in commanded Sir Sussex Pulteney James Craig in Essex. With the help of carriages the former would have taken their routes by Maidstone, difficult ; reached the great chain of chalk hills before the enemy; or he might have brought 10,000 men to bear on their left flank while it was embarrassed by the difficulties of the way through the Weald of Kent. Thames from Tilbury, crossed the London. would have been madness Craig would have or have hastened di- rectly to " , It in the British to have risked a general battle in the field, even in such tempting Our troops were not positions as the chalk hills offer. then of a quality to meet and frustrate the manoeuvres of such an army as that which Napoleon would have led to We needed every advantage which numbers and positions could afford. It was in London itself, or the attack. rather along the skirts of Greenwich, Southwark, and Lambeth, that it was our business to fight the. great battle to the uttermost, day after day, and night after night ; bringing to the relief of every post fresh combatants as they arrived in quick succession from all parts of the Kingdom. What mattered the burning of some hundreds of houses, when compared with the mighty stake which was at issue ? Our best reliance was upon the numbers and the daring courage of Englishmen upon the resolu; tion of millions to vanquish tens of thousands." l In an incredibly short time over 300,000 yeomanry and volunteers were enrolled, while on the high seas no fewer than 120,000 men were in the service of Old 1 Narrative of some Passages in the Great 1 810, by Lieutenant-General Sir War with Henry Bunbury, France , from 1799 K.C.B., pp. 176-7. to NAPOLEON AND THE 68 The wealthy gave generously of their supply England. of this world's goods for the defence of their country. Lloyd's voted the sum of 20,000 3 per cent consolidated 1 annuities for the relief of maimed ing of rewards for valour, and volumes warriors, for the grant- such for the charitable instincts of It speaks like. our forefathers that within a couple of months over 150,000 was raised by contributions no alone. less practical charOf voluntary acter was the gift of the East India Company of twenty armed ships for the protection of the Thames the Trinity House Brethren voting ten frigates, completely equipped and manned, for a similar purpose. These were moored ; across the river, in the Hope. In addition, a smart corps at a of volunteer artillerymen was formed and kept up cost of over 10,000. At a crowded meeting held on July 26th, 1803, in the Stock Exchange, the following declaration was proposed, and unanimously carried by between four and five The thousand prominent representatives of commerce. citizens of London determined to contest every inch of ground should circumstances require " We the tants of it. Merchants, Bankers, Traders, and other inhabiits neighbourhood, deem it our London and bounden duty, at the present momentous period, to make public our unanimous determination to stand or fall with our King and Country. " The independence and existence of the British Empire the safety, the liberty, the life of every man in the are at stake. The events perhaps of a few Kingdom 1 According to the official returns, up to December 9th, 1803, no fewer than 380,060 men for England, Scotland, and Wales, and 82,941 for Ireland, making a grand total of 463,001, had volunteered their services for internal defence. 59 Com. Journal, p. 502. Quoted by Clode, Vol. I, p. 313. INVASION OF ENGLAND 69 months, certainly of a few years, are to determine whether children are to continue free men and members we and our of most the flourishing community the world, or in whether we are to be the slaves of our most implacable enemies themselves the slaves of a foreign Usurper " We look on this great crisis without dismay. We have the most firm reliance on the spirit and virtue of the ! We believe that there exists people of this country. a firmer as well as nobler courage than any which rapine can inspire and we cannot entertain such gloomy and ; unworthy apprehensions of the moral order of the world, as to think that so admirable a quality can be the exclusive attribute of freebooters or slaves. our laws and We fight for to defend the dearest hopes of our children to maintain the unspotted glory which we have inherited from our ancestors to guard from outrage and shame those whom nature has entrusted to our protection to preserve the honour and existence of the country that gave us birth. "We fight for that constitution and system of society, which is at once the noblest monument and the firmest liberties We bulwark of civilization fight to preserve the whole earth from the barbarous yoke of military despotism fight for the independence of all nations, even of those ! ! We who are the most indifferent to our fate, or the most blindly jealous of our prosperity ! " In so glorious a cause in the defence of these dear and sacred objects, we trust the God of our Fathers will inspire us with valour which will be more than equal to by the hope of the daring ferocity of those who are lured, plunder, to fight the battles of ambition. " His Majesty their own is defence. about to We upon his people to arm in and we believe, that he will call trust, that the free men of this land, forth in the going righteous cause of their country, under not call on them in vain the blessing of Almighty God, will inflict the most signal NAPOLEON AND THE 70 chastisement on those who have dared to threaten our a chastisement, of which the memory will long guard the shores of this Island, and which may not only vindicate the honour, and establish the safety of the destruction British empire, but may also, to the latest posterity, serve example to strike terror into tyrants, and to give as an courage and hope to insulted and oppressed nations. " For the attainment of these great ends, it is necessary that we should not only be an unanimous, but a zealous, an ardent, an unconquerable people that we should consider the public safety as the chief interest of every inthat every man should deem the sacrifice of his dividual fortune his and duty country as nothing more than should murmur at any exertions his life to his that no man or privations which this awful crisis may impose upon him that we should regard faintness or languor in the common cause as the basest treachery that we should unshaken resolution to conquer go or to die and that we should look upon nothing as a calamity compared with the subjugation of our country. "We have most sacred duties to perform we have most invaluable blessings to preserve we have to gain glory and safety, or to incur indelible disgrace, and to fall into the field with an Upon our efforts will depend the triumph of liberty over despotism of national independence over projects of universal empire and, finally, of into irretrievable ruin. civilization itself over barbarism. "At such a moment we deem it our duty solemnly to bind ourselves to each other, and to our countrymen, in the most sacred manner, that we will employ all our exertions to rouse the the kingdom every we sort, that and to assist the resources of be ready with our services of spirits, we will and on every occasion, will rather perish together, of the British Name in its than defence live to see the and that Honour tarnished, or that noble inheritance of greatness, glory, and liberty destroyed, which has de- INVASION OF ENGLAND 71 scended to us from our forefathers, and which we are determined to transmit to our posterity. "JACOB BOSANQUET, " Chairman." * Resolutions of a similar character, but often in more emphatic terms, were passed by the inhabitants of many other districts and towns. Bonaparte was anathematized from one end of the country to the other. The good " people of Lambeth styled him an obscure Corsican, who began murderous career by turning his the citizens of Paris who his artillery upon boasted, in his public letter from Pavia, to have shot the whole municipality who put the and unoffending inhabitants of Alexandria, man, woman, and child, to the sword, till slaughter was tired of its work," and so on. " Such is the tyrant we helpless, innocent, are called upon to oppose," this resolution concludes "and such is the fate which awaits England should we suffer him and his degraded slaves to pollute our soil." In The Times of the 6th August, 1803, a writer sums up the progress of the volunteer movement as follows ; : " Eleven weeks are barely passed since the declaration we defy any man living to mention a period of war, and when half so much was ever effected, in the same space of time, for the defence of the country. naval 1st. force such as Great Britain never had before, has been A completely equipped, manned, and in readiness to meet the enemy. 2nd. The regular military force of the has been kingdom put on the most respectable footing. 3rd. The has been called forth, and encamped with 4th. The supplementary militia has militia the regular forces. also been embodied, 1 and even encamped. Anti-Gallican t No. 2, pp. 37-8. 5th. An army NAPOLEON AND THE 72 men of reserve of 50,000 force, and is now has been adopted has been already added to this A in great forwardness. 6th. measure for calling out and arming the whole mass of the people, in case of emergency confident that our information moment that at this is correct, there are nearly 300,000 and we when we ; men are say, enrolled Volunteer, Yeomanry, and Cavalry Corps, of whom at least a third may be considered as already disciplined and accoutred." different in Patriotism was in the Men the counting-house and the factory to snatch an hour at drill. Members of Parliament showed their appreciation by a resolution air. left " That the thanks of the House be given to the several Volunteers and Yeomanry Corps of the United Kingdom for the promptitude and zeal with which, at a crisis the most momentous to their country, they have associated for defence. its " Ordered, nemine contradicente. " That a return be prepared, to be laid before this House next Session of Parliament, of all Volunteers and Yeomanry Corps, whose services shall have been then accepted by His Majesty describing each Corps, in order that such return may be entered on the journals of the House, and the patriotic example of such voluntary exerin the ; tions transmitted tc posterity." The male population indulged in a universal game of follow-my-leader. Just