N AND THE ii 4 defence of the country other than by wearing a red coat and shouldering a musket. " If the enemy," he says, in the " should effect an invasion, or internal commotion require of parishes should march to that the male inhabitants a distance from home, the clergyman would then be most and suitably occupied, in my judgment, in the general superintendence of the property and female parishioners and children left behind by his weight and actively ; some measure, protect the former from abuse or alienation, while he would be constantly at hand to administer comfort and assistance to the latter. influence he might, in In this situation, require it, he will the necessity of the country should if do far more good than if individual bodily powers in the ranks of an he exerted his army ; he will keep himself more at liberty to apply to those studies, which the proper discharge of his duties require and, above all, preserve that ascendancy over the minds of the ; people, which is of so much importance to the effectual 1 discharge of the sacred office he has sworn to execute." Another eminent prelate of the time, Dr. R. Watson, F.R.S., Bishop of Llandaff, issued a clergy of his diocese. common enemy, his as is somewhat lengthy He stirring address to the certainly held certified epistle by no brief for the this brief extract from : " You will not, I think, be guilty of a breach of Christian charity in the use of even harsh language, when you explain to your congregations the cruelties which the French have used in every country they have invaded for no language can reach the atrocity of the fact. They everywhere promise protection to the poorer sort, and they everywhere strip the poorest of every thing they possess; they plunder ; 1 Dated August 6th, 1803. Anti-Gallican, Vol. I, p. 112. INVASION OF ENGLAND their cottages, is set them on fire when the plunder they torture the owners to discover their they put them to death when they have none exhausted wealth, and to discover and they 115 ; ; they violate females of the hoary head, and trample on all all ages they insult the decencies of life. ; This is no exaggerated picture whoever has read the account of the proceedings of the French in Swabia, in Holland, in Italy, in Switzerland, knows that it is not. And, can there be men in Great Britain, of so base a temper, so maddened by malignity, so cankered by envy, so besotted by folly, so stupefied as to their own safety, as It is said there to abet the designs of such an enemy? are such men but I have too firm a confidence in the general good sense of the people of Great Britain to believe, that such men are either many in number, or respectable for character, or formidable for connexion. The men of this principality, at least, have nobly shown, in ; ; a late instance, 1 that they inherit the spirit of their ancestors, and have too ardent a love of their country to submit to a foreign yoke, under whatever specious ' promises of supporting the rights of men,' of introducing liberty and equality,' the invaders may attempt to deceive them. 1 . " . . Are the French coming hither to enrich the nation ? Will they pay attention to the poor of this country, when they have so many thousands of infinitely poorer persons in their own ? Will they reward their seditious adherents amongst us? Yes, they will reward them, as all history informs them, with contempt, pillage, beggary, slavery, and death. The nation will be ruined by exorbitant impositions our naval policy will be destroyed our commerce our lands will be divided (not to France transferred amongst those who wickedly covet their neighbour's goods), but amongst French soldiers, who will be everywhere stationed, as the Roman soldiers were of old, to awe the 1 The Fishguard Invasion. See Vol. I, chapter ii. NAPOLEON AND THE ii6 people and collect the taxes the flower of our youth will be compelled to serve in foreign countries, to promote the wicked projects of French ambition Great Britain will be made an appendage of continental despotism. "... I am sincerely of opinion, that few of us will live to see such a system established in France as will procure to its inhabitants half the blessings which our ancestors have enjoyed, which we do enjoy, and which it is our interest to take care that our posterity shall enjoy, under the constitution of Great Britain." l . A special prayer Providence " ment against was written invoking the for the protection of this foreign violence, unanimity at home, in and . . aid of Divine Country and Govern- for the preservation of defence of our liberties, laws, and 2 religion." The Press played a not unimportant part in the formaand although the days of colossal tion of public opinion, circulations had not yet arrived, it is probable that in a penned for the restricted sense the stirring exhortations much weight as the less dog- matic utterances of modern leader writers. "If you have Bath Herald? benefit of readers carried as qualities for a soldier," writes the editor of the are imperiously called upon, by everything valuable to man, to be a Soldier. Honour and Pride urge you to it, "you and your Country demands your exertions. Serve it then in the manner most consonant to your station and to your a VOLUNTEER! Since writing the feelings, and be foregoing we are happy to find that the enrolment at the Hall is rapidly increasing. Sixteen honest Sons of St. 1 2 Anti- Gallican, Vol. I, pp. 55-56. European Magazine 1803, , 3 July 23rd, 1803. p. 76. JOHN BULL BONAPARTE!! and Blue Bell of $cotlanfc. When But O n.l it's O Wh.il it's O m i O my shall In- this he'll r.H-t'd hat Bon. y dwell litll.' IL.VV it's O ? liki-i my so wed, this litll.- little him ( to take care! Boney heart, if a tear shall spell. Unney wear? die ? i cr>' dim my rye I he boMly brags, with conwquoiee full cramm'd, he will land; happy island hi. legion* Yet still () KUKI.,,,,!'. But in home; mak,' tlw people stare advise should this lie Kin,- rats shall squall his .lirge, in sweet m.-l.xlioiis And .it his they crouch teiwath rltx-s ti> tiir 'I'd ? stay huU- him should he come. Cftrsir.il.ut Kranrc oak stick! ,lc.nc, Honey come rl.:.ps 1 ami what rloalhcs I.irp- What ! how Ml Die poor J-'mich, .loath.-* But its August ne.irt, where docs birth plan- Ttiat .Iocs this little m O m my Where and Ilii when .-nine he'll Perhaps it's O in my heart, if lie AN INVASION BROADSIDE OF AUGUST, 1803 INVASION OF ENGLAND 117 Crispin have been just taken down by their employer, Mr. James Phipps, 1 of St. Margaret's buildings, and entered man determined as Volunteers each to sacrifice his all, and to the last in support of his Country, and to stand up wishing from his soul for a speedy opportunity to leather the FRENCH and The same well strap their quarters." issue also contains the announcement that "we are informed on good authority that Government has accepted the 2 patriotic offer of Mr. Lye, of this City, in offering for their use in case of invasion, 20 filled waggons and 1 50 horses " ! ! The spring poet had the satisfaction of seeing his effuand out of season. The journal quoted above published a long poem by Samuel Whitchurch, ironsions printed in " monger, of Market Place, Bath, entitled The True Briton to his Country," which contains apt allusions to Acre and the Nile, Sir Sidney Smith, the hero of the former battle, being an old Grammar-school boy, while Nelson was a frequent visitor to this great resort of fashionable folk. The finishing lines are For Hark ! : the thunder of the NAVY roars- Strong beats the pulse for WAR loud sounds the drum, And our brave Sons invite the Foe to come ; For they remember Acre?s famous fight, Britons put the vaunting Gaul to flight When ; Remember too the Battle of the Nile And at the threats of rash invasion smile. 3 A motion brought forward in the House of Commons for a further increase in measures of by Colonel Crawford national defence received, strange to say, less attention 1 Phipps was a bootmaker, and in 1812 issued silver tokens for is. in conjunction with Culverhouse and Orchard. Mr. Lye was a carrier, and the holder of what had been Wiltshire's Mr. 43., 2s., ' 2 business. J. and 3 Bath Journal, July 3Oth, 1803. NAPOLEON AND THE ii8 than would have been expected, but Pitt ably supported the officer in a speech which is not without its significance " for the present day. We are told that we ought not fortify London because our ancestors did not fortify to it," no argument, unless we can show you that our ancestors were in the same situation as he said. we are. "Why, sir, that is We might as well be told that because our ancestors fought with arrows and lances we ought to use them now, and that we ought to consider shields and corselets as affording a secure defence against and artillery. If the fortification of the capital to the security of the country, I think it musketry can add ought to be done by the erection of works such as I am recommending you can delay the progress of the enemy for three days, these may be the difference between the safety and the If of the capital. destruction It will not, I admit, make a difference between the conquest and independence of the country, for that will not depend upon one nor upon ten battles loss of ; but it may make thousands of lives, the difference between the with misery, havoc, and desola- spread over the country, on one hand, or on the other of frustrating the efforts, of confounding the exertions, tion, and of chastising the insolence of the enemy." As some kind of concession to these arguments, the truth of which could not be refuted, several block houses were built at the entrance to the Thames. That all was not well with the method of defence taken shown by the speech already quoted, although own particular district, good was progress being made. Windham, a bitter critic of the Government, and one of Pitt's ablest supporters, be- as a whole is in isolated places, as in Pitt's trays his anxiety as to the general want of sound military INVASION OF ENGLAND measures warrants " in its a long note to Wilberforce. Its 119 importance reproduction. The breaking up of Parliament," he says, " advanced can hardly help regretting on another account. One wants a means of publishing the abominable backwardness in which things are with respect to as the season defence : by some is, I so as literally to put it in the situation described writer in the Moniteur^ namely that if fifty thou- men can anyhow get on shore, they must conquer the island. What shall we say to the fact, that at the end of now more than five months since the King's message not a sand single ball cartridge (I suppose) has been fired from one end of the country to the other, unless perhaps a few that I have desired to be fired just by me in Norfolk, and some hear Grey has been using upon the same principle that the corps, which have been in Northumberland? that I such as they are, remain to this moment for the greater part, without arms ? that excepting, I am afraid, a very few thousand men to the army of reserve, not raising, the smallest addition has been or can be made to a force truly regular, such as can alone be opposed upon equal terms to the troops by which we shall be invaded? and that the whole assistance, that would be received from works, of whatever sort, is all When men yet to be begun, and even and impracof of of the invasion, ticability impossibility conquering a country such as this, they say what may be true, but which is certainly not so for any reasons which they can, settled? talk of the difficulties or at least which they do, give. It general vague notion founded on is all a kind of loose, what they have been accustomed to see and to conceive, to which the answer is that so was everything which we have seen successively NAPOLEON AND THE 120 happen for these last fifteen years. Considering things but upon principles somewhat less general than those which I have been alluding to