gates, a brig, and a corvette, all the orders of Rear-Admiral Bedout, had taken Not only had the town under refuge. authorities refused to render assist- ance to the half-starved crews of these vessels, but the Governor of Algeciras had allowed the enemy to capture two French the vessels without so much as firing a gun from Eventually King Charles, seeing that Bonaparte was not to be trifled with, signified his assent to a secret treaty 1 which stipulated that the Governors of batteries. Cadiz and Algeciras were to be dismissed, and the King of Spain undertook to see to the safety of all French ships then in Spanish ports, or any that might put in later. He also guaranteed to repair such vessels, provision them, or render any assistance necessary, the cost of which would third of the be defrayed by the French Government. A Spanish subsidy was to be kept back in payment or part payment of any disbursement made by that country on behalf of French vessels, and towards compensation after the cessation of hostilities. Furthermore, Spain in her anxiety to prevent the violation of her territory consequent upon any Franco-Portuguese conflict, undertook to make francs a the sister month kingdom provide a subsidy of to the Republic. 1 Dated 1,000,000 Article 6 of this treaty Paris, igth October, 1803. INVASION OF ENGLAND " France 101 recognize the neutrality of Spain, and promises not to oppose any of the measures of neutrality which may be taken." remaining article provided that will A was inserted with a view to fostering commerce, and allowed cloths and other French manufactures to be sent to Portugal without duty. The expense of maintaining the French army of nearly men was alone enormous, but to this had to half a million be added the pay of the mechanics and other labourers engaged in preparing the flotilla. Spain's subsidy helped war chest of the Republic, as did that of But men were wanted even more than later. Portugal money, and Genoa was to be called upon to furnish 6000 to replenish the sailors. Switzerland was to supply half her army, and nearly the whole of it if France was attacked. The modern Alexander was steadily and surely getting his grip on Europe, and then he would close her doors and shut out Great Britain's commerce. He would conquer the sea by the land if he could not achieve his object in any other way. After Bonaparte had gone carefully through the mass of detailed information which, in accordance with his desire, had been sent to him from the various commanders, he found that it would be quite impossible to invade England for some months to come. Many of the vessels which had been put on the stocks at the time of the rupture of the Peace of Amiens were still incomplete. The Batavian and the Texel squadrons, were and as the navy was now to play an specially backward, important part in the modus operandi, delay was inevitable. flotilla, At four as well as the Brest the beginning of November, 1803, only one prame> sloops, eighty -six bateaux of various kinds, and NAPOLEON AND THE 102 seven caiques were at Boulogne, fifty-seven were on the way, and thirty-five at other ports a grand total of 190, to which must be added 416 vessels acquired by purchase. Either on the stocks or ordered were 2453 boats of various The Head kinds. 1 shore, of the Army was again at the sea- and spent the whole of one day superintending the arrangements of a gun-sloop and a gunboat. internal " beginning to take a satisfactory turn," to use his own words, but the above figures as regards concen- Everything is tration at the chief port of departure do not seem to justify He asks for Ganteaume's opinion as to the practicability of the flotilla. " Do you believe it will It is capable of transcarry us to the shores of England ? the statement. porting 100,000 men. Eight hours of a night favourable to us will decide the fate of the universe." 2 Although we find the First Consul writing in the early " of 1804 that the season is advancing; whatever does days not reach Boulogne in the course of January can be of no use to us," 3 the projected invasion was postponed. No amount of persuasion could possibly complete the organ- Bonaparte was bitterly disaphe had even chosen the boat, Le Prince de ization in so short a time. pointed, for Galles, in 1 which he intended to cross the Channel personally, Desbriere, Vol. Ill, pp. 236-237. 2 Bonaparte to Ganteaume, Paris, 23rd November, 1803. Bingham, Vol. II, " to p. 39. "It is absurd," says Dumouriez, suppose that a flotilla of from 1 200 to small boats could cross the Channel in perfect order even in calm 1500 weather and never break if it did, then on the English rowing boats, backed up by disorder would ensue, and the vessels block-ships, land batteries, and troops and frigates would catch the invading flotilla in the rear and smash it between coast it would have its formation; but even to fight another flotilla of : two 3 fires against the coast it was seeking to land on." Dumouriez MS., Bonaparte to Citizen Daugier, I2th January, 1804. and Empire, Vol. Ill, p. 81. p. 5* Thiers' Consulate INVASION OF ENGLAND 103 and 100,000 troops were massed on the coasts; but State duties at once important and urgent precluded his giving quite so much personal attention at the camp as formerly. The work, however, continued with great activity, but the misfortunes which frequently happened to detachments of the flotilla when at sea, and the confusion which arose forces the First Consul owing to the multiplicity of orders, to admit that, where we are if it continues, " We shall no longer know I" 1 Bonaparte, the young Corsican democrat of a dozen years before, was now within sight of the crown of Charle- magne. 1 Bonaparte to Decres, Paris. 6th February, 1804. Napoldon, Letter No. 7528, Vol. IX, p. 239. Correspondance de CHAPTER XV FURTHER BRITISH PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENCE, 1803 AND 1804 "All men of sense in England confessed that England had never been so near her ruin." NAPOLEON. contemporary writers, statesmen, poets, and humorists amongst them, have left in- MANY teresting accounts of the social condition of England in the warlike the two succeeding years, sican when Ogre" was on every the days of 1803 and of the "Cor- name one's lips, and false alarms of his arrival an everyday occurrence. One of these " " the seventies of the last cenfar into authorities lived tury, forming as it were a living link between the alarm and that occasioned more than excited by Bonaparte years later by Napoleon le Petit. George Cruikshank witnessed the marching and counter-marching of He lived to be one of the volunteers of the Great Terror. fifty the pioneers of the national defence movement of 1859-60. He has bequeathed to us a delightful glimpse of those " Good King George " was ready stirring times when take the against the foe, of whom the three Cruikmany ludicrous portraits. field to shanks made so " 1 Every town," writes George Cruikshank, 1 A " was, in fact, Pop- Gun fired off by George Cruikshank , in defence of the British Volunteers of 1803, e tc. t p. II. 104 INVASION OF ENGLAND 105 in one place you might hear the some youth learning to beat the drum, at another place some march or national air being practised a sort of ' tattoo ' garrison of upon the fife, and every morning at five o'clock the bugle horn was sounded through the streets, to call the volunteers to a two hours' drill, from six to eight, and the same again in the evening, and then you heard the pop, pop, pop, of the single musket, or the heavy sound of the volley, or distant thunder of the artillery, and then sometimes you heard the ' ' Park and the * ' Tower guns firing to celebrate some advantage gained over the enemy. these volunteers were taught (by the regulars] and fire, As soon as how to load they were set to practise 'ball-firing/ and when these regiments were thought to be pretty well instructed in all points, they were inspected by general officers, and if the inspecting officer thought them sufficiently advanced, a day was appointed, and they were marched off to a ' grand review.' I was but a boy, a little boy, at that time, had a sharp, critical eye for all those military movements, and used to be much amused at the occasional but I blunders of the ' awkward squads ' ; and as I often had the ' opportunity of witnessing the regulars exercise,' I judged of and compared the evolutions of my father's regiment ' ' standard and I remember feeling considerable and when I saw the pride pleasure Loyal St. Giles's, and by this ; ' ' Bloomsbury, Volunteers wheel out of the old of gate 'Montague House' (then the British Museum, and the site of the present building) to march to Hyde Park to St. George's, be reviewed, where they acquitted themselves in so soldierlike a manner as to gain the approbation of the reviewers, and, of course, of themselves." Cruikshank specially remarks on the excellence of the City Light Horse. " I NAPOLEON AND THE io6 once saw this regiment go through their exercise on a fieldon day Finchley Common. A finer regiment of cavalry I never saw, nor have I ever seen regulars more perfect in the evolutions." The wave spread until it engulfed the whole country, children and all. Says the caricaturist: "Not martial only did the men in 1803 form themselves into regiments of volunteers, but the boys of that day did so likewise, and my brother . . . who was my elder by three years, formed one of these juvenile regiments, and appointed himself the colonel. We had our drum and fife, our ' presented by our mammas and making our accoutrements. ' colours small 'gun stocks,' into which by barrels, kindly polished make 'em lead, to we ' ' Betty * who also also procured fixed mop-sticks for with a tinge of black- look like real barrels. their fathers 'drill'; and, The boys watched as the old cock crows the little one we children followed in the steps of our papas, were ready for inspection quite as soon as our learns/ so and we and could march ' good order, to have our Fieldfrom Bloomsbury Church to the fields, where Russell elders, day,' sisters, We assisted in in and Tavistock Squares now stand." 1 And so another trait of the nursery can be put down and the little mobs of children who marched to heredity, along the city streets and the country lanes at the time of the Boer War were only following the instinct implanted in them by their forbears of a century before. Madame Vigee her daughter is Lebrun, whose portrait of herself and still one of the favourite pictures in the Louvre, was staying A in England in 1803, an^ found her 1 Pop- Gun fired off" by George Cruikshank, in defence of the British Volunteers of 1803, p. 19. INVASION OF ENGLAND 107 Brighton scarcely conducive to her peace of mind "At the time I was there/' visit to or an incentive to work. she says, "the English feared a descent by the French. The generals were perpetually reviewing the militia, who for ever marching about with drums beating, making an infernal din." 1 were This display of patriotism was not confined to the poor and lowly. A man's social standing had nothing what" ever to do with it. The squire forgot " caste and stood shoulder to shoulder with the ploughman. Pitt, as Colonel of the Cinque Ports Volunteers, 2 drilled his troopers at Walmer Castle every day, Fox became a private in the Chertsey Volunteers, and the Duke of Clarence commanded a corps near his seat at Bushey, thereby setting a splendid example to others in high places. in loving Addington put Commons wearing a military uniform. at Walmer Even the peace- an appearance at the House of In a letter written Castle, the probable date of which 1803, Pitt tells Wilberforce We is August 8th, most are going on here proportion to our population, most extenevery species of local defence, both naval and and trust I shall both add very much to the military, security of essential points on this coast, and set not a bad rapidly, and " : in sively, in example to oth