onent parts, beg leave most respectfully to represent to your Lordship, 1 2 Section 53. Record Office. Internal Defence, 1803, Vol. I. Addressed to the Earl of Uxbridge, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Anglesea, and forwarded by him to Lord Hobart. NAPOLEON AND THE 6o and through your Lordship to His Majesty's Ministers, the weak and defenceless state of this County. "The number of Volunteers who had expressed their present readiness to defend their country with their lives, a great whom were willing to arm, and clothe themselves at * and all consented to march to the their own expense utmost limits of the Kingdom in case of Invasion or In order to render this force (which was Insurrection. part of ; hourly increasing) as effective as possible, a County subscription had been set on foot, for the purpose of Arming and clothing as many more as that Fund would admit of; and from the known liberality and Patriotism of the Inhabitants there was every reason to expect that the voluntary contributions would have been very considerable. " Thus rouzed was the spirit of this Loyal County thus animated were the Inhabitants with the most ardent ; zeal for the General welfare, when they learnt with the greatest mortification and concern that it was the intention number of Volunteers to six times that of the constitutional Militia, and consequently that the number to be raised in this county would be no of Government to limit the more than 768 ; a force so perfectly inadequate to the purpose of repelling a foreign foe, that in case of an attack it might not be found more than sufficient for the preservation of internal order and regularity. " However gratifying it is to them to observe that the of Individuals have far outstript the exertions spirited most sanguine expectations of the Country, and however wise it may be in His Majesty's Ministers generally to arm no more men than are deemed necessary, it is presumed that there may be some local circumstances which may make it prudent to deviate from the general system of defence with respect to those parts of the Kingdom which may be considered as most defenceless. In this state they 1 The is peculiar, and it seems probable that very large" was accidentally omitted. construction of this sentence some such expression as "was INVASION OF ENGLAND 61 conceive this County to be. If, as is commonly supposed, be the design of the Corsican Tyrant to cause diversions it and Government by landing in same time then there is no part of His Majesty's dominions however remote from the enemy secure and they have reason to believe it is not at distract the councils of many places at the ; impossible that this Island may be one object of the That this is far from improbable, will, it general Attack. is presumed be admitted when it is considered that Angleall sey is an Island on the Irish Channel possessing an extent of Sea Coast 60 Miles in circumference, vulnerable at all points that situated as it is at the utmost extremity of the North- Western District, and there not being (as they ; Regiment within six days march of this nor a place, single soldier in the Island, they are utterly destitute of the means of resistance. ." believe) a single . . were necessary, many similar cases could be cited. Writing on the 24th August, the Duke of Gordon, Lord If it Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire, points out to Lord Hobart that " the offers of service already given in to me for the county of .... far exceed the number allowed Aberdeen When forwarding to the Rt. Hon. Charles Yorke (3840)." his arrangements for the volunteer infantry of the same district the Duke admits " that he has thought it proper to confine his Force chiefly to the Coast, and by doing so have been under the necessity of declining the acceptance of numerous offers of Service from the Internal parts of the county the whole offers within the County amounting to very near 12,000 men." 1 At the end of October neither arms nor accoutrements had been sent for the men, and in same month a meeting of the Lieutenancy of Aberdeenshire was held which severely condemned the middle of the 1 8th September, 1803. Record Office. Internal Defence, 1803. NAPOLEON AND THE 62 the lack of attention on the part of the War Office. The continual changing of plans put so many stumbling-blocks " in the way, that as yet none of the Corps are embodied." The only regular troops in " this extensive Military District, reaching from Montrose northwards to the extremity of the Island, are two young regiments of Militia, one Troop of Dragoons, and some recruits for the Army of Reserve." The meeting also petitioned for " a more considerable naval force on the coasts of this part of the Kingdom. It is at present, as they are informed, confined to one vessel lying in the Firth of Forth." Written in pencil are these remarks on the back of the above document " Acknowledge] H[is] G[race]'s letter him that the Resolutions transmitted by H.G. and inform : ; have been transmitted to the Commander-in-Chief information. for his That V[ice] Afdmiral] Bligh 1 has received orders to proceed to Scotland to take the command of the vessels stationed for the defence of the Coast, that . . . be assured that the Admiralty are not unmindful of the protection necessary to be given to so important a part of H.M's dominions, (insert here some paragraphs H.G. may from the Admiralty letter, somewhat softened.) I have further the honor to inform H.G. that the Earl Moira sets Command of may rely upon it out for Edinburgh on this day to take the H.M's forces in Scotland, and that H.G. that everything will be done for the defence of Aberdeenshire that the exigencies of circumstances can require." This reply may have palliated the heartburnings of the worthy citizens of Aberdeen for a short time, but on the 5th November, 1803, the Duke of Gordon remarks that up 1 Sir Richard Rodney Bligh (1737-1821); Commander-in-Chief at Leith, 1803-4; G.C.B., 1820. INVASION OF ENGLAND to that date " 63 three corps only were supplied with arms. made to the Board of Ordnance for Application has been Arms, &c to the others, but they are not issued." In this hopelessly inadequate way the Government was " " preparing for the coming of Bonaparte's veterans. letter sent from the Secretary-at-War to the Lords Lieu- A tenant of Counties in October admits the tangle into which the various Acts had got. "Whatever difficulties may have attended the execution of these important measures of preparation and defence, it is a great satisfaction to reflect, zeal that they have arisen, in a great measure, from a and alacrity on the part of the people, which have exceeded even the hopes and expectations of the Government. They have proceeded from the spontaneous and unanimous feelings of a high-spirited nation, to maintain its determined independence against the utmost efforts of an insolent and implacable enemy and pressing forward, instantaneously, with one heart and mind, to uphold the ; honour of a beloved Sovereign, and to preserve and invaluable laws and liberties." 1 its ancient Eventually Scotland was divided into four military districts, the Northern with head-quarters at Aberdeen, under 2 Major-General the Marquis of Huntly; the Centre with head-quarters at Dundee, under Brigadier-General Donald M'Donald ; the Western with head-quarters at Glasgow, W. Wemyss and the Southern with under Major-General ; head-quarters at Musselburgh and 1 European Magazine^ 1803, West Barns, the former p. 325. 2 as This distinguished General (1770-1836) raised the regiment now known the Gordon Highlanders, which played a conspicuous part in the Napoleonic wars. 1827. The Marquis succeeded to the dukedom of Gordon in NAPOLEON AND THE 64 under Major-General Sir J. St. Clair Erskine, and the latter under Major-General Don. 1 Apropos of the unguarded state of the North British coasts, the Association for Promoting the Defence of the Firth of Forth and Scotland in General was started in and met with well-deserved success, the expenses being defrayed by voluntary contributions. In order to call attention to the objects of the Association, and to July, 1803, awaken the people to a sense of the danger which threatened them, a mass of patriotic literature and placards was sent broadcast all over the country. The sea fencibles were armed with to supply A pikes, but anybody sum was an apathetic Government had to teach the men failed the use of the weapon. and a drillpremium was also therefore set aside for this purpose master obtained, with good paid to the first twelve men results. A in the force who by their skill proved that they were capable of imparting their knowledge The ordinary volunteers were not forgotten, to others. a large number of silver medals was also struck for " presentation to the best shots of those competitors whose for regularity of conduct, drills, and punctuality of attendance were approved of by the commanding officer." at The " Report of the Association states that many of the companies in this district have by practice acquired so first great a degree of proficiency, that in their exercise every fifth or sixth shot is made to take place in a target of three feet diameter, at the distance of about 100 yards. This, with the precision common ; and if is a high degree of on a proportional scale may be accuracy battalion firelock, expected from them in 1 battle, the efficiency of the military History of the Edinburgh, or Queen's Regiment Light Infantry Militia, by Major R. C. Dudgeon. P- 39i Ai'O'i iii.osisoi- N.\ . lULNAPAiin; !'(,,'.: : . AN INVASION BROADSIDE OF AUGUST, 1 803 INVASION OF ENGLAND defence of the country will thereby, it is 65 evident, be greatly augmented." Colonel Crichton, one of the committee, invented a machine "to be fixed on coach or chaise-wheels," and drawn by two horses, which was large enough to carry from ten to twelve men with their arms and accoutrements. Experiments showed that this light vehicle could be hauled at the rate of seven miles an hour over fairly rough country, and was therefore of special value for conveying to another with fair rapidity men from one place should occasion require. Nearly one hundred of these vehicles were built and handed over to the Lord Lieutenant, and several suitable for artillery were stationed at Dunbar. Premiums were paid and others who had the greatest number of wheel-carriages mounted with these frames ready for use to farmers A new gun being introduced to the were Association, given to the inventor to carry on his experiments, and trials were made at Leith Fort. on the shortest notice. facilities A contract was entered into with some of the shipbuilders of Leith for the equipment of several vessels of from fifty to seventy tons, to be used as an auxiliary force for the defence of the Forth. The largest of these two 24 and out on experi- carried two i8-pounders. Another vessel was fitted mental lines, and twelve herring boats were also secured for 300 was voted for the purposes of defence. A sum of purchase of greatcoats for the volunteers. Within a short time military schools sprang up at most various places in the south of England, the important command of the which was under ShornclifTe being camp, General John Moore, and Essex, Kent, Sussex, and many other counties were dotted with the tents of soldiers but ; the hesitancy of Ministers as to II. F some definite plan of NAPOLEON AND THE 66 action, ment and the inordinate number of Acts of relating to internal defence, precluded Parlia- complete efficiency. "That the Emperor of the French was thoroughly in earnest can no longer be doubted," says Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Bunbury, who was on the staff of the Quartermaster-General's Department in Kent and Sussex at the " It is also pretty evident, that it was his design to land upon that part of the coast of England which lies nearest to Boulogne, that part which stretches from the The landing cliffs of Dover to the bor