n should be made to him on the subject." The Prime This called forth a lengthy rejoinder from the Prince and a curt answer from his royal father. " Should the implacable so far succeed as to land," says the letter, Enemy "you have an opportunity of showing your zeal at the head of your regiment. It will be the duty of every man to will stand forward on such an occasion think that mine to it is dear to ; and I shall certainly an example in defence of everything and to my people." 2 Further letters to set me the King, the Duke of York, and Addington meeting with no better response, the matter was allowed to drop, although the Prince was not shaken in his determination " If there : be reason to imagine that Invasion will take place directly, am bound, by the King's precise order, and by that honest zeal which is not allowed any fitter sphere for its I action, to hasten to 3 my regiment." On being presented with the freedom of the city of Chichester, the Prince of Wales took occasion to make the " I following public statement as to his intentions much gratified with this mark of your attention to : am me still more with the attachment you express and King my Family, which have been called to the Throne for the protection of the liberties of these Realms. personally, and to the I shall strive to merit both, prosperity of my Country my by making the glory and primary object The Prince of Wales to the Rt. Hon. Carlton House, July the i8th, 1803. 1 2 "G. R."to "My Dear Son." in whatever Henry Addington, dated from Dated from Windsor, August the ;th, 1803. 8 The Prince of Wales to the Rt. Hon. Carlton House, October the 24th, 1803. Henry Addington, dated from NAPOLEON AND THE 134 may be placed. In this struggle, my duty and prompts me to seize every occasion which circumstances will allow me of coming forward, and of shewing my 1 No less anxiety to stand and fall with my Country." was the made the of Duke to Clarence patriotic speech by situation I zeal " the Teddington Corps wherever our duty calls us, : My I Friends and Neighbours go with you fight in ! will ; 2 your ranks and never return home without you." Commander-in-Chief the Duke of York and Mr. Adding; ton planned to pay soldiers in cash in view of the probability that paper currency would depreciate on Bonaparte's landThe Government stored sufficient flour in or near ing. London to supply the metropolis for a fortnight, while there was sufficient in the hands of the millers to prevent famine for a further three weeks. 3 for the safety of his The King began make plans dominions, and to to fear for the removal of his family and treasure. 4 Fire beacons 5 were to be used to signal the approach of the French flotilla. They were made of "a large stack, of furze, or faggots, with some cord-wood in all, at least, eight waggon-loads, with three or four tar barrels, or pile, sufficient to yield two or three miles. a light unmistakable at a distance of These were to be used by night by ; day, a large quantity of hay was to be wetted and set 6 The premature alight, in order to produce a smoke." 1 3 European Magazine^ 1803, p. 325. The Life of Lord Sidmouth, Vol. II, 4 See 5 Some letter to 2 Ibid., p. 326. p. 227. Bishop Hurd in Introduction, p. xvii. interesting information as to the operation of these beacons in Dorsetshire will be found in The Three Dorset Captains at Trafalgar^ p. 5. The subject has been most dramatically treated by Thomas his charming novel The Trumpet Major. Hardy, both The Dynasts and 6 English Caricature and Satire on Napoleon I, p. 128, by John Ash ton. in INVASION OF ENGLAND firing of a beacon at Hume 135 Castle, Berwickshire, proved that the volunteers of the southern district of Scotland were by no means dismayed when they were summoned They supposed landing of the invaders. flocked from all quarters to their respective rendezvous to resist the ; one might have thought that they belonged to a regular Highland regiment, so eager were they to defend hearth and home. Sir Walter Scott, who with writes the authority of an eye-witness, has left a brief record of this amazing display of devotion to a common cause : "The men of Liddesdale," he says, "the most remote to westward which the alarm reached, were so the point much afraid of being late in the field that they put in requisition all the horses they could find, and when they had thus made a forced march out of their own county they turned their borrowed steeds loose to find their way back through the hills, and they all got safely back to their own stables. The Selkirkshire Yeomanry made a remark- able march, for although some of the individuals lived at twenty or thirty miles distant from the place where they mustered, they were, nevertheless, embodied and in order in so short a period that they were at Dalkeith, which was their the alarm post, about one o'clock on the day succeeding first signal, with men and horses in good order, though many of the troopers the roads were in a bad state, and must have ridden forty or fifty miles without drawing bridle." 1 In October, 1803, the poet Crabbe was staying in Aidborough, his native town, when alarm signals were fired. His son 1 " burst into his father's room and awoke him with Note to The Antiquary (ed. Black, 1891), p. 521. occurred on the evening of the 2nd February, 1804. This false alarm NAPOLEON AND THE 136 some ' difficulty, saying, Do not be alarmed, but the French are landing, and the drum on the quay is beating to arms to which Crabbe replied, Well, you and I can ' ' ; do no good, or we would be among them we must wait the event.' Such was his indifference to these warlike rumours and his resignation to the inevitable that he soon ; afterwards Of fast asleep." 1 fell a less philosophical Twining, who " 1803, says: Colchester. Many have I I left, more are preparing to leave is very very uneasy to stay here the mind was Thomas dated Colchester, October I3th, suppose you will not ask me why I leave leave it because I am afraid to stay in it. myself think there till turn of in a letter moment able to get away on my back." 2 little danger, yet and run the number of in order to had spread the military inhabitants of Boulogne General Villatte went so far as to the plague amongst caused much anxiety. on the matter, which read as follows To alone. Kingdom infected bales of cotton been thrown from British cruisers " I though I should be of alarm upon the coast, at all unless I walk away with a knapsack report that a issue a circular ; And if I stay I may not be risk. Scares were not confined to the United The it the Ports "BATTERY OF Along : the Coast. ST. FRIEUX, 2$tk Ventose.XIL [i6th March, 1804]. " Remain at your posts, Citizens, and increase your vigilance. 1 George Crabbe and His 7'imes, 1754-1832, p. 198, by Rene Huchon. Translated by Frederick Clarke, M.A. 2 (Ed. Murray, 1882, pp. 235-6). Quoted in above, p. 198. INVASION OF ENGLAND " The English, unable to conquer us ploying their last resource " : by force, are 137 em- the Plague. Five bales of cotton have just been thrown upon our coast. "All are hereby forbidden to approach any boats or Let patrols be inobjects that may be cast on shore. stantly on foot let them be accompanied by custom-house ; officers - " VlLLATTE, General of Brigade. " P.S. These presents shall pass from port to port, from the battery of Petite-Garonne to the entrance of the harbour at Boulogne." At the First Consul's instigation searching inquiries were made, with the result that the source of this alarming report was found to be an old hammock which had been washed up on the beach. Invasion instructions now being thought imminent, the following were issued by the General commanding the Southern District of England " As : is most desirable and essential on the near of the expected enemy, or his actual landing, approach on the coast of Kent, that the quickest intelligence of such an event, should be diffused over the whole county, it is judged expedient, for this purpose, to establish fire beacons on the it fifteen or sixteen most conspicuous and elevated points of the county, which successively taking up the signal, beginning from Canterbury, (headquarters) in con- sequence of intelligence received there, will, in a very short space of time, communicate it to the most distant part of the county and, on which signal, every one is immediately to assemble at his known place of rendezvous, ; and there expect and receive orders for his further proceedings, from the General Officer, under whose command the several Volunteer and other Corps are placed." NAPOLEON AND THE 138 During the course of a debate on military matters at Stephen's on the Qth December, 1803, Charles Yorke, whom George III said was the best Secretary -at -War he had ever had, 1 stated that the army " had been nearly St. doubled since the last session, having been augmented from 60,000 to nearly 120,000 men. As to the system of the Army of Reserve, it was similar to that which was almost universally followed abroad, that of having batThe militia were in excellent order, and talions in depot. 70,000 men in England, and 14,000 in volunteers amounted to 380,000 men, amounted to Scotland. The 340,000 of whom were infantry, and were disciplined almost was possible for any equal number of men in Although they might not be able to meet the enemy in line, yet there were many situations in which they might and with the greatest advantage. As to their as well as the same it time. clothing, he thought it much better that they should be dressed like the regular soldiers, as the enemy, at a short 2 distance, might take them for regulars." Pitt, who was the next speaker, said that he wished to see the volunteer forces of the country " brought to the utmost possible pitch of perfection." volunteers, instead of receiving be remunerated 1 Rose's Diaries, pay for He suggested that twenty days, should for forty or fifty days. Vol. II, p. 165. Yorke became Home Secretary in August, 1803. Annual Register, 1804, p. 17. A list of yeomanry and volunteer corps accepted and placed on the establishment in Great Britain issued from Whitehall, gth December, 1803, thus sums up the force Total of effective 2 : rank and file, staff officers, 341,687 noo; ; field officers, Serjeants, 14,787 1246 ; ; captains, 4472; subalterns, 9918 drummers, 6733; making a grand ; total of 379,943 men. Devonshire returned the largest number of volunteers, with 15,212 ; followed by Lancashire, 14,278 ; West Riding of Yorkshire, 14,006 ; London, 12,460; Westminster, 10,684; and Kent, 10,295. 8000 were artillery, and 33,000 cavalry. See also ante. Vol. Of I, p. these some 52, note. INVASION OF ENGLAND Mr. T. Grenville went further. ment roundly and pointed out He 139 abused the Govern- although the army consisted of 120,000 men, "70,000 were to be deducted from that number for the militia, which would leave that, and 50,000 only, who deserved the name of regulars a great proportion of which was in the army of reserve." The conduct of Addington's administration was ably ; defended by Lord Castlereagh, who went into elaborate " statistics in an endeavour to make a good case. The army of the United Kingdom," he state of the " was this there were : 1 30,000 men in 50,000 in Ireland on permanent pay 180,000 men the militia amounted to of this total of ; regulars to 96,000 ; 84,000, The for general service. force consisted of 340,000 in Great Britain, making a and the of which 27,000 are for limited service, and 69,000 disposable Ireland, averred, Great Britain, and total of 410,000. The volunteer and 70,000 in sea-fencibles The gross force of the United Kingdom then be considered as 700,000 men in arms. might The total force in Ireland consisted of 120,000 when all were 25,000. . . . armed, and the number could be considerably increased. In Great Britain there were about 1 20,000 of the volunteers yet remained to be armed with muskets, the arms that could be spared havi