g Col. Dorien as Senior Officer to lead the Heavy Regiments and Colonel Lin8 singer the light Regiments of Cavalry, M. Genl Finch and Fitzroy the two Brigades of British Infantry and ; ; ; Brigadier Genl. Whetham the Batt 8 of Infantry of the Col. Levisson from Plymouth could be German Legion, if spared [he] would make an admirable commander of the this little corps flank companies acting as light troops would then render Dorsetshire safe and might be useful in : moving either towards Portsmouth or Plymouth if the attempt is made on either of those great naval arsenals. The Adjutant and Quartermaster Generals had best remain in the Capital for the use of Head Quarters and the assistance of their departments of the District will fully answer what may be required. If one of those Brigades under Jarret could be added for the occasion notice should be given for the attendance of the 6 th named Aide-de- Camp may be ; thus and your placed at own secured \sic\ and their horses Radipole Barracks. " I remain my " dear Frederick " Yours "GEORGE R." INVASION OF ENGLAND No less interesting is 147 a communication in which the King county, indeed Dorsetshire seems ever to have been thoughts ON BOARD THE ROYAL ' "Monday, My in his : " " same gives further instructions for the defence of the SOVEREIGN.' Sept. loth, 1804. Dear Frederick, " I return the Lists of Commissions which having my approbation I have signed and return that met with all the Subsequent Steps may be taken for preparing the Commissions the Arrangements for the Volunteers and ; Lieut. Gen 8 to be called forth in case of actual Invasion meet with my fullest approbation. " I have seen the Assistant Barrack Master Gen and 1 fully approved of the Plan He has proposed for additions and erecting a Riding House which will one of the best Cavalry Barracks in the Kingdom and a Regiment at least must ever be placed here, as also a Batallion \sic\ in the Foot Barracks, for Dorsetshire is one of the most vulnerable parts of the Kingdom. I ever remain to the Barracks, render ; it " My "Dear Frederick, Your most affectionate Father, "GEORGE R." 1 power put a strong hand at the helm of Bent on " setting Europe to rights," he was Pitt's return to Government. the only British statesman at that time strong enough to Once a grapple with the double-dealings of Napoleon. man of peace, and if not actually an upholder of the French Revolution, he was for allowing that nation to work out its own destiny, he now felt convinced that war, long and protracted though 1 it might be, must continue the Mr. Broadley's collection of Invasion MSS. NAPOLEON AND THE 148 policy of Great Britain until either that country or France Pitt and the King were never any too finally triumphed. Each regarded the other with a certain amount of suspicion. The "obstinate upper lip" of the Minister did not admit of the complacence which made Addington cordial. so beloved of His Majesty. Pitt's character is almost as complex as that of Napoleon. Never were two great men so like and yet so unlike. Had Pitt possessed the robust constitution, the indomitable perseverance, the sleepless energy of Napoleon, Waterloo might have been fought a dozen years earlier. Despot he unquestionably was, and while the Man of Destiny intrigued, Chatham's son plotted with those Governments of Europe which were not under the domination of France. 9,024,8 1 7. from the I os. 6d. in coffers of During his administrations the form of direct gifts were taken Downing Street to replenish the war- chests of Continental Powers. 1 " In Pitt's dictionary " delay was printed in capitals, while with Napoleon time was "everything," although in diplomatic affairs the latter knew the value of temporizing when it was necessary. 2 Pitt's was a when compared with his antagonist's progressive one, cost his country millions in consequence. If Pitt and it had faults, his great vacillating policy crisis in good points were equally evident. At this our national history he plunged into the 1 Rosebery's Pitt, Appendix A. in 1806, after Pitt's death, when Fox, then Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, proposed a cessation of hostilities. Coquelle gives it as his opinion that it was always Napoleon's policy to be "unwilling to break off 2 As negotiations with England, for he was unwilling that public opinion should hold him responsible for the continuation of the war. In all the negotiations he carried on up till 1814, he kept this principle clearly before him ; to arrange matters in such a way as to make his opponents bear the odium for which he alone was responsible." Napoleon and England, 1803-1813 > p. 90. INVASION OF ENGLAND man who had struggle with the desperate energy of a much to do and so little time to do it marked him for his own, and his lamp of Notwithstanding flickering. this, his 149 so Death had in. was already wonderful ability was life placed at the nation's service unremittingly, and it never he was laid by the side of Chatham in Westminster Abbey. " What sepulchre," exclaimed Wellesley, failed until "embosoms much glory Much of the remains of so much excellence and so " ! Pitt's time was now taken up with his scheme kingdom. To adding end he introduced the Additional Force Bill, which to the military strength of the for this was calculated to revitalize the regular army and add con- Doubtless the new Chancellor of siderably to its ranks. the Exchequer would have liked to introduce those plans for reform which had ever been his first love, but this was Everything had to bow before the one great subject which filled the public mind, and that was how best to repel the invasion which, from all continental impracticable. accounts, every day brought nearer. The dying statesman faced the problem, but in the of 1 805 confessed that his early days plan of defence had not come up to his expectations, the number of men joining small. Six hundred thousand and volunteers were now ready to take the however, and the King in his speech from the throne the regular army being very troops, militia, 1 field, " expressed himself as being well satisfied with the unabated zeal and improved discipline of a vast volunteer force, and 1 According to the official strength of the army, rank and and colonial troops. enrolled volunteers, defence. returns of January 1st, 1805, the effective file, was 139,491, exclusive of 22,375 foreign The militia numbered 89,809, and there were 360,814 making a grand total of 590,114 armed men for internal NAPOLEON AND THE 150 the general ardour manifested by every class of his subjects, which, in their united effort, had completely checked, and had been abundantly sufficient to deter the enemy from so desperate and hopeless an enterprise." At the same time His Majesty urged upon his subjects the necessity for not The crisis was not yet over. martello towers were erected round the Seventy-four coast, and many of them are still standing, silent witnesses to England's peril at the beginning of the nineteenth relaxing their efforts. They century. are circular in form, the diameter being about forty feet at the base and thirty feet at the top, with a height of thirty feet. The brick walls vary in thickness from nine feet to seaward to six feet on the land- ward The side. designed for one above buildings are of two stories, the lower one a powder magazine and warehouse, and the for additional accommodation. The flat roofs are bomb-proof, surrounded by a breastwork four feet swivel gun and two howitzers comprised their high. A armament. These peculiar fortifications, which closely resemble an inverted flower-pot on a mammoth scale, cost from 7000 upwards. During the last few years a large number of them have been disposed of, but of those resome are still used by the War Office and the tained Admiralty for various purposes other than defence. Of the two martello towers at Felixstowe, for instance, one has for cattle, and is the property of a private person, while the other serves for an Admiralty Marconi station. As an additional means of defence it was been converted into a shelter proposed to flood the low-lying portions of Kent and Sussex by damming the sluices which drained the water from the land, but the scheme was abandoned. A more practical measure was the excavation of the Royal Military INVASION OF ENGLAND Canal from Hythe Marsh, one of the Rye, thus to 151 cutting off Romney districts likely to afford a landing-place for Bonaparte's legions. The veteran General Dumouriez very ably sums up the question of the defence of the British Isles a little before If Napoleon landed in Lincolnshire, the former Governor of Cherbourg was confident that Spalding camp would stop his march on London, " whilst the army corps Trafalgar. assembled round Lincoln would surround him, starve him, and compel him to surrender." Should Yarmouth be the chosen spot, the town had adequate defences. There was a camp at Gorleston, and an army to defend such important Norwich, Beccles, and Bungay. centres as also protected, while well the Colchester Suffolk was camp was admirably placed to resist an incursion in Essex. Kent plentifully supplied with armed men, and the Western and Midland divisions could be hurriedly and Sussex were any point attacked. The camp on the Isle of was the pivot of the defence of the Thames, and Sheppey there was a second large body of soldiers at Canterbury. marched " to Romney and Rye have by the excellent that now the a prescribed defence, backed up Oxney." Dumouriez concludes at camp Emperor will not put " his scheme into execu- be only too glad very shortly, under Bonaparte pretext of continental wars, to break off all his immense tion. will and puerile preparations, and take his troops off to Italy or The English must never relax their defence Germany. . . . so long as this demonstration lasts, if only to keep up the martial energy of the nation to full pitch, and possibly use it during the continental war that is without doubt on the eve of breaking out." 1 1 As events proved, the foresight of Dumouriez MS., August, 1805, pp. 280-9. INVASION OF ENGLAND 152 Dumouriez was phenomenal. prophet esteemed in If the remaining twenty years of his now rest. he was not treated as a own country, he certainly deserved to be so that of his adoption, where he elected to spend in his life, and where his bones CHAPTER XVI THE ADMIRALS WHO WATCHED, " 1803 never did, or never shall, desert the service of I do more than serve till I drop?" I AND my but what can 1804 country; NELSON. day following the renewal of war saw Admiral Cornwallis, 1 with ten sail-of-the-line, on the way to I mask Ushant, there to which fleet, Bonaparte had a thorough state of repair and arma- the his station off Brest ordered to be put in ment. At a later period the blockading fleet was increased to twenty sail and a number of frigates, and in the year of reached a total of thirty-four vessels. it Trafalgar Vice- Admiral Lord Nelson commanded in the Mediterranean, which was now assumed to be of some importance, and was soon to prove all-important; Admiral Lord Keith 2 was in the Downs, while at Portsmouth was Lord Gardner, 3 and 1 at 4 Plymouth Admiral George Montagu, succeeded The Hon. Admiral William Cornwallis of the Channel (b. 1744). Commander-in-Chief from February, 1801, to February, 1806 ; Vice- Admiral of Great Britain, May I4th, 1814; d. 1819. 2 Admiral Lord Keith (George Keith Elphinstone), b. 1747. He was made a peer of Great Britain in 1801 for his services in connection with the Egyptian Lord Keith continued on the active list until 1815 ; d. 1823. Expedition. 3 Admiral Lord Gardner (b. 1742). Commander-in-Chief on the Irish station, August 3Oth, 1800; of Ireland 4 fleet ; on December 23rd, 1800, he was made a peer d. 1809. Admiral Sir George Montagu, K.G.C. Portsmouth, June, 1803, to January, 1809 153 (b. ; 1750). Commander-in-Chief at K.G.C., 1815; d. 1829. NAPOLEON AND THE 154 on June 8th, 1803, by Admiral Sir Joh