ship will hear from all quarters that Bonaparte . . . threatens us hard, and perceive that his Majesty's Ministers, in consequence the nation in general, believe he will and make the attempt to carry his threats into execuI am very confident he will fail. but At the same tion, I he by am confess should bound to that time, however, luck make a with considerable force good landing any either in England, Ireland, or Scotland, the country would be thrown into such confusion there is no saying to what extent the evil might go. We are, I am happy to tell certainly you, well prepared and are improving daily." With l the dawning of a new year Nelson's opinions on the destination of the Toulon fleet underwent several changes. 1 Mr. Broadley's collection of MSS. NAPOLEON AND THE 174 He came to the conclusion, after was either bound former. On much deliberation, that it for Ireland or the Levant, probably the hearing in February, 1804, that the enemy's squadrons were about to sail, he was equally positive that " the " ultimate object of the Corsican tyrant was Egypt. 1 This difference of opinion is not surprising. The First Consul had done everything possible, by feints at Brest, suggesting that the Emerald Isle was threatened and by the establishment of a camp under General St. Cyr at ; Taranto, to make believe that an expedition to the East was contemplated, order deceive the "ravening wolves of the seas," as he persistently called the English " in to sea dogs." On January 3 1804, we find Nelson writing to Sir John Acton at Naples that he "which are the eyes of a sadly in want of frigates, 2 a complaint re-echoed fleet/' is correspondence of Cornwallis, as has already been noted. Owing to the terrible stress of weather, he had in the been compelled to send three frigates into port to be reThe dearth of ships was indeed a very serious fitted. There were now ten fewer sail-of-the-line in the matter. navy than had been available in the previous camThis was largely due to St. Vincent's economical paign. turn of mind. By his "penny wise and pound foolish" 3 policy he had cut down expenses to such a low ebb that British old vessels were not even patched up. Collingwood, who 2 Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. V, p. 411. Ibid., p. 396. In these days when it seems likely that reduction and retrenchment will once more become the motto of those responsible to the Empire for the effi1 3 ciency of the navy, it would be well if the position of our fleet at this period of the Great Terror be brought to mind. History has repeated itself very often in the past. future. It is not impossible that it may do the same in the INVASION OF ENGLAND was not 175 in the habit of complaining, acknowledged that the Dreadnought, although a good ship in many respects, " has been ill fitted out for it was a part of Lord St. ; Vincent's employ convicts to fit out the ships, instead of the men and officers who were to sail in them. economy The consequence to is, that they are wanting in every kind of arrangement that skilful men would have made, and most of them have been obliged to be docked since their l At a later date he equipment, at a very great expense." " writes You will be surprised to hear that most of the : knees which were used in the Hibernia were taken from Spanish ships captured on the I4th of February [1797]; and what they could not furnish was supplied by the iron!" 2 " We are on the eve of great events," Nelson announces on April 8th, 1804. sail-of-the-line "Last week, put their at different times, heads outside Toulon ; two and on Thursday, the 5th, in the afternoon, they all came out. We have had a gale of wind and calm since therefore I do ; not know whether they are returned to port or have kept I have only to wish to get alongside of them so highly with the present fleet under my command officered and manned, the event ought not to be to sea. ; doubted." 3 On April 7th a frigate informed him that she had sighted the French fleet outside Toulon two days before. Two frigates were thereupon despatched in the hope of getting further information that the enemy quarters. 1 3 ; A would lead to their meeting with but they had all returned to their home couple of days afterwards the Frenchmen Correspondence of Lord Collingwood, p. 98. Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. V, p. 489. 2 Ibid. , p. 100. NAPOLEON AND THE 176 took another walk round, when the Amazon captured a large brig almost under the enemy's batteries. The following day four sail-of-the-line and three frigates made a great parade and attempted to recapture the lost ship. When the British vessels drew near, however, they turned about, and with on playing " this some day we put back to port. "If they go Nelson writes to Lady Hamilton, game," all sails set, shall lay salt upon their tails." 1 Bonaparte, after debating several schemes, had at last perfected his plans for the combination of fleets, which to be effected at the earliest favourable moment. La Touche TreVille was to leave Toulon, touch at Cadiz, and add the French sail-of-the-line VAigle to his fleet, elude was the vigilance of the English squadron off Rochefort, where he would be joined by Villeneuve's five ships, and then make for army for Ireland. Boulogne with all speed. With the consummate craftiness of which Napoleon was past master, he caused reports to be circulated that the Brest fleet was really the centre of operations, and that it was about to embark an This would necessitate the constant presence of Cornwallis's ships, and prevent the Admiral from rendering assistance to the squadron in the Downs for fear of Ganteaume, who was now in command at Brest, Protected by the sixteen sail-of-themaking line thus brought together, the 1 30,000 men of the Army of England would pass over to the Promised Land. 2 his escape. he kept in the background Touche TreVille would one day take his ships for Nelson's supposition that La if another trip proved correct. On the I4th June, 1804, 1 Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. V, p. 491. 2 Mahan's Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution, Vol. p. 125. II, INVASION OF ENGLAND 177 he edged out of the harbour with eight sail-of-the-line and several frigates. Rear-Admiral Campbell, with the Canopus, Donegal, and Amazon, was reconnoitring, and the French Admiral immediately gave chase. It was hardly to be expected that three vessels would combat with eight ships " as fine as paint can make them." Campbell thought it well to edge his way towards Nelson. When La Touche Tr^ville saw the main body of the he at once flew orders to return to port, English after having sailed about four leagues. He found in this miniature skirmish an excellent opportunity for self-glorififleet Accordingly it was given to the world in general, and to the French nation in particular, that Nelson had run cation. " I pursued him until night," says the official "he ran to the south-east. In the morning, at report; The whole statement daylight, I saw no more of him." was a tissue of lies, but it served its purpose, and La away. Touche was warmly applauded as a fitting antaCopenhagen and the Nile. So confident was Napoleon that the invasion would take place during the year that he told M. Denon, head of the French Mint, to prepare a medal in commemoration of the The obverse event, and trial pieces were actually struck. Treville gonist of the hero of bears the head of Napoleon, whilst the reverse represents Hercules crushing the sea monster, thus typifying the downfall of the greatest maritime Power. The inscription Descente en is Angleterre Frappfo a Londres-en, 1804.} 1 For further information as to this medal and other French and English medals connected with the invasion projects of the Great Terror and the volunteer movement they originated see chapter xxi, in which they are fully dealt with. II. N NAPOLEON AND THE i;8 When tail" the man who was supposed to have "turned heard of the scurrilous document he was furious. was a good friend If Nelson he was a bitter La Touche's "You will have seen Monsieur how he chased me and how I ran," enemy. letter of " he said to his brother. take him, he "Such a which " I shall eat liar is it." below be done will must be conceded that it l my if it I and by God, another occasion he keep On notice, is in it if ; I said, except to thrash him, my " power ; and again, never heard of his acting otherwise than as a poltroon and a liar." Nelson was unable to wreak his vengeance on his adversary, for La Touche Treville died on board the Bucentaure on August 1 8th, 1804, of over-exertion, brought on "in consequence of walking so often up to the signal-post upon Sepet to watch the British fleet" at least, so the French papers his death," said. " I always pronounced that would be humour. said Nelson, with a touch of grim Villeneuve was appointed to succeed La Touche Treville, who was buried on the summit of Cape Sepet. " From these heights," said Villeneuve at the open grave, " which command the harbour and our ships, the shade of La Touche be Treville will inspire us in our enterprises ; he will midst of us, and with our eyes turned towards his tomb, we shall feel ourselves imbued with that indefatigable zeal, that courage at once prudent and intrepid that love of glory and of his country, which, ever present in the whilst they are objects regret Sailors Touche in ! him, must be of our eternal admiration and also objects of our they will be such to me. gives you this promise. 1 The emulation. successor of La Promise, on your part, Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, p. 147. INVASION OF ENGLAND 179 with the same claims, he shall receive from you the same fidelity and the same attachment/' 1 that, Nelson's health was now worse that he could only last a few than ever, and he felt if he continued months longer mercy of the elements. But throughout correspondence during this time of trial and stress there is the cheerful, optimistic note that eventually the to remain at the his opportunity will come for him to annihilate the French fleet. One thing he is perfectly certain about, and that is, "we is never have a solid Peace until the Invasion shall tried and found to fail." 2 Nelson was unflinching in the performance of his duty, to the welfare of his seamen. attention paying particular letter to Mr. Marsden of the Admiralty shows that he A had no sympathy with either unscrupulous Government In acknowledging the contractors or somnolent officials. receipt of " frocks " and trousers for his sailors he remarks " instead of their being made of good Russian duck, as was formerly supplied the Seamen of his Majesty's Navy, the frocks at 45. 8d. each and the trousers at that per pair, those sent out are made of coarse wrapperthe frocks twopence each, stuff and the price increased 43. and the think their trousers threepence per pair. ... I therefore you one of each, in order that Lordships may judge of their quality and price and at the it necessary to send ; same time beg to observe, for their information, that the issuing such coarse stuff to the people who have been accustomed to good Russian duck cheaper, will no doubt occasion murmur and discontent, and may have serious 1 Naval War, Vol. II, pp. 162-3, by Captain E. Translated by the Hon. Captain Plunkett, R.N. Dated April iith, 1804. Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. V, p. 492. Sketches of the Last Jurien de la Graviere. 2 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 80 I therefore am most consequences. decidedly of opinion, that the Contractor who furnished such stuff ought to be hanged and little else, if anything, " have received them from him. is ; . . 1 due to those who In August Nelson . Amazon, which ship was wrote to Captain Parker of the refitting at Malta, telling him to make haste to rejoin the " for the day of Battle cannot be far off, when I shall fleet, want every Frigate for the French have nearly one for every ship, and we may as well have a Battle Royal, Lineof-Battle Ships opposed to Ships-of-the-Line and Frigates ; to Frigates. On " 2 . . .