ng been first given to the volunteers of the metropolis, and of the counties on the sea coast. As to the navy, the number of ships of war amounted to 469, and an armed flotilla of small craft, to the amount of 800, could be speedily added. The ordnance and every other branch of the public service had been considerably 1 augmented." Fox threw 1 in his lot against the Government. See Life of Lord Sidmouth, Vol. II, p. 235-6. "As they NAPOLEON AND THE 140 professed to be lasting," fools' know he that the peace of Amiens could not " and called those people nature's said, * who thought 1 have made otherwise, they should greater exertions, and have had more than 300,000 muskets This was the beginning of the end. No party could hope to cling to office in face of a continual onslaught on the part of so keen an opposition, backed by ready." public opinion, which was clamouring for more vigorous measures of defence in a voice daily gaining in strength. Towards the end of 1803 the Volunteer Amendment was brought before the House of Commons. Many commanding officers had been unable to send in their returns of the number of volunteers as required by the Army of Reserve Act, for want of the arms being distributed, and the reports had to state that they were Bill " " fully equipped." The present Bill," said Mr. Secretary Yorke on the igth December, 1803, "was to remedy those defects. The number of days which it would be necessary to have attended, for the purpose of claiming an exemption from service, in the army of reserve, or The Bill provoked a militia, would be twenty -five." flood of oratory on both sides of the House. Addington admitted that there had been " several defects and incon- who was splendid in power, but superb by saying that "Ministers could claim the merit of hardly originating any of the measures which had hitherto been taken for the defence of the veniences." Pitt, in opposition, retorted country. They had rather retarded and enfeebled the volunteer system, than contributed anything to its force and efficiency." In a particularly strong and forceful speech 1 Annual Register, 1804, P- 19- made in the PITT BRINGS KOX AM) SHERIDAN INTO LINE. NOVEMBER, 1803 INVASION OF ENGLAND House his of open Commons on hostility to the 141 the I5th March, 1804, Pitt showed Addington Ministry by asking for an inquiry into the condition of the navy, prefacing his remarks by stating that only twenty-three gunboats had been built since the beginning of 1803, while in the same period Pitt the enemy had launched nearly one thousand. pacific Wilber- was warmly supported by the usually " voted for the inquiry because he imagined that the result of such a proceeding would be to clear the force. Fox character of Lord St. Vincent from and kinds of censure all suspicion." Addington turned on Pitt by averring that the small craft which had been built by the previous Administration were "utterly unserviceable, and could not go, without danger, from Plymouth to the Eddystone lighthouse." Mr. Tierney waxed wroth and descended to personalities. "The country was much indebted to Mr. Pitt for his exertions as a volunteer, but he thought the land service was enough for him, and that he might leave the sea service to abler hands." the-line, frigates, sloops, There were, he said, 5 1 1 ships-ofand smaller vessels, nine block 373 lighters and small craft, fitted out in the King's yards, and 624 boats of the flotilla, completely equipped and ready for service. The motion for inquiry was lost by ships, a majority of 71, but shortly afterwards it came out that the Army of Reserve was 14,000 short of its full strength, and Mr. Secretary Yorke admitted that the total of the March was 267,043 men, including the militia and artillery, which was a decrease of 12,000 on the returns of the ist October, iSoi. 1 more damaging regular force on the ist A admission could hardly have been made. 1 Annual Register , 1804, p. 65. NAPOLEON AND THE 142 The economies practised during Earl St. Vincent's term of office at the Admiralty, although made in good faith and with a view to ultimate benefits, afford a particularly glaring instance of the failure in certain quarters was usually a means and that end was war with an augmented army. " James, the naval historian, records that many old and useful officers and a vast number of artificers had been to realize that with Bonaparte a peace to an end, the customary discharged from the King's dockyards of timber and other important articles of naval supplies stores had been omitted to be kept up and some articles, ; ; including a large portion of hemp, had actually been sold out of the service. deficiency of workmen and of materials A produced, of course, a suspension in the routine of dockyard New ships could not be built nor could old business. ; ones be repaired. of the ships in commission, too, having been merely patched up, were scarcely in a state to * keep the sea." Many At a later date Pitt poured the vials of his wrath on the Government for not exerting itself more in the way of He accused the increasing the usefulness of the army. " Ministers of contradictions in the plans, repugnancies in the measures, and imbecility in the execution : nothing in which every step has not been marked by unnecessary It is clear that Pitt was no mere seeker after delay." and when Addington resigned 2 it became perfectly obvious that Chatham's son would have to be a modern Atlas, supporting the world on his already enfeebled office, shoulders. 1 2 it At the time James's Naval History (\^^ Fox was not in the good graces edition), Vol. Ill, p. 212. Addington sent his resignation to the King on the 26th April, 1804, but was not made public until the I2th May. INVASION OF ENGLAND 143 of George III, and although Pitt was anxious to have his Cabinet strengthened by so able a statesman, the King As a consequence Lord man" who had already served as refused. Foreign Affairs, and was Grenville, "that proud Secretary of State for Pitt's first cousin, "with many 1 would not accept office. and some qualities," Four future Prime Ministers sat at the table of Pitt's second Administration, and Lord Melville (Henry Dundas) talents succeeded St. Vincent, an appointment which, in the light 2 of after-events, was singularly unfortunate. So far as the internal condition of England is concerned, her state was far from satisfactory. For thirteen years that is, from 1789 to 1802 agriculture had been going from bad to worse, and it was only now beginning to show As a consequence the slight signs of improvement. farmer and the labourer, never too optimistic at the best of grumbled louder than ever. Nevertheless, allowing of people who in times of war either think that armed force should never be resorted to, times, for the usual proportion or that if it is the Empire is bound to suffer defeat " this tempting Providence, the men showed good public spirit. They answered the appeals for volunteers as Britishers always have done in times of crisis, but when time" for by Lord Rosebery. In the Tenth Report of the Commissioners of Naval Inquiry, appointed under Mr. Addington's regime, mention was made of various malpractices, The matter was brought before and suspicion was thrown on Lord Melville. 1 Pitt, p. 115, 2 Parliament on the I3th February, 1805. The opposition seized upon this exposure with avidity, and a division took place, resulting in 216 votes to 216. The Speaker gave his casting vote against the First Lord of the Admiralty, and Melville was censured as ' guilty of a gross violation of the law, and a high breach of duty." The unhappy statesman resigned, and on the matter ' being brought up again he was impeached of high crimes and misdemeanours, but was ultimately acquitted. NAPOLEON AND THE 144 Mr. Secretary Yorke blandly stated that they might be considered as armed if they carried pikes, the patriots very justly considered themselves slighted. On May day on which Pitt took his seat on the ministerial bench of the House of Commons as Prime Minister, and Napoleon became Emperor, London was en to the fete, 1 8th, 1804, the the occasion being the presentation of colours Loyal London Volunteers at Blackheath. The Duke of York, accompanied by the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, proceeded from the Tower in the Lord Nelson barge followed by the regiments in the river fencible boats and many hundreds of smaller craft. Father Thames perhaps never bore a more stately pageant as the flotilla slowly Salutes from temporary made its way down-stream. and volleys fired by corps of volunteers lining the banks mingled with the music of regimental bands. Nearly all the ships lying at anchor were decorated. At batteries Greenwich the veterans of a hundred fights welcomed the men who were to defy Bonaparte, and the ten regiments then marched to Blackheath. There they were met by Princess Charlotte and a large party of notable people, the " It was colours being presented by the Lord Mayor. reserved for the present age," he said in the course of a " lengthy speech, to prove the falsehood of the imputation that the genius of commerce had subdued the fire of freedom in our breasts ; and to evince that those, who by and industry best learn to acquire wealth, by intrepidity and exertions best know how to preserve civilization their The whole of the volunteers then passed before the Duke of York and the Princess, and fired a royal salute. The King certainly did not minimize the responsibilities it." of his position, and was fully alive to the impending crisis. INVASION OF ENGLAND 145 1 following communication to the Duke of York is yet another proof of his keen personal interest in all that The appertained to the welfare of his troops. His Majesty's anxiety as to the vulnerability of Dorsetshire was doubtless aroused by its comparative proximity to Brest, and shows that Napoleon was right in his belief that the fleet in that important roadstead would be one of the chief concerns of England. "QUEEN'S PALACE, KEW. " "June My " 15, 1804. Dear Frederick, Genl. Bertie from the 9th to the 77 th Reg* of Foot on the death of Genl. Marsh meets with my thorough approbation as well as Lieut. Genl. Hunter's The removing th rd succeeding to the 9 and Lord Charles Fitzroy to the 3 This I trust will very naturally Battalion of the 6o th give the other Coldstream the advantage of a promotion on the next vacant Reg1 of Infantry by removing M. Genl. Cowell to a Battalion of the 6oth or a Black Reg* by advancing the excellent Adjutant from one of these Corps to . an Old Regiment of Foot. " I cannot deny I am rather hurt that there is any objection made to forming so large an Army of Reserves in Dorsetshire where, or in Cornwall, I think an attack more likely than in Essex, Kent or Sussex but as I am not obstinate, I will agree to lessen the demands from ; other districts, by only calling for M. Genl. Finch's brigade from the Eastern District, the Royal Reg. of Horse Guards from Canterbury to be replaced by the 4th Dragoon Guards and the 1 5 th Light Dragoons from Hampshire, the Battalions and Artillery of the German Legion in addition to its Cavalry now at Dorsetshire to be encamped at Radipole, the 25 th Foot from Ireland, and the Stafford and Somerset 1 II. L Mr. Broadley's collection of Invasion MSS. NAPOLEON AND THE 146 Regiment of Militia. I fear the reduction of force will not be sufficient reason for your absenting yourself entirely from the Capital though I trust you will, when the Regi- ments are in sufficient order to begin the Manoeuvre with effect together, come to Weymouth where your and rooms for Taylor and another Aide de apartment shall be Camp In this case the ever aired and ready for your reception. Duke of Cumberland as Genl. of the South West district must naturally command the Troops the Duke of Cambridge my German Legion Lieut. Genl. Manners at [blank] as Lieut. Genl. of the English Infantry M. Genl. Garth command the whole cavalry havin