n Colpoys. 1 At the immediate outbreak of hostilities Lord Keith was given the Plymouth station, but he declined it and went to the Downs. From these fleets various squadrons were detached at different times to watch enemy had vessels ; Pellew 2 all ports in which the cruising off Ferrol, Colling- wood 3 off Rochefort, and Thornborough * off the Texel. With the disposal of ships for the protection of British colonies we have nothing to do. Suffice to say that North America was guarded by Vice-Admiral Sir Andrew 6 5 Mitchell; the East Indies by Vice- Admiral Peter Rainier; Admiral RearSir J. T. Duckworth 7 and the Jamaica by Leeward Islands by Commodore Sir Samuel Hood. 8 It was absolutely necessary to prevent the squadrons at Brest, ; Toulon, Rochefort, Ferrol, and in the Texel from putting be strictly accurate, from escaping without to sea, or, to giving fight. St. Vincent, who was still at the head of the 1 Admiral Sir John Colpoys (b. circa 1742). Commander-in-Chief at Plymouth, June, 1803; made a Lord of the Admiralty, 1804; Admiral of the Red, 1809; d. 1821. 2 Admiral Sir Edward Pellew, afterwards Lord Exmouth (1757-1833). 3 Vice- Admiral Lord Collingwood (b. 1750). Rear-Admiral of the Red, 1801 ; Vice-Admiral of the Blue, April 23rd, 1804 promoted to ViceAdmiral of the Red and created Baron Collingwood, November gth, 1805 ; ; d. at sea, 1810. 4 Edward Thornborough, G.C.B. (b. 1754). Commander of a North Sea under Lord Keith, March, 1803, to October, 1804 ; Vice-Admiral, June 9th, 1805 Admiral, December 4th, 1813; K.C.B., January 2nd, 1815; G.C.B., January I ith, 1825; d. 1834. 6 Admiral Sir Andrew Mitchell, K.B. (b. 1757). Commander-in-Chief at Rear- Admiral of the Blue, 1805 d. 1806. Halifax, 1802 6 Admiral Peter Rainier (b. circa 1741). Commander-in-Chief in the East Admiral Sir division in the ; ; ; Indies, 1793-1804; Admiral, 1805; d. 1808. 7 Admiral Sir John Thomas Duckworth (b. 1747). Commander-in-Chief at Jamaica, 1803 ; Admiral of the White, 1813 ; d. 1817. 8 Vice- Admiral Sir Samuel Hood, Bart. (b. 1762). Chief in the East Indies, December 24th, 1814. Died Commander-in- si fac . v> INVASION OF ENGLAND British Admiralty, 155 had imprisoned the French Toulon a few years before, thus proving blockade to be strategically sound so far as his it fleet in system of This went. plan was to be followed now. "Lord St. Vincent's defence of the Island," says Tucker, 1 " was a triple line of barricade fifty gun-ships, frigates, sloops of war, and gun ; in the Downs oppo; of but another France, powerful ships-ofsquadron, upon the coast of the enemy vessels, site to support the former, or coast and a force on the beach over their any the shores of the English ports to render assurance the-line, continually disposable, to to attack on all ; This force for the defence of the Island was sure. doubly entrusted to Lord Keith, 2 having under him Admirals 3 5 4 Thornborough, Vashon, Russell, Louis, and Patton." Unfortunately few of the vessels belonging to the various blockading and defence squadrons were in first-class condition, and Nelson complained bitterly, even going so far some of them were unseaworthy, and that as to state that " It is not a store-ship a week that would keep them in 6 Again, repair." " " We them come are in the right fighting trim," he as soon as they please. says, let a altogether so well officered fleet and manned never saw I ; would to God the ships were half so good The finest ones in the service would soon be destroyed by such terrible ! weather . . ." Collingwood's ship, the Venerable, was in 1 2 3 4 5 6 much the same Memoirs of the Earl of St. Vincent, Vol. II, p. 205. Admiral James Vashon (1742- 1 827). Admiral Thomas Macnamara Russell (circa 1740-1824). Rear- Admiral Sir Thomas Louis, Bart. (1759-1807). Admiral Philip Patton (1739-1815). Nelson's Despatches, Vol. IV, p. 175. Mahan's Life of Nelson deals very thoroughly with the condition of the admiral's fleet at this time. NAPOLEON AND THE 156 condition as the Victory, and his crew were "almost worked to death." "We began by discovering slight defects in the ship," he remarks in one of his outspoken and enter" and the farther we went in the examinamore important they appeared, until at last it was taining letters, tion, the discovered to be so completely rotten as to be unfit for have been sailing for the last six months with sea. We only a sheet of copper between us and eternity. I have written to Lord St. Vincent," he concludes, " to ask him for a sounder ship but it deranges me exceedingly to be thus for ever changing." 1 The exchange was made, and the Venerable foundered the following year. The Culloden ; flew Collingwood's flag until he shifted it to the Dread- nought, which in turn gave place to the Royal Sovereign. On the other hand, Sir Edward Pellew's experience was not so unpleasant. " I know, and can assert with confidence that our navy was never better supplied, and that our men were follows that never better fed or better clothed." 2 life in It the British navy at this period was not The furious gales played havoc with the ships, and the ships played havoc with the men. No wonder that Nelson prophesied he would live to fight particularly enviable. one more battle only. Upon Admiral the Honourable William Cornwallis, who commanded in the Channel, and Admiral Lord Keith, who held a similar position in the Downs, rested mainly the responsibility of protecting the English coasts. The former cruised off Ushant and blockaded the Brest fleet in own harbour, at the same time keeping in touch with Lorient and Rochefort, and convoying merchant vessels its 1 2 Correspondence of Lord Collingwood, p. 95. Parliamentary Debates, 1804, p. 892. INVASION OF ENGLAND 157 when necessary. Keith had not only to safeguard the trade routes and the fishing interests of the North Sea, but also to keep an eye open for any of the enemy's vessels which might elude the vigilance of his colleagues, Rear- Admiral Thornborough and Sir Sidney Smith, 1 " " held tight off the coast of Holland. This chapter minor work will deal as concisely as possible if such a term is who with the allowable in warfare of these officers, whose courage was no less than their responsibility, leaving the big events to be dealt with in chronological sequence in the chapters which follow. To do anything like adequate justice to these defenders of " home and beauty " would England's treated in detail, if require a dozen and might tend chapters rather than to elucidate the narrative. is portion lost when to obscure The sense of prothe lesser lights of history, however have served the principal actors, they may allowed to have the stage to themselves for too long a time. In this particular drama Nelson is the master player. faithfully are The name of Cornwallis conjures up no romance in the public mind, although recent historians have not failed to show their keen appreciation of his sagacity and seamanship. He no great is a much underrated hero command, and degree because his personality neither aggres- deportment " is He seemed quiet and reserved in his elderly, and rather short and stout in person sive nor inspiring. if partly because sea-fights are associated with his in a lesser and, still, habited in a suit of brown and a round hat, instead of blue with a three-cornered one, would have looked more like a sober citizen or simple country gentle1 Admiral Sir William Sidney Smith, G.C.B. (1764-1840). NAPOLEON AND THE 158 than one of England's naval demi-gods. He was particularly abstemious both in meat and drink, scarcely touching wine, and living for the most part on pulse and man 1 vegetables." " It is quite right that " Nelson should be the of England. darling hero Trafalgar was so overwhelming a victory that it not only precluded Napoleon from ever using his mosquito fleet, but crippled his navy and put a seal upon British supremacy at sea. From that to this no one has cared to dispute the fact. But the value of Cornwallis's blockade of Brest cannot be over- day estimated in studying the plans of the Admiralty for the circumvention of Napoleon's deeply laid strategy. Had the Brest fleet put to sea instead of the allied fleet, the probability is that Cornwallis would have given it as severe a drubbing as was received by Villeneuve and Gravina off Cape Trafalgar. Good Fortune and Giant Circumstance gave the men and ships of France and Spain into the hands of Nelson. The how Cornwallis watched his quarry at Brest, the determined way in which he hugged the coasts story of of France in fair weather and foul, and the skill with marred only by one strategic error of importance, namely, the detachment of which he directed operations Calder to Ferrol in the later stages of the campaign fascinating chapter in the history of the develop- makes a ment of sea power. Cornwallis never left his station on any pretext whatever if he could possibly avoid doing so. Anything short of a hurricane he rode out, and sheer necessity alone made him seek the calmer waters and shelter of Torbay, to return on the slightest abatement 1 Reminiscences of a Naval Captain A. Crawford, R.N. Officer during the Late War, Vol. I, p. 49, by INVASION OF ENGLAND of the weather. 1 The Admiral, as well 159 as the officers and men under him, must have had constitutions of iron. One wonders whether modern steel-clads and their crews could stand the buffeting and strain that was imposed upon those wooden ships and the sailors who worked them, during the long years before and after Trafalgar, presuming that such a protracted blockade became necessary, probably an exceedingly remote contingency. Cornwallis kept more strictly to the literal interpretation of St. Vincent's plan of "sealing up" the enemy than Nelson. It must not be inferred, however, that he did not give them an opportunity to come out "into the open." As a matter of fact, he offered them every encouragement to fight, but he took good care that neither his inshore squadron nor the heavy ships under his immediate command should be too far off to admit of the French Admiral eluding him, although he was obliged to weaken his forces on more than one occasion. " First blood" was drawn on the i8th May, 1803, by the crew of the Doris, commanded by Captain Pearson. The Doris was a frigate attached to the fleet which had left Plymouth under Admiral Cornwallis the day before, and was then off Ushant. After a desperate resistance on the part of her crew of ninety-two men he secured as a prize Her captAffronteur, a French lugger of fourteen guns. tain 1 and eleven seamen were ' ' In the day of sailing-ships the English base at Torbay and Plymouth. moderate weather the blockading its killed and fourteen wounded, fleet operated against Brest making this in easterly or The plan was simply : kept its position without difficulty ; but in westerly gales, when too severe, they bore up for English ports, knowing that the French fleet could not get out till the wind shifted, which equally served to bring them back to their station." Mahan's Influence of Sea Power, Vol. I, p. 30. fleet NAPOLEON AND THE 160 while the only casualty on the British ship was one man Another vessel of small tonnage, the Jeanne, wounded. was also captured. Homeward-bound merchant vessels looked to Cornwallis some measure of protection from privateers and the for possibility of any of the enemy's ships having escaped other blockading squadrons, and in 1803 the Admiral was so severely handicapped for want of frigates that two sailof-the-line had to be requisitioned for this purpose. The Lords of the Admiralty admonished him for running so " It is important to His Majesty's should you keep your squadron more collected off the ports of the enemy, to watch their proceedings." 1 hazardous a risk. service that A told that " it appears to them [the Lords of the Admiralty] to be essentially necessary, from accounts received of the state of the enemy's force, that you shoul