d day later he is not detach any of your line-of-battle ships on services of The boot fitted on the other foot, and had that nature." 2 misfortune occurred the moral blame would have rested on the authorities " The at home who stinted great want of small vessels I him of frigates. have several times pointed out to the Admiralty," Cornwallis informs Collingwood. 3 Even when St. Vincent's administration was a thing of the past and Melville reigned in his stead, he was unable to meet the Admiral's wishes in this respect. His fleet was increased to sixteen sail-of-the-line it is true, but he could not get frigates, owing to " a deficiency of means to supply what you suggest. No exertion shall be omitted, 1 From to the Sir Edward Nepean, 25th July, 1803. Despatches and Letters relating Blockade of Brest, 1803-5, Vol. I, p. 82. Edited by John Leyland (Navy Records 2 3 Society), 1899. 26th July, 1803. Ibid,, p. 83. 30th August, 1803. Ibid., p. 138. INVASION OF ENGLAND and 161 hope with success, to bring forward additional ships of war but, till that can be done, it is necessary to make I ; the most of those we have, by a judicious arrangement and distribution of our forces. Nobody judge of the truth of what is better competent to allude to than yourself, for many of the ships I found in I you know perfectly how commission when I came into office have been sent in such a condition as to require to be broken up or put into dock and it is power, I by any means ; my physically impossible that, could, as yet, have been able to bring forward sub- stitutes for in them." 1 Referring to the principles of blockade, Collingwood made some pregnant remarks when the French squadron at Rochefort of the war. evaded Sir Thomas Graves in the later stages Brest was believed to be their destination. "If they are arrived practicable one blockaded fleet is, there, to block it will be a proof of how a port in winter. To sail little from up and enter another, where the whole without being seen, does not come within the comit is port, prehension of the city politicians. Their idea is that we are like sentinels standing at a door, who must see, and may intercept, all who attempt to go into as the ships are at sea they are content, that every one of the blasts which security of the country." Rear-Admiral 1 Vol 2 1 1 we endure considering lessens the 2 Campbell, 3 commanding Melville to Cornwallis, 2nd November, TI, p. But so long it. little 1804. the inshore The Blockade of Brest, 8. Dated Dreadnought, off Ushant, February 4th, 1805. Correspondence of Lord Collingwood, p. 99. a Admiral Sir George Campbell, G.C.B. (b. 1761). Rear- Admiral of the ist, 1801, and attached to the Channel fleet ; K.C.B., January, 2nd, 1810 ; Commander-in- Chief at Portsmouth, May 2ist, 1818 ; d. 1821. Blue, January II. M NAPOLEON AND THE 162 squadron of three sail-of-the-line and two frigates, took up at the entrance of Brest Harbour in June, was he but shortly afterwards succeeded by Colling1803, " to leave and the first to rejoin me," l as last the wood, his position A letter written by the junior the anxieties and hazardous upon light There was no feather-bed work at duties. Cornwallis said of him. officer shows a dim nature of his have no news here," he says, " and cannot be more complete seclusion from the world, with only one " Brest. in We that of preventing the French from doing object in view The Admiral sends all the ships to me, and cruises Ushant by himself; but with a westerly wind it is impossible with one squadron to prevent ships getting into Brest Harbour for it has two entrances, very distant from harm. off ; one to the south of the Saints, but which, off Ushant, where we are, is entirely out of view. I take the utmost pains to prevent all access, and an anxious time I each other have of it, what with tides and rocks, which have more of danger in them than a battle once a week to go into port I do not expect until the conclusion of the war." Collingwood did not long remain in 2 command of the " It was a station of great anxiety," he inshore squadron. writes on the loth October, 1803, "and required so con- stant a care and look-out, that I have often been a week without having my clothes off, and was sometimes upon deck the whole night." The duties were so arduous and the strain so great that frequent changes were made in the " I was there longer than was intended for want of a proper successor, and saw all my squadron relieved more than once. ... I think that Bonaparte's experiment officers. of the invasion will soon be made, and hope that 1 Correspondence of Lord Collingwood, 2 p. 91. it Ibid., p. 92. will Vw? ^ * INVASION OF ENGLAND not be 163 held too lightly for in that consists the only danger. They should not merely be repulsed, but with such exemplary vengeance as will deter them from any ; and future attempt to subjugate our Country, example to all other nations their independence." how they may Collingwood did not agree " I do not know that their coast with little this firing senior his enemy officer's to a hail of and bombing upon of any essential benefit, or whether it may harm by accustoming them to a great fire is not rather do with an 1 instructions to continually subject the fire. will give also preserve 2 injury." Considering the frequency of gales in the autumn and winter, comparatively little damage was done to Cornwallis's fleet by tempestuous weather. The first trouble of importance was occasioned by the Boadicea and Sirius, which came into collision "working up between Berthe- aume and Camaret Bays, with a moderate breeze," on 27th July, 1803. The Sirius sustained bad injuries, rudder being " broken off about five feet from its the the head and from the stern-post, part of the quarter and the galleries upper part of the stern frame materially 3 The Boadicea seemed to be dogged by damaged." entirely torn disaster, for she struck on a rock later, necessitating her In the gale at the putting into Portsmouth for repairs. end of November, 1803, the Dreadnought Rambler, Atalanta, and Fox were obliged to make for the same shelter ', " from losses and having sustained some damage, the 4 Dreadnought without her foreyard." Navigation was so the from the French short home dangerous during voyage 2 1 Ibid., pp. 93-4. 3 The Blockade of Brest, Vol. Ibid., p. 94. 4 I, p. 104. Ibid., p. 208. NAPOLEON AND THE 164 Rambler had coast that the overboard." The 1 to "throw ten of her guns following month the Impetueux^ while riding out a severe gale, injured her mizen mast, and "the mainsail, main topsail, the were blown to pieces mizen and fore storm staysails one of the starboard main chain ; and the ship laboured so excessively in the trough of the sea, and shipped so much more water than the pumps would carry off, that it became absolutely plates drawn ; 2 necessary for her safety to bear away for this port" [Cawsand Bay]. All these happenings weakened Corn- power of resistance, of course, and on the 28th December, 1803, we find him writing to the Admiralty that the ships which had put into Cawsand Bay had, "from wallis's bad weather and other circumstances, been much longer absent than before, and perhaps than their Captains could But wish. has reduced the force under it my orders There watching the port of Brest very considerably. are now only the Impe'tueux and Culloden of the inshore . squadron." He demands been destroyed . many of them have and the return of the "as in the late gales," ships immediately. writes to the sails, . 3 In the following January (1804) Pellew " the ships have suffered con- Admiral that siderably for the last twelve days in one^continued gale. have none of us a second topsail fit to bend. We . . . . . . The people have been worn out, and our sick list upon an 4 "The loss of a main topmast and average above 60." 5 mainyard, with almost all the principal sails of the ship," necessitated Captain de Courcy putting into the same month. her doom on 1 3 The Cawsand Bay met the Magnificent following May a submerged rock, and in September another The Blockade of Brest> Vol. Ibid.) p. 229. 4 I, p. 208. Ibid., p. 237. z Ibid., p. 224. 5 Ibid., p. 255. INVASION OF ENGLAND vessel, the Indefatigable^ also came 165 to grief from the same cause during a fog, necessitating considerable repairs. Intelligence as to the state of the French navy and of Bonaparte's intentions reached Cornwallis from a number of sources. Men taken from captured vessels were sometimes persuaded to speak. In October, 1803, a Dane boldly put out from Brest with news, while the master of a British ship which had been detained at Ferrol for sixteen months eluded the vigilance of the sentries and escaped in a small boat to one of Pellew's ships. John Hookham Chargt d Affaires } Frere, Mr. at Madrid, ren- dered invaluable service until his recall in August, 1804, at the instance of the Prince of the Peace. The most notable a exploit in this direction was performed by Hamon, in who to Cornwallis's fleet, French pilot attached June, 1803, volunteered to disguise himself, land near Brest, gather first-hand information as to the condition of the enemy's ships, and return within carried out his enterprise, three and He days. his report successfully shows that the advanced to put to sea, to say nothing of engaging the blockading squadron. In Brest fleet was not sufficiently the road, ready for sea, were four sail-of-the-line, four In the frigates, four sloops, two brigs, and six gunboats. harbour, ready for sea, were two line-of-battle ships, while four were building, as well as five gunboats, which had only just been laid down. for his daring with his life. a boat should meet him at The plucky pilot nearly paid had been arranged that a certain time and place and It take him back to his ship. Unfortunately for Hamon the orders were not carried out. After being fired at pre- sumably by the patrols he was obliged to return to Brest, where he remained until the following Sunday the fifth NAPOLEON AND THE 166 day of his stay on shore. He then hired a boat and two boys to take him " on board a certain vessel " in the harbour. The tiny crew found themselves unable to boisterous wind, and put back to headway against the The spy then land. make set out for his distant ship alone. "About four o'clock the next morning," he says, "they saw me from the Culloden, and sent a cutter which picked me up about two miles from the ship; and I verily believe but for this fortunate and circumstance I should have died of thirst being leaky, had occasionally to my boots, and what with that, my fatigue, for the boat, be baled with one of anxiety, and sailing upwards of fourteen hours without as much as a drop of water to refresh me, I dare say my ." being nearly exhausted will not surprise you. his for with the $o by presented Admiralty . . Hamon was services. So many deeds of daring were performed by British our naval history, when the sailors at this trying period of very existence of Great Britain as a nation depended upon and seamanship, that it, is almost impossible their vigilance to single out an instance for separate mention. maritime annals of this But in the country there can be no more stirring incident than the amazing performance of the crew of the Sheerness, one of the smallest of the look-out cutters stationed off Brest Harbour. man own Lieutenant Henry and as youthful as he was brave, commanded the tiny vessel, and the men under him were worthy of so valorous an officer. On the Rowed, a after Nelson's morning of September the marfes hugging the French effort to reach the Brest hesitation which is heart, 9th, 1803, coast, as fleet. he saw two chasse- was With their way, in an that absence of an essential characteristic of the true INVASION OF ENGLAND 167 commander of either soldiers or sailors, he told off seven men and a mate to launch a boat and cut out one of the enemy's craft, while he directed the course of the Sheerness towards the o