 his birthday " Hamilton. lot to Lady " he Forty-six years of toil and trouble of lot mankind How few more the common ! " reflects. he bemoans his unhappy leads us to expect ; and therefore it is almost time to think of spending the few last years in peace and peace of quietHe cherishes the hope that the differences of the ness." two nations " will be settled before the following summer, or such a universal War as will upset that vagabond He had applied for leave to go to England, Bonaparte." but the outbreak of hostilities with Spain and the hope of 3 a decisive battle was also in the scales and outweighed his desire for home, although we find him asking " in November never did, or never why of desert the service shall, my country but what can I do more than serve till I drop ? If I take some little care of his successor is not arrived. I ; myself, cough I is may yet live, very bad, and of the I4th February." 1 2 to perform it some good service. brings forth the effect of 4 Dated August I2th, 1804. Dated August 28th, 1804. 3 Nelson's Letters to 4 Battle of St. Vincent, 1797. Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, Ibid., p. 177. Lady Hamilton, Vol. II, p. 73. Ibid., p. 277. My my blow p. 153. INVASION OF ENGLAND The ships off Cadiz, formerly 181 commanded by him, were shortly afterwards placed under Vice-Admiral Sir John 1 Orde, a man whom Nelson cordially detested, and who had brought out the asked-for leave from the Admiralty for the commander to vacate his post and return to England. " Malcolm, present, is "To my I am not surprise," writes Nelson to Captain yet settled, for Sir John Orde, for the command of a squadron outside placed in the the Straits, which for the present occasion is lopt from my command. When there was nothing to be got I had it when the prospect of money comes forth, it is given to ; Admiral Campbell had it at the beginning of the French war, and now Sir John at the beginning of a Spanish war. However, if I can but get hold of the French fleet, I shall have no occasion to envy the lot of any man. another. bow with submission to the will of the Almighty." been already made to the fact that Nelson's plan of campaign was not clearly understood by I Reference some of has his colleagues. 2 In August Captain Whitby went so far as to call the attention of Lord Cornwallis to what he considered was a grave strategic cation he says error. In his communi- : " Though Lord Nelson sea, there are so many is indefatigable in keeping the reasons that make it possible for the French to escape through the Mediterranean, which, of Government are not told by him and which, course, perhaps, he does not consider (at least I think so) that I have been long determined to warn you of the circumstances upon my arrival, not choosing to trust it from the Mediterranean. First, then, he does not cruise upon his rendezvous second, I have consequently repeatedly known ; 1 Sir John Orde (1751-1824). 2 See p. 172. NAPOLEON AND THE 182 him from a week to three weeks, and even a month, unfound by ships sent to reconnoitre the Belleisle herself was a week thirdly, he is occasionally obliged to take the whole squadron in to water, a great distance from Toulon ; ; fourthly, since in his absence, least, I came away the French squadron got out and cruised off Toulon several days, and at out, he only got sight of them at a when he came them arrive at their own harbour. draw one general conclusion that it is very possible for them to escape him. Upon the last occasion they might have got to the West Indies, or elsewhere, without the possibility of discovery, had they so chosen, and from all this, I draw these particular ones great distance, to see From all this I likewise, concurring with other circumstances they have ten sail-of-the-line at Toulon, one at Cadiz, four I think : and twenty you say at Brest, making in all one and forty sail-of-the-line. If they pass Lord Nelson, they can relieve Cadiz (which is only blockaded by two frigates), Ferrol, Rochefort and if in their way to Brest you meet them some morning, when at Ferrol, six at Rochefort, ; they are attempting a grand junction, I shall not be I mention this to surprised. you that you may pay what attention you choose to this scheme of probabilities, and have your ships so much in your eye at daylight that you may be prepared for their reception. I must add one other thing, however, which is that in gales of wind he drives so far away that the finding him is very diffiI have cult, and the enemy have the greatest chance. no doubt, therefore, that they can come out the rest, ; the object, remains to be proved. . . ." * Nelson afforded the French every opportunity to put it was part of his settled plan but in one respect to sea, Captain Whitby was right, 1 ; in that he discerned that there Captain Whitby to Cornwallis, i8th June, 1804. From Colonel CornThe Blockade of Brest, p. 343. wallis West's collection, in INVASION OF ENGLAND was a possibility of the enemy making 183 for the West Indies, while the Admiral was of opinion that they would proceed to Egypt or the Straits. When the enemy eventually gave him the slip his fleet was "between Sardinia and the African coast," 1 a position which would have enabled him to cut the enemy off from either destination had he known of their whereabouts. such a large sphere of action that him it Nelson had was impossible to "sit tight," as did Cornwallis off Brest, other if for lengthy spells of bad weather. 1 no than that his ships, by reason of their condition, were unable to contend against reason wretched for The Great Campaigns of Nelson, p. 131, by W. O'Connor Morris. CHAPTER XVII BOULOGNE EN FETE, "The 1804 expedition of Caesar was child's play ; mine, the enterprise of NAPOLEON. the Titans." and sudden death" took the place of battle in the thoughts of Bonaparte for MURDER a short time after La Touche Trdville's A Royalwhich Georges Cadoudal, Pichegru, and Moreau were implicated, and several prominent Englishvainglorious skirmish off Toulon. ist conspiracy, in men had been was brought to foolish light by enough to concern themselves, the disgraced Fouche, who was Minister of Police. The First thereupon reinstated as Consul retaliated in a way which for an ugly stain on his character. The all time has left Duke d'Enghien 1 was made to to suffer as an example of what would happen any members of the Bourbon family should they attempt to interfere with the Conqueror's plans. This event did much to inflame public opinion against the man who was about to become Emperor of the French, both in England and on the Continent. His strongest partisans the men who believed implicitly that he would bring about a new and better order of things could not reconcile a deed that was as unjustifiable as 1 Shot March it was unscrupulous. 2ist, 1804, at Vincennes. 184 INVASION OF ENGLAND 185 People blinked and rubbed their eyes, and finally awakened to find that it was not so much France that Bonaparte cared for as his From own renown. henceforth personal ambition was to be the dominant note of his character. His pletion. He many and so undertaking was rapidly nearing comscarcely gave himself sufficient time to rest, colossal varied were the duties he undertook. " In present position of Europe all my thoughts are directed towards England," he tells General Brune, French the Ambassador later, on March I4th, I8O4, 1 and disposal "nearly 120,000 men and at Constantinople that he has at his 3000 boats, which only await a favourable wind in order to 2 There plant the imperial eagle on the Tower of London." of course, a suspicion of rodomontade and exaggeraand the many mishaps which constantly occurred to the flotilla annoyed him intensely. In July, is, tion about this, 1804, a lost number of men were drowned and owing several vessels to the boats not being able to withstand the severe weather, and he implicitly enjoined Talleyrand to tell the diplomatic agents that the Emperor was satisfied with the strength and general behaviour of the army, and that he passes " whole days superintending its instruc3 Joseph Bonaparte had already been appointed Colonel of the 4th Regiment at Boulogne, in order that he tion." " should be allowed to contribute to the vengeance which 1 2 Bingham, Vol. II, p. 68. 30th July, 1804. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 83. Pont-de-Briques, 1st 3 August, "The Ibid., Vol. II, p. 84. 4th, 1804, "returned to head-quarters 1804. Emperor," says The Times of August This day [July 22nd] at half-past four in the morning, excessively fatigued. It visited every part of the shore, to give the orders that were necessary. he is almost superfluous to mention that the troops, both naval and military, executed them with alacrity. With such an example before their eyes, impossible that they should not." it was 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 86 the French people propose to take for the violation of this last treaty [Amiens], and that he should be afforded an opportunity of acquiring fresh titles to the esteem of the nation." 1 A cordon of wooden walls, weather-beaten and leaky though they might be, was the real bar to the realization He of his dreams. Nelson, Pitt, indomitable his fortune Was it perfectly certain that eventually will. British nation Napoleon's beckoned him forward still be fought felt and the whole would bow to power was growing Austerlitz was yet to ; ; ! possible that a few admirals in their timber floats could keep the greatest warrior of modern times in check? Because Britannia ruled the waves to-day, was there any vital reason why she should be mistress of the ocean Napoleon must have put to himself a thousand times, and yet one of the chief causes of his failure to make France as mighty at sea to-morrow ? as on land Such questions was due to his as these own erroneous idea that he could conduct maritime warfare with the same tactics, the same precision, as on land. 2 England had a superior fleet and admirals who fought with their brains, while few of Napoleon's commanders had achieved special distinction The guiding in seamanship. spirit, sitting in his at St. Cloud, expected his naval squadrons to the 1 same precision as a regiment. Bonaparte's message to Bingham, Vol. 2 the Senate. St. cabinet move with His remark that he Cloud, i8th April, 1804. II, p. 73. "... In valuing naval power he did not appreciate that a mere mass of had not the weight he himself was able to impart to a mass of men. He never fully understood the maritime problems with which from time to time he had to deal. ." Mahan's Influence of Sea Power on the French ships . Revolution, Vol. II, . p. 27. 2^-^ VIGNETTE OF THE INVASION SCHEME ON LETTER PAPER USED BY FRENCH SOLDIERS. 1803-5 INVASION OF ENGLAND "made circumstances" was in 187 certain respects perfectly true, but he could not control winds and tides as he could men and methods. It is curious that a master who visited the school at Brienne should have reported of the youthful Napoleon that he would make " an excellent seaman." Probably if he had been trained for the sister service the professor's prediction might have proved correct, mind was capable of excelling it was His passion for applied. for his receptive everything to which detail and the rapidity in with which he expected his commands to be carried out contributed in various ways to defeat the very plans he was maturing with so much care. Had he waited until the many new ships then building in the yards of France and until the seamen had learned the Holland were ready ; twin virtues of self-control and subordination ; until the admirals had gained more confidence in themselves and in their fleets, Napoleon might possibly have wrested the him Trafalgar The general condition of the French navy was unsatis- Trident from Britannia. factory in every way. Impatience lost The incompetency ! of its officers was a legacy of the Revolution, and the monarchy which 1 preceded it. During the ancien regime it had been the most aristocratic of professions