ther. Setting every shred of canvas the ship possessed, he almost succeeded in overtaking his adversary under the very walls of a heavily armed battery some nine miles east of Bec-du-Raz. Then the wind fell, and the case seemed desperate, if not altogether hopeless. Rowed crowded four men and himself into a dinghy built to hold two, and they pulled towards the chassemarte^ which by this time was beached. Thirty soldiers stood on the shore ready to defend it. Slowly the tiny boat with its load of heroes approached the French ship, but progress was difficult. When they reached the deck of the chasse-maree it was to see her crew wading ashore as fast as their legs could carry them. Bullets began to and the Englishmen hoisted one of the movements should not be too evident, cut patter on the deck, sails so that their the cables, and succeeded Desperate men are human in getting the ship afloat. beings exaggerated, and the crew towed their capture behind their cockle-shell a third of a mile before they noticed that they were being chased. One man promptly boarded the prize, and shouted defiance men in the rapidly approaching French boat. He was followed by Rowed and the others, who were on the to the ten defensive almost before the assailants could believe their eyes. As though by the wind and the a special dispensation of Providence, the right quarter at the right moment, of the enemy's guns and the cannon of the came from fire no more harm than if they were loaded with blank shot and were saluting the gallant little band of Englishmen as they sailed away with their prize in the direction of fort did 1 NAPOLEON AND THE 68 their Such an incident served station. to the relieve dreary monotony of the seemingly endless blockade of 1 Brest, for Cornwallis's work did not end with Trafalgar, but continued until the end of February, 1806. When became known that some of the ships of the Domingo expedition were on their way home, RearAdmiral Campbell was sent to intercept them. He failed to do so, and they stole into Spanish ports as already it St. Edward Pellew afterwards Lord Exwas therefore obliged to blockade Coruna instead of taking up his station off Rochefort, as it had been originally intended. This weakened Cornwallis's squadron mentioned. Sir mouth by three enemy's line-of-battle ships vessels which were and a frigate, and when the fitting out at the ports were became necessary to considerably strengthen wooden walls without. Pellew himself failed stop a number of Dutch ships, under the command completed it the line of to of Vice-Admiral de Winter, which escaped from Ferrol. Although every British captain was on the qui vive and prepared for surprises, no French squadrons were captured, a few small fry alone falling into their hands, but one sailof-the-line was taken in the West Indies. In this matter Bonaparte was singularly fortunate ; there scattered units of his fleet on the high seas. * J Although the fortifications of Brest, were The no later the Gibraltar of North-Eastern France, are as remarkable in 1907 as they were in 1807, the relations between that picturesque portion of the French littoral and Plymouth, on the opposite In early summer the whole English coast, are of the most pacific character. country around Brest is one vast strawberry-garden, from which an almost is exported to the English market. The enterprise of the Great Western Railway is rapidly making Brest a popular travel-centre, and their steamers now carry large numbers of English holiday-makers over the waters which witnessed the deeds of prowess of Lord Howe and the Hoods, as well as those of minor heroes like Lieutenant Henry Rowed. inexhaustible supply INVASION OF ENGLAND movements of the other British naval officers 169 who so ably championed Britain's cause during this trying period of her history, will be detailed as events develop. Keith's plan of defence that of Nelson in 1801. his comprehensive 1803 was similar in some respects His ideas are clearly stated letter to the to in Admiralty of the 7th June, : "... A considerable number of small gunboats or barges will in case of necessity, be extremely useful," he says, " and should be kept in constant readiness ; but in bad weather these could not possibly ride among the banks. They ought, therefore, to lie at Harwich, in the Swale, Colne River, Sheerness, and other places which may be recommended for convenience and security. The great difficulty with respect to them will be bringing them out to act when occasion shall require. Perhaps approve of their crews, except the officers and two trusty hands, being kept in the blockships on the stations to which they may be attached, and of arrangements being made for the boats being carried to them at the shortest notice, by some people of the description of the sea fencibles, under the direction and promptly their lordships may superintendence of intelligent officers, when occasion shall would appear necessary that a complete require. of land communication by signal-posts or telesystem should be established along the coast. Due attengraph, tion will be paid by me to an arrangement by signals in Horsley Bay, Goldermire's Gate, the King's Channel, and the Wallet, whence the signals (which should be some of the same that are used on shore) might be communicated by land till they reach Sheerness. ... I am of opinion that the possibility of the ships and vessels stationed in one or more of the channels being attacked by a superior force should be held in view and that in such case, as It ; well as in case of this being discovered that the enemy NAPOLEON AND THE number of small vessels were passing over the out of reach of their fire, that both block-ships and sands, gun-vessels should retire as expeditiously as possible to the Warp, and form a line of defence under the direction of the flag officer commanding at Sheerness, who should in a great hold himself in preparation for such an emergency from the Nore Light to Shoeburyness, or towards the Blackstail Beacon a position which I apprehend it would be nearly impossible to force. It would appear advisable that the block-ships should be particularly well provided with firebooms, and keep boats in readiness with grapnels to tow off fire-vessels, should the enemy make use of such means to force them from their station on the approach of any embarkation of their troops. " Such is the general system my own I presume to recommend ; such arrangements, and fully confiding on the discernment, judgment, but, greatly distrusting and ability of their lordships, capacity for and on the various and superior sources of information to which they can refer, I shall thankfully receive and punctually attend to the execution of any alterations direct/' A they may be pleased to 1 month later Keith augmented the above plan of and suggested to the Admiralty the advisability of arming a large number of boats propelled by oars for use in a calm, when his sailing vessels would be useless. operations, He also saw that small vessels mounting a mortar or howitzer would be valuable for the protection of the coast of Essex, Suffolk, Kent, and Sussex. Both suggestions were acted upon, 2 and the sea fencibles, whose ability had been questioned by Nelson to the 1 2 number of some 14,000. Memoir of Admiral Lord Keith, Ibid., p. 326. were again embodied These men were placed in in 1801, p. 323, by Alexander Allardyce. INVASION OF ENGLAND 171 charge of the various craft under the command of Sir In Pitt's opinion, Keith's arrangements were E. Nagle. 1 " and very zealously executed." 2 The old policy of bombarding French ports containing divisions of the flotilla was again put into force, and although it often effectually prevented the prames and gun-sloops from remarkably able, uniting at Boulogne, the naval records of the time are by no means convincing anent the amount of damage done on land or to the shipyards. Captain A. Crawford, whose Reminiscences are of special value in this respect, because their writer served in a ship belonging to the Downs squadron from the 2$rd May, 1803, until after Trafalgar, certainly shows that the " continual bombing " was anything but effective in many instances. Treport, Dieppe, Fecamp, Havre, and other ports received attention in turn, and the damage done was speedily The British Admiralty officials repaired. were not slow to avail themselves of any contrivance to defeat Bonaparte's ends which had the germ of practicability in it. " Some sapient blockhead," to use the expressive term of a contemporary officer in the King's service, suggested that Boulogne Harbour should be rendered unserviceable by sinking heavily weighted with huge masses of masonry at the entrance. By towing the three merchant ships which were set apart for this purpose into a satisfacseveral vessels tory position at night, and then setting fire to them, it was thought that the flotilla would be temporarily blockaded by artificial means. After several abortive attempts, the plan was relegated to the graveyard of defeated hopes along with Fulton's torpedoes. 1 2 European Magazine, 1803, p. 75. Rose's Diaries, Vol. II, p. 59. NAPOLEON AND THE 172 Nelson, whose aptitude for maritime warfare was to transcend the consummate genius of the man whose achievements were the talk of Europe, had not been idle since the rupture. sea captain of On the iSth May, 1803, tne greatest time joined the Victory? and he sailed as Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean fleet two days later, all accompanied by his beloved Hardy. Nelson did not station his fleet close to Toulon, although his frigates kept their eyes on the port, and this caused no little discussion his junior officers. 2 out of sight he hoped did not, at this juncture, take advantage of the opportunity afforded them, for in- among to be out of mind. By being The enemy was planhad not been received his lieutenants. The ning yet by British Admiral, growing weaker every day, paced his quarter-deck and cursed the French and the Government which starved him of ships. His was by far the most imstructions regarding the combinations Bonaparte portant station, and yet Admiral Cornwallis off Brest had a larger fleet. Once let him lose sight of the enemy, should they see fit to sail from Toulon, and there would be no knowing when he might come across them again, or what mischief they might not do in the meantime. So the long months rolled by and Nelson's feeble frame became feebler. His eyesight caused him much anxiety, and he averred that in a few years he would be "stone blind." The physicians advised his return to England, but he 1 Nelson left the Victory with Cornwallis on his way to the Mediterranean, This was in accordance with instructions hoisting his flag on the Amphion. received from the officials at the Admiralty, who were of that the opinion Commander-in-Chief off Brest might require the ship. Cornwallis sent the Victory to Nelson two months later. a See Captain Whitby's letter of the nth June, 1804, to Cornwallis,/^, p. 181. INVASION OF ENGLAND 173 " I steadfastly refused to entertain such a proposition. must not be sick until after the French fleet is taken." What a splendid example of British bulldog tenacity, and of Nelson's personal and practical exemplification of the practice of his immortal maxim on the subject of duty ! The following communication from Lord Hood, addressed to "Lord Nelson, Duke of Bronte," has but recently come time. It in and to light, is now published for the first no way minimizes the danger which was so who watched be evident should any of the Admirals caught napping : " " ROYAL COLLEGE, GREENWICH. "Oct. i$tk, 1803. My dear Lord Duke, " I give your Lordship a thousand thanks for your very affectionate letter of the 2ist August. I am happy to hear you enjoy health and flatter myself the day is not far distant when we shall be informed of your having taken or destroyed the greater part of the Toulon fleet. Your Lord