, but the men in command paid the price of their blue blood at the guillotine. As a result, young lieutenants became admirals, and skippers of merchant vessels walked the quarter-decks of men-ofwar. 2 Although Napoleon had chosen the best officers in the service for the most responsible positions, they were all 1 2 is very clearly shown in the Dumouriez MS. The Great Campaigns of Nelson, p. 17, by W. O'Connor Morris. This NAPOLEON AND THE i88 men when compared with their antagonists. Villeneuve had already shown a deplorable lack of skill at the battle of the Nile when he neglected to succour the valiant Brueys in his hour of need. Ganteaume was no of inferior mettle less nervous of meeting a British largely through fleet, for his French army to reinforce the stranded want of confidence in attempts Egypt had failed himself and an everin present fear of Keith, a feeling which haunted him Bruix was certainly more daring, but relief expedition of 1799 he allowed himself to be after his his days. all hemmed by a British squadron. To make the mediocre and to put new life into the personnel of his naval in at Brest efficient, was the Herculean and almost impossible task which Napoleon had set himself. His eagerness in administration, this direction knew no bounds. He annexed Genoa be- cause of the reputation her men bore as sailors. The Emperor did not even take the trouble to disguise the In a letter to the Arch-Chancellor of the Ligurian fact. Republic he says " My : sole reason for uniting to obtain the command the three frigates which Genoa will thousand soldiers its Genoa was and yet to the empire naval resources ; port contains are not yet armed. never be truly French till it furnishes six sailors to which sailors, are of I my wish its fleets. to It neither is exact from the contribution which establish a naval conscription there. I it. require. money nor old Sailors, You must vain to talk of governing a people without occasioning frequent discontent. Do you not know that, in matters of state justice means force as well as virtue? It is in Do you think I am so sunk in decrepitude as to entertain any fears of the murmurs of the people of Genoa ? The only answer I expect or desire to this despatch is, sailors, ever sailors. You INVASION OF ENGLAND 189 are sufficiently acquainted with my resolution to know this desire is not likely to be ever diminished. that Think of nothing your administration, dream of noth- in my name ing, but sailors. Say whatever you please in I will consent to it all, provided only that the necessity of furnishing sailors urgent expressed with sufficient l force." At is ; Helena Napoleon bewailed the St. been unable to man find a fact that he had sufficiently strong to raise the character of the French navy. " There is in the navy a peculiarity, a technicality that impeded all my concep" If I proposed a new idea, immetions," he exclaimed. Ganteaume, and the whole Marine Department, were up against me. Sire, that cannot be.' Why not ? Sire, the winds do not admit of it.' Then objections were started respecting calms and currents, and I was obliged diately * ' ' ' to stop short. How is it possible to maintain a discussion with those whose language we do not comprehend ? How often, in the Council of State, have I reproached naval officers with taking an undue advantage of this circum- To hear them talk, one might have been led to suppose that it was necessary to be born in the navy to know anything about it. Yet I often told them, that had it stance. been my power to have performed a voyage to India with I should, on my return, have been as familiar with in them, their profession as with the field of battle. not credit this. They But they could always repeated that no man could be a good sailor unless he were brought up to it from his and they at length prevailed on me to adopt a about which I long hesitated, namely, the enrolment cradle plan, ; 1 Bignon, 1850). Vol. V, p. 79. Quoted by Alison, Vol. VI, p. 400 (ed. NAPOLEON AND THE 190 of several thousands of children from six to eight years of 1 age." The programme was as nearly commanding genius could make it. military half of perfect as Napoleon's the all, it seems only in keeping with the eternal fitness of things that England should have reared great admirals and France great generals at the beginning of the nine- After teenth century. pelled then as Great Britain, by her insularity, was comto safeguard her very existence by a now of superior power; her sons breathed of the salt winds deeply and became the Vikings of modern times. fleet hemmed in by other states, her children only just from a hand-to-hand struggle with their own emerging kinsfolk, and under the despotic sway of a soldier of France, fortune, quite naturally gave the world. men of military renown to In July of his coronation year (1804) Napoleon was at Boulogne superintending operations, but found time to write one of those passionate and melodramatic letters Empress Josephine which recalls to mind his multitudinous effusions to her when he was in Egypt and she was plain Citoyenne Bonaparte. "In the last four the to days since I have been absent from you constantly on horseback, and my health." I have been has not impaired After tender solicitations as to her own this exercise " The wind freshened during the night, and one of our gunboats dragged her anchors and went ashore a league from Boulogne. I thought boat and crew welfare, lost, but he adds we managed was grand 1 : ; to save everything. The spectacle the alarm guns, the coast in a blaze of fire, the This conversation took place on November 6th, 1816. Vol. IV, p. 102. See Las Cases, INVASION OF ENGLAND 191 sea tossed with fury, and roaring. The soul was suspended the between eternity, At 5 a.m. ocean, and the night. it cleared up, everything was saved, and I went to bed all the sensations inspired by a romantic and epic with dream." The l month Boulogne was the scene of a The newly -made Emperor had magnificent spectacle. determined upon a grand review of the Army of England, at which the crosses of the Legion of Honour were to be following distributed. In order to give a truly personal touch to the took place on his birthday (August I5th). No better place could have been chosen than Boulogne, the Aldershot and, for the nonce at least, the Spithead of France, for its natural advantages for such a demonstration are great. fete it In the centre of a vast plain rises a hill, and from this point Napoleon addressed the eighty thousand men congre- A throne gated to do honour to the Head of the Army. twelve was on and this stood erected, approached by steps the ancient chair of Dagobert, the crosses and ribbons to be distributed rinding a place in the helmet of clin and on the shield of Bayard, le Du Gues- chevalier sans peur et sans reproche, these priceless relics having been brought from Paris for the occasion. Such a combination as this was eminently worthy of the man who undoubtedly learnt from Talma, the tragedian, and was endowed with a sense of dramatic propriety far beyond that given to ordinary was insinuated by the presence of these Napoleon was a worthy successor of the greatest captains and conquerors of ancient times, and in this respect coming events cast their shadows mortals. It historic "properties" that before, although possibly not precisely 1 Bingham, Vol. II, p. 82. on the According to Soult's report, fifty lines men which perished. NAPOLEON AND THE 192 Napoleon at this moment assembled round soldiers contemplated. How many of the his throne anticipated that the modern Caesar was yet and ride to perform his mightiest exploits over roughshod Europe with these very regi- ments ? Two hundred banners decorated the throne ; not a few of them were bullet-riddled and in tatters, and stained with the blood of men who had perished on the victorious fields of Lodi, Arcola, Marengo, and a score of others. Far off in the offing the ships of old England could be seen some riding at anchor, others patrolling up and down in some damage to any craft When the Emperor arrived on the hope of being able to do for making Boulogne. the scene, a salute was fired from innumerable pieces of cannon, and a fanfare of trumpets signalled his approach. With a smile of satisfaction Napoleon glanced at the surrounding him, and then repeated with due solemnity the form of oath to be taken by the members legions of the Legion of "Commanders, Honour : officers, legionaries, citizens, soldiers, swear upon your honour to devote yourselves to the service of the Empire to the preservation of the integrity of the French territory to the defence of the Emperor, of the laws of the Republic, and of the property which swear to combat, by all the they have made sacred means which justice, reason, and the laws authorize, every attempt to re-establish the feudal system in short, swear ; ; to concur with all your might in maintaining liberty and equality, which are the basis of all our institutions. Swear " ! From " We the voices of the chosen recipients rose the words " it Then Napoleon turned to the whole swear ! INVASION OF ENGLAND " army and said, hazard of your 193 And you, soldiers, swear to defend at the the honour of the French name, your life country, and your Emperor." As the wind arose so the waves were lashed into fury round the Tour d'Odre, but otherwise the weather was took hours for the Emperor to distribute the decorations, for whenever he recognized a soldier whom he had seen during one of his campaigns, he would pass It perfect. a few pleasant words with his old comrade. It was in this way that Napoleon endeared himself to the army; for one word, for one look from the magnetic personality which held their destinies in his sway, many a brave fellow A would defy death fitting and perish ! denouement to this splendid ceremony had been arranged. A fleet of new boats was to meet at a given point and then to make for Boulogne, arriving there This was done at the height of the festival. still in order to further arouse the enthusiasm of the troops, who, as everybody believed, were soon to cross the Channel en route for London. Madame 1 Junot thus graphically describes an untoward incident as she herself " It was five o'clock, saw it and : for a considerable time I had observed the Emperor turning frequently and anxiously to M. Decres, the Minister of Marine, to whom he repeatedly He then took a glass and said something in a whisper. looked towards the sea, as if eager to discover a distant sail. At length his impatience seemed to increase. Wife of Junot, afterwards Duke of Abrantes. Napoleon first made the He was acquaintance of this distinguished soldier at the siege of Toulon. writing a letter in the trenches when a cannon-ball struck the ground near by, " Bien I Here's covering them both with debris. Junot's only comment was, 1 sand enough II. for this letter O " ! NAPOLEON AND THE 194 Berthier, too, who stood biting his nails, in spite of his dignity as Marshal, now and then looked through the and Junot appeared to be in the secret, for they all It was evident that something was the Minister of the Marine received At length expected. a message, which he immediately communicated to the Emperor and the latter snatched the glass from the hand of M. Decres with such violence, that it fell and rolled down the steps of the throne. All eyes were now directed to the point which I had observed the Emperor watching, and we soon discerned a flotilla, consisting of between 1000 or 1 200 boats, advancing in the direction of Boulogne from the different ports and from Holland. "But the satisfaction of Napoleon was not of long duration. An emphatic oath uttered by M. Decres warned It was the Emperor that some accident had occurred. glass ; talked together aside. ; . . . soon ascertained that the officer who commanded the first division of the flotilla had run foul of some works newly The shock swamped some of 