ed that they will be allowed to close with the enemy can be done to advantage. moment comes, the Lieutenant-Colonel reminds the regiment of the instructions he has been inculcating on them at drill, to make their charge with the utmost steadiness and precision, so that all parts of the line, by coming in contact with the enemy at the same The leading company instant, may support one another. will take care not to hurry too much, but to carry on the line, so that each individual may preserve the entire command of his person, that he may be able freely to use his bayonet, not only to thrust, but to parry. If the charge is made with too great rapidity, the line will be broken one part of the regiment will be cut to pieces before another comes up, and the whole will rush on to certain wherever "When it the INVASION OF ENGLAND 127 whereas, if the charge is made steadily and the correctly, superior strength and impetus of this regiment must bear down whatever is in the way. destruction ; "If the force of the enemy in immediate contact with regiment be broken, the pursuit is by no means to be made without orders. It may be necessary to wheel to this the right or left to support other parts of the line. " In firing, the regiment will see the folly of and danger of firing at random. If their fire is ineffectual, they may as well stand to be shot at with ordered arms. Every must take a steady aim, so as to be certain that shot will take place in some part of the platoon individual his If the smoke prevents the regiment opposite to him. from seeing the enemy's lines distinctly, they will always the flash from the muzzles of their muskets, by which the regiment can direct its own fire. In short, let the object rather be to keep up a well-directed than a very quick fire always remembering that as little time be lost in loading as possible. It will be the business see of the supernumerary ranks in the rear to look over the shoulders of the ranks in front, and to correct any error in the aim. " When prisoners are taken they are to be immediately disarmed and passed to the rear. " If the regiment (which is not likely) should be charged in front by cavalry, they will on no account fire till ordered, and then only the two front ranks the front rank taking aim at the horses, the centre rank at the men. If the fire is reserved and then given within a few yards, in the faces of the cavalry, one half will drop, and the horses, in all ; probability, will carry the other half to the right-about, all events, if the regiment will receive them steadily, and, at without breaking, though the whole may be overthrown, will be killed or hurt. Receiving a charge from cavalry, each rank will charge [with] their bayonets, one over the other. The supernumerary rank to close well up very few NAPOLEON AND THE 128 may have no to the rear, so that the cavalry time to cut at them. " Should the regiment be drawn up on a beach to oppose the landing of the enemy, it will probably be ordered to reserve its fire, as the horizontal fire of musketry against men well covered in boats must be very ineffectual. In such cases it is only cannon which can play on the enemy with effect. The battalion, therefore, will reserve its fire till the boats take the ground, when each officer command- ing a platoon will pour in his fire on the boat opposite to him, at the instant the enemy expose themselves, by rising up in the boat in order to leap on shore a well-directed against men so huddled together must be destructive, and the battalion will instantly give them the bayonet, before they have time to form and recover from their confire hardly possible that any troops can withstand of attack; whereas, if met only by a distant from the heights, they will suffer little will infallibly fusion. this fire It is mode land and form, and press on with all the spirit and advantage which usually attend the assailants. This was precisely the error which the French committed opposing the landing of our troops in Egypt. when " Should the boats of the enemy be fitted with guns in endeavour to shelter itself behind sand-hills, walls, or broken ground, while the enemy and it will not be advanced to the pull for the shore beach till the boats are nearly aground, when, of course, the enemy cannot give above one discharge of their guns, which becoming useless the moment they attempt to land, their bows, the battalion will ; the regiment will attack them as already directed. "Adhering to these hints, steadily obeying orders, reimpetuosity, and fighting with the cool, courage of their native minds, instead of straining their determined imitating the intoxicated and blind fury of their enemy, and above all calling on the God of Battles to aid them in the preservation of those blessings which He has conferred INVASION OF ENGLAND this upon them, service, and may hope regiment 129 to render essential to merit a large share of that glory which shall be acquired by all the forces of their country in repelling the threatened invasion. " By order of the Commanding Officer, "BAIN WHYT, "Captain and Adjutant ist Regt. R.E.V." The ominous cloud which hung heavily over the land "Preparations, vast and various, are going grew darker. forward in every quarter to repel the invasion. Troops marching in every direction, and the volunteers perfecting On in discipline. Lord Cavan, the coast, every officer is at his post. of Wight, ordered not to sleep out No military officer is for the future to be in the Isle of the Island. permitted to leave his camp or barracks for more than two hours on any pretence whatever. The three Military Divisions of Essex 1 are under the following command : Colchester, General Sir James Craig, K.B. Chelmsford, Hon. Major-General Finch and Danbury, Major-General ; ; Beckinth." 2 parties of the Guards were busily a line of batteries on the heights of engaged the park in which stood Moulsham Hall, for the defence Working in erecting Every thoroughfare in Essex was to be broken up, with the exception of the turnpike road, directly Breastintelligence was received of a French landing. of Chelmsford. and comprising Nun's Hill,3 Penge Common, and Norwood, passing between Wands- works to begin at Blackheath, 1 " Essex has the means of defence far beyond any other part of the kingdom within itself, which is not the case of the Kentish coast." From Admiral Lord Keith to Admiral Markham, I2th August, 1803. Letters of Admiral Markham, p. 107, edited by Sir C. Markham, K.C.B. . a 8 . . European Magazine, 1803, ? Nunhead. II. K p. 324. NAPOLEON AND THE 130 worth and Battersea, were also contemplated. The instructions issued by General Wolfe in 1755, when England was menaced by the French, were One do reprinted, and it is could have proffered better advice. any pregnant sentence reads thus; "While a man is able to doubtful officer if his duty, and can stand, and hold his arms, it is infamous to retire" October the iQth, 1803, was appointed for a general and the volunteers trooped to places of worship throughout the length and breadth of the land to invoke fast, the aid of the God of Battles. The Lord Mayor and Corporation of London attended the service at St. Paul's Cathedral in state, the congregation including the Honourable Artillery Company and several volunteer corps. The bandsmen were seated in the choir and the organ loft, and afforded a picturesque relief to the cold vastness of the metropolitan church, dressed as they were in a new uniform of striking design. After the sermon the various companies of the Third Regiment assembled under the dome and took the oath of allegiance, over the kingdom. had a congregation of which followed all an example Every church in the City it might be proud every ; parson exhorted the church militant to a lively sense of its responsibilities to God and man in resisting the threatened Divine service was held at the drum-head in Westperil. minster Hall, the Temple Church was crowded, and the Duke of York and the Guards went to the Almonry Chapel, Westminster. On the 26th of the same month the King held a grand review of volunteers belonging to the London district in Hyde Park, at which Monsieur, "dressed in green, with red facings, the Prince de Conde, in white, Duke de Bourbon, in white, faced with faced with blue, the INVASION OF ENGLAND red, and the Duke de Berri, in green/' 1 131 were present. A conspicuous figure was General Dumouriez, then about to undertake the compilation of the scheme of scarcely less national defence so frequently alluded to in these pages, and specially summoned to England for that purpose. 2 sea of red covered the natural green of the Park the salutes the crowd 200,000 strong, " It was altogether a day on and the cheers were deafening including 12,401 volunteers. ; A ; which we have to congratulate London and the Empire at large it was a day which afforded the most glorious sight : we ever witnessed, without a single thing to excite the smallest regret." 3 Two Westminster, Lambeth, and Southwark corps to the number of 14,676 men were inspected in the Park by His Majesty, who set a most commendable days later the to his subjects example gave to all by the unwearied attention he matters connected with the military prepara- These regiments by no means represented the total number of volunteers in or near the metropolis, which it was tions. computed reached the respectable number of 46,000* men. In the General Orders issued on the following day, the Duke of York took occasion to remark that " His Majesty perceives, with highest satisfaction, the that spirit of patriotism, on which the system of the Armed Volunteers throughout the kingdom was originally founded, has risen with the exigencies of the times, and at this loyalty and moment forms such a bulwark to the Constitution and of the country, as will enable liberties 1 2 3 4 us, under the Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. See Introduction, p. xxvii. LXXIII, part ii, p. Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. LXXIII, part ii, p. 977. Ibid., p. 978. 975. NAPOLEON AND THE 132 of Providence, to bid defiance to the unprovoked malice of our enemies, and to hurl back, with becoming indignation, the threats which they have preprotection sumed to vent against our independence, and even our existence as a nation. His Majesty has observed with peculiar pleasure, that, amongst the unprecedented exer- which the present circumstances of the country have called forth, those of the Capital of his United Kingdom tions have been eminently conspicuous. The appearance of its numerous and well-regulated Volunteer Corps, which were reviewed on the 26th and 28th instant, indicates a degree of attention and emulation, both in officers and men, which can proceed only from a deep sense of the important objects for which they have enrolled themselves, a just estimation of the blessings we have so long enjoyed, and a firm and manly determination to defend them like Britons, and transmit them, unimpaired, to our * posterity." The King had the field already declared his intention of taking 2 personally should necessity arise, and the Prince " a mere Colonel of a regiment, the Major-General commanding the Brigade, of which such a regiment must of Wales, form a part," used all his powers to persuade his father to give him higher rank. A voluminous and somewhat acrimonious correspondence ensued, but the King was as adamant where the Heir Apparent was concerned. " Since no event in my future life," writes His Royal Highness to me for the misfortunes of Addington, "can compensate not participating in the honours and dangers which await the brave men destined to oppose an invading enemy, I 1 Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. 2 See letter to Bishop Hurd LXXXIII, part ii, p. 978. in Introduction, p. xvii. GKOR(;K in C;KI.S THE BETTER OF BONAPARTE. SEPTEMBER 15, 1803 INVASION OF ENGLAND cannot forego the earnest renewal of my 133 1 application." Minister replied that the King " desired that no further mentio