-line and four smaller vessels, had been anxiously looking for the enemy's squadron. He was overjoyed to see flying from the Defiance, a look-out ship stationed several miles from the rest of the fleet, the signal that the had suddenly appeared. But the shown up the enemy did not last rift in Frenchmen the fog which had for long, and it became so thick while the fleets were forming in line for battle, It was a game of that they actually passed each other. naval hide-and-seek. Calder engaged the enemy with his starboard guns, Villeneuve returning the fire with his port cannon. The pounding continued on both sides for about four hours and a half, during which time the San Rafael and the Firme struck their flags. The latter vessel was simply a battered hulk, her rigging and masts having been shot away by the skilful marksmanship of the British tars. It was un- fortunate that they both belonged to the Spanish navy, for the southern officers whole affair and crews were so sick of the on mutiny. commanders that two Spanish that their condition bordered Napoleon had warned his ships were only equal to one Frenchman, knowing, as he did, that several of the former had left port either in a half-finished state or badly manned and 8.30 p.m. the action was discontinued. provisioned. Both fleets At spent NAPOLEON AND THE 224 the night repairing damages, which were not very extensive except in the case of the two sail-of-the-line already mentioned, and the Windsor Castle, a British ship. Many of the shots had been fired at random owing to the Thirty-nine British officers and men lost their lives in this indecisive action, while 159 were placed dense haze. The enemy's hors de combat. losses were much more At severe and totalled over 470 in killed and wounded. daybreak it looked as if Villeneuve showed signs of fight, but evidently thinking better of it, and remembering " Napoleon's order, Notre intention est que vous fassiez votre jonction en tvitant le combat? he crowded on all sail and eventually passed out of sight, notwithstanding that the British were inferior by one-fourth in point of force. 1 While Villeneuve received a congratulatory message on battle from Napoleon, 2 Calder was the result of the obliged to ask for a court-martial, so violent were the attacks made upon him in England. Had he decided to renew the action on the second day it might certainly have been decisive, and Calder would have gained the laurel wreath victory gave to Nelson three months later. On the other hand, he ran the grave risk of the enemy being strongly reinforced owing to the abandonment of the blockades of Ferrol and numbered As his own squadron only would have been foolhardy to attempt Rochefort. fifteen it the defeat of the thirty-seven ships thus concentrated. Sir Robert Calder's reputation was damned by the suppression of a paragraph in his despatch to Cornwallis, in which he distinctly stated that he might find it necessary to make a 1 2 James's Naval History; Vol. Ill, 1 3th August, Vol. XI, p. 86. 1805. p. 244. Correspondance de NapoUon> Letter No. 9073, INVASION OF ENGLAND 225 junction with his senior officer immediately because of the " combined squadrons in Ferrol. The despatch as " edited by the Admiralty officials ended with an expression of 1 Added to hope that the engagement might be renewed. this, Napoleon caused accounts of an alleged victory over Calder to be inserted in French newspapers, and when these were received from Paris and copied into London journals, public indignation was so great that the luckless English Admiral felt called upon to take action. At the court-martial he was severely reprimanded for not having renewed the engagement, but his undoubted bravery was not questioned. Although Villeneuve was belauded to his face, the Emperor alternately praised and cursed him to others. " In one communication he says, Villeneuve has fulfilled his 2 object the junction "; in another he calls the Admiral "a poor creature who sees double, and who has more percepThus Napoleon endeavours to face tion than courage." 3 He both ways. are to be relied Cambaceres how tells upon ; to Decres little the Spaniards he says, " They fought like lions."* made Villeneuve shelter straight for the Bay of Vigo, which he reached on the 28th inst, but found no orders awaiting him. Despatching 
