d, who was now blockading Twenty-four hours Nelson anchored in Gibraltar Bay, later Cadiz. and on the 2Oth he went on shore " for the first time since the i6th of June, 1803 and from having my foot out of the 1 A month afterVictory, two years, wanting ten days." wards he joined Admiral Cornwallis off Ushant, and ; detaching the Victory and Superb, proceeded to Portsmouth. This time good fortune had attended Villeneuve. He rallied the Spanish fleet and the French men-of-war at Cadiz, and steered for his destination at Martinique, which he eventually reached on the I4th May, but no Missiessy awaited him, for he had turned back, and actually put in Rochefort six days after Villeneuve had arrived at 2 The latter had instructions to wait forty Martinique. at days there for Ganteaume's arrival, attack the English colonies, and afterwards proceed to Santiago, wait another twenty days, and then if the Brest fleet did not arrive, sail for Cadiz, where despatches would await him giving particu1 Ibid., p. 475. 2 Desbriere, Vol. IV, p. 570. NAPOLEON AND THE 216 of further movements. 1 lars Ganteaume was unable to pierce the bulwark of battleships which had been established by his adversaries before Brest. No gale came, and Cornit was only when very heavy weather obtained that Ganteaume could possibly elude the enemy without giving battle, which Napoleon especially wallis stuck to his post, for told him not in the An to do. opportunity was given him to stress of weather middle of April, when under escape Cornwallis was forced to raise the blockade, but by the time the French were ready the British had come back, Writing to Napoleon on the 1st May, 1805, Ganteaume raises his voice like one " I cannot possibly describe to crying in the wilderness and the attempt was abortive. : you the painful feelings which I have endured on finding myself kept in port while the other squadrons are in full sail for their destinations, by our difficulties me rest, no and ; if I and may be cruelly compromised and most afflicting idea allows this last have thus long resisted the impatience and the sufferings by which I am racked, I have done so because I have seen not one chance in our favour should I run out, and all chances in favour of the vantageous battle enemy dition was and enemy ; a disad- inevitable as long as the is shall keep his present position, and then our expewould be irreparably ruined, and our forces for a long time paralysed. Majesty the assurance Here I would fain repeat to your have already given you, as to the order and preparation in which I keep all the vessels the crews are all mustered on board, no communications take . . . I ; place with the shore except for indispensable objects of duty, and at all hours every vessel is ready to obey the 1 2nd March, 1805. Correspondence, de Napolton, Letter No. 8381, Vol. X, p. 185. INVASION OF ENGLAND which signals may be made to which alone can enable us to it ; profit these 217 arrangements, by the first favour- able opportunity, will be kept up with the utmost exactitude." 1 The awe in which Napoleon was held, and Ganteaume's " is set forth in a note to Decres. Although fear of reproof, in last your me you recommended " the Emperor," it runs, nothing favourable to say dare not write to him, having I I ; to write frequently to remain silent, awaiting events, being unwilling to trouble him about mere trifles, and I confine myself to saying that I trust he will do us 2 justice." Time was on further delay. the wing, and Napoleon would brook no sent two ships-of-the-line under Rear- He Admiral Magon with orders to Villeneuve to wait thirtyfive days after the former's arrival, and then, if Ganteaume had not joined him, sail by the shortest route to Ferrol, with the vessels in that port, release the and appear before Boulogne. 3 No sooner had for a junction Brest fleet, Magon sailed than the Emperor altered his mind, and sent a frigate ordering Villeneuve to remain one month only in " has not started by the the West Indies. If Ganteaume 2Oth May, he is not to start at all, but remain always ready." 4 After Villeneuve had captured a number of British ships, the word was passed round by the prisoners merchant that the conqueror of the Nile had arrived and been reinforced by Admiral Cochrane's and Empire, Vol. 1 Thiers, Consulate 2 27th April, 1805, Ganteaume to Decres. 3 I4th April, 1805. at ships, 8th May, 1805. which Ill, p. 364. Thiers, Vol. Ill, p. 365. Correspondance de Napoleon, Letter No. 8583, Vol. X, p. 3214 Barbados Ibid., Letter No. 8699, Vol. X, p. 383. NAPOLEON AND THE 218 had been exaggerated from two to four. This completely unnerved the French commander, and notwithstanding the repeated attempts of Lauriston, who was in charge of the troops on board, and which were landed at Martinique and Guadeloupe, he turned his twenty ships towards France, regardless of his instructions to wait. Napoleon's later orders apparently never reached him. 1 The net results of Villeneuve's cruise were insignificant. Beyond the taking of the Diamond Rock at Martinique, and desperate resistance on the part of its had signally failed to carry out any of the important duties entrusted to him. He was unable to after a brave British defenders, he a junction with the Rochefort squadron because Missiessy had returned to Europe before time, thus upset- effect plans Napoleon had matured with so much In other respects the commander of the Rochefort the ting care. squadron had certainly been more successful than his colleague, for the French colonies had been reinforced, and the island of Dominica added carried little weight with the Missiessy of his post and gave it to their number. This Emperor, who relieved to Allemand. had suited Napoleon's purpose to leave France and proceed to Italy. In doing so he had two distinct objects It in view. He wished to make grand military demonstramight be tions in the south, so that England's attention diverted from the preparations at Boulogne, and the sailing of his fleets, to that of further activity on the Continent. At the as King of delay the same time he had determined Italy should take place without in the beautiful Emperor that his coronation cathedral of Milan. stopped at 1 any undue On Turin and Alessandria. Desbriere, Vol. IV, p. 684. his At way the INVASION OF ENGLAND 219 he spent considerable time, for he resolved to erect what would probably be the strongest fortress in the latter place world, and capable of accommodating forty thousand that, should the Austrians pour a His notion was troops. horde of soldiers into Italy at an inconvenient moment, the men of the garrison would be able to keep the invaders employed while Napoleon raced over the borders with an army capable of raising the siege and driving out busily the enemy. On the field of opportunity This would at the still further lead was about that he Marengo the Emperor saw a fitting armed force. for a great theatrical display of England to the assumption to lead his battalions to expense of other Powers. more Donning victories the hat and years before on the same field, when he so skilfully defeated the Austrians, he reviewed an enormous mass of warriors. The scene resem- uniform which he had worn five bled the great fete at Boulogne minus the relics the Emperor and Empress being seated on thrones command- From this point of ing a view of the whole spectacle. " " addressed the men who Little Corporal vantage the were to be the heroes of other battles, the while they " " the place resound with cries of Vive VEmpereur! Napoleon was not the only person in high office who made was busily employed Pitt had concluded a and Austria the previous 1 He was now participated. at this time. defensive alliance with Russia year, in which Sweden also engaged in consolidating the Third Coalition against France by trying to draw Russia into the new combinaParliament voted no less than tion. 44,559,521 of war 1 Much interesting information as to the rise of the Third Coalition will be found in The Paget Papers^ Vol. II, pp. 81-221. NAPOLEON AND THE 220 men were in arms, including In addressing the House of Lords on 380,000 volunteers. the defence of the country, 1 Lord Hawkesbury, referring to taxes, while over 800,000 the military force at Great Britain's disposal, stated that "it not only greater than at any former period, but greater than the force of any country, of equal population, in every is way." He added France " that the proportion of the population of of bearing arms is not more than one in capable fourteen of her active male population. Whilst France, . . . Russia, and Austria do not give more than a proportion of armed men to their active population of one in fourteen, the United Kingdom . . . gives a proportion of one in independent of our regular army and militia. our volunteers at 380,000, our sea fencibles at Taking the 30,000, regulars and militia being taken at 400,000, the whole of our armed force amounts to 810,000. That ten. . . . not in the proportion of one man in fourteen, not in proportion of one man in ten, but in the proportion of one in five of our active male population at this hour in is arms. . . ." All these preparations did not disconcert Napoleon, and while he was placing the iron crown of Lombardy on his own head with the words, " God has given it to me woe to him who touches it " his admirals had reached the West ! Indies, thereby carrying out the first part of the great So everything was going in the direction he wished, and the Emperor's spirits rose accord- combination of fleets. far his adopted son, was apof pointed Viceroy Italy; Genoa, Parma, and Piacenza were added to France while Lucca with Piombino was ingly. Eugene Beauharnais, ; raised to the dignity of a principality 1 Delivered March and handed over 8th, 1805. to INVASION OF ENGLAND 221 Eliza Bonaparte. With a dash of the pen republics became departments or kingdoms, to add further lustre to the glittering diadem of the universal conqueror. Napoleon waxed more enthusiastic than ever over his English venture. He little thought that his incompetent subordinates had, notwithstanding their early success, shattered at one fell swoop his gigantic preparations. CHAPTER XIX TRAFALGAR AND THE FINAL COLLAPSE OF THE INVASION PROJECTS " The political greatness of England consists in her navy." NAPOLEON. THOUGH did not lose his head, but with his usual fore- A" The sight detached the Curieux Europe. to combined Admiralty that the to way its Nelson had missed his quarry, he inform fleet The warning was not the was on in vain. word to Admiral immediately 1 his at to relax Rochefort, and to form a Stirling guard 2 junction with Sir Robert Calder off Ferrol, there to await sent authorities the Emperor's naval forces now making for Brest. On the i Qth July, 1805, Villeneuve was off Cape Finisterre, of a violent gale, which caused one of which was leaking damage at the alarming rate of six inches an hour. When the storm had died away, all went fairly well until the 22nd, in running the teeth to several of his ships, a day destined to be consecrated to the God of Battles. That big affairs often have the smallest beginnings 1 Vice-Admiral Charles Stirling Commander 1810; of (b. 1760). Cape of Good Hope station, is Rear-Admiral, April 3rd, 1804; Vice- Admiral, July 3ist, ; 1807 d. 1833. 2 Admiral Sir Robert Calder, K.C.B. (b. 1745). Rear-Admiral, 1799; Vice-Admiral of the Red, 1808; Admiral of the White, 1813; K.C.B., 1815; d. 1818. 222 INVASION OF ENGLAND 223 " a trite saying. Napoleon himself remarked, There one step from triumph to a fall. I have seen that greatest affairs Had events." is but in the a little thing has always decided great not the fog which obscured the horizon from early morning until noon suddenly lifted, it is possible that Villeneuve would have formed his junction with Ganteaume, and the invasion of England taken Calder, stationed off Ferrol place. with fifteen sail-of-the