04, refers to the Admiral's sortie, Napoleon also " has greatly the English because they know the seas to defend, a squadron escaping terrified all which he states ; having from Brest would be able to do incalculable ravage, and if in November you were able to land 16,000 men and 500 that, horses in Ireland the result would be disastrous to our enemies. probabilities me you could be ready, and what are the of success. See General O'Connor and talk Tell if with him about the places for landing." 2 In December, 1804, war broke out between Great Britain and Spain. This answered Napoleon's purpose very well. Mr. Broadley's collection of Napoleonic MSS. Dated "No. 100. At Boulogne, on my return from Staples, the 5th [indistinct] Year XII," namely, the end of July or the beginning of August, 1804. 1 2 Desbriere, Vol. IV, p. 166. NAPOLEON AND THE 202 England could not add to her fleet to any appreciable extent for some time to come, consequently a number of the vessels now blockading French ports would have to be detached to watch the hostile maritime operations of Spain. The Emperor cast covetous eyes on the ships, and very soon concluded a treaty by means of which he secured the co-operation of at least twenty-five sail-of-theand eleven frigates. 1 England had raised no objection line imposed on Spain by Napoleon so The long as she levied no troops for his assistance. to the annual subsidy Government of George III felt itself tricked when extenand military armaments were reported to be going on at Ferrol, especially as the dissolute and unscrupulous Godoy, Prince of the Peace, who was the sive naval real of Spain, had posed as a neutral. of two frigates, afterwards strengthened ruler A tiny by the addition of two more from Nelson's none too numerous fleet, was despatched to intercept four huge treasurethen the Mercedes, Medea, Clara, and Fama ships force making for Cadiz. Sir Graham Moore,2 the brother of In the hero of Corufia, was given charge of this mission. the engagement which took place on the 5th October, most of the crew and a large number of non-combatants, including women and The remaining children, some three hundred souls in all. 1804, the Mercedes blew up, killing ships were captured, and its 1 way 1,000,000 worth of specie found into the British Exchequer. Mahan's Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution, Vol. II, p. 140. 2 As Captain Moore Vice- Admiral Sir Graham Moore, K.C.B. (b. 1764). he was appointed, in July, 1803, to the Indefatigable, attached to the Channel fleet; Rear-Admiral, August I2th, 1812; K.C.B., 1815; Commander-inChief in the Mediterranean, 1820; Commander-in-Chief at Plymouth, 183942; d. 1843. INVASION OF ENGLAND 203 A pathetic incident now occurred which brought down the fury of the opposition on Pitt's head. An officer who had spent a quarter of a century in amassing a fortune was returning from the colonies accompanied by his wife and family of nine. At the beginning of the fight he and his eldest son had left the Mercedes, only to see the illfated ship blown into the air a few minutes a single member of his family, except the boy Not later. who accom- panied him, was ever seen again, and his whole fortune of 30,000 went to the bottom of the sea. This was repaid by the British Government tion for the terrible loss he but was poor compensa- later, Whether had sustained. this justifiable or not is still debated by At any rate, Spain declared war forthwith, historians. and it is significant that Napoleon ordered Fouche to act of violence have " was several articles inserted in the papers with the object of exciting France to war, and of indisposing as l possible the other Powers against England." much as Notwithstanding his extensive preparations, Napoleon overtures to Great Britain for peace early in 1805, not because he desired a cessation of hostilities for himself, made but because the French nation showed unmistakable signs of dissatisfaction at his warlike policy. condition of conflict was slowly but The now chronic surely draining In the autograph letter the resources of the country. which he addressed to the King of England, the Emperor " declared that Though peace is the wish of my heart, yet war has never been adverse is to my glory." and true cluding paragraph interesting, characteristic of Napoleonic statesmanship. 1 St. Cloud, 2Qth October, 1804. Bingham, Vol. The con- to the leading There II, p. 100. is a NAPOLEON AND THE 204 suspicion of trying to shift the responsibility for any further strife that might ensue to the Emperor's adversary. It is in its as platonically philosophical portent, and runs follows : " Alas what a melancholy prospect to cause two nations to fight, merely for the sake of fighting. The world is sufficiently large for our two nations to live in it, ! and reason is sufficiently powerful to discover means of reconciling everything when the wish for reconciliation exists on both sides. I have, however, fulfilled a sacred duty, and one which is precious to my heart. I trust your Majesty will believe in the sincerity of my sentiments, and wish to give you every proof of it." my The British Government had been bitten before, was shy of making friends with Napoleon. and Lord Mulgrave, Minister for Foreign Affairs, addressed his reply to Talley" His rand, and this was an additional cause of offence. Britannic Majesty," he said, "has received the letter addressed to him by the Chief of the French Government. There is nothing which his Majesty has more at heart than to seize the first opportunity of restoring to his the subjects blessings of peace, provided it is founded upon a basis not incompatible with the permanent interests and security of his dominions. His Majesty that object cannot be attained but same time provide persuaded that by arrangements which is peace and security of Europe, and prevent a renewal of the dangers and misfortunes by which it is now overwhelmed. In may at the for the future conformity with these sentiments, his Majesty feels that he cannot give a more specific answer to the overture which he has received, until he has had time to communicate INVASION OF ENGLAND with the continental Powers, to whom he 205 united in the is most confidential manner, and particularly the Emperor who has given the strongest proofs of the wisdom and elevation of the sentiments by which he is of Russia, animated, and of the lively interest which he takes in the security and independence of Europe." say whether Mulgrave intended that It is difficult to the Emperor should read the word " Coalition " between At any rate, the House of Commons shortly the lines of his communication or not. subject was referred to in the afterwards, in the speech from the throne. little reason to think that the There is very Emperor acted out of the goodness of his heart, since Missiessy had but a few days before received regarding the suggestion which has been put forward that the communication was sent in the hope that British West depredatory instructions Indies. The might possibly cause the British Government to show its hand in regard to a possible alliance on the Continent is it 1 Even Thiers is forced to admit worthy of belief. "although determined upon a war of extinction entirely that, it necessary to commence a which was quite useless at that by procedure against England, he thought his reign time." On January nth, 1805, the Rochefort fleet escaped, and on the 1 8th of the same month Villeneuve sailed from Toulon. Nelson was off the Maddalena Islands, at the northern end of Sardinia, watering his eleven ships, and information of Villeneuve's preliminary success did not reach him until the following day, when it was reported by the frigates Active and Seahorse. He immediately signalled the fleet to get under weigh, 1 and by six o'clock in Rose's Life of Napoleon /, Vol. II, p. 7. NAPOLEON AND THE 2o6 the evening every scrap of available canvas was crowded on in chase of the enemy. Nelson believed them bound for the southern end of Sardinia, "eastward," as his crafty adversary had hoped. So confident was he that Villeneuve would be sighted before he had covered many leagues that every vessel was cleared for action and kept in close order A strong sea was running, with very heavy On the 25th the Victory was squalls from the westward. in the of Gulf Cagliari, but no enemy was visible. standing for battle. Nelson betrayed his terrible anxiety for the safety of a note to Sir John Acton. " I consider the destruction of the Enemy's fleet of so much consequence," England in he wrote, " that would willingly have half of mine burnt I to effect their destruction. I may find " them I am in a fever. God send l ! Obtaining little information beyond learning that a French ship of 80 guns had been obliged to take refuge in the harbour at Ajaccio on the iQth, very much crippled, Palermo on the 28th, hoping to find that had been compelled to anchor there. In opponent this he was disappointed, and concluded that the Frenchmen had either returned to Toulon or gone to Egypt he looked in at his or the " Morea : Celerity in these fellows yet." 2 awaited frigates him at and 300 " my movements may catch Off he set towards Egypt, but nothing Alexandria, excepting three Turkish bad soldiers," while the commander of the fort gave all up as lost, believing Nelson's ships to be " I have not a shade of doubt, but that the French fleet. Egypt was the 1 2 original destination of the Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, p. 331, January 3ist, 1805. Ibid., p. 333. French fleet," INVASION OF ENGLAND Nelson writes on February " nth when 207 off Gozo. 1 He was Napoleon's profound wiles," which led to this belief by we have already noticed, and partly by the fact that in Egypt, had frequently the French Consul Lesseps, promised the Mamelukes that whenever they wanted to overrun the country, Napoleon would supply them with 5000 soldiers at a month's notice. The Emperor well knew view the importance of Egypt from a strategical point of indeed, he had already stated that ; it " must sooner or later belong to France." Not until Nelson was learn that Villeneuve off Malta eight days had put back later did to the port he had he left such high feather the previous month. A gale in the Gulf of Lyons had played sad havoc with his littleexercised ships, and as it was impossible for him to make in in any headway obliged to turn their tail " Nelson had at Toulon. that " if fate broken condition, he had been and resume his old position at least the satisfaction of had been unkind to him, it knowing had dealt an equally hard blow at his antagonist. The following despatch from Villeneuve to the Minister of Marine, written on his return to port, proves that the French fleet was by no means in such good condition as Napoleon had been led to suppose " I : declare to you that ships-of-the-line thus equipped, short-handed, encumbered with troops, with superannuated or bad materials, vessels which lose their masts or sails at every puff of wind, and which in fine weather are constantly engaged in repairing the damages caused by the wind, or the inexperience of their sailors, are not I had a presentiment of this fit to undertake anything. 1 Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, p. 339. NAPOLEON AND THE 208 before I enced it." sailed ; have now only too painfully experi- I 1 The Emperor showed his indignation " failure in his usual abrupt way. be done with admirals who allow their determine to hasten receive " ? home at Villeneuve's What," he asked, at the first " is spirits to sink, to and damage they may In his opinion, the ships ought to have been repaired en route. "A few topmasts carried away, some were everyday occurrences. casualties in a gale of wind, Two days of fine weather ought to have cheered up the But the great evil of crews, and put everything to rights. our navy is that the men who command it are unused to all the risks of command." 2 Comparisons are not odious in history, 