erected along the coast. the boats, and several of the men jumped overboard. The cries of the people on the seashore, who hastened to assistance, excited their much alarm. The accident was exceedingly mortifying, happening, as it did, in the full gaze of our enemies, whose telescopes were pointed towards us, and it threw the Emperor into a violent He descended from the throne, and proceeded with rage. Berthier to a sort of terrace which was formed along the He paced to and fro very rapidly, and we water's edge. could occasionally hear him utter some energetic expression In the evening, a grand dinner took place in honour of the inauguration. About six o'clock, just as dinner was served for the soldiers under This augmented the tents, a heavy fall of rain came on. a and formed ill-humour, gloomy termination Emperor's to a day which had commenced so brilliantly." 1 indicative of his vexation. 1 Quoted in The Life of Napoleon Bonaparte, pp. 315-16, by S, Baring-Gould. INVASION OF ENGLAND As was Napoleon minimized the extent his usual policy, of the accident. " The 195 passed off very well yesterday," he told Cambaceres, "only there was a little wind. The spectacle was fete new and imposing. seldom been seen together." So many bayonets have l From a gunboat Napoleon himself witnessed an engagement between his batteries and the cannon of the British For a couple of hours brisk ships two days after the fete. firing continued on both sides, but little damage was done, and the action was indecisive. An obelisk marks the spot on which the chair of Dagobert was placed on this historic An appropriate inscription records the fact, a plan of the disposition of the army and with together the insignia of the Order of the Legion of Honour. occasion. A glimpse of the better side of Napoleon is afforded to us during his stay at Boulogne, which is in direct contrast to his outburst of passion on the day of the great review. He had requested his brother Louis, now elevated to the title of Constable and soon to be made king of Holland, to bring his wife Hortense and their elder child to inspect the progress of the harbour works. The Emperor took particular interest in his young nephew, whom he once thought of choosing as his successor, and was frequently seen carrying his namesake in his arms, to the immense satisfaction of the soldiers. princess was On one occasion when the yacht used by Bruix for inspec" tion purposes shots were exchanged with the enemy. My son," says Hortense, "was not at all frightened, which sailing in the 2 pleased his uncle very much." In September, 1804, by which time the Emperor's latest 1 2 Pont-de-Briques, lyth August, 1804. Bingham, Vol. II, p. 89. Queen Hortense, Vol. I, p. 197, by L. A. Taylor. INVASION OF ENGLAND 196 orders had been executed as far as possible, the flotilla became concentrated at the port of Etaples, having the left section of 274 boats, commanded by General Couraud at Boulogne, holding the centre ; under Admiral Lacrosse with two squadrons of 324 boats in all ; at the same port was also the right section under Admiral Magon with at Wimereux sheltering the reserve under 323 boats Captain Daugierof 97 boats; and a small squadron of 81 boats for the transport of horses at Calais, making a war ; flotilla of 1099 vessels of various kinds. There were also 1 Havre, Cherbourg, and Brest, which were not included in the above programme. Sorties were made almost daily, and if the divisions of gunboats which put out 196 craft at from the various ports sometimes returned victorious their encounters with British frigates and smaller in vessels, they more frequently found it prudent to retire under the As a shelter of the heavy batteries mounted on the cliffs. fighting force the flotilla was not a success it remained to be seen if the French navy proper would acquit itself with honour and cover the passage of the armada of boats which ; the future Lord " mosquito Exmouth was in the habit of calling the fleet." 1 Desbrifcre, Vol. IV, pp. 88-90. CHAPTER XVIII NELSON IN CHASE OF THE ENEMY, "The 1805 world attaches wisdom to him that guesses right." NELSON. plan for the concentration having failed owing to Nelson's first of his fleets La Touche untimely NAPOLEON'S he busied himself with another concepwatchfulness and Treville's death, based on the same fundamental idea, but differing in many other respects. Ireland, still discontented with the tion, motherland, and at war with herself, presented a fine opening for a revolution. A certain section of her population was France, and with Napoleon felt that an expedition to that country might be attended still with coquetting success. 1 The 18,000 soldiers already stationed Brest were to embark in the twenty vessels of Ganteaume's fleet, under Marshal Augereau. After having at reached Ireland by a circuitous route so as to elude detection, and landed his human freight, two alternatives were left to of the cover the Vice- Admiral. If the wind favoured the crossing from Boulogne, he was to hasten back and passage if not, he was to convoy seven Batavian flotilla its sail-of-the-line, ; then lying in the Texel with an army of 25,000 strong on board, and proceed to Lough Swilly. The capture of Dublin was to be his primary object. 1 See ante, 197 p. 94. NAPOLEON AND THE 198 Should unforeseen circumstances army from setting foot on "One invaded. the Emperor preventing the Scotland was to be arise Irish soil, of these two operations must succeed," told Decres late in September, 1804, "and then, whether I have 30,000 or 40,000 men in Ireland, or whether I am both in England and Ireland, the success of the war But which is with us." l was only part of a vast strategic movement, " " successful would place the crown o' the world this if on Napoleon's head. British fleets The Emperor sought by causing the Toulon to deceive the and Rochefort squadrons to sail in separate divisions for the West Indies, the former under Villeneuve and the latter under Missiessy. 2 The Toulon squadron was which had been lost, to regain the Dutch colonies as well as to take supplies to St. Domingo, a colony in the fortunes of which Napoleon evinced the keenest personal interest. St. Helena (absit omen) was also to be wrested from its possessors, two vessels remaining in the vicinity for a time to play havoc with British commerce. The Rochefort fleet had similar aggres- measures to carry sive were to be included 1 out. St. Lucia and Dominica in its list of captures, while 2Qth September, 1804. Correspondance de NapoUon. Martinique Letter No. 8063, Vol. IX, p. 557. 2 Missiessy belonged to a noble family, of which several scions had served at sea. He first saw action in the American War, and acquitted him- France with honour. The Revolution brought him speedy promotion to RearAdmiral, though he was given no opportunity of distinguishing himself until he was appointed Commander of the Rochefort squadron, formerly held by Villeneuve. In 1809 Missiessy was given the rank of Vice- Admiral in com- self mand of the Scheldt squadron, at Antwerp. After the Restoration Louis XVIII made him Maritime Prefect of Toulon, and having remained true to King during the Hundred Days, he was maintained at his post, and took a leading part in the reorganization of the French navy until his death in the 1832. INVASION OF ENGLAND 199 and Guadeloupe had to be reinforced. This expedition Villeneuve and over, the real war-game was to begin. Missiessy were to join hands with their seventeen sail-of1 the-line, return to Europe together, and raise the blockade of Ferrol, thereby releasing the ships at Coruna. All were then to concentrate at Rochefort. By ordering these two fleets to sail before Ganteaume, the Master of War hoped that the English would be so fully occupied in their pursuit that the Brest fleet would be able to slip out of the harbour and accomplish one or other of its alternative movements. That the Commander-in-Chief of the latter force experienced the same difficulty as his predecessors in obtaining sufficient sailors to work his ships is borne out in the following hitherto unpublished despatch from Decres to Ganteaume. The document is undated, but it was evidently written at the end of June or the beginning of July, 1804. " You say that if you had 4000 conscripts it would enable the vessels to get under weigh. Herewith, my dear Admiral, is a draft of the letter which I propose to submit to the Emperor on this subject. I send it to you before I speak to him about it in order that you may be acquainted with its details. 2 It is no longer a project now that the has Emperor given you the troops. You have a great task and a difficult one, for which your predecessor had prepared nothing. Please God you will fulfil it as successfully as I One cannot give you conscripts. both desire and hope. 1 Mahan's Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution, Vol. II, The harbours of Ferrol and Coruna are adjacent. 2 Napoleon in a letter to Vice- Admiral Ganteaume dated the 3rd July, 1804, says that there is no possibility of levying conscripts at present, but he has ordered 3000 troops to be placed at his disposal and hopes that with these and sailors taken from smaller vessels he will be able to maintain a full p. 132. complement. See Desbriere, Vol. IV, p. 159. NAPOLEON AND THE 200 As me always that there can it, difficulty hoped he will give them to you. In that you can carry out the reorganization, otherwise our vessels in port are nothing better than logs. I do not know how you get on with Missiessy, but I cannot impress upon you the necessity of too great discretion with If by chance he does him, for you are in presence of not get on with you, you must tell me so frankly. It will not be at the moment of action that it will be time to make up your mind on that score. He expressed to me for soldiers, the be no tells Emperor about so it to be is . and to the told to Emperor a He was Durento leaves Paris to-morrow desire to return to Paris. remain at his post. to rejoin you. " At War the moment of finishing my letter the Minister of me that troops will be put at your disposal in twenty-four hours, which occasions the official letter subjoined to this, which without that was only a project. informs " All good wishes. " DECRfcS. " I do not yet order the return to port of the Necessity the Vulcain, and the Festin, because I wish to take the orders of the Emperor on the subject on this head. Therefore suspend everything relating to it. For the same reason put off the disbanding of the 400 invalids. 1 you on the matter by the first post." I will write to The Emperor looked upon a sortie with almost as much enemies regarded a victory, probably because the French admirals so rarely put to sea. On the satisfaction as his 25th July, 1804, several frigates Ganteaume with five sail-of-the-line and had weighed anchor, but was forced to retreat before a British Sir Thomas 1 Graves. detachment under Rear-Admiral " The Emperor is exceedingly Mr. Broadley's collection of Napoleonic MSS. INVASION OF ENGLAND 201 pleased both with the sortie and your return to writes the Minister of Marine. it I " You have port," only to repeat both to maintain and complete this feeling on his part. astonished to receive no more news of you. Do not am forget to forward me intelligence by each post, and when commander of the squadron should fulfil Give him the necessary orders. I send you the plan of a new carronade, which I specially recommend to at sea the you are this duty. your attention. I hear very bad news of the health of La Touche. Take care of your own. I am worn out with work and details of every description. The place of a It is killing work. Minister should not be at Boulogne. Vale et amour. Consider me always at Paris letters ; arrive quicker there. War. I have written to the Minister of J1 . . .' In a personal communication to Ganteaume, sent from Aix-la-Chapelle, and dated the 6th September, 18