and Nelson wrote Admiralty on the 22nd February that, notwith" have received no standing the bad weather, his ships to the damage, and not a yard or mast sprung or crippled, or He scorned Napoleon's idea that were continued the blockade indefinitely the British ships would eventually have to be withdrawn as unsea3 scarcely a sail split." if worthy. mented, " "Bonaparte," Britain's greatest seaman comhas often made his brags that our fleet would be worn out by keeping the sea that his was kept in order and increasing by staying in port; but he now finds, I fancy, if Emperors hear truth, that his fleet suffers more ; in one night than ours in a year." 4 For the moment Napoleon pondered over a new 1 2 3 4 Thiers' Consulate and 2ist January, 1805. Napoleon to Lauriston, 1st February, 1805. Empire Vol. , Vol. VI, p. 359. Ill, p. 307. Ibid. t p. 308. Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, p. 345. Vice- Admiral Collingwood, March I3th, 1805. To idea. Nelson s Dispatches, INVASION OF ENGLAND In effect as was it He was it a in 209 to send the Brest fleet to India as soon fit state to brave the waves and winds. treasured the hope of an Eastern Empire, and still entertained this project until it was eclipsed by another His pet scheme plan, which was to end in Trafalgar. received another check just about this period, owing to the death of Bruix. This distinguished officer, never robust at any time, was unable to stand the phenomenal pressure of work necessary in his position as Admiral of the Boulogne On March flotilla. Admiral Lacrosse succeeded him. I3th, 1805, Nelson again put in an appear- ance off Toulon. Everything was normal, so he continued to cruise up and down the coast, until, on the 4th April, he received intelligence that he had for the second time missed His health was then "but so-so," but the his quarry. thought of meeting the French in a decisive battle helped him to bear his physical exhaustion with wonderful forti- tude. In a few words, Napoleon's third and last attempt to outwit Nelson was this Villeneuve, after having vacated Toulon, was to call at Cadiz for the Spanish squadron : of six sail-of-the-line, and one French ship, commanded by Admiral Gravina, with Missiessy and Meanwhile, the Brest fleet of and then his five sail at Martinique. fall in twenty-one ships was to get under weigh, pick up the fifteen vessels at Ferrol under Rear-Admiral Gourdon, and with all possible speed effect a junction with the other With such an immense armament, and provided the combination was carried out two fleets in the West Indies. in its entirety, the great naval personalities of France and Spain with fifty-nine battleships would, was hoped, carry all before ii. p them and appear it off Boulogne. " Leaping NAPOLEON AND THE 210 the ditch" would be a theory no longer, but an accomplished fact. First, then, let Villeneuve wait a favouring wind For process westward swift to Martinique, Coaxing the English after. Join him there Gravina, Missiessy, and Ganteaume ; Which junction once effected all our keels Now nigh to sixty sail regain the Manche, While the pursuers linger in the West At hopeless fault. Having hoodwinked them thus, Our boats skim over, disembark the army, And All a be ours. 1 in the twinkling of London will Fortune favours the bold. on the sailed 3 patriot's eye Villeneuve's eleven ships March, and reached Cadiz. Sir John Orde, who was stationed off that port, beat an ignominious retreat, and instead of sending word to Nelson, north without leaving a single frigate to spy on the doings of the enemy. Thus Nelson was kept in suspense as to the direction taken by Villeneuve until fled the 1 8th April, and then the information vouchsafed was very unsatisfactory, for the vessel spoken state definitely that the was the French fleet was unable to which had been Nelson, in writing to the Admiralty on the iQth, satisfied that the enemy was not bound for sighted. said he it was West Indies, the squadron at "but intended forming a junction with Ferrol, and pushing direct for Ireland or Brest." 2 Good luck seemed to have forsaken the hero, for he was unable to get a 1 2 fair The Dynasts, Part wind. I, act IV, It scene took nine days to 3, p. Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, p. 411. 21, make by Thomas Hardy. INVASION OF ENGLAND 211 " Dead foul! dead foul!" he complained. His indomitable courage stands out clearly in many of his letters. He moaned over his mischances and illsixty-five leagues. health, but he never closed an epistle without the assur- ance that he would not be cast down, and that his dearest wish was to be face to face with the enemy. Incredible exertion sustained his spirits, but sapped his life. Nelson sent the Amazon to Lisbon on the chance of getting news, proceeding with his eleven ships to Cape St. Vincent, from whence he took up a position fifty leagues west of Scilly. off Brest or to He This would enable him to join the fleet go to Ireland, whichever was necessary. sent a warning to Lord Gardner, Commander-in-Chief of the squadron cruising off Ireland, that the French fleet might possibly come his way, that Admiral's disposal should he " sary. I feel vexed at However, I deem his ships at assistance neces- their slipping out of the Mediter- " ranean," he averred, as game. and placing I hope, had marked them my for my own dear Lord, that you will annihilate them, instead of Nelson and Bronte." 1 In a communication to Viscount Melville his indomitable spirit burns like a consuming fire. It almost seems if his daring became keener as the sands of life ran as out " : am made to despair what man can do shall be have marked out for myself a decided line of conduct, and I shall follow it well up although I have now before me a letter from the Physician of the Fleet, enforcing my return to England before the hot months. Therefore, notwithstanding, I shall pursue the enemy to the East I done. not I ; 1 April igth, 1805. Nelson's Dispatches^ Vol. VI, p. 413. NAPOLEON AND THE 212 or West Indies, if I know that to have been their destina- the Mediterranean Fleet joins the Channel I 1 shall request, with that order, permission to go on shore." tion, yet, if From this West Indies letter it is clear that Nelson regarded the as Villeneuve's destination quite within the range of probability, although he clung to his old idea He rightly that an attack on Ireland was contemplated. feared that Sir John Orde had not sent frigates to watch He could not run to the West Indies " withthe enemy. out something beyond mere surmise," 2 while if he neglected doing so it was highly probable that Villeneuve would take Jamaica and other important possessions if as well as effect a junction with Missiessy. he thought fit, Nelson there- Rear-Admiral Sir Richard Bickerton, 2 a thoroughly competent officer, to the command of the Mediterranean, should he find it necessary to pursue the enemy fore appointed distant waters. in It was most essential to guard the Mediterranean, for Napoleon might yet try his sending a fleet to Egypt, or even attack Sicily. midst of the anxiety attendant upon a skill in In the man who was prac- tically alone responsible for the safety of his country, Nelson's mind occasionally wandered back to Merton, and he conjured up thoughts of the happiness he would have as soon as he could wreak his vengeance upon his adversary. He even found time to make arrangements for building a kitchen there. The first 1 About 20th 2 May news he received of the April, 1805. real whereabouts of Nelson's Dispatches^ Vol. VI, p. 414. Ibid., p. 419. 4th, 1805. 3 Admiral Sir Richard Bickerton (b. 1759). Rear- Admiral of the Red, April 23rd, 1804; appointed to the Board of Admiralty, 1805 ; Commander- in-Chief at d. 1832. Portsmouth, 1812; Admiral of the White, June 4th, 1814; INVASION OF ENGLAND the combined fleet 213 said to have been given to is him by Rear-Admiral Donald Campbell, of the Portuguese navy, but by birth a Scotchman. " My lot is cast, and I am off to the West Indies," 1 he wrote on the loth Lagos Bay, but not month did he have May when in until the beginning of the following positive intelligence of Villeneuve's Napoleon believed that Nelson had sailed for destination. the East Indies, 2 and was positive of success. He persuaded himself that England's downfall was a matter of a few weeks or months at most. the serious of Brest ; she game I know If England is from the terrible chance she runs. when aware of playing, she will raise the blockade not, in truth, what kind of precaution is but will protect her " A nation has no fortifications and no army to lay itself open to seeing an army of 100,000 veteran troops land on its shores. This is the masterpiece of the flotilla is very foolish it ! of money, but it is necessary for us to be masters of the sea for six hours only, and England will have ceased to exist?* He orders Berthier to emIt costs a great deal bark everything, "so that in twenty-four hours the whole may start." His intention was to land at expedition four different lost." points. "There is not an instant to be 4 Nelson anchored his ten ships 6 at Barbados on June 4th, where he was told by General Sir William Myers that information had reached him the previous night from Brigadier-General Brereton, stationed at St. Lucia, that 1 2 3 4 May 1 loth, 1805. 3th June, 1805. Nelson's Dispatches, Vol. VI, p. 431. Bingham, Vol. II, p. 136. Qth June, 1805. Ibid., p. 135. 20th July, 1805. Jdt'ct. t p. 137. On May nth Nelson had detached one ship, the Royal Sovereign^ to guard a convoy of troops for the West Indies. 6 NAPOLEON AND THE 214 enemy had been seen off that island, going towards the south, probably for Tobago or Trinidad. Nelson " If your hesitated, but determined to take the risk. the intelligence proves false, remarked before sailing, you and lose me the French fleet," he later events certainly justified In a subsequent letter to the British Minister at Lisbon Nelson disposed of Brereton very summarily. this assertion. "If either General Brereton could not have wrote," he said, " or his look-out man had been blind, nothing could have prevented my fighting them [the enemy] on June 6th but such information and from such a quarter, close to the ; " But for General Again, Brereton's damned information Nelson would have been, enemy, could not be doubted." living or dead, the greatest 1 man in his profession that England ever saw." The Admiral was not scent until he found it know that he was on to out for himself. He set sail additional line-of-battle ships which had joined Cochrane, who had been the wrong with two him under sent to search for Missiessy, for Tobago, and there learnt from an American vessel that she had been boarded by a French man-of-war the day before. The same evening another ship signalled that the enemy him at that in almost of a nature came island. contradictory Reports On the 8th someone told him that the enemy was daily. to sail four days previously for an attack upon Grenada and Dominica. The following day he was informed that " and that on the 4th the all was well at these places, from had not moved Martinico, proving all our former enemy was at Trinidad, accordingly the /th found information to be 1 false." Dated June I5th, 1805. a Ibid., p. 452. 2 In this way Nelson chased from Nelson's Dispatches^ Vol. VI, p. 456. INVASION OF ENGLAND island to island. On the nth he was off 215 Guadeloupe, on 2th at Antigua, where he disembarked the troops he had taken on board at Barbados for the purpose of rightthe 1 ing the French should they have succeeded in effecting a At noon the following day " I sailed in my landing. enemy, and I do not yet despair of with them before they arrive at Cadiz or getting up to which coasts I think they are bound, or, at Toulon, least, in time to prevent them from having a moment's of the pursuit superiority." The bows of his well-worn ships were again turned towards Europe, and on the i8th July he came across his old friend Collingwoo