
===== [Bantry-A] chars 69809-71809 =====
on being informed that his scattered fleet had completely reunited. It preceded him in getting away from Brest, crowded on all sail, and missed Bouvet's division owing to a dense fog. On the morning of the 2ist, been reduced to one by which time his force sail-of-the-line, the Nestor, had and the NAPOLEON AND THE 12 the Commander-in-Chief gazed on the Irish coast with eager eyes, and drew near to Bantry Bay. Fraternite, During the night the lights of numerous vessels were observed, which he surmised were British, whereas they belonged to his own missing fleet. A storm arose and played havoc with the frigate, and two days after the Fraternite had lost her consort. The Romaine came in sight for a short time later and disappeared. On the 28th Bouvet's Immortality was reported, and on the following day Hoche knew much that the expedition which he had planned with so care had turned out a fiasco. Two ships remained to tell the tale, the Scevola, which was rapidly sinking, and the Revolution, which was engaged in rescuing the crew of the former, although she herself was in an almost disabled state owing to a collision. Meanwhile the other admirals had arrived off the Irish coast on the 2ist December with 1 thirty-five sail. Un- favourable weather again precluded them from keeping together, and on the 22nd Bouvet anchored at Bear Haven with eight sail-of-the-line and seven other vessels. The remainder were afterwards blown to sea. 2 The admiral and Grouchy held a council of war, the former being of opinion that a search should be made for Hoche ; but Grouchy, who as military commander-in-chief was supreme once the fleet was at anchor, gave orders that the 3 6500 troops under him should be landed at Bear Island, and then altered his plans, making Bantry his objective. Bouvet, however, made not the slightest attempt to carry out the command, and Grouchy did not enforce it as he 1 3 Mahan, Vol. I, p. 355. 2 Ibid., 356. In Bantry Bay, thirteen miles west of Bantry. The remains

===== [Bantry-B] chars 76321-78121 =====
cape, expedition a It God little later. and lived to command a similar 3 has been repeated again and again that an "act of alone prevented the invasion of Ireland in the " winter of 1796. The weather was certainly against the French part of the time, but Grouchy's dilatoriness was as conspicuous at Bantry as it was at Waterloo, and must be taken into account. Napoleon gave it as his opinion that had Hoche been able to land his "fine army" he would have been successful. 4 Where was the main British fleet fate of Ireland 1 2 4 had trembled in the balance ? James's Naval History, Ibid., pp. 8 1 -2. all this p. 81. time, while the The fifteen sail- Epitomized by Robert O'Byrne, F.R.G.S. 3 See/0tf, p. 140. Dumouriez says that Creasy's Invasions of England, Vol. II, p. 209. Admiral Bouvet sacrificed his ships and General Hoche not been parted from his army by a storm, the expedition would not have failed. MS., p. 267. NAPOLEON AND THE 16 of-the-line under Admiral Colpoys, which usually cruised had been blown thirty miles to the westward, and two or three frigates under Sir Edward Pellew alone remained to watch the enemy. Colpoys was not aware off Brest, that the expedition had sailed until the day after the majority of the ships had reached the mouth of Bantry made Bay, and then he mouth under Lord Bridport, which was the fleet off Brest, if he should 1 sail," for Spithead. The fleet at home " at Ports- to relieve necessary, or to pursue the enemy, got under weigh when nearly all the if scattered units of the French fleet were on homeward their voyage. This unsatisfactory method of watching an enemy contrasts strongly with Lord St. Vincent's (formerly Sir " " John Jervis) later injunction to hermetically seal up the French fleets in their harbours. Blockade duty at this time 