

He had now to submit to the Committee a very important consideration, to which he should call their most serious attention. As soon as the the present subject was finished his right hon. friend (Mr. Foster) would proceed to lay before them the situation of the finances of Ireland. His right hon. friend would have to state that he had borrowed for the service of Ireland 2,500,000l. in that country, and that he had borrowed 4,500,000l. in England for the same service. To meet the expences of the loan raised in Ireland, his right hon. friend was ready to propose the necessary taxes; but he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) had no hesitation in saying that he trusted the Committee would agree with him in thinking that, in the present distressed state of the Irish 219 Finances, it would not be wise or expedient to call on his right hon. friend to lay taxes on that country for the purpose of meeting the expences of the loan of 4,500,000l. raised in England. It was therefore his intention to propose to the English members and the Irish members of the House of Commons, that the expences of that part of the loan raised for the service of Ireland should be charged on the Consolidated Fund of England (as a loan to Ireland) in order to procure the public creditor a permanent security, and for at least a twelvemonth, while an inquiry was making into the finances of that country, to bear the interest of the money so raised. He trusted that the Committee would be of opinion, let whatever might be the issue of that inquiry, that it would be advisable to come forward in the way which he recommended, and out of the comparative affluence of the English finances, to afford aid to Ireland in the hour of her particular embarrassment. With a view of furnishing the Committee with the means by which this great good could be effected to Ireland, without any inconvenience to this country, he had forborne to take more than 5,000,000l. from the surplus of the Consolidated Fund, leaving a sufficient sum to meet the proposed charge. Though this was a novel proposition, he was persuaded that it would be received without grudging, or any indisposition on the part of the Committee, to afford to Ireland that assistance which he had shewn could be afforded to her, without any material inconvenience to Great Britain. He repeated, that the inconvenience would be immaterial; for what was the nature of the additional taxes, by which the surplus of the Consolidated Fund-would be so much increased as to enable the Committee to do that which he recommended? The duty on British spirits had been founded on a principle which had over and over again been recognized by the Committee as just. After the experience of last year, namely, having found that spirits had continued to be sold at the increased price to which they were raised when distilled from sugar, there were no reasons to suppose there would be any diminution in the con sumption of the article from the very small advance on the price which the presen duty could be expected to occasion. With respect to the other duties, they were all recommended to the Committee, on views very different from those con- 220 nected with finance. They were proposed expressly for the purposes of endeavouring to procure for British shipping those imports, which the war in which the country was engaged, necessarily limited (and which were now enjoyed by foreigners); and of encouraging the exertions of British manufactures, and the consumption of British colonial produce. Policy would have dictated these measures without any reference whatever to their, beneficial tendency with respect to finance. He was therefore justified in saying that Ireland might be assisted without prejudice to Great Britain, and he trusted that the assistance would be received in Ireland as it would be given in this country; namely, as affording a mark of our disposition to lend every possible aid to Ireland under the embarrassed circumstances in which she was placed, and as tending to enforce the necessity and the policy of either country stepping to the support of the other, when the one was able to give, and the other so situated as to require assistance.