

objected to the Property Tax as unequal and unjust; but congratulated the right hon gentleman on the terms on which he had procured the loan.

objected to the tax on cotton, as only likely to produce serious injury to the country. This was not perhaps the proper stage for entering into the discussion minutely, but he could not help observing that a duty on the raw material, which would make a difference of 4d. in the pound, upon an article not worth above 12d. per pound, at present, should not be adopted with precipitation. He was sure the right hon. the Chancellor of the Exchequer would find, upon inquiry, that such a tax would have an injurious operation upon the manufactures of the country. As to the timber tax, he thought it would have a tendency to exclude the timber from the Baltic, and, perhaps, in that view was beneficial, as a means of encouraging our trade with our own colonies, and with America, but as an article of revenue he did not know that any expectations should be founded on it.

said, that the tax had been already proposed, and was in an advanced stage at the present moment. He denied that there would be any apprehension from it of injury to our manufactures. We had much cotton in our own colonies, and there had been of late years a greater fluctuation in the price of that article than the addition of this duty would effect, notwithstanding which, it had continued to prosper. There was, besides, an immediate quantity on our hands, and much would be obtained from different parts. As to the duty upon timber, he was prepared to expect the effect described by the hon. gentleman, and had provided against any failure by a larger estimate.

said, that if any inconvenience was to occur which might prevent the importation of cotton wool from America, it might be brought from the East Indies to any amount.

stated, that the cotton which; came from India sold at 8d. a pound, 223 while that from America sold at 12d. The coarser could not supply the place of the finer. The produce of our own colonies was extremely limited in this respect; and it should be well considered whether it was right to give a preference to the cotton of the Brazils above the cotton of America.

The Resolutions were then agreed to.

Back to PETITION OF MR. DODD.

Forward to IRISH BUDGET.

Noticed a typo?| Report other issues (data@parliament.uk)|
