

CH. I. AFTER JENA 5 

Zastrow and General Kéckritz—to whisper the right word in his 
ear and induce him to ask for an armistice. 

The war had lasted only a little over a week. The Prussians 
had gone into it with flags flying. All the wild enthusiasms, the 
bragging pride, the rattling swords, had sounded the din of a 
confident untried nation newly entering upon war; and the 
memory of Frederick the Great had lured these people on. It 
was on the 5th of October 1806 that the Prussian minister at 
the court of the Emperor Napoleon had handed an ultimatum 
to the foreign minister Talleyrand, and the ultimatum had ex- 
pired on the 8th. On the 12th, after hostilities had commenced, 
Napoleon had made a final appeal for peace and had asked the 
Prussians to prevent the great battle that seemed impending; 
but the Prussian king claimed that the letter did not reach him 
in time, and Jena was fought on the 14th. Frederick William’s 
demand for a suspension of arms came as his answer to this final 
overture from Napoleon. With it was coupled a regret that the 
pacific proposal had arrived too late to prevent the carnage. In 
this way, at one touch from Napoleon, Prussia crumpled, and 
cringed, and came whining back to the side of France. 

Napoleon refused to grant an armistice. His reply to the 
request betrays his preoccupations in this October of 1806. 

Any suspension of arms which would give time for the Russian 
armies, whom you seem to have appealed to in the winter, to arrive, 
would be too inimical to my interests for me to be able to subscribe 
toit....Ido not fear the Russian forces... .I met them in the last cam- 
paign. But Your Majesty will have more to complain of than I. Half 
of your States will be the theatre of war....The other part will be 
ravaged by your allies and will suffer still more. It will be an eternal 
subject of regret to me that two nations which for so many reasons 
were meant to be friends, have been drawn into a conflict so purpose- 
less... .Still I must repeat to Your Majesty that I shall be glad to see 
a way, if it is possible, of re-establishing the ancient confidence which 
reigned between us, and of reconciling the sentiments that I bear 
towards you with my duty and with the security of my people, 
compromised once again by this, the fourth coalition in fifteen 

years. 

1 Correspondance de Napoléon 1°", t. x111, No. 11,031. 

6 INTRODUCTION 

Napoleon had been fighting this Prussian war, in fact, with his 
eyes fixed upon a corollary, and that corollary was the entry of 
the Russians into Poland. It was a contingency he had merely 
divined, but if it should occur at all, he would owe Prussia a grudge 
for it. So in his reply to their demand for an armistice he turned 
even the approach of Russian friends into an added terror for 
these Prussians, that they might fear it more than he himself 
did, and so end by trying to prevent it. Frederick William misread 
the conclusion of this letter, thinking that he saw in it a promise 
of kind treatment and quick forgiveness. In reality it was a 
pointed and deliberate and ominous expression of a doubt. 
Napoleon was not sure whether policy and events would leave 
room for the good sentiments that he still affected to have for 
the Prussian king. He was not sure that he could afford to be 
friendly to the court of Berlin at all if the Russians brought war 
into Poland. 