

ENGLAND AND THE SYSTEM OF TILSIT 

Chap. 1 Prussian attempts to induce England to make 

Peace : é ; ; : a : Gy 

II The Russian Mediation : : ; : 288 

III Austrian Policy and the Austrian attempt to 
bring about Peace . : : : : 310 

IV Alopeus makes a Final Effort on behalf of 
Peace : ; : : : : : 339 

APPENDIXES 

A The Conduct of Alexander on the 16th of June 1807 361 
B_ The Instructions to Lobanov, June 1807 : ‘ 367 
C Alexander’s Desertion of Prussia at Tilsit . ; 372 

Index . 7 : ; ; : : : : : 881 

PREFACE 

Tue following work deals with the overtures and parleys and 
negotiations for peace which come in an unbroken series during 
the war of the fourth coalition. It is therefore a study of di- 
plomacy in time of war; of negotiations that form the running 
line of accompaniment and commentary to the military story; 
of peace overtures that are often mere subterfuges in the game 
of fighting—strategic moves, or pieces of propaganda, or means 
of sowing dissension between allies, or tricks to gain time. It is 
also a study of the postures and moods of the various powers of 
Europe, as these were altered by military events and registered 
in the demands of diplomats; and in this way it seeks to give the 
inner history of the war, the essential story of the ups and downs 
of the struggle. It is in particular a study of the diplomacy of 
Napoleon—the objects for which he was fighting and the methods 
he used to gain his ends—in the period when it might be claimed 
that his genius was at its finest and his power was at its height. 
The story has been told with special reference to the personalities 
engaged in the work of diplomacy, so that it might become 
apparent how much in these Napoleonic times the course of 
events could be deflected by the characters and the idiosyncrasies 
of ambassadors and ministers who were far from home. It is 
intended that the result should be at least a sample picture of 
the Napoleonic era, and should illustrate the strange tangle, the 
hidden undercurrents and the clash of personalities, that lay 
behind a Napoleonic war. 

The problem is set during the course of the Prussian negotia- 
tions for peace, which began immediately after the battle of 
Jena and finally led Napoleon to an important declaration of 
policy at a time when he had to face a revived coalition. In 

racing out the consequences of this new statement of policy, 
and in following the various overtures and discussions that 
ensued, the narrative describes the attitude and conduct of the 

Vili PREFACE 

powers of Europe in the six months before the battle of Fried- 
land. Tilsit comes in the centre of the story and an attempt has 
been made to interpret the diplomacy that surrounds the 
meeting of the two emperors on the raft in the river Niemen. 
This interpretation has been supported on one or two contro- 
versial points by special treatment in Appendixes. Finally the 
book shows the “system of Tilsit” in operation and traces its 
effects upon the problem of maritime peace, breaking off at the 
moment when the last thread is cut and the isolation of England 
is secured—at the moment when new problems in Spain open a 
fresh period in the history of Napoleon. 