

1 Lucchesini’s account of his mission in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 
1795, bis 1807, 11 (Publikationen aus den K. Preussischen Staatsarchiven, 
Bd. xx1x), 631-4. 

2 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. x11. No. 11,045. 

8 INTRODUCTION 

complained to Berlin of his unfitness, until the man had been glad 
to be recalled. It was not tactful of the Prussians, when they 
were seeking the best escape possible from the predicament into 
which the war had brought them, to send for the purpose the 
very man whom Napoleon had seized upon as the prime mover 
of the quarrel, the cause of all the trouble. | 

Napoleon was more careful in his choice of a negotiator, and 
the appointment of Duroc was significant. It was necessary to 
prevent Talleyrand from having a hand in the discussions; he 
might juggle with the negotiation and insinuate his own ideas 
into the affair, or try by devious processes to’smooth down the 
severities of his master. No diplomat, but a tool, a cat’s-paw, 
the secretary of Napoleon, was chosen to treat with Lucchesini. 
He was still to be mere secretary, nothing more than a scribe, 
the unprotesting servant of his master’s whims. Napoleon loved 
Duroc for his faithfulness in this kind of service. “‘ His cold and 
unexcursive mind’’, wrote Bourrienne, “suited Napoleon, whose 
confidence he enjoyed until his death.” General Rapp has 
summed up those qualities in him which made him particularly 
useful to his master in the negotiation of the peace with Prussia: 

Duroc was a man whose services were almost indispensable to the 
Emperor. He always enjoyed the highest favour and the greatest 
confidence, which he in every respect deserved. Few men were so 
distinguished for tact, spirit of business, and skill, as Duroc; and at 
the same time few were so remarkable for modesty. His devotion 
to the Emperor was without bounds. He had a good heart and was 

an honest man; his only fault was his fear of displeasing and his 
excessive timidity.! 

Napoleon in appointing this man to treat with the Prussians 
really kept the whole negotiation entirely in his own hands. 

At midnight on the 21st of October Duroc and Lucchesini 
began a conference that lasted for a few hours and discussed the 
terms of the proposed peace treaty. The Prussian plenipotentiary 
spent the rest of the night in thinking out a reply to the proposals 
that had been put before him, ready for the second interview 
that took place on the 22nd: he was kept moving about from 

1 Rapp, Mémoires écrits par lui-méme (1828), p. 118. 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 9 

place to place as the French armies advanced, but Napoleon 
refused to see him personally. Onthe 28rd, at Wittenberg, amore 
official conference was held, and on the following day Lucchesini 
was informed of what Napoleon’s intentions were. He was given 
the basis of the proposed treaty of peace. On the morrow again 
he was in Potsdam and wrote to his master. The terms that had 
been offered him were so exacting and costly that he would not 
take it upon himself to sign them. 