

Frederick William himself, waiting for news from his minister 
Lucchesini, was in one of those moods when a queer psycho- 
analytical apathy fell upon his repressed mind, and he would 
busy himself with odds and ends of futile occupations and in- 
terests, like a harassed man who picks at a piece of string. He, 
who was “rather the conscientious drudge of state than its first 
servant”, could not bear the awfulness of responsibility and 
shrank from taking a decision in matters he knew to be so 

CHI. AFTER JENA 11 

momentous. From his way of walking around, from his habit 
of toying with trifles, people said he was indifferent—that he 
might have had ten kingdoms to lose. Blindly he clung to his old 
ministers, Haugwitz, Zastrow and Beyme, keeping the more 
vigorous Hardenberg out of his counsels, lest he should hinder 
the conclusion of peace. The queen herself was aware that it was 
her own policy of war with France that had come into discredit: 
she might be anxious to continue the struggle but she would not 
interfere in politics any more. On the 20th of October she joined 
the king at Cistrin, where the inhabitants of the surrounding 
country were already rushing within the fortified walls, dragging 
everything they could carry. All the hope of the ministers was 
centred in the negotiation that Lucchesini was conducting; but 
there was a certain nervousness, since Lucchesini had been 
keeping silent for a time. Frederick William wrote a pitiable 
_ letter to Napoleon, expressing his anxiety and complaining of 
the delay; and this letter seems to have crossed with Lucchesini’s 
despatch announcing the terms which Napoleon had dictated.1 

Lucchesini’s report now reached the Prussian king, and the 
Prussians were at last able to know the kind of treatment Napoleon 
intended giving them. The peace terms that were now presented 
were the ones that Lucchesini had not dared to undertake 
the responsibility of accepting, and they showed Napoleon 
more severe than the Prussians had contemplated. Prussia, 
according to these terms, was to renounce the provinces she had 
hitherto possessed between the Rhine and the Elbe and to 
abandon her former relations with Germany. She was to engage 
not to interfere in the affairs of Germany but to promise that 
she would recognise the drastic changes that Napoleon contem- 
plated there, particularly the great extension of his Confederation 
of the Rhine. She was allowed to retain the Duchy of Magdeburg 
and the old Mark of Brandenburg, so that as a result of the terri- 
torial rearrangements her centre of gravity was to be shifted 
eastwards; in future she was not to allow preoccupation with 

1 The letter is quoted from the French Archives by Driault, Tilsit (1917), 
p. 41, and (rather differently) by Lefébvre, Histoire des Cabinets de 
UV Europe... (1866), 11, 899-400; so presumably it was despatched; but cf. 
Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 219 (note). 

12 INTRODUCTION 

German affairs to obscure what Napoleon regarded as her true 
function in Europe—she was to concentrate upon her réle of 
buttress against the powers of eastern Europe, and cease to be 
the competitor of Napoleon in Germany. She was given a geo- 
graphy that would itself set the conditions of her future policy 
and turn her attention eastwards. This treaty was Napoleon’s 
answer to the challenge that the court of Berlin had given to him 
in the year 1806. He had wanted to keep Prussia as an ally, as 
a client state; she had been useful to him because she could 
check or frighten Russia; but she had chosen to adopt rather 
the réle of a German power, she had entered into competition 
with him for that hegemony of Germany which Austria had 
allowed to slip from her hands, she had been willing to leave him 
his influence in south Germany, his Confederation of the Rhine, 
but she had come to issue with him over the question of the 
leadership of the north. This being the nature of the struggle, 
and Napoleon having won in any case at Jena what he might 
consider as a special title to the overlordship of Germany, it was 
natural that the guiding principle of the peace treaty should be 
the final settlement of the problem of Prussia’s place on the map— 
that is to say, the exclusion of Prussia from the Germanic system.! 