

Manuscript materials from the British Museum and the 
“Records Office in London, the Archives of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs in Paris, and the Court and State Archives in 
Vienna have been used, and have been collated with published 
records and printed correspondence, e.g. the collections from the 
Prussian and the Russian Archives. 

Any virtue that this study may possess owes so much to the 
kindness of Dr Temperley that the opportunity of a Preface 
must be taken to say an inadequate word of thanks. 

H. BUTTERFIELD 
November 1929 

BN 

INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTER I 

PRUSSIA’S ATTEMPT TO MAKE SEPARATE 
PEACE WITH NAPOLEON AFTER JENA 

‘Tue fine show of armies arrayed and kings in proud posture 
had collapsed into medley and muddle in the twin battles of 
Jena and Auerstadt. It littered the countryside and strove 
painfully to sert itself out afresh, as the din subsided and the 
smoke cleared away. Napoleon, sprawling upon the ground to 
study his maps, fell into an undignified sleep, and his guard took 
silent stand around him. Murat, writing to his master, apologised: 
“Your Majesty will pardon my scribble, but I am alone and 
dropping from fatigue”’,t and he who was no weakling blundered 
the strokes of his pen, as if he had been drunk. The release from 
the tension of battle liberated the worst elements in an army. 
The forces of the very victors seemed endangered by indiscipline. 
‘*The footsteps of the corps d’armée”’, wrote Soult a few days later, 
‘‘are marked by fire, devastation, and crimes atrocious beyond belief. 
The orders of the leaders are despised, the lives of officers are en- 
dangered, and as a crowning evil the resources and food afforded by 
the country are destroyed as French troops come upon the scene.” 
A stray English traveller who came by soon after the battle 
found a devastating sight, the ground littered with papers, 
letters, account books, pamphlets and miscellaneous unwanted 
goods, while the French ruammaged baggage waggons, tossed part 
of the booty to the country people clamouring around, and with 
the recklessness of light-hearted soldiery invited all passers-by to 
stop and share their luck.” All was in disarray and men went 
off to shoot game or to steal poultry, to ransack houses or to 
pilfer from farms. ‘Never was pillage carried further than in 
this campaign and disorder extended even to insubordination.” 

1 Lettres et documents pour servir ad Vhistoire de Joachim Murat, 1v 
(1910), 391. 

2 Private and confidential. . .narrative of the circumstances which led to an 
interview between the Emperor Napoleon and G. Sinclair, by Sir George 
Sinclair (1826). 

I-2 

4 INTRODUCTION 

The Prussians, in still worse condition, had all their evils com- 
plicated by panic. In the morning they had lightened their 
burdens by throwing away their food, and the end of the battle 
found them scattering through the villages to satisfy hunger and 
thirst, digging up potatoes and turnips in the fields, and rushing 
blindly, officers and men alike, ignorant of the true direction for 
retreat. An English minister, Lord Morpeth, took to his heels, 
abandoned his mission before it had really begun, and found a 
speedy vessel for England. Haugwitz, who had the direction of 
Prussian policy, made hurried escape to Magdeburg. The king 
himself had great difficulty in evading capture, and only after 
many miles of riding hither and thither, many hours in the saddle 
without food of any sort, did he find his way in the face of the 
French watch fires and through the midst of his own straggling 
forces, to a brief day of rest at Sommerda. On his way he saw 
the two streams of fugitives from Jena and Auerstadt meet and 
cross in confusion; and everywhere were tumults and alarms, 
fugitives and panic-stricken herds, disorders and wild rumours, 
and an infectious atmosphere of despair. The queen had left her 
husband on the eve of the disaster and was making her way to 
Berlin. Stories of battle followed her, reports began to be spread 
concerning a great defeat of Napoleon, it was even whispered 
that Murat was dead; but when she was but a few hours’ journey 
from Berlin the truth overtook her and a little later she received 
a sorry letter from the king. She found Berlin in a fever; her 
children had already been sent to Stettin and it soon became 
apparent that she must continue her journey, merging it now 
into a flight for existence. She wrote to the king: ‘“‘ Everywhere 
there is the hope that all is not yet lost and that God will help 
us. You still have troops and the people adore you and are ready 
to do anything”. But the king, Frederick William, had never 
had any heart in this conflict, and it was noticed that he now 
showed a sort of bitter satisfaction at having found his own 
premonitions come true. Even before the battle there had been 
a heart-breaking series of war councils at Erfurt, there had been 
distraction and delay; and now that the battle was over it was 
easy for the military men who were at hand—men like General 