

On these terms a Prussia greatly weakened, and so unable to 
imagine herself a possible rival to France, was to pay a huge 
indemnity for the war she had brought about, and was to return 
to her place in the French system of politics; she was to co- 
operate with Napoleon in the war against England by closing 
her ports to British vessels, and she was to guarantee the integrity 
of the Ottoman Porte, agreeing to join France in its defence if 
the Russians should attack it. This last clause reveals the 
context of the whole treaty and gives at least a clue to the situa- 
tion from which it proceeds. There was no mention of what 
Prussia must do if the Czar turned his forces into Poland. That 
contingency was not contemplated for the moment; in truth it 
had never been more than a wild surmise of Napoleon’s, and he 
was now beginning to doubt it and to change his ground a little. 
One of the bulletins of the French army at the time when these 

1 For this treaty see Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, u, 577. 

oy 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 13 

terms of peace were communicated to Lucchesini, stated: ‘We 
have not yet received news of the conclusion of a treaty between 
Prussia and Russia, and it is certain that no Russian troops 
have appeared to this day on Prussian soil”. Later, on the 18th 
of November, when it had become known that the Russians were 
indeed advancing, Napoleon wrote to one of his ministers, “All 
my intelligence told me that the Russians retreated when they 
learned what had happened to Prussia”. It is to be noticed that 
when he became certain that the Russians were coming to meet 
him he considered this whole treaty as inadmissible and imme- 
diately cancelled all its arrangements. 

The king of Prussia found these terms much more exacting 
than he had anticipated. He had thought of a speedy forgiveness 
and then reconciliation, and a return to the fold. On the 26th of 
October he sent Count Zastrow to Charlottenburg to join 
Lucchesini in pursuing the negotiation and to make a strong 
attempt to secure better terms of peace. He “could not disguise”’ 
from the Emperor that the severity of his stipulations had dis- 
tressed him all the more in that the letter he had received after 
Jena had given him hopes of a reconciliation on more easy terms. 
He talked again of his “‘sincere desire to re-establish the old 
relations with France”’.? 

Napoleon gave Zastrow a friendly interview, and spoke kindly 
of Haugwitz. On the 28th of October the two Prussian nego- 
tiators recommenced the discussions with Duroc. Two days later, 
in a note to that minister, they accepted the bases which Napo- 
leon dictated for a peace—bases in some ways modified from those 
given at Wittenberg a week before.?, The French demands had 
not become more merciful or kind; Napoleon gave it to be 
understood that he would require Frederick William to forbid 
the entry of Russian troops into his territory and to engage to 
fight at the side of France in the event of a war with Russia; the 
Prussian king felt the conditions grievously hard and was very 
unwilling to accept them. On the 6th of November a conference 
was held at Graudenz to discuss the advisability of submitting; 