

At Magdeburg the king of Prussia met Haugwitz who had 
charge of foreign policy and had led the country into war; also 
Lucchesini who had been ambassador at Paris, and the secret- 
cabinet councillor Beyme. They were depressed to hear of the 
refusal of the armistice and they discussed the course that 
Prussia ought now to pursue. They all agreed that it was 
necessary to appeal for peace. Beyme wrote an alarming letter 
to his wife in Berlin, in which he declared that “‘the situation 
was such that one must not bid but beg for peace; it would be 
presumption to make a proposition; one must surrender com- 
pletely ”’.1_ The words were spread abroad; it was no secret that 
negotiations were being entered upon; and everywhere arose an 
expectation of early peace, a certainty that the treaty would be 
an ignoble one for Prussia, a feeling that it was useless to go on 
fighting while the king and his ministers were surrendering 
everything in abject negotiation. One can understand why, in 
such an atmosphere, Prussia offered little resistance to the 
French. 

Lucchesini was chosen to conduct the discussions with 

1 L. von Ranke, Denkwiirdigkeiten des Staatskanzlers Fiirsten von Har- 
denberg, 111 (1877), 211; 16. 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 7 

Napoleon, and he received full powers to conclude a treaty. He 
was instructed to consent to the cession of Prussia’s Westphalian 
provinces up to the Weser, to agree to the sacrifice of Bayreuth, 
but to use every effort for the securing of an armistice. He was 
not anxious for the odious mission, and wrote: 

On the morning of the 18th [of October] the king and Count 
Haugwitz forced upon me the wretched commission of going to ask 
the French Emperor for peace. I could not get out of this thankless 
and mournful task. I was charged to draw up my own instructions 
and to write the letters to the Emperor myself. The king approved 
and signed them and then left for Ciistrin. I left Magdeburg at noon 
on the 18th: 

On the 20th he reached the French armies and despatched the 
king’s letter to Napoleon, but was himself detained at the 
outposts. “‘I have sent Duroc to see what he wants’’, Napoleon 
wrote soon afterwards, ‘‘and I am waiting for his return. The 
Prussian king seems quite decided vo come to terms. I will do 
this, but I shall not let it prevent me from entering Berlin.’’? 
He appointed Duroc to treat with Lucchesini and at midnight 
on the 21st of October the negotiation for peace began. 

The Prussians were not wise in their choice of a negotiator. 
Lucchesini, when ambassador in Paris, had more than once 
proved an obstacle to the smooth working of the Franco-Prussian 
alliance, and long before the emergence of the controversies 
which had led to war, Napoleon, who disliked and distrusted him, 
had talked of having him recalled. He had been responsible not 
for creating but for exaggerating the fears and distresses that 
had precipitated the recent struggle, for he had not only trans- 
mitted some wild rumours to Berlin, he had advised his king to 
take carriage and fly direct to St Petersburg; and Napoleon had 
been to this extent correct in charging him with keeping bad 
company, listening to wild talk, taking his information from 
speculators, and writing despatches that made trouble. From 
that moment Napoleon had abused his character, and had 