

Napoleon’s conduct in the meantime had given the Prussians 
little reason to expect an easy conclusion of peace. The French 
armies were sweeping across the country and into the four 
corners of Germany to hunt out the remnants of Prussian military 
strength. The battle of Jena had been made the starting-point 
for the complete subjugation of the defeated state under a 
system of military occupation and financial exaction. Napoleon 
entered Berlin in triumph. He seems to have been intoxicated 
by the very act of fighting, and the exhilaration of conquering 
so easily. One would have inferred that he had no motive left 
for ever desiring the Prussians as his friends, no political object 
in view to make him wish to soften their humiliation. He seemed 
like a man with a great resentment, as though this war, for all 
its laurels and victories, had cut across his path and had inter- 
vened to spoil his plans. 

So while Lucchesini had been engaged in flying conferences, 
negotiating peace with Duroc but at the same time moving from 
town to town to keep pace with the advance of the French 
armies, crowds of fugitive Prussians, a little ahead of the 
invaders, were being driven into exile and were flying to escape 
capture. From Berlin the wealthy, the noble, the official classes 
had taken to flight on hearing of the battle of Jena. All who had 
the means had hastened away; all the booksellers, it was noticed, 
seemed to remember Palm; and it was said that on the afternoon 
of the 17th of October not a vehicle was left in the city, not a 
horse, not even a donkey. The military governor of Berlin was 
amongst the refugees; the government was dispersed, the king 
and queen were known to be in flight somewhere, and were 

10 INTRODUCTION 

trying to meet one another. The journeys of these Prussians were 
suffered under the most nerve-racking conditions. A description 
exists of how from Berlin the travelling carriages were pursued 
by the hootings of scoundrels and the menaces of the dregs of 
the populace who did not like to see themselves so deserted, and 
hastened back to scrape at the heels of the French. Sometimes 
the road would be blocked with fugitives; fear drove them on, 
bad news followed them round; mishaps did not fail to occur 
on journeys so taken under pressure. Horses would be driven 
to the last stages of exhaustion and fatigue; the breaking of a 
carriage wheel would come to overwrought minds as a nerve- 
racking catastrophe and would hold up a procession of miserable 
refugees; and all the attendant circumstances were calculated to 
induce dejection. If a pause were made, and if at last there were 
some feeling that the flight might be at an end, still the sound of 
cannon, or the rumour that troops had been seen across the river, , 
would start the race again. It was in such an atmosphere as this, 
and not in cool council chambers, that the king had to decide 
important questions of policy. The court was in full flight. The 
ministers were dispersed and overtaken with panic. Conferences 
would be driven from town to town, held so to speak under the 
cannon’s mouth. It was natural that these people should judge 
the situation of Prussia from their own immediate circumstances. 
It was difficult for them to meet their political problem with a 
mighty exercise of will, when every petty detail of their daily 
life was conspiring to keep them in dejection. It is easy to under- 
stand why they looked to Lucchesini, and put their hope in the 
clemency of Napoleon, and set their hearts on the conclusion of 
peace. 