

CH. I. AFTER JENA 27 

and promote his views, and will do so more effectively than if he 
permitted her once again to become an embittered insincere ally. 
Prussia is to be a weakness and a burden to her new friends, a 
complaining partner in the war and a dejected advocate of peace. 
She is to be this because he has given her the motive and has 
provided her with just the appropriate cue. Once he has made it 
known that the Prussian king shall not return to Berlin until 
Russia and England have cometoterms, he can leave the situation 
to work itself out. The rest is automatic. 

Napoleon, having achieved the conquest of this state, had no 
intention of retaining the country as a permanent part of his 
acquisitions. He had been at a loss at first as to the use he might 
make of his good fortune—had even talked of deposing the house 
of Brandenburg and enthroning another reigning family in its 
stead. For the future, however, he determined to make a 
military advantage out of his occupation of the territory; he 
needed it in his forthcoming campaign in Poland. Further than 
this, he had found a way of using the conquest as a diplomatic 
weapon, as a thing of negotiable value, in his dealings with the 
powers. So Prussia was not allowed to make peace, was not 
allowed even to accept defeat; she was thrown back into the 
coalition which she was seeking to escape. 

This statement of policy came as an appendix to the armistice 
that Zastrow and Lucchesini signed on the 16th of November 
1806. That armistice had still to be ratified by the Prussian king. 
According to its sixth article the ratifications were to be ex- 
changed by the 21st of November. Duroc himself was sent to 
the Prussian king to secure the acceptance of the arrangements. 
His instructions were peremptory; if the slightest objection were 
made to the terms he had to propose he was instantly to return. 
On the 21st of November the whole question of the armistice was 
discussed by the Prussians in a conference held at Osterode. The 
military men present expressed the opinion that the stipulated 
surrender of the fortresses would not be a serious blow to Prussia, 
as such a loss would be inevitable in the chances of continued 
war; while the suspension of arms would give the king an oppor- 
tunity to raise troops. Stein, however, who had been in com- 
munication with Hardenberg, pointed out the discrepancy that 

28 INTRODUCTION 

existed between the terms of the armistice and the general 
policy of peace that was expounded in Talleyrand’s note of the 
16th; he showed that if the future of Prussia depended upon the 
willingness of England and Russia to make sacrifices for her, it 
could not depend on the conclusion of an armistice that would 
only alienate these powers from the Prussian cause. The armistice 
and the note that came as an appendix to the armistice were not 
complementary but contradictory statements. This was the most 
disastrous side of the convention which Zastrow and Lucchesini 
had signed. At the very moment when Napoleon finally and 
decisively set down Prussia as belonging to the coalition, making 
her a factor in the system of compensations that England and 
Russia were to accept at a future peace and so binding up her 
fate irrevocably with theirs, he asked the Prussian king to engage 
to commit hostilities in favour of France. The armistice that was 
offered as a promise of peace contained really a new commitment 
to war. It was all part of Napoleon’s way of giving with one hand 
and taking away with the other. Stein riddled this fallacy of 
the armistice. He laid bare another piece of Napoleonic trickery, 
showing that it was not in the power of Prussia to fulfil the terms 
of the convention and expel the Russian troops, and that if the 
armistice were signed Napoleon would soon discover this and 
denounce the agreement; by which time the fortresses would have 
been handed over to him and so lost beyond recall. To this 
reasoning the cabinet councillor Beyme contributed further by 
showing how the engagement that no troops of either power 
should remain in East Prussia was one which also told in favour 
of France, since that region would be affected by the Polish 
insurrection and so would be lost to Prussia by the armistice. 
These arguments eventually carried the day.! The armistice was 
rejected. The king placed his fate and future in the hands of 
Russia. He did not risk much by this, ‘‘for the armistice would 
have robbed him of nearly everything”. 