

In a note which came as an appendix to the armistice the real 
schemes and intentions of Napoleon were made apparent; and 
it was revealed that the armistice itself was only incidental to 
the new development of Napoleonic policy. Lucchesini after- 
wards related that he knew nothing of this note until the sus- 
pension of arms was settled and signed; otherwise, he maintained, 
he would never have put signature to the agreement. Duroc, it 
seems, received the note suddenly by messenger from Talleyrand, 
and handed it to Zastrow, who read it and seemed pleased with 
it, evincing what many contemporaries would have thought a 
typically Prussian reaction to its contents. ‘So much the better,” 
he said, “‘this gives us some more means of forcing the Russians 
to enter into negotiations with France. Anyhow the treaty is 
signed.” The note recalled the generous conduct Napoleon had 
pursued in giving up conquests he had made after the collapse 
of three successive coalitions against him. “‘But in the course 
of wars perpetually renewed, France, Spain and Holland have 
lost their colonies. It is natural, it is just, that the countries 
which the right of conquest has put into the hands of the 
Emperor, should serve as compensations for the Colonies.” In 
a similar way ‘“‘ His Majesty cannot give up any of the conquests 
which the chances of war have put into his power before the 

1 A précis of the apology which Lucchesini made for the signing of the 
armistice can be found in Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 421. See also F. v. Ompteda, 
Nachlass (1869), p. 248 (No. 152): ‘“‘ Notatum des Gesandten Ompteda tiber 
eine vertrauliche Unterredung mit dem Marquis Lucchesini(Wien) Ende Jan. 
1807”. It will be noticed that Lucchesini had found his way to Vienna, 
where, according to Razoumovski, his conversation was hostile to Russia. 
A. Wassiltchikow, Les Razoumovski, t. 11, 3™¢ partie (1894), ch. m1, pp. 81-2. 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 25 

Ottoman Porte is completely restored to all its rights over 
Moldavia and Wallachia, and before its absolute independence 
is recognised and guaranteed”’. In other words, Napoleon refused 
to conclude separate peace with Prussia. 

In his message to the Senate a few days later he outlined the same 
policy with similar logic—talked again of his extreme moderation 
in previous wars, and remarked that ‘‘a large number of the 
Cabinets of Europe are sooner or later influenced by England, 
and without a solid peace with this power our people will not be 
able to enjoy the blessings which are the first aim of our labours”. 
He stated that he would not evacuate Poland and Berlin ‘‘ before 
a general peace was concluded, the conquered colonies restored 
and the independence of Turkey guaranteed’’, and he made it 
clear that he was ready to treat for peace with England, Russia 
and Prussia “but only on bases such as do not permit anybody 
to arrogate to himself any rights of superiority over us, and such 
as give back the colonies to their Mother-Countries, and guarantee 
our commerce and industry the prosperity they have a right to”’. 
This same message to the Senate announced also the creation 
of “the continental system”’, which was intended to place Great 
Britain in a state of blockade and to put her under the ban of 
Europe. 