

1 Corresp. de Nap. I*, t. x11, No. 10,448. 

* 

CH. I, AFTER JENA 17 

A proclamation issued to the French army on the 26th of 
October contained these words: “‘The Russians boast that they 
are coming upon us; we will march to meet them; we will spare 
them half the journey. They will find Austerlitz this time in the 
middle of Prussia”. On the 31st of October the advent of this 
new enemy is still rather doubtful. ‘‘We do not hear any more 
talk of the Russians’’, the bulletin runs; but its challenging tone 
shows that there exists an idea that they will come into Poland. 
“We are longing for a hundred thousand of them to come. But 
the rumour of their advance is mere nonsense. They will not dare 
to come to meet us”, Four days later, however, the question is 
decided: “‘ The Russians are a long way off; but it is possible that 
we shall meet them and be at grips with them in a month’s 
time”. This is the moment that finds Napoleon breathless, and 
the whole man flashes to life. On this day, the 8rd of November, 
he writes urgently to Paris for reinforcements. He sends for 
Kosciusko, the Polish rebel, to incite his fellow-countrymen 
against the Russians and henceforward his correspondence is 
full of the idea of an insurrection in Poland. At this time 
Talleyrand whips round to the court of Vienna, where armaments 
have been made to guard the territory and enforce the neutrality 
of Austria. These armaments have suddenly taken on an appear- 
ance of menace, so Talleyrand writes to the French minister 
there, writes directly to the Austrian chancellor himself,! to 
demand their instant cessation. Altogether these first days of 
November are a pivot. Once more Napoleon shows himself alert, 
breaks out with unbaffled energy, and nerves himself for a 
crisis. A certain situation has arisen and all the schemes and 
expedients that were to have been contingent upon it are now 
given release. Here is something that makes the peace-terms of 
November inadequate. There is to be a war with Russia in 
Poland after all—and this war produces a new situation in 
Europe and leads to a drastic reconsideration of many of 
Napoleon’s plans. 

On the 25th of October the French entered the Prussian 

1 Talleyrand to Stadion, 2 Nov. 1806, A[rchives du ministére des] A[ffaires] 
Eltrangeres], Autriche, t. 379. 

BN 2 

18 INTRODUCTION 

capital, and at this time they in Berlin and Napoleon in Char- 
lottenburg discovered documents and correspondence which 
revealed the solidarity of the Prussian connection with Russia 
and linked up the two nations more closely than Napoleon had 
even suspected, and entirely dissipated what doubt there had 
been concerning the existence of an understanding between the 
two courts. ‘Napoleon has found a letter in Charlottenburg”, 
wrote the Countess Voss, “‘left by the Queen, or, as they say, 
slipped behind a sofa cushion where it had remained unnoticed, 
and this letter has made him quite furious.’’ These compromising 
documents convinced him more than ever of the treachery as 
well as the unwisdom of the conduct of the court of Berlin in the 
summer of 1806. In his bulletin of the 26th of October he begins 
to put his finger upon the connection between the Czar Alexander 
and the Prussian court as the cause of the war policy of Prussia 
and he no longer repeats former statements about an unwilling 
king being rushed into hostilities by a war party in his cabinet. 
From this moment he bursts out in bitterness against the queen 
of Prussia and advertises her friendship for the Czar and attacks 
her with gratuitous insults in his proclamations. If it had before 
seemed a serious matter to fight the Russians in Poland with a 
defeated and embittered Prussia sulking in the rear, the objections 
to this course were redoubled now that it had come to light that 
Prussia had for a long time been pursuing a dual foreign policy, 
balancing her alliance with France by a more secret and intimate 
connection with the Czar. 