

The prospect of a campaign in Poland had raised a further 
issue that was likely to make Napoleon withdraw the offer of 
peace that had been made to Prussia. The whole problem of 
“‘the barrier of the east”’, the buttress against Russia, had been 
in Napoleon’s mind ever since he had come to issue with the 
court ef Berlin, and the approach of the Russian armies in 
November brought the question to a further stage, since it put 
Poland more directly under the eye of Napoleon and gave him 
a more immediate interest in the idea of reviving the kingdom. 
The national feeling of the Polish people would be at his service 
in a war against Prussia and Russia, if he could convince them 

: 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 19 

that in return for their assistance he would undo the work of the 
partition treaties and restore their state to its former independ- 
ence. It would be the revival of the old connection between 
France and Poland, and much that was sentimental in the 
relations between the two nations tended to make such a policy 
attractive. France had been helpless to prevent the destruction 
of Poland, but now that Napoleon was striding Europe as an 
arbiter, remodelling the continent and doing feverish map- 
making, it was natural that there should be a certain expectancy 
in the air, and a feeling that France would do her part at last.1 
Opportunist as he was, Napoleon certainly encouraged the Poles 
to hope for salvation in this way; he dangled the scheme for 
the restoration of Poland before their eyes; it suited him to take 
the point of view that “ France has never recognised the different 
partitions of Poland”; and, without promising anything, he 
hoped at least to secure Polish assistance in the forthcoming 
campaign against Russia, by merely keeping alive the vague 
expectations. Further than this he seriously considered the 
possibility of actually adopting the policy that the Poles desired 
and reviving the Kingdom of Poland. He saw that this revived 
kingdom might be made a client state of France as in the 
eighteenth century, and thus might be used as a substitute for 
the Prussian barrier in the east. The idea was one which would 
demand a readjustment of the peace terms he had already 
offered to Prussia; but, further, it was a course which in any 
case rendered the future alliance of Prussia less important to 
him, and made immediate peace impossible. The emergence of 
the Polish question necessarily threw the fate of Prussia into 
the melting-pot again. It was a further reason for cancelling the 
arrangements already made. 

The restoration of Poland, then, became an open question, 
but Napoleon did not definitely commit himself to any scheme 
as yet;? the subject was one upon which his own entourage seem 
to have had no unanimous opinion. The prolific writer Mont- 
gaillard presented on the 5th of November a project which com- 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I®, t. x11, No. 11,279. 
2 Ibid. t. x11, Nos. 11,258, 11,279; t. xv, No. 12,603. 

20 INTRODUCTION 