

Having agreed to the treaty the Prussians still trembled, and 
for some time they were kept in suspense. The actions of 
Napoleon became strange and inconsistent; the shadow of the 
man loomed threateningly again; and every sign in the sky 
seemed malevolent. The negotiators at Charlottenburg were left 
to themselves. Their note of the 30th of October, accepting the 
terms of the French treaty, dropped into an awful void and 
never had an answer. The Prussians found themselves helpless 
and bewildered before one of those long inauspicious silences of 
Napoleon—silences of a man who was brooding new terrors for 
the world. The Emperor had decided to change his plans. 

* * * * 

The whole history of the year 1806 proves that the real 
antagonism in Europe at this time had been between France and 
Russia. Throughout the year both powers had turned their 
attention to the Adriatic and the Near East and had seen there 
the next, the most immediate, conflict of their interests. The 
Czar had watched anxiously the eastward extension of Napoleon’s 
power in the Mediterranean and was jealous of the growing 
influence and supervision of France over the politics of Constan- 
tinople; Napoleon could hope, in fact, that he would declare war 

16 INTRODUCTION 

against the Turks in order to destroy the French predominance 
there. For some time Napoleon, when he had concluded treaties 
with various powers, had made a cardinal point of securing a 
clause, apparently innocent but really directed against Russia, 
guaranteeing the “independence and integrity” of the Ottoman 
Porte; that is to say, he envisaged a war with the Russians that 
should be fought ostensibly on behalf of Turkey. So long as 
there was a power like Prussia, even half-unwillingly and merely 
ostensibly allied to France, but acting as a barrier on the Polish 
frontier of Russia, the government of St Petersburg would find 
in it one reason for carrying on the conflict with France not in 
that region but in the Turkish Empire. Prussia indeed by being 
a buttress in the east had had her place in the Napoleonic system 
in Europe and had formed part of that disposing of forces which 
Napoleon had hoped to maintain. That was why he had considered 
war with her as a “‘civil war” and could not forgive her for forcing 
it upon him. 

From the moment when the problem of Prussia had become 
serious, the Russians had never ceased to occupy Napoleon’s 
attention. They had denounced a peace treaty signed by their 
plenipotentiary in July, and it was plain that they would find 
in the new crisis their own opportunity. Over and over again 
Napoleon had betrayed his apprehensions. He seems to have 
been very anxious that the Russians should not come to meet 
him in Poland. It would give him war in the wrong quarter: 
““My concern with Russia is in connection with the Porte’’,! he 
had written to Talleyrand in July. Moreover, it meant a winter 
campaign in a region which by its climate and geography made 
warfare difficult for Frenchmen and victory only less miserable 
than defeat. Circumstances were particularly unfavourable for 
such a struggle if France had to fight without the intended 
assistance of Prussia. Perhaps, finally, it is not fanciful to say 
that Napoleon saw himself deprived of what he had conceived 
to be a chance of gaining a foothold in the Ottoman Empire. 
In any case he made it clear to the Prussians that their fate was 
to depend upon the conduct of the Czar. 