

prised the re-establishment of Poland, “‘if it is no longer allowed 
to be hoped that the cabinet of Berlin will oppose a serious 
resistance to Russia”. Montgaillard thought that after all the 
humiliations it had suffered the Prussian royal family would 
never be reconciled to imperial France.!_ Jomini, however, a few 
days later was urging the merits of an alliance with Prussia, and 
showing what might be won from the gratitude and friendship 
of Frederick William if the Prussian lands could be increased by 
as much of Polish territory as could be scraped together for 
them.2 Napoleon at St Helena made claim to have considered 
such ascheme, declaring that he had desired Hanover, the Prussian 
provinces of Saxony, Westphalia, and Franconia, and Magde- 
burg, for himself; but asserting that he would have made 
Frederick William the ruler of a restored Poland, and would have 
given part of the Illyrian provinces to Austria in return for the 
cession of Galicia. It is more than likely that he played with 
such schemes for the future of Prussia—halting at them, perhaps, 
for a moment, as his mind went through the kaleidoscope of the 
possibilities before him, and then idealising them in his memory 
during exile. But what seems irresistible as the solution of the 
Polish problem in the later months of 1806 is that Napoleon still 
held everything fluid, and preserved the mobility and uncom- 
mitted freedom of his mind, and was prepared to do anything 
as he might be called upon to adjust his policy to the exigencies 
of a growing situation. 

At any rate he would have nothing more to do with the peace 
treaty he had offered to the Prussians. All that had happened 

1 Clément de Lacroix, Mémoires diplomatiques de Monigaillard 1805-19 
(1896), pp. 807-21. 

2 F. Lecomte, LeGénéral Jomini ; savie et.ses écrits (1860), pp. 51-4. Jomini, 
Vie politique et militaire de Napoléon racontée par lui-méme, 1 (1827), 8328-9. 
See also proposals of Hauterive in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 11, 
581—2 (footnote); 11, 612-13; Driault, Tilsit, pp. 68-9. On the whole 
subject of Poland see Handelsman, Napoléon et la Pologne 1806-7, pp. 
1-22 and 167-76. 

° Corresp. de Nap. I*", t. xxxu, p. 448 in the quarto edition (p. 358, 
octavo): “Extraits des récits de la Captivité; Tentatives pour le rétablisse- 
ment de la Pologne”’, 20 Aug. 1820; cf. however, ‘‘Entwurf einer Proklama- 
tion Napoleon’s tiber die Absetzung des Hauses Brandenburg (Ende 1806)”, 
Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 11, 581-8. 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 21 

since he had proposed the terms of it, all that he had learned of 
the duplicity of the court of Berlin, impelled him to make a 
different and a more drastic use of his recent victories. This is 
where the astonishing efficiency of his subjugation of Prussia 
came into use. After Jena he had remorselessly pursued the 
remnants of the Prussian armies and had captured the Prussian 
strongholds. Many victories had been given to him by the 
shameful conduct, both the cowardice and the treachery, of his 
enemies. Towards the end of October and in the first days of 
November news of the capture of Hohenlohe’s army, of the 
capture of Stettin and Cistrin, and of the fall of Magdeburg and 
Liibeck reached Napoleon, so that on the 16th of November he 
could announce: “the campaign against Prussia is entirely 
finished”. Duroc stated that if only the news of the fall of 
Magdeburg had not come through at an inauspicious moment 
peace might have been concluded. But Napoleon, having 
astonished hirnself by the ease and the completeness of his 
victory, determined to exploit his success and make more 
effective use of his advantage than the terms he had already 
granted would allow. The arrival of the Russians in Poland 
and the amazing facility of his recent conquests had produced 
a great extension of the scope of his plans. 