

1 Letter of Frederick William to Napoleon, 26 Oct. 1806, in Ranke, 
Hardenberg, 111, 219-20. 2 Ibid. 111, 221. 

14 _ INTRODUCTION 

the whole assembly was of the opinion that it was out of the 
question to think of renewing the war, and Haugwitz put forward 
the idea that the slightest hesitation or delay would provide 
Napoleon with an excuse for raising his demands. Everything 
was done to prevent or to evade the necessity of having to fight 
Russia, whose armies were by this time unmistakably advancing 
into Poland. It was decided to attempt to persuade the Czar 
to avoid hostilities, and a messenger was sent to St Petersburg 
to make the treaty palatable to the Russians. On the 7th of 
November Frederick William wrote a letter to Napoleon: 

In spite of the dreadful sacrifices which you, Sire, have just imposed 
upon me, I do not desire any less sincerely that this peace, already 
assured by my acceptance of its bases, shall enable me soon to re- 
establish with Your Majesty the friendly relations which a moment of 
warfare has suspended... .I have not even waited for the signature of 
the treaty before stopping the advance of the Russian troops.’ 

These Prussians, it seems, were anxiously holding their breath, 
lest Napoleon should change his mind again and revoke the 
agreement he had offered. Haugwitz, grovelling to the victor, 
still wrote to Lucchesini to induce him to seek an amelioration 
in the terms of the treaty; Prussia must not be made too weak 
to act as a check against Russia, he said; Prussia was only too 
anxious to be at the service of France; and he pressed the idea 
and fawned like a servile courtier, engaging his word ‘“‘as a man 
of honour, who for twelve years has consistently worked to 
cement the relations between France and Prussia”. If only 
Talleyrand would appear, thought Haugwitz—he at least could 
work on lines less wild and impolitic “‘than that terrible principle 
of the destruction of Prussia to guarantee the future repose of 
France”’.? Talleyrand distrusted some of the drastic measures 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 396, Protokoll der Konferenz abgehalten in 
Graudenz am 6 Nov. 1806. 

2 EK. von Hoépfner, Der Krieg von 1806 und 1807 (1855), Part 1, vol. 11, 
p. 389; A. Lefébvre, Histoire des Cabinets de l Europe 1800-1815, 11 (1866), 
402-3. 

- Bane to Lucchesini, 7 Nov. 1806, in Bailleu, Preussen und 
Frankreich, 11, 578-9; cf. Hauterive to Talleyrand, 19 Oct. 1806, ibid. 11, 

612-13: “Je vois, mon cher ami, que vous n’étes pas persuadé encore que 
la Prusse est une puissance vile’’. 

Cel. AFTER JENA 15 

of his master, and loved to tone them down, and regarded the 
victory of Jena in the moral effect it had upon Napoleon as 
tantamount to a disaster for France. Lucchesini also thought 
that in him lay the one hope of Prussia. Prince Ferdinand, 
great-uncle of Frederick William, sought an interview with the 
conqueror, wrote ‘“‘as the brother of Frederick the Great, as the 
oldest member of the family, and as the oldest soldier in Prussia”’, 
in order to beg for pity—wrote also to Murat to ask for the 
amelioration of the peace terms; but his efforts were ignored, 
There was some talk even of Frederick William himself going to 
make personal appeal to Napoleon. It was in vain to try to 
bend or soften that rough imperious will—nothing was to be done 
save to reconcile oneself to the great sacrifices demanded and 
hope that now Napoleon would at least not change his mind and 
harden his heart anew—would not retract his offers and hurl 
the whole question into the melting-pot once more. 