

1 Corresp. de Nap. I®, t. x11, No. 11,277. 
* Handelsman, Napoléon et la Pologne 1806-7, p. 21. 

~ 

CHats AFTER JENA 23 

already occupy; and it is agreed that there will be neither French nor 
Prussian troops in the other parts of Polish Prussia that we do not 
hold. So you have Polish Prussia considered as a separate thing from 
Prussia; and, moreover, you have a Poland that can show itself, if it 
has the means...a Poland which menaces Russia, and by this can 

lead her to the peace we desire, that is to say a peace that preserves 
the Ottoman Porte. 

From all this it appears that Napoleon has by no means committed 
himself to a restoration of Prussia in any future settlement of 
Kurope. If he has not committed himself to the Poles, either, 
he still leaves himself room to play with them, and opportunity 
for stirring their hopes. He has merely reaffirmed his desire to 
have, on the frontiers of Russia, a power that will preserve and 
uphold his interests in the Ottoman Porte. One wonders what 
he could have expected the Prussians to see in the armistice to 
make them welcome it as safety and reassurance and hope. One 
wonders why the negotiators dared to sign such a document at 
all. Lucchesini defends himself by saying that they were held 
like prisoners at Charlottenburg, that their correspondence with 
the Prussian court was uncertain, that they could not obtain 
correct information of the true situation of things. They thought 
the Russians were still far away, and, in that case, they knew that 
the king could ratify the armistice, and when the Russians 
arrived find an early pretext for breaking it; but even if the 
Russians were approaching they felt that the king could refuse 
to confirm their work. They were afraid of an insurrection of 
the Poles, and they counted that a suspension of arms would 
discourage this. They were distressed that the estates of the 
Prussians seemed condemned to be the theatre of the new war. 
The Czar Alexander, it was thought, would be ready for peace 
if Napoleon decided not to attempt the restoration of Poland. 
Talleyrand begged the Prussian negotiators to make the Czar 
see the dangers that would fall upon Prussia, if Russia persisted 
in the war—the danger there would be of Russia herself being 
thrown beyond the Dwina if the risen Poland and the provinces 

1 Handelsman, Napoléon et la Pologne 1806-7, pp. 20-1. See also 
Talleyrand to Andréossy, 18 Nov. 1807, printed ibid. p. 215. 

24, INTRODUCTION 

conquered by France should receive a chief who would be a mere 
vassal of France. It was further insinuated to Zastrow and 
Lucchesini that it was very important for the restoration of 
Prussia to make Napoleon commit himself to something by the 
signature of a document such as this. Under such arguments and 
apprehensions the Prussian negotiators signed the armistice; 
and, wrapped up in the same insinuations and insidious sug- 
gestions, the document came to the king of Prussia, inviting 
acceptance and ratification.+ 