

Napoleon then acknowledged that England, out of reach of 
the French armies, could be a perpetual foe of France and the 
source of repeated wars in Europe; but he met the problem by 
the establishment of a new and sweeping principle of policy. 
The idea rested on the carrying out of a series of thorough but 
conditional and temporary conquests in Europe, which were to 
be the pledge of a general peace. Napoleon would not subdue 
Prussia for ever or annex the state finally into his Empire, but 
he would occupy the territory until his enemies should find it 
to their own advantage to redeem it. To end the French occu- 
pation the Prussians would set everything in motion for the 
cessation of the war. The Czar had been willing to come forward 
to fight for the salvation of Prussia; now he would be called 
upon to make peace for the identical object. The continent 
would find the sufferings of the war so heavy that Europe would 

26 INTRODUCTION 

range itself against England on behalf of tranquillity. To restore 
the Prussian monarchy, raise up a barrier against France and 
bring relief to Europe, the Russians would abandon their thoughts 
of interference in Turkey, and the British would surrender their 
colonial conquests. Everything was comprehended in one tren- 
chant principle of policy, for Napoleon had a way of fusing his 
problems together and resolving them at a stroke, covering the 
whole political situation by an imaginative leap, a bold synthesis. 

It was all a new mapping out of the European situation, a 
fresh disposing of the forces at play, a great European design 
that fits in with the other “continental system” which was 
decreed a few days later at Berlin. Napoleon’s attempt to boy- 
cott English trade and shipping represented the same kind of 
conspiracy to range the continental powers against England. 
Europe was to suffer for England’s persistence in the war, and 
was to be the accomplice of Frarice in bringing the British 
government to heel. Such plans resulted in a heavy increase of 
Napoleon’s obligations and burdens in Europe; for they 
demanded that a large extent of territory or coastline should be 
under the occupation or control of France. They had in fact to be 
extended before they could come into effective operation against 
England; and until the alliance of Russia was secured their 
working was not sufficiently drastic. But there is asensein which 
these plans of November 1806 are a half-way house on the way 
to Tilsit. They represent a stage in the development of the 
Napoleonic design of beating England through a control of the 
continent. 

In this new organisation of policy the Mediterranean does not 
occupy the same prominent place as before; the ambitions that 
centred in Turkey and the east are not in the forefront for the 
moment; Napoleon has had to change his plans. He no longer 
holds the picture of a Russia deterred on the side of Poland by 
the presence of a Prussian barrier and coming to grips with 
France in the south of Europe. He has a different map in his 
mind. He accepts the war in Poland, accepts the defection of 
Prussia—will not even allow this power to return to his system. 
But he changes his old difficulty into a source of power, for 
Prussia in the ranks of the coalition is still to Serve his purposes 