

On the 9th of November Napoleon decided to reeommence the 
negotiation that had been suspended, and ordered Duroc to meet 
Lucchesini and Zastrow at Charlottenburg once more in order 
to tell them 
that I consider the battle of Jena as terminated, now that the corps 
which had been cut off at Liibeck have surrendered, and that in this 
state of things I do not see anything to prevent us negotiating seriously 
for the conclusion of peace. The necessary preliminary seems to be an 
armistice such as they have requested from M. Talleyrand.* 

The former negotiations and preliminaries and outlines of peace 
now counted for nothing and were swept away as an outworn 
pastime; henceforward the two powers were to settle down to 
‘negotiating seriously ”’. 

1 Instruction for Duroc, 9 Nov. 1806, in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 
il, 579-80. 

22 INTRODUCTION 

On the 16th of November the Prussian plenipotentiaries, 
Zastrow and Lucchesini, signed an armistice which handed over 
to Napoleon all that his armies had hitherto failed to secure. 
The Prussians engaged to withdraw their troops to Royal Prussia 
and the region around Konigsberg, and to surrender part of the 
province of Silesia together with a large number of fortresses 
that the French had still failed to capture. It was also stipulated 
that parts of East Prussia should be occupied by neither Prussian 
nor French troops. A clause of the convention announced the 
continuance of negotiations for peace at Charlottenburg, and 
provided that, in case of the failure of these, hostilities should not 
be resumed by either party without a warning of ten days being 
given. In addition to these things the king of Prussia was to 
expel any Russian troops that had entered his territory and to 
engage not to receive them on Prussian soil during the armistice; 
that is to say, he was to commit hostilities against the very ally 
he had called to his aid. 

Napoleon described the suspension of arms as “only a military 
measure, which serves to arrange the question of winter in a 
season so advanced”’. At the same time he ordered his marshals, 
Davout and Lannes, to make no announcement of its signature 
until the fortresses were actually given up to the French.? He 
was anxious concerning the Poles whose aid he was invoking 
against the Prussians and Russians; he knew they were jealous 
of his negotiations with Zastrow and Lucchesini. They were 
afraid lest, having compromised them, he should desert them 
and make peace with their oppressors. If he could delay in- ° 
forming them of the armistice until the actual execution of the 
terms, then, he said, “‘it will be easy to make the Poles see that 
by the suspension of arms, their existence is partly recognised. 
...In the long run everything is favourable to their cause’’. 
Talleyrand wrote: 

The conditions (of the armistice) are such that Poland, if there is 

a Poland, will recover the liberty of having and expressing an opinion. 
Our troops will not withdraw from the part of Polish Prussia that we 