

1 Stuart to F.O. No. 35, 11 Oct. 1806, F.O. Russia 65/64. 

* P. Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon, No. ccxxv1. 

‘ 

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 37 

defence of the altar as well as the throne, and mobilised religious 
fervour. All French agents were ordered to leave the country, and 
if French subjects refused to submit to conditions imposed by 
the government their expulsion was pronounced. With flourishes 
and beating of drums the Russians hurled themselves into this 
war, from which they were to make so quiet an exit at Tilsit. 

For the breakdown of the negotiation that he had been 
conducting with England throughout the summer of 1806 
Napoleon with some insincerity blamed the death of Charles 
James Fox. He took pains publicly to deplore the calamity that 
had robbed the world of so reasonable a statesman and cheated 
Europe of its chances of peace. Certain suspicious happenings 
in Paris had caused the British government at the beginning of 
August to supersede the man originally in charge of the nego- 
tiation and to send out a more trusted minister specially 
instructed to meet Napoleon with firmness. This man, an eccentric 
Scottish peer called Lauderdale, had a notorious lack of humour 
and knew none of the supple arts. A certain stiffness that he 
introduced into the transactions in Paris made it easy to believe 
that he was not passionate for the cause of peace. Frenchmen 
were able to argue that this change of ministers was due to the 
illness and declining influence of Fox—that behind the stubborn- 
ness of Lauderdale was the obstinacy of the prime minister 
Grenville. The truth was that in negotiations which had lasted 
for months Napoleon had merely played with England, had 
feinted and dipped and twisted, mocking the earnest efforts of 
Fox with his own insincerity and evasiveness and repeated sharp 
practices, till distracted English ministers in Paris and a dis- 
tracted government at home had come to feel baffled at every 
point. Fox, as foreign secretary, instead of differing from his 
prime minister, had steadily refused to be a dupe, had led the 
way in resisting the aggressions of France,! and had approved of 

1 See Dropmore Papers, vi11, 85, 105, 195, 217-18. Lord John Russell, 
Memorials and Correspondence of C. J. Fox, tv, 136 (Fox to Bedford, 26 Ap. 
1806: ‘‘ You will be happy to hear that it occasioned no difference or even 
a shade of difference in the Cabinet’’). 

38 INTRODUCTION 

the whole turn that the negotiation had taken as a result of the 
sending of Lauderdale. Before his death in the latter part of 
September he declared the impossibility of treating with a man 
like Napoleon.! Lauderdale, far from being an enemy to peace, 
had ever been one of the most bitter of the opponents of Pitt, 
had stormed violently against the policy of war with France, 
and, if we are to believe Lord Holland, had been ready to go 
further than Fox himself in pursuing every opportunity that 
might lead to an arrangement with France.? During August, 
when a settlement seemed further away than ever, when also it 
was feared that a depressed Czar would ratify the treaty that 
his plenipotentiary had signed, and when, to crown the mis- 
fortunes, it became apparent that Fox himself could not live 
very long, the English ministry, faced with renewed war and the 
loss of an ally and the death of its most brilliant leader, carried 
on its labours in a gloomy and over-anxious mood, guided by 
an uninspiring Grenville who, far from being warlike and arro- 
gant and proud, was only too morbidly conscious of the 
responsibilities of his position. 