

1 Dropmore Papers, vi11, 8352. Instruction to Lord Morpeth (the minister 
despatched to negotiate peace with the court of Berlin), 29 Sept. 1806, 
F.O. Prussia, 64/73. 

2 Dropmore Papers, vu11, 321-4. Windham to Lauderdale, No. 6, 10 Sept. 
1806, F'.0. France, 27/74. 3 See above, pp. 84-86. 

40 INTRODUCTION 

unimaginative Scotsman with whom he had to treat; he showed 
every anxiety for peace with England—and declared that a 
speedy settlement would avert the impending war with Prussia* 
—but he had in view a separate negotiation, an isolated treaty, 
with England, and this was what the British government was 
determined never to concede. Lauderdale took his stand upon 
the ground that a French peace with Russia was a sine qua non 
of peace with England, that England would not come to terms 
unless Russia had been able to do so, and that therefore the 
subjects that interested Russia should come up for discussion 
first;2 but Napoleon who was merely playing for time parried 
and twisted still, and when finally he allowed the pertinacious 
Lauderdale to have his way in the matter, he showed no dis- 
position to grant any of the demands that the Russians had put 
forward or to make any appreciable alteration in the treaty that 
had been signed by Oubril and rejected by the Czar.2 The 
Russian government, for its own part, was determined to make 
no further attempts to renew the negotiation. The Prussians in 
the meantime were hurrying into war. It is evident that the 
peace discussions in Paris had developed into a game that was 
not taken seriously by either party. 

Throughout the month of September England showed herself 
more and more warlike, more exacting in her demands. If the 
discussions were not abandoned until Napoleon had actually left 
Paris for the opening of the Prussian campaign, this was because 
Lauderdale had determined to throw upon Napoleon all the 
blame for the failure of the negotiation. Even after he had 
declared his mission at an end he was invited to resume the 
conferences, and still replied ‘“‘that he had no choice in imme- 
diately applying for his passports but that so long as he remained 

1 Lauderdale to Earl Spencer, No. 15, 26 Sept. 1806, 7.0. France 27/74: 
Champagny “‘said he was charged by the Emperor to say that if I would 
arrange a peace within a week the war with Prussia that was likely to break 
out would be prevented and that measures for a pacific arrangement with 
that power should immediately be taken”’. 

: Lauderdale to Karl Spencer, No. 16, 26 Sept. 1806, F.O. France 27/74, 
printed incompletely in Parliamentary Debates, v111, cols. 193-5. 

3 Lauderdale to Earl Spencer, No. 16, 26 Sept. 1806, F'.0. France 27/'74, 
in Parliamentary Debates, viii, cols. 197-8. 

CH. I. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 41 

in France he never would refuse to see the French negotiator’’.} 
The British cabinet sent out to him successive instructions 
between the 10th of September and the 1st of October, raising 
the British demands as the turn of events gave England the 
advantage in negotiation, but he did not think it necessary to 
make use of these since the conversations were breaking down 
already upon questions that concerned Russia. ‘I have given 
the negotiations as much as possible the appearance of going off 
on Russian objects,’’ he wrote, “‘for the purpose...of binding 
Russia more closely.”’? The English people were anxious for his 
return and looked for it daily. When late in August the news 
had come to them that an expedition under Sir Home Popham 
had captured Buenos Ayres by a free-lance effort, and a mani- 
festo addressed by that general to the trading corporations of 
the country had kindled excitement and sent a fever of specu- 
lation running through the land, till even at the foreign office 
the hope had gained ground that very soon the whole of the 
Spanish colonies in that part of the world might be captured for 
England, not only did the government become more exacting 
but the people feared lest a peace even on revised terms should 
be concluded and the hope was everywhere expressed that 
Lauderdale would soon return from Paris.2 In January 1807 
the subject of the whole negotiation came up in parliamentary 
debate but the whig ministry had no fear of meeting opposition 
on the question of the final rupture. It was rather open to censure 
on the ground that it had allowed the protracted discussions for 