

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 43 

left his kingdom and was not seen in it for three years; he had 
taken it into his head to go through Germany calling the courts 
to follow him in a royalist crusade against France. It is said that 
some wag posted a placard near the palace gate at Stockholm, 
offering a reward to the person who could tell the Swedish nation 
where they might find their king. Equally irresponsible he proved 
in his relations with his allies, and if they did not please him he 
would sulk or try to cheat them, and carry on toy wars of his 
own. It seems to have been his habit to remain inert during a 
campaign and plunge into action at the very moment his allies 
had to surrender. Hence he became an incalculable factor, 
bringing into affairs a fine element of surprise. 

At the moment when Napoleon, master of Prussia, resolved 
to reject any separate peace with Frederick William, and was 
preparing to push forward to meet the Russians in Poland, he 
decided to take steps to get rid of this unnecessary enemy in his 
rear and to induce the Swedish king to abandon his allies; and 
in the middle of November his minister at Hamburg, Bourrienne, 
drew the new Swedish chargé d’affaires at that town, M. Netzel, 
into a discussion that was directed ostensibly to the purpose of 
ameliorating the lot of Swedish prisoners but in reality to the 
object of putting forward an overture for peace. The reason for 
the overture is apparent from the declaration of Bourrienne to 
Netzel that it was not to be expected, after Napoleon had gained 
possession of all the Prussian fortresses, ‘that he should leave 
Stralsund in his rear”. Therefore, “‘if the king of Sweden would 
only censent to remain neutral, peace might be concluded”. 
Bourrienne observed to the Swedish minister 

that Bonaparte had long remarked the loyalty and noble spirit of 
the King of Sweden, and that he desired nothing so much as to be at 
peace with him. That Bonaparte had acted with injustice towards the 
King of Sweden, but that the Swedish King on his part had to 
reproach himself on the same score....That no attack had hitherto 
been made against Pomerania but that His Swedish Majesty was on 
the point of losing one of his finest provinces; that if he would make 
peace, the possession of that province should be guaranteed to him 
with an augmentation of territory to secure its frontier; and that he 
might consider Napoleon as his friend. 

44 INTRODUCTION 

Also, the king must consider that his present allies ““in paying 
him their money only meant to abandon him to his fate”. 

These arguments might have been convincing to many 
Swedish people. M. Netzel fell in with them completely. 
Bourrienne wrote: 

I had good reason to be satisfied with the manner in which M. Netzel 
received my first overtures. I said nothing to him of the justice of 
which he was not previously convinced. I saw he understood that his 
sovereign would have everything to gain by a reconciliation with 
France, and he told me that all Sweden wanted was peace. Thus 
encouraged I told him that I was instructed to treat with him... .He 
added. ..that he would write the same evening to his sovereign.* 