

1 J. De Maistre, Mémoires et Correspondance (1858), p. 268. ) 

BN 3 

34 INTRODUCTION 

The chancellor sent a letter to Talleyrand, giving an outline 
of the conditions from which he would not depart in any nego- 
tiation. Napoleon, according to his terms, was to evacuate 
Dalmatia and Albania; the Sardinian king was to have an 
indemnity for recent losses of territory; Sicily was to be left in 
the hands of its legitimate monarch, and perhaps Naples itself 
restored to him. Even on these conditions there was to be no 
treaty until the state of war between England and France had 
been brought to an end.! From this communication it was 
inferred in London and in Paris that Russia meant still to go on 
with the peace discussions. An English plenipotentiary, Lauder- 
dale, who remained in negotiation with Napoleon, was actually 
instructed by his government to treat on behalf of the Czar, 
working upon the basis of the “four points” which Budberg 
had put forward.” It caused great surprise, therefore, and even 
some incredulity at first, when there was news of a warlike mood 
and a plunge into armaments and a rush of inflammatory con- 
versation at St Petersburg. It was not known that the Czar had 
been coming to a secret understanding with Prussia and that 
this had reached its head upon Budberg’s entry into office. It 
was not yet realised how much Budberg was out of sympathy 
with the peace party. Men wondered why the Russians were so 
bellicose. 

Before the end of September the English minister announced 
that the Russians “‘consider the negotiations on all sides to be 
now broken off”.? Soon afterwards we find him writing: 

Budberg is wound up to a pitch of fury against Bonaparte, which 
His Imperial Majesty’s gentle disposition in vain endeavours to curb. 
I never see him that he does not tell me ’Empereur me chassera 
plut6t que faire telle ou telle chose, etc. etc.4 

The same minister found himself roughly handled when it was 
Jearned that the English were still hankering after peace, 

1 Sbornik (Imperial Russian Historical Society), uxxx11, 459-61. 

2 See below, pp. 839-40. 

5 Stuart to F.O. No. 31, “31 Sept.” 1806, F.0. Russia 65/64. 

* Charles Stuart to Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 12 Oct. 1806, in Private 
Correspondence of Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 227-8. 

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 35 

playing with new proposals and presuming even to treat on 
behalf of Russia. 

General Budberg exclaimed with great warmth that in the present 
state of affairs both parties would be degraded by...such conditions, 
that if His Imperial Majesty thought proper to consent to stipulations 
so little calculated to restore tranquillity to Europe, he would not be 
the minister through whom the negotiation should be conducted. 

It little mattered that Stuart tried to explain to the Russian 
government how the new instructions to Lauderdale were an 
attempt to carry out Budberg’s own policy as expressed in his 
note to Talleyrand. Budberg declared 

