that the expressions of the letter were misunderstood if they were 
interpreted to be a fresh overture on the part of Russia, when on the 
contrary intended to be a mere recapitulation of terms which had been 
' already offered by the French Government to the British Negotiators, 
and from which at the time he had not formed the slightest hope 
of success, and that it had not ever been the intention of this 
Court to send another Minister to Paris, because the first overture 
would now be expected from France.! 

And to show that the French government were not anxious for 
peace, Budberg added that 

M. Talleyrand after receiving his letter had merely sent for the 
members of the Russian Chancery who had been left at Paris. ..and 
delivered their passports without the smallest intimation of any wish 
to recommence the negotiation which had been thus broken off. 

Then the chancellor, before closing this interview with the 
British minister, enlarged upon the attitude of Russia to the 
whole question of peace in Europe, and explained the motives 
which induced him to wish for a continuance of the war. He 

expressed his firm conviction that while Holland remained in the 
possession of France it was impossible to make any peace consistent 
with the security of Europe, because from that frontier or from 
Italy the French territory flanks every state able to oppose the 
smallest resistance to her views. 

1 Stuart to F.O. No. 35, 11 Oct. 1806, F.O. Russia 65/64. Also No. 34, 
7 Oct. 1806, ‘‘Baron Budberg utterly rejects all idea of the renewal of the 
negotiation...”, F.0. Russia 65/64. 

3-2 

36 INTRODUCTION 

He was of opinion that “the present state of affairs offers a more 
advantageous prospect on the side of Naples”. Russia rides 
a high horse, it seems. This is an astonishing rise in her anticipa- 
tions. But she has not heard, as yet, of the battle of Jena. She 
is still burning with indignation against the tenour of Oubril’s 
treaty. She can dare to be warlike, even to the point of making 
the British minister feel uncomfortable. 

[Budberg] deprecated the possibility of peace on the part of Great 
Britain with unusual warmth and expressed the determination of this 
Court to continue the war at all hazards, in terms so exactly corre- 
sponding with the opinions I had felt myself compelled to bring forward 
when it was my duty to expose the disadvantages of M. d’Oubril’s 
treaty, that I could not consistently reply to the various arguments 
urged in the conversation.+ 

What Budberg was turning into the jargon of a diplomat, and 
translating into terms of political prospect and foreign office 
calculation, was an emotional thrill that was sweeping like a 
whirlwind over Russia. War horses rampant, fever psychology 
working to pressure with terrific generation of heat, “‘a kind of 
patriot explosion” as the French consul at St Petersburg re- 
ported2—it is impossible to mistake that fierce exultation in 
crisis which the war of 1914 has helped us to understand. There 
is an electrified atmosphere, a release of the elemental things in 
human nature, an infectiousness and facile unanimity of mood— 
all turned into an exalted religious ardour and felt to be highest 
idealism. Budberg was not pushing a purely personal policy. 
Alexander had caught the fever. The British minister announced 
that “this Government is certainly wound up to a pitch of 
resentment against France beyond what I have witnessed upon 
any former occasion”. Decree after decree gathered up the 
military resources of the Empire. Towns and trading corporations 
and rich seigneurs vied with one another in making voluntary 
sacrifices for the war. Alexander issued a manifesto to arouse 
the nation against France; the Holy Synod pronounced “the 
excommunication of Napoleon”, declared that the war was a 