

1 Lauderdale to Earl Spencer, No. 16, 26 Sept. 1806, ibid. 

2 Lauderdale to Grenville (Private), 26 Sept. 1806, in Dropmore Papers, 
vill, 358. 

3 Lord Grenville to Lord Lauderdale (Private), 22 Sept. 1806, in Dropmore 
Papers, vu, 352: ‘“‘The capture of Buenos Ayres trumpeted up as it has 
been by Popham and his agents, has already produced such an impression 
here as will make the surrender of that conquest most extremely difficult, 
unless one could get much more for it in the way of security in Europe than 
I know how to shape or expect. At all events we are clearly entitled to 
include it in our wti possidetis, or to ask its full value for it’’. Lord Grenville 
to Howick (Secret), 29 Sept. 1806, ibid. v111, 366-7: ‘‘It is impossible not 
to believe that rather than see all Spanish America fall into our hands, as 
it must now do in twelve months more of war, France would willingly give 
up Naples”. 

42 INTRODUCTION 

peace to obscure the urgency for effective military preparations. 
“As to the necessity of continuing the war and the propriety of 
breaking off all negotiation” there was “‘but one voice.” 

The Swedish king had his opportunity at this period of showing 
loyalty to his allies and persistence in hostility to Napoleon, 
though in his case the decision was not in any sense backed by 
the suffrages of a nation. He had been an erratic ally to be yoked 
with. In October 1806 the British government was threatening 
him with the withdrawal of his subsidies. At the end of the same 
month the English ambassador at his court reported the un- 
popularity of his headstrong policy and the unrest that prevailed 
in Sweden not merely in the lower orders but even among the 
nobility of the land, and especially in the mercantile classes 
whose interests were injured by the war. The enmity that 
Gustavus bore towards France was not based upon the calcula- 
tion of political interests, but was a personal thing, a romantic 
hatred for the Corsican, the ‘“‘ Mister Bonaparte’’, and he counted 
his kingdom as an instrument, a resource, for the carrying out 
of his private, personal aims. Misdirected passion, feverish 
obsessions, morbid mysticism and the play of twisted impulse 
set Gustavus IV awry, in whatever he undertook. Beneath his 
sullen, morose exterior he had something volcanic that made 
him terrible. Proud of his resemblance to Charles XII he hoped 
to repeat the exploits of his hero. A kind of religious fanaticism 
cast a shadow over his mind and he loved to brood over the 
prophecies of Daniel, to discover contemporary history in the 
Book of Revelation, to gloat over the idea that Napoleon was 
“the Beast”’, and to reinforce his crazy politics with the cryptic 
messages of Scripture. When Napoleon for a time ignored his 
insults, as though disdaining to punish the Swedes for the ravings 
of their monarch, Gustavus was said to have purchased busts 
and pictures of the man, and took melancholy pleasure in 
wreaking vengeance upon these, as though it eased his passion 
to kill his foe vicariously. And when he became a poor uncrowned 
wanderer, with no Napoleon to fight, he turned his unpleasant- 
ness upon his queen and diverted his cruelty to her. In 1808 he 