

The Swedish king was asked to recognise the necessity of a 
prompt decision and a quick reply to this overture. In the 
meantime the French minister promised to do his utmost to 
prevent any act of hostility from being committed against the 
Swedish possessions. 

Then, when the news came to Stockholm, more storms and 
violent outbursts from the volcanic king. Within an hour of 
the arrival of the overture Gustavus had revealed the whole 
affair to the English ambassador, and his reply was on the point 
of departure. M. Netzel had dared to consult what he thought 
the interests of Sweden, rather than to conduct all things in 
accordance with the whims of the monarch. He was condemned 
for his whole course of action. What did he want with talking 
to this M. Bourrienne at all—about Swedish prisoners or any 
other matter? The king was amazed that his minister should 
“so far depart from the positive instructions he had received as 
to hold any intercourse with the French mission, since the 
slightest knowledge of his master’s sentiments must have sug- 
gested to him the impossibility of his approving such a measure”’.? 
M. Netzel was immediately recalled, and was ordered to make 
public the reason for his disgrace. A Swedish officer at this time 
had a skirmish with some of Napoleon’s men, and afterwards 
was told by the French that the affair had been a mistake, since 
orders had been given for no act of hostility to be allowed against 

+ Mémoires de M. de Bourrienne, t. v1 (1829), p. 225. 
* Pierrepoint to Howick, No. 97, 18 Nov. 1806, F.0% Sweden 73/36. 

CH. II. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 45 

the Swedes. He was put under arrest for taking notice of the 
French declaration.1 The Swedish king’s hostility to France 
was a personal unreasoning hatred of Napoleon; it was not the 
sort of controversy that could ever be brought to a compromise, 
or cancelled or smoothed over by any adjustment of interests. 

Each of these three allied powers therefore had remained 
steadfast on the subject of a separate peace with France and in 
the closing months of the year 1806 had given an example of its 
determination and good faith. The king of Prussia, however—the 
monarch who had the most need to give proof of his fidelity— 
had given fresh cause for uneasiness and doubt to his allies by 
his persistent and avowed efforts to desert the coalition and 
come to an arrangement with France after Jena. 

The cabinet of St Petersburg had throughout the year com- 
plained of the influence of men like Haugwitz and Beyme at 
the court of Berlin, and had united with the government of 
England and even that of Austria in an attempt that was 
seconded by the patriots—men like Stein—in Prussia, to induce 
the Prussian king to dismiss such ministers. Frederick William 
had refused to give this guarantee of his intentions. Before the 
defeat of Jena had made the Prussians forget their allies and think 
only of saving their country, the Czar had not been entirely 
confident of his friend; and when he sent Count Tolstoy as his 
military representative to the Prussian army headquarters, he 
gave him secret instructions to be on his guard against any 
treachery. All that had taken place between the two courts, he 
wrote, “would not suffice to do away with the reasonable 
distrust which the present composition of the Prussian Cabinet 
must inspire and which its conduct on occasions still recent has 
only justified too well”’.? 