

The death of Pitt at the beginning of the year had brought 
into power in England a coalition of his political opponents. 
A “ministry of All the Talents” had hazardously dovetailed 
itself together and stepped into the government of the country, 
led gloomily by Grenville. After long sighing the unruly whigs 
had come into their share of office, only to curse the evils of these 
strange days that had at last tormented them by giving them 
their hearts’ desire. Fox had been the chief light of this whig 
party, had led his followers carelessly, irresponsibly, defiantly 
at times, and for years had shown them how to torment Pitt 
and storm against the policy of war with France. When Fox 
became foreign secretary in the ‘‘ ministry of All the Talents” it 
seemed that the whig peace policy was enthroned at the foreign 
office itself, and it was believed that now, at least, the chances 
of peace would be explored to the uttermost, perhaps even to the 

* Lord Holland, Memoirs of the Whig Party during my time, 11 (1854), 
77 et seq. 
2 Ibid. 

CH. II. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 39 

great peril of England. But Napoleon did not understand the 
mental reservations with which one must take the extravagances 
and vagaries of English party politics; he could not read between 
the lines of parliamentary debates or see the difference between 
a Fox in opposition and a Fox in the seat of government; 
particularly in matters of foreign policy he failed to appreciate 
the continuity that governmental action can show even under 
the most violent changes of cabinet. He could have wished for 
nothing better than to have a whig and a former profligate at 
the foreign office in London, and Fox in particular he had met 
and talked to, had even embarrassed with extravagant compli- 
ments. He thought that this therefore was a moment to be 
exploited. He imagined that here was a man whom he could use. 
Charles James Fox lived long enough to show that this was but 
another of those miscalculations into which Napoleon’s defective 
sympathies so often led him. 

The situation became more hopeful for the cabinet of London 
when it was learned that Russia refused to be separated from 
England or to be bound by the treaty of Oubril; and as the 
arrival of this news coincided with the serious development of 
the French quarrel with Prussia, Grenville imagined for a moment 
that Napoleon might be cornered into negotiating conjointly 
with the courts of London, Berlin and St Petersburg, for a 
general pacification of Europe. He pressed the Russians to send 
some responsible person to Paris “to treat in the Emperor’s 
name, but in strict confidence and constant communication with 
His Majesty’s Government”; failing this he asked that the 
Russian ambassador in London should be given the requisite 
powers; and, in anticipation, he instructed the minister Lauder- 
dale in Paris to negotiate on behalf of Russia as well as England.” 

Other powers, however, did not show the disposition to pursue 
the possibilities of peace with so much research.? Napoleon, true 
to his former practices, did everything to amuse and cajole the 