

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 398. See also F.O. 64/71, George Jackson’s 
reports Nos. 10 and 11, 21 and 283 Nov. 1806. G. Jackson was the semi- 
official British agent with the Prussian court, England being at that time 

still technically in a state of war with Prussia. His correspondence (F.O. 
64/71) and his diaries (11, 29-54.) throw some light on this period. 

s 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 29 

Within a few days Duroc brought to Napoleon the news that 
Prussia, finding the Russian troops already within the borders, 
had had no choice but to reject an armistice, the terms of which 
she could not hope to carry out; and a little later Zastrow and 
Lucchesini received the orders of their court. Lucchesini was 
commanded to remain with the French and to continue the 
negotiation for peace in any locality that might be agreeable to 
the French government. For when Prussia rejected the armistice 
she did not intend by this to imply that she plunged whole- 
heartedly into the war against France. She took the step because 
she had decided that if she had to fight it must not be against 
Russia. She refused to ratify not because she repudiated or 
abandoned the idea of ending the war but because she discovered 
the trickery of the armistice and found that it was not a step 
towards her object. The two Prussian plenipotentiaries were 
directed by Talleyrand! to Posen, where the Emperor had just 
arrived. On the 6th of December they had their interview with 
him.? Napoleon declared to them that since the Prussian king 
had rejected the armistice which they had signed and had 
disavowed their work it was obvious that they had not the 
confidence of their court, so he would negotiate with them no 
longer. He stated that if his armies met the Russian forces in 
Poland military reasons would not allow him to restore any part 
of the dominions of the king of Prussia. There could be no 
negotiation with the Prussians; for, desiring the recovery of 
their territories, they had nothing with which to negotiate for 
them. The only reason which could induce France to listen to 
their overtures wouid be the hope that they might draw into the 
transaction other powers like Russia and England with whom 
there might be made some bargain or exchange. More clearly 
and decisively than on the 16th of November it was shown to 
the Prussian plenipotentiaries what Napoleon’s new policy 
implied for their government. The future of their nation was to 

1 Talleyrand describes his interview with the Prussian negotiators on the 
29th of November in P. Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon 
(1889), No. ccxvit. 

2 For this interview see G. Jackson to Howick, No. 17, 16 Dec. 1806, 
FO. 64/71; cf. Corresp. de Nap. I°", t. xiv, No. 11,894. 

30 INTRODUCTION 

depend on the success of their persuasions with other courts on 
behalf of a general peace. 

Thus, in the beginning of December, Prussia is a member of 
the coalition against her will, and finds herself at war with 
Napoleon in spite of herself. Events have reached their full 
cycle and she has discovered that her action in declaring war 
against France has produced a situation which prevents her 
from turning back when she desires. The very coalition which 
she has called to her aid and for which her conduct is at any rate 
the signal and the opportunity, has become—as Napoleon fore- 
saw—the very thing which forbids her resumption of former 
relations with France; and she finds herself more closely and 
irrevocably bound up with its fortunes than she had ever 
dreamed of becoming. Fora long time she had refused Napoleon’s 
offers of separate arrangement with her, she had insisted on 
having her war, until there had come-a time when Napoleon, face 
to face with Russia, could not safely admit of a separate treaty 
with her. It was not merely that he was proud and angry and 
intoxicated by easy victories—though these things perhaps 
encouraged him to plans that were too large and to enterprises 
that were to be too great a burden to France; and such personal 
factors have weight in history as much as the logic of policy. 
But Prussia had produced a fresh situation and a fresh problem 
for Napoleon. For it was not a case of simple arithmetic, of 
plus and minus, of a coalition of three turned into a coalition of 
four; the entry of Prussia into the ranks of Napoleon’s enemies 
had reversed a system and smashed a synthesis, and upset the 
chart of forces that Napoleon had mapped out for Europe. And 
the new peace policy outlined by Talleyrand on the 16th of 
November, coming almost simultaneously with Napoleon’s real 
decision to isolate England by measures such as he had toyed 
with and had revolved in his mind and had even effected in an 
experimental way before he plunged into them with the decree 
of Berlin, was really a new synthesis, a fresh way of envisaging 
the problem and of mapping out the relations of Europe, that 
Napoleon worked out for the changed circumstances. 