

It was observed at Osterode when the king rejected the 

M 

CH. I. AFTER JENA 31 

armistice that he did it “with regret, not with indignation”’. 
Prussia had begun the war of the fourth coalition; Napoleon was 
compelling her to see it through. But she was an unwilling 
member of the coalition, scarcely more than a mere passenger 
in it. That was her disposition when December came in, and the 
campaign in Poland began. 

CHAPTER II 
THE REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 

Prussra had little to do with the making of the coalition 
that faced Napoleon at the close of the year 1806. She would 
indeed have found it useful to prevent this renewal of European 
warfare and she certainly had not reached the state of mind that 
was needed for any “‘concert of Europe”. But there are secret 
sympathies and latent accords between the events of history; 
a kind of magnet seems at times to draw matters to an issue and 
collect a number of affairs to one point, creating some “attrac- 
tion” that is more subtle than the direct relationship of cause 
and effect. The renewal of war after the lapse of almost a year, 
the breakdown of negotiations that had been pursued since the 
beginning of 1806, did not come merely as a coincidence at this 
period. The Prussian war gave a signal to other powers, and 
provided them with an opportunity, and hurried affairs to a 
head. It galvanised transactions that had been allowed to drag 
themselves to weariness. It awakened old sympathies and 
forgotten indignations. 

Prussia, true to the self-regarding policy that she had followed 
throughout these Napoleonic wars, had met France single-handed 
and had not even waited for an ally. Once she had been beaten 
at Jena she wished for nothing better than to return to the side 
of Napoleon. She liked to regard her friendship with France as 
having been merely suspended for the moment by a private 
quarrel, an unfortunate interlude of war. The larger European 
implications of her conduct were inconvenient to her. The fact 
that an ally was coming to join her was the very thing which 
spoiled her plans. Napoleon’s latest policy of deliberately binding 
up her fate with that of a coalition seemed an injustice, and she 
resented it.1 The other enemies of France, for their own parts, 
did not return to the struggle out of consideration for Prussia, 
but showed themselves disposed to continue the fighting even 

1 See e.g. below, p. 71. 

CH ils REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 33 

at the expense of this power and against its wishes. Each, in 
fact, made its diagnosis of the whole European situation and 
came back into war by its own separate path. 

In the summer of 1806 Budberg became chancellor of Russia. 
After Czartoryski, who “never assembled the diplomatic corps”, 
who only gave a dinner on rare occasions, who avoided inter- 
views and never replied to letters, and whose coldness in speaking 
made him “unable to kindle men or please them”, the new 
minister, himself a former ambassador, was welcomed by the 
foreign representatives at St Petersburg, for he was an old-world 
man, full of the courtly ways of former times—“‘ who affected 
to Catherinise everything”; and he punctiliously gave his dinner 
every Thursday, was glad to talk on every occasion, and was 
- extremely polite at listening; while he replied ‘“‘to the least of 
our notes with an exactitude that (was) infinitely agreeable to 
us”’.1 He was one of the tribe of “German” statesmen who so 
often reached the highest office in the service of the Russian 
state, and although it was feared at first that his call to power 
was the sign of a more pacific policy which the Czar Alexander 
seemed now to have at heart, it soon became apparent that 
Budberg was more warlike than his predecessor, his pro-German 
prejudices making him specially ready to promote a war for the 
sake of Prussia. Soon after he assumed office he was faced with 
a peace treaty which a Russian plenipotentiary, Oubril, had 
signed in a panic in Paris, and instead of ratifying the document 
he tore it up with such éclat, and made so much noise about the 
transaction for the sake of impressing the British government, 
that the whole incident seemed like a deliberate challenge to 
further war. Nothing was done to save the pride of Napoleon— 
nothing to temper for him the humiliation of having a solemn 
treaty thrown in his face. The British minister related that 
Budberg “assured me he had disapproved of the whole mission 
entrusted to M. d’Oubril, who had been sent to Paris in a moment 
of complaisance which he flatters himself will not again occur 
during his continuance in place”’. 