

After the battle of Jena the Russians despaired of the policy 
of their ally. The Czar was “dismayed” to hear that Lucchesini 
had been sent to Napoleon on any errand of peace whatsoever, 
He prophesied the result: 

I fear that Napoleon will shew himself moderate and accommo- 
dating at first, in order to put himself in a position later to make the 

1 Pierrepoint to Howick, No. 98, 23 Nov. 1806, F.O. Sweden 73/36. 
2 Alexander to Tolstoy, 27 Sept. 1806 (v.s.) in Sbornik, Lxxxrx, p. Ixxv. 

46 INTRODUCTION 

King feel the burden of his oppressive and dangerous friendship. He 
will certainly not confine himself to demanding provinces from him; 
he will make a point of drawing him into his system, he will insist 
on the re-establishment of the Treaty of the 15th of February which 
in stipulating and guaranteeing the independence of the Ottoman 
Porte will provide pretexts in advance for a future war with Russia. 
If peace were concluded Alexander would attribute it to 
‘enemies of the public cause, playing the game of France in the 
bosom of the Prussian monarchy”. The Prussian ambassador 
suggested to him that tentative overtures by Lucchesini might 
lead eventually to a general negotiation for peace in which 
Russia herself might join; but he brushed the idea aside as he 
had done when England suggested it in September. 

‘*His Imperial Majesty combatted the idea with warmth” and 

declared ‘“‘that he had no confidence in such a negotiation; that 
besides this he had no motive for subscribing to such a proposition ; 
that France had incited the Ottoman Porte to war against Russia, 
and that this moment, of all moments, was the least proper for giving 
a thought to any sort of accommodation.”’! 
When the hints of a disposition for a general pacification thrown 
out in Talleyrand’s note of the 16th of November were com- 
municated to St Petersburg the Russian cabinet refused to 
listen to them.? When there was a fear that the Prussians would 
come to a separate arrangement with France the Czar more than 
once expressed “‘the determination not to embarrass the move- 
ments of the army by respect for their neutrality”. On the 10th 
of December the British ambassador wrote to his government 
that “this Court has without hesitation rejected every insinua- 
tion brought forward by the Prussian Government urging the 
expediency of a general negotiation for peace”. And at the very 
end of the year, when things were becoming more desperate, he 
reported: “The Russian Ministers in the present critical state 
of affairs fully retain the determination to maintain the contest 
to the utmost extremity”’.® 

1 Despatch of Goltz, Prussian minister at St Petersburg, 6 Nov. 1806, 
in Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 224-8. 

* Stuart to Howick, No. 68, 10 Dec. 1806, F.O. Russia 65/65. 

3 Stuart to Howick, e.g. No. 57, 28 Nov. 1806, No. 68, 10 Dec. 1806 and 
No. 76, 29 Dec. 1806, F'.O. Russia 65/65. 

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 47 

Out of these facts four powers arise, like four shapes looming 
through a mist. Each has its peculiar countenance as it sets 
itself to meet France, for each is a personality. So everything is 
ready for the next scene in this problem of peace, and we have 
all the elements of what the novelist would call a “situation”. 
Napoleon’s overtures for a general negotiation—or rather the 
hints he gave in that direction—to General Zastrow, in the final 
interview at Posen on the 6th of December, set the machinery 
in motion to plot out the next developments. The Prussia 
described above is the power through which the overture is to 
be communicated to the coalition, the power whose persuasions 
are to give it weight, the power for whose interests the whole 
scheme is to be set working. When it is remembered what place 
Prussia occupied in the thoughts of her allies, it will be easy to 
hazard a guess as to the weight that her persuasions will have 
with them and the solicitude that her interests will awaken in 
them. When it is remembered, too, that the Russia whose 
attitude and temper are described above was the closest of all 
the friends of Prussia, bound to her by the personal friendship 
of her sovereign as well as by reasons of state, and having every 
motive for judging her most leniently—and that even she was 
suspicious and impatient—it will be tempting to prophesy what 
complexion a fresh overture for general peace will have, coming 
from Prussia, and what answer the Czar, who refused to listen to 
Talleyrand’s proposal of the 16th of November, will give to the 
restatement of the overture on the 6th of December. But 
history defies prophecy and refuses to be worked by mathe- 
matics, and, like nature, is full of surprises and incalculable 
chances; and the fate and adventures of the peace proposal of 
the 6th of December make a longer story than could have been 
foreseen. 