

BOOK ONE 

THE WINTER CAMPAIGN 

CHAPTER I 
THE PRUSSIAN PEACE MOVE 

Freperick WILLIAM oF PRUSSIA, rejecting the armistice 
of November 1806, threw himself into the arms of the Czar and 
wrote: 

Receive, Sire, my solemn promise that henceforward I will stand 

unshakable in the resolution I am taking; I shall not sheathe the 
sword...until your interests, now bound up with mine more indis- 
solubly than ever, induce you yourself to desire it. This is my firm 
determination. 
Haugwitz under these circumstances became an impossible 
minister. Indeed all the world seemed tired of him, for he had 
kept the peace at the wrong moments and he had gone to war 
out of due time. He had advised his master to turn against 
Russia, all the powers of the coalition were crying out that he 
should be got rid of, and the Austrians were repeating that his 
continuance in office was the obstacle to their entry into the war.? 
To the patriots of Prussia and to the allies of Frederick William 
he had become the symbol of the weakness if not the treachery 
of the court of Berlin, just as Hardenberg had become the symbol 
of the vigorous anti-French policy which was desired. So 
Haugwitz passes out of history. 

Stein was offered the vacant post, but he was more intractable 
than Haugwitz. He saw that the king was unwilling to correct 
obnoxious principles of government, or destroy the “inordinate 
secret influence” of men like Beyme; also he looked up to Har- 
denberg as the man to conduct Prussia through the war. So he 
made excuses, and pleaded his lack of experience in the conduct 
of foreign affairs. It did not improve matters that the partisans 

1 Frederick William III to Alexander I, 23 Nov. 1806, in P. Bailleu, 
Briefwechsel Kénig Friedrich Wilhelm’s III und der Kénigen Luise mit 

Kaiser Alexander I, vol. uxxv of the Publicationen aus den K. Preussischen 

Staatsarchiven. 
2 See especially Alexander I to Frederick William III, 18/30 Nov. 1806, 

in Bailleu, Briefwechsel, p. 1382. 

54 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

of reform in Prussia thought to force the king’s hand, and procure 
the promotion of Stein and Hardenberg. The king, precisely 
because he felt so small and was conscious of his weakness and 
was sensitive on the subject, resented those who reminded him 
of this matter, or attempted to dictate to him; he disliked any 
scheme that seemed derogatory to his own royal power. So 
Hardenberg was left to sulk and the king allowed Stein to depart, 
calling him a “refractory, insolent, obstinate and disobedient 
official, who, proud of his genius and talents, far from regarding 
the good of the State, guided purely by caprice, acts from pas- 
sion and from personal hatred and rancour”.1 A Haugwitz was 
better than such men; the king fell back upon the old school. 
Two military men, Generals Zastrow and Kockeritz, had for years 
been his intimate advisers, had been the despair of the coalition 
ministers, and had become as hated and feared as Haugwitz. 
Zastrow, an old servant of Frederick the Great, succeeded to the 
control of foreign affairs, though much against his will. He had 
been the recipient of Napoleon’s latest intentions on the subject 
of peace; he had come from Charlottenburg full of views about 
what Napoleon desired from Prussia, and his appointment was 
symbolical of the policy his government was about to adopt. 
The semi-official British representative in Prussia at the moment 
wrote: ‘‘The reason for not giving Hardenberg the portefeuille 
is at last declared— With him as Minister every hope of a peace 
with France was lost’”’, 