

The story can be tracked down amid the mass of events and 
issues that make the history of the first six months of 1807; but 
when this is done, it must be accompanied by a mental reserva- 
tion, for one can never afford to lose sight of the fact that this is 
but one tale disentangled from a network of intertwined plots 
and stories—one thread pulled out of the tapestry of history and 

48 INTRODUCTION 

put under the microscope. Diplomatic events and developments 
themselves are an abstraction from universal history, and this 
question under discussion is but an isolated strand even out of 
the diplomatic issues of the time. Napoleon was not by any means 
entirely preoccupied with the question of peace in Europe. He 
was a military leader and we see him organising armies, calling 
up recruits, disposing his forces, ordering shoes for his soldiers, 
arranging the construction of bakeries, busying himself with all 
the paraphernalia of war. He was a human mortal, and we hear 
of him enjoying the balls and the brilliant life of Warsaw, adoring 
the beauty of the Polish ladies, laying siege to the heart of the 
Countess Walewska, and writing to the Empress to reassure her 
about his health, or to calm her jealousies or to prevent her from 
appearing inconveniently in Poland. He was the Emperor, 
ruling France from the distance, organising propaganda, directing 
theatres and newspapers, rebuking his chief of police, aiding 
necessitous manufactures in France, and writing ‘‘M. de Cham- 
pagny, literature ought to be encouraged”. Now he looked to 
the exploitation of Prussia; now he was luring the Poles with 
vain promises and inciting them to rise against the Russians. 
Even in diplomacy his hands held the threads of many schemes 
and purposes. He was arranging a treaty with Turkey, or 
winning the alliance of Persia, still fingering the idea of the 
ultimate conquest of India; and constantly he was turning to 
Austria with bribe or persuasion or menace, trying to win her 
alliance or to fasten her doubtful neutrality. Only at times— 
after the battle of Eylau, for example—would he turn aside to 
write a letter to the king of Prussia, or an instruction to a minister 
—just as he would turn aside to send a hurried line to the Em- 
press—and in this way would move the problem of peace a step 
further, and bring a new turn to the negotiations with the 
coalition. 

In the eyes of contemporaries this diplomatic story did not 
seem to hold the centre of the stage. Few people were in the 
secret. Napoleon would carry on a correspondence that was kept 
even from Talleyrand. At one period we find the British cabinet 
is left wondering, and British ministers abroad merely scent 

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF THE COALITION 49 

suspicious peace moves. Public opinion in England would catch 
occasional rumours and indulge in some wild guess-work. The 
ery would go up that Prussia was betraying the cause and angling 
for a separate peace. Men would wonder what the Austrians 
were about. But the subjects of conversation would be the 
Russian general who was supposed to have sold himself to the 
French, the latest Russian “victory” that was so unaccountably 
followed by retreat, the failure of the British fleet to reduce the 
Turks at Constantinople, the taking of Danzig by the French. The 
abolition of the slave-trade and the question of Catholic Eman- 
cipation and the fall of the “ministry of All the Talents” in 
March were the great events in English politics. And when the 
situation was tightest and the fate of Europe was about to be 
decided, an English correspondent would be writing: “‘ There is 
no earthly thing talked of but duels and the Yorkshire election”’, 