

Prussian ministers on 1/13 Jan. 1807, and Budberg’s reply of 3/15 Jan. 1807 
(mentioned below). 

2 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 426. 

5 Alexander I to Frederick William III, 6/18 Jan. 1807, in Bailleu, 
Briefwechsel, p. 144. This letter was accompanied by a more formal one 
which was meant for the eyes of Napoleon, ibid. 146. 

CH. I, THE PRUSSIAN PEACE MOVE 59 

On the 28th of January Zastrow communicated to Talleyrand 
the reply of the Czar to the messages of Kriisemarck. Russia, 
he said, “desires only to know the basis upon which France 
wishes to treat, and she leaves to you the choice of the seat of 
negotiation providing only that it is established in a neutral 
country”; and he added that Lublin in Galicia was a likely 
place for a congress. 

Talleyrand, forwarding this to his master on the 8rd of 
February, commented that the reply of Russia to the overture 
“seemed at first glance to offer more obstacles than facilities. ..”’. 
But he concluded: “After all, the dispositions of Russia 
depend upon events, and events depend upon Your Majesty’’.” 
From this it appears that the movement for a general negotiation 
for peace has gone far enough for the present, and the French 
government is disposed to let it rest for a time and to wait for 
the chances of war to determine the next step. These are Talley- 
rand’s words, of course, but Talleyrand is only divining the 
intentions of Napoleon; and there is no doubt that in this case, 
at least, he judged them correctly. 

It was upon what Talleyrand called “events” that the entire 
diplomacy lay dangerously and delicately poised; for the move- 
ments of the whole negotiation registered the rise and fall of 
military or political happening. And what Talleyrand neatly 
called ‘‘events” had already broken in upon the course of the 
diplomatic discussions. The Russians had entered the war 
shouting, and their shouting had made them brave, but now 
their tone had lowered and their mood was somewhat chastened. 
The Czar, who had struck a masterly attitude in December, and 
had repulsed all thought of peace, was now warming to a more 
benevolent temper towards France, and was willing to think of 
sending a diplomat to a congress. He was ready to listen to an 
overture from Prussia which he had rejected but a week before. 
It seemed unaccountable to observers—this sudden softening of 
heart; but there was a factor behind it, for ‘“‘events” were 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 276. 
2 Talleyrand to Napoleon, 8 Feb. 1807, in P. Bertrand, Lettres inédites 
de Talleyrand a Napoléon, No. CCxXXII. 

60 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

pressing home. The wild romanticisms of the Czar were coming 
to shipwreck once more upon grave inescapable realities. And 
many things had forced themselves into the picture to qualify 
the first ardour of his crusading. 

At the end of the old year the Russians claimed to have won 
a victory at Pultusk; but even if they had just basis for the 
assertion, it was a victory followed by retreat. Napoleon might 
have met disappointment here, but there was nothing to make 
the Russians proud, no glory of pursuit, no reaping of the fruits 
of success. The inadequacy of Russian generalship, the quarrels 
and outbursts of peevishness among the Russian leaders, can- 
celled all that could be boasted of in the bravery of the troops, 
and produced everywhere a lack of faith in that army from which 
so much had been hoped. The Czar received a letter from Tolstoy, 
his representative at the Prussian army, full of complaints about 
- the lack of discipline on all sides, and the worthlessness of the 
officers, and the weakness even of Bennigsen; and at this sorry 
story the man seemed overfaced. Replied the Czar, “Who else 
is there? Where is that man among us who enjoys the general 
confidence and at the same time combines military talents with 
the severity that is necessary for command? For my part I do 
not know him....”’ There seemed no remedy for the evils, and 
the prospect appeared not likely to be an improving one, so the 
Czar could only talk despairingly and bewail the “indescribable 
difficulties of the situation”. This, in a letter to Tolstoy, at the 
very time when he was considering the peace proposals of 
Prussia.? 