

And away in the east of Europe the French army had crossed 
the Vistula, and the soldiers did not like it. Were they never to 
stop until they had reached China? they asked. In Poland they 
found a flat region of marsh and heath, bog, forest and lake, and 
rough intractable land; and Napoleon “discovered a new element 
—mud’’. In an unhospitable climate and amid hostile inhabi- 
tants Napoleon’s troops found themselves short of shoes, clothing 
and food. The thaw was worse than the frost; scarcely anything 
that could be called a road existed; often the forests made it 
difficult to deploy large numbers of troops. Communication was 
difficult, information was hard to get, the guns sank into the 
mud; “‘one marched all day to cover three or four leagues”’; 
couriers lost their way—and all this was very far from France. 
‘““The dampness of the country...and the frequency of marshes 
and sluggish streams, choked with the decaying débris of the 
forests’? made the land unhealthy and malarious. The French 
hospitals were filled with fever-stricken soldiers. In front were 
the Russians, a new kind of enemy. Napoleon, when he mentioned 
them, would use words like “‘savage”’, “‘ barbarian”. They were 
not like other people. To Europe, still, Russia was a legend, a 
bear; it loomed from the deep darkness of Asia; it spelled hidden, 
untapped power. The eye lost itself in the mists and snows of the 

BN 4 

50 : INTRODUCTION 

endlessly retreating, uninviting North; a victory that drew the 
conquerors further into the recesses of that unknown, unexplored 
desert seemed a grim, unhopeful thing to the French. What did 
Napoleon want with crossing the Vistula, they asked. Hence- 
forward they were to find that a second Austerlitz was no simple 
matter. They were to see bitter fighting under conditions that 
favoured the enemy. They were to be harassed by Cossacks, who 
seemed something more, and at the same time something less, 
than human. It appeared that they were to be satisfied with 
indecisive fights, or half-victories that resulted in retreat. 
Misery attended them. And in their rear the Austrian armaments 
loomed, sinister; here was another foe waiting to fall upon 
Napoleon if he stumbled into disaster. 

And yet the rationale of all this, the logic of this muddle and 
misery, lay in the diplomacy that gave meaning to the fighting 
and explained what each power was fighting for and determined 
how long men should go on with the fighting. It is in the diplo- 
matic story which is to be unravelled that the war in Poland 
can be translated into terms of reason and purpose. What each 
side sought to win, out of the clash of battle, was, in the last 
resort, a diplomatic advantage, a “pull” in negotiations. And, 
since in the year 1807 the outbreak of hostilities did not destroy 
the thread of negotiation, but kept it moving in unbroken 
sequence, the diplomatic story is the true index of the fluctuation 
of fortunes, the real barometer of the war; in a way it is the 
essential history of the European struggle against Napoleon. 