

aid of Austria the hope of success in warfare diminished, so that 
the only way to prevent Napoleon from spreading more evil 
throughout the continent seemed to be to disarm him by a 
general pacification. Napoleon himself had given the opening 
for such a measure, and the Czar was made to see that by 
accepting the proposal he in no way compromised his dignity; 
Napoleon had taken the first step. Such an attempt to make 
peace would not by any means prejudice military operations. It 
was true that Alexander had regarded Talleyrand’s overtures 
of the 16th of November as inadmissible, but this was a fresh 
offer, and it would be futile to close the door against all accom- 
modation. Above all this new move of Napoleon’s implied a 
concession on his part that it had been hitherto impossible to 
secure from him, and contained a surrender on a point for which 
he had always stood out in negotiations, though it had wrecked 
all previous attempts at peace. If the restoration of Prussia was 
to depend upon the sacrifices England was prepared to make, 
there would have to be a combined negotiation, a congress. This 
offer by Napoleon represented such an advance upon his former 
determinations—his insistence upon separate transactions with 
each power—that the opportunity ought not to be missed. The 
Prussian king, in his distress, therefore, hoped that the friendship 
the Czar bore towards him would dispose him to make sacrifices 
compatible with the interests of his monarchy for the purpose 
of arriving at a settlement. Napoleon demanded free navigation 
in all waters, the recovery of the colonies that England had 
captured, and the guarantee of the independence of Turkey and 
of the rights of that power over Moldavia and Wallachia; the 
restoration of Prussia was to depend upon the satisfactory 
arrangement of all these matters. What was asked was that the 
Czar should send a plenipotentiary to the French headquarters, 
and use his influence at the court of London to make England 
do the same.} 

1 Frederick William III to Alexander I, 22 Dec. 1806, in Ranke, Har- 
denberg, 111, 257. Extracts from Kriisemarck’s instructions and from the 
documents he carried, ibid. v, 418. Précis of military memorandum of 
Zastrow, showing the difficulty of defeating the French, ibid. v, 421. 

CHeyte THE PRUSSIAN PEACE MOVE 57 

On the 8rd of January Kriisemarck arrived at St Petersburg 
and on the 6th he had an audience of the chancellor Budberg. 
On the following morning the purpose of his mission was com- 
municated to the British ambassador, together with the reasons 
““why it is impossible to listen to the present overture from 
the King of Prussia”. The Russian court “is not averse to 
conciliation but can only listen to propositions brought forward 
immediately by France’’.1 

Up to this point, then, everything has answered to expectations. 
The overture is made and Prussian persuasions seek to render it 
effective; but it comes from the wrong quarter; the recent history 
of Prussia, her repetition of attempts at peace, the fact that this 
proposal is merely the last of a series of overtures conveyed to 
St Petersburg, disqualify this power from fulfilling the réle of 
intermediary in the present circumstances. The overture must 
come direct from France to gain validity. All this lies within 
the realm of predictable events, and is according to timetable. 
But within a few days the train leaves the rails and takes an 
uncharted course. The persevering Kriisemarck makes this 
possible, for he refuses to abandon the object of his mission, and 
combines his efforts with those of the Prussian ambassador at 
St Petersburg till he is rewarded with a different answer. 