

Another dismal story had recently come from Vienna telling 
of the failure of the final effort to persuade the Austrians to join 
the coalition. In the confident days before the news of Jena had 
arrived the Czar had been pleased to see Austria declare herself 
neutral, had regarded it as a happy thing that the court of 
Vienna had not actually joined the French.2. But when the 

+ Alexander I to Tolstoy, 3 Jan. 1807 (v.s.) in Sbornik, LXxxix, p. Ixxvi. 

* Budberg to Nicolai, 9/21 Oct. 1806, No. 8, F.0. Russia 65/66; see also 

Stuart to Fox, No. 28, 30 Sept. 1806, F.O. Russia 65/64, for an account of 

the Czar’s fear lest Austria should be unable to avoid an alliance with 
France. 

CH. I. THE PRUSSIAN PEACE MOVE 61 

Prussian disaster was announced, and more particularly when it 
was seen that Haugwitz still retained office and was making 
overtures for peace with France—doing everything, in fact, to 
prove that Prussia could no longer be counted upon, or trusted 
as an ally—the Russian minister saw that his country could 
not bear the whole burden of the war and declared “that 
this Court must now look with some degree of anxiety to 
Austria for support”. There was no question, as yet, of in- 
citing or luring the Austrians into the contest. “If Austria 
intends to act she must of her own accord come forward for self- 
defence and...the impulse of circumstances will more strongly 
shew the expediency of a measure so necessary for her situation, 
than the suggestion of a Foreign Power.’! This was on the 
17th of November. Two days later the situation seemed still 
more urgent, but even yet Budberg was proud and unbending. 
““It does not become the dignity of the Court of St Petersburg”’, 
he said, “‘to solicit the assistance of Austria”; and he thought 
that propositions for combined action against France should 
come rather from Vienna. It was Stuart, the British chargé 
d’affaires, who persuaded him that “circumstances imperiously 
demanded a mutual immediate explanation upon all the 
points at issue, and a speedy concert of measures necessary 
to check the advance of France in Poland”; and as a result 
of Stuart’s persuasions, small scruples of pride and petty 
resentment were swept aside, and Pozzo di Borgo was sent 
‘to Vienna to press the Austrians to immediate action.? The 
middle of January saw the final failure of this mission,® and 
left no hope that Austria would bring early assistance in Poland: 
Napoleon’s armies, at least for a time, found fresh security as a 
result. 

When Stuart was informed that the Russians had given way 
to the arguments and suggestions of Prussia, he saw something 

1 Stuart to Howick, No. 52, 17 Nov. 1806, F'.O. Russia 65/65. 

2 Stuart to Howick, No. 56, 19 Nov. 1806, F'.0. Russia 65/65. 

3 Stuart to Howick, No. 7, 14 Jan. 1806, F.0. Russia 65/67: “From the 
moment the negotiation has been brought to bear upon the real question 
of peace or war the Court of Vienna has studiously avoided all appearances 
favourable to Russia”; see also below, pp. 114 ff. 