

Ten days after the chancellor Budberg had explained to the 
English minister “‘ why it was impossible to listen to the present 
overture from the king of Prussia” he held another conference 
with Stuart, who reported: 

Although in the course of this interview the General constantly 
referred to his former language. ..it was not difficult to observe from 
his discourse the effect of a material alteration in the sentiments and 
decision of the Emperor upon the'subject of the negotiation for peace 
projected and proposed by Bonaparte. 

Budberg declared that his government, though determined to 
bring forward no overture to Bonaparte, was anxious 

to show a conciliatory disposition...and try to ascertain on what 
grounds the French Cabinet is willing to treat, by requesting the 

1 Stuart to Howick, No. 4,7 Jan. 1807, F.0. Russia 65/67. 

58 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

Prussian Court, on Kriisemarck’s return to Memel, to sound the 
French Government and learn whatever particulars can possibly throw 
light on the views of that power with respect to a general peace.* 

The Russian reply to Kriisemarck’s proposals is contained in 
a note from Budberg to Kriisemarck and the Prussian ambassa- 
dor, dated the 8rd (15th) of January, and declaring: 

The Emperor will... be disposed to enter into negotiation with the 
French Government to discuss the means of putting an end to the 
present war, and will invite the British Government also to take part 
init. His Imperial Majesty knows too well the principles which govern 
the Cabinet of St James to be able to doubt of its adhesion to the 
proposed negotiation as soon as it can take place in a way honourable 
to the allied powers. But as it would be perfectly useless to set such 
a negotiation on foot if it did not promise up to a certain point the 
results that one has a right to expect from it, the Emperor desires 
first of all to know the basis upon which.the French government pro- 
poses to treat; and as the seat of the negotiation could not be a matter 
of indifference by reason of the influence which one of the two parties. 
might bring to bear upon the negotiation in consequence of the position 
of the respective armies, His Imperial Majesty would at the same time 
like a place to be selected for the negotiation in a neutral country, 
Galicia for example. These two points granted, the Emperor would 
..-gladly accept any equitable arrangement in conformity with the 

overtures that have just been made by His Majesty, the King of 
Prussia.” 

In a letter to Frederick William, the Czar wrote: ‘“‘ Your Majesty 
will recognise, I hope, in all this, my desire to outdo your own 

efforts, provided only that it is compatible with my duty to my 
country ”’.3 

This is a surprising change of temper in the Czar who, riding 

upon the wings of rhetoric, had so recently proclaimed the 
emancipation of Europe. 

1 Stuart to Howick, No. 10, 17 Jan. 1807, F.O. Russia 65/67. Enclosed 
in this despatch is the note addressed to the Russian chancellor by the two 