

Zastrow came to office determined to take the one opening 
which Napoleon had left to Prussia for the conclusion of peace. 
The latest French statement on the subject had made it clear 
that the Prussian king could not hope to return to Berlin until 
both England and Russia had come to terms with the French 
empire. This was sufficient cue to start Zastrow on a quest for 
the general pacification of Europe, and since the alliance with 
Russia was cemented by a very close friendship between 
Frederick William and the Czar Alexander, it was obvious that 
in St Petersburg the first move had to be made. Zastrow mean- 

1 Frederick William III to Stein, 3 Jan. 1807, in eek Life and Times 
of Stein, 1, 305. 

CH. I. THE PRUSSIAN PEACE MOVE 55 

time kept in touch with the French government as though no 
war existed. He communicated to Talleyrand the news of his 
appointment, and later, of his determination to work for a 

general negotiation. On the 8rd of January 1807 Talleyrand 
replied : 

His Majesty has seen with great pleasure that there has been called 
to the direction of affairs a man whom he esteems, whose opinion has 
been unvaryingly in favour of an alliance between France and Prussia, 
and who would have wanted to prevent if he could the events of recent 
times and those which may be to follow. The rapidity of events must 

make it apparent how important is every minute, and how useful the 
armistice would have been. 

Talleyrand hoped that Zastrow would “neglect nothing to hasten 
the end of the evils of war”.1 The hint was very pointed. 
Zastrow, in any case, was not the man to delay. On the 22nd of 
December he had prepared his messages for St Petersburg, and 
on the following day Lieutenant-Colonel Kriisemarck, who had 
been entrusted with one or two previous missions to the Russian 
government, set out on his errand to persuade the Czar to lend 
his ear to Napoleon’s proposals of December. 

Kriisemarck carried a letter from the king to the Czar, with 
which was enclosed a précis of Zastrow’s last conversation with 
Napoleon. The letter asked “if the peace proposals thrown out 
by the French emperor were not worth serious attention?” At 
the same time it protested vigorously that the king would not 
separate his cause from that of Russia—as though the key to the 
whole transaction had not been that Napoleon had repulsed all 
his attempts to separate his cause from that of the coalition. 
The arguments of this letter, combined with Kriisemarck’s 
instructions, painted a grim picture of the immediate danger 
Prussia was in through an enforced retreat of the Russian armies, 
and the sad situation of the king who was compelled now to 
think of taking refuge in a foreign country. Napoleon had even 
threatened to dethrone the reigning house of Prussia if he 
defeated the Russians. The Czar was reminded that he had failed 
to win Denmark and Austria to his cause, and that without the 

1 In Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 273-4. 

56 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 