

The first of Napoleon’s separate overtures to Prussia was 
transmitted even before the battle of Eylau. A letter of the 
29th of January, direct from Talleyrand to Zastrow, put a pistol 
to the head of the Prussian king, by proposing an immediate 
treaty of peace and alliance between the two nations, with the 
object of guaranteeing the integrity of the Ottoman Porte—and 
offering the very plain threat that, if the alliance did not take 
place, the next step in the execution of Napoleon’s plans would 
mean the dethronement of the house of Brandenburg for ever. 
“Time presses”’, the letter said. Napoleon’s own situation, it was, 
that was pressing. Also he was going torush the Prussian govern- 
ment, and carry his object by storm. Always, too, there was this 

1 Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 11, 584-6. 
* Hutchinson to Howick, No. 6, 9 Jan. 1807, F.O.,.Prussia 64/74. 

CH. I. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 73 

insistence upon “‘the integrity of the Ottoman Porte”; Prussia 
was to betricked into fighting against Russia.! But this overture 
was despatched before Zastrow’s note communicating the Russian 
acceptance of a congress had reached Talleyrand, and the two 
messages crossed on the way. The acceptance of a general congress 
was sufficient answer to the proposal for a separate peace, so the 
Prussians sent no reply to the latter, and Napoleon, by subse- 
quently concurring in the idea of a general negotiation and 
offering after Eylau to send plenipotentiaries to Memel, withdrew 
to his former ground. 

A few days after Napoleon had expressed his intention of 
sending plenipotentiaries to a congress he tacked again, resuming 
the attempt to draw Prussia into peace and alliance with France, 
repeating it in a more acceptable, more enticing form, and 
pressing it home with clever argument, in the overture that was 
brought to the Prussian king by General Bertrand. 

In the Recollections of the Countess Voss the following entry 
appears on the date of the 16th of February 1807: 

A letter from Wilson. He is pleased with the Russians but we 
are not all so here. A perfectly atrocious French General of the name 
of Bertrand arrived to-day. Kliix brought him here, and he saw the 
King for a moment before dinner. In the evening he insisted upon 
being presented to the Queen, who was as furious with him as I was. 
He has a repulsive countenance and ventured to say to her that 
**Napoleon hoped she would use her influence to hasten the conclusion 
of peace and hoped also that she would not keep up any unjust 
prejudice against him’’. The Queen answered him, with the greatest 
mildness and dignity ‘‘that women had no voice in war and peace”’. 
We were horrified at his manner and his whole proceedings... . 

General Bertrand had appeared at the Russian outposts on 
the 15th of February. The Russian commander writing to inform 
the Prussian king of his arrival, conjectured that his mission 
might have reference to the demand of an armistice by the 
French, and urged the Prussian king to give no thought to such 
a proposition. The very suggestion of the step by Napoleon 