

Life for that court in exile breathed no high expectancy. 
There was patience and resignation but no spirit for the war. 
On the entrance into Memel, it is true, hope had picked up again, 
as the sun burst out to greet the refugees and the weather began 
to be kind. Memel, a small clean town, with pretty houses and 

CH. Il. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 69 

a pleasant sea-shore, proved a quiet, welcome shelter, where 
good quarters were not hard to discover. But the queen, though 
recovering from her illness, was plunged into deep depression as 
the slanders published by Napoleon overtook her. The king was 
a poor passenger in the place, himself part of the burden of 
things; was indeed “prostrate in mind and body”. Even the 
royal family had difficulty in getting good food at times, and 
perhaps this helped to cause the recurring illnesses that gave so 
much anxiety. There was some society at Memel, and constantly 
new faces appeared. Besides the relatives of the king and their 
attendants there were many military officers who made frequent 
resort to the town; also a number of government servants who 
had faithfully followed the royal family into exile; and English, 
Swedish, and Russian diplomatic missions attached to the 
Prussian court. Constant influx of wounded soldiers, the landing 
of foreigners who would disembark at Memel, and the arrival of 
hosts of refugees, added to the population until sometimes it 
became difficult to find food. But Haugwitz and Lucchesini had 
disappeared, they had retired to their estates; and Stein and 
Hardenberg were gone—had stamped away like offended giants. 
Only the Zastrows and Beymes were near to handle the problems 
of politics and meet the emergencies of war. 

Dreary, monotonous days there were, and time would often 
hang heavily; occasionally there would be depression that killed 
society and forbade entertainment. But life organised itself, and 
found a ritual for the special conditions, and took on a character 
of its own. Neighbouring proprietors would send presents of 
game to their king, and fishermen would do homage “in kind”’, 
while countryfolk would come into the town with gifts from farm 
and dairy. You would drive the queen to the harbour to watch 
a ship set sail; you would arrange sleighing parties or take tea 
with the Countess Voss; you would make bandages for the 
wounded. In this world people acted as though sorry for one 
another, and conspired to forget depression, and by petty 
occupations teased the mind out of its black broodings. Little 
personal touches seemed to make up the sum of life. Members of 
the English mission appear to have brought some liveliness into 

70 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

the circle at Memel. There was George Jackson, who had shared 
the successive flights and wanderings, and who in his pedestrian 
way has left a record of all these days telling of how he fell ill 
with the bad water at Ortelsburg, how at another place there was 
nowhere to sleep save on a bed improvised from straw and 
articles of clothing spread on a filthy floor, and how for some 
time five men lived and slept in one room with an inadequate 
supply of food. There was Lord Gower, ‘“‘a handsome minor’’, 
who played the gallant to the Countess Voss and gave her 
“twelve pairs of beautiful English silk stockings”. There was 
Sir Robert Wilson, a stagey but irrepressible figure, a man full 
of excitement, passing on his enthusiasm to all around. He would 
give the queen a copy of his book on Egypt, and send wine and 
tea to the Countess Voss; he would play charming chevalier to 
them both; but he would desert them at times, for he was in 
love with the bright eyes of danger and you could not hold him 
if there were hope of a battle. Lord Hutchinson was at the head 
of the party, but he had an unpleasant way with him, and he 
was a shaggy-looking creature. He would talk of the greatness of 
Napoleon, and pooh-pooh the hopes of victory, and shake his 
head in an unbelieving way if the Russians sent good news. So 
the clock beat out the solemn days. You would laugh when the 
sun was shining, but it was a pathetic kind of laughing. You 
toyed with trivialities and made yourself a world of little things; 
it was a mere flight from the big inescapable preoccupation. You 
would make jest over a tea-cup with the Countess Voss; only she, 
when she found herself alone, would turn aside to her diary, and 
write with vagrant touches of sadness. The whole was a kind of 
stage-play, as though one danced on the edge of the abyss. And 
the king—for his part, he would not dance; he had no escape 
from the burden of things. You looked on him with a sort of 
pity, awkward, unattractive as he was. He revolved his sad 
misfortunes, and talked of sending the queen and royal children 
to Riga. On the eve of Eylau it seemed that Napoleon was 
pressing in. If he won the battle of Eylau he would keep his 
promise to be in Kénigsberg on the morrow. To this king, to 
this circle of luckless refugees Napoleon came now, with heavy 
temptation. He offered them separate peace, and beguiled them 