

Before the full memoir had been communicated to the king, 
and before he had actually seen all the arguments in writing, the 
overture was communicated to the Czar, coupled with an avowal 
of fidelity to Russia but also with the most tactless insinuations 
in favour of peace. The king begged his friend to give full con- 
sideration to Napoleon’s offers and pressed him to ask himself if 

119 Feb. 1807; Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 482. The whole of this was not 
communicated to the king until 22 Feb.; ibid. 11, 315. 

78 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN .BK I. 

he really thought that with the means at his disposal he could 
hope to restore stability. and independence to Europe by any 
continuance of the war. The difficulty of the military situation 
was carefully displayed. The improbability of success in the 
campaign without the help of Austria was insinuated, at a time 
when there could be little hope that the court of Vienna would 
join in the war. And “ voluminous memoirs” were communicated 
to show that even if military advantages were gained the dangers 
that were about to result from an impending scarcity of pro- 
visions would place the Russian army in an embarrassing position. 
Prussia made it very clear that she was anxious for peace; in 
spite of her protestations of fidelity she did not make it too 
evident whether she was not anxious also that the Czar should 
acquiesce in her acceptance of Bertrand’s proposals.1 It seems 
to have been in regard to this overture, that the Prussian am- 
bassador in St Petersburg reported to his government: “The 
Baron Budberg was astounded that the proposal was not entirely 
rejected and that the king should see any point in submitting 
it to the decision of the Emperor”.? The British minister to 
Russia related at the same time that the Czar was dissatisfied 
with the repeated pacific overtures that were brought to him 
from the court of Frederick William.® 

A still worse impression was given by the fact that the 
Prussian king sent a representative to Napoleon himself—and 
this the very day after Bertrand had made his proposals. Colonel 
Kleist was despatched to the French headquarters on the 17th 
of February. The Countess Voss curtly wrote, ‘‘I should not have 
done this”, and she spoke for a proud minority. The mission 
had to be accounted for, especially to the Russian government; 
so it was urged that the Russian general had wished to gain time, 
and that this mission would give him an interval. Kleist, it was 
explained, was sent 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 430; see also ibid. 11, 807, 311. Frederick 
William III to Alexander I, 19 Feb. 1807, in Bailleu, Briefwechsel, p. 147. 

2 Despatch of Goltz (undated, but printed along with other Russian 
replies to Bertrand’s proposals, and referring to these or to Napoleon’s 
previous offer of separate peace) in Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 335. 

3 Douglas to Howick, No. 10, 6 Mar. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/68. 

CH. II. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 79 

to treat of the exchange of prisoners. He is not furnished with full 
powers for any other purpose. He has been charged at the same time 
to tell the Emperor Napoleon that the King has hastened to com- 
municate the overtures of Bertrand to his august Ally, and that if an 
agreement can be arrived at with Russia the King will come to further 
explanations with Napoleon.+ 