

Perhaps there was an idea that Kleist could obtain first-hand 
knowledge of the state of the French army. There was certainly 
no sign of giving Napoleon’s offers a straight refusal. In truth 
the king of Prussia was pleased with this talk of peace after 
Eylau and wanted to hear more of it. 

Kleist has left an account of his reception at the French 
headquarters. He interviewed the French emperor at Osterode 
on the 24th of February and the conversation lasted for two hours 
and a half. Napoleon received the Colonel graciously, but 
became more cool when he learned that Bertrand’s proposals 
had been transmitted to St Petersburg. He seemed in a state of 
some excitement, and would break into passionate exclamation, 
interrupting reasoned discourse with wild menace and braggart 
defiance, and hurling interjections like rocks at the head of the 
Prussian officer. 

‘*T must observe to Your Majesty”, wrote Kleist, “‘that he really 
had the appearance of a man whose mind is greatly disturbed; and 
it made him distracted and caused him to keep on repeating the same 
thing. During the contentions which took place, the Emperor told 
me, among other things, that Your Majesty had a loyal character and 
that he was making it his duty to restore you to your lands; that he 
only wished for confidence from Your Majesty, and that he would do 
anything to please you... .Of the several boastings which he allowed 
himself to make, the strongest was: that if he could not come to an 
arrangement with Your Majesty, and if a second victory over the 
Russians should decide the fate of Europe, he would have to establish 
at Berlin a system that should be in accordance with his political 
views; he was ready to make war for ten years more; he was only 
thirty-seven, and he had grown up under arms and in the midst of 
affairs.” 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 482; see also Frederick William III to Bennigsen, 

ibid. 111, 311; to Alexander I, 5 Mar. 1807, ibid. 11, 317; to Napoleon, 
17 Feb. 1807, in M. F. von Bassewitz, Die Kurmark Brandenburg, 1, 385. 

80 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I, 

This description agrees with all that we know of Napoleon’s 
conduct at moments of disappointment and frustration. It 
represents the primitive reaction he always made to anything 
which thwarted him, and shows the kind of self-betrayal into 
which his voleanic instincts would perpetually entrap him. When 
in the year 1818, after the retreat from Moscow, the Austrians 
were preparing to turn against France and to join the Prussians 
and Russians in rolling back the Napoleonic empire, Metternich, 
who was in charge of the diplomacy of the court of Vienna, had 
an interview with Napoleon at Dresden, and found him in the 
same baffled, disappointed, petulant mood. His account of the 
conversation bears some resemblance to that of Kleist, though 
the Prussian is more reticent and concise, and attempts to illus- 
trate the conduct of Napoleon rather than to reproduce the 
dialogue; also Kleist is not an egoist like Metternich, who 
recounts his own brilliance in the debate, taking care that he 
himself shall stand out dignified and dominant in the picture. 
Napoleon at Dresden advanced “with an affected calmness’’, 
but “‘his features soon darkened”. Once more he bragged, and 
was nervously defiant; he threw his hat in a corner, and said 
that he did not mind if the powers compelled him to fight; he 
declared once again: “‘I have grown up on fields of battle”. He 
showed hot indignation at one moment, and had an injured air 
at another; there were sudden falls from a high tone of defiance 
and menace and bravado to a crooning, caressing appeal and a 
softened persuasiveness; as though some booming wave should 
rear itself and crash, and then slowly trail itself out ina chastened 
diminuendo. The interview lasted for nearly nine hours, and 
Metternich called it “‘a series of friendly demonstrations alter- 
nating with the most violent outbursts”; finally the Emperor’s 
tone, at the close of the conversation, became “‘calm and soft’’.1 
The whole description is reminiscent in many ways of Kleist’s 
report, where we can see the identical Napoleon, though with not 
quite the same efficient foil as Metternich to fetch out his drama- 
tic sallies and provoke his versatile mind. The Emperor in these 
moods would work, in fact, to a pattern, which constantly 