

This was not the time to think of wresting conquered colonies 
from England, or holding up discussions until the arrangement 
of a general congress. Napoleon’s next move was a suspension of 
his large design; he dropped for the moment the idea of using 
Prussia as a factor in a large scheme of “compensations”. This 
policy he exchanged for something more immediate, more adapted 
to the pressing moment. He made a series of attempts to win 
Prussia from the coalition, and lure her into a separate peace. 
Some negotiations now come in parenthesis; all that has gone 
- before is held in the air for the moment: it is only after the 
failure of the attempt to isolate Prussia that the threads of the 
former policy are picked up again and the plans for a congress 
renewed. 

And if the pride of Napoleon and of the Czar had been 
chastened by the weariness of the fighting, the Prussian king 
and his court, who had never felt hearts beat high for this war- 
fare, were not likely to stand on ceremony in their efforts to put 
an end to the miserieés. The wretched journeys that had been 
forced on them after Jena—the flight, that so often had to be 
resumed as a new wave of the French invaders caught up—had 
continued into the new year, till the Prussians felt themselves 
hover dizzily on the last ridge of their dominions, not knowing 
from day to day whether the wandering had come to an end. 
They had been driven from Graudenz on the 15th of November 
by the ‘‘alarm of the French having arrived nearly opposite the 
town, on the other side of the Vistula’. At Osterode a week 
later they had refused to ratify the armistice which their pleni- 
potentiaries had signed. Then we catch sight of them at Ortels- 
burg, wondering where they can find a residence in case they 
have to retire into Russia. Here the queen had 

literally only a small, scantily furnished room, on the ground-floor 
of one of the wretched barns they call houses, which one can hardly 

5-2 

68 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

step out of without getting up to the ankles in mud....The King 
takes a morning walk while their room, which like our own serves for 
sitting and bedroom, is arranged for their Majesties’ breakfast. 

Uncomfortable, harassed with illness, they finished December at 
Kénigsberg, “a large and dirty city, affording only very bad 
accommodation”. 

“Every apartment, however mean,” wrote one of the King’s 
entourage, ‘“‘is crowded with noble fugitives, and the streets are all 
bustle: but everything is packed up, and the royal party are prepared 
for more distant flight... .I cannot help laughing when I look round 
the room in which I am writing, and think on the royal company 
I am keeping. Such a pigsty as our apartment cannot be described.” 

People were beginning to lose faith in the Russians who had 
boasted that they would bring deliverance; they waved hand- 
kerchiefs for Pultusk on the last day of the old year, but the 
morrow presented them with the sad realisation that they had 
shown their joy too soon; and in the early days of January the 
journeying began again. For three days in the wild northern 
winter, a queen ill with fever had her bed improvised in a coach, 
and travelled over sheets of snow and ice, sometimes almost 
within reach of the roaring sea-waves, till she had covered a 
hundred and fifty miles. The first night she spent on the way was 
under a roof that allowed the snowflakes to tumble upon her bed. 
And others who did this journey have described the confusion 
that came upon them—disarray of carriages waiting for room to 
pass, crowds of anxious people bustling to find shelter, and all 
amid the play of wintry weather and the din of wild sea-storms. 
This brought the party to Memel, the last resting-place they 
could have in Prussia; it was wondered if the Russians could save 
them; and still no one could settle down comfortably with any 
assurance that the wandering was at an end. 