

CH. Il. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 70) 

with words that had a lilt of former days. And the cabinet that 
had to weigh and ponder his proposals, was one of which Stein 
wrote soon after the battle of Kylau: “I expect nothing from the 
ingredients of the Court of Memel—it is a soulless, meaningless 
combination, capable of nothing but corrupt fermentation... 
For myself I look for nothing from empty, slow, flat people’. 

In the middle of January Zastrow was thinking hard, clearing 
up in his mind the question of the réle and policy of Prussia, 
and formulating the situation with greater precision and em- 
phasis. Haugwitz after Jena had found it useful to ask the Czar 
to participate in the arrangement he was trying to make with 
France. And when Napoleon had defined his policy in November, 
demanding a general negotiation, Haugwitz, as was natural, had 
communicated this to Russia. Now, in the middle of January 
Kriisemarck was at St Petersburg, transmitting the final pro- 
positions concerning peace that Napoleon had made to Zastrow. 
But in each of these contingencies the Prussians had come to a 
separate decision, had sought to meet only the problem of the 
moment, had taken the course that occasion put before them. 
Zastrow, hammering out his problems at Memel, ran all these 
into a policy. Napoleon—it was now taken for granted—would 
not negotiate separately with Prussia. It had also become 
obvious that the Russians were in difficulties in Poland. Zastrow 
was dissatisfied with things. Lesseps, the French consul, passing 
through Memel on his way home from St Petersburg, had two 
interviews with the minister who expressed “‘the strongest desire 
for peace and seemed pained at the fact that the fate of Prussia 
had been bound up with that of Russia”.? Zastrow remarked 
to a British representative at Memel that it would have been 
better for the Czar to tell the Prussians “‘to save themselves as 
best they could”, than to promise assistance that he was unable 
to give; he came to the conclusion that the inadequacy of the 
Russian efforts in Poland, and the refusal of Austria to combine 
her forces in the struggle against France, and the slowness of 
England to come to the help of Prussia, produced a military 
situation that gave reason for alarm; he decided “that there 

1 Seeley, Life and Times of Stein, 1, 312. 
2 P. Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon, No. CCxxxIv. 

72 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

would be nothing to gain and everything to lose by the con- 
tinuation of the war”; and from all this he showed, in a Note on 
the Situation of Affairs, dated the 16th of January, that the best 
thing the king could do for his people would be “to secure a solid 
and durable peace as quickly as possible”, though he must do 
it ‘with the greatest delicacy and circumspection” in order to 
avoid offending his allies.1 The Prussian desire for a general 
peace, therefore, was not from now the event of a moment, the 
result of a particular conjuncture, a separate act, a separate 
decision each time; it became an attitude. In future it was a réle 
consciously adopted, a principle deliberately worked out. It was 
the whole policy of Zastrow. Prussia took the cue from Napoleon 
and found her place in his diplomatic system. In the heart of the 
coalition and bound up with its fate she took the line that he 
marked out for her, and she still played his game. Lord Hutchin- 
son who arrived at the Prussian headquarters in December 
as the official representative of the court of London, warned 
General Zastrow that it was not the intention of England and 
Russia to negotiate with France. “I thought it necessary to 
make this declaration as I have long perceived that they flatter 
themselves with hopes that England would not only negotiate 
but that she was willing to make great sacrifices to extricate 
Prussia out of her present difficulties.’’? 