

1 Souvenirs du Baron de Barante, 1 (1890), 175. See also ibid. 1, 216: 
“Quant aux militaires leur mécontentement s’exprimait par des bons mots, 

avec le verve épigrammatique propre au soldat frangais et qui semble le 

préserver du découragement’”’. 
2 See the Correspondence of the French Archives de la Guerre printed by 

Foucart, Campagne de Pologne, 11 (1882), passim. 
® Foucart, op. cit. 11, 128. 

BN 

66 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

our soldiers have almost all a bad colour, that they are thin, 
especially the older ones and the conscripts, and that anyone 
who saw them in France or Bavaria a year ago, would not 
recognise them to-day’’.! As they advanced they would find 
houses forsaken, often pillaged already; they would come upon 
villages abandoned;? they would find that the Russians in re- 
treating had destroyed everything they had been unable to 
carry away. After Eylau, Napoleon knew the strength of the 
enemy he had to fight in a region where even the elements were 
against him. His bulletins fell into an elegiac tone and this man 
of countless battles began to sing the horrors of war.? The 
“legend” of the Corsican seemed broken, and one caught a 
picture of a career that was not all facile Ulms and Jenas. “‘It 
was leaving Berlin that was the mistake”, said Daru. And 
Murat, a few days after Eylau, wrote despairingly to Napoleon: 
“Sire, it is time that Your Majesty did something. We are here 
absolutely without resources. I do not think it is possible for us 
to remain forty-eight hours longer in this position, because of 
our lack of provisions, and for many other reasons”’.4 

The patriots of Poland had been shy of throwing themselves 
in fine surrender into the war against Russia. They would not 
at the call of Napoleon, and without guarantees from him, rise 
up in blind quixotic passion to aid the French armies by their 
insurrection. And now after Eylau the question had to be asked 
again, “‘What will the Austrians do?” They were still arming 
in the rear, and could bring new disaster to Napoleon if they 
chose to come out of their neutrality. “Ah, if only I were the 
Archduke Charles!” exclaimed Jomini. These Austrians were 
by no means friendly at heart; their only hesitation would be 
the doubt that their hour had not yet come; they were waiting 
till the French should be in unmistakable straits. Napoleon 
himself in after days confessed that their intervention would at 

1 Foucart, op. cit. 11, 215. 2 Ibid. 11, 150, 158. 

3 K.g. Corresp. de Nap. I*, t. xtv, No. 11,796, Bulletin No. 58, where 
Napoleon speaks of “‘les trophées trop chérement payés sans doute par le 
sang de tant de braves”’. 

“4 Murat to Napoleon, 14 Feb. 1807, Lettres et documents pour servir a 
Vhistoire de Joachim Murat, v (1911), 122. 

CH Il. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 67 

this moment have had something decisive in it, and the Austrian 
government came to see that in failing to join the allies it had 
missed its opportunity. On the morrow of Eylau, while the final 
decision of the Austrians was still pending, still anxiously looked 
for, the situation of the French was urgent and insecure. 