

at Tilsit. 
* * x * 

But if the Russians had been arrested by the gravity of things, 
and sobered by the thud and pressure of hard insistent realities, 
the next turn of the wheel, the next unrolling of “events”, came 
as a kind of see-saw and made Napoleon himself more amenable. 
A battle on the 8th of February astonished Europe by its grim- 
ness, and drew lamentations from Napoleon, and stood out as 
one of the fiercest and most costly engagements of the age. At 
Eylau each side claimed a victory, but each withdrew when the 
fighting was over; and the campaign seemed to freeze up for a 
time while both armies slunk back into winter quarters. The 
French failed in what they were trying to do, and experienced 
all the anguish of defeat. The whole setting amid frosts and 
blinding snows, and the psychological conditions of the warfare, 
were of a most depressing kind, and had a particularly noticeable 
effect upon Napoleon. Immediately after the battle, at two 
o’clock in the morning, he took up the talk of peace. Tired out 
as he was he sent “‘just a word” to Talleyrand: 

As to the communication which the Prussian King has made I 
think it may be answered in this way; say that I accept the overtures 
made for putting an end to the war; that far from raising any kind of 
difficulty concerning the place, the most natural place seems to me 
to be the intermediate one; that I propose Memel even; and that I 
will send plenipotentiaries there as soon as I am informed that 
Prussia and Russia have nominated theirs.? 

So in the early days of February all parties have had time to 
be weary of the wasting wintry war in Poland, and all are 
finding it useful to talk of negotiations for peace. At last there 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I®, t. xv, No. 11,786. 

64: THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

has been wrung from Napoleon an explicit offer to send pleni- 
potentiaries to a congress. It is to be noticed that there is no 
mention of England, though Napoleon had brought up this idea 
of a general negotiation in order to fasten England, in order to 
hold her to a system of ‘‘compensations” and so secure the 
restoration of the colonies she had won from him on the sea. But 
in the difficult days after Eylau the ulterior problem of peace 
with England is less important than the predicament of the 
moment. It is a matter of far greater urgency to make some 
arrangement with Prussia and Russia, or at least to institute 
some parley that will give time for reinforcements to arrive. So 
Napoleon will send ministers to Memel as soon as the Prussians 
and Russians have named theirs; for his difficulties are immediate 
ones; he is seeking extrication. 

CHAPTER II 

NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES AND HIS 
SEPARATE OVERTURES TO PRUSSIA 

Iv was said that the French troops marching into Poland, 
tramped to a satirical song which ran 
We go in search of a Kingdom 
For little brother Jerome. 

The fortunes of the ensuing campaign were not such as to make 
these soldiers change their tune. In the thaw that set in after 
Pultusk, observers and reconnoitring parties of both sides would 
remain clamped in the mud in sight of one another—symbol of 
the kind of helplessness in which the fighting had to be carried 
on. All through the month of January the reports of com- 
manding officers told of hunger and hardship and disease that 
imperilled the French troops. The daily incidents of a soldier’s 
life—the supplying of food, the marching across country, the 
sleeping, the pillaging and all the long weariness of winter 
waiting—now began to appear as things depressing and sinister. 
Difficulties and privations multiplied themselves for these 
French soldiers, far as they were from their country, and with 
lengthy lines of communication. And war that had been so 
glorious suddenly seemed insane.? “‘I see nothing for it but to 
die of hunger if we stay here two days”, complains one general. 
“Send bread”’, is the ery of another who finds his troops falling 
ill through bad food and inclement weather. ‘‘The troops lack 
everything’’, wrote a third. Soult reported that his troopers had 
to tear thatch from the houses in order to have anything to give 
to the horses.? And another general declared: “It is evident that 