

1 Talleyrand to Zastrow, 29 Jan. 1807, in Lefébvre, Histoire des Cabinets, 

111, 63-4. This proposal was communicated to the Czar (Douglas to Howick, 
No. 9, 28 Feb. 1807, F.O. Russia 65/68). 

74 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN . BK I. 

would be a confession of failure, thought the general, and there- 
fore could only be an additional reason for the vigorous pursuit 
of the war.? 

Bertrand came with a proposal of peace, based on the idea 
that Napoleon must have a barrier between France and Russia 
—either the house of Brandenburg or some other—and that this 
power must be friendly to France. If the Prussian house was to 
be restored this must be under conditions that would make it 
recognise that it owed its renewed existence to the will of 
Napoleon; and the idea of using the good offices of Russia for 
the restoration of the Brandenburg family was for this reason 
inadmissible. It would be inconvenient if the Prussians became 
bound to the Czar by gratitude and passed into a state of 
vassalage to him. So the very thing which Napoleon had in- 
sisted upon as the condition of peace in December 1806 became 
in the following February the very thing which he looked upon 
—or pretended for the moment to look upon—as the disqualifi- 
cation. 

This argument was driven home by a score of incidental 
thrusts. Russia herself, it was hinted, was slow to come to the 
help of her ally—and some of the remarks and writings of 
General Zastrow and others show that this reasoning would find 
sympathetic ears in Prussia. Napoleon pretended that he was 
dissatisfied with the Russian answer to the overture of December 
1806 and with the unwillingness of the Czar to use that proposal 
for the benefit of Prussia. ‘‘ Besides”, he wrote, ‘“‘ Russia has 
nothing to offer in compensation for the re-establishment of the 
Prussian house.” All this was part of a clever attempt to rob 
the Prussian government of the faith it had had in those over- 
tures of December, and in the establishment of a congress. 
Napoleon even attacked the idea directly—a congress would 
bring endless discussions and delays; and, he said, Prussia would 
be the loser by the waste of time, since her provinces would suffer 
from the continued absence of administration and government. 
He saw that he could not hope to lure Prussia into a separate 

1 Enclosed in a note from Zastrow to Hutchinson, 15 Feb. 1807, F.O. 
Prussia 64/74. 

CH. I. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 75 

peace unless he began by frightening her ministers with the 
assertion that he now considered the other method of negotiating 
as inadmissible. 

Once this was done, the new overture could have its chance; 
and if M. de Zastrow would either come himself with full powers, 
or send a person of equal confidence, a peace could be signed 
immediately and the king would be reinstated in all his posses- 
sions up to the Elbe. 

But it is significant that while Napoleon declared in un- 
equivocal terms in his instructions to Bertrand that it would be 
contrary to his interests to see the Prussian kingdom restored 
by the influence of Russia, he dropped the hint that he would 
be willing to see the Prussian king reinstated by the generosity 
of England. “A few distant isles that England might cede”, he 
wrote, ““would be nothing compared with the glory that that 
nation would win if by means of such cessions she could know 
that it is to her that the House of Prussia owes its restoration.” 
He seems to have feared that, with all his plans for a congress, 
England would slip from his grasp. Perhaps she would refuse 
to accept his challenge and would decline to regard the restora- 
tion of Prussia as an adequate indemnity for the surrender of 
her conquests by sea. The cool relations, the traces of suspicion 
that still existed between England and Prussia gave every sign 
that if Prussia was to find salvation in any congress it would be 
by throwing herself more completely than ever into the arms 
of Russia. Napoleon had no wish to see this.+ 