

Bertrand had orders not to commit his promises to writing. 
The sincerity of Napoleon’s offer of peace is doubtful. Beyond 
all question there was a trap somewhere for Prussia. She was 
to be a means of extrication from immediate difficulties. After- 
wards who shall say what the mercy of Napoleon had in store 
for her? 

On the 16th of February the Prussian king wrote a gracious 
acknowledgment to Napoleon, without committing himself to 
any policy, and in the evening he sent Bertrand back to his 
master with a letter and with a message to the effect that his 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xv, Nos. 11,809 and 11,810. 

76 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

obligations to Russia compelled him to consult the Czar before 
coming to a decision.! His first thought was to take the course he 
had contemplated in the autumn of 1806—to secure the assent 
of the Czar to the conclusion of a separate peace. On the 17th 
of February the Countess Voss writes: “The King sent for 
Riichel, and had a conference with him, Zastrow, and Harden- 
berg, about the proposals of this Bertrand. God grant that they 
may not make any advances to Napoleon, nor give in to ill- 
luck”. On the 20th she writes: ‘Another Conference. The 
Queen told me she had implored the King to stand firm and not 
to conclude peace. She was very much pleased with Hardenberg, 
but the other two are very wavering’’. There were stout patriots 
even among the Prussians. 

The offended Hardenberg, strangely enough, was called out 
of his sulks to give his opinion at this moment, when once more 
Napoleon was asking the Prussians.to desert their allies and 
return to dependence upon France. Hardenberg saw that here 
was a crisis, he jumped to the danger the king was in, he knew 
that there was a trap for his country; hence the importunity of 
his arguments in a memorandum which he wrote on the 19th of 
February. 

He reminded Frederick William that after Jena Napoleon had 
deluded Prussia with a hope of generous treatment. 

Can we doubt that he is deceiving us again? Has he explained 
himself fully and clearly on the conditions of peace that he proposes? 
And if he had done so, if the King were able to acquiesce in painful 
sacrifices, would he keep his word? Would he withdraw his troops? 
...Can it be thought that in his treaty of peace he would not insert 
a clause hostile to England or Russia or Sweden which would straight- 
way compromise us again? 

This ‘‘so-called peace,’’ he wrote, “‘even supposing we were 
to obtain it, which I think is very unlikely,’’ would only be 
““a truce of very short duration. It would detach us from 
Russia and...rob us of the last shred of honour. Prussia, 
crossed off the list of independent Powers, would become the 
slave of Napoleon, either as a French province under the 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 308. 

CH. II. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES UU 

banner of Napoleon, or, if she opposed the least of his wishes, 
as the victim of his superior armies’’. 

You might take up the argument of Napoleon and retort that 
the only alternative would reduce Prussia to dependence upon 
the Czar. Hardenberg would not flinch—he would say: Accept 
the fact frankly, “We cannot disguise from ourselves that we 
are in truth dependent upon Russia’’. It was useless to expect 
the Czar to be reconciled to the secession of the Prussians from 
the coalition; Russia would entertain no proposals which ‘‘ would 
give Napoleon the opportunity of turning his best forces against 
her on the frontier of Turkey or in Italy”; Russia’s interests 
would compel her to continue the fight against France in the north, 
“and would not the estates of the King be in that case exposed 
to all the evils of war?”’ Hardenberg saw that the overture was 
the result of the precarious military situation of Napoleon, and 
that Napoleon had made it with the object of gaining a better 
advantage in his war against Russia. It was not a real wish for 
peace, for he had refused to make a treaty after Jena and had 
just thrown overboard the preparations for a congress. It was 
a conspiracy directed against Russia. So Hardenberg attacked 
the idea of asking the Czar’s permission to accept it—would 
listen to no talk of throwing upon Russia the obligation of 
rejecting. He would not consent to leave the decision to St 
Petersburg at all; to ask this, even, would undermine confidence. 
He dealt trenchantly with Bertrand’s proposals, declared that an 
overture which offered anything less than a general peace was 
not to be debated at all, advised the king to reveal the whole 
affair to the Czar, and urged that Prussia should reconcile 
herself to a more vigorous prosecution of the war.! 