

90 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

hospitals he removed the wounded, whenever possible, back to 
Breslau and Glogau. He called upon the Senate for more troops. 
There was disorganisation among his Polish levies; generals and 
officers had quitted their post; and the soldiers had lost heart. 
He set himself to restore order. And when Marshal Lefébvre, 
sent to open the siege of Danzig, was all alarms and full of grave 
misgiving, Napoleon had to be inspiration to his leader, warming 
him with words of encouragement, disparaging his fears and 
winning him with promise of fame—had even to send Savary to 
put heart into the Marshal, and discover if the situation were so 
difficult and disquieting as the reports made it appear. 

Small wonder that he declared to Austria: “‘The upshot of all 
this will be an alliance between France and Austria or one 
between France and Russia; for there will never be peace for 
the peoples—the peace they are all in need of—except by such 
a union”.! It is tempting to dwell on this assertion, where 
Napoleon is speculating about alliances, with his mind seeming 
to veer towards Tilsit. Yet the hint of union with the Czar is 
rather a stick with which to waken the Austrians. ‘An alliance 
with Austria, if it is possible”, says Napoleon, “‘would give at 
least a period of tranquillity. I am sufficiently inclined towards 
this to be prepared to make some sacrifices for it.” Even in 
pressing his advances to Vienna perhaps he thought rather of 
lulling her fears, and fixing her in her neutrality than of actually 
drawing her into his system. And as for the talk of Russia, this 
must not be taken too seriously. “I think that an alliance with 
Russia would be very advantageous, if it were not a fantastic 
idea, and if any dependence could be placed upon that court.’’? 
At this moment he is rather more earnest, and seems more 
pressing in his offers to Prussia. He is waiting for her answer to 
the proposals he sent by Colonel Kleist. For he has stretched 
out his arm to the Prussian king with an offer of renewed friend- 
ship, and if there is talk of refusal he growls something about 
dethronement. 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I*, t. xtv, No. 11,977. 

2 Ibid. t. xtv, No. 12,028; cf. J. Holland Rose, he of Napoleon I 
(1924), 11, 127. 

CHAPTER III 

THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND TO THE 
PRUSSIAN PEACE MOVE 

Tue peace proposals that Kriisemarck carried to St Petersburg 
at the close of the year 1806 were to be passed over to England 
after their acceptance by the Russian cabinet; and the Czar 
fulfilled the promise he had given to. support them with his 
persuasions at the court of London. The Prussian minister of 
foreign affairs also took up the theme, and when a new British 
representative came to Memel, with instructions to fasten 
Prussia to a vigorous, warlike policy, Zastrow, having the 
courage of his cowardice, dared to greet him with this reddest of 
all red rags and whisper the forbidden word of “Peace”. “He 
dwelt strongly on the offer which Bonaparte had made to nego- 
tiate conjointly with Russia and England, and he seemed to 
think it would not be unadvisable to assemble a general congress 
for the purpose of forwarding so desirable an object.’’! Distance, 
however, prevented the English ministers from keeping pace 
with continental affairs, and they did not reply to the overture 
until the 7th of March. 