

* Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 490-8. For the note of 3/15 January see above, 
p. 58. 

CH. Il. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 87 

not trust his fairest invitations, did not dare to put herself at 
his mercy once more. And the importunity of his offers and 
overtures to her only served to convince his enemies that the 
armies of France were in difficulty and danger at last. 

After Eylau the troops returned to winter quarters,! and 
Napoleon soon moved to Osterode, where for over five weeks he 
kept at bay the wolves that yapped at the heels of his army, 
and exorcised those looming shapes of hunger and privation that 
throw a shadow of danger over a thwarted frozen army. Life 
in that snow-bound village was no game for Emperors; there was 
discomfort and hardship and the cold was cruel at times. Over 
and over again Napoleon would clutch at the promise of spring; 
the snow would begin to melt, the rivers would be unloosed, 
and he would send out a cry of relief; but still would winter 
return and harden the world up again. Savary found his 
master “‘eating, sleeping, giving audience, and transacting 
business, all in one apartment”. But he tells us: “If the Em- 
peror, instead of sitting in a hole like Osterode, had gone to a 
large place, he would have taken three months to do all that he 
actually did in one”’. 

March was an anxious time. From France there came whispers 
of the unwelcome reception that had been given to the tidings 
of the battle of Eylau. Napoleon had to find antidote for ugly 
rumours and sinister shakings of the head that undermined 
confidence in Paris—had to explain away the doleful comments 
he himself had made after the battle; and he carefully kept his 
eye upon the indiscretions of his supporters, the calumnies of 
his foes, the vagaries of the newspapers. He gave instructions 
that first in the salons, then in the press, the report should be 
unofficially spread that Russia had no troops left to call upon, 
that her army was crying out for peace, that her soldiers were 
accusing great nobles of being in the pay of England—selling 
Russian blood for British gold. He reproved the newspaper 
“craze for copying all the English like to say about that power”. 

1 The rest of this chapter is based upon Corresp. de Nap. I°’, t. xiv, 
Nos. 11,854-12,248, i.e. Napoleon at Osterode, 22 Feb./31 Mar. 1807. 

88 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

He watched the mood of France, told the Empress to set an 
example of gayness, bade her play a royal part just as if he were 
at her side in Paris. 

From Vienna there were disquieting reports of armaments and 
equivocations and unavowed hostility. Napoleon met Austria 
with a show of power, played the nonchalant braggart, adver- 
tised the numbers of his troops, proclaimed his recent levies of 
new conscripts, pointed to his organisation of fresh reserves, and 
ordered it to be spread abroad “that if it is imagined in Austria 
that I am in difficulties, I ask nothing more than to pass my 
army of Brittany and Normandy in review before an Austrian 
officer, who will see with his own eyes how many troops I can 
send into Bavaria within a month”. He commanded Prince 
Eugene in Italy to “keep an eye on Austria, and let General 
Marmont be told to do the same—not in writing in case the letter 
should be intercepted”. “I have no reason to believe that this 
power wishes to make war, but she is arming and we must always 
be ready.”’ Eugene had his orders to be prepared; “‘but carry 
out your dispositions gradually, and without precipitation”’, for 
the Austrians must not be reduced to panic. ‘‘ You must be 
careful”, wrote Napoleon to Talleyrand, “that M. de Vincent 
does not raise alarm in his reports to Vienna; he must not 
perceive that we have any resentment against Austria. We 
must continue to talk of our project of alliance.”’! 