

On the side of England there were still more apprehensions, 
for she might create a diversion on the continent, or send an 
expedition against the coasts of France. Napoleon multiplied 
preparations, placed Antwerp and Brest in a state of siege, 
created a strong army of observation in Germany, and made 
anxious enquiries for news from the Baltic and the North Sea 
towns. “Ifthe English send an expedition I think they will send 
it to the Baltic”, he wrote. Twenty to twenty-five thousand men, 
he believed, would be the limits of its strength. He ordered the 
fortresses of Stettin, Ciistrin, Glogau, Magdeburg and Hameln 
to be prepared to withstand a siege. ‘Whether the enemy 
makes a very large invasion at the estuary or at Stralsund, he 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I", t. x1v, No. 12,181. 

CH I. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 89 

may possibly become master of Berlin for a short time, if he 
has very strong forces. Frederick himself did not defend his 
capital.” At the end of March there seemed a prospect of an 
expedition being sent against Brest. Napoleon’s empire was 
beginning to need an extensive system of defence; it was a 
sprawling thing to cover; the coasts of Italy might be attacked; 
and above all the army in Poland was to be prepared against 
a diversion in its rear. Napoleon could not know how the British 
government would let its opportunity slip by. _ 

But the greatest of all his difficulties—his grand preoccupa- 
tion at this time—was the condition of his armies in Poland. 
“Tf I had had bread, and if the bad weather had not come, 
I should have reached Kénigsberg before [the enemy] and 
defeated them in detail.”’ Again: “My greatest anxiety is for 
food”. When Ney reported the privations of his troops, Napoleon 
could only write, ““I am pained to hear of all you are suffering. 
You must still have patience. Provisions are ready here for your 
corps; it is the transporting that makes the difficulty”. And, 
‘““T must organise my provisions. It is a game of lottery to do 
anything in March or April”. He commissioned Talleyrand to 
see the provisional government of Poland, and enlist their 
assistance in this matter. “Make them understand that the 
problem to-day is less a military question than a matter of 
provisions; and they must use all the means in their power, and 
arouse zeal and patriotism....They must look after transport 
and procure me what I ask. I shall not grudge the paying... . 
Money is not lacking, and I count it nothing if only provisions 
reach me and my army is supplied with food.” Again he wrote 
to Talleyrand: “Work miracles. To fight the Russians is child’s 
play if only I have bread....If the patriotism of the Poles can 
not rise to this endeavour they are not good for much... .The 
importance of the charge I am committing to you is greater than 
all the negotiations in the world”. Talking of clothing for his 
troops and mounts for his cavalry he declared: “There is no 
money better employed than that which is lavished on these 
objects”. Shoes he ordered; bakeries he built; he raised bridges, 
he organised his transport. To stop the congestion of the 