

That ministry became proverbial for its slowness and in- 
decision; and, rightly or wrongly, its parsimony became a 
byword in Europe. The enemies of Napoleon perpetually spoke 
of the need of winning Austria to their cause, and the need of 
rousing England to activity, in the same breath. Starhemberg, 
the representative of Austria, wrote in the highest terms of 
Howick when that minister stood out in the early months of 
1807 as the one man of energy and determination in office; but 
all the time he described the slackness of the cabinet, declaring 
that ‘‘Napoleon must count very much on this indifference” 

Grenville’s ‘“‘own unsleeping distrust of foreign governments, 

1 K.g. Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 20, 24 Mar. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte 
aus London: ‘‘Le successeur de M. Fox ne laissait rien 4 désirer et c’est 
avec autant de satisfaction que de vérité que je puis avoir l’honneur d’assurer 
Votre Excellence que depuis 14 ans que je suis en Angleterre je n’ai point 
vu de Secrétaire d’Etat qui ait autant réuni les suffrages de tous ceux avec 
lesquels il avait 4 faire et dont quoique toujours bien avec tous, j’ai eu plus 
personnellement raison d’étre content”. Perhaps Howick’s policy of not 

pressing the Austrians to join in the war (see below, P. 110) may account 
for this pleasant relationship with Starhemberg. 

CH. It. THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND 95 

to whose treachery or incapacity or cowardice he attributed, 
often most unjustly, the successive defeats of coalitions against 
France”, showed itself in Howick’s cold and ungenerous des- 
patches. Small points of difference were worded with too little 
regard for the susceptibilities of foreign powers, and were 
exaggerated by representatives abroad who often misconceived 
the nature of their office. There were men like Canning at home 
who had resented Fox’s policy of declaring war on Prussia in 
the summer of 1806; for it had merely given triumph to 
Napoleon’s plan of sowing dissension between the powers. But 
there were louder protests when, after the Prussians had entered 
the field against France, the ministry still refused to forget old 
resentments and co-operate in the war.! Even after Jena the 
government did not relent, but made it the burden of their song 
that they had had no share in the mischievous counsels which 
had hurried the Prussians into an imprudent war—they were not 
in any way responsible for the misfortunes of that unhappy 
country. Still they persisted in their distrust, while the Russians 
stormed at them for their delays; still they shouted “ Hanover” 
and cried out for guarantees, carrying their suspicions to the 
point of demanding that the Czar should add his pledge to the 
promises of Prussia in the treaty that was to settle their affairs 
with the court of Berlin. 

All this created irritation between the allies, and the Czar for 
some time refused to give any of the guarantees that were asked 
of him.? Moreover, acommercial treaty with Russia that worked 
to the great advantage of English merchants was on the point of 
expiry, and the importunity of the British government, its 
eagerness to see the treaty renewed without any curtailment of 