

The net result of the overtures of February, then, was to 
remove still further the chances of a general negotiation. The 
check given to France at the battle of Eylau, the very fact that 
Napoleon had pressed strongly either for an immediate arrange- 
ment with Prussia or for the conclusion of an armistice, and 
therefore must have needed these things, gave hopes that his 
military situation would soon become desperate. The con- 
clusion of the Czar Alexander, after the discussion of these 
overtures, coincided in a remarkable way with the final summing 
up that Hardenberg had given in his Memorandum of the 19th 
of February. The allies must reconcile themselves to a continua- 
tion of the war and must take steps to prosecute it with greater 
vigour. They must at the same time renew their efforts to per- 
suade Austria to join forces with them and to induce England to 
give active assistance. Alexander did not depart from his 
original offers on the subject of the general negotiation. A note 

1 Douglas to Howick, No. 10, 6 Mar. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/68. 
2 Zastrow to Goltz, 19 Mar. 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 336. 

86 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

from Budberg to Goltz of the 26th of March explained his whole 
position: 

The Emperor is deeply convinced that the object (of the war) can 
no longer be obtained by any other way than that of arms so long as 
France does not consent to treat of the general interest simultaneously 
with all the powers participating in it, and to give evident assurance 
of her willingness to give repose to Europe—which she alone has so 
long disturbed—by stating finally and in a straightforward way the 
basis upon which she intends to begin negotiations. The Emperor 
cannot, in regard to this matter, go back upon the principles enu- 
merated in the Note: Budberg to Goltz of the 8rd (15th) of January. 

In this way, during the winter months that open the year 1807, 
Napoleon still finds himself faced with that initial difficulty of 
the war with Prussia, and he is not comfortable. But his mind 
does not fret and fumble, or helplessly revolve; he is not like 
the Czar or the Swedish king—he is held by no obsessions; so 
he can reconcile himself to a retreat. He refused to think of a 
separate peace with Prussia in December 1806; but in February 
he can assert that this is the only sort of arrangement that is 
admissible to him. In December he had a cosmic scheme that 
demanded nothing less than a general negotiation for peace; 
within a very few weeks this is the one thing which he says he 
will not have. In December he is talking of a resurrection of 
Poland, setting hearts aflame in Warsaw; but he will not let the 
idea run away with him, he will not entertain it further than 
suits his purpose; he is not like Czartoryski, dominated by a 
dream of a revived Poland; he is the master, not the servant 
of his policies; and so, in February, we find him willing to abandon 
the idea altogether. Over his enemies he had this virtue of 
supreme elasticity, this power of adjusting himself to every turn 
of the shifting situation; and sometimes his sudden reversals 
seemed like flippancy. But in the early months of 1807 his trick 
had been found out, his manceuvres were uncovered. A Prussia 
that had recently yearned to be at his side again—that was at 
this very moment longing for nothing so much as peace—could 