

Before the interview with Kleist was finished Napoleon put 
an alternative to Prussia. On the one hand he repeated the 
offer of a separate peace which should be concluded within a 
month and should restore to the king all his provinces up to 
the Elbe; onthe other hand, he declared himself willing to accept 
the proposal of a congress provided the discussions were preceded 
by an armistice. If military operations continued during the 
prosecution of a general negotiation, he said, each side as it 
gained a victory would raise its demands and the negotiation 
would have nothing stable to rest upon. Once more it was 
evident that whether congress or separate negotiation were 
accepted, he was determined to find extrication from his imme- 
diate military difficulties. He continued his policy of attempting 
to make the Prussians despair of ever finding peace and salvation 
through Russia—enlarging upon the warlike character and 
ambitions of the Czar, and on the difficulties England would 
place in the way of any congress that might assemble. On the 
26th of February Kleist returned to his master bearing a letter 
in which Napoleon declared his agreement to the idea of a con- 
gress. England, Prussia, Russia and the Porte were named as the 

CH. II. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 83 

powers that were to join Napoleon in the transaction, but a 
decided preference was expressed for the way of separate 
negotiation, and sly doubts were cast upon the pacific intentions 
of England and Russia. 

Napoleon did not soon surrender the hope of winning Prussia. 
At the end of the Prussian campaign of 1806 the rough and rugged 
General Bliicher had fallen into the hands of the French, after 
being pursued across Germany to Liibeck. He had been treated 
well as a prisoner at Hamburg, being allowed liberty to move 
much as he liked and have intercourse with his family; and all 
respect had been shown to his bravery. Finally he was restored 
to his country in exchange for a captive French general, and on 
his way to his king he was interviewed by Napoleon at Fincken- 
stein. The audience took place on the 22nd of April and lasted 
a whole hour. Napoleon tried every means in his power to be 
charming to the man—to make it impossible for Bliicher to hate 
him: and he attempted to win the stout patriot over to the idea 
of peace with France. He took up the argument he had used in 
1806—that Prussia and France belonged to one another; he said 
that warring against Frederick William was like right hand 
fighting left; he declared the impossibility of bringing England to 
reason. Blticher, however, was incorrigible; he resented even 
Napoleon’s efforts to be charming; it was impossible to turn him 
pacificist. ‘‘Bliicher does not speak a word of French”, wrote 
George Jackson in his diary, “and his orders to his son, who acted 
as his interpreter, were never to translate to him anything that 
Bonaparte might say, which had the slightest allusion to a 
Prussian peace.” 

When the news of Bertrand’s mission reached St Petersburg, 
the Czar Alexander viewed the French proposals in their true 
light.2, He saw them only as an attempt to put a wedge into the 