

1 Mémoires du Prince de Metternich (2nd ed. 1880), 1, 146-54, 11, 461-3. 

CH. Il. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 81 

recurs in his letters as well as in his conversations. He would 
offer friendship, confidence, and soothing assertions on the one 
hand, threats, boasts and loud defiance on the other. It was a 
kind of conduct which, pursued unremittingly for a long 
period, must have been a formidable attack upon a man’s 
emotional nature; for, whether he tried warm advances or 
sinister menace, Napoleon would explore the emotional content, 
the world of infinite suggestion, in each, and would leap from 
the one mood to the other, and practise a frenzied reiteration, 
in a way that could only be exhausting to his hearer. The 
policy he adopted towards Prussia whenever he sought to win her 
in the years 1806 and 1807, was precisely this alternation of 
friendly assurance and arrogant threat. Kleist’s despatch has 
the marks of truth and sincerity. The sallies against the Czar 
and the comments upon the aggressive intentions of Russia 
agree with Napoleon’s constant utterances in other places, with 
the whole character of the proposals which he sent to the king of 
Prussia by Bertrand, and with his mood and policy in the early 
half of 1807. The symptoms of agitation coincide with those 
which we are accustomed to find. We may take it that Napoleon 
was disappointed with the Prussian king’s response to his 
overture, that he was in petulant mood as a result, and that, in 
fact, his situation was giving him considerable anxiety. 

It is evident indeed from Napoleon’s correspondence that the 
situation was difficult for him in the February of 1807. He him- 
self seems to have been in low spirits after Eylau, and talked in 
his letters of his own tiredness and of the rigours of the Polish 
winter. He confessed the losses he had had in the battle and 
declared that his distance from France made them all the more 
serious for him. To the empress he wrote that “‘the country is 
covered with dead and wounded. ..one’s soul is oppressed with 
the sight of so many victims”. On the 18th of February he 
declared: ‘‘I desire very much to secure a rest of a month or six 
weeks for (the army)’’. Above all he was concerned about the 
feeding of his troops, and his letters repeatedly express his 

1 For Kleist’s report, dated 2 Mar. 1807, see Bailleu, Preussen und 
Frankreich, 11, 586-9. 

BN 6 

82 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

anxiety on this question. On the 20th of February he writes: 
“T ask for bread and I am sent shoes”’. On the 26th: “It would 
seem that the enemy is advancing. My greatest concern is for 
provisions”. To Rapp on the same day: “‘ The only thing which 
gives me some anxiety is the question of provisions. Procure 
what you can for me. Spare no money for the engaging of trans- 
ports”. In a letter to Soult of the same date Napoleon reveals 
the seriousness of the question. After describing how the food- 
problem is the difficulty and how he hopes that “in four or five 
days we shall be in a tolerable position”, he mentions some stir 
among the Prussian troops, adding: ‘‘ You can see what a false 
movement this is, and how, if we had bread and brandy we 
could make them repent of it”. All this is on the 26th of Feb- 
ruary. It was on the 24th that Napoleon had his interview with 
Kleist. Here is a further confirmation of the fact that he was 
genuinely disconcerted by Prussia’s refusal of his overtures, and 
that Kleist’s account of his demeanour is authentic. 