

These English ministers were not likely to be slow in piercing 
the meaning of the offers of Napoleon. Stuart, in sending from 
St Petersburg his report of Budberg’s action, had put the position 
plainly to them: 

“The fact is’’, he wrote, ‘‘that the sole Balance in the hands of the 
powers waging war with Bonaparte, which can offer solid ground of 
negotiation is comprised in the Colonies conquered by Great Britain 
from France and her Allies, and this compensation according to the 
argument of the Russian Government must ensure the restitution of 
the territories wrested from the King of Prussia... . From the language 
of Bonaparte to M. de Zastrow it is generally understood that the 
evacuation of Moldavia and Wallachia will not induce the French 
Government to cede objects of real value in the eyes of the Allies.’ 

i Hutchinson to Howick, 23 Dec. 1806, F.O. Prussia 64/74. 
2 Stuart to Howick, No. 10, 17 Jan. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/67. 

92 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

Lord Hutchinson after speaking with the Prussian minister 
announced that the hope of Zastrow “as well as that of every 
other man in Prussia is that they may be enabled to obtain 
peace on tolerable terms by the cession of captured colonies 
which England is to make to France”. 

Now, at the moment when the invitations were sent to 
London, England had not even made peace with this Prussia 
for whom she was asked, out of her charity, to cede the spoils of 
victory. Lord Hutchinson had recently arrived at the Prussian 
headquarters to put an end to the state of war, and his instruc- 
tions were headed with the peremptory command: “You will 
first satisfy yourself that all negotiations for peace with France 
are at an end”.? There was no predisposition in favour of 
Prussia, at all, among Englishmen, and the reception of an 
overture of any sort from Memel was only calculated to confirm 
lingering suspicions. After the battle of Jena things like this 
were said in England: “That Prussia had fallen a sacrifice to 
her want of a good principle and that if that Monarchy should 
be abolished it must be recollected that it was but a new one”’. 
One magazine could write: “For our part, if she alone were to 
suffer by the event, it would be a subject of rejoicing to us, to 
see the regicidal flag of France on the towers of Berlin, and a 
Corsican Viceroy master of the palace of Potzdam’”. The 
English ministers were jealous of all the things for which the 
Prussians had quarrelled with Napoleon. They did not wish to 
see the armies of Berlin lording it over the north of Germany. 
Not any more than Napoleon did they like the idea of a con- 
federation of states under the hegemony of Prussia. George 
III’s interests in Germany ran counter to those of Berlin and 
it did not soften his anti-Prussian heart to learn that Frederick 
William had gone to war with France after Napoleon had pro- 
mised Hanover to England. Whigs and Tories alike had learned 
the weakness of the ruling spirits at Berlin, and, in recent tenure 
of office, had had bitter experience of their treachery. When it 
was known that Zastrow was chosen to be the new foreign 