

1 Corresp. de Nap. I*, t. x1v, No. 11,890. 

2 The Russian replies to Bertrand’s proposals are contained in: Alexander I 
to Frederick William III,20 Feb./4 Mar. 1807, in Bailleu, Briefwechsel, p. 148 ; 
Alexander I to Frederick William III, 20 Feb./4 Mar. 1807 (*‘ Une réponse 
ostensible’’), ibid. p. 149; report from Schéler (in St Petersburg) to Zastrow, 
4, Mar. 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 479. The Russian replies to Kleist’s 
proposals are to be found in: Alexander I to Frederick William II, 

6-2 

84. THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

coalition—as Napoleon’s usual practice for the sundering of 
alliances. He put them down as a result of the difficult position 
in which the French armies found themselves. To him the fact 
that Napoleon had changed his ground and was luring Prussia 
with private overtures, instead of proceeding with the idea of a 
congress, was a proof of the insincerity of the peaceful protesta- 
tions of France. He kept firm to the position he had taken up in 
the middle of January when he had acceded to the Prussian 
proposals, and he still promised to prove his eagerness for peace, 
once the French had given satisfaction on the two points men- 
tioned in Budberg’s note on the subject. He ridiculed “the 
extreme arrogance with which Napoleon imagines the fate of 
Prussia to depend only upon himself”’. He made great point of 
the vagueness of the French proposals. “‘If Bonaparte had 
really wished to come to an arrangement with Your Majesty he 
would not have omitted to inform you of the basis on which 
this arrangement would take place.’ The Prussian ambassador 
warned his government that the conclusion of a separate peace 
would “irrevocably destroy the confidence of the nation and the 
minister, and would put an end to the friendship the Czar had 
fortheking”. There was the alternative of a general negotiation. 
Napoleon had made it conditional on the conclusion of an armis- 
tice; this, said Russia, “‘ would only serve to the advantage of the 
common enemy”. And the fact that the French had proposed 
Memel as the seat of the congress, when it was ‘“‘ contrary to the 
first dictates of prudence and against the principles of war to 
establish in that way a point of correspondence behind the line 
that our armies occupy”, was only a further proof of the sus- 
picious nature of their advances. Turkey was to be admitted to 
the congress; but Napoleon made no mention of Sweden. At 
the very outset it was apparent that Napoleon was disposed to 
raise obstacles and find preliminary points of conflict. He himself 
had said that a congress would sit for years. 

13/25 Mar. 1807, in Bailleu, Briefwechsel, p. 154; note from Budberg to 
Goltz, 26 Mar. 1807 (n.s.), in Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 490. For the attitude 
of Russia see also the despatch of Goltz printed in Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 
335, and Budberg to Alopeus, 13/25 Mar. 1807, F'.O. Russia, 65/72. 

CH. Il. NAPOLEON’S DIFFICULTIES 85 

The Russian government could not be blind to the fact that 
Napoleon’s overtures of February were directed against Russia 
and against the Russo-Prussian alliance. The king of Prussia, 
naturally, having transmitted such proposals to St Petersburg, 
found himself more than ever discredited in his réle of peace- 
maker; and in future the Czar was less ready to listen to his ally. 
“General Budberg has assured me’’, wrote the English ambassa- 
dor at this time, ‘“‘that His Imperial Majesty has expressed his 
disapprobation of the constant readiness of the Prussian Court 
to listen to proposals of negotiation”.! In March the Russian 
General Bennigsen was making complaints of “alleged move- 
ments taking place at Memel to produce a disposition for peace”’. 
Zastrow was concerned to see the distrust that his policy was 
arousing; it was calculated to weaken the cause of Prussia even 
at St Petersburg. He believed that ‘“‘suspicion between friends 
and allies is always an evil” and directed his representative with 
the Czar to act in an unofficial way and do what he could to 
counteract the complaints of men like Bennigsen.? The Prussians 
knew they had lost character. They needed to protest. 