

} Hutchinson to Howick, No. 8, 29 Jan. 1807, F'.O. Prussia 64/74. 
2 Howick to Hutchinson, No. 1, 20 Nov. 1806, F.0.. Prussia 64/74. 

CH IIL: THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND 93 

minister at Memel the appointment was taken as a promise of 
further feeble policy, this time preconsidered and forechosen.} 
There was no mood for making excuses and allowances, and 
Stuart at St Petersburg jumped to the reasoning that would go 
straight to the English heart, when, on hearing of the new 
proposal for peace, he declared, “It is evident that the Prussian 
Monarchy regenerated by Bonaparte will be no less subservient 
to the views of France than a Dynasty of his own creation 
- placed on that throne’’.? 

In England the ministry of the day was distinguished only 
by a certain lack of cordiality in its relations with the continent, 
and an evident disinclination to work hand in hand with the 
other powers of the coalition. So long as Fox was at the foreign 
office his general humanity tempered what might have been 
harsh and insular in the attitude of the party in power, his 
personal qualities won esteem abroad and he infused a warmth 
into his intercourse with foreign powers. When he died in 
September 1806 he was universally regretted, and the fear was 
expressed repeatedly at foreign courts that English policy would 
make a change for the worse.* But the rupture of the peace 
negotiations and the new need for vigorous action brought out 
the weak side of the Whigs. Lord Grenville seems to have been 
an unfortunate influence in the ministry showing himself in 
foreign policy more whig, more averse to the methods of Pitt, 
than even the Foxites themselves. He had entered office in 
desponding mood and never recovered his energy; and _ his 
ascendancy in matter of policy was heightened when Lord 
Howick, who was new to diplomacy, found himself transferred to 
the foreign office. The situation was certainly not encouraging; 
recruiting was low, finances were embarrassed, and there was 

1 Hutchinson to Howick, 283 Dec. 1806, F.0. Prussia 64/74. On the 
29th of December Hutchinson wrote: “‘ There is something in the conduct 
of this court, whether arising from fear or some other weak or foolish motive, 
which leads me to suspect that negotiation, or at least desire of negotiation 
with France is not entirely abandoned....The sincerity of Prussia is still, 
in my opinion, doubtful” (ibid. Despatch No. 2). 

2 Stuart to Howick, No. 10, 17 Jan. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/67. 

3 K.g. Stuart to F.O. No. 31, “31 Sept.” 1806, and No. 85, 11 Oct. 
1806, F.O. Russia 65/64. 

94 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

every temptation to minimise the responsibilities and commit- 
ments of England. The budget of 1806 had been drawn up with 
the greatest possible economy, and all the preoccupation with 
peace-making during this year had made the government over- 
look the necessity of preparing new enterprises of war. Howick, 
though he was greatly distracted by his work as party leader 
and by the demands of internal politics, and though he had the 
reputation of being hot and ill-tempered and difficult to manage, 
seems to have been happy in his personal relations with the 
ministers of foreign powers, and he won their approbation; but 
this may have resulted from nothing more than his agreeableness 
in conversation, and his power of stating his case in interviews.1 
He did not succeed in justifying British policy before foreign 
courts, or in infusing geniality into British foreign relations; 
while the king, who as elector of Hanover could have little love 
for Prussia or for transactions that centred in Prussia, was 
disposed to encourage still further the things that were harsh 
and unsympathetic in the measures of the reconstituted 
ministry. 