

The Czar of Russia, out of friendship, gives his sanction to 
a movement that promises to lead to the restoration of Prussia. 
Howick replies that the claim of friendship does not commit 
England in this way to Prussia. He regards the question in the 
colder light of policy. England, it is true, wishes to use her 

1 Howick to Douglas, No. 927 Mar. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/68. 

CH. Ill. THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND 103 

colonies to raise up a barrier and a safeguard against France. 
But Alexander, with some cause of irritation against the court of 
Vienna, and with one possible source of hostility against Austria 
in the Ottoman Empire, finds nothing to discount the policy 
that his friendship for Prussia suggests; while England has no 
desire to see Prussia raised to a great power in the north of 
Germany, and has not forgotten the history of that court of 
Berlin which was ‘“‘ unable to defend itself”, and ‘‘even in time 
of peace fell into a state of dependence upon France”. She 
therefore chooses Austria, rather, to be the barrier against 
French aggression. This is an issue between the allies. This is 
to be the stumbling-block in all future talk of peace. But 
England holds the colonies, so she has a decisive voice. The 
history of the ensuing weeks, when the peace-negotiations 
advance and the aims of the enemies of Napoleon find clearer 
formulation, shows this cleavage growing more deep as Canning 
and the new ministry prove no less insistent and unequivocal 
in the matter than were the men of “All the Talents”’. 

The Austrians were counting on this—were sunning them- 
selves with the expectancy. For Austria—as well as Prussia— 
was looking for England to bring back her power, and she too 
hoped that British maritime conquests would be used to buy 
her restoration. Without joining in the war she nursed her 
claims, hoping that the map of Europe would demand her 
exaltation, trusting that the “‘balance of power” would cry out 
for her aggrandisement. Surely she alone could be that barrier 
against France which England demanded as security for the 
repose of Europe—and without which the British government 
would refuse to disgorge its conquests. Yet the conduct of the 
whig ministry gave her, also, apprehension at times. She would 
eall on the British minister to see if England was changing her 
policy.! In March Lord Douglas at St Petersburg was indulging 
in more of his indiscretions, glorying in new mischief; lately 
arrived in Russia, he conversed at length with the Austrian 
minister there, in terms that implied a reversal of English policy. 
His remarks were “based on a system of isolation that England 

1 K.g. Adair to Howick, 24 Feb. 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir of 
a Mission to the Court of Vienna in 1806 (1844), pp. 190-1. 

104 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

had adopted in the present conjuncture and according to which 
she was determined not to sacrifice any of the advantages she 
had obtained in the maritime war for the general utility or the 
amelioration of Europe”. The Austrian government was greatly 
concerned to hear “this opinion enunciated by a new diplomatic 
agent at the moment he had received his instructions”. The 
conduct of Lord Hutchinson at Memel and the refusal of the 
court of London to consent to a Russian loan, seemed te confirm 
the words of Douglas. There was some disquietude at Vienna. 
The chancellor remarked that no sign was yet apparent of the 
preparation of an English expedition to the continent; and that 
England had manifested “no intention of endeavouring to 
obtain at a general peace securities for the Continental Power 
by the restoration of (her) conquests’’.? Incidental occurrences 
reinforced the apprehension. The Austrians, though they were 
crying “neutrality” from the housetops, trembled for their 
interests in a future settlement of Europe. Though they were 
inactive, they could not be indifferent. 