

Larochefoucauld, with more insight than Adair, divined the 
real significance of the overture, and reduced the situation to 
its proper terms. The fact was that the Austrians were nervous 
and conscience-stricken and had a feeling of insecurity. They had 
recently heard of the signing of Oubril’s treaty,! and they knew 
that the Russian peace would make their position a precarious 
one. Stadion confessed to Larochefoucauld that the news had 
come as a surprise; he showed signs of disappointment; and he 
added that he was all the more anxious and in suspense because 
Napoleon had made no reply to the letter the Emperor had last 
written him. The Austrians, left in the lurch, dreaded these long, 
ominous silences of Napoleon, and feared that fresh injury, new 
hostility, were brooding. Larochefoucauld saw his advantage, 
deliberately avoided giving reassurances, and heaped up the 
agonies of the Austrians, playing on their anxieties and lashing 
their fears. He reminded them that their present principles and 
policy were known to be the same as ever—only more “dis- 
guised”’; they had learned nothing from Ulm and Austerlitz. 
He tore away the veil from their double-dealings, and whipped 
them with frank recapitulations of their lack of faith. And he 
comforted them with the conclusion that “‘it seemed impossible 
to him that any confidence at all could be placed by the 

1 The treaty between Russia and France signed by Oubril in July 1806 ; 
see above, p. 338. 

110 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

government at Paris in the conduct of the court of Vienna”’.? 
Little wonder that Stadion thought he heard the distant 
rumblings of war in it all, and put himself in the hands of Adair. 

This nervousness of Austria is the key to her conduct for the 
whole of the ensuing year, and is the explanation of all the 
contradictions and evasions and equivocations of her policy. It 
was a definite factor in the European situation; and as part of the 
fatalism of events it had to be accepted and allowed for, like the 
bad weather in Poland. 

England, though anxious to see Austria engaged against 
France, did not hurry her, was unwilling to press her to act 
against her will, and refused to bribe her in any way. Lord 
Howick in November 1806 showed no disposition to alter this 
policy, and wrote: 

It may be doubted whether it would be prudent in all the circum- 
stances of the moment to urge the Austrian Government to measures 
which a conviction of its own necessity and a sense of its own honour 
do not inspire it with the courage voluntarily to adopt. All that can 
be done therefore is generally to continue the assurances which you 
have already been instructed to give, of support from His Majesty 

whenever circumstances shall permit the King to give and Austria to 
accept his assistance.” 

The Russians, it has been seen, adopted a similar attitude at 
that period; for their mood was ruffled and prickly, and they 
would do nothing that had the appearance of crying for help.® 
It was Napoleon who first betrayed anxiety about Austria, 
as his differences with Prussia developed. Immediately he 
changed his tone, and abandoned his threatening attitude. “It 
is absolutely necessary to remove every difficulty with Austria”, 
he wrote, “‘by fixing our boundaries in Italy.”” When the Czar 
repudiated the peace treaty which Oubril had signed for Russia, 
the crisis which released a score of waiting plans, and struck off 
a host of new sparks of thought in the mind of Napoleon, brought 
out the project of an alliance with Austria, and he wrote a 