

1 See e.g. the second despatch from Budberg to Nicolai, 14/26 Aug. 1806, 
in F.O. Russia 65/66. 

108 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

to fix my opinion of him, but there is no concealing the fact that 
he is absolutely Russian and his policy is diametrically opposed 
to France.” The time came when he would write “I cannot 
vouch for the veracity of this minister”, after Stadion had been 
insistent in his declarations and promises.? 

To confirm his view he produced specimens of the instructions 
that had been sent by the Austrian government to its servants 
abroad—despatches in which Stadion had talked of the “ excessive 
power” and “unbridled ambition” of France; had described 
Bonaparte as one who “‘without the least respect for the rights 
of men or for justice or humanity, only seeks to augment his 
sway for the advancement of his family and his minions”; and 
had shown Austria’s true policy to be the quiet cultivation of 
confidential relations with England and Russia, with careful 
avoidance of any step that might awaken French suspicions. 
The Austrian government, it appeared, was slowly and secretly 
gathering up its forces in readiness for the war that would come 
when the convenient moment should arrive.? 

On the 13th of August 1806 the Austrian chancellor declared 
that the farthest limit had been reached in submission to 
Napoleon, and, “in the strictest confidence”, outlined to the 
British minister, Adair, “the course which His Imperial Majesty 
intended to pursue in future”, saying that the emperor would 
follow a defensive system, would not even oppose the passage 
of French troops through his territory, but, at the same time, 
would not be the first to dishonour himself by recognising 
Napoleon’s new arrangements at Naples, would make no further 
sacrifices of territory, and, if attacked, would avoid a general 
action, and make a retreat into Hungary. Count Stadion gave 
assurances that preparations were very forward.‘ 

‘ Larochefoucauld to Talleyrand, No. 55, 23 July 1806, A.A.E. Autriche, 
t. 379. 

2 Larochefoucauld to Talleyrand, 14 Oct. 1806, A.A.E. Autriche, 
t. 379. 

5 Passages from the instructions of Stadion to the Austrian minister to 
Spain and the Austrian chargé d’affaires in Wiirtemberg, intercepted by 
Larochefoucauld and enclosed in his despatch No. 55; see above, note 1. 

* Adair to Fox, 13 Aug. 1806, F.0. Austria 7/80. This passage is deleted 
from the document published in Adair’s Historical Memoir, p. 120. 

CH. I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 109 

Yet the Austrians had no intention of going to war if 
diplomacy could prevent it. 

At this very moment Count Stadion was making advances for 
closer intimacy with France. A few days before his pronounce- 
ment to Adair he had stated to Larochefoucauld, the French 
minister, his desire for a closer union between Austria and France, 
affirming that 
he had given instructions to Count Metternich (the new minister in 
Paris) to use every means in his power to put an end to a state of 
distrust that was so disagreeable to him personally ; he was of opinion 
that the welfare of his sovereign lay in binding himself more closely 
to the Emperor Napoleon, and he would welcome everything that 
might further this. 