

In fact, at this very moment, the veil was beginning to lift from 
the mysterious and silent purposes of the cabinet of Vienna. 
While Napoleon was still: waiting for the reply to Kleist’s com- 
munications—a reply which was to come later after a good deal 
of rumination; and while the promotion of a general negotiation 
by Prussia was held in long suspense—to be resumed in time, 
however, with more precise plans for a congress—the Austrians 
made an important move, and offered their mediation. It was 
their contribution to the problem of peace in Europe, though it 
came as an added complication. It interpolates at this point, 
and brings a large parenthesis, but it by no means destroys or 
displaces the Prussian plans for the assembly of a congress. 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, No. 2, 5 Ap. 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. Adair to Douglas, 3 Ap. 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir, 
pp. 384-6. Douglas defended himself in his despatch No. 17 to Canning, 
16 Ap. 1807 (FO. Russia 65/68), and in areply to Adair, 11 Ap. 1807 (Adair, 
Historical Memoir, pp. 386-9). The misunderstanding gave the British 

government an opportunity to make many profuse protestations of fidelity 
to the continental powers. 

* Adair to Howick, No. 24, 4 Ap. 1807, F.O. Austria 7/83 (omitted 
from the Historical Memoir of Adair), 

BOOK TWO 

THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA 

CHAPTER I 

THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA AND THE 
OFFER OF MEDIATION 

Ir was supposed, in the summer of 1806, that it would be the 
Austrians rather than the Prussians who would soon be at war 
again with Napoleon. There had been boundary difficulties to 
be settled in Italy, where the French were making encroachment; 
and Napoleon had been mortifying these long-suffering Austrians 
by a succession of miscellaneous demands of an irritating kind. 
The Emperor Francis was having to sacrifice his ancient titles, 
his proudest dignities, and put away all the fading glories of the 
“Holy Roman Empire”; he had found himself confronted with 
drastic changes in Germany, which gave France a ruling influ- 
ence there; and he was expected to disown his relatives and allies 
by assenting to the claims of the usurping ruler at Naples. The 
Austrians themselves had been inviting animosity by their 
connivance at the Russian occupation of Cattaro—the key to 
the Adriatic territories which they had ceded in the treaty of 
Pressburg; and they were creating successive diplomatic crises 
for themselves by their evasions and procrastination when they 
were pressed to take steps for expelling the Russians and handing 
over the port to Napoleon’s troops. Napoleon in revenge was 
keeping his armies in Germany and each side complained of the 
non-execution of the recent peace treaty. 

M. de Larochefoucauld, the French ambassador at Vienna 
during the year 1806, had no love for the Austrian chancellor 
with whom he had to transact business. He found the man 
evasive in interviews, and detected a guilty embarrassment in 
his manner, and in time came to feel him untrustworthy and 
secretly hostile, too much engaged in “caressing the Russians”. 
‘*As to Count Stadion”, he wrote, “‘I have waited a long time 