

1 Howick, writing to Hutchinson on the 20th of February 1807 (F.0. 
Prussia 64/74, No. 1), said: ‘“‘ Nothing can be more afflicting than the repre- 
sentations made by Your Lordship not only of the state of the Prussian 
court but of the divisions among the Russian generals”. On the 22nd of 
February the Prussian king informed his minister in London that ‘“‘je suis 
faché que nous ayons 4 faire ici 4 un homme aussi peu communicatif que 
le Lord Hutchinson” (intercepted despatches, Add. MSS. 32,273). 

2 See e.g. Anti-Jacobin Review, Nov. 1807, ‘Plain facts—or a Review of 
the condition of the Late Ministry’; Farington Diary, vol. 1v, under 
** April 16, 1807”’. 

* See De Maistre, Mémoires et Correspondance, p. 311: “‘On l’a turlupiné 
dans les papiers anglais sur quelques ridicules extérieurs qu’il s’était donnés 
ici et que nous n’avons pas vus. Son véritable tort est qu’il parle trop bien 
frangais et italien...et qu'il pourrait fort bien ne tenir a l’ Angleterre que 

par son nom et ses droits”’. 
* Howick to Douglas, No. 8,7 Mar. 1807, F.O. Russia 65/68. 

CH. II. THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND 99 

of grievances, expressing in strong terms their resentment 
against the conduct of the government there, Instead of turning 
this into a diplomatic paper, smoothing over its crude attack and 
presenting all its complaints in less repellent guise, he despatched 
the document itself, making its bitterness his own. This so 
offended the Czar that the man’s position became impossible at 
the Russian court. Budberg refrained from treating with him, 
spoke of him only with irritation, and left him to gather his 
political information from indirect sources. And when Alexander 
and his ministry finally left St Petersburg to join the Prussians 
at Memel, the ambassador was not granted an audience and was 
not allowed to follow—‘‘A very humiliating position for a 
British ambassador”’, he wrote.1 Canning, on becoming the new 
foreign secretary in March, saw that he had annoyed the Russians 
with “unreasonable and unnecessary demands, urged in no very 
becoming manner”’, so immediately recalled the man without 
giving a word of appreciation of his services, and ordered his 
successor to make apology for him. Douglas, in truth, was little 
of an Englishman; hence his unpopularity at home. After he 
was superseded at St Petersburg he showed no desire to 
return to his country, but lingered in Russia, long after the 
treaty of Tuilsit, ingratiating himself with the enemies of 
England by expressing his admiration of Napoleon and de- 
claring that his government ought to make peace.? And when 
he departed from Russia he made his way not to England, but 
to France.’ 

Hutchinson and Douglas were unfortunate ministers to have 
in charge of British relations with the coalition powers. Neither 
could be on terms of intimacy with the government to which he 
was accredited; neither was treated with confidence on the sub- 
ject of the French overtures; neither received anything more 