

1 Writing to Nicolai on the 9th of October 1806 v.s. (despatches communi- 
cated to the British government and to be found in F'.0. Russia 65/66) the 
Russian Chancellor urged England to postpone all discussion of the Hano- 
verian question, which was an obstacle to peace and co-operation with 
Prussia, and refer the fate of the electorate to the general pacification of 
Europe. Budberg declared the Czar’s dissatisfaction with England for her 
unwillingness to move to the help of Russia. 

2 Stuart’s cypher despatch, No. 41, to Howick, 28 Oct. 1806, F.0. 
Russia 65/64, reports the Czar’s positive refusal to give the required 
guarantee. 

96 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

English privileges, only increased the friction. Russia and Prussia 
again and again urged that an English force should make a 
diversion on the continent to relieve the pressure of the French 
armies in Poland, but Starhemberg wrote to his court: “I see 
secret plans of diversion adopted one after the other and aban- 
doned for the sake of economy”’.!_ Napoleon took precautions to 
guard his frontiers against an expedition that did not arrive; 
the English ministry preferred ventures like the taking of 
Buenos Ayres which would work to the profit of Great Britain in 
some far corner of the world, rather than serve the combined 
cause; and the result was, that not only did the Grenville govern- 
ment fail to despatch a force themselves, but they made it 
difficult for their successors to carry out a plan when it was 
decided to send relief to Europe.” It was reasonable that on the 
question of subsidies they should take the line of declining to 
incite powers to war with Napoleon by the offer of pecuniary 
grants, that they should refuse to buy enemies against France 
when self-interest or self-defence did not determine the powers 
to take up arms in their own cause; but they carried the reaction 
against Pitt’s subsidy policy too far, refusing to give grants to 
an ally who merely defended his own territories,* measuring 
their offers to the service which each power rendered to the 
general interest, with the result that Prussia, incapacitated and 
reduced to dependence, might be argued to be no subject for aid 
at all. Then they delayed the grant of money, and, having at 
last decided to give it, they still desired to strengthen their 
government by refraining from great financial commitments, so 
they limited their offer to an amount that startled and dismayed 
their allies. When the Czar asked them to guarantee a Russian 
loan in London they remembered the evil effects of such a 
measure in the time of Pitt, and declined in an ungracious 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 1, 1 Jan. and No. 9, 7 Feb. 1807, W.S.A. 
Berichte aus London. 

2 Communications from Alopeus, the Russian minister in London, to the 
new foreign secretary, Canning, 19 Mar., 17 May, 5 June 1807 (v.s.), on the 
subject of a military diversion, F.O. Russia 65/72. 

% See Howick to Adair, No. 1, 13 Jan. 1807, F.O. Austria 7/83; Howick 
to Pierrepoint, No. 4, 2 Dec. 1806, F'.0. Sweden 73/86. 