

CH. It. THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND 97 

manner, saying that Russia might at some future time make war 
against England, and repudiate the loan. All these things had 
an influence on the question of peace at a later date, and fill a 
large space in the Czar’s excuses for the treaty of Tilsit; but, 
although the Czar in January was beginning already to adopt 
the air that “he was deserted by his allies”, that “he had na 
ally”, and the Russian chancellor was already showing that 
irritable disposition, that withholding of confidence, that became 
very marked at a later date in his relations with the British 
ambassador, the real evil effects of the attitude of the English 
government came out more plainly in the summer.! What is 
more important at the moment is the fact, of which all these 
measures are a symptom: the lack of cordiality and of rich 
sympathy in the relations of England with the continent. 

The ministry was served very badly by its agents in the most 
important stations abroad. Lord Morpeth had been sent to 
negotiate peace with Prussia and had caused a great hitch by 
abandoning his mission, escaping with the wave of fugitives from 
Jena;? Englishmen and Prussians alike who were on the spot 
declared his successor, Lord Hutchinson, unfitted for the charge. 
He was an indolent, unsociable man, with an ungracious manner, 
and violent temper—‘“‘improperly neglectful of his personal 
appearance, hair uncombed, clothes unbrushed”’. He had played 
an important part in the Egyptian campaign of 1801 but had 
been unpopular among his brother-officers there. At Memel his 
suite regarded him as a disagreeable person. A military man, 
with a high opinion of the powers of Napoleon, he had no faith 
in the cause which he was serving; and in his counsels at the 
Prussian headquarters he had nothing but discouragement to 
give. He sent to his government reports that only increased the 
suspicions against Prussia and did nothing to reconcile and unite; 
so that a contemporary rhymist could tell of 

Hutchinson, sent out the Lord knows where, 
To write us long despatches of despair. 

1 E.g. Douglas to Howick, No. 1, Jan. 26, 1807, F.O. Russia 181/6. 
2 The British ministry expressed its disapproval of Morpeth’s desertion ; 
ef. Private Correspondence of Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 224-6 and 231. 

BN 7 

98 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

Altogether he confirmed the English ministry in the weak points 
of its foreign policy. 

Lord Douglas, who went to St Petersburg at the new year, 
was “a perfect novice in politics” and had been given his post 
purely for party purposes, in return for votes registered against 
Pitt. He was totally ignorant of diplomacy. After haggling 
about the conditions and the payment of his mission and 
“loitering away his time in England in choosing his service of 
plate and stocking his wardrobe”’, he set out for Russia, where 
he conducted himself in strange fashion. His appointment was 
unpopular in England, and the papers described how he rode 
about St Petersburg “‘in a dress compounded of every costume 
in the known world”’, till he became the standing jest of the 
natives.2, Perhaps he was maligned for party purposes,’ but his 
diplomacy was certainly unsound. He was instructed to secure 
the guarantee of Russia to the claims of George III over 
Hanover, and to bring about the renewal of the expiring com- 
mercial treaty; and from this he seems to have gathered that 
his whole duty was to complain.- He carried out his mission in 
the spirit of an enemy spy and wrote hostile accounts of trans- 
actions in St Petersburg. When the Russians at last promised 
to guarantee that Prussia should not have Hanover, he demanded 
a further guarantee against France, till he was instructed that 
this had not been the intention of his government.4 On one 
occasion the British merchants in Russia sent him a statement 