

* Larochefoucauld to Talleyrand, No. 61, 6 Aug. 1806, 4.4.E. Autriche, 
t. 379. 

* Howick to Adair, No. 7, 14 Nov. 1806, F.0. Austria 7/80. 
3 See above, p. 61, and below, pp. 114-15. 

CH, I, THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 111 

friendly, fervent letter to the Austrian Emperor. After this, over 
and over again, in his correspondence with Eugene, the com- 
mander of the army in Italy, he reiterated that he was on good 
terms with Austria, that the language of newspapers and of 
conversation must be entirely pacific and that nothing must be 
done to alarm the court of Vienna; while in letter after letter he 
betrayed his anxiety on the point and ordered precautions to 
be taken. And time and again, with all the wearisome insistence 
of the most frantic suitor he made advances and pressed for an 
alliance, exhausting the arguments by which to conjure and 
beguile, now luring with smooth words, now playing the braggart 
and hinting possible menace, one moment calming the Austrians 
with reassurances, next moment redoubling their fears, then 
offering them fairest promise and richest bribe, or if these failed, 
resorting to some trick that would entrap—all the while neatly 
rattling that dreadful sabre of his, till the Austrians, with their 
coy replies and the cold neutrality, and their evasive promises 
of friendship, began to show obvious symptoms of embarrass- 
ment, and feared that their unresponsiveness might be construed 
as hostility. 

It began in the middle of September when Napoleon proposed 
to the court of Vienna the conclusion of an alliance, grounded on 
the basis of the treaty of 1756, stipulating the integrity of the 
Ottoman Porte and the independence of Saxony, and therefore 
directed against the courts of St Petersburg and Berlin. It was 
explained that Prussia was going to war to assert undue pre- 
tensions over Germany, and every chord was touched that 
would set Austrian jealousies vibrating. When an evasive reply 
was received Larochefoucauld was ordered to renew his efforts 
** as of your own accord and not as though you were acting under 
instructions’’, and was told to threaten that in case of refusal an 
alliance would be made with Prussia. He was further recom- 
mended to warn Stadion that if he allowed this opportunity to 
slip, he, and he alone, would be responsible for any disaster that 
might fall upon Austria; it was a risky form of argument, 
Talleyrand admitted, ‘‘but’’, he wrote, “nobody is more capable 
than you, Ambassador, of putting into dangerous reflexions all 

112 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

the nuances and all the delicacy necessary for their efficiency’’.+ 
The elector of Wurzburg was made the intermediary of a further 
overture. Still the Austrians made evasive replies and paraded 
their neutral intentions. On the eve of Jena they almost per- 
suaded the English minister at their court that they were pre- 
paring to join the coalition;? though the defeat of Prussia dashed 
these hopes to the ground,’ and drove Stadion to the side of the 
French minister. The chancellor became more ingratiating than 
before, and held many, and long, interviews with Larochefou- 
cauld. ‘He told me a host of things that might be taken for 
certainties if words sufficed in politics”, wrote Larochefoucauld ; 
and he added: “I keep up the appearance of having no dis- 
trust”.4 He had succeeded in persuading Talleyrand that the 
Austrians felt the advantages of the alliance proposed by 
Napoleon, but were unwilling to become involved in the existing 
war.> The two ministers attempted to induce Napoleon to 
exempt Austria from engagements that would involve her in the 
war with Prussia, and rather to concentrate on the eventual issue 
with the Czar; but Napoleon would have no exceptions, insisted 
on the immediate present, enlarged on the opportunities of the 
flying moment, played with the idea of a partition of Prussia 
as an inducement to the Austrians, threatened to make some 
alternative alliance, and became every day more impatient, 
more pressing. At the beginning of November he learned after 
long uncertainties that the Russians were marching to meet him 
and that he was faced with a campaign in Poland. The army 
with which the Austrians were proposing to guard the neutrality 
of their states had hitherto given him little concern, but hence- 
forward it would be in a position to threaten his rear. Now, in 
a flash, he revealed himself in his most alarming mood. He had 