

1 Dropmore Papers, vol. 1x, Introduction, pp. xxxviii-xxxix. 

2 Despatches of Caulaincourt, in Grand-Duke Nicholas Mikhailovsky, 
Relations diplomatiques de la Russie et de la France, e.g. 11, 189, 246, 252. 

3 P, Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon I°", No, cccxxx. 
On the 12th of August 1808 Douglas described to Canning the pacific 
dispositions of the French government and advised the opening of discussions 
(F.0. Russia 65/74). 

4-2 

100 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

than a limited and partial communication of the content of 
Napoleon’s proposals or even of the reception that was given 
to these; each therefore saw movements for peace, half-concealed, 
and regarded them as objects of suspicion; each wrote to his 
government of doubtful transactions and negotiations, and 
complained of confidence withheld.1 A certain M. de Litzow 
arrived in St Petersburg from Prussia; Douglas was merely 
allowed to make conjectures as to his mission, but the man 
‘announced on all sides the favourable opportunity of making 
peace at present with Bonaparte”. When he was leaving, 
Budberg informed the ambassador that an offer of a separate 
peace had been made to Prussia, as well as proposals of a wider 
negotiation, but that “‘little attention had been paid”. “I have 
no right to doubt these assertions”’, wrote Douglas, as he saw 
the arrival of still another Prussian messenger in St Petersburg, 
‘““but...if I allow myself to reason upon circumstances I am led 
to suspect”. In April Douglas heard of Bertrand’s mission and 
the succession of offers that Bonaparte had made, but he learned 
them from the Prussian minister, Goltz. ‘‘ None of these various 
papers have ever been confided to me by this government”’, he 
wrote.2 The British ministry, therefore, at one moment en- 
visaged Prussia as stealthily working for a separate peace; at 
another moment took alarm lest the Czar, out of friendship, 
should succumb to the pacific persuasions of king Frederick 
William. It refused to send help to Prussia until it should be 
reassured on the subject of that separate peace; it only learned 
the fidelity of Russia as Alopeus, the Russian minister in London, 
communicated the French overtures and stated the intentions 
of his government. 

The truth was that the whigs themselves had no diplomats to 
send to important posts in Europe and the demands of party 

1 Hutchinson to Howick, No. 6, 9 Jan. 1807, F.O. Prussia 64/74: ‘‘ Every- 
thing they say and everything they do is enveloped in such doubt and 
mystery that it is impossible not to be suspicious’’. 

2 Douglas to Howick, No. 9, 28 Feb. 1807, F.O. Russia 65/68. 

5 Douglas to Howick, No. 15, 3 Ap. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/68. 

4 Budberg to Alopeus, 13/25 Mar. 1807, and other documents communi- 
cated by Alopeus, F'.0. Russia 65/72. 

CH. Ilr. THE ATTITUDE OF ENGLAND 101 

prevented them from making use of the experienced men who 
had seen previous service.t The distance of England from her 
allies, and the slowness of communications at that period, were 
sufficient in themselves to hinder the intercourse of England 
with the continent; but the inadequacy of the diplomatic service 
greatly increased the isolation. It prevented the cabinet of 
London from quite realising the estimation in which it was held 
abroad, at a time when men muttered ugly things about this 
country—when even the patriotic Englishman away from home 
had become angry and ashamed. It prevented the cabinet also 
from visualising the situation on the continent, and it delayed 
the assistance of England in the campaigns on the mainland of 
Europe. So it came to be easily believed that the government 
had no heart in the war, and was on the point of reversing its 
policy; the rumour quickly caught that England was meditating 
a system of “‘isolation”’. The British government seemed to have 
no interest in the continent; it fought rather for Buenos Ayres 
and Egypt, collecting more maritime plunder for itself. The 
spirit of Pitt seemed dead. 