

Lord Howick sent his reply to Kriisemarck’s peace-proposals 
in a despatch to Lord Douglas dated the 7th of March. He sup- 
ported the Czar’s demand for a formal statement of the French 
bases of negotiation as a preliminary to the assembly of a con- 
gress, and only disagreed with his suggestion of a seat for the 
proposed meetings. The subject was important to England 
because of the difficulties of communication; a town in Galicia 
would be too far distant. Howick suggested Copenhagen as 
more central; though he had no objection to Hamburg or 
Dresden provided that the French garrisons were withdrawn 
from these places, and that unmolested communications could 
be guaranteed. When it came to the principles of the negotiation, 
he expressed himself at length on the system of “equivalents” 
for which Napoleon had stipulated in December. He answered 
to the expectations of Europe and confirmed Napoleon’s fears 
by attacking the implied basis of the whole overture for peace 

1 Besides the above notes on Douglas and Hutchinson, see below, on 
Adair, English minister to Vienna, pp. 117-18. 

102 THE WINTER CAMPAIGN BK I. 

and refusing his concurrence to the particular scheme of 
compensations to which the negotiation was pointing. 

‘“‘An apprehension that Prussia may indulge a mistaken hope that 
His Majesty can ever be induced to admit such a principle of exchange 
makes an early and frank explanation of the Sentiments of His 
Majesty’s Government on this head, indispensable... .” 

...The English objects in negotiating would be, “‘first the honour- 
able fulfilment of all engagements to (her) allies by the restitution of 
the territories of which they may have been dispossessed, or an 
indemnity for the losses which they may have sustained in (her) cause ; 
and, secondly, the re-establishment as far as it is found to be prac- 
ticable of some equilibrium of power which may tend to insure the 
tranquillity and independence of Europe. To attain these objects 
His Majesty would always be willing to make great and important 
sacrifices.” 

But the second of these aims would not be furthered by 

the restitution of territories which France could at will resume with 
equal or greater facility than she originally overran them. Govern- 
ments which owe their existence to the mere articles of a Treaty and 
which possess no military frontier towards France, must even in time 
of peace fall into a state of dependence upon that power.... Your 
Excellency will therefore state that His Majesty, though satisfied with 
his colonial possessions and far from designing to add to them, cannot 
consent to restore to France or her immediate dependencies those 
acquisitions obtained by his arms in return for the insecure restitution 
of Conquests on the Continent which France can at pleasure regain. 
To increase the power and to multiply the resources of the great 
Continental states of Russia and Austria, could it be accomplished 
without any injustice to other powers, His Majesty would willingly 
do much, but he does not feel equally disposed to surrender Conquests 
for the reinstatement of princes who have been dispossessed of Do- 
minions which they were unable to defend, and who have no claims 
founded on specific engagements or arising out of general friendship 
and alliance. 