

Adair had been strongly warned, in his instructions, of the 
inadvisability of any attempt to urge the Austrians to declare 
war, unless they could see for themselves that this was the policy 
their own interests dictated to them; but when Pozzo di Borgo 
reached Vienna and the two Russian ministers called for Adair’s : 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 78, 7 Oct. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus 
London. 

2 Stadion to Starhemberg, 28 Ap. 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach London. 
Stadion, in despatch No. 4 of 5 Ap. 1807, had described the interest he took 
in seeing that Adair “soit fixé ici d’une maniére plus solide qu’il n’a été 
jusqu’a présent et qu’on le récompense en quelque fagon des services qu’il 
rend a son souverain.” See also Stadion’s despatch No. 5 of 11 July 1807, 
but cf. p. 128 below. . 

3 Private Correspondence of Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 296. 

CH.-I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 119 

co-operation, he sent arguments, excuses, and apologies to his 
government and threw himself into the endeavour.! These three 
men consulted and combined together and began a vigorous 
organised campaign to break through that stubborn neutrality 
which was working so much to the advantage of Napoleon, and 
to combat that obstinate perversity which was the paralysis of 
the Austrian counsels. 

Their failure, coming at a moment of pessimism and dis- 
quietude, was the greatest of all the disappointments of the 
campaign. So soon as Pozzo di Borgo brought the court of 
Vienna to the direct issue of intervention or non-intervention, 
all hints and suggestions of an impending decision vanished, and 
Count Stadion, faced with the logic of the situation, resorted to 
the wildest fencing, to arguments that ceased to be even plausible, 
rather than recede from the position he had taken up. The 
Austrians had no love for France, but, wrote Pozzo di Borgo, 
“their hearts are frozen with fear, it is the master-motive of 
their conduct’”’.? 

The situation would have been much more simple if Austria 
could have been indifferent to the issue of the war in which she 
refused to take part. But hers was not a disinterested neutrality, 
her own fate was being hammered out while she stood watching, 
and it soon became evident that the longer she dallied and made 
attempts to flirt with both parties, the more difficult it would be 
for her to come to terms with the victor. She dreaded a victory 
for France which would enable Napoleon to turn upon her with 
punishment for her equivocations; she was anxious lest the 
Russians in despair should make a self-regarding peace with 
France, ignoring the salvation of Europe which they had set 
out to secure; she was nervous about England—for England 
might win a selfish advantage by coming to a private arrange- 
ment with Napoleon. These powers soon learned how to tease 
the Austrian government by threatening to leave its interests 

1 Adair to Howick, No. 33, 30 Dec. 1806, F'.0. Austria 7/81. The parts of 
this despatch referred to above are printed in Adair, Historical Memoir, 
pp. 162-9. 