

1 Talleyrand to Larochefoucauld, 12 Oct. 1806, A.A.E. Autriche, t. 379. 

2 Adair to Fox, No. 18, 13 Sept. 1806, in Adair, Historical Memoir, 
p. 128, and Adair to Fox (separate), 24 Sept. 1806, F'.0. Austria 7/80 
(omitted from the Historical M emoir). 

% Adair to Howick, 24 Oct. 1806, in Adair, Historical Memoir, p. 148. 

* Larochefoucauld to Talleyrand, No. 83, 25 Oct. 1806, 4.A.E. Autriche, 
t. 379. 

pEScere:c, Talleyrand to Napoleon, 9 Oct. 1806, in P. Bertrand, Lettres 
inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon, No. cxcrx. 

(Chtig 115 THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 113 

already filled the Austrians with apprehension by appointing a 
military representative, Andréossy, to replace Larochefoucauld. 
He followed this step by issuing peremptory demands for Austrian 
disarmament. Coupling his anger with reassurances he repeated 
his call for an alliance, calmed any doubts the Austrians might 
have concerning the fate of their Polish provinces in the forth- 
coming campaign, and ordered Andréossy to “‘bring up lightly 
the question of the exchange of Galicia for Silesia”’.!_ The court 
of Vienna ceased its armaments but made no response to the 
renewed overtures. On one occasion the French minister met 
their refusal “‘in a tone of menace”. 

The suddenness and completeness of the victory of Jena— 
a victory for Napoleon over a new enemy and over a power that 
since the time of Frederick the Great had lived on a tradition of 
military glory—and the astonishing collapse of a whole monarchy 
which crumpled up in a way that was new to modern history, 
made the march of Napoleon seem like a cataclysm in nature and, 
more than anything else, was the type of achievement calculated 
to create a Napoleonic legend. Upon Austria, whose counsels had 
so long been confessedly ruled by timidity, the effect could only 
be disastrous. From this time the court of Vienna may spread 
hints that she intends joining the coalition, and may delude the 
ministers of Russia and England by judicious suggestions that 
she is always about to come to an energetic decision, but however 
much she may desire the downfall of France she is never sure 
that the opportunity has really arrived and she is haunted by 
the fear that if she makes a false move Napoleon will turn aside 
to finish with her before coping with Russia and will destroy her 
by some rapid stroke before her allies can come to her aid. If 
she is told that French designs in Poland are a menace to her 
own Polish provinces, she finds that Napoleon has anticipated 
her apprehensions and is ready with every assurance. If she is 
informed that Napoleon is always the enemy of Austria and will 
deal with her in turn, Napoleon points out Russia as a possible 
menace, too, and by every insinuation turns the eyes of Austria 

1 See the correspondence between Talleyrand and Andréossy printed in 
Handelsman, Napoléon et la Pologne, pp. 215-18. 

BN 8 

114 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

upon the issue in Turkey. When the allies press for her co- 
operation she replies that her armaments are not ready, that her 
finances are exhausted, that she must have time to recuperate; 
she makes capital out of these difficulties and advertises them, 
and the Austrian Emperor will lay the responsibility for his 
decision at the door of the Archduke Charles who is resolutely 
opposed to war, while the Archduke Charles will say that the 
decision is not his, that he is not Emperor. Russia must con- 
centrate her forces upon the struggle with Napoleon himself, 
and not discount her chances in this campaign by making 
diversions against Turkey; the Czar has not enough men in 
Poland—these are the objections of Austria, and if one victory 
is gained over the French, she says that two more must be won 
before she will risk a declaration of war. And all the time 
Napoleon entreats and makes promises and tries plan after plan, 
overture after overture, even repeats his threats at times, in an 
attempt to bring the government of Vienna into some engage- 
ment with France, and he too is met with evasions and delays 
and perpetual suggestions that a favourable decision is about to 
be announced, till he asks in despair, ‘‘ What is the House of 
Austria after?” 