

1 Adair to Howick, 14 Dec. 1806, in Adair, Historical Memoir, p. 157. 

2 Stuart to Howick, No. 58, 28 Nov. 1806, F'.0. Russia 65/65. Stuart to 
Adair, 26 Nov. 1806, in Adair, Historical Memoir, pp. 347-8. 

3 Printed in Beer, Zehn Jahre Gsterreichischer Politik (1877), pp. 472-6. 

8-2 

116 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

in Europe till, to the minds of Englishmen, his name came to 
mean something crooked and sinister. In 1807, however, he was 
still on the side of the gods, servant of Liberation. Astute in 
diplomacy, subtle and smooth in speech, skilled in all the 
pleasant ways of courts, he seemed the very man to make his 
cause plausible and telling. With his social gifts, his love of deft 
intrigue, his graces of the “ancien régime”’, he was fitted for the 
old-world court of Vienna. This was a cause in which his personal 
feelings came to reinforce his zeal for the general good, the private 
hatreds of his passionate nature were at one with the motives 
of his public service, and the vanity and selfishness and ambition 
of the individual and the things in his make-up which were the 
most mean and corrupting, only added fuel to his desire to achieve 
the purpose of his mission. 

Pozzo was seconded by Razoumovski, the Russian am- 
bassador, and most influential of the foreign ministers in Vienna 
at this period. By his great wealth and social prestige Razou- 
movski had acquired an admitted ascendancy in the Austrian 
capital. He had rooted himself in the place, entwining his 
interests round it, becoming himself rather an Austrian than a 
Russian, and it was known that even should his official mission 
cease he would not return to his own country. His recall had 
been announced and his successor appointed in the summer of 
1806, but his removal was a manceuvre of palace intrigues and 
the change was long delayed.1| Napoleon was waiting for this, 
the Austrians were crying out against it, and when it should 
happen all the world knew that it would mean a tremendous 
weakening of the influence of the coalition in the counsels of the 
Austrian government; for though he was charged with having 
vested interests in Austria, and with neglecting the cause of his 
own government, and though he was even held culpable by many 
people for not having prepared the court of St Petersburg for 
the disastrous collapse of Austria at the close of 1805, he was a 

 Czartoryski’s protest against the removal of this minister is printed in 
Sbornik, LXxxi1, 312-14. Budberg condemned the recall of Razoumovski 
as “the consequence of a court intrigue before he came into office”. Stuart 
to Adair, 26 Nov. 1806, in Adair, Historical Memoir, Appendix, p. 347. 

CH. I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 117 

good “coalition” man. In society, above all, he succeeded in 
doing what it was impossible for anybody to do in official 
intercourse with the government at Vienna, and it was due to 
him more than to anyone else that the French minister in his 
despatches to Paris had to complain that the people of Vienna 
were loud in their sympathy with the coalition, that they 
rejoiced to hear news of reverses to French troops, that they 
were waiting to fall treacherously on the rear of Napoleon if the 
opportunity snould occur, and that the situation was such as 
to make a Frenchman’s position delicate and embarrassing. 