

1 Adair to Howick, 28 Jan. 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir, p. 179. 

2 Stadion to Starhemberg, 21 Feb. 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach London. 

3 Talleyrand describes his conversations with Vincent at Warsaw in 
letters to Napoleon (P. Bertrand, op. cit. pp. 302-464 passim) and in 
despatches to Andréossy (A.A... Autriche, t. 380 passim). 

4 P. Bertrand, op. cit. No. ccxxxrx, where Vincent is described as per- 
petually saying, ‘‘Ne voulez-vous rien faire avec nous, ni par nous?” 

126 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

these terms and he made it known that there could be no peace, 
no stability, until France and Austria or France and Russia 
combined to guarantee it to Europe.! At last he imagined he had 
fastened Vincent to something definite; he interviewed the man 
in person, and sent instructions to Talleyrand at Warsaw and to 
his ambassador in Vienna. Vincent drew him on. He could not 
disguise from himself, he said, that the proposed basis seemed 
satisfactory. The offer to restore Prussia would particularly 
remove the uneasiness his government had felt. When pressed 
to say what the court of Vienna would demand in the proposed 
peace he declared that great value would be set upon the 
possession of part of the Adriatic coast and of Dalmatia, but he 
made it understood that his court expressed desires rather than 
demands or even hopes in this matter. What he considered as 
far more necessary, and as being essential to the security of 
peace, was that Napoleon, having arranged the continent, should 
keep only a stipulated number of troops in Germany until the 
maritime peace should be concluded. Napoleon even showed 
himself disposed to grant this point. Vincent had no powers to 
sign anything on the spot, but he would write home for fresh 
orders. It was not until Talleyrand enquired if, once these terms 
of peace could be agreed upon, Austria would help to win and 
conquer such a peace, that the futility of the discussions became 
apparent. Vincent pretended not to see that Napoleon was 
working for an alliance of that kind; in his naive way he ex- 
plained that he had been talking of peace, not of war, and that 
his court would make no engagement binding Austria to join in 
the war, and that Austria would use persuasion and influence, 
but nothing more, to bring the belligerent powers to reason. He 
had played a deep game, but he had won from it a statement of 
the dispositions of France in regard to a future settlement.? 
Napoleon was angry when the news of the failure of this 
negotiation and the reports of the continual armaments of 
Austria seemed to suggest that that power was contemplating 

? Corresp. de Nap. I, t. x1v, No. 11,977. 

* P. Bertrand, op. cit. No. ccu. Talleyrand to pndigossy} 12 Mar. 1807, 
A.A.E. Autriche, t. 380. 

CHat: THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 127 

hostilities against France. He made a show of force and assumed 
a threatening attitude, but repeated the same offer of alliance 
and pointed out the splendid réle that Austria could play in thus 
contributing to the cause of peace. Even England, he said, 
desired peace at bottom, and could not bear the immense financial 
burden of the war.1 This communication reached Vincent at 
an opportune moment and he was in a position to use it to 
advantage, for before it arrived he received new instructions. 
These were sent from Vienna on the 11th of March, when it was 
known that the Czar had given a favourable answer to the 
tentative proposal of Austria. On the 18th of March Vincent 
informed Talleyrand of the intention of his court to contribute 
to the cause of peace by mediating between the belligerent 
powers, and he supported his offers by describing the reception 
they had received at St Petersburg. The overture was unofficial 
and Vincent was unable to grant Talleyrand’s request for a 
written communication on the subject. Talleyrand criticised the 
answer of Russia to the proposal. He saw that the Czar con- 
sidered his war with Turkey as being separate from his war with 
France, and was disposed to conclude it by a separate trans- 
action. He saw too, that although the Russians had stated the 
basis upon which they would consent to negotiate with the 
Ottoman Porte, they had not shown the same frankness with 
respect to a peace with France but had merely declared an in- 
tention of treating. He explained that while the Russians stipu- 
lated for the maintenance of ancient treaties in their settlement 
with the Porte, Napoleon demanded more and insisted upon the 
complete independence of Turkey. Vincent however slurred over 
the objections and made it understood that the present overture 
was merely a preliminary one and that modifications could be 
made at a later date.” 