

2 Extracts from Pozzo’s despatches are printed in A. Vandal, Napoléon 
et Alewandre I°" (1911), 1, 17-22, 39 et seq. 

120 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

out of any future settlement of the affairs of Europe. Secretly 
praying for the downfall of France the Austrians felt the dangers 
of the attitude they were adopting, and dreaded the contingency 
that might come to force their hands. On the 30th of December 
Count Stadion “admitted that it was morally impossible in the 
present state of things to look forward to neutrality as a per- 
manent system”’.? 

In these circumstances the declaration of policy that Napoleon 
made on the subject of a general peace, came as a welcome 
suggestion to the court of Vienna at the close of the year 1806; 
for it not only gave the hope that a pacification would put an 
end to the dilemma that was before Austria, it provided her 
with a réle and a purpose, it gave her some fixity of aim in the 
existing difficulties, and it enabled her to evade the problem of 
intervention that was daily pressing more closely upon her. On 
the 6th of December Adair reported to London that “the 
communication made by M. Talleyrand to Count Lucchesini on 
signing the armistice on the 16th [Nov.]...will, I have reason 
to believe, be productive of an offer from this Court of its media- 
tion for a General Peace’’.” 

Adair’s first thought, when he became aware of the Austrian 
intention, was that this premature talk of peace, when the 
Russians had barely come to grips with Napoleon in Poland, 
would have a restraining influence upon the prosecution of the 
war. Immediately he wrote to the English minister, Stuart, 
informing him of what the Austrians proposed to do, and 
“cautioning him against the effect such a measure may have 
in relaxing the exertions of the court of St Petersburg”.? His 
information, arriving at a time when every message from Vienna 
was giving anxiety to the Czar, drew out the Russian chancellor 
to a declaration of opinion. Stuart ‘observed that such a 
measure would afford time for the French government to ripen 
and combine her military and political operations”; he thought 

1 Adair to Howick, No. 33, 30 Dec. 1806, in Adair, Historical Memoir, 
p. 168. 

* Adair to Howick (Separate), 6 Dec. 1806, in Adair, op. cit. p. 156. 

3 Ibid. Se 

CH. I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 121 

that Austria “without really forwarding the peace” was merely 
delaying the time when she would be called upon to take action, 
trying to create an excuse for disbanding the troops she had 
already assembled in Galicia and Bohemia. Budberg declared 
his agreement but added that 

in case the offer should be submitted to the Court of St Petersburg 
it would be necessary to shew the sincere wish of His Imperial Majesty 
to conciliate all existing differences by patiently and temperately 
hearing what conditions the French Government may propose as a 
basis of negotiation; but that this Power would not on that account 
desist from any military enterprises or cease to press the armaments 
which there is reason to believe have already commenced in Austria. 