

Pozzo and Razoumovski found an ally whose assistance 
seemed likely to add weight to their efforts. This was the English 
minister at Vienna. 

The English tory newspapers were never weary of insisting 
upon the fact that 

At the court of Vienna, a court which, however fallen in dignity, 
still prides itself in the antiquity of its nobility, the splendour of its 
appearance, and the forms of its ceremonial, the son of an army 
surgeon was commissioned to represent the dignity of the British 
nation. 

But the wits retorted that, son of a famous surgeon, he was 
‘le fils du plus grand saigneur de l’Europe”’. The surgeon was 
the man who was hero of the Scottish version of ‘‘ Robin Adair’’, 
and Robert, the son, did not go unsung, for he was the subject 
of famous parodies in the Anti-Jacobin Review, and was the 
favourite object of ridicule of the enemies of the Whig party. 
He had no experience in diplomacy, though at a critical period 
in the history of Anglo-Russian relations he was charged with 
acting as representative of the English opposition at the court 
of the Czarina Catherine II, and the mysterious journey that he 
made to St Petersburg, the attitude he adopted towards the 
English minister there, and the uneasiness he gave to the British 
government at the time, brought him into disrepute. The incident 
provoked the lines about 

the youth whose daring Soul 
With Half a Mission sought the Frozen Pole. 

118 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

He seems to have been an easy, impetuous, light-headed fellow, 
firm friend of Fox. But he was married to a French woman, who 
was “suspect”, and he was never allowed to escape from the 
handicap which this gave him. According to Starhemberg the 
French wife “was the only reason which prevented Fox from 
nominating Adair as under-secretary for foreign affairs”. As it 
was, he went to Vienna—the appointment was an acknowledged 
“‘job”—retaining the post on the condition that Mrs Adair 
stayed in England. Howick, when he came into office, repeatedly 
said that “‘if she went to Vienna her husband would be recalled 
on the spot”.! Everything gave the idea that his was a pre- 
carious appointment, from which the interests of England would 
suffer. And yet when the tory ministry came into power in 
March and talked of replacing him by a person of dignity and 
worth, more adequate to a court like the Austrian, there came 
from Vienna one strong insistent line of protests. ““We could 
not be anything but annoyed if M. Adair were recalled.’ From 
the allied headquarters at Memel the new ambassador to Russia, 
Lord G. Leveson-Gower, wrote strongly to the ministry in order 
to prevent the change.? And although a new minister-pleni- 
potentiary was despatched and reached Vienna, Adair did stay 
on—stayed after his wife had outraged the English government 
by making the forbidden appearance in the Austrian capital— 
and only returned to England when the British diplomatic 
missions were driven out of Europe after Tilsit. 