

Away in Warsaw another special agent, General Vincent, was 
conducting an evasive diplomacy. The Austrian government had 
despatched him in January to the French headquarters, “for no 
particular object”, so it declared, ‘‘beyond that of obtaining 
correct information of what is going on there”. His stay in 
Warsaw caused some apprehension by reason of the mystery 
that surrounded it, and the reticence that was shown concerning 
its purpose. For a long time he waited, playing for time, without 
coming to any point, and in March Talleyrand was writing that, 
though “the time which has elapsed since Vincent has been in 
Warsaw might give to suppose the existence of active negotia- 
tions and perhaps of an arrangement between the two powers, 
there has been nothing but discussions which as yet have been 
fruitless”.3 Adair saw that the object of the mission was ‘“‘kept 
a most profound secret”’,* but guessed that it was concerned with 
the proposed movement for peace. 

“IT cannot dismiss my suspicions”, he wrote, ‘‘that although 
Austria would be sorry to see a separate peace concluded by Prussia, 

Ay Adair to Howick, No. 15, 26 Feb. 1807, F.0. Austria 7/83 (passages 
omitted from the document published on p. 191 of Adair’s Historical 
Memoir). 

2 Ibid.; see also P. Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a4 Napoléon, 
No. Ccxtv. 

° Talleyrand to Andréossy, 8 Mar. 1807, A.A.E. Autriche, t. 380. 

* Adair to Howick, 21 Jan. 1807, in Adair, Historicak Memoir, p. 174. 

CH. I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 125 

or even a peace concluded at this moment by Prussia and Russia 
together, she would seize with eagerness any opening that might be 
afforded to be the mediatrix of a general peace, in the discussion for 
which her own interests might be likely under such circumstances 
to be considered.”’! 

Stadion informed the Austrian minister in London of the motive 
of this mission. Vincent had been sent, he said, to deal with the 
problems that were bound to arise from the proximity of the 
belligerent armies to the neutral frontier, but he had also been 
charged: 

not only to sound the dispositions of Napoleon with regard to a 
negotiation of peace by means of a Congress of the powers concerned, 
such as he himself had suggested, but also to declare how much our 
August Master wishes to contribute to the promotion of a just and 
lasting peace.? 

Until the Russian government replied to the first hint of the 
proposed mediation, Vincent did not seriously press the subject 
in his conversations at Warsaw, but concerned himself with 
gaining time, patiently listening to offers of alliance from France, 
quietly transmitting them to his government, carefully avoiding 
every commitment, until Napoleon despaired, could not think 
what Austria was wanting, even talked of offering part of 
Silesia as a bribe to her, though he saw it was a “‘ hazardous” 
move.2 At the beginning of March Vincent secured from 
Napoleon a declaration of his intentions and a statement of the 
plans he had for Europe, the basis he desired for a future peace.* 
In reply to his overtures Napoleon declared that the integrity 
of the Porte and the restoration of Prussia, which implied, he 
said, the abandonment of his views on Poland, were the objects 
he had in view. He asked Vincent to state what he, on his part, 
would demand for Austria, he invited him to conclude a treaty on 