

General Budberg, while accepting the proposal of mediation, 
sought to fasten the Austrian government down to the inter- 
pretation of it that Stadion had given to Pozzo di Borgo. He 
insisted that the mediation should not be the éxcuse for a weak 
and pacific policy on the part of the court of Vienna. He 

CH. I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 123 

pointed out the advantage that would result from effective 
armaments which would give weight to the mediation, and he 
explained how, under cover of the negotiation, Austria could 
advance and hasten military preparations without raising 
suspicion or compromising herself with France. 

Nor during this period did the Austrians cease to raise the 
hopes of the allies by hints of their intention of entering the war. 
Once more, on the eve of the battle of Eylau, the government 
sent round a whisper—it wished to enter into explanations with 
the coalition, and everybody was on tiptoe to see the desired 
event, Adair reported, in cypher, secret communications between 
Stadion and Razoumovski, Pozzo di Borgo, and himself, and 
described how Stadion’s brother had acted as intermediary.” 
He gave optimistic accounts of the condition of the Austrian 
army, related even the conversion of the Archduke Charles, and 
declared that everything would be ready within a few weeks. 
Adair listened readily to such flowery tales. Perhaps this 
explains why his presence was so welcome at Vienna. Later he 
must have recognised the excess of his enthusiasm, for when 
he published his despatches in his Historical Memoir of a Mission 
to Vienna, a large number of excisions that he made consisted 
of passages where he had been over eager to promise or predict 
a forthcoming intervention of Austria. M. Andréossy, French 
minister in Vienna, did not at this period allow himself to be so 
deceived, ‘‘It is easy to see...’’, he wrote, “‘as I have often had 
the honour to inform your excellency, that in completing the 
organisation of her army, in adopting a warlike tone, and in 
making military dispositions, Austria was only seeking to delude 
both parties.’ Disillusionment soon came to the allies. Eylau, 
which should have brushed away the last obstacle and convinced 
the Austrians of their opportunity, produced a contrary effect, 

1 Merfeldt to Stadion, 4/16 Feb. enclosed in Stadion to Starhemberg, 
5 Ap. 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach London. Budberg also declared his 
opinion in a despatch to the Russian minister in Vienna, dated 24 Jan. 1807 
(v.s.) See Alex. Wassiltchikow, Les Razoumovskt, t. 11, 3™° partie, p. 85. 

2 Adair to Howick, No. 7, 28 Jan. 1807, F.O. Austria '7/83; see also 
No. 8, 14 Jan. 1807, ibid. The passages referred to are omitted from the docu- 
ments printed on pp. 172 and 177 respectively of Adair’s Historical Memoir. 

3 Andréossy to Talleyrand, No. 23, 10 Mar. 1807, A.A.E. Autriche, 
t. 880, but cf. pp. 162 et seq. below. 

124 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

and seemed to come itself as a discouragement. Now it began 
to appear that not France only, but Russia, was being regarded 
as a possible menace.! People shook their heads and feared that 
these Austrians were anxious about Turkey and jealous of the 
movements of the Czar, and that they would be happy to see 
Russia and France break against one another, and wear them- 
selves out in the contest, until both should cease to be a menace 
to their neighbours.? At the same time, the court of Vienna was 
anxious concerning the future of Germany, and looked with cold 
distrust upon the ambitions of the Prussian ministers. “Shall 
I tell you what people are thinking here?’’, said Stadion to the 
Russian ambassador: ‘‘ They are thinking that you are carrying 
on the war for the interests of Prussia.” 