

With this plan slowly forming and defining itself in their 
minds, the Austrian government could more easily and com- 
fortably resist the pressure of Pozzo di Borgo and his colleagues; 
the importunity of the demands for the intervention of Austria 
only confirmed the court of Vienna in its adoption of a policy 
which provided such a plausible means of escape. The final 
answer of Stadion to Pozzo was 
that, after everything else had been tried, the measure that had been 
adopted, that is to say the offer of mediation and the desire to take 
part in the promotion of peace, was the only one which could be 
reconciled with the differences of opinion here, particularly between 
the Archduke and the Emperor.? 

Stadion gave it to be understood that such a step was the only 
one which could possibly allow any chance of the eventual entry 
of Austria into the war. He declared his intention of supporting 
the mediation by a great display of forces. He pointed out that 
if Napoleon should refuse to consent to a general negotiation, 
his obstinacy would put him so obviously in the wrong, that 
Austria could have no choice but to turn against him; while, if 
Napoleon accepted, things would happen during the discussions 
which would make Austria range herself on the side of the allies, 
and gradually drift from mediation into war. 

1 Stuart to Howick, No. 77, 29 Dec. 1806, F'.O. Russia 65/65. 
2 Despatch of Pozzo di Borgo 14/26 Jan. 1807, quoted in Vandal, 
Napoléon et Alexandre I°", 1, 40. 

122 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK It. 

As a preliminary to the offer of its good offices the Austrian 
court sought to secure a statement of opinion from Russia, and 
instructed Merfeldt, its minister at St Petersburg, to sound the 
disposition of the Czar and discover in what way the measure 
would be received. After several conferences with the chancellor 
Budberg, Merfeldt was able, in the middle of February, to send. 
a very favourable report to his government. Budberg explained 
to him that on the rejection of Oubril’s treaty he had looked to 
France to make the next move in negotiation, but that each 
power was afraid of compromising its dignity by suing the other 
for peace. The mediation of Austria, he thought, would remove 
any obstacle caused by the unwillingness of both France and 
Russia to make the first advances. Prussia had recently sent 
Colonel Kriisemarck with a similar proposal, but Austria was 
in a far better position than Prussia to act as peace-maker on 
this occasion. She had the same interests in seeing a limit placed 
upon the power and aggressions of Napoleon and in securing the 
independence of Germany, but she had the advantage in that 
she could support her mediation by a large army and with the 
resources of a great power. Prussia, also, by the very fact that 
her whole existence depended upon her efforts for peace, had 
an interest in exploiting every chance of negotiating, and so was 
unfitted for the serious réle of peace-maker, being unable to 
exert the same persuasion and invite the same response as the 
court of Vienna could do. The Czar, added Budberg, also 
desired that the intervention of Austria should put an end to his 
differences with the Porte; he wished to leave to Turkey all the 
territories and all the rights which her last treaty with Russia 
had secured to her; all that he would insist upon would be the 
maintenance of the treaties. He desired nothing so much as the 
re-establishment of the former relations with Turkey under the 
guarantee of Austria and England; but he wanted the destruc- 
tion of the French ascendancy in the Divan. 