

At the close of the year 1806 the enemies of France set out 
seriously to win Austria to their side and to rescue their shaking 
cause; for the Austrian intervention, that was of such moment 
to Napoleon, had become a matter of unconcealed urgency to 
his enemies after the Prussian collapse had put an end to their 
first rash and over-confident hopes. The battle of Jena had 
reawakened Austrian terror of France, and minor points of 
complaint that had previously disturbed the relations between 
the courts of Vienna and St Petersburg, now came into light 
again, and old quarrels and jealousies broke out anew, intensified 
by the conduct of the Austrian minister in St Petersburg, a 
certain General Merfeldt who “mischievously exaggerated and 
inflamed every topic of dissension”.1 Strangely enough, the 

* Adair to Howick (Private), 29 Jan. 1807, F.O. Austria’7/83. This passage 
is omitted from the close of the despatch as it is pubyehed on pp. 180-1 of 
Adair’s Hisiorical Memoir. 

CHa THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 115 

Austrians had just been complaining that the Russians did not 
“speak out to them”, and had been excusing their inactivity 
by saying that they were kept in the dark concerning the 
Russian efforts in Poland and the Czar’s attitude to themselves;1 
when, within four days, there arrived in Vienna one of the 
cleverest of the agents of the coalition. The Corsican, Pozzo di 
Borgo, in the service of the Czar, was pursuing Napoleon with 
all the passion of a vendetta, and the Russian government, 
making every attempt to prevent recent bickerings with Austria 
from leaving obstacles in the way of understanding, had released 
this man upon Vienna allowing him to draw up his own instruc- 
tions.” He carried a letter from the Czar to the Austrian emperor, 
which declared that the Russians had no aim in fighting but that 
of self-defence, and showed in the strongest terms the necessity 
for co-operation. He carried also a flattering letter from the 
Czar to the Archduke Charles.? His object was to persuade the 
Austrians to grasp the favourable moment and intervene imme- 
diately in the war, and he was to propose the exchange of a 
declaration between the two powers to the effect that the war 
should be carried on to the utmost extremity, that no peace 
should be concluded unless by mutual consent, and that in case 
Prussia should abandon the common cause her neutrality should 
not be respected. Such was the distrust of the Prussians at this 
time, that, on the suggestion of the British minister in St Peters- 
burg, even they were not allowed to pierce the secret of this 
mission, in case they should seek to win favour with Napoleon 
by betraying the move to him. “The fate of Europe”, wrote the 
Czar to the Emperor, “will depend upon the decision you are 
about to make.” 

Pozzo di Borgo when he had at last helped to hound Napoleon 
from the continent was destined to be a creator of the tyranny 
that took his place, an apostle of the Holy Alliance, the incarna- 
tion of the policy of reaction. He became a kind of potentate 