

On the Ist of April Napoleon left his dreary quarters at 
Osterode, and moved to a neighbouring village. Here he found 
comfort, for he lived in the castle of Finckenstein, the residence 
of a Prussian court official. For two months he stayed in the 
place, having walks with Murat in the garden, attending a daily 
parade of troops in the grounds, and riding off on tours of 
military inspection. Every day he would sit before masses of 
correspondence from his marshals and his ministers in France, 
from Talleyrand at Warsaw and the chief of police in Paris, 
from the vassal kings of Naples and Holland, and other members 
of his family; then pacing the room with slow and measured 
tread, bursting out on occasion with angry or passionate gesture 
in those terrible tempers of his, he would dictate the letters that 
directed the movements of an army and the destiny of an empire 
but only half revealed the soul of the man—letters crisp and 

134 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

pointed, full of abrupt ejaculations and neat colloquialism, not 
without moments of acid reproof and stinging concentrated 
criticism—not without open-hearted generosity and stirring 
trumpet-calls. To Finckenstein Napoleon’s officers would come 
to report or to receive his orders; and Bliicher came, as we have 
seen, surly and rugged and cold, determined to resist the charms 
and blandishments of his attractive foe; an ambassador from 
Turkey who had been waiting for over a month in Warsaw 
arrived, not so eager as could be desired to promote the French 
alliance, and not at all pleased to find that there was an envoy 
from Persia as well; Talleyrand also came, when Napoleon could 
not quite trust him in Warsaw talking too freely with an Austrian 
minister; came also—not Josephine, for Napoleon would not 
hear of it—but the Countess Walewska, who perhaps was not yet 
disillusioned in her hopes of promoting the salvation of Poland. 

One would like to have been at Finckenstein, to catch a 
glimpse of that short, uniformed figure, now beginning to grow 
stout—getting stouter in the thick of campaigning—not as 
handsome as he once had been, but with those strange irre- 
sistible eyes. Never was his mind more masterly or his genius 
more sure than in those weeks that preceded Tilsit, when he 
rescued the situation in Poland and once more organised 
astounding victory. Already when he moved to his new quarters 
he had caught a hint of the better weather that was approaching 
and he was not the one to be slow in making dispositions for 
the event. Already he was shaking the snow from his coat, and 
one could catch the first rumblings of the adjustments and pre- 
parations that were soon to set his gigantic machine in motion 
once again. Danzig had been invested, and he was beginning to 
press the siege with vigour. He moved against the Swedes and 
compelled them to make a truce. He took a sultan under his 
wing and directed the efforts of the shah, signing a treaty with 
Persia, finding it prudent to delay commitments with the Porte. 
He rejoiced to hear the failure of British ships which had sought 
to dictate policy at Constantinople; he became satisfied, after 
long doubting, that the Turks were really ready to co-operate 
with him; he even talked of enterprises in* India. ‘Make 