

That the Prussians soon gained heart from the event is proved 
by the first achievement of the Czar after his arrival in Memel. 
This, too, had a spectacular appeal, and was the satisfaction of 
a hope long deferred. On the very day of Alexander’s coming, 
Hardenberg wrote hima letter complaining of continued exclusion 
from office, and attacking the policy of Zastrow.! Vainly for a 
long time Hardenberg had been urging his king to a more hearty 
prosecution of military measures, a more welcome acceptance of 
war, and a more cordial union with Russia. The Czar talked with 
Lord Hutchinson, found that he was “authorised to speak on 

1 Hardenberg to Alexander, in Ranke, Hi ardenberg, V, 483. 

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 139 

behalf of England”,! and catching the rising tide of confidence 
and enthusiasm at Memel, he renewed his attempts to secure the 
dismissal of the unpopular ministers. Very soon his wishes were 
granted, and Hardenberg was restored to power. 

From this point Hardenberg and Alexander moved hand in 
hand. Their names had become a legend for passionate hatred of 
Napoleon. Each of them independently had come to be to the 
enemies of France the symbol of a creed and of a cause. It was 
an encouraging sight for all—these men, putting heads together, 
organising the salvation of Europe. They had been at one in the 
deductions they had made from the pressing peace overtures of 
Napoleon in February. From now they set themselves to carry 
a stage further the same kind of thinking to advance their 
previous conclusions, to intensify their former confidence. Alex- 
ander picked up the thread of the argument he had used in 
rejecting the peace offers of France; Hardenberg jumped into 
the same line of thought, which was the policy he had urged at 
the time of the proposals of Bertrand. Too sympathetic in their 
aims and ideals, perhaps they allowed their ardour and goodwill 
to carry them away. Perhaps it was easy for them to run into 
the kind of thinking that was pleasing to one another. Each 
seems to have imparted some of his enthusiasm to his friend, 
each seems to have outstripped the other in his flight, each in- 
cited the other to the logical development and elaboration of 
views arrived at previously. Very pleased with themselves, both 
soon went riding into the sky, conquering the French from a 
broomstick, reorganising Europe as though Waterloo had already 
been won, and inaugurating a period of optimism and ambition 
that may have suited the unbalanced imagination of the Czar 
but seemed strange and utterly unreal in the counsels of a state 
like Prussia. 

At one time the Prussian king had put a challenge to the Czar, 
questioning whether he had the means sufficient to secure the 
objects for which he was fighting and to achieve “a peace, 
general and solid, such as would not only re-establish the King 

1 Lord Hutchinson to Lord Howick, No. 17, 10 Ap. 1807, F.O. Prussia 
64/74. 

140 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 