

view with Merfeldt, in a letter to Budberg 6/18 Ap. 1807, in Sbornik, 
LXXXVIII, 35-8. 

9-2 

132 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

England clung to her maritime plunders and left them to pursue 
the master of the continent empty-handed.t The matter of 
highest moment was to enlist the British government in the 
Austrian cause, and secure its colonial conquests as objects of 
negotiation. Yet what was England doing? the continent was 
asking. It had even been rumoured that she was resuming 
separate negotiations at Paris. On the other hand if she refused 
to join in the arrangements for peace in Europe and persisted in 
the war, matters would be still worse, the pretext would exist 
for the continued retention of French troops in Germany, and 
the source would still remain for future wars and disturbances 
in Europe. Count Stadion expressed his uneasiness when he 
communicated the offer of mediation to London. In his despatch 
to Starhemberg he recalled those mischievous words by which 
Douglas at St Petersburg had insinuated the adoption of a“ policy 
of isolation” by England, His instructions were pressing. 

“It seems to us impossible to reach the goal’’, he wrote, ‘‘unless 
England takes a principal part and joins a maritime peace to the 
Continental Peace. There is nobody but the British Ministry at 
present in a position to negotiate on equal terms with France; there 
is nobody but England able to offer real compensations for the 
objects which would be necessary for the establishment of any sort of 
balance in Europe; she alone can induce Napoleon to withdraw all 
his troops to France, she alone can contribute with real efficacy to 
the security of the future pacification.” 

Stadion appealed to the interests of Great Britain herself, and 
added “‘whatever may be the political opinions of the Cabinet 
of St James’s, it could never cut itself asunder from the general 
system of Europe”’.? 

With all these preparations and safeguards the Austrian 
mediation put out to sea, for the four winds of heaven to blow 
upon it. 

+ “Tl n’y a que le Cabinet Britannique qui soit dans le moment en position 
de pouvoir négocier avec la Cour de France 4 avantage égal; il n’y a que lui 
qui puisse offrir des compensations réelles....”’ Stadion to Starhemberg, 
5 Ap. 1807 (No. 1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach London. 

* Ibid. The official offer of mediation is printed in Parliamentary Debates, 

x, cols. 101-2, with covering letters from Starhemberg to G. Canning, 
18 Ap. 1807, cols. 100-1. ‘. 

CHAPTER II 

THE REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR IN 
ALL PARTIES 

Tue Austrian mediation came to the powers at war at the 
moment when they were beginning to regain their liveliness. 
The campaign seemed to unfasten itself. All was galvanic again. 
With the passing of March things seemed to loosen and thaw, 
and something of the change of weather passed into the com- 
batants, and you began to discover that though Napoleon might 
still talk of an armistice, he did not want it yet—the Russians 
might consent to negotiate, but they were exchanging whispers 
about “driving the French beyond the Rhine”. England at last 
awoke and picked up a score of lost threads of activity. And 
the Prussians not merely gained confidence along with the rest 
of the powers, but became the most aggressive and boastful of 
them all. On the one hand Napoleon began to talk more loudly, 
more hopefully of the campaign; on the other, all his enemies 
leapt up at once to put energy into the coalition. The Austrian 
intervention was not very fortunately timed. 