

in full possession of his lands but free Germany from the French 
yoke and drive Napoleon beyond the Rhine”.! The context of 
these words had been sufficient to reveal that they were intended 
to dishearten the Russians by magnifying the task that was to 
be accomplished. Alexander had accepted the challenge, had 
agreed that such was the kind of peace that he was fighting for, 
had taken up that cry of ‘‘ driving Napoleon beyond the Rhine” 
and he had added, “I do not doubt that we shall succeed in this, 
if we stay united until the end”. Alexander came to Memel to 
promote the union of the two powers, and to be near his armies 
—altogether, to stiffen the resistance to France. But the vision 
had been conjured into existence of a Germany freed from the 
yoke of the usurper, and in this there was an idea that simply 
cried out for elaboration and development. It was a thought that 
figured large in the conversations that took place when the Czar 
had his meetings with the king and ministers of Prussia. And 
it led to the most pretentious statement of policy and aim that 
the coalition had yet put forward. 

On the 7th of April Hardenberg gave an outline of his views 
in a statement, addressed to the Prussian king and the Russian 
Czar. The enemies of France must draw together in concerted 
operations. Austria must be pressed to join immediately in the 
campaign—so much homage he paid to the necessities of the 
military situation. But where he blossomed out, spread himself, 
and waxed lyrical, was on the subject of future peace. He urged 
the adoption of a political scheme, a statement of what the allies 
were fighting for, a “platform” that should bring the powers into 
line with one another so that no suspicions or dissensions might 
make cleavage in the coalition. And having shown the necessity 
for this instrument he forthwith produced his programme. 

You were to seek the “general good” of Europe, Hardenberg 
admitted; he would not dare to scorn or to forget such a pious 
phrase; yet “in so far as this allows it, the political plan should 
favour the particular interests of the allied powers, in a way that 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 431. 

2 Alexander I to Frederick William III, Feb. 20/Mar. - 1807, in Bailleu, 
Briefwechsel, p. 152. 

OHeril. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 141 

will realise the general good, so that out of it will emerge a force 
able to counter-balance that of Bonaparte and maintain the 
independence of Europe’’. Certainly you were to promote this 
“general good” and further the universal cause, but you would 
do it by advancing the particular interests of the allies, making 
the two, as far as possible, coincide. Hardenberg went beyond 
this and proceeded to show how you might ensure the desired 
security of EKurope and promote the views of the coalition by 
favouring the particular aims and interests of one power among 
the allies—namely, Prussia. You were to see the Prussian and 
Russian governments in consultation with Lord Hutchinson 
coming to some arrangement on the lines Hardenberg had to 
suggest. They would not only draw up a statement that would 
represent the views of the existing coalition against France, they 
would make arrangements for the benefit of the court of Vienna, 
and secure the adhesion of Austria to the proposals—for, said 
Hardenberg, they were sufficiently acquainted with the views of 
Austria to speak on her behalf and to work out her own interests 
for her. Austria, indeed, was the rival to be feared on this very 
question of post-war reconstruction; she was the competitor of 
Prussia; very fortunate that she was not on the spot to press 
and supervise her own cause, very clever of Hardenberg to 
arrange that here at Memel should be decided how Austrian 
interests were to be catered for in the reorganisation of Europe. 