

Geil. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 135 

preparations at Brest”, he ordered, “which will give an idea 
that there is to be an expedition to Ireland. Speak of this to 
Irishmen themselves and see that the news spreads.”?! From 
Stralsund to the bounds of Persia his eye swept the whole line; 
and he was co-ordinating a great effort and seemed like organising 
a grand confederacy to bring the Russians to heel. Still it was the 
Russians who were the focus of his thoughts, and nothing at all 
breathed expectancy of peace. 

He watched the drift of opinion in Paris and caught the 
flying rumours. His eye was on the columns of newspapers, and 
the conduct of theatres in the capital. If anything of the gossip 
of salons or the talk of cafés touched the political situation, he 
would get wind of it. Occasionally he would turn round as though 
something was tugging at his coat; some element in French 
affairs would demand his intervention. It annoyed him that the 
public seemed incorrigible on the subject of Eylau; people 
persisted in taking too seriously the bulletin he had issued after 
the battle; 

“*Never has the position of France been greater or finer than to-day”’, 
he wrote. ‘‘As for Eylau I have said time and again that the bulletin 
exaggerated the losses....As for the letters that some officers may 
write, it must not be forgotten that they do not know what is going on 
in an army any more than the people who walk in the garden of the 
Tuileries know what is going on in the Cabinet.’ 

There had been a new call for conscripts; more murmuring, more 
complaints. Napoleon would try to make answer—to stop the 
foolish speculations of his subjects. ‘‘ There is no point in always 
talking of peace”, he would say. “That is just the way not to 
get it.” He would have peace, he said, though he had to fight 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I®, t. xv, No. 12,486; cf. No. 12,362. 

2 Corresp. de Nap. I*,t.xv, No. 12,361. The effect that the news of Eylau 
produced in Paris can be appreciated from a remark in a report from the 
Austrian chargé d’affaires in Paris, Le Févre Rechtenberg, to Metternich 
dated Paris, 23 Nov. 1912: ‘“‘La bataille du 7 Sept....fut d’abord assez 
généralement représentée & Paris comme une seconde bataille d’Eylau. 
La consternation de grand nombre de familles qui avaient des craintes a 
concevoir, s’était alors étendue a la généralité”. English Historical Review, 
xvi (1901), 515. 

3 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xv, No. 12,382. 

136 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

for it. It was the true military man’s way of murmuring Peace 
with his hand on his sword. He was his former self again, and 
old familiar strains were returning to his utterances—echoes of 
passed campaigns. It was exaggeration perhaps, but it was not 
a mere hoarse boast and it came with the authentic Napoleonic 
ring, when he wrote: “It is probable that within a fortnight 
I shall have defeated the Russians”’. 

Yet if we are to see Napoleon in his giant days at Finckenstein 
and form the least conception of that brain which was teeming 
with ideas, racing with utmost fertility of expedients—every 
new conjuncture striking off more sparks as from a perpetually 
live wire—we must give a glance at the things he did in aside, 
the threads of government which he followed up, as it were, in 
parenthesis, when for a moment he could turn his head from the 
grand preoccupation. We see then the summary way in which 
he could dispose of the sundry by-problems that came to side- 
track him, we realise his mastery of touch in the most casual 
matters, and we can gain an impression of the agility with which 
he could bring the focus to every new question that confronted 
him, the versatility of his mind in the face of a complexity of 
problems, the clearness with which he would sort out the issues 
from a confusion of events, and the certainty with which he 
could swoop down upon his objective. These are the things 
which make the impressiveness of Napoleon’s genius and give 
it the imperial range. Amid all the labours of war and of 
diplomacy he had time to quarrel with the Pope, or play 
‘paternal government” to necessitous industries in France. He 
would go into a lengthy discussion about the founding of a 
special school of literature and history, or give comprehensive 
regulations for the education of girls. Not merely the broad 
direction of policy but the intricacies of small detail came under 
his careful scrutiny. ‘“‘It was he who called attention to the 
omission from a return of two regiments which had been over- 
looked at Luxembourg; it was he who, by comparing hospital 
with the regimental returns, discovered how many of his men 
were marauding all over the country.” It was he who informed 
his minister of police of what Mme de Staél was=doing in Paris, 