

CH. II. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 137 

when the minister had announced that she had actually left 
the city. Further he would give lessons in government to his 
brothers, tirelessly reiterating and ringing the changes on the 
text: “A prince who in the first year of his reign is held to be 
good, is a prince who will be laughed at in the second”. He 
would attempt to heal family quarrels, and write to his brother: 
“You treat your wife in the way one would lead a regiment”’. 
And when little Charles Napoleon died, and his mother, Queen 
Hortense, proved inconsolable, it was the Emperor who, father 
of all the Bonapartes, concerned himself in her grief and showed 
unceasing anxiety on her account, and took measures to provide 
for her amusement. 

Napoleon at Finckenstein was no ineffectual optimist, lost in 
a tangle of dreams, but a master-mind, about at its zenith, 
exulting in the fever of action. When he found again his zest 
for the fight and felt himself riding to victory there was something 
positive and real in his change of mood, something more than 
self-delusion; for he had new plans afoot and was beginning to 
see a way out of his distresses. If he reared himself more proudly 
and spoke less pressingly for peace, it was all part of the game of 
chess that he was playing, and not for a moment did his passions 
run away with him. But coinciding with all this there was a 
revival of confidence in the ranks of his foes, and a wave of 
optimism came over them that reached heights of rashness and 
enthusiasm for which it is not so easy to find a basis. There 
was a decided attempt to tighten the coalition against France, 
a determination to pursue the war with vigour, but no positive 
grounds can be discovered for the extravagant hopes and self- 
congratulations with which the Russians and Prussians amused 
themselves at this period. As usual they allowed Napoleon to 
be the first to come out of the winter’s inactivity and to spring 
upon them with a fresh assault. All the time the threat to 
Danzig was giving their military leaders alarm. Yet it is inter- 
esting, in watching these people, to see how some trick that 
their own minds played with them, carried them to ecstasies of 
confidence and ambition, while no very definite military ad- 
vantage or military prospects created or confirmed their ardour 

138 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

—rather their own psychology fed them with it; with the result 
that for many weeks we are dealing with men who are, so to 
speak, in a dream, who, having achieved some sort of buoyancy 
in themselves, have lost touch with the hard earth and become 
unanchored in their thinking. 

The arrival of the Czar in person at Memel gave the start to 
the new rush of hope and ardour. He in whom all had pinned 
their faith, came like a ray of light into the dreary life of the 
place. Like the hero of a poem he appeared, giving a romantic 
touch to the days of that court-in-exile, drinking tea with 
Queen Louisa, riding horseback, reviewing troops, discussing 
matters of state and measures of war with statesmen and 
soldiers, hammering at Lord Hutchinson for English subsidies, 
and defeating Napoleon in cabinet talks. The emperor was with 
his army, the saviour of Europe was on the spot, those quarrel- 
some and inefficient Russian generals had a master close at hand 
—the thing had a look of vigour, it seemed like determination, 
it gave the illusion of success. The Czar had left St Petersburg 
at a moment when the overtures of Bertrand and Kleist had 
made Russia more warlike, more assured that the French were 
in sore straits. He brought with him to Memel that confidence 
grounded on Napoleon’s difficulties of the winter. Everything 
was staged for mutual compliments and congratulations. Every- 
thing was calculated to make all the illogical things in the minds 
of men play traitor to reality. 