

To the enemies of France the Austrians sent with these 
proposals some footnotes of explanation. They could not grant 
a place in Galicia as the seat of a congress, they said, since 
Napoleon might see an opportunity for abusing their invitation 
and filling the province with his emissaries or attempting to 
spread his Polish insurrection there. It would be easy to stir 
up discontent in a territory so recently acquired by Austria. 

1 Adair to Howick, 14 Mar. 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir, p. 208. 
See also despatch Razoumovski to Budberg 20 Feb./4 Mar. 1807, in Alex. 
Wassiltchikow, Les Razoumovski, t. 11, 8™° partie, pp. 100-2. 

* Starhemberg to Canning, 18 Ap. 1807, in Parliamentary Debates, x, 
cols. 100-2. Ry 

CH. I. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 131 

Stadion also took the view that Turkey was outside the system 
of Europe and not concerned in the questions at issue in the 
negotiation. If a Turkish minister took part, he explained, the 
man would be under the complete influence of France whenever 
the discussion touched on the larger European issues. Constan- 
tinople was merely notified of the mediation, but not invited 
to join in the congress.1_ When the court of Vienna asked the 
views of Russia and France on the expediency of an armistice, 
it turned aside to explain to the Czar that Napoleon would in 
all probability demand a suspension of hostilities in order to 
gain time for military preparations and reinforcements. Though 
not acquainted with the precise opinions of the Russian govern- 
ment, Stadion wrote that he had 

reason to suppose that the Cabinet of St Petersburg will see no ad- 
vantage in an arrangement which would apparently leave France in 
possession of all the conquests she has made over Prussia, and on the 
other hand keep the Russian troops almost on their frontier. It appears 
that if there is to be question of an armistice it can only be on terms 
which would establish some equality between the positions of the 
respective armies or which, at any rate, would not make the situation 
of things worse by perpetuating it.? 

But with all their whisperings and safeguards and manipula- 
tions the Austrians knew that their schemes might be ruined and 
all they had hoped to secure from their mediation thwarted, if 
one power proved intractable—and that power the one which 
had offered no hint of the reception it would give to their 
proposals. The Austrians had not merely decided upon mediation 
in order to escape warlike commitments and evade the dilemma 
afforded by the war of the fourth coalition; they had adopted 
it as a device for securing a voice in the future settlement of the 
continent. All would be ruined if England scorned their media- 
tion and refused to make this her opportunity for contributing 
to the salvation of Europe. All would be hopeless for them if 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, 5 Ap. 1807 (No. 1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

2 Soltikof (acting foreign minister at St Petersburg), describing his inter- 