

At some times Napoleon would have growled at the Austrians 
and pushed their mediation down their throats, or dismissed it 
with a swagger. But now he was rather in a mood to humour 
them. In a way he was not sorry to see them adopt a réle which 
would prevent or at least postpone their entry into the war 
against him. He had every motive for gaining time and begin- 
ning a negotiation which might relax the efforts of his enemies 
or provoke differences and dissensions among them. If he could 
not have his way with the Austrians, yet at least they had given 
him something to juggle with. He had forgotten none of his old 
tricks and manceuvres; as his response to the offer of mediation 
clearly proved. Everything was buried in suggestions and 
stipulations that hinted no generous gesture from him, no desire 
to meet his enemies half-way. Everything was worded to an- 
nounce that though they offered themselves as peace-makers, 
the Austrians were expected to come as a secret support against 
the Czar. Again there was that harping upon “‘the integrity of 
the Ottoman Porte”; the phrase had become a wearisome 
obsession with him; he knew that no words could have been 
more charged with menace to the proposed negotiation, no cry 
could have been raised better calculated, behind its plausibility, 
to challenge and inflame any discussions that might be con- 
templated. The Austrians might have their mediation to play 
with, but it must spoil no plans, and Napoleon must have a free 
hand to turn it, as he had turned his overtures to Prussia, into 
a conspiracy against the Czar. 

It satisfied the Austrians that the Czar disclaimed all pre- 
tensions against Turkey, and that Napoleon was promising to 
restore the Prussian monarchy and abandon his Polish schemes. 

BN 9 

130 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

They did not look too closely at the further inconsistencies in 
the respective demands of the two monarchs, and they declared 
themselves encouraged in their purpose. The way was now clear 
for another advance, and they came forward with an official 
offer of their good offices on behalf of peace. It was important 
that they should prescribe unobjectionable bases for the nego- 
tiation they had in view, in order to give no loophole to unwilling 
powers. A month before their offer of mediation, Stadion had 
in an unofficial way given an outline of the principles which he 
would wish to lay down for a proposed congress. He had de- 
clared that Poland must be left as before the war, that the affairs 
of Germany and Italy—in which the Austrians had many 
interests—should be the subject of general revision and nego- 
tiation, and that the question of the Ottoman Porte should be 
settled according to former treatiés.1 There was an obvious 
anti-French bias, however, in these stipulations and Napoleon 
had recently announced his refusal to accept that renewal of the 
old treaty arrangements in Turkey. Therefore the Austrians 
took refuge in pious vaguenesses, and drew up a note that could 
be accepted by all parties, demanding only that the negotiation 
“should extend over the reciprocal interests and essential 
relations of the Powers taking part in it”, and that a secure and 
stable settlement should be made for the future.? No particular 
method of pursuing the negotiation was laid down, but a town 
in Moravia or Bohemia was offered for the assembly of a 
congress. 