

According to Hardenberg’s plan the Prussian king was to be 
restored to his estates, and something was to be done to strengthen 
his position and improve his frontier. He declared the very 
weakness of Prussia a reason for increasing her power. “It 
would be impossible for Prussia to withstand the slightest blow 
from France if she were not made stronger, not so much by 
augmentations of territory, as by the rectification of her 
frontiers.” And he showed how you could secure this object by 
transplanting the king of Saxony into Poland. 

When he came to discuss the large problem of the future 
stability of Europe, Hardenberg could pursue the question in 
an unhampered fashion, for his country had no solemn engage- 
ments which bound it first of all to secure redress for the victims 

142 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK II. 

of Napoleonic conquest; it had not, like Russia and England, a 
point of honour at stake in this matter. Therefore, without being 
too much harassed by such points as the claims of the kings of 
Naples and Sardinia, he was able to concentrate upon his favourite 
well-fondled scheme of raising up in central Europe a power that 
would arrest the devastating career of the Corsican usurper. 

Here Hardenberg pronounced the magic name of ““Germany’”’. 
He could not fly in the face of England, whose conquests were 
the one thing in the hands of the coalition that could be offered 
to Napoleon in negotiation. He could not ignore the Austrians, 
who had held the legacy of Holy Roman Empire. Therefore he 
dodged like a diplomat and took refuge in an evasion. “Ger- 
many” should be the buttress of the reorganised continent. Not 
the old Germany, however, with its effete institutions and 
cloudy dignities and dust-ridden formalities, not the Germany of 
mediaeval empire and Austrian hegemony—this had been in- 
capable of meeting the French onrush. The Germanic system 
should be remoulded, it should be strengthened and organised 
into a confederation; and this, placed under the guarantee of 
Russia and England, should be the mainstay of the new Europe. 

Then appears the reason why the “general good” that is to 
be promoted must be achieved by the advancement of the 
private interests of the allies, why the erection of a bulwark 
in Europe must take precedence over the claims of unfortunate 
monarchs of Naples or Sardinia, why everything is to be sub- 
ordinated to the creation of a powerful Germany. Austria is not 
to return to the primacy that Napoleon had usurped; Prussia is 
to be advanced to a share with her in'the leadership. She, along 
with Austria, is to control the destinies of the new confederation. 
The problem of the heritage of the obsolete Empire is to be 
solved by a division. One will not be over-tender with the rights 
of the minor princes of the old imperial system in working the 
reconstruction—nowhere do Hardenberg’s proposals fall into a 
fond solicitude for the small and weak. 

‘““On the independence of Germany”, he writes, ‘‘hangs that of 
Europe. But it cannot exist so long as a large number of little courts 
have divided interests and are at cross-purposes. *Sovereignty must 