

Napoleon refused to allow an official reply to be made to this 
overture before it had been officially opened to him by Austria, 
but he ordered Talleyrand to give an intimation that his answer 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xtv, Nos. 12,028, 12,082. 
2 P. Bertrand, op. cit. No. cctxv. Talleyrand to Andréossy, 22 Mar. 1807, 
A.A.E. Autriche, t. 380. 

128 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

would be favourable provided that Austria did nothing to cause 
him uneasiness or alarm. He immediately seized upon the fact 
that the Russians had accepted the offer of mediation because 
it seemed a means of dragging the court of Vienna out of its 
isolation and of engaging it to join the coalition. Therefore as a 
condition of his acceptance he demanded that Austria should 
not arm, and should adopt no hostile attitude. She must sin- 
cerely take up the part of peace-maker, and Talleyrand was to 
show her what a fine réle this was. 

Talleyrand informed Vincent of the attitude of Napoleon and 
wrote also to Andréossy at Vienna, ordering him to act, if the 
matter were broached to him, as though he were “not certain, 
but had an idea that France would not be unwilling to accept 
the intervention of Austria for the establishment of a peace in 
which Turkey should be comprised’’. 

‘‘Tf there is talk of an armistice’’, the instructions went on to say, 
**You must remark that in the despatches which I write to you there 
is no mention of this topic; you do not see any reason why the Emperor 
should desire an armistice; you do not think the matter has entered 
his head; it does not seem to you that such a proposition should come 
from him; the power which has been allowed to intervene as mediator 
is the one to do this, if it thinks proper; still, it is your private opinion 
that a suspension of arms is not only natural but necessary in the event 
of a negotiation. To negotiate while fighting would be to work upon 
bases which would shift every day with the movement of events; 
consequently it would be fruitless.’’? 

Napoleon declared that a proposition like the following would 
be acceptable to him: 

There shall be a suspension of arms of three or six months’ duration 
between the belligerent powers, and it shall be based upon the actual 
status quo; negotiators on behalf of Russia, Turkey, Prussia, England 
and France, shall meet at Vienna to work for peace under the media- 
tion of Austria.® 

It was a repetition of the proposal of a congress that Napoleon 
had made to the Prussian Colonel Kleist a month before, with 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xiv, No. 12,098. 
* Talleyrand to Andréossy, 31 Mar. 1807, 4.4.E. Autriche, t. 380. 
3 Corresp. de Nap. I@, t. x1v, No. 12,181. . 

OH. 1. THE POLICY OF AUSTRIA 129 

Vienna instead of Memel as the seat of negotiation, and with the 
admission of Austria as mediating party. An armistice was 
wanted and was to be put forward with the same arguments as 
before, only Napoleon was unwilling to ask for it directly, this 
time, and did not even wish the question to be raised as yet. 
Talleyrand was ordered not to mention it at all to Vincent until 
later. Meanwhile Austria would have something to keep her 
quiet. 