

CH. Il. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 145 

their characters had room to play, never for a moment did they 
show his generous impulses; while along with his passion for 
rule, his insatiable greed of conquest, there went a gift of 
efficiency and a reforming zeal that left their mark from Dal- 
matia to the farthest edge of the German dominions—beside 
which the Prussian craving for power is a pretension and an 
offence, and seems selfishness unredeemed. 

While Hardenberg was occupying himself with his masterly 
remappings of Europe there arrived from London a despatch 
which was a challenge on the question of the re-establishment 
of Germany. It was a reminder that England had a hand in 
the matter, that there was vexation in store for the men who 
were to remodel Europe, and that even with Napoleon beyond 
the Rhine the strife and perplexity would not be over. It was 
Howick’s reply to the peace proposals which had come to him 
from St Petersburg at the beginning of the year; and it arrived 
conveniently at the moment when the Russians and Prussians 
were engaged in discussing their intentions in personal confer- 
ences.1 The point on which the British government seemed 
disposed to create the greatest difficulty related to the erection 
of a bulwark that would keep France in check for the future. 
England had made it plain for a long time that she had fixed 
upon Austria for the réle, and that she would tolerate no 
aggrandisement of Prussia. Howick’s despatch did not mention 
Prussia by name, when it declared England’s refusal to use her 
maritime conquests in the way that was desired at Memel; but 
it clearly designated a certain state which was considered to 
have no claims upon England by reason of any friendship or 
alliance and it mentioned the futility of restoring a prince who 
had been unable to defend his own dominions—who even in 
time of peace had fallen into dependence upon France. It was 
further at issue with Hardenberg’s proposals in that it gave a 
priority to the claims of the minor victims of Napoleon and 

t See above, pp. 101-2. The despatch was addressed to Lord Douglas at 
St Petersburg but a copy had been sent to Lord Hutchinson at Memel and 
he communicated it to the Russian ministers. Hutchinson to Howick, 
No. 17, 10 Ap. 1807, #'.0. Prussia 64/74. 

BN 10 

146 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

recognised England’s obligations to the dispossessed princes. 
Here was much matter for discussion and the conversations at 
the allied headquarters in Poland were continued. It was agreed 
that the correspondence with Napoleon should be taken up again, 
the negotiations for a congress resumed. It was arranged that 
the aims of the proposed concert of the powers at war with 
France should be modified according as England, Austria and 
Sweden agreed to subscribe to the treaty. Finally, the proposals 
of Hardenberg were diluted and wrapped in generalisations, and 
robbed of any sting that they might have, in a convention 
concluded between: Prussia and Russia at Bartenstein on the 
28rd of April. 