

In the middle of May, when Canning sits down to write 
despatch after despatch, he makes it clear that he is ready with 
an active policy and that it was not for nothing that he called 
himself the disciple of Pitt. Foreign ministers in London soon 
found him more determined than his predecessors in the energetic 
prosecution of the war. Distrust of the Prussians and anger at 
the Hardenberg proposals, determined Lord Hutchinson to 
refuse to have anything to do with the convention of Barten- 
stein, when it was put before him for his accession. Canning 
would not allow these things to ruin the concert. He blustered 
—threatened to refuse to accede if the Czar did not guarantee to 
check the Prussian designs; but everywhere he declared the 
convention agreeable to England, he officially communicated to 
the Austrian minister his intention to accede, and he urged the 
court of Vienna to follow his example.” If he did not actually 
sign, the fault was not on the British side. The Russian minister 
in London was furnished with powers for the transaction. 
Everything waited in readiness for the arrival of Colonels 
Engelmann and Kriisemarck, the emissaries of Prussia for the 

1 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 6, 16 May 1807, F.0. Russia 
65/69. 

2 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 44, 20 May, and No. 46, 26 May 1807, 
W.S.A. Weisungen nach London. 

154 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

purpose. English observers at the Prussian headquarters com- 
mented on the delay of the departure of these men and could 
not understand it. When eventually they did reach London, it 
was the 28th of June, and two days later, before anything had 
been done, rumours came through of a great battle lost at 
Friedland.1 This was an end of combinations and conventions 
and attempts to tighten the coalition. 

1 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 20, 29 June, and No. 21, 30 June, 
1807, F'.O. Russia 65/69. 

CHAPTER IIl 

THE RECEPTION OF THE AUSTRIAN 
PEACE PROPOSAL 

Ir was at the moment when the campaign was awakening once 
more and when ali the powers were recovering the warlike mood, 
that Austria came with her proposals for peace. In the Prussian 
headquarters there was confidence untimely and excessive. Even 
the Russian commander, the grumbler Bennigsen, who had been 
frowned at for his pessimism and his lack of enthusiasm could 
scarcely be refrained, it was said, from proclaiming his master 
king of Poland on the spot. The Swedish king was shouting for 
the Bourbons; London was the scene of unfamiliar activity. 
And Napoleon was beginning to slip and slant as in former days, 
and take refuge in indirectness—to do everything in fact to 
prove the falsity of his various pacific assertions. The Austrian 
mediation, instead of falling among chastened people, weary 
with the war-ridden times, dropped into a gang of rowdies, who 
were in a mood to bellow and brag. Russia had promised to 
receive it kindly—but on the condition that behind it there 
should be an imposing show of power; Napoleon would not turn 
it out of doors,-he said, if Austria would abandon her armaments, 
and display nothing but an olive-branch. The Austrians were 
deluded if they imagined that mere diplomacy could straighten 
out this situation. 