

But it does appear truly inconceivable that the delusion which the 
Court of Vienna is too probably practising upon itself in this Parade 
of a splendid and imposing Mediation should so entirely have got 
possession of the Austrian Cabinet as not to permit them to see that 
no party can in truth be thankful to them for this interference what- 
ever motives of policy may prevent either from actually declining to 
accept it.” 

This mediation, accompanied by the armaments Austria had 
been making, could not fail, argued Canning, to arouse some 
resentment in Napoleon; and if he should win another victory, 
Austria lay at his merey. Russia could only regard the whole 
affair as an evasion of the plain duty that was before the court 
of Vienna; and if the next engagement proved as indecisive as 
the others, the emperor of Russia, “‘having fully redeemed the 
credit of his arms and seeing no further probability of effecting 
the ulterior objects of the war without the co-operation of 
Austria”, might see nothing to prevent him making peace for 
himself and Prussia, and leaving Austria to her own resources. 
How could this power expect her welfare to have consideration 
from the allies if she “‘held out no encouragement to expect that 
she would concur with them in contending by force of arms” 
for the objects in view? Even should a congress assemble there 
could be no reason for complaint on her part if the allies arrived 
at a settlement “omitting only those points in which Austria 
feels vitally interested”. Scenting the real apprehensions of the 
Austrians, taunting them by a parade of their own worst pre- 
monitions, conjuring up the possibilities with which they had 
been tormenting themselves in their most dreadful times of 

1 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 2, 16 May 1807, F.0. Russia 
65/69. 
2 G. Canning to Adair, No. 5, 9 June 1807, F.O. Austria 7/84. 

158 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

uncertainty, Canning resumed the coward’s arguments for being 
brave at such a moment, and summarised the selfish reasons for 
Austria’s enlistment in the common cause. One course was open 
to the court of Vienna—to accede to the convention of Barten- 
stein; the powers “ might otherwise accept disadvantageous offers 
from France, considering that acceptance (however inadequate 
to greater objects) as a less evil than the hopeless continuance 
of a protracted contest”. And unless this was done, without 
delay, Austria’s “good offices for the establishment of peace 
would be fruitless”’.+ 

Starhemberg, the Austrian minister, gleaned from his con- 
versations with Canning some hints of the kind of peace that 
would be acceptable to the British government. “As to the 
Prussian Monarchy ’’, he wrote, “‘it is easy to guess that England 
attaches no other value to its existence and re-establishment 
than what the general interests of other powers might demand. 
The conduct of Prussia has destroyed all kind of attachment 
to her in England.” 

“TI do not think that it is the same with Russia”, adds 
Starhemberg. And later he refers again to the subject. “It is 
possible that Russia, concerned above all with the interests of 
Prussia, will neglect the interests of Austria.” 