

The king of Sweden was hauled into the movement that was 
to tighten up the coalition. He took the opportunity to strike 
another of his romantic attitudes, and he played up to his part 
of crazy knight-errant. A military convention, concluded at 
Bartenstein on the 21st of April, brought him into the group and 
marked out a plan of co-operation with Prussia, by which he 
was to lead a joint expedition of Prussians and Swedes against 

1 The convention of Bartenstein is printed in F. de Martens, Recueil des 
traités, v1, 409. 

10-2 

148 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

the French in Prussian Pomerania. Gustavus, however, having 
come to this agreement, thought he had done enough, and 
regarded himself as absolved from further commitments with his 
allies, and saw no necessity for acceding to the other, the 
political, convention of Bartenstein. Although he was heartily 
in favour of its spirit and of the intention of vigorously continuing 
the war, he was not in full agreement with its politics. 

“Nothing will give me more joy”, he wrote to the Prussian king, 
‘than to be able to join with you in the secure re-establishment of 
order and independence; but to reach this important aim, it is neces- 
sary, I think, to turn our attention to the cause of Legitimacy, the 
Bourbon cause, and to declare ourselves publicly in its favour, and not 
to lose sight of the principles upon which the existence of all legitimate 
governments and of their subjects, is based.’’! 

He was the “die-hard” of the coalition, and all the adjustments 
and balancing of forces were wasted upon him. That was why 
he regarded the political convention of Bartenstein as “super- 
fluous” and as “having relation to objects entirely foreign to 
our present efforts and cares” 

While the continental enemies of France were arriving at 
these measures of more effective co-operation and more deter- 
mined energy, England was arising out of the “apathy” that 
had brought her into universal reproach, and was sharing and 
anticipating the aims of her allies. Events in domestic politics 
produced a change of ministry. The occurrence was at first 
unpopular in Europe; the Austrian government declared it little 
calculated to inspire confidence; it was remarked that the 
ministers were personally more feeble than the men whom they 
replaced, and it was feared that they would find difficulty in 
facing the House of Commons. Various matters—the demands 
of home politics at a critical moment, and a short illness of 
Canning’s that had been hastened by over-work—prevented for 
some period the dissipation of this opinion, and caused a con- 
tinuation of the delays of which the British government had 
been guilty. The slackness of the retiring cabinet projected its 

1 The letter is printed in Koch and Schoell, eb ei abrégée des traités de 
paix, vit (Paris, 1817), 456-7. 

CHa. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 149 

evils for a space into the regime of the new government and made 
it impossible for the succeeding ministers to come out with 
an immediate display of energy. And the distance from the 
continent postponed any appreciation of the effect that the 
constitutional change could have upon the European situation. 