

CH wil. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 143 

disappear for them in matters of war and peace, and must only belong 
to the heads of Confederation.” 

And if it should be objected that the problem of Germany was 
not solved by a division between Austria and Prussia, or that 
at least a fresh ditficulty was raised by it, if it was argued that 
according to this plan Germany would still be divided against 
itself and its two great powers would find the new situation more 
rife with jealousies and mutual conflict than before, Hardenberg 
was ready with an answer that belongs rather to the politics 
of the copy-book than to serious statesmanship; he said that 
Austria and Prussia must not quarrel, but must work as allies, 
and be good.! 

One cannot for a moment be blind to the stupidity and in- 
fatuation of these Prussians. It is impossible not to condemn 
the basic principles that underlay their policy—the ardour with 
which they made everything turn to the benefit of themselves, 
the readiness they showed to equate the good of mankind with 
the private advancement of Prussia. Ambition for domination 
in north Germany had become a growing obsession with them; 
it commanded their minds whenever for a moment they could 
forget that the French had hunted them to the farthest corner 
of their land. It had been their secret purpose when they had 
become allies of France in 1806; it had made them eager to 
occupy Hanover and organise a confederation of the north. For 
its sake they had later come to quarrel with Napoleon and had 
shown themselves more exacting in negotiation, more ready to 
plunge into war; with the result that Napoleon found it easy to 
make it his case that he fought the campaign of Jena to save the 
smaller German states from domination. All the time the British 
government, alert for its interests in Hanover, and made alive 
with jealousy, saw what was at the heart of these Prussians and 
stood watching them with irreconcilable distrust. 

These were the people who had fawned and cringed before 
Napoleon, and then had become a dead weight in the coalition. 
Wavering, irresolute, fear-driven they had feinted and twisted, 
and left friends in the lurch. In the contest that cracked a 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 341-4. 

144 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

continent they had shuffled their way with nothing of grandeur, 
had sided in turn with both parties, had often double-crossed 
both, now sending piteous calls for help to their allies, now 
making pathetic manceuvres for peace, never winning for them- 
selves a title to the greatness they were pursuing or forging 
an excuse for the ambitions that they had in contemplation. 
Looking on what there was of selfishness and ruthlessness in 
their policy, as it appears in that gigantic piece of self-betrayal 
which Hardenberg wrote at Memel, one begins to think more 
kindly of this Napoleon who had such men arrayed against him, 
and one can view his career of conquest with more equanimity 
and less pain. Early he had come to an encounter with Austrians 
and Prussians and the like, and had learned their unfaithfulness 
and double-dealing and cowardice; and nobility and kindness 
that had been in the rising youth might well have withered at 
the contact. Little wonder if he came to think all the old 
governments contemptible, and accepted everything in diplo- 
macy as crooked, and counted every royalty a mean and ragged 
thing. These people had menaced him with their feigned friend- 
ship and secret conspiracies. On every side of him were govern- 
ments selfish, effete, corrupt. If he thought it a little matter to 
wipe them out and clean away the crusted relics of degenerate 
mediaevalism, who can say that it was not a service? If his 
diplomacy was cunning and clever, what else could have 
prospered against the methods and devices of Vienna? Many of 
these enemy governments had taught him something in selfish- 
ness and treachery, and some could have very little to urge in 
defence of their own utility; if he hardened his heart against 
them and became too like themselves, perhaps it is not mere 
weary waste of pity to reflect on the world that moulded him— 
to recall the youthful Bonaparte who, as a subordinate officer, 
had been willing to starve for the sake of his family—and to 
glance at times, in aside, at the Napoleon who could forgive 
generously, who was the cherished friend of his soldiers, who 
organised the welfare of peoples, and who bewitched with charm 
of personality every person who came near him. In all their 
ambitions the Prussians had nothing of his grandeur, and when 