

That convention was not merely an engagement, but an appeal; 
it was drawn up in a way intended to make it not merely accept- 
able, but inviting. It was an attempt, also, to find a common 
formula for diverse points of view. It was therefore conveniently 
vague on matters that were likely to cause disagreement. It was 
a document based on the optimism of the moment and proposing 
to set limits to the power and aggressions of Napoleon, to free 
Germany from the oppressor, to raise a barrier against France 
for the future, and to separate the Crown of Italy from the 
Crown of France. 

Nothing in it contradicted the proposals of Hardenberg of the 
7th of April; nothing in it suggested that that minister had 
modified or abandoned any point; nothing was mentioned that 
would forbid the interpretation of the convention in the light of 
Hardenberg’s programme or would give final reassurances to any 
person who had had reason to be alarmed by the Prussian 
ambitions. Everything in fact supported the reading of the one 
into the terms of the other. In the convention of Bartenstein, 
a restored and reconstituted Germany was to form a barrier 
against France, the independence of Europe was again declared 
to rest upon that of Germany, and the obsolete Holy Roman 
Empire was to be replaced by a strong federation; but the more 
precise features of Hardenberg’s plan were omitted out of 
delicacy; to have talked openly of abolishing various powers of 
sovereignty enjoyed by smaller rulers, or even to have declared 

Chait. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 147 

in plain words the combined supremacy of Austria and Prussia, 
would have touched delicate interests, or would have demanded 
from the signatory powers commitments that as yet were far 
too definite. These things could not be hauled into the common 
formula. 

Even as it was, the convention bore signs of its Prussian origin. 
By its terms Austria was to be consulted in the reorganisation 
of Italy, but she was not mentioned in connection with the future 
of Germany. Vague promises of territory were held out to 
powers which should join the concert; in the case of Austria these 
took more precise form; she should receive the Tyrol again and 
have a frontier on the Mincio. Austria was envisaged, that is to 
say, in her connection with Italy, not in the light of her former 
relations with Germany; and this in a political statement that 
was intended to be inviting to her. 

Prussia was to be restored completely to her former power, 
with compensations for any territory not returned to her, and 
with the advantage of a better military frontier. Another of the 
Prussian objects of the war was guaranteed in a clause which 
promised indemnities to the Prince of Orange for his losses in 
Germany and Holland. Russian ambitions did not assert them- 
selves in this document. The independence of Turkey was 
guaranteed.! The Czar, who had a habit of making surrender to 
personalities, and was impressionable when he could be met in 
personal interviews, seems to have given Hardenberg free scope 
and to have satisfied himself with the joy of being the deliverer 
of Europe. He is all benevolence, and it is Prussia that is haughty, 
self-confident, exacting. 