

you are of all the difficulties which the present administration have 
had to surmount in making the preparations for it.” 

Immediately on entering office, Canning recognised the 
feebleness of England’s diplomatic representation on the con- 
tinent, and saw the special necessity of having a competent 
minister with the monarchs at the allied headquarters. He 
promised the early departure of ‘‘a person invested with the 
highest diplomatic character and furnished with the most ample 
instructions and powers” who should be attached to the Czar. 
He informed the allies that the government was engaged ‘ 
ascertaining the highest amount to which it will be possible to 
earry the pecuniary exertions of England”? and he gave it to 
be understood that the new minister would be able to deal with 
the question of subsidies immediately on his arrival; only he 
insisted that Prussia should conclude a treaty of concert that 
was much belated and give a guarantee that she would come to 
no separate arrangement with France, before she should receive 
any money from England. 

1 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 5 (Secret), F.O. Russia 65/69. 

2 G. Canning to Alopeus, 18 June 1807 (replying to fhe note from Alopeus 
5/17 June 1807), F.O. Russia 65/78. 

$ G. Canning to Hutchinson, Nos. 8 and 4,5 Ap. 1807, F.O. Prussia 64/74, 

CHepIT. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 151 

The first of Canning’s instructions for the new minister who 
was to go to the allied headquarters did in fact direct that a 
treaty should be concluded with Russia ‘“‘of which the object 
shall be the joint prosecution of the war until the conclusion 
of a general peace which shall comprise and secure the interests 
of all the powers engaged in the contest”’.! All the enemies of 
France were to be invited to accede to it; and Canning thought 
that the proposal would destroy any impression that prevailed 
concerning the insular policy of England. But Canning came 
into office with an intense distrust of the policy and practices 
of the ministers at Memel; his early despatches to Lord Hutchin- 
son show that he seriously feared the conclusion of separate 
peace by Prussia; the idea of the treaty of concert appealed to 
him as a way of tying her hands in future. 

The day after the instruction was drawn up the English 
government received the news that the very kind of convention 
which it desired had already been concluded at Bartenstein; 
Canning was asked by the Russian minister to accede to it. The 
new English representative was informed of the event which 
eancelled his first instructions, and he was told that “‘as the 
principles upon which it was founded were consonant to the 
orders he had received”’, England would probably join the 
concert; but, it was added, “it is probable indeed that His 
Majesty’s accession will be accompanied with a reservation 
making that accession conditional upon His Imperial Majesty’s 
consenting to guarantee the literal execution of the Treaty of 
Renunciation signed at Memel on the 28th of January”’.? 
Canning, like his predecessor, had an instinctive distrust of 
Prussian policy, and meant to make the Czar the pledge against 
the danger of Prussian ambitions. England in 1806 had been 
antagonistic to the Prussian scheme of a northern confederation, 
by which that power had intended to share with France the 