

But gradually there emerged from the array of uninspiring 
names, one that had the compelling, unmistakable marks of 
strength. He was one of those personalities that are winning 
and yet at the same time must be unpopular. He had that sort 
of witty tongue that makes a man hated for his wit. Nimbleness 
and versatility gave a swiftness to his mind and there was 
something so palpably clever about him that he could not but 
be distrusted. Quick, sensitive, short-tempered, he could display 
a haughty or quarrelsome or trenchant side, and these moods 
which would bring out “‘the flash of his eye, and the scorn of his 
lip”, were the times that found him most brilliant. Taunted as 
the son of an actress, famous as author of skits and epigrams that 
had had a smart and a sting, gifted with an eloquence that was 
almost considered a crime, George Canning brought to the 
Foreign Office an application, an energy and a practical ability 
that set off those more “flashy”? arts which had brought him 
into a sort of paradoxical disrepute. Coming into office with a 
strong notion that British foreign policy was in need of a grand 
awakening, he very soon produced a series of instructions that 
swept the length and breadth of the political situation. In 
despatches that would glow with heat and passion, breaking out 
often in impetuosity and wrath, and sometimes surprising the 
reader with their betrayals of flaming personality, he sought to 
give England a more masterly hand in the politics of Europe. 
Finding his country suspected of insularity by her continental 
allies, he took the opportunity of his appointment to circulate 
the strongest assurances that this was a misapprehension; he 
induced the king to write a personal letter to the Czar in con- 
firmation of his assertions,! and when the Austrian complaints 
reached him concerning the language of Douglas at St Petersburg, 

1 George III to Alexander I, 10 Ap. 1807, F.O. Russia 65/72. The reply 
of Alexander, 7 May 1807, is in the same volume. 

150 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

and the fear of an impending system of “isolation” on the part 
of Great Britain, he was ready with the most convincing dis- 
avowals. He quickly instructed his ministers “‘to counteract the 
notions known to have been entertained and not sparingly 
insinuated...with respect to the imputed selfishness of the 
enterprises and military achievements of this country”.1 He 
ordered Lord Hutchinson to proceed to Sweden to discuss the 
question of a joint expedition, and he set on foot a negotiation 
with Sweden that led to the conclusion of a military convention. 
And when the Russian minister, in a particularly angry note, 
complained of continued delays in the execution of a military 
diversion, he was able to show a righteous wrath and came out 
with a vigorous retort: 

But surely, Sir, it was not in a Note from you to me that I should 
have expected to find the reproach that the British Government was 
not prepared with such an expedition two months ago, apprised as 