

George Canning had always asserted that the only conditions 
to which England could listen in any proposal of peace or 
mediation were such that Napoleon would be certain to reject. 
When he found the basis of the Austrian proposals satisfactory 
he swore that France would have nothing to do with them unless 
she received another check, and even in that event he declared 
that Austria would do better to play an active part, taking it as 
her opportunity. When he heard that France had actually ac- 
cepted this very mediation—agreed to throw Italy and Germany 

156 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

into the discussions of a congress—it was nonsense to him, the 
insincerity was palpable, it was a trick to gain time, Napoleon 
was bent only on trapping the allies into the granting of an 
armistice. Starhemberg saw that England attached to the pro- 
posed Austrian intervention the idea of an “armed mediation”; 
she ‘“‘divined the intentions of the Russian government” on 
this point. But, after all, the court of Vienna had the satisfaction 
of learning that England accepted its good offices, on the con- 
dition that her allies did the same—stipulating only that the 
seat of any negotiations which might be set on foot should be 
a place remote from the immediate influence of the campaign 
and should be so situated as to “‘afford His Majesty in an equal 
degree with all the other powers concerned the opportunity of a 
prompt and uninterrupted communication with his plenipoten- 
tiaries”’.1 

Canning had a commentary to make on this acceptance, and 
he did not address it to Austria. 

‘**In giving this answer’’, he wrote in a despatch to the new minister 
to the Czar, ‘“‘the King has done no more than refer the decision of 
the question to the Emperor of Russia, without whose perfect con- 
currence it is obvious that Prussia cannot take any step whatever, 
and who in proportion as he bears the brunt of the Continental War 
is best qualified and best entitled to judge of the course which it may 

be fit or necessary to pursue in the acceptance or rejection of any 
overture for pacification.” 

Canning touched on the inconvenience of the mediation; the 
thing could be welcome to nobody but there was advantage 
capable of being derived from it “‘if Austria [could] be induced 
to support its offer of Mediation or resent its refusal”. Let the 
Czar listen to no proposal of an armistice, in any event; far from 
leading to peace it would be “calculated only to afford time for 
the power of Buonaparte to strike its roots wide and deep in the 
country of which he at present has military possession”. As to 
a naval armistice, Canning declined “in the most unequivocal 
manner” to entertain the idea. And he gave his full concurrence 

. 1G, Canning to Starhemberg (with covering note) 25 Ap. 1807, printed 
in Parliamentary Debates, x, cols. 102—4 (No. 11). . 

CH. Ii. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 157 

to Alexander’s decision ‘“‘that a previous settlement of a basis of 
negotiation acceptable to all parties is essentially requisite 
before a Congress can be opened with any prospect of useful 
discussion”.!_ To the British minister in Vienna, Canning 
revealed his real opinion of the whole transaction. 