

1 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 1, 16 May 1807, F'.0. Russia 

65/69. 

2 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 12, 17 May 1807, F'.0. Russia 
65/69. The treaty of Memel, by which peace was concluded between England 
and Prussia on the 28th of January 1807, is printed in the Annual Register 

(1807), p. 712. 

152 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK II. 

leadership of Germany and balance the Confederation of the 
Rhine. Canning came down with redoubled anger on Harden- 
berg’s new proposals, and wrote heatedly to the new minister 
concerning the renewed pretensions of the cabinet of Berlin. 

“‘T have received private intimations”, he wrote, “‘that M. de 
Hardenberg immediately upon his restoration to Power has been 
busied in framing a plan of pacification for Germany, which is founded 
upon the idea of placing all the states of the North, under the super- 
intending Protection and military authority of Prussia—and that 
Hanover is specially intended to be comprised in this arrangement.” 

¢ 

He set it down as an “extraordinary idea”’; said that Prussia 
was trying to treat her neighbours as France had done, and 
commanded: 

Your Excellency will not hesitate to declare in the most unequivocal 
terms His Majesty’s determination not to consent to the creation of 
such a predominant power in Prussia, and the resolution of the British 
Government not to suffer the electoral dominions of His Majesty to be 
incorporated....The experience which Hanover has had of the 
exaction and tyranny belonging to the military laws of Prussia, 
especially when enforced upon neighbouring states, has excited in that 
country a repugnance to Prussian Protection which makes any 
arrangements founded upon that principle in the highest degree 
distasteful. 

Canning was not hostile. “His Majesty is perfectly ready to 
co-operate for the restoration of the Prussian monarchy to all 
its own estates”, he wrote; he even showed a willingness to see 
the Prussian system strengthened in a sound political way; but 
he was merciless when it came to the restoring of that military 
system “ of which the vice and weakness have been unfortunately 
made too manifest to all the world”’, and he considered that 

to attempt to re-establish that same fictitious power and to give it 
strength and support by subjecting to it in a great degree the neigh- 
bouring countries which are as much entitled as Prussia to the re- 
covery and maintenance of their independence is a project in which 
there would be as little of policy as of justice.... 

He shouted and harangued where Howick had delicately in- 
sinuated, and he returned more than once to his text, that 

CH..11. REVIVAL OF MARTIAL ARDOUR 153 

Prussia was “‘a power who has shown herself unequal to her own 
defence, but who would repair that instrument which has broken 
short in her own hand, at the expense of her neighbours, and 
then call upon them to trust exclusively to it for their pro- 
tection”; once again you were met with that terrible “flash of 
his eye and scorn of his lip’’, and a diplomatic despatch became 
eloquence in his hands as he enlarged upon the point. He ex- 
plained the arrangements which he would be willing to accept 
for the future of Germany. He would have a federation in the 
north in which the states should bear their part ‘‘not as subor- 
dinate vassals, but as great and independent members”’, acting 
not under compulsion, but out of free-will. And he demanded 
that the Czar should check these vagaries of Prussian am- 
bition.} 