

In his quick trenchant style, with its touches of frankness, its 
semi-colloquial lapses, and its insistent repetitions, Napoleon 
drove home his policy and administered his rebuke. 

Still he was not satisfied. The affair was too big for trifling. 
So although Talleyrand protested that he was saying nothing to 
Vincent, Napoleon called him to his side, out of range of the man. 
He might inform Vincent of his departure, and promise to return 
in a few days; this would have the advantage of making it 
appear that there was nothing to hide. Also, ‘You might tell 
M. de Vincent that it is possible that an overture has been made 
to me; that this unexpected call would give you to think so, but 
that you do not know anything”’.2. But the few days passed by, 
and Talleyrand made no return. “During the whole month of 
May Baron Vincent attempted to get into touch with the 
French Headquarters. It was in vain. And he was very hurt 
byaits7 

The Emperor and minister were having one of their differences 
of opinion at this time, and the long alliance between the 
limping, humorous, courtly aristocrat who had been bishop, 
exile and diplomat in turn, and the Corsican adventurer, “so 
badly brought up”, who had leaped from the dismal lodgings of 
an impoverished subaltern to a grandeur that outshone the 
royalty of Louis XIV, was fast coming to a close.4 Napoleon 
was essentially a man of visions and impulses, every conjuncture, 
every trick of circumstance only prompting him to more grand 
designs, only luring his eye to more untrodden hills. But 
Talleyrand could not go with him all the way, and, aristocrat 
at heart, would not consent to be a mute unreasoning tool. 
Talleyrand’s thought was of that withering kind that was so 
Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xv, No. 12,453. 

Ibid. t. xv, No. 12,488. 

Driault, Tilsit, p. 111. 

1 
2 
3 
4 See Revue Historique, t. cxivi (juillet-aott, 1924), pp. 222-30. 

168 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

fashionable and attractive in the gilded world of his youth. He 
talked with a wink and a smile, his sarcasm would charm a salon, 
and, in repartee, he would cover a sword-thrust with velvet; 
but always his was the talk of the sceptic rather than the 
enthusiast, the critic rather than the dreamer; he could be 
delightfully oblique, he was never daringly grand. He thought 
best when on the defensive. This is where he differed from his 
master. This is why he was able to play a sort of second critical 
self to Napoleon, checking his flights of ambition, softening his 
intemperate expressions, and moderating his indiscreet out- 
bursts—and, on the positive side, furnishing him expedients 
rather than grand designs. Hence he was perhaps the man to 
know Napoleon, and realise the true situation of affairs, better 
than Napoleon himself. 

So, while his master was riding away on the wings of some new 
inspiration, Talleyrand kept his ear to the ground and caught 
any rumbling that promised danger. He had the instinct of 
self-preservation developed to its highest power. At the close 
of 1805 he seems to have felt that Napoleon was over-reaching 
himself, over-straining the power of France in the attempt to 
carry out his unbridled ambitions; and he made great point, 
after the battle of Ulm, of a scheme by which the beaten Austria © 
should be won into alliance with France and, by the cession of 
Danubian territory, should be induced to direct her ambitions 
towards Turkey and the east, leaving Napoleon a free hand in 
Germany and Italy. Napoleon scorned such moderation, used 
his victory to despoil and enfeeble Austria, and so left that 
country bitter, and secretly hostile, ready to avenge herself if 
ever opportunity came. Throughout the year 1806 Talleyrand 
faithfully served Napoleon in the attempts to make peace with 
England and Russia, and to avert the Prussian war. But after 
the battle of Jena Napoleon seems again to have feared, or to 
have desired to prevent, Talleyrand’s moderating counsels, and 
the minister was carefully excluded from the whole negotiation 
with Prussia. It was the opinion of many people that his inter- 
vention was the only thing which could have saved Prussia and 
bridled the anger of Napoleon. The story of Napoleon’s attempts 