

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, No.36,28 Ap. 1807, W.S.A. Berichteaus London. 

2 G. Canning to Adair, No. 6, 26 June 1807, F'.0. Austria 7/84. Starhem 
berg to Stadion, No. 58, 27 June 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

160 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

Russia in turn moves it one step further on to the shoulders of 
Prussia. The Czar had already expressed satisfaction with the 
Austrian intention to mediate, and his original answer to the 
proposals of Merfeldt had been communicated to all the powers 
concerned. He could not draw back at this point. He merely 
took up the attitude he had maintained throughout the whole 
year, and held to the principle which Howick and Canning had 
cordially approved and confirmed; he accepted the mediation, 
provided only that Napoleon should state the bases upon which 
he proposed to treat. 

It was left for the Prussians to catch up the tale and make out 
the rest of the argument. Napoleon would not give satisfaction 
on this question of bases, they said, and they addressed their 
reply to this subject, “‘[The king’s] natural moderation would 
induce him to accept without scruple the offer of His Imperial 
and Royal Majesty if he could convince himself that the basis 
which France would consent to in a negotiation would be such as 
his honour allowed him to accept”’.1 Now it is true that the 
Prussians could have no desire to see a peace concluded under 
Austrian auspices. Their ambitions in Germany ran too much 
counter to those of Austria and they had disliked the mediation 
from the start. Before the close of the year 1806, when Lord 
Hutchinson had first raised the subject, the foreign minister 
Zastrow had “regarded the idea with great indignation and said 
that the interference of Austria was not only not desirable but 
might probably be mischievous”’.2 It is moreover certain that, 
at the time when the offer of mediation was actually made, the 
Prussians were showing themselves the most unreasonable and 
arrogant of all the powers. But it is difficult to imagine that the 
Czar and the king who were so closely co-operating in Prussia, 
so firmly united at Bartenstein, would draw up, without con- 
nivance or mutual comparing of notes, their respective replies 
to this mediation which so nearly concerned the very matters 
they had had under discussion. The Czar in his subsequent 

1 Annual Register (1807), p. 730. 
2 Hutchinson to Howick, No. 2, 29 Dec. 1806, F.O. Prussia 64/74. See 
also Hutchinson’s despatch of 23 Dec. 1806. . 

™ 

CH. II. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 161 

conduct acted up to the Prussian reply, and followed this with 
measures that revealed the Prussian attitude to be really his 
own. The answer of the king of Prussia was despatched with a 
copy of the convention of Bartenstein to the Prussian minister 
at Vienna. The answer of the Russian government was sent to 
the Russian minister there, “accompanied by an instruction to 
press Austria in the strongest manner to accede to the above 
convention”. Later, these two ministers received parallel in- 
structions asking for an immediate categorical answer from 
Austria on this subject.t Both powers moved in step, and 
showed that they were acting in concert. Prussia in sending the 
convention of Bartenstein as her answer to the mediation was 
really speaking for Russia as well as for herself—speaking also 
for England. 