

Talleyrand, it is plain, did not desire any more of those sweeping 
Napoleonic victories that would only lure the French armies to 
more distant wars. And he had no wish for a peace which would 
strengthen Napoleon in Europe, and confirm his vast designs, 
while leaving England at war, ready to raise new coalitions at 
the first opportunity. He desired a congress and a settlement. 
He had quarrelled with Napoleonic diplomacy.+ 

Now Napoleon, from the very time when the Austrians made 
their official offer of mediation, seems to have had little real 
desire for peace; and, even when he was talking of negotiation, 
even while he was taking steps for the promotion of a general 
congress, he appears to have returned to his former preference 
for separate discussions and arrangements with individual 
powers; he desired once more to create division among his 
enemies, and dissolve the coalition by making private treaties 
with single members of it. When, in March, he wrote to Talley- 
rand, intimating that he would be inclined to accept the 
mediation of Austria if it should be offered, he added that in 
three months his troops would be ready, and that by September 
he would have 80,000 men. 

1 Vandal, Napoléon et Alexandre I°", 1, 44-5. 

CH. Ill. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 171 

“Not that I do not want peace with Russia’’, he went on, ‘for 
I think that this would lead to peace with England; but I think also 
that when two powers like France and Russia wish to make peace, 
the best way of doing it is for them to treat with one another directly.” 

On that very day Napoleon sent a new message to the Senate: 

‘Our policy is fixed’’, he declared: ‘‘ We offered peace to England 
before she engineered the Fourth Coalition; this same peace we still 
hold out to her....We are ready to conclude a Treaty with Russia 
on the same terms that her negotiator had signed—terms which the 
intrigues and persuasions of England induced her to reject. We are 
ready to give tranquillity to those eight millions of people whose 
country has been conquered by our arms and to restore to the King 
of Prussia his capital.’ 

It is significant that, at a moment when he was declaring his 
willingness to accept the mediation of Austria, he took great care 
that the court of Vienna should not remain ignorant of this 
“Message to the Senate’’.? And it is significant that in a docu- 
ment that is intended to advertise his desire for peace, he speaks 
once more in the language of separate negotiation, he offers 
England and Russia the terms they have already indignantly 
refused, and to the Prussian king he only renews the promise of 
restoration to his estates, for which that king has recently more 
than once declined to desert his allies. A little later he addresses 
the king of Sweden, and, behind him, speaks to the Swedish 
people, in deprecation of the war which was so ruinous to them. 

Peace, even a truce, accorded to Sweden, would answer the dearest 
desires of the Emperor, who has always felt a true grief at making 
war on a nation brave, generous and both historically and geographi- 
cally, the ally of France. And, in fact, ought Swedish blood to be 
shed to defend or destroy the Ottoman Porte? Ought it to be shed 
to maintain the freedom or enslavement of the seas? What has 
Sweden to fear from France? Nothing. What has she to fear from 
Russia? Everything.* 