

CH. II. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 169 

to make a separate peace with Prussia in the early months of 
1807, when it was too late, prove that a restraining influence 
would have been useful and profitable to him in the days after 
victory had come to him too easily at Jena. Metternich, in a 
despatch to Stadion in the year 1808, traces Talleyrand’s opposi- 
tion to his master to the closing months of the year 1806, and the 
fall of Prussia. From that time, at any rate, Talleyrand seems 
to have been neither happy nor contented. He hated the Poles, 
hated the life he was compelled to lead in Warsaw.! On the 27th 
of April he wrote: ‘‘ Nothing can compensate for our stay in this 
country, where it snows and rains, and one gets wearied. And 
all Poland is not worth one drop of the blood which we are 
shedding for it”.2. Napoleon at St Helena declared that his 
minister condemned his Polish policy—even ventured to suggest 
that he might have helped to thwart it.* It is said that Talley- 
rand never looked more pleased than after Eylau when Napoleon 
was in difficulties and had to put forward offers of peace. Even 
after Friedland the man could not resist the temptation to 
thrust his views, when writing to congratulate his master: 
“*T like to think of [this victory] as the last which Your Majesty 
will be obliged to win. That is why I value it so much”. 

All this will help to explain why Napoleon distrusted the 
freedom which Talleyrand allowed himself in his discussions with 
General Vincent. Talleyrand had leanings towards Austria, had a 
bias in favour of moderation, had a hankering after peace. And, 
when convinced that he was right, he was none too scrupulous in 
the measures he would take to force his master’s hand. So Napoleon 
put him out of reach of Vincent, and kept all the threads in his 
own fingers. 

There is a memoir which Talleyrand wrote with much care 
and thought—many erasures and alterations—on the 4th of 
June 1807. The man was still looking for peace, and thought the 
moment favourable. He considered the new ministry in England 

1 E.g. Jomini, Vie Politique, 11, 328; Mémoires du duc de Rovigo, 111, 116; 

Blennerhasset, Talleyrand (Eng. tr. 1894), 11, 117. 
2 Talleyrand to Clarke, 20 Ap. 1807, in Lefébvre, Histoire des Cabinets, 

11, 44, 
3 Corresp.de Nap. I, t. xxxi1, pp. 443-4 (quarto ed.), p. 358 (octavo ed.). 

170 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

to be so weak in parliament, so much distrusted by the public, 
that it would wish to offer to the English people the bribe of a 
peace with France. He saw that Prussia, in her present position, 
would welcome any settlement. He was of opinion that Russia 
was only waiting for a not too costly escape from a war which 
was such a burden to her. He himself desired peace then and 
there, without waiting for new victories to compel it. 

“Your Majesty’, he wrote, ‘‘ will prefer to owe it to milder methods, 
which although they may take more time, will give a more complete 
and secure result. In fact, if Prussia and Russia are compelled to make 
peace alone, without being able to reproach England with having 
abandoned them, England will preserve all her influence over them. 
She will gain by it, for she will be able to make her own peace with 
less sacrifices—and, consequently, to our disadvantage. And if she 
goes on with the war in the new conditions, she will be able to hope 
to find allies yet on the Continent.” 