

news of a British defeat near Constantinople. 
2 P. Bertrand, op. cit., No. CCLXxxuI; see also, especially, No. ccxc. 

II*2 

164 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK I. 

quite so assured; those conversations at Warsaw—Talleyrand 
and an Austrian general ‘‘on the best of terms”—did not leave 
him free from uneasiness. Time came when he put them at an 
end. 

Napoleon had learned months before, from intercepted des- 
patches, the very truths that Andréossy was trying to bring 
home to him—that the Austrian government was merely nursing 
its hatred and gathering strength for a favourable moment.* 
The point to be discovered was: with what immediacy did the 
warlike intention now present itself to the court of Vienna? 
Talleyrand imagined that his own theory on this matter was 
confirmed and his whole argument clinched—he seems to have 
assumed that Andréossy ought to make an embarrassed retreat 
from his position—when the Austrian emperor made a formal 
offer of mediation to the powers at war. This, taking place in 
April, came at the very time when Andréossy’s panic was at its 
height. Napoleon, however, had been in the utmost anxiety 
during the whole difficult winter campaign; he could see that 
Talleyrand was arguing in a circle and he was inclined to agree 
with his minister in Vienna.? At the moment when the official 
note arrived, with the offer of Austria’s good offices, he felt the 
situation a delicate one. It was important that he should not 
offend the Austrians. Yet he had no intention of foregoing any 
of his desires for their sakes. He declared his opinion to 
Talleyrand. 

It is of interest to me to gain some time. A negotiation without 
armistice is ridiculous, since there would be no basis for it to rest upon; 
but to make an armistice before I have taken Danzig would be 
difficult. Now everything gives me to hope that Danzig will be taken 
in a fortnight... .° 

He exchanged ideas with his minister and gave much thought 
to the reply which was to be made to the Austrian overture. 
Taking great care with the phrasing, making many subtle verbal 

1 See above, p. 108. 

* Cf. P. Bertrand, op. cit. Nos. ccLxxxvi and ccxc with Napoleon’s 
letters Nos. 12,450 and 12,458 in the Correspondance,.t. xv. 

3 Corresp. de Nap. I@, t. xv, No. 12,841. a 

CH. Il. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 165 

corrections, and manipulating cleverly the implications of words, 
he finally concocted a note, accepting “‘ for himself and his allies” 
the “friendly intervention of Austria”. He explained to Talley- 
rand that if it should be asked who the “allies” might be, hé 
must reply “Spain, etc., the Porte, and Persia’’.1 None of these 
auxiliaries had been invited by Austria to join in the negotiation: 
Talleyrand had already noticed the glaring exclusion of Turkey, 
but Vincent had been all smoothness, for he had had instructions 
from Vienna, stating that “if our intervention is accepted on 
the express condition that Turkey shall take part in the nego- 
tiations, there will be no difficulties about that, we are sure, on 
either side”’.? It did not matter that at this very moment the 
Austrians had been making credit with the Russians by giving 
the assurance that the Turks would be kept out of the negotia- 
tion. This was all part of Austria’s double-barrelled policy. 
Even in his official acceptance of mediation, Napoleon could 
not deny himself the opportunity of a fine sortie against England: 
He only feared, said he, “‘that the power which up to this time 
seems to have made it asystem to found its greatness and strength 
upon the divisions of the Continent, will use the Congress to 
raise bitterness and bring out new causes of dissension”. It was 
curious, too, that he should find this moment when peace was 
under discussion and mediation was being accepted, “‘a natural 
and clear occasion”’ for renewing his offers of alliance to Austria.® 
Having met the uncomfortable proposition with a reply 
calculated to bring controversy and delay, Napoleon carefully 
laid out the policy Talleyrand should then pursue in regard to 
the Austrian mediation. He explained the course that should be 
taken in the discussions with General Vincent, and from Fincken- 
stein he closely supervised the conversations that took place in 
Warsaw. It would seem that he did not feel too sure of these 
ministers who were “‘on the best of terms”.4 “To all the 