

Austrian mediations might come and go—and Napoleon would 
bow politely to them as they passed—but he was not inclined 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xiv, No. 12,098. 
2 Ibid. t. x1v, No. 12,100. 3 Ibid. t. xtv, No. 12,099. 

4 Ibid. t. xv, No. 12,459 (72nd Bulletin). 

172 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

to meet the powers and clear up the whole situation in a congress. 
His words and actions were full of contradictions, and one cannot 
listen to his peace talk at all seriously. Perhaps, as usual, he 
did not know himself just what he intended to do, and carried 
on the discussions for a congress till the military situation should 
become clear, throwing out offers of separate peace by the way, 
in case one should find response, and so playing with the alter- 
native courses open to him, until “events” should give him his 
cue. 

The Austrian government was satisfied with the English 
response to its overture;1 for it did not know the full implications 
of Canning’s attitude, it did not realise that England had merely 
passed on to her allies the unpleasantness of turning down this 
most unwelcome proposal. When the Austrian minister 
Starhemberg informed the British government of the answers 
of the other powers, Canning showed some surprise at the news 
that Russia and more especially Prussia had given disappoint- 
ment to the court of Vienna, and Starhemberg had to report 
that “the English cabinet finds the two replies perfectly con- 
formable to that which it made itself’’.2, On the other hand, the 
Austrians were “‘disagreeably surprised” to find a “sortie” 
against England in the note by which Napoleon gave his consent 
to the mediation. “I did not expect, either”, wrote Stadion, 
“to see in a reply to a pacific measure a kind of offer of rapproche- 
ment or alliance with us.’ 

The Austrian government, however, did not entirely abandon 
its plans, and gave it to be understood that an attempt would 
be made to persuade the French cabinet ‘to enter into some 
explanations of the sort which the two Courts [of Russia and 
Prussia] demanded”’.* Vincent was ordered to communicate the 

? Stadion to Starhemberg, 830 May 1807 (No. 1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

2 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 54, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

* Stadion to Starhemberg, 7 May 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach London; 
see also Adair, op. cit. p. 234. 

* Stadion to Starhemberg, 80 May 1807 (No.1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. ’ 

* 

CH IIT. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 173 

replies of the allied powers to Talleyrand and to accompany them 
with some verbal explanations. For a long time he waited for 
an opportunity of interviewing the French minister, but 
Napoleon had taken care that Talleyrand should be out of reach, 
and at last, on the 16th of June, Vincent gave up the hope and 
merely despatched copies of the English, Russian and Prussian 
notes to the French headquarters, with an earnest appeal for 
the return of Talleyrand to Warsaw. But by this time Friedland 
had already been fought.? 