

1 Corresp. de Nap. I@’, t. xv, Nos. 12,341 and 12,390. P. Bertrand, op. 
cit, Nos. ccxctv and ccc. 

2 P. Bertrand, op. cit. No. CCLXxXXVI. 

3 The French answer to the official offer of mediation is to be found in 
Adair, op. cit. p. 227; translation in Annual Register (1807), p. 712. 

4 See Corresp. de Nap. I’, t. xv, Nos. 12,389 and 12,488. 

166 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

observations of General Vincent”, he commanded, “‘ you must 
reply: ‘We shall make no difficulties about incidental points’. 
Also, in conversation, fall back frequently on the fact that, at 
this distance, you cannot tell what my intentions are.’’! More 
than once Napoleon sought to restrain his minister. “It remains 
for the present to wait in silence and with the greatest circum- 
spection for whatever may turn up.’”? It was important, above 
all, that the question of an armistice should not be raised at this 
point. “If peace is really desired, there will probably be a 
demand for an armistice, and then things will take on a more 
sincere character; for at bottom Russia and even England can 
find no pleasure in seeing me enjoy the revenues of Prussia for 
five or six years....But wait for events.’ Incorrigible Talley- 
rand, however, seemed bent on making things “‘take on a more 
sincere character”. He allowed Vincent to draw him into 
conversation about a suspension of arms, and went so far as to 
say that Napoleon would require that any armistice which might 
be concluded should be based on the dispositions of the respective 
armies at the moment of signature. Napoleon, jealously watching 
every move, came down with a sharp reprimand. 

It seems to me that you were in too much of a hurry. I have recom- 
mended to you, and still recommend, the greatest circumspection. 
You know that first of all I must have Dantzig; it is even possible that 
I must have Graudenz also. You have therefore committed a very 
great error. You ought to have held to your first statement—that 
you know nothing of these things. Why play with explanations of 
this kind when we do not know whether the powers have accepted 
the mediation or not?...There are no circumstances under which it 
could be more necessary to move carefully; the less you say, the 
better.... You must be absolutely ignorant of military operations... 
this is not your business. 

Then Napoleon revealed his real opinions and intentions: 

I regard the intervention of Austria in this affair as a misfortune. 
I have replied to it because I did not wish to give her any complaint 
against me at the present moment. It is necessary, therefore, to be 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xv, No. 12,890. 
2 Ibid. t. xv, No. 12,450; see also No, a 458. 
3 Ibid. t. xv, No. 12,390. 

CH. IIt. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 167 

circumspect, to go quietly, and to watch things happening. We must 
commit ourselves to nothing in any way—not a jot more than is 
written in the Note; the very place where a Congress is to be assembled 
must, if it suits, become an excuse for delays and discussions. I re- 
commend you to let all this sink in, as it is of the greatest importance 1 