

Although he received no official communication on the subject, 
Starhemberg, from these conversations with Canning and from 
his observations in London, was able to deduce and divine the 
objects that England would seek to promote in any negotiation 
for peace. The English ministry, he said, desired a treaty that 
would organise the interests and relations of all the powers and 
would have the guarantee of all. It wished to see Austria in a 
position to stand by such a treaty, and was ready not merely to 
allow her to recover most of her losses, but to see her acquire 
an augmentation of territory in the Tyrol or Bavaria or Prussian 
Silesia. Like Alexander, the English ministers regarded it as 
important that the Germanic system should be restored to order 
and independence, and that to this end the Confederation of the 

* G. Canning to Lord Pembroke, No. 2, 15 May 1807, F.O. Austria 7/85. 
G. Canning to Adair, No. 5, 9 June 1807, F'.0. Austria 7/84. 

CH. II. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 159 

Rhine should be abolished; but they would not give Prussia the 
same place in that reorganisation that the Czar was willing to 
allow. Like their predecessors they refused to put into the 
background the claims of those rulers who had been the victims 
of France, and they stood out plainly for the re-establishment 
of the kings of Naples and of Sardinia; and they stipulated for 
the independence of the Ottoman Porte. Starhemberg declared 
“with certainty” that they were “ready to make the greatest 
sacrifices in order to bring about a peace of this nature, and that 
none would be too costly for them provided that the honour and 
superiority of the British flag were not compromised”’.! Stadion, 
learning this, asked for more precise information as to the extent 
of the sacrifices which England was disposed to make for the 
attainment of peace, but Canning would not declare his inten- 
tions at the moment, urging that he must first be accurately 
acquainted with the principles upon which the negotiation would 
be conducted and the basis upon which France would be pre- 
pared to treat. His Majesty “must reserve to himself to 
proportion [those] sacrifices to the importance of the restitutions 
to be made by France and to the degree of security which may 
appear likely to be obtained for the continuance of tranquillity 
in EKurope”’.? Canning is very careful to keep the conquered 
colonies up his sleeve; he will not put all his cards on the table; 
he will first satisfy himself that the peace is going to be to his 
liking. The conquered colonies are an important lever for the 
English politicians. 

But all this matters little as yet. The mediation will defeat 
its own purposes—this is the seasoned opinion of Canning. The 
proposal is as unwelcome to him as it can be to any of his allies; 
only he will not be the one to toss it by with a refusal—he must 
show that England is not sulking or playing a lone hand. There- 
fore he will pass on the obligation and transfer the unpleasantness 
to Russia; for his own part he accepts the good offices of Austria, 
on the condition that his partners are willing. 