

that Austria does not wish to do anything for the moment, but 
that she would like an opportunity to present itself when she might 
without risk join hands with the other Powers with whom she 
is tacitly making common cause though without compromising 
herself.... Her estrangement from France is unremediable....I see 
no political method of winning over this power; her line is taken; the 
fact is indubitable.® 

1 Adair to Howick (Separate), 16 Nov. 1806, F.0. Austria 7/81. (This 
passage was deleted from the document published in Adair, Historical 
Memoir, pp. 151-2.) 

2 Andréossy to Talleyrand, 25 Nov. 1806, A.A.E. Autriche, t. 379. 

3 P. Bertrand, op. cit. pp. 389 et seq. 

‘ Talleyrand to Andréossy, 19 Mar. 1807, A.A.E. Autriche, t. 380. 

5 Andréossy to Talleyrand, No. 26, 20 Mar. 1807, A.A.E. Autriche, t. 880. 

CH. Il. THE QUESTION OF MEDIATION 163 

Soon afterwards, carried away by his idea that the Austrians 
were nursing a “‘secret desire and hope” for the “annihilation” 
of France, Andréossy picked up an alarmist rumour and wrote 
to his government in a scare. Long and frequent cabinet 
meetings were being held in Vienna, he related—and couriers 
were flying to St Petersburg and Constantinople, and there was 
an unaccustomed liveliness of correspondence. The Emperor had 
told the Russian minister that he would declare against France 
once the allies had secured two victories. A ‘“‘secret connection” 
existed between Russia and Austria, Napoleon was about to be 
the dupe of a conspiracy; and—here was the key to the riddle, 
the explanation of many suspicious happenings—there was a 
surreptitious scheme afoot for the dismemberment of the 
Ottoman Empire.’ 

Talleyrand did not believe the story, but he showed that he 
was not without uneasiness. The total sum of the information 
against Austria was difficult to explain away. He searched out 
the inner inconsistencies of the various rumours—showed that 
the report of designs against Turkey did not tally with the alleged 
disposition of the Austrian troops; and he secured denials from 
General Vincent, who contradicted the rumours of military 
activity and repudiated the suggestion that his government had 
formed connections with other powers. 

‘**General Andréossy seems to have set himself to believe everything 
which is calculated to raise our suspicion of the intentions of the Court 
of Vienna”, wrote Talleyrand. *“‘...General Andréossy and Count 
Stadion have no confidence in one another and from their connection 
it will be difficult to derive anything that will lead to a rapproche- 
ment.’”? 

Talleyrand compared this strained situation with the happy 
relationship that existed at Warsaw, where he and General 
Vincent were “‘on the best of terms”. But perhaps Napoleon 
did not follow his minister so far; he does not seem to have been 

1 Andréossy to Talleyrand, No. 29, 4 Ap. 1807, 4.4... Autriche, t. 380. 
See also No. 28, 28 Mar. 1807, where Andréossy shows himself irritated 
because the people of Vienna had betrayed their disappointment on hearing 