

Prussia, then, was made the scapegoat, hers was the burden 
of communicating the new intentions of the now confident allies; 
she voiced the real answer of the coalition when she wrote: 

His Imperial and Royal Apostolic Majesty will easily see that the 
noble object which he had in mind when he offered his mediation to 
the powers at war, will be beyond all doubt sooner and more fully 
attained by his accession to the above Convention than by the 
employment of his good offices.” 

The Austrian mediation which was so unwelcome to the powers 
of the coalition was a matter for serious anxiety to Napoleon, 
who had so often declared himself bewildered by the politics of 
the court of Vienna. He feared now that sharp practices were 
afoot, and he suspected the connivance of his enemies. Not until 
June could Talleyrand write to say that the Russians themselves 
had been displeased with the Austrian proposal and that “this 
puts aside every idea of a secret understanding between Austria 
and Russia”’.? In the weeks that preceded the offer of mediation 
Napoleon’s relations with the court of Vienna had become more 
and more mystifying and strained, partly because the conduct of 

1 Adair to Canning, 29 May and 3 June 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir, 

pp. 241, 244. 
2 A, Lefebvre, Histoire des Cabinets (1866), 111, 74. 
3 P. Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon I°", No. cccxvt1. 

BN It 

162 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

the Austrian ministry had itself been equivocal, partly because the 
French minister in Austria had shown himself unfitted for his post. 

‘“‘No appointment could more fully prove the hostile intentions 
of Bonaparte nor be more disagreeable to this court”’,* wrote 
Adair, when Andréossy was sent to Vienna; and Andréossy 
himself reported: “My nomination has caused the court and 
ministry the most lively disquietude”.? In the society of the 
Austrian capital he found the atmosphere hostile and felt his 
position delicate and embarrassing; he had reason to envy his 
Russian colleague Razoumovski. From the beginning he took 
his réle to be that of a rather unfriendly observer, and adopted 
a policy of “‘extreme reserve”. It was easy for him to take alarm 
at the tone of conversation in the city, and to end by confusing 
it with the reasoned policy of the government, and his petty 
social vexations would make him a more jealous observer. From 
the middle of March 1807 he kept Talleyrand puzzled and per- 
turbed by his reports of Austrian military preparations, and by 
his sinister comments on the secret intentions of the Austrian 
government.? Talleyrand sent to him a despatch in cypher 
recommending him to inspire or to increase confidence in his 
relations with the chancellor, Stadion, but also to keep a constant 
watch over any movements that might take place in the army, 
and to send reports concerning these in cypher. The news from 
Vienna became more and more disquieting. On the 20th of 
March Andréossy gave his opinion 