

““This truth Lord Hutchinson and all of us will ever declare’’, 
wrote the impetuous Wilson, ‘‘that there never was a sovereign, an 
army, ministers, or a nation, more disposed to carry on a war and 
to remain faithful to alliances, than the Russian. If that country 
now adopts a policy which her own interests justify, England, and 
England alone, is the real friend of Bonaparte and of France.” 

Feeling relaxed when it became known that the British govern- 
ment was sending a new minister to treat with the Czar, that 
an expedition of English troops might shortly be expected in 
Europe, and that Lord Hutchinson was to depart for Stralsund 
to discuss a military diversion. There was a suspension of 

1 Wilson, Diaries, 11, 170. 
~~ 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 185 

judgment at Bartenstein, a stifling of natural resentment, until 
the new English minister should arrive and report what his 
government was doing. But if his coming should be long 
deferred, if he should bring a mere handful of promises or shifty 
evasions, if, in the meantime, disaster should come upon the 
armies and enterprises in Poland—then would the latent store 
of bitterness be released, and a hideous accusing finger be levelled 
in the direction of England. 

For the present, the chancellor Budberg was writing to St 
Petersburg: 

The army is in the best possible condition. The cavalry horses are 
ready for the campaign. The demeanour of the soldier is superb; he is 
animated with the best of spirits, and thinks only of adding new 
victories to those which he has already won.! 

The queen of Prussia wrote to her father on the 15th of May, 
looking back to the days of misfortune and despair, as to a far 
half-forgotten world. 

The Battle of Eylau had very important results... .Now, with the 
return of spring and the revival of nature, patriotism also seems to be 
awakening in every Prussian heart. The activity manifest on all hands, 
the sending of our excellent Bliicher to Pomerania, the number of 
new battalions which have been formed during recent months, are 
things which inspire me with hope....Yes, dearest father, I am 
convinced that all will yet go well, and that a happy meeting is in 
store for us. The siege of Danzig proceeds most satisfactorily.? 

Until the middle of May the ‘“‘snugness” continued at head- 
quarters. There was a mood for minimising difficulties, and 
slurring over mistakes, and gazing gladly into the future. It 
needed but a pinprick to burst the bubble. On the 19th of May 
the news was abroad that the Russians had failed to relieve 
Danzig. It ought to have caused no surprise, but somehow the 
allies were not in readiness for the misfortune, and had prepared 
no shock absorbers for their minds. The event found them 
floundering, and cut the cord that kept them buoyant, and very 

1 Sbornik, LXxxvilIl, 39. 
2 Translated in Moffat, Queen Louisa of Prussia pp. 166-7. 

186 TILSIT BK III. 

soon hopes and optimisms were cut away, to go sailing the sky 
like a bunch of gaudy toy balloons that a gust of wind has taken. 
“The news from Danzig causes the greatest depression”, wrote 
Jackson, “both here and at headquarters. Surrender is inevitable. 
When the Emperor read the despatches he was quite overcome 
by his feelings.” Six days later the French were in the city. 
Day broke upon the dreamers. Men winced at the sudden smell 
of danger. Soon were unloosed all the things that were the 
shadow of doom to coalitions—reproaches of betrayal, accusa- 
tions of lethargy, suspicions and complaints between allies, the 
torments of irresolution, the awful sense of opportunities gone. 
A new psychological atmosphere supervened. We are on the 
high road to Tilsit. 