

‘Flimsy and unsubstantial the optimisms might seem—poor 
basis for self-congratulation. Yet something contrived to make 
the allies very sanguine at headquarters. One man described 
them as “snug”’. 

From England, no news since the middle of March; no money, 
no diversion, no message of reassurance. Lord Hutchinson 
neglected to write to his government, and English ministers 
seemed “‘to know nothing but from chance reports and the 
accounts of merchant captains”. Hutchinson would grumble 
and moan, and dilate upon the strong position of Napoleon. 

‘*He spends nearly all of the day in looking over the map and 
consulting with Bennigsen”’, wrote George Jackson. “Consultation 

1 K.g. G. Jackson, Diaries, 11, 106: “‘ Hardenberg told me to-day that they 
have the best grounds for believing that Austria would soon declare herself”’. 
Cf. Hutchinson to Adair, 1 Ap. 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir, Appendix, 
p- 381: ‘“‘They have got it into their heads here...that the Austrians are 
at length determined to take a part in the war, and to act with the allies.... 
I satisfy myself with saying that they may be better informed than you are”’. 

2 Adair to Lord Hutchinson, 13 Ap. 1807, in Adair, op. cit. Appendix, 
pp. 394-7. 

3 On the 19th of March 1807 we find Douglas reporting from St Peters- 
burg: “There is reason to suppose that it has...forcibly been put to 
the Emperor by some people here...that Russia is abandoned by her 
friends. ..and that even her intimate ally Great Britain neglects to support 
her at a crisis when any reverse of fortune might endanger the Empire 
itself”. Douglas to Howick, No. 18, F'.0. Russia 65/68. 

184 TILSIT BK Iti. 

follows consultation, but nothing is done. I confess I should be sorry 
to see an English army again under Lord Hutchinson’s command, 
for a spirit of procrastination such as one can scarcely conceive or 
understand, rules him on all occasions... . 

His lordship is still in ‘the Slough of Despond’, and as loud as 
ever in depreciating our resources, and magnifying those of Bonaparte. 

Ld H. keeps up the same offensive strain of mingled despair and 
contempt. He is, of course, treated by both the Emperor and King 
with invariable attention, but with their ministers he is not on very 
cordial terms.... 

Colonel Hougo. .. has got himself into a scrape. .. by one day taking 
Lord H. seriously to task, and exposing to him, pretty unreservedly, 
what people say of him, and of his manner of viewing and talking of 
the present state of affairs....” 

The Englishman who chanced to be with the armies in Poland 
would hear murmurings and complaints concerning the apathy 
of his own country, and would wait with sullen impatience. He 
would catch a whisper that the British government “have too 
great an interest in the protraction of the war’’.1 He would find 
Hardenberg surmising that the resignation of “ All the Talents” 
was due to popular dissatisfaction with the ministers for their 
indifference to the continental cause. He would discover not 
only Hardenberg, but the Prussian king and queen, and many 
others, repeatedly declaring the hope that the new ministry 
would replace Lord Hutchinson and send a more acceptable 
representative to headquarters. 