

1 Budberg to Soltykov, 14/26 Ap. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxvit1, 39-41. 

182 TILSIT BK III. 

the troops, might have caused discomfort and discontent at 
headquarters; but even here the allies could retort that the 
French were in a predicament far worse; for Polish, German, 
and Italian soldiers were continually deserting from the ranks of 
Napoleon, bringing tales of bitter privation, of shortage of food 
and horses, of troops unwilling to fight, of officers pressing for 
retreat, and of grave indiscipline. “Several prisoners”, wrote 
Budberg, “have related that the soldiers are reduced to eating 
horseflesh.’’+ 

Among the Prussians there was a strong party feeling on the 
question of peace or war. Zastrow headed the advocates of 
surrender and enlarged on the hopelessness of the situation. 
Hardenberg led the war party, and for ever urged a display of 
vigour. But Zastrow had had his day, and now was out of 
fashion, and was soon to leave the scene amid some unpleasant- 
ness; while the partisans of energy had recently received new 
support and encouragement by the arrival of Bliicher. Bliicher 
had done clanging deeds, had shot defiance at the Corsican; and 
was returning from captivity like a hero caught from the 
clutches of the oppressor; he had tales to tell of discontent in 
Germany—men wriggling under the heel of Napoleon and only 
awaiting the signal to rise; had one very reassuring story of how 
at Finckenstein he had seen the Emperor himself and found 
him impatient for peace. Like the clatter of spurs, or the singing 
of a martial tune or the telling of old tales of gods and heroes, 
the coming of Bliicher would fire imagination, and give a nervous 
thrill, and make men feel themselves brave. 

The rugged, petulant Swedish king was for once in affable 
mood; it seemed that he might prove useful at last; he appeared 
disposed to join in a combined action that should threaten 
Napoleon’s rear. More strange still, there was a general con- 
viction that the Austrians were on the point of a declaration of 
war. It was imagined that the convention of Bartenstein would 
precipitate a decision; active steps were being taken to press 
the occasion; and wise men, winking knowingly, said “There is 
reason to expect...”. Bennigsen claimed that he had good news 
from Vienna. Hardenberg thought he had cause for believing 

1 Budberg to Soltykov, 14/26 Ap. 1807, in Sbornik, txxxvutt, 39-41. 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 1838 

that the hour had come. The Empress of Austria had recently 
died and it was pleasant for some people to assume that she had 
stood in the way and had been responsible for much of the 
hesitation. Wilson claimed that the official news from Vienna 
was favourable, and that the public talk “under very high 
sanction” was “charged with good omens as to Austria’s co- 
operation”’.! These expectations might have come out of the 
blue—stray thoughts that a wind carries, hopes born of some 
fond mood—for all the basis that can be found for them. The 
Prussian minister in Vienna denied that he had encouraged 
any such anticipations. Robert Adair, British representative 
there, suspected that some ‘“‘enemies of the public cause” had 
been at work, maliciously raising the hopes of the Prussians in 
order to take advantage of the moment of disappointment when 
the king should find out his mistake.? 