

It was true that there was a peace party among the Prussians, 
causing anxious ferment even at the army headquarters. 
Czartoryski, who in former days had walked arm-in-arm with 
Alexander, talking over with him the dreams of generous youth, 
and airing an expansive liberalism, was a spokesman of this 
group. Having much in common with the Czar, sharing largely 
of his sympathies, his flying schemes, his mutability, he had yet 
an essential divergence; for his successive plans revolved around 
a different constant—in all his bold imaginative recastings of 
policy he would find his centre in the idea of a new Poland, that 
should arise under the wing of the Czars. So while Alexander 
was burning to rescue Europe from the hands of Napoleon, he 
himself had a different pre-occupation. He had no affection for 
the Prussians; he had urged the Czar to attack them before 
Austerlitz; and, reasserting his distrust in the face of the secret 
Russo-Prussian alliance of 1806, he had surrendered office and 
made way for the pro-German Budberg.? He had promoted 
Oubril’s negotiation and for some time after Jena had been 
pressing the government to make peace. Novossiltzov, the 
Charles James Fox among Alexander’s early companions, man 
of reckless habits and wild living, with impressive talents and 
liberal tendencies and an admiration for the British constitution, 
was another member of the peace party; also Strogonov, the 
third of the group of Alexander’s youthful friends, who had 
fought bitterly against Oubril’s treaty. So the men who had been 

1 Bennigsen to Alexander, 28 May/9 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxxix, 3. 

2 Czar Alexander to Bennigsen, 29 May/10 June 1807, in Sbornik, 
LXXXIX, 4. 

8 Czartoryski’s attitude towards Prussia is well illustrated in his Memo- 
randum; cf. Sbornik, LXxxiI, 292-310. 

190 TILSIT ' BK III 

not only the servants and instruments but the close intimates 
of the Czar in the first phase of his reign, had become out of 
sympathy with his policy and lent their weight to the opposition; 
and Alexander, who could not open out his romantic heart to 
a “realist” politician like Budberg—who indeed was said to be 
at this moment on somewhat cool terms with the minister— 
stood out rather aloof, curled in upon himself; perhaps expanding 
at times at the warmer touch of Hardenberg. 

A more sinister atmosphere hangs around opposition that 
comes in mutterings from the army itself. There is something 
frightening in the isolation in which an autocrat must live— 
something terrible for him in the significance of his army, which 
in a moment can make him impotent. Russia had had a century 
of palace revolutions, and lightning military conspiracies, and 
mysterious overthrows; they would seem to have been the 
recognised way of “tempering” the autocracy. Alexander had 
been raised to the throne in the track of murder done by night, 
and he seems to have gone through life like a man haunted as 
a result—seems to have been at times dogged and overfaced by 
a relentless second self. The thought of a military uprising could 
raise a sort of primeval fear in him, opening an uncanny psycho- 
analytical room in his mind. It is true that we find no hint of 
revolution on the eve of Friedland; but it is important, in setting 
the stage for Tilsit, to remember, as a possible element in the 
situation, that there existed this tract of primitive unredeemed 
territory in the mind of the Czar. Not only did this nightmare 
lie hidden beneath the mind and moods of Alexander—not 
only did he actually imagine sometimes that in the darkness he 
heard the muffled footfall which had announced to his father 
his tragic fate—but, as we shall see, there were people prepared 
to evoke the fear, and conjure up the nightmare and play upon 
its terrors. 