

Everybody is asking how it is that the soldiers of a prince who is 
a model of humanity and magnanimity, can be allowed to commit 
excesses without number—which, besides ruining the country of his 
ally and best friend, compromise the existence and honour of the 

army itself.t 

1 Hardenberg to the Czar Alexander, 17 May 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, 
v, 506-14. 

< 

188 TILSIT BK II. 

Amid it all there came an astonishing bitterness, as of sudden 
disillusionment. The passions that had leaped to brave music 
seemed turned into something devastating. We can judge the 
intensity of the disappointment from the eagerness with which 
men pounced upon a scapegoat. Queen Louisa, who recently 
had hailed the spring with warm hope and high anticipation, 
was like one possessed with a demon, and wrote in a strain like 
this: 

Danzig, Danzig is lost to us....It is maddening. The place might 
have been saved if Bennigsen had made a slight diversion to draw 
off the attention of the besiegers.. . . His apathy is simply indescribable. 
...He talks of fighting a pitched battle between to-day and the day 
after to-morrow. I do not believe him. What I do believe is that 
some evilly disposed individual has got the upper hand with him. 
He has won two battles and thereby secured all the orders of the 
Russian Empire. His huge pension has been augmented by twelve 
thousand roubles. That is probably enough for a man, so called because 
he is going about on two legs....I am beside myself, I admit it. 

Hardenberg helped the queen to draw up a renewed attack upon 
Bennigsen*—addressed this time to the Czar himself: 

Since my last letter, events have quite changed colour, and the loss 
of Danzig has plunged all the world into very deep grief. I cannot 
deny, my dear Cousin, that what tears my heart, is to see the lack 
of zeal that there is in the execution of your benevolent intentions, 
and how General Bennigsen does everything to make the whole world 
believe that it is we who do not keep our word and who are the cause 
of his incomprehensible apathy. Pardon me, my dear Cousin, if I 
make bold to tell you that I am beginning to doubt his good intentions, 
for all this week he has been changing the reasons which he alleges 
in excuse for his inaction. So long as you were at head-quarters he 
said it was your presence that paralysed his operations. Now that 
you have made a sacrifice to the good cause by withdrawing from the 
army. ..it is we who are the victims of his ill-humour. Your glorious 
army would gather new laurels everywhere, if only it were well led.® 

Bennigsen was in league with the peace party, said some—with 
the Grand Duke Constantine and the apostles of timidity. He 
* Translated in Moffat, Queen Louisa of Prussia, pp. 168-9. 

2 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 441-2. 
* Bailleu, Briefwechsel, pp. 466-7. 

cH.I. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 189 

was denounced as a traitor, declared worthy of the knout. And 
Bennigsen, pressed by his master to move forward and make 
some display of energy, began to give colour to the accusations, 
and shake his head and augur ill from any continuation of hos- 
tilities. In the first week of June he announced some successes, 
but pleaded sickness and talked of retiring.1 The Czar replied 
to him curtly: “I expect you to do what your duty and the 
honour and glory of Russia demand of you’’.? 