

In this way the Austrian mediation flickered out. Perhaps it 
had served its purpose. At least it had covered the weakness 
of Austria’s policy; it had assisted, it had excused, the protrac- 
tion of her neutrality. It had been her reply to the importunity 
of both Napoleon and the coalition—her escape from all the 
traps that were being laid to embroil her in the war. 

1 Driault, Tilsit, pp. 111-12 (two letters from Vincent to Talleyrand, 
16 June 1807). 

CHAPTER IV 

THE RESUMPTION OF THE PRUSSIAN 
NEGOTIATION FOR A CONGRESS 

Wautte the Austrians were making their hopeless attempt to 
proceed with their mediation, a parallel negotiation was seeking 
to promote a general congress and was being carried on between 
the belligerents themselves. It was conducted with more 
smoothness and honesty, and seemed to approach more closely 
to the desired end, than the twisted and profitless transaction 
that the mediation had come to be; and on the eve of Friedland 
it appeared to have reached astonishingly near its goal. It was 
a continuation of the original discussions that had been carried 
on since December 1806 when Kriisemarck had ridden to 
St Petersburg to convert the Czar to the idea of a congress; and 
the last step that had been taken in the matter was the overture 
by Colonel Kleist in February containing Napoleon’s alternative 
offers of either separate peace with Prussia or a congress of the 
powers at war. When the Czar came to join his armies, and 
overhauled the whole peace question in his discussions with the 
Prussian king, when, also, the English reply to the proposals of 
Kriisemarck had arrived, a conference came to the decision that 
this negotiation should be taken up again. It was determined 
that a reply should be made to the proposals which Kleist had 
brought, and that Napoleon should be asked the bases on which 
he would consent to treat in a congress. On the 21st of April, 
before the convention of Bartenstein had been actually signed, 
the Prussian king, on behalf of Russia, Prussia and England, 
sent a letter to Napoleon. He declared that the allies desired a 
general and honourable peace ‘“‘ which should ground the future 
independence and repose of Europe upon a stable arrangement 
of things that should be guaranteed by all the contracting 
parties”. The allies stipulated that the settlement should equit- 
ably indemnify those victims of the war to whem the courts of 

CH. IV. PRUSSIA AND A CONGRESS 175 

St Petersburg and London were bound by solemn engagements. 
England, it was assured, was willing to make sacrifices for the 
sake of peace; and the Prussian king affirmed “with the most 
complete certainty”, that, far from having any designs against 
the Ottoman Porte, the Czar merely demanded the maintenance 
of the existing treaties with Turkey. The participation of Turkey 
in the congress, therefore, was considered to be out of place; 
but it was asked that Sweden should be admitted and also that 
Austria should be allowed to join in the negotiation. These being 
the sentiments of the allied powers, Napoleon was invited to 
explain frankly the bases upon which he would treat. 