

On the 9th of June the Prussian government drew up a com- 
munication to be made to the court of London, summarising 
the situation, and recalling the conditions of the impending 
negotiation. On the very eve of the congress, and as he was 
touching his desired object, the king was not too optimistic. 
Napoleon might be trying to trap him, might use the negotiation 
to hinder rather than promote the work of peace. His bases were 
not above suspicion: 

1 Frederick William ITI to Napoleon, 10 May 1807; printed in Bassewitz, 
Die Kurmark Brandenburg, 1, 388-9. 

2 Corresp. de Nap. I’, t. xv, No. 12,594. 

3 Ibid. t. xv, No. 12,464. 

CH. Iv. PRUSSIA AND A CONGRESS 177 

It cannot be disguised that a principle so vaguely enunciated, and 
susceptible of so many interpretations, only gives a very little hope 
of our reaching the proposed goal, and that it will only be by the most 
vigorous pursuit of the war, the prompt and effective aid of Austria, 
and the help furnished by England to the Continental Powers that 
we can succeed. The consequences which Napoleon will perhaps draw 
from the proposed basis may be such as, far from facilitating the 
general peace, only make it more and more distant, especially if he 
regards himself as master of the part of Continental Europe which he 
happens to occupy at present and thinks to establish a system of 
compensation upon this state of occupation.... 

But, to refuse the opening of the Congress would be to play into 
the hands of Napoleon....We must therefore lend ourselves to the 
opening of the Congress and even hasten it as much as possible. The 
King. . . will send his plenipotentiaries to Copenhagen as soon as those 
of the King of England are ordered to go... . But the King thinks that 
this determination of the powers at war with France ought not to 
excuse any of them from vigorously pursuing operations against the 
common enemy. 

A similar statement was drawn up for the court of Stockholm; 
and also onein the same sense to be communicated to Austria along 
with the whole correspondence. It is immaterial whether these 
documents were actually despatched and reached theirdestination; 
the fact that they were drawn up is a register of the situation.+ 

On the very eve of Friedland, therefore, Europe is on the point 
of seeing the assembly of a congress that is to comprise Austria 
and all the powers at war. The offer of Napoleon to meet Russia, 
Prussia and England in a negotiation has been widened by the 
English insistence upon the interests of monarchs like the kings 
of Naples and Sardinia, by the Prussian desire to see Sweden and 
Austria enter the discussions, and by the French counter-claim 
on behalf of Spain and Turkey and “other belligerent powers 
who are allies of France”. A situation of things has been 
produced in which both parties are willing at least to make a 
pretence of negotiating and both are anxious to do it without 
any preliminary armistice. Both sides, also, welcome the inter- 