

Napoleon declared himself very pleased with the suggestion 
of Copenhagen for a congress; it was the place he had thought 
of himself. He was disappointed with the proposal to exclude 
Constantinople from the transaction, but he thought that the 
king of Prussia had not said the last word or delivered an ulti- 
matum on this subject. He was displeased also with a reference 
to indemnities in the Prussian king’s letter; though even on this 
point he liked to suppose that Naples, not Sardinia, was the 
party in mind. 

Within a few days he sent his reply. The king of Prussia had 
asked that the peace should be general, honourable, and solid. 

But would it be general if several of the principal powers at war were 
not comprised in it, not summoned to guard their interests for them- 
selves? Would it be honourable if it conflicted with the most sacred 
engagements, by separating those who have made common cause in 
the present war, while it admitted all the allies of one of the belligerent 
parties?...The participation of Spain, Turkey, and other powers at 
war who are allies of France in the present conflict is as necessary as it 
is just in this work of peace. I raise no difficulty about allowing 
England and Russia to make common cause, although France has 
always regarded this as contrary to the first principles of her policy. 
Why do you refuse me the same thing with respect to Turkey?? 

- Napoleon declared this to be the one obstacle to the opening 
of the proposed negotiations; and he kept his word. He made 
1 Frederick William III to Napoleon, 21 Ap. 1807; printed in M. F. von 

Bassewitz, Die Kurmark Brandenburg, 1, 386-7. 
2 Corresp. de Nap. I°", t. xv, No. 12,487; see also No. 12,464, 

176 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

no mention of an armistice on this occasion; he thought that his 
enemies would demand this in order to save Danzig, and he was 
not disposed to grant it until he had secured his object. 

When, on the 10th of May, the king of Prussia submitted to 
his arguments and acquiesced in his demands,* he replied: 

There remains now no objection for me to make. My plenipoten- 
tiaries and those of the powers which are making common cause with 
me in this war, will be at Copenhagen on the day Your Majesty cares 
to appoint. As to basis. ..everything is contained in these two words: 
equality and reciprocity between the two belligerent groups. 

England and Russia will do for my allies what I do for theirs... .? 

This correspondence seems to have been kept very secret. 
Talleyrand himself knew nothing until the 24th of April, when 
Napoleon wrote to him, enclosing the letter just received from 
Prussia with a copy of those that had passed between himself 
and the king during the two preceding months. Talleyrand was 
ordered to say nothing to the Austrian General Vincent. ‘‘Since 
you were not aware of the other letters it is possible that you 
may be ignorant of this’’,3 wrote Napoleon, and it was not until 
the end of May that he decided to inform Austria of the corre- 
spondence. The king of Prussia, whose history told against him, 
was still distrusted by some people around him, and was 
suspected of questionable transactions with France; but he had 
acted with the cognisance of the Emperor Alexander and he 
informed the British government of the correspondence. 