

‘“‘This misfortune’’, wrote Wilson, after the fall of Danzig, “‘has 
depressed all our spirits, and rendered our situation here very un- 
comfortable; for the English are accused as the cause of the disaster 

by their supineness, and our best friends painfully express their regret 
at such disloyal conduct.” 

Hardenberg, ‘self-appointed keeper of the conscience of the 
coalition, played the schoolmaster to England as he had done 
to the Czar and the Prussian king. On the 24th of May he wrote 
to the Duke of York, urging the dismissal of all distrust, the 
hastening of perfect concert, the abandonment of hesitations 
and lethargy, for “the last act of the great drama” had begun. 
There is something ironical—something indicative, too, of the 
new role that Prussia is seeking to adopt—in the way Harden- 
berg makes use against England of the very language which had 
so long been used against the cabinet of Berlin. ‘Distrust, 
slowness, irresolution, disunion, pusillanimity—these”’, he wrote _ 
to the Prussian minister in London, “have been the cause of all 
our misfortunes.”’ Lord Hutchinson, he declared, whatever his 
private virtues might be, was a disagreeable, suspicious and 
dismal diplomat, and a minister was needed who would be “‘ more 
active, more zealous for the common cause, more versed in 
affairs”.* Like beleaguered troops gazing out to sea for a gleam 

* Hardenberg to the Duke of York and to Jacobi-Kloest in Ranke, 
Hardenberg, 111,.862-3. 

? 
a 

cH.I. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 187 

of the sails that should bring relief, these allies waited for 
England until they were tired of waiting; and Englishmen on 
the spot, perhaps too unaware of the difficulties at home, had 
exhausted their patience and used up their arguments in defence 
of their country and government. It was useless to go on saying, 
“Wait until Leveson-Gower arrives”. June came in, it was long 
since there had been news from England, and no Leveson-Gower 
appeared—‘‘a fact which caused much suspicion”. ‘People 
here begin to think that our promises are vow et praeterea nihil; 
and at the army they are flung continually into the teeth of our 
countrymen who are there.” 

No peace, now, for Alexander. Bennigsen, his chief com- 
mander, fell ill in the midst of the depression. The hope that 
had been placed in Austria gradually dwindled away; it was clear 
that the loss of Danzig would only confirm the cabinet of Vienna 
in its timid neutral course. The Czar decided to leave the army, 
and though some people were not sorry to see him hand over 
the conduct of the campaign to his generals, the gesture of 
departure at this particular moment heightened the discontent. 
The army itself was in difficulties. 

Unfortunately there is a great scarcity of provisions, and the 
Russian army is so distressed that the men actually pass whole days 
without a morsel of bread. Just now, as an amazing effort, the con- 
tractors have promised provisions for three days. 

A crisis had been threatening for a long time. Bennigsen said, 
“‘T have been preaching for two months”. He had preached, 
but he had not brought remedies. Hungry Russian troops 
plundered the land still left to the Prussian king. Annoyance 
and bickering were bound to follow. Hardenberg complained 
to the Czar: 