

1 Projet de Voffice & remetire par le comte de Finckenstein au cabinet de 

Vienne, 9 June 1807; Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 495. Office a remettre mut. mut. 
aux cours de Londres et de Stockholm, 9 June 1807; ibid. v, 498. 

BN I2 

178 THE INTERVENTION OF AUSTRIA BK Il. 

vention of Austria in the congress though they combined to 
ensure the failure of the Austrian attempt to mediate peace. 
They do not refuse to see the court of Vienna take a part in the 
establishment of peace in Europe but they reject the peculiar 
implications of the particular movement which that court 
desires to promote, and, above all, they object to the mediation 
as the attempt of Austria to evade the real issue and postpone 
any energetic decision. 

This congress, however, which is being promoted by direct 
correspondence between the belligerent groups, does not promise 
great hopes. It is a victory in that it fastens Napoleon down to 
a general negotiation at last, but it is not the finish of fighting. 
It still leaves Napoleon the opportunity to resort to his usual 
practices in negotiation, and the French basis for the discussions 
provides no check, no guarantee against this. In one point at 
least it promises trouble. Napoleon says, “England and Russia 
will do for my allies what I shall do for theirs. I shall do for the 
allies of England and Russia what they will do for mine”’. It is 
not a case of Prussia doing anything for her allies; she is a 
passenger in the affair. Napoleon evidently regards her still as 
possessing nothing with which to negotiate. She is part of the 
system of compensation. France accepts a congress on the con- 
dition that the existing occupation of Prussia by her armies shall 
constitute a value in negotiation and shall be the basis of a 
scheme of compensation. England however has declared her 
intention of refusing to surrender her conquests merely for a 
restoration of Prussia, and she demands a positive value in 
return, a barrier against the power and aggressions of France. 
Therefore the Prussian king is not hopeful about the impending 
congress. He declares the inadmissibility of Napoleon’s basis of 
negotiation if that basis is made to imply that he regards 
“himself as master of that part of Continental Europe which he 
happens to occupy at present and thinks to establish a system 
of compensation upon it”. Each side, therefore, places every- 
thing on the issue of the warfare; each is perfectly determined 
to prosecute military operations with vigour. The congress, even 
if it had met, would not have prevented Friedland. 

BOOK THREE 

’ 

TILSIT 

CHAPTER I 

THE COALITION ON THE EVE OF 
FRIEDLAND 

Tue last sands of the hour-glass were now slowly trailing out, 
and the strange tangle of fate was coming to its unravelling. 
The men of the coalition were watching the sky and observing 
the signs and portents. In the last days of April the Czar and 
the Prussian king were still at Bartenstein, exchanging their 
pleasant courtesies, giving decorations and dinners, and talking 
deep schemes with Hardenberg—still floating on their optimism. 
The glowing mood at the allied headquarters rose superior to 
crude facts, even flew in the face of facts, and men were walking 
upon air. One would have said that the Russian troops were 
strangely inactive, and that the generals gave no promise of 
energy or capacity; but they found easy excuse for themselves 
and said that they were only collecting their strength. One 
would have inferred that the situation was serious, with Napoleon 
pressing tightly upon Danzig; but they were not crushed with 
this thought. Danzig, they said, was “garrisoned by sixteen 
thousand men,...and its magazines plentifully supplied. ..with 
every means for carrying on the war for some months”. They 
congratulated themselves that the besiegers were chiefly 
Germans, who deserted at every opportunity. It pleased them 
to think with Budberg, the Russian chancellor, that ‘All 
accounts agree about the enemy’s not yet having siege-artillery 
in front of this town. The general, Count Kalckreuth, who is in 
command there, has no apprehensions’’.t Moreover, a Russian 
force was preparing to move to the relief of the beleaguered 
city; and this was a hopeful sign, though indeed one might have 
seen that its numbers were inadequate for the task, and that 
it was tempting providence with its insufferable delays. Sickness 
in the Russian armies, and difficulties with the provisioning of 