

controversies underlay these instructions of Leveson-Gower, 
and if time had permitted all the questions to be pursued there 
would have been much high argument. 

Soon after reaching Tilsit the minister had audience of 
Alexander. Perhaps he did not quite appreciate a change that 
had taken place in the Czar; perhaps he made the mistake of 
still speaking to the exalted monarch of Bartenstein days. He 
soon had a severe rebuff. He began by offering congratulations 
on the “brilliant advantages” obtained by the Russian troops 
—but these had been forgotten by now. He expressed the 
earnest desire of his government for “‘the most intimate Union” 
with Russia. It was a kind of poetry that satisfied the Czar 
in some of his mystical moods; one wonders if it would not 
be provoking at a moment when England was being held 
responsible for the adverse turn of affairs. Leveson-Gower was 
soon interrupted, he had something of a surprise, and the whole 
interview turned out to be a chain of unpleasantnesses for him. 
Summing up the conversation in his report to London he wrote: 
“The language and tone of His Imperial Majesty were to me 
perfectly unexpected”’. 

I was interrupted by the Emperor, who expressed his determination 
not to change his present system of politics and flattered himself that 
he had given sufficient proofs of his steady perseverance init. He said 
he was persuaded of the good intentions of the English Government 
and relied with perfect confidence on the known firmness of His 
Majesty’s character; but that he had to complain of the whole burden. 
of the war having fallen upon his armies, that he had repeatedly in 
his audiences to Lord Douglas and in conversations with Lord 
Hutchinson at Memel, urged the absolute necessity of a diversion 
upon the Continent being made by England, that hopes had been 
held out that a British force would be sent to the North of Germany 
—month after month however had passed, and no troops were even 
embarked,—that the Russian army had by its bravery hitherto 
maintained the contest and in every battle which had been fought 
had gained an advantage of which however he was sorry to say his 
general had not sufficiently availed himself...but that it ought not 
to be forgotten that the chances of war were uncertain, and that this 

1 Canning’s instructions to G. Leveson-Gower, Nos. 1-7 and 12, 16 May 
1807, F.O. Russia 65/69. 

198 TILSIT BK III. 

was the last act of the great drama which had occupied the attention 
of the world for the last fifteen years. The enemy had the superiority 
in number as well as military talents, nothing but the unparalleled 
valour of his troops could have enabled them to maintain the contest 
against these advantages. The importance of relieving his army from 
so severe a pressure was incalculable, for nothing less than the last 
hope of salvation of Europe was now in question. 

When Leveson-Gower gave assurance of the preparations that 
were being made for an English expedition, and described the 
difficulties that caused delay, and called attention to the 
limited nature of the land forces which England could raise, 
the Czar continued: 