

BN 13 

194 : TILSIT BK Ill. 

a forlorn poet, unappreciated in the world, and lonely under the 
stars. 

In the middle of June we catch sight of the disillusioned 
Alexander giving expression to his complaints. His bitterness 
comes to the surface and we are allowed to see a stage in the 
process by which the Saviour of Europe forgot his réle and lost 
his inspiration and gave himself into the hands of the enemy. 

Full in the sparkle of gaiety and fashion in the London life 
of these years—making wise heads shake by his prowess at 
cards, causing no end of a rustle among the petticoats, and 
giving rise to much chatter that sent a ripple round the tea-cups 
—was the handsome, spoiled, and rather moody younger son 
of a man who had once declined to be prime minister of England. 
From his infancy he had been petted and idolised by the ladies, 
and now, at thirty-four, he was still a kind of darling of society. 
He was the Lord Granville Leveson-Gower, whose correspond- 
ence with Lady Bessborough gives such a bright and intimate 
disclosure of the gossip and social life and petty preoccupations 
of the Napoleonic times. He was reputed the best whist-player 
of his day, though indeed the luck persistently went against him, 
and he was said to have lost as much as £23,000 at a sitting. 
Also he had a weakness for the fair sex, and drifted into many 
adventures and indiscretions, about which Lady Bessborough 
—and the other gossipers—had much to say. When in the year 
1804 he was appointed to succeed an unsuccessful minister at 
St Petersburg, the Russian ambassador in London bewailed the 
British government’s choice, and had unpleasant forebodings— 
for no one, he said, could succeed with the Russian ministers 
who had any inclination to gamble. While he was in St Peters- 
burg he disliked his residence there, was wearied with the society 
of the place, and found diversion in close friendship with the 
Russian Princess Galitzin; and Lady Bessborough, hearing 
ominous whispers in London, felt it her duty to warn her friend 
against the feminine wiles that might lure him to an unwary 
betrayal of the secrets of his mission. He belonged to that 
brilliant aristocratic world that was the fine flower of the 

s 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 195 

eighteenth century—where the grave and the gay rubbed 
shoulders, and the card table was not far from the politician’s 
desk, and a statesman would play all night without forsaking 
his office next morning. Leveson-Gower, lightly as he trips over 
the pages of the social history of the day, was not without 
ability. He carried out the work of his mission; he did much to 
bring about that third coalition which was the last heart-breaking 
achievement of Pitt; then he returned to England, determined 
to marry that Princess Galitzin—his “Little Barbarian” as he 
called her—if she could contrive to obtain a divorce from her 
husband. At the end of March 1807 Canning, looking for a man 
to re-establish the reputation of England with the Czar, after 
the painful comedies of Lord Douglas’s mission, turned to his 
friend Leveson-Gower, urged upon him the call of “‘publick 
duty”, said that it was in his hands to rescue the European 
situation, and that it was in his power to be “‘useful beyond 
any other man”’.! Others seconded Canning’s persuasions, and 
Leveson-Gower agreed to serve; but he confessed that his “real 
motive” for accepting was that he might see his “Little Bar- 
barian” once again. He did not set out straightway ; home politics 
delayed his departure; there were many murmurs because he 
had to stay so long, waiting for the parliamentary elections; it 
was not until past the middle of May that he managed to leave 
England. He was sent, really, to prevent the tragedy that was 
threatening the coalition—he was sent, though he did not yet 
know it, to forestall the disaster of Tilsit. And no one quite 
realised that it might be a race against time. 