

‘““Why not send your militia?” I replied that neither the laws nor 
the feelings of the country would admit of their being employed on 
Foreign Service. His Imperial Majesty answered, with some degree 
of haste, ‘‘ Will your laws be better preserved by a French army 
laying waste your country? for be assured’’, he added, “‘that if the 
Russian Army experiences any reverse of fortune, the whole mass 
of the French Force will be turned against Great Britain, and that the 
defeat of this army would be as calamitous to England as to Russia”’. 

Once again the Czar said: “‘*‘ Why not draft your militia into your 
Regulars?’ I answered that such a measure could only be 
resorted to upon some great and very peculiar emergency’”’. 

There was question as to the point where the soldiers should 
disembark. The British government thought of a landing on the 
Elbe. The Czar reminded Leveson-Gower that there had been 
a promise to send troops to Stralsund. The king of Sweden was 
expecting this, would take it as a personal affront if the plan 
should be changed. It was dangerous to wound the suscepti- 
bilities of a monarch who was so much the slave of his personal 
emotions—especially when he was carrying on the war in defiance 
of the wishes of his nation. Could the troops be sent in two 
bodies—one to make landing by the Elbe, the other to disembark 
at Stralsund? Leveson-Gower had to shake his head; England 
was in no position to send an expedition big enough to be 
divided. ‘The Emperor then ended this subject by saying, Act 
where you please, provided you act at all. ’ 

¥ 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 199 

Having taken the offensive the Czar did not allow himself 
to be dislodged. He traversed the situation and kept up a 
running attack upon the conduct and disposition of England. 
He complained of the inactivity of the British forces stationed 
in Sicily; these troops, he said, might have prevented Napoleon 
from releasing men in Italy and bringing them to bear against 
Russia in Poland. 

The Emperor then turned to another subject upon which he 
expressed himself with some warmth, and said that having asked the 
British Government to facilitate the means of raising a loan in 
England, no attention whatever had been paid to this request. He 
asked me whether His Majesty’s Ministers doubted of his honour, or 
of the punctuality with which be should fulfil his engagements. He 
had requested that, which had been done for former sovereigns of 
Russia by the Republics of Holland and Genoa. The loans made to 
the Empress Catherine had been faithfully discharged, both interest 
and capital, and he felt extremely hurt that suspicions were cast upon 
his honour by the little attention given to the representations that 
had been made upon this subject.? 

Leveson-Gower was no stranger to Alexander; he had served 
at St Petersburg before; but he had not expected to meet this 
Alexander, disillusioned and critical, and of injured petulant 
mood. This was a far cry from the “‘snugness” of Bartenstein 
and that hint of “‘ driving the French beyond the Rhine’’. There 
are signs that the Czar was becoming weary, if not of the turmoil, 
at least of the disillusionments of the campaign. He ceases to 
speak in ecstatic tones, other voices are drowning in him the 
voice of divine invocation, he finds himself coming to earth, 
finds earth becoming cruelly objective. The Czar who explains 
that the French are superior in numbers and in military talents, 
and insists upon the uncertain chances of war, and talks of the 
need of relieving his army from “so severe a pressure”, is no 
longer mere visionary and dreamer peering through mists of 
romance. He is feeling the cold touch of earth, and precisely 
because he has been a dreamer he does not like the touch. 