

The opposition in the army found its centre and its voice in 
the Grand Duke Constantine; but Constantine was no traitor, 
and it is better to regard him rather as the intractable younger 
brother. Ugly, uncouth, impetuous and untamed, this man was 
fitted to be the favourite of his father, the wild and shaggy 

a 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 191 

Emperor Paul, whom he resembled in his backward mentality, 
in a certain coarseness of fibre, in his fierce tempestuous disposi- 
tion and his wild and fantastic humours, as well as in his passion 
for soldiers and for military parade. Yet certain human qualities 
which seemed once to show themselves in Paul but had been 
withered by cruel treatment and a relentlessly hostile environ- 
ment—a kindliness of heart, a generous childlike impulsiveness 
and a stubborn sort of loyalty—remained to make Constantine 
lovable and won him the affection of his soldiers. He had a 
strange liking for his brother, and showed him the strongest 
devotion, but he did not in the least understand Alexander’s 
mystical fervour, and did not think that such exaltations 
should be encouraged. He who called himself “‘the donkey 
Constantine’”’—who, when he entered Paris with the victorious 
army in 1814, rushed to visit not the Louvre but the stables— 
who had the roughest contempt for everything that looked like 
dandyism—had a summary way of judging the vagaries of his 
brother’s romanticism. Also, like his father, he had come to 
admire Napoleon and to have a high estimate of his prowess. 
During the negotiations at Tilsit he hurried to receive instruction 
from French officers, and when the alliance with France had been 
concluded he caused French prisoners to produce a miniature 
of Napoleon’s camp of Boulogne in the gardens of his palace. 
It is useless to explore for deep and subtle reasons behind the 
judgments of this erratic haphazard mind; with an eye only for 
the realistic, with an intelligence that would seize upon the 
immediate, and with no power to follow his brother’s remoter 
kind of thinking, he would grasp at the tangible elements of the 
situation; and, stationed with an underfed army amid incapable 
and quarrelsome generals, in the face of an enemy whom he 
admired and felt to be superior in war, he would easily find 
reasons for jumping to an impulsive desire for peace. 

So one day we find Hardenberg talking to the Czar of the 
untrustworthiness of his officers, and the dangerous conduct of 
the peace party, and the intrigues of men like Constantine. | 
Alexander brushes the talk aside and makes some defence of his 
brother. Then without warning there appears the impetuous 

192 TILSIT BK III. 

Constantine himself, raving of peace and declaring that no time 
must be lost. It is a startling confirmation of all the suspicions 
that are abroad; we hear that the Czar is much impressed. He 
apologises to Hardenberg for his unbelief and orders his brother 
back to the army. It would even seem that he takes more 
seriously the accusations that have been levelled against 
Bennigsen; for this same day he sends a general to enquire into 
the conduct of the commander-in-chief, even orders this man to 
remove Bennigsen from the post if it should seem a necessary 
step.! 