

On the 10th of June he reached Memel. He was not to blame 
for the last delays; he had left England two-and-a-half weeks 
earlier; but he had been kept five days in Copenhagen, waiting 
for a breeze, and after this he had been teased with contrary 
winds and had needed another week before his final landing.” 
His instructions were hardly calculated to meet the urgency of 
the situation as it had developed during his renewed delays. 

1 Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, 1 Ap. 1807, in Private Correspondence of 
Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 245-6. 
2 Private Correspondence of Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 257-8. 

13-2 

196 TILSIT BK Ill. 

England desired to unite closely with Russia in the conduct of 
the war, and was anxious to follow the decision of the Czar in 
regard to the Austrian mediation; but in the shadow of these 
fine protestations she had many issues to make with Russian 
policy. There was a distracting campaign which the Czar was 
conducting in the east against the Ottoman Empire; it seemed 
important that he should be induced to make peace, and calm 
the awakened anxieties of Austria, and concentrate on the war 
in Poland. Leveson-Gower was instructed to press this question, 
and to show that if he made separate peace with the Porte, the 
Czar might forestall any inconvenient claim on the part of the 
Turks to take part in a future congress of the powers at war. 
Secondly, the time had come for the announcement of the 
pecuniary aid which England could give to the continent. The 
limited nature of this demanded excuse and explanation. The 
Russians had to be reminded that if the Austrians should enter 
the war and become entitled to financial assistance, then even 
this limited grant would have to be still further subdivided. The 
Czar had to be soothed for the disappointment he would have 
at the refusal of the British government to grant his request for 
a loan. Again, a Russian minister in Sicily had failed to give 
adequate support to the English representative there; this 
compared badly with the sincere attempts that were being made 
to second the policy of Russia at Constantinople; it was reason 
for grave complaint. There was a long-standing controversy 
about the commercial relations of England and Russia; the Czar 
had been unwilling to renew the former facilities given to British 
merchants, and Canning expressed a fear that this might mean 
some “abatement of friendship”; yet Canning realised that it 
had been unreasonable to ask for a continuance of all the former 
privileges and concessions; what he desired was a reasonable 
treaty. He showed his more trenchant, unyielding side in his 
demand for a guarantee from the Czar against alleged aggressive 
designs on the part of the Prussians; he threatened to refuse 
accession to the Convention of Bartenstein unless such a safe- 
guard should be provided; he would not join hands with the 
Czar in a war for the aggrandisement of Prussia. Many fine 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 197 