

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 205 

ambitions. Now there came home to these people all the things 
that Canning had thundered and threatened; and they knew it 
would matter little that all Europe should be arranged and 
pacified, if they themselves were left in isolation, to make what 
efforts they could for their own welfare. 

A General Stutterheim had been instructed, before the news 
of Friedland reached Vienna, to make his way to the allied 
headquarters. The Austrians claimed that the intention of his 
mission was “‘to express the attachment of Austria” to the Czar 
and the Prussian king and “‘to explain to them the degree of 
activity that Austria was in a position to give to her policy, and 
the nature and extent of the means she might employ”. This 
assertion was afterwards taken to mean that on the very eve of 
the battle of Friedland the cabinet of Vienna had decided upon 
war; but from the instructions that were drawn up for this 
mission we can now see how unconverted and unrepentant were 
the Austrians still—persistently clinging to their neutrality.® 

The cabinet of Vienna confessed that it was unable to join the 
allies, or accede to the convention of Bartenstein. For its decision 
it found various pretexts. Russia was at war with Turkey, and 
this raised complications and embarrassing side issues. The 
coalition gave no sign of activity, no promise of success. England, 
to all appearances, was indifferent to the fate of Europe. 
Stutterheim was ordered to make capital out of the shortcomings 
of the allies; all of which might have been straightforward for 
him if it had not been coupled with a further, more delicate 
commission, based upon “the interest which the Cabinet of 

1 Adair to Canning, 27 June 1807, in Adair, op. cit. pp. 252-5. 

2 Stadion to Starhemberg, No. 2, 11 July 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

3 The Russian minister in Vienna, Razoumovski, gave a sketch of the 
situation of Austria in June 1807, and showed why the court of Vienna was 
likely to maintain its neutrality in the war. According to him the “pacific 
party is composed of the most powerful families without exception”’, the 
death of the empress had placed the emperor more completely under the 
influence of the Archduke Charles, and ‘‘le mot de paix est devenu le cri 
de ralliement”. He did not blame England but he thought that English 
subsidies and an English diversion on the continent would have altered this 
situation of affairs. (Razoumovski to Alopeus, 14/26 June 1807, F.0O. 

Russia 65/73.) 

206 TILSIT BK III. 

Vienna must have in seeing that the present struggle does not 
end in a way entirely contrary to its views by private and isolated 
arrangements with France, of which Austria would always be 
more or less the victim”. Stutterheim was to rescue Austrian 
interests from the perils that any future negotiation might 
promise—was to do this at the very moment when he was giving 
the last denial to the hopes of the allied powers. It was becoming 
more difficult for the Austrians to expect that they could 
discover a back door into a peace congress when they had 
refused to take part in the war. It would need slanting eyes and 
subtle sleight-of-hand to find the ends of the tangle with which 
Stutterheim was faced. His government confessed that it could 
not show him the way—left him to his own cunning, asked him 
to spin his threads out of nothing. The Austrian chancellor 
admitted that 