

1 G. Leveson-Gower to Canning, No. 1, 17 June 1807, F'.0. Russia 65/69. 

200 TILSIT BK III. 

Leveson-Gower reporting to his government feels that he has 
not been able to meet the unexpected situation: 

I cannot say that the Emperor appeared perfectly satisfied with the 
answers made by me to the various complaints urged by him against 
the conduct of His Majesty’s Government. He begged me to repeat 
to you word for word what I had just heard from him, and ended 
my audience by many expressions of civility to myself... . 

I thought it my duty to state respectfully such reasons as occurred 
to me in justification of my Court, but at the same time avoided as 
much as possible any kind of disputatious argument. 

It was a duel still more heated and unrestrained when the 
British minister had his first interview with the Russian chan- 
cellor. The mention of the matter of finance brought Budberg 
flashing out with an angry phrase; more than once he would 
spring off at a tangent with some blazing irrelevancy; you might 
meet his argument about subsidies, you might offer a placating, 
disarming thought—then he would wrench himself free, would 
tell you that it was not the money that mattered anyway, would 
insist that what was needed was actual soldiers on the spot. 

I told General Budberg that such had been the anxiety of His 
Majesty’s Government to be prepared to assist his allies upon the 
occasion of any pressing emergency that means had been taken for 
forwarding to Russia a certain quantity of Bullion for such purpose, 
which remained at my disposal. The General replied in rather an angry 
tone that he hoped he was to understand me as making the offer of 
a loan and not a subsidy, that if I meant the latter the acceptance of 
it was out of the question, that if I meant the former he could return 
no answer till he had taken the orders of the Emperor. I answered 
that as I had made no proposal I expected no answer... . He answered 
it is not money, it is men we want, we have to contend against not 
only France, but Italy, Spain, Germany and a great part of Poland, 
and the troops of all these countries are now fighting against us. 

He then preferred against His Majesty’s Government complaints 
similar to those I had heard from the mouth of His Imperial Majesty 
upon our not having undertaken any diversion on the Continent, 
which I answered by the same arguments I had used in my audience 
of the Emperor, but which I urged with less reserve than when 
replying to His Imperial Majesty. 

1 G, Leveson-Gower to G. Canning, No. 2, 18 June 1807, F'.0. Russia 65/69. 

cH.1. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 201 

There was no time for renewed discussions. On the 15th of 
June alarming news was flying around. The Grand Duke 
Constantine was back again urging truce without delay. 
Alexander was not then at Tilsit, and Budberg ‘“‘who alone 
persisted in the opinion that it was necessary to continue the 
war to the bitter end, objected that the Russian army had not 
yet been beaten, that it could fall back on numerous reserves, 
that the Polish provinces were to be trusted, and that the 
Emperor could count on the backing of his nation’, But 
Czartoryski, who was supposed to know all about the Poles, said 
that no hope could be based upon this people, they desired only 
to regain their independence, they would rise up as Napoleon 
advanced. Constantine ridiculed the idea of attaching weight 
to the reserves, for these were neither numerous nor equipped. 
Novossiltzov was there, speaking in favour of peace.1 Budberg 
hurried to consult the man whose views he could most count 
upon; he held a conference with Hardenberg, and the two put 
heads together. There was no escape from the situation, and 
they sent their verdict to the Czar. ‘‘We could not disguise 
from ourselves the possibility that as a result of all that is 
taking place, the army may be obliged to fall back upon our 
frontier.’’? Then everything was in an uproar, and panic flooded 
the scene, and the blind world wheeled into the night. On the 
morning of the 16th of June the Czar, at Olitta, received 
Bennigsen’s confession of defeat. ‘“‘I should think it necessary 
and prudent”, wrote the general, “to begin some negotiations 
for peace, if only to gain time and repair our losses. This, Sire, 
you will decide.’’? Very soon there went dinning through the 
world the terrible name of Friedland. 