

The windy spaces and desert darkness and untried distances of 
the north were yawning for Napoleon, if the Russians would 
only give him the gateway. Talleyrand was afraid that they 
would. Robert Adair at Vienna observed to the Austrian 
chancellor 

that these fresh successes would lead probably to fresh pretensions 
on the part of France, and that Bonaparte, to whom no project 
seemed preposterous or impossible, might adopt that of carrying his 
army into the heart of Russia and attempt to dictate the law even at 
St Petersburg.” 

Count Stadion agreed that “this would give us one chance 
more”’; but he thought that Napoleon would rather offer peace. 
The idea of allowing Napoleon to lose himself in the depths of 
Russia and go plodding to his own destruction was already in 
the air. Eylau and the torments of the winter campaign in 
Poland had made it clear that Napoleon was no match for 
Nature. In some moods Alexander would have opened his 
country to the oppressor, and felt it all a solemn tragedy, set 
under lurid skies. In one mood Alexander actually came to do 

1 Vorontsov Archives, xvit (1880), No. 91, 14 July 1807, pp. 157 et seq. See 
Sorel, L’Europe et la Révolution Frangaise, vu, 169. 
2 Adair to Canning, 27 June 1807, in Adair, Historical Memoir, pp. 252-5. 

204 TILSIT BK III. 

it, and let Napoleon wear himself against the terrors of the 
north. But Alexander would not do it now—when Czartoryski 
was muttering that the Poles would rise in his rear, when there 
was too much reason to believe that the Russian people could 
not be counted upon, when somebody even breathed that the 
Czar was in danger of assassination. Alexander was not at this 
time tuned for the music of 1812; the tragic réle was not so 
compelling. For he had not merely lost a battle; it was due to 
his friends as much as to his foes that he had lost a mood. His 
heroism fed upon the mood; and the mood was played out. 

But even if the world were ready to hear of peace between 
France and Russia, it was much less prepared for ‘“‘Tilsit”’, and 
the magnificent gesture of reconciliation. One is tempted to 
smile at the inadequacy of the first conjectures people hazarded 
concerning the consequences of Friedland. To guard against the 
illusion that after Friedland “‘Tilsit”? was the only thing that 
could have happened, perhaps it would be interesting to examine 
the steps taken by the respective powers of Europe after they 
had heard of the battle. These will be an index to the fears and 
expectations and desires of contemporaries; a key, perhaps, to 
possible alternative courses which were open even after the 
disaster. 

There was great alarm at Vienna when the news arrived. With 
some people there was a gasp of horror at the tragedy in which 
they themselves had so nearly become involved; and a heart 
stood still as though it had just missed death by a hair’s-breadth. 
Perhaps there was some relief that neutrality had been able to 
spin out long enough. But the Austrians, who have been nervous, 
and feverish for self-preservation during the whole of this story, 
found at bottom little reassurance to have the noise of Friedland 
whistling in their ears. A report from Adair at Vienna shows 
that they trembled more than ever for their provinces, feared 
the continuance of war lest they should become embroiled in 
the struggle, dreaded that the Czar with or without Prussia 
might conclude a peace that would be damaging to Hapsburg 
interests, and were jealous even of the assembly of a congress, 
for fear it should neglect or over-ride their own desires and 