

These were the commotions that were stirring around the 
gentle figure of Alexander—miserable, tantalising bickerings for 
a man who bore upon his shoulders all the burden of “‘all the 
Russias”. An iron man would have brushed them away with 
a sweep of his mighty arm—would have stamped his foot to 
shake a mountain. But Alexander was not terrible. No monarch 
was more susceptible to immediate influences and suggestions 
from the external world. All his mysticisms and philanthropic 
moods were at the mercy of the crude play of events or of 
environment. Let him go on soothing himself with his dreams 
of chivalry, of liberation, and he would sit and smile though the 
thunders were rumbling destruction—he would sit and feel 
himself a hero and sense the grand tragedy of the situation. Let 
him be conscious of the halo that was round him, keep him in 
his dream of being the centre of an epic, play delicately upon 
his vanity—and he would float on the poetry of it, nodding 
benignantly. But set such a man in the midst of petty vexations, 
under the insistent torment of minor bickerings, amid quibbles 
and quarrels and sorenesses—treat him as a little man, pester 
him with annoyances, forget that he is a poet—and, though for 
a long time he may seem still to swim serenely on his roman- 
ticisms, though he may not bully you or brutally thrust you 
aside as an enraged giant would—yet these things will sink deep 
and slowly simmer, and gradually he will feel the halo fade away, 
and he will come himself to fall to the littleness of things—till 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 448-9; see S. Tatistcheff (1891), Alexandre I” et 
Napoléon, pp. 115-16. 

a 

cH.t. THE COALITION BEFORE FRIEDLAND 1938 

some day, at the beckoning of some other voice, he will turn from 
you altogether, will find his romanticisms, his poetry, his halo 
elsewhere, will discover some other réle in which he can again 
feel himself the hero of an epic, still nod his head and smile like 
a benignant god—and then he will turn back upon you all your 
own pettinesses and squabblings and vexations, to show that 
they have not gone unremembered. 

History gives us only grudging fragments of herself, and it is 
not possible to tell how the deepest mind of Alexander was 
working on the eve of Friedland. We know he still averred that 
he would persist in the war against Napoleon; we do not know 
with what changed voice he might have come to assert this, or 
what deep heart’s misgivings he stifled or repressed when he 
spoke. It is impossible not to believe that something in him 
resented the irritation of these days when the Austrians appeared 
distrusting, the English seemed bent on rushing off at a tangent 
in selfish adventures of conquest, the Prussians—no allies, 
anyhow, rather an added responsibility—were annoying him 
with complaints about the failure to relieve Danzig, the conduct 
of his troops, and the incompetence of his generals; while, all 
the time, there were two parties in his own camp, each tugging 
at his coat and trying in turn to gain his ear, and Bennigsen 
himself was becoming a half-hearted, unwilling leader. The 
surface Alexander might not yet register the change; the external 
system of his overt ideas and conscious purposes quite possibly 
remained the same; he may have still felé determined; but all 
these annoyances and disappointments were tapping on the 
walls of his brain, and if they did not yet seem to touch the 
surface-thinking, they found the back door into that hidden 
room of the mind where buried thoughts rankle. Some day a 
shock would shake them out, and find them festered and sore 
through having been underground. Already Alexander was 
accustomed to saying that he “‘had no ally”’; he allowed the idea 
to eat into his mind, and even when he seemed most defiant, the 
thought was still his misgiving. And when he said that he had. 
no ally, it was not merely the grumbling of a man of affairs who 
resents a lack of co-operation, it was something like the cry of 