

1 Tatistcheff, Alewandre I* et Napoléon, pp. 116-17. 
2 Budberg to Alexander, 3/15 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxxix, 13. 
3 Bennigsen to Alexander, 3/15 June 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 9-10. 

CHAPTER II 

AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA AFTER THE 
BATTLE OF FRIEDLAND 

Frrepianp would not have been prevented by the calling 
of a congress such as had been still contemplated in the early 
days of June; for there had been no intention of suspending 
military operations and handing everything over to the dip- 
lomats. But if the machinery had been there, ready to undertake 
the work of peace-making—if there had been plenipotentiaries 
already at their tables in an atmosphere of discussion and 
debate and with pacific transactions pending, you might have 
prevented Tilsit and kept the Czar from pursuing that solitary 
road that led to the French alliance. For Tilsit was by no means 
the logical conclusion of Friedland, or the natural corollary. The 
thing which would have been inherently expected from the 
result of that battle was not the hearty embrace of victor and 
vanquished and a proud partition of world empire into realms 
of East and West. This was a later development, coming out of 
a tangled web of events and interactions. A strange and tricky 
path stood between, a path not easily to be traced; for much of 
it lay along the psychology of a Czar who might have had a 
swarm of Budbergs and Hardenbergs pressing around him, but 
yet was in reality a lonely man, sitting high and dry above the 
mere practitioners of politics and mooning with a mind un- 
balanced and strange—that worked all the more strangely at 
the moment because it was beaten and misunderstood. 

All the world would not have agreed that even peace must 
necessarily follow the disaster of Friedland. Almost a month 
after the battle a lady could write from London, ‘There are 
rumours of a flag of truce, but not believed’’,! and later than 
this Count Vorontsov in London “‘still offers bets that there will 
not be peace with Russia—at least not before Christmas”’.? 

1 Private Correspondence of Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 260. 
2 Ibid. 11, 265. 

(CH. II. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 203 

Razoumovski, Russian ambassador at Vienna, wrote to the 
Austrian chancellor, ‘“‘I am persuaded that never will peace be 
made, except after a victory”. Bennigsen had said that the 
Czar might find it prudent to negotiate “if only to gain time and 
repair our losses”. It was Bennigsen who asserted that ‘“‘the 
way to defeat the French is to increase the distance which 
separates them from the Rhine, and draw them on to the 
Dneister’’. 

“What is it that may induce the Emperor to wish for peace’’? 
wrote Vorontsov. ‘“‘Is it the fear of Napoleon’s invading Russia? 
That would be precisely the thing to be desired. Bonaparte would 
find himself in the predicament of Charles the XII.... Without fort- 
resses, without points of support, with a cloud of our light troops on 
his flanks and in his rear, he and his army would die of hunger and 
be compelled to surrender... .”’4 