

1 G. Canning to Lord Pembroke, No. 16,7 Aug. 1807, F.0. Austria 7/85. 

» Stadion to Starhemberg, No. 1, 6 Sept. 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

* Pembroke to Canning, No. 6, 3 Sept. 1807, F.O. Austria 7/85. 
? 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 211 

putting Austria in the most respectable condition, augmenting 
her internal and external power, could there be the most distant 
possibility of repose for Europe”. Starhemberg even thought 
that the recent events might work to the advantage of his own 
country; for if the Czar had abandoned the cause of the king of 
Naples, then the sacrifices which would have been devoted to 
the benefit of this monarch might be apportioned for the 
promotion of Austrian interests.+ 

There was an apparent desire in England “‘to see the large 
interests of the moment discussed in a Congress’’; but the 
Austrian ambassador found Canning too proud to make the first 
move. Starhemberg offered to go to Paris 
to inform the Cabinet of the Tuileries through our Ambassador there 
of the wish of the Cabinet of London to work along with Austria in 

a Congress of all the Powers for the purpose of concluding a general 
peace on bases that would promise security and lasting repose, 

The news of the treaty of Tilsit, however, and the receipt of an 
offer of mediation from the Czar—*“‘ the demi-overture of Russia’’, 
as Starhemberg called it—cancelled these Austrian efforts.” 

There was something pleasingly coy about the Austrian 
overture to Canning. Its assertiveness was deliciously veiled, 
and in it all there was a hint of tentativeness and doubt. Stadion 
evidently had an uneasy shyness in putting out some of his 
suggestions. But there was another state that saw its oppor- 
tunity in the catastrophe that overwhelmed Europe, and was 
prepared to rise to valiant schemes of aggression over the ruins 
of the continent. It did not tamely submit to the platitude that 
in war the winner must gain and the losers stand the loss; it 
soared to the sky with the paradox that winner and losers should 
all make handsome profit, should all come to aggrandisement 
and power, should all of them be richer than ever they had been 
before. You would arrange this happy consummation by turning 
your attention to an innocent third party and making a market 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 63, 8 Aug. 1807, W.S.A. Berichie aus 

London. 
2 Ibid. 

14-2 

212 TILSIT BK III. 

of the territory of monarchs unable to take care of themselves. 
It was a scheme worthy of Napoleon; but only a Napoleon could 
earry it out. It was a glorification of the kind of politics that 
had produced the partition of Poland. It was put forward with 
no bashful hesitation or squirm of delicate conscience, but with 
an impudence and a callousness that would have been more 
pardonable in a conqueror like Napoleon. The proposal was the 
last resort of a government that was like a cat in a corner, 
tormented into ingenuity by the very desperation of its position. 
Prussia was the sponsor of the scheme; and its creator was 
Hardenberg. 