

It was a bold thing to expect that on the morrow of Friedland 
Napoleon would accept the congress which, in the midst of all 
his difficulties, it had been his persistent policy to evade. 
“Without a doubt”, wrote the Austrian chancellor, “ Napoleon 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, No. 2, 11 July 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 

London. 
2 Lettow-Vorbeck, op. cit. Iv, 471. 

208 TILSIT BK III. 

in his present situation will be less willing than ever to depart 
from his principle of a separate negotiation.”! But behind all 
Austria’s plans of pacification there was one idea that was the 
magnet of her policy. It was reasoned that if Napoleon could 
see a hope of regaining his lost colonies, if the restitution of 
maritime conquests could be dangled as a bribe, if you could 
play upon this—as the Austrians seem to have thought—the 
master-motive of his policies, then he might be brought to allow 
the establishment of a general negotiation. The idea of a congress 
was impossible—it was admitted at Vienna—“‘unless England 
declared herself in favour of it, and, so to speak, took or shared 
with us the initiative’’.? 

So while the French and Russian monarchs were at Tilsit 
making their summary disposal of Empire, an Austrian courier 
was trailing to England, with instructions for the ambassador 
in London. 

Napoleon must be interested in putting an end to the maritime war 
which so far has brought him neither laurels nor advantages. It 
seems to us therefore that if the Minister of Great Britain declared 
himself ready to renew negotiations for peace, but at the same time 
declared his firm resolution to bind them closely with the negotiations 
for a Continental Peace. . . there would be in this the strongest motive 
for France to consent to a Congress... .° 

The motives that led the Austrians to take this interest in the 
establishment of peace came out in the despatch. “‘As to the 
restoration of the King of Prussia to his estates, it can only be 
regarded as conformable to our views, and it could only be a too 
considerable aggrandisement of this power, that would be con- 
trary to our political interests....” It was hoped that there 
would be no question of a re-establishment of Poland, ‘‘ which, 
even if it did not touch the two Galicias, would always be an 
event dangerous and disastrous to Austria’’. 

...the integrity of the Austrian Monarchy is of too general an 
interest for Kurope and for England herself to allow us to doubt the 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, No. 2, 11 July 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 
2 Ibid. 3 Ibid. 

CHa it. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 209 

importance which the Cabinet of St James will place upon refusing 
any consent to an arrangement which would change our present 
state of possession.1 

Napoleon might win his Friedlands, or lose; Austria might be 
a party in the war, or might remain a spectator; but the 
ministers of Vienna would have a hand in the peace-making, 
and would be ready with arguments for the promotion of their 
own interests. “‘I have not wished to repeat in so many words 
the offer of the intervention of Austria”’, wrote Stadion, ‘‘ because 
the essential thing is that we take part in the pacification in 
whatever way possible.” Austria, renewing her offer of media- 
tion, avoided the explicit use of the unwelcome word; but 
Stadion saw that there was no réle for his government save that 
of mediator, “‘since we are to be considered as a neutral power 
and it is only thus that we can intervene in any Congress for 
peace”? 