

General Stutterheim, being able to do nothing but raise hopes, 
having to refuse everything which might be interpreted as a precise 
or positive engagement, lacking any authority to take measures that 
would bind the Court of Vienna for the future, or compromise its 
political action, will have few means at his disposal. 

Having decided to maintain their neutrality, the Austrians did 
not intend to remain passive, or quietly await the inevitable 
approach of a disastrous peace. For them diplomacy should 
take the place of war; they would weave their subtleties covertly, 
and gamble on events, like sharp men on the Stock Exchange.! 

It was while these very instructions were being written that 
the expected contingency arose, and the news of Friedland 
arrived. If Stutterheim were to proceed on his mission he 
would need fresh orders from his court, directed to the precise 
event. 

His instructions had to be modified on the assumption that when 
he arrived at the armies he would find an armistice concluded and 
negotiations set on foot... .It would not in that event be a question 

* Lettow-Vorbeck, Der Krieg von 1806 und 1807 (1893), 1v, Anlage v1, 
pp. 469 and 474, Instruktionen an den ésterreichischen General von 
Stutterheim und Antworten des Kaisers von Oesterreich an die Monarchen 
von Russland und Preussen. 

¥ 
* 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 207 

of operations of war; the only thing that would matter would be to 
make the pacification as little injurious to Europe as was possible in 
such a disastrous conjuncture.1 

Stutterheim’s new instructions assumed that on his arrival at 
the allied headquarters he would find ‘“‘negotiations for peace 
already set on foot, and perhaps far advanced, between France 
and the two Allied Sovereigns’’. 

The presence of M. de Stutterheim at the side of the Emperor 
Alexander may still however be very useful for the interests of the 
Court of Vienna, if he arrives in time to prevent too great a precipitancy 
in such an arrangement and to induce the allies to treat. ..with our 
amicable intervention. 

“Tt is the fate of the one-time Poland’’, wrote Stadion, ‘‘ which is 
of the greatest moment. ..in the stipulations of a future peace.’”? 

It was feared that Napoleon might keep his promise to the Poles, 
might even demand that Austria give up her own Polish 
provinces to form a new kingdom for one of his vassals. And 
even if he left their possessions intact the Austrians knew that 
the formation of this new state would be a danger to them, 
creating disruption and discontent among their own Polish 
subjects whose national aspirations would be left unrealised. 
There was another contingency to be apprehended. If France 
should give concessions to Russia in Moldavia and Wallachia, 
this would be a new menace in the east. To prevent such an 
issue it was important to manipulate for Austrian intervention ; 
Stutterheim was ordered to point out to the allies the dis- 
advantages under which they would labour if they treated 
separately with Napoleon and found themselves with nothing 
to support them against the overwhelming preponderance of 
France. Austria offered her mediation. 