

“It will be easy for you to imagine the agitation of his soul since 
the sad events that we have heard of’’, wrote the king to Queen 
Louisa. ‘‘An armistice is being negotiated...and it appears that 
closer discussions are to follow. Their results ?—we shall have to wait 
and see. As soon as the business of the Armistice is settled the 
Emperor intends to go with me to Taurrogen to be nearer to the seat 
of negotiations and—if necessary—to see the Friend of Mankind 
[Napoleon]. What an attractive prospect! I shudder to think of it, 
and yet I see it clearly coming, and, what is more, you will remember 
I always told you it must come to this.’’® 

Perpetual pathetic refrain—‘I always told you so”. 

The Prussian king and his ministers indeed had a number of 
shocks and surprises before they had been many hours at 
Scezawel. Hardenberg goes so far as to say that already the Czar 
was not the same man.* There was an unexpected haste on the 
part of the Russians to conclude their armistice with the French; 
Alexander was even beginning to familiarise himself with the 

1 Alexander I to Frederick William III, 4/16 June 1807, in Bailleu, 
Briefwechsel (vol. txxv of the Publicationen aus den K. Preussischen 
Staatsarchiven), p. 157. 

2 Countess Voss, Recollections, under the date 19 June 1807. 

3 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 21 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 32. 

Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 539. 

216 TILSIT BK III. 

idea of having an interview with Napoleon.’ Napoleon was 
making the amazing demand for the surrender of the three 
Prussian fortresses of Graudenz, Pillau and Colberg—was re- 
quiring these as a condition of his armistice with Russia, and 
seemed determined to insist upon the point.? If the Russians 
could evade the concession, he would transfer the demand to 
Frederick William and make it a stipulation in his armistice 
with Prussia; and if this could be taken as an index of what he 
intended doing in actual negotiations for peace, the outlook was 
more gloomy than ever. It seemed that Napoleon had a pre- 
disposition to deal harshly with these Prussians whom he had 
courted and cajoled since the close of 1806. 

The unfortunate Frederick William once again felt the 
oppressiveness of his station and shook to see the handwriting 
on the wall. He had unwillingly put everything to hazard and 
the chances had turned against him; now it had come to the last 
throw, and there seemed nothing to count upon save a purely 
personal factor, an utterly incalculable element in the mind of 
Alexander. There was something unaccountable—defying ra- 
tionalisation—something like a streak of quixotism which had 
kept the Czar faithful to Prussia even when she had seemed 
most unworthy, and had made him uncritical and unseeing even 
when she most looked like a sponging friend. It was an arbitrary, 
in a way a capricious side of his purposes, independent of reasons 
of state; at times it would seem to have cut across the true logic 
of Russian policy; it was separable from the interests of the 
Empire. But Alexander was now defeated and might be com- 
pelled to look to his own salvation. Everything hung on the 
secret workings of the mind of a man who was no longer the 
master of events. And Alexander, mysterious being, mixture of 
strange impulses, with something baffling in his purposes and 
unpredictable in his actions, was wearing a haggard look, 
pursuing a lonely course—his real ideas and intentions a matter 
for dark whispering or breathless conjecture. He was discussing 