

The situation was changing while the Austrians were preparing 
their despatches. Before the instructions were completed for the 
Austrian minister in London, it was heard that “the two 
Emperors pass whole days together, and deal with political 
affairs in a way that seems to exclude any foreign intervention 
whatever”. The terror of the thought made Stadion more 
importunate for his scheme. The minister Starhemberg was 
instructed to press England, “if she places any importance on 
the amelioration of the situation of Europe, to offer means of 
compensation by the restitution of the conquests she has made 
in the maritime war’’.® 

Alexander, in coming to his arrangements with France at 
Tilsit, completely outpaced this Austrian move. By the time 
Stutterheim reached his destination, everything had been 
settled; he did not even see the Czar. Napoleon interviewed him, 
and talked for two hours, saying that he was well pleased with 
the behaviour of Austria during the war in Poland. 

1 Ibid. 

2 Stadion to Starhemberg, No. 3, 11 July 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. ; 

3 Stadion to Starhemberg, Nos. 3 and 4, 11 July 1807, W.S.A. Weisungen. 
nach London. 

BN 14 

210 TILSIT BK III. 

George Canning, on hearing the news of Friedland, had 
written to the allied headquarters in Poland to say that he would 
be willing to join in a general negotiation for peace. Further 
than this he did not go. He immediately recognised the real 
meaning of the overture from Austria, and took off its stage 
costume. To the British minister in Vienna he wrote that 
Austria had 

recommended the British Government immediately to declare willing- 
ness to treat for General Peace, and demand the Assembly of a 
Congress to which His Majesty should insist upon Austria being 
admitted as a mediating party; and that in the progress of the 
negotiation Great Britain should hold herself ready to make sacrifices 
out of her conquests for the purpose of...augmenting the territory 
and influence of Austria.1 

When Stadion saw his communication stripped of its philan- 
thropic embellishments, he was shocked, and detected a mis- 
carriage. He sent a severe reprimand to Starhemberg for having 
exceeded his instructions. ‘‘My instructions. ..did not mention 
an aggrandisement of the Monarchy’’, he explained, ‘“‘ but spoke 
of the general interest which demands. ..that there shall be no 
change for the worse in its state of possession.’’? He declared to 
the English minister in Vienna that the 

recommendation was made with the view of effecting a general peace, 
during the negotiations for which this Government hoped indeed that 
a guarantee of the present territories of the House of Austria, if not 
a restoration of some of those which she has lost would be offered as 
favourable to the re-establishment of an equilibrium which might 
ensure the future tranquillity of Europe.* 

Canning, in replying to the overture, did not cease to repeat 
his former assurances, and declare his willingness to use the 
colonial conquests for the amelioration of Europe. He still kept 
them up his sleeve; he would refuse to make sacrifices “‘for 
illusory objects”; but he seemed “‘ quite convinced that only by 