

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 21 and 22 June 1807, in 
Deutsche Rundschau, cx, 33 and 86. 

* Bennigsen to Alexander, 7/19 June 1807, in Sbornik, txxxtx, 23. 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 217 

very little with Budberg, and Budberg was the man who watched 
most carefully over the interests of Prussia, over the pro-German 
side of the imperial policy. Frederick William, who was always 
feeling the clammy hand of fate upon him, must surely have 
felt it now. 

A Prussian officer named Schladen had been sent to the 
headquarters of Bennigsen, and had talked to Russian generals. 
His reports of the 21st of June were received at Sczawel. They 
disclosed the intensity of the crisis to which Russian policy had 
come. Widespread conspiracies for peace were on foot; Russian 
officers were fraternising with the French and holding con- 
ferences; the Grand Duke Constantine was active and intriguing. 

“IT will not stop to speak here’’, ran the second report, ‘‘of the 
excesses of all kinds committed by the army, or of the imperturbable 
coolness with which the commander-in-chief listens to the complaints 
of the poor wretches who are despoiled under his very eyes, so to 
speak,...but what has surprised me is to perceive that the desire for 
peace manifests itself almost everywhere; that without the least 
restraint the officers at the table of General Bennigsen speak of the 
necessity of concluding it with greatest haste; that no one even seems 
to think that the Emperor might have a different opinion; and that 
in general all these gentlemen think they have so managed the affair 
that they can be sure of succeeding and carrying it out even against 
the intentions of the Emperor....It seems certain that the ramifica- 
tions of this intrigue are very deep; and if the presence and energy 
of Your Excellency do not save Prussia, I am in great fear of the 
consequences....If the armistice is accepted and if the Russians 
remain in their present position Prussia is ruined.”’+ 

It would seem to have been expected of Hardenberg that he 
should think out a way of escape. He was certainly not the man 
to sit and watch the procession of events and commend his 
country to the high stars. This was the really desperate moment 
for Prussia, the time of crucial strain. Hardenberg met it with 
a flourish. One might almost think that he exulted. Desperation 
seemed to give drive to his thinking, whipping it to astonishing 

1 Second report of Schladen to Hardenberg, 21 June 1807, in Ranke, 
Hardenberg, v, 522. 

218 TILSIT BK III. 

rapidity and range. On the 22nd of June, the day after his 
arrival at Sczawel, Frederick William was writing to the queen: 

Unless Napoleon is quite intractable there is no doubt, from the 
disposition of men around the Emperor, and from the Emperor’s own 
disposition, that there will be an immediate accommodation with 
France. In what manner? That is the great point under discussion; 
it is being worked upon continuously. To-day Hardenberg and 
Budberg have given their joint opinion in a conference we have had 
with the Czar. Gigantic plans are afoot, to try to avoid the blow 
which threatens us, and it is hoped that, if we humour Bonaparte on 
different matters which he has very much at heart, we shall succeed 
more easily in rescuing our common interests. But these are as yet 
only general ideas, though they have been communicated to Kalec- 
kreuth so that he may be able to make tactful use of them in such a 
way as to learn something of the benevolent intentions of the Friend 
of Mankind....Heaven knows what result we are to expect. 