

While the Prussians at Memel at the beginning of the second 
week of June were still moping over the continued inactivity of 
the Russian forces, news came to them of Bennigsen’s forward 
movement and his success against the French at Heilsberg. At last 
the decisive hour was come, and the day seemed promising. The 
brain throbbed violently to feel the climax so near. ‘‘The Queen 
was quite beside herself with joy. The King writes hopefully 
about this victory.’’ There was a moment of tension and strain 
as the world waited for the issue. We are dealing now with 
people whose nerves were set on edge. The mood of eager hope 
soon passed. On the 138th there were unpleasant misgivings. It 
was remembered how Bennigsen had cried “Victory!” after 
Pultusk, after Eylau—and the old agonies of doubt returned. 

‘““My beloved Queen is so happy!’’, writes the Countess Voss; but 

‘‘Bennigsen has retreated....Is he afraid of a second battle? He 
never follows up a victory and he never follows up the defeated enemy 
or any advantage he may have acquired; or have we been deceived 
and this was no victory, only a new catastrophe?” 
On the next day: “The Queen came to me early, in great trouble 
and uneasiness. The King writes that he is very much displeased 
with Bennigsen, who has lost every advantage from these so- 
called victories, by his retreat”. On the 15th, before anything 
was heard of Friedland, people were beginning to say, ““God 
alone can help us now”, and the Prussian king was “‘very sad 
and downcast, believing that everything was lost”’. 

Then the moment of tension broke, and broke in bitterness 

™ 

CH. II. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 213 

and despair. The news of the battle reached Memel on the 16th 
and found men feverishly angry. The king mooned and mumbled 
that this was just as he had foretold; that was how he would 
console himself when calamity overwhelmed him. His un- 
pleasantness turned against Hardenberg. “I defended the man”’, 
wrote Countess Voss, “but this only irritated the King more 
than ever.”’ The queen eased the strain on her mind by giving 
vent to all her complaints and suspicions against the Russian 
generals. She made herself ill with weeping. Hardenberg seemed 
more calm, but it was the calmness of despair; “‘he seemed 
incapable of giving the King advice”. One person is reported 
as having taken the news with more of unconcern; for Princess 
Radziwill remarks that “the ironical expression on General 
Kalckreuth’s face struck me disagreeably. Alone among that 
sorrowful crowd he seemed indifferent to the calamity that had 
befallen us”’. There may be prejudice in this; but Kalckreuth 
is worthy of notice; he had defended Danzig, was reputed to be 
the friend of peace, and a man not unacceptable to Bonaparte; 
and he was to be the minister to negotiate for Prussia in the 
transactions of Tilsit. 

The Prussians received the defeat of Friedland in an ungenerous 
mood, and there was a commotion in Memel as preparations were 
made for further flight. It was expected that the royal family 
would leave Prussian territory and take refuge at Mittau or Riga. 
But one interesting alternative plan was put forward, and came 
from a strange quarter. Cabinet councillor Beyme had been one 
of the enemies of the party of vigour and reform at Berlin, had 
been the incarnation of those obnoxious principles of government 
that had estranged men like Stein from the royal service; for 
no matter who was minister, Beyme always had the ear of the 
king. But since Hardenberg’s return to power, to a virtual 
dictatorship in Prussia, the man—we have it on Hardenberg’s 
authority—had had a change of heart; he had ‘“‘ behaved very 
‘well and constantly followed good principles”’.1 We are told that 
after the news of the final Russian disaster Beyme “appeared 
to have some heart and hope left”. It is pleasant to find him 