

1 Hardenberg to Stein, 10 July 1807, in Ranke, Hardenbery, v, 535. 

214 TILSIT BK Ill. 

putting forward a proposal which might have failed completely 
but which was at least a glorious gesture, a thing to make a 
Napoleon envious—and which, if it had not saved the Prussian 
state, would have sent it down in the colour and glow of twilight, 
and all hung round with the romance that clings to a valiant 
lost cause. 

Beyme was alone in maintaining that, supposing K®6nigsberg 
occupied by Napoleon, the King had still a nobler alternative left 
than quitting his country ; this was to take advantage of the transports 
lying at Libau to go with what was left of the Prussian army, and land 
in Pomerania, where troops, fortresses, Bliicher and Gneisenau were 
at the King’s disposal, and when all North Germany, Denmark and 
Sweden would unite with him; the Queen and the Royal Family 
could embark for Copenhagen where a very friendly welcome awaited 
us, and where we should be nearer than at Memel to the seat of 
war....+ 

Hardenberg seems at a later date to claim credit for having 
urged such a policy; for in declaring what he would have done 
if he had been king, he outlines precisely this scheme—putting 
the blame for its rejection on the shoulders of Frederick William, 
of whom he writes with some disrespect: ‘‘ But it is impossible 
to change a man’s character, and it is unwise to try. If it could 
have been done we should not have been where we are now’’.? 
Princess Radziwill, however, who describes Beyme as being 
alone in urging the step, goes on to say, ““So much opposition 
was shown and so many difficulties raised that nothing was done 
except that we were ordered to get our travelling baggage ready 
and hold ourselves prepared to start at the first word of the 
King”. So history was cheated of a dramatic moment, an 
episode magnificently defiant, a fine futile adventure. 

On hearing the result of Friedland the Czar, on the 16th of 
June, wrote a letter to the Prussian king: 

It is with a sore heart, Sire, that I fulfil my duty and communicate 
the tragic news that I have just received from General Bennigsen. 

* Princess Anton Radziwill, Forty-five years of my life (Eng. trans. 1912), 
pp. 266-7. 

2 Hardenberg to Jacobi-Kloest, 12 July 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, 
p. 542. 

’ 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 215 

It is cruel for me to have to give up even the hope of being as useful 
to you as my heart had wished and as the means which I had employed 
seemed to justify our expecting....I am resuming my journey 
to-night to go to Taurrogen; perhaps Your Majesty will think fit to 
go there yourself; it will be necessary for us to be together and to 
come to a common decision.+ 

A later messenger advised the king that the Czar would await 
him at the village of Sczawel. Frederick William was still in 
unpleasant mood; it made him bitter and indignant to learn 
that he was to confer with Alexander not on Prussian but on 
Russian territory;? but on the 20th of June he journeyed to 
Sezawel, and ordered Kalckreuth to follow, Hardenberg having 
set out the previous night. The meeting with the Czar was 
a mournful one; Alexander was evidently in great anguish. 