

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 11, 458-62. 

220 TILSIT P BK III. 

Moldavia, Wallachia, Bessarabia, Roumania, Bulgaria. Napoleon 
shall take Greece and the adjacent islands. Prussia herself, 
indeed, will have nothing to do with the spoils of Turkey, will 
have none of the odium attaching to such usurpations; she will 
take Saxony, gaining it by a neat kind of exchange, transferring 
the king of Saxony to Poland. Russia in return for benefits 
received shall give up her Polish provinces; Austria shall do the 
same, and shall be given places like Dalmatia, Bosnia, and 
Serbia; while Prussia shall surrender part of her Polish territory, 
reserving to herself such important places as Danzig, Posen and 
Thorn. So shall be formed the new kingdom of Poland which 
shall be given to the king of Saxony. It was a very profitable 
scheme for Prussia, and one which would spare her much of the 
unpleasantness of actually sharing in the partition of Turkey; 
it included, moreover, a plan by which she would gain those 
towns of Liibeck and Hamburg, which had brought her into 
difficulties with Napoleon in the year 1806. England might be 
allowed to conquer Egypt, to keep Malta and to regain Hanover, 
if she would consent to adopt more liberal maritime principles; 
but if she refused this, and failed to come to an arrangement 
before the forthcoming spring, the Baltic should be closed 
against her shipping. So all parties would be humoured in some 
of their favourite ambitions and pet preoccupations, and all 
problems would find their solution in the removal of ‘“‘the sick 
man of Europe”’. 

It was a brilliant improvisation, containing many things 
calculated to soothe Napoleon and entice some of his cherished 
ambitions. It flattered his desire to curb the maritime preten- 
sions of England; it humoured the vague plans that he held for 
predominance in the Mediterranean; it accorded with various 
thoughts which he had had and which he had never dismissed 
from his mind concerning the impending destruction of the 
Ottoman Empire. But it was a monstrous piece of pretentious- 
ness on the part of a power which had done so little to justify 
its existence as Prussia in this last year. And, addressed to 
Napoleon when he was almost at the farthest edge of the 
Prussian dominions, with Europe prostrate behind him and a 

? 
a 

CH, Ii. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 221 

Czar suing for peace, it was a sublime exhibition of impudence. 
It was an offer to outdo Napoleon in all his crimes of conquest, 
if he would only allow his former enemies to range themselves 
at his side. It was a proposal to put the Napoleonic system into 
the hands of a syndicate. It is not an unfair specimen of what 
may be called Hardenberg’s grand manner. 

These “gigantic plans”? were discussed by Hardenberg and 
Budberg in conferences held on the 21st and 22nd of June. They 
were communicated to the Russian Czar and the Prussian king.! 
Both monarchs accepted the scheme, and, although Alexander 
had some misgivings concerning the reception it would have at 
the hands of Napoleon,? it is certain that while he was holding 
his early interviews at Tilsit he was promising the king of Prussia 
that he would use the opportunities of conversation to promote 
this very proposal. The plan was not merely entertained, but 
steps were taken to secure its execution; though at first the 
initiative remained with Prussia. At this time, when actual 
negotiations for peace between France and Russia were not yet 
opened, the Prussians still imagined themselves in the position 
which they had held for the previous half-year—they dreamed 
that they would be the channel for the discussion of peace 
between the powers, and they pictured themselves as the prin- 
cipals in the negotiation that should take place. 