

The “ gigantic plans”’ were embodied in a memoir, written on the 
22nd of June, and beginning: 

Must we make an armistice, or press on to the conclusion of peace? 
It would be a thousand times better to do the latter promptly than 
to subscribe to an armistice which would compel us to cede the three 
fortresses of Graudenz, Colberg and Pillau—for this is a stipulation 
that can only inspire distrust of the intentions of Napoleon. 

Peace will not be difficult to make, if he wishes it sincerely. Prussia 
is bound to England by no treaty, and has no obligation towards 
Austria. Russia is in the same position in regard to the latter; she 
can regard herself as released from her engagements with the court 
of London, since this court has done nothing since the beginning of 
the war to fulfil its own obligations....Russia finds herself for the 
moment unable to continue the war alone, with what remains of the 
forces of Prussia. It is only with Sweden, therefore, that the two 
allied courts have an engagement not to cease the war except by 
joint action; but Sweden has made an armistice, its King thought it 
superfluous to accede to the Convention of Bartenstein; and, while 
it would be necessary to act as much as possible in concert with him, 
still, necessity knows no law. 

...We must accept the armistice, if it can be obtained without 
the cession of the fortresses... but if we cannot achieve this, there is 

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 22 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 35. 

CH. Ii. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 219 

nothing to do but to bring up the question of peace itself without 
delay, for the cession of the fortresses would make continuation of 
the war almost impossible, and would certainly deprive us of the 
assistance of England and Austria, even if they were determined to 
help us in any real manner. 

It appears that in negotiating peace under such circumstances, it 
is only by a new political system that we shall be able to reach a state 
of things favorable to Russia and Prussia, and to put an end to the 
wars that desolate Europe. We are in the condition foreseen in 
Article 14 of the Convention of Bartenstein, when we must come 
together to discuss the measures to be taken for our own safety. It 
is necessary to arrange something which shall be agreeable to Napoleon 
and at the same time shall establish a strong and firm state of 
possession guaranteed by an alliance between Russia, Prussia, and 
France. It is the system which Napoleon has ardently desired in past 
days. Founded upon bases equally profitable to all three powers, it 
will impose its settlement on all the rest of Europe, and will force 
even England to make an equitable peace and to establish less burden- 
some principles in regard to the freedom of the seas. If this system 
is adopted Napoleon cannot wish to weaken Prussia; on the contrary 
he must seek to make her strong. 

It reads like the Arabian Nights. The ogre turns into a mouse. 
Europe dwindles to a chequer-board, kingdoms and empires are 
transformed into pieces for a complicated game of chess, and 
the inhabitants are as grasshoppers. It is a kind of plan to 
give its maker the artist’s creative thrill. Necessity knows no 
law, says Hardenberg; reasons can be found to excuse the 
desertion of allies; Russia and Prussia must abandon the war 
with France, join hands in an alliance directed chiefly against 
England, and help Napoleon to impose his system upon the 
continent. But the point is, Napoleon will have to be bribed; 
this is the crux of the matter, the master-stroke of the whole 
scheme; you will inaugurate the new system by a grand coup, 
which shall lure the contracting powers away from their own 
mutual jealousies and controversies. The triumvirate must find 
a victim to despoil. Turkey shall be divided between the allies, 
as Poland once had been—this is Hardenberg’s great conspiracy. 
Russia may have the eastern part of the Balkan peninsula, 