

Napoleon once before had driven Hardenberg out of office. 
It was on the morrow of Austerlitz, and for a long period after 
this event we find the man whining that he was not consulted 
by the king, sulking because he was left on one side, gloating 
over the discomfiture of Haugwitz, and expressing a peevish 
kind of pleasure in the fact that he had no part in the disasters 
of his country. There is something distasteful in the attempt 
which he made to gain the favour of the French Emperor after 
Friedland. When he argued that it was not his fault if Prussia 
was not the sincere ally of France, one feels again that he had 
a kind of mean second self to fall back upon at times. He is a 
more proud statesman, he is in some ways a more plausible 
personality when success is near and he can feel the wind at his 
back, and he is able to look down upon the world from a pedestal. 
At Bartenstein he lifts his head, becomes director of the coalition, 
acts as schoolmaster to England and takes custody of the con- 
science of the Czar; but even here, in that moment of artificial 

1 See below, pp. 257-8. 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 229 

optimism, he is quick to over-reach himself and, mapping out 
the aggrandisement of Prussia, he shows a disregard for estab- 
lished rights, a contempt for the interests of the small and weak. 
After Tilsit he once more displays ability to sweep over the 
continent with a comprehensive scheme, and ease in handling 
large masses, and fertility in colossal design; yet it is apparent 
that he is more callous, more cynically conscienceless, more 
avowedly selfish than before. Tortured by the desperate moment, 
he would seem to have fallen to pieces, like some men who can 
be unscrupulous and Machiavellian all their lives, covering up 
their crookedness by plausible and diplomatic arts, but come in 
old age to a kind of disintegration, and lose the convincing mask 
that was over them, and reveal themselves to the world as crafty 
and cynical and dotingly dishonest. 

In the situation of Prussia during the years 1806 and 1807 
there is perhaps some extenuation for Hardenberg and the other 
ministers. These were men exiled from their capital and clinging 
fearfully to the last corner of their kingdom; they had received 
a shock of startling suddenness at Jena. It would appear that 
the alternate moods of unaccountable optimism and morbid 
despair among the Prussians, the quick changes from high- 
handed aggressiveness to abject fright, were the result of some- 
thing like a psychological collapse. The lack of continuous policy 
and purpose, the rift within the soul, the general unerectness of 
bearing and all the fitful starts of energy, together with that 
perpetual tired way of sinking into an injured tone, signified a 
sort of nervous prostration. Prussia’s egotism, now self-pity, 
now unscrupulous ambition, is like the infantile kind of selfish- 
ness, the lack of consideration for others, the certain absence of 
scruple, the faulty contact with the outside world, that one 
finds in a man of distracted or deranged mental condition. 
Prussia is a pathological case. She has a look of drawn tenseness 
and cannot relax her mind from the strain of living in one 
perpetual burning moment of crisis. Even in Hardenberg’s 
voluminous memoirs and proposals, where thought showed itself 
so disproportionate to ensuing action, there is a wasteful exercise 
of ingenuity, a frantic turning of wheels that refuse quite to grip 