

In all these personal contacts, the Prussians were doomed to 
be unfortunate. They had a scheme that was brilliant and brutal 
and bold; and it was their one hope of salvation; Hardenberg 
desperately clung to it as though no alternative could be 
imagined. But it needed infinite tact in the proposing; only a 
genius could make it attractive to a Napoleon who was in the 
mood to be repelled by it; it was a preposterous piece of pre- 
tentiousness if it could not be backed by the “grand manner”, 
Yet Hardenberg, who was the one man of personality in the 
Prussian cause, and was desperately anxious to be the spokes- 
man of his own scheme, was excluded from the discussions by 
the animosity of Napoleon. 

CH, II. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 233 

The two Prussian negotiators were badly received at Tilsit, 
and were not well treated by the French. They did not work 
successfully together. Kalckreuth wrote in vain to Talleyrand, 
and for a time could not elicit a reply. When Goltz, his colleague, 
stepped in, and, after some difficulty, secured an answer, his 
report to Hardenberg declared: 

I hope that Count Kalckreuth will not find a new cause for jealousy 
in all this. I am determined to make every effort to gain his confidence 
and establish that degree of harmony between us which alone can 
make our negotiation prosper....Up to this moment his conduct 
towards me has been exceedingly ungracious—I can forgive him for 
it with all my heart, for my personal feelings count for nothing in 
all this; but I do not forgive him for having done nothing for the 
service and the interests of the king. It was for him to have been 
long ago on the most confidential footing with the minister Talleyrand 
—it surely was not for me to make the way for him—but the king 
does not seem to credit all this; it has appeared to me that His 
Majesty justifies his conduct, and it seems that in order to give no 
displeasure I had better not touch on this point any more.! 

The Prussian king, himself, was not the man to charm away 
an antipathy. He was in an unpleasant mood at Tilsit and 
groaned under the oppressiveness of his burdens. The presence 
of a mind more masterful than his own always stunted and 
repressed him, and put an obstruction across his thinking; and 
Napoleon, more than anyone, paralysed him and froze him up. 
Pitiful passenger, still, in this history, Frederick William flits 
ineffectually across the days, one party urging him to be 
cordial and free with Napoleon, the queen all the time pressing 
him to share her defiance and indignation, he himself divided 
in spirit, cursed with an internal smouldering, but outwardly 
gloomy and cold. He could not drive a weak cause to success 
by the effectiveness of personality. Napoleon seems to have set 
out to torment him in the interviews, and entertain him with 
trivial irrelevancies. ‘‘ Are you still studying tactics?”’, he asked 

1 Goltz to Hardenberg, 2 July 1807, in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 
m1, 590-1. 