

The queen of Prussia was anxious to make a firm resistance 
to the attacks upon Hardenberg; but she worked from premises 
different from those of the king and the minister. She knew that 
Hardenberg had “gigantic plans” afoot, but she was not ad- 
mitted to the secret of these—she was not informed that they 
contemplated alliance with France and a complete reversal of 
policy. So her arguments were wrong from their first principles. 
She, amid all the catastrophes, had clung to her indignations 
and animosities and had not ceased to cry out in bitterness 
against France. She was prepared to see Prussia punished, she 
expected serious loss of territory, but she would have no return 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 225 

to the old system of vassalage, she would have her husband truly 
sovereign in whatever lands he might retain. 

A thing which I adjure you to take well to heart is to use all the 
energy of which you are capable in the whole course of this affair, 
and do not give way an inch on any point which might destroy your 
independence... . The sacrifice of territory must be counted as nothing 
in comparison with the sacrifice of liberty. Let Napoleon rob you of 
half of what you once possessed, provided that what is granted to 
you is yours in full possession so that you have the power to do good 
and give happiness to the subjects God has allowed you to keep, and 
make your political connections in the place where honour calls you 
and your inclinations lead. Hardenberg must not be sacrificed— 
certainly not—if you do not wish to take the first step towards 
slavery and draw upon yourself the contempt of the whole world. 
You have two means of keeping him; and they must not be neglected ; 
the first is the Emperor Alexander,...then there is yourself, my 
beloved, you are a good speaker when. once you are prepared. If 
I were in your place I should tell Napoleon that he would easily see 
how little you could condescend to his demand, how this would 
deprive you of your best servant; that it would be as though you 
demanded him to dismiss Talleyrand who was serving him well but 
whom you had reason to complain of, and distrust; in this way he 
would see for himself that this is a game that two can play. 

Over and over again the indignant and embittered queen 
reiterated her advice. ‘If Napoleon says he is vindictive, say 
that you are stubborn as a mule. Then we shall see what happens.”’2 
It was all very well; but the masters of policy had decided to 
find safety in humouring Napoleon. The queen could afford to 
regard the dismissal of Hardenberg as an act of servility towards 
a foreign conqueror; but the government was contemplating 
Prussia as an ally and coadjutor of France. Frederick William 
had to disillusion his queen and inform her of the new projects 
of policy. 

Without doubt the arguments of your two letters. ..are very just, 

but the execution of their purpose has become all the more difficult, 
and in part impossible, since it seems to have been decided to embrace 