

On the 28th of June Hardenberg wrote to the Czar; he had 
come to doubt the prudence of remaining any longer in office. 
His letter is of interest as showing the way his gigantic peace 
plan still filled his mind. He was willing to resign his place— 
but if he did this, it would be for the sake of his scheme. 

‘““The whole system of policy is going to be changed”, he writes, 
‘and connections are going to be formed with France. Would it not 
be more conformable to the interests of the King for me to remove 
myself from his counsels and his service as early as possible, if 
Napoleon persists in showing implacable hatred against me?...I shall 
hinder the firm establishment of the new system which, once adopted, 
must be followed with consistency and energy—for God keep us from 
all palliatives and half-measures.’’? 

Still, on the 28th of June, and in face of his own personal down- 
fall, Hardenberg was repeating his old phrases about the new 
system of politics. Perhaps he was beginning to doubt of its 
realisation—to wonder if the Russians were putting all their 
energy into its promotion. Writing to Budberg on this day, 
communicating the armistice of Prussia, he says that the king 
“puts all his hope in the certainty that his August Ally will not 
separate his cause from that of Prussia, and that there will be 
insistence on the negotiations for peace being conducted con- 
jointly and with common accord’’.? He enquires when the 
discussions are to begin, and who the Russian plenipotentiaries 
will be, and how the Prussian ministers shall take part, but there 
is a note of rising fear. On the following day, the 29th, he 
recapitulates his whole scheme once more, and gives his 

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 26 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 41. 

2 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 484-8. 

3 Ibid. 111, 488-9. 

15-2 

228 Bs, TILSIT $3 BK III. 

suggestion as to the way the Czar may put it to Napoleon.’ It is 
the final effort of a man who sees the receding of his dreams. 

The arguments of the Czar did not overcome the objections 
of Napoleon. It was obvious that Hardenberg’s continuance in 
office was destroying his own plans for the negotiation. The 
minister did not dare to sign the armistice that was arranged 
between France and Russia. Kalckreuth declared that if he 
came to Tilsit the whole negotiation would suffer. His presence 
at the head of the government became an actual hindrance to 
the transaction of affairs as well as a grievance to the French. 
On the 6th of July he gave in his resignation, and Goltz, who 
had been ambassador at St Petersburg and had already been 
joined to Kalckreuth as a plenipotentiary in the negotiations 
for peace, took charge of the foreign department. Stein was 
called out of retirement to conduct the internal affairs of Prussia. 
And Hardenberg, who always has a somewhat malignant streak 
somewhere in his thinking, declared that he was very pleased 
to think that his signature would not have to appear on such a 
treaty as Prussia would be made to accept. 