

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 465-6, 

CH» IT; AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 223 

minister doled out the fragments of this Empire and juggled with 
the map of Europe; and in his last sentence he added a fine new 
touch, a glorious parting thought: “May not Switzerland be 
erected into a Kingdom for Jerome Napoleon?”.1 It was not 
that the Swiss had given offence; but there had been a whisper 
that Napoleon wished to have Silesia for Jerome. To Prussia it 
was of momentous importance that Jerome should be given a 
prize elsewhere. 

Napoleon in the flush of victory had no patience for the 
fawnings and caresses of the Prussians. The demeanour of 
Hardenberg repelled him; he was in no mood to be soothed and 
stroked. He resented the glib way in which Prussia now came 
over to claim friendship and to tell him how easily everything 
could be arranged. In the letter he received from Frederick 
William he detected an offer of alliance; according to the Czar 
Alexander the proposal was offensive to him; though Harden- 
berg, quibbling over the phraseology of that particular letter, 
retorted that the word “alliance”’ was not mentioned.” Napoleon 
showed himself irritated, and came down with a malicious swoop 
upon the one definite proposal that was put before him. He 
refused to accept Hardenberg as the spokesman of the Prussian 
peace project, refused to treat with him at all, and further 
declared that his existing official position in Prussia was un- 
acceptable altogether. No peace would in fact be concluded so 
long as Hardenberg was in power. Napoleon would prefer to 
make war for forty years.® 

The demand for the dismissal of Prussia’s patriot minister 
was a rude rebuff to the Hardenberg proposals of peace, and 
came as a shock to the Prussians. It meant the removal of the 
most trusted servant that the king had at hand, and this at a 
time when Prussia, frantic with desperation, was placing all her 
remaining hope upon the dexterity with which she could 
manceuvre the negotiation with France. It was the ruin of the 
role Prussia had imagined for herself in the organisation of peace, 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 493-4. 
2 Hardenberg to Alexander, 6 July 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, 11, 506. 
3 Ranke, Hardenberg, 1, 477-8. 

224, TILSIT BK III. 

and, coming at this moment, it was a startling index of the 
manner in which Napoleon intended to deal with his former 
allies; for if this kind of stipulation preceded the actual dis- 
cussions for peace men quailed to think of what the terms of the 
treaty itself would be like. Things might have fared better for 
these Prussians, since they were intending to court Napoleon 
and exorcise the devil that was in him, if they had stepped 
forward to a gracious concession on what he was pleased to regard 
as a point of dignity and honour and confidence. Perhaps better 
than whinings and scrapings this accommodation would have 
won his kindly smile. At any rate, to us who catch the fall of 
after-events, it seems foolish that the Prussians used up all their 
prayers on questions that were essentially preliminary. They 
were anxious to win the favour of Napoleon, and Napoleon 
refused his confidence so long as Hardenberg remained in power. 
The removal of the minister was: therefore a pledge of the 
sincerity of Prussia, and they might have outstripped his desires 
in their eagerness to prove how genuine was their reconciliation. 
They preferred to stand and make issue—yet not to show a 
resolute face and meet Napoleon’s demands with a clear, abrupt 
refusal; but to pester him with their arguments and weary him 
with their importunities and nauseate him with their prayers, 
all the time leaving him to understand that if he was immovable 
they would not dare to oppose him. So ona question of confidence 
they made it plain that they would give way only if they were 
forced. 