

1 Queen Louisa to King Frederick William III, 27 June 1807, in Deutsche 

Rundschau, Cx, 42-8. 
2 Queen Louisa to King Frederick William III, 29 June 1807, in Deutsche 

Rumndschau, cx, 201. 

BN 15 

226 TILSIT BK III. 

a new system of politics entirely opposed to the old....Up to the 
present I have not given way on the question of Hardenberg, but he 
himself feels, as he did in 1805, that if this point is insisted upon any 
further, his services will become useless and even harmful to the State 
and it will be necessary for him to retire.+ 

Every attempt was made to wear out the determination of 
Napoleon by argument and importunity. A hundred facts were 
adduced to calm a passion; protestations and reasonings were 
accumulated—little levers to remove a mountain of a prejudice; 
with all the weariness of commercial travellers the Prussians 
would demonstrate the innocence of Hardenberg, would persist 
in bearding this Napoleon who if he stamped his foot could make 
them tremble. On the 26th of June Frederick William had his 
first interview at Tilsit, and it was decided to take the oppor- 
tunity to dismiss from the mind of Napoleon the misapprehen- 
sions that were making for the ruin of Hardenberg. It was 
arranged that the king should bring up the topic “at the close 
of the conference”’, so that the delicate matter should not wreck 
the other objects of discussion. Hardenberg drew up a series of 
notes to guide the conversation. 

The King makes himself the pledge of the loyalty and impartiality 
of Baron Hardenberg;...it is absolutely false to say that the Baron 
has the least connection with England, or has even a partiality for that 
power; it is twenty-five years since he left the service of Hanover and 
broke with the Prince of Wales in a way which did honour to him; for 
seventeen years he has been in the service of Prussia; his conduct... 
must have been presented in a very unjust way to the Emperor;... 
the King has few servants at hand to whom he could give the portfolio 
of foreign affairs; M. Zastrow failed him in many respects; if Napoleon 
insists upon another negotiator he will appoint one; but the King 
appeals to the sentiment of the Emperor to appreciate what would 
result from his making it a preliminary condition that the King should 
remove from affairs a minister whom he thinks worthy of both his 
own and the Emperor’s confidence.’ 

The king recited his part; he would make poor show with his 
reasonings; his sense of his own inferiority, his fear of a great 

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 29 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 208. 

2 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 479-80. 

CH, Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 227 

mind, made him more than usually undignified when he came 
into argument with Napoleon; in any case Napoleon met him 
with the response which above all others is disconcerting; he 
granted the king’s statements, agreed that Hardenberg might 
be “a respectable man”’, confessed that he himself was ‘vin- 
dictive”’; and so left the king without weapons.1 