

230 TILSIT 4 BK III. 

the rails, which makes the documents seem like the excessive 
introspections and endless revolvings of a mind that is racing 
with fever. 

The wildness of Hardenberg’s proposals after the battle of 
Friedland, and the fervour with which he believed in them, and 
the cleverness with which he urged them, as well as their utter 
lack of relation to the real condition of Prussia at this period, 
are typical of the monstrous things that result when a tired mind 
is whipped to momentary frenzy by sheer desperation. 

Prussia, indeed, during the whole Napoleonic period, was 
impelled by a kind of determinism to the pursuit of a selfish 
aggressive policy. She was in a tantalising state of unstable 
equilibrium in which she could feel herself on the brink of being 
a power in Europe. The career of Frederick the Great had given 
her a foretaste of this; her geographical position asked for 
extension and greater security. The Napoleonic wars did not 
themselves provide a clear call and invitation. It was not at 
first apparent that the Corsican would be the enemy of every 
established kingdom and every royal house in Europe. It was 
not at first assumed that he would be dishonest with even an 
ally. A kingdom situated between France and Russia would 
not, like these powers, find immediately the unmistakable 
direction of its interests; once the two empires were at war it 
would not be irresistibly attracted to either side; no matter 
which side she chose, Prussia was bound to take it with some 
misgiving. As surely as the situation of England demanded an 
unceasing struggle against Napoleon, the interests of Prussia 
seemed to dictate an exploitation of more casual chances. Thus, 
Haugwitz, a short time before he led the country into war with 
France, explained to the king that if his foremost desire was to 
be assured of his possession of Hanover, his advantage would 
lie in the strengthening of the alliance with Napoleon. 

Prussia could not be, like Austria, urbane and subtle in her 
self-seeking. She was in the position of a parvenu, whois straining 
to better himself. She was anxious to take short cuts to a prize 
that had become tormentingly near. She would make undignified 
bids for power. And if in 1806 she fell a victim to Napoleon it 

* 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 231 

was not that she was a martyr of the cause of Europe, but that 
her selfishness still was not sufficiently far-sighted. The time had 
come when her®* own interests demanded that she should 
generously co-operate with the enemies of Napoleon. It was 
important for her own sake that she should cease her policy of 
snatching the immediate moment, and selfishly lying in wait for 
the local opportunity. But Haugwitz, over-excited by the 
thought that he had been cheated, did not learn the truth in 
time. Prussia shouted like a swashbuckler, and rushed into war 
with Napoleon like some petulant and troublesome Balkan state, 
that cannot refine its purposes or work for a postponed advantage. 