

General Kalckreuth, who was about to make his way to Tilsit 
to negotiate an armistice for Prussia, was informed of the whole 
design and was instructed to sound Napoleon on the subject of 
a partition of Turkey.? He was made the bearer of a letter to 
the Emperor himself, in which Frederick William, speaking for 
Russia as well as for Prussia, wrote: 

I am persuaded that Your Imperial Majesty desires to put an end 
to the war; I am not less ardent in my wish to see the end of its evils, 
and I can promise you that my ally, the Emperor of All the Russias, 
shares my sentiments in this regard. It will therefore be easy for us 
to come to an understanding.* 

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 22 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 35. 2 See below, pp. 256-7. 
3 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 463-4. 4 Ibid. 111, 464-5. 

222 TILSIT BK III. 

The letter went on to state that Hardenberg himself would be 
the principal agent in putting forward the proposals Prussia had 
to offer; and Kalckreuth would join him as an auxiliary in the 
negotiation. 

Here Hardenberg saw a snare. He remembered the animosity 
Napoleon had had against him since the close of 1805; he 
recalled how in 1806 this had led to his estrangement from 
power. It was a serious obstacle to his proposed mission, and he 
took steps for its removal. He who had become the incarnation 
of all that was anti-French in the policy of Prussia—he who had 
been the symbol and the hope of the Prussian enemies of 
Napoleon, wrote a cringing letter to Duroc, the secretary of the 
French Emperor. 

‘*Great men’’, the letter began, ‘‘are the soonest to escape from the 
prejudices which they may have been led to adopt. Your August 
Sovereign,...had one against me, I did not merit it, and I hope it 
will be easy to destroy it. It has not been my fault that at the period 
when I had the honour of negotiating with Your Excellency, Prussia 
did not become the ally of France on a plan that was liberal and fine, 
and conformable to the interests of both States. I would have liked 
the policy of Prussia to have had character, to have been worthy of 
a great power....I had no part in the disastrous war which leaves us 
desolate, never did my policy consist in the art of deceiving. I have 
been accused of being now English, now Russian. I am neither, but 
I am a good and zealous Prussian....The stipulations which I shall 
have to transmit will be religiously observed, and a system of friend- 
ship between France and Prussia which we have sincerely in view 
will be established on a solid and lasting basis.’’1 

All this was on the 23rd of June, two days after Frederick 
William had met the Czar at Sezawel. But as late as the 29th 
of June Hardenberg was still urging his grand design, re- 
capitulating his proposals in a memoir intended for the eyes of 
the Czar. There had been news of a revolution in Constantinople 
—pleasant news for Hardenberg, since it gave reinforced argu- 
ment and additional excuse and a good opportunity for his 
destruction and partition of Turkey. Once more the Prussian 