

The anger of Napoleon against this power after Friedland 
seemed to take the character of an unremitting pursuit. He did 
not bury his animosity in the formulas of diplomatic discourse 
or cloak it in official terms; Talleyrand described him truly— 
he was “‘ badly brought up” ; having no reason to save appearances 
he confessed his vindictiveness, aired his hatred, and made no 
show of moderation. He had not forgiven the Prussians for their 
double dealing in 1806, when they had followed a dual foreign 
policy and made secret engagements with the Czar. He had not 
forgotten how they had resisted all his attempts to win them 
over during the winter campaign in Poland. He knew that they 
had taken courage out of his difficulties and embarrassments, 
that they had exulted at Bartenstein. And even on the 20th of 
June, after the battle of Friedland, he had learned that it was 
they who had given the refusal to the Austrian mediation. When, 
within a few days, they were rushing once more to his side, 
hankering after their former alliance, it was natural that he 
should put no faith in them and that he should believe them 
more dishonest than they really were. We find him wondering 
why the Czar can show them so much fidelity, reminding his 
new friend that they will very quickly play their tricks upon 
him. Napoleon knew them false as allies, futile as foes; they 
had ended by making their friendship unnecessary to him; he 
could afford to give way to his passions. 

There is something in the history of diplomacy which inclines 
to be cold and forbidding, and lacks the full-blooded leap of the 

232 TILSIT BK III. 

larger story of human lives. Like the history of institutions it 
will tend to concern itself with the development of a system, 
abstracted from its human context; it will aspire to the mathe- 
matical theorem. There is a balancing of forces, and adjustment 
of interests; there is much that proceeds out of the logic of a 
situation, there is much that seems to come by a kind of auto- 
matic interaction. Sometimes, in rationalisation, one can almost 
forget that human beings are at work, with play of mind and 
mood and impulse; acts will not seem to cry out for an explana- 
tion in personality, but will be referred to some logic of policy. 
And history will fall to her greatest temptation—hearing the 
tick of the clock, but forgetting to feel the pulse. 

At Tilsit one can make no mistake. Here is the play of 
personalities, palpable and direct. It is not “ Russia” that takes 
a course of action, like a piece of mechanical readjustment. It 
is not ministers of departments who balance an impersonal 
policy. It is not government that evolves an official logic. Here 
“Russia’’, the government, is a Czar, bundle of emotions and 
prejudices, an accident in human nature, “and if you prick him 
he will bleed”. An angry outburst is not mediated by couriers 
riding across Europe, or tempered by the lapse of time, or 
cushioned in the circumlocutions of diplomatic jargon. The 
whole dramais played out on the spot. A revolution is telescoped 
into a few days. Everything is determined by personalities that 
act upon one another immediately. 