

234 TILSIT BE III. 

on one occasion; and the king answered, “‘ Yes sir’’.1 At another 
time he enquired if the king did not wish to see Berlin again, 
after so long an absence. The Prussian queen knew her Frederick 
William. ‘‘ What was your reply?” she wrote,...“‘I beg you to 
tell me.” Napoleon would wonder how the man fastened his 
innumerable buttons. Describing one day a review of troops, 
Frederick William wrote: “‘Do you think he addressed a word 
to me! Not once. I, for my part, tried to do so whenever there 
was an opportunity—Then he replied politely and briefly, but 
all that he said to me was to ask if Tilsit was an old town’”’. It 
is apparent that Napoleon merely amused himself. 

Frederick William confessed that during the first interview 
that he had at Tilsit, it was Alexander who did most of the talking. 
We may take it that he himself attended in no genial or pleasant 
mood; for we find him writing the same day: 

I have seen him, I have spoken to that monster, choked out of 
hell, formed by Beelzebub to be the scourge of the earth—lIt is 
impossible for me to describe to you the sensation I had at the first 

sight of him. Never yet have I passed through a more rude trial; 
all my faculties were in revolt during that terrible interview.” 

On the second occasion he felt Napoleon “infinitely better 
disposed”, and said, “I confess that I was not in any way 
embarrassed in his presence”; but Frederick William would not 
know how to be cordial. His negotiator, Kalckreuth, wrote to 
him on June the 30th: 

Your Majesty will succeed. . .if you will bow to inevitable necessity, 
and treat Bonaparte with friendship and cordiality. This is all he 
expects and asks for, and it is easy. There is much distress at the 
dangerous coldness of Your Majesty towards him; it is imagined that 
Your Majesty sulks with him, and openly despises him. There is a 
pretence of feeling uneasy, which is not genuine, and no explanation 
can be found except by assuming that Your Majesty was ill. Your 
faithful subjects, even the Emperor of Russia, are distressed at this. 
If it costs Your Majesty so much to speak with frankness and 

1 A story that De Maistre reports, Mémoires et Correspondance, p. 276: 
‘Le roi, en portant le doigt 4 son chapeau comme un grenadier qui salue, 
répondit ‘Oui, Sire’”’. 

* King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 26 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 40-1. 

» 
os 

CH. Il. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 2385 

cordiality to Napoleon, I offer myself for anything you will deign to 
command; I might ask an audience. The Emperor of Russia is on the 
best of terms with Napoleon; Your Majesty might very easily be on 
the same footing... .Napoleon only asks the glory of receiving your 
confidence... .1 

On the Ist of July Frederick William, after another interview, 
writes: 

All parties united in pressing me to open myself to Bonaparte and 
to appeal to his heart—in general to pay court to him more 
assiduously—although I had thought until then that I had left 
nothing undone to this end.. .. But [Napoleon] seemed to have a more 
preoccupied air than before and to be out of temper. So it was in vain 
that I appealed to his heart and his magnanimity, and trooped out 
all the fine phrases and promises that my feeble eloquence could 
prompt.’ 