

It has been seen what was the conduct of the various powers 
after the battle of Friedland. England declared herself ready to 
join in a general congress if the Russians should decide that they 

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 29 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 205. Kalckreuth claimed that the suggestion came from 
Murat, ibid. p. 207. Kalckreuth’s letter to Frederick William, 28 June 1807, 
is printed in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 11, 589. 

2 Deutsche Rundschau, cx, 207 and 213. 

a 

CH. II. AUSTRIA AND PRUSSIA 237 

could not continue the war. The court of Vienna came forward 
again with a not disinterested mediation. And the Prussians 
placed all their hope upon a reversal of policy that involved 
alliance with France and the partition of Turkey. The Czar, 
during all this time, was coming to an arrangement with Napo- 
leon, and it is the course of this transaction that now remains 
to be followed. But it is interesting to note that while these 
events were keeping men bréathless and expectant, news came 
through that the Swedish king had just denounced an armistice 
and attacked the French. His own allies begged him to desist. 
Fate seems to have played strange tricks with him. His fantastic 
deeds are a red streak in this grey story of balanced, calculated 
actions. 

CHAPTER III 
RUSSIA AND THE ALLIANCE OF TILSIT 

Ow the 16th of June, the Czar Alexander, as we have seen, 
received Bennigsen’s letter confessing defeat at Friedland and 
urging the commencement of negotiations, “if only to gain 
time”. The news was soon confirmed by a report which the 
Russian chancellor received from Zismer, a diplomat at the 
army headquarters. 

...1 take up my pen to inform Your Excellency of the great 
disaster which has come upon us. General Bennigsen did not reveal 
it in full to the Emperor straight away, for fear of giving him a shock. 
...Disorder came upon our army, and the soldiers disbanded them- 
selves in a moment. It was a complete rout, no order, no leadership. 
..-If an eye-witness of the whole campaign may be permitted to 
speak unreservedly to his chief, Your Excellency will perhaps forgive 
my zeal for the service and my attachment to my country when I dare 
to give you my advice in the present circumstances. It seems to me 
that there is nothing ‘to be done except to demand an armistice as 
soon as possible, or further, to set on foot negotiations for peace until 
the rest of the army and the reinforcements behind the Pregel are 
in a position to give us once more the means of obtaining honorable 
conditions. It is impossible for me at the moment to determine the 
losses we have just had; but they must be immense....The picture 
that General Bennigsen gives to the Emperor...is infinitely less 
black; but I am bold enough to assure Your Excellency that I have 
exaggerated nothing, persuaded as I am that you ought to be 
informed of the truth, even if you do not wish to make use of it.} 

Evidently there was a panic at the Russian headquarters; 
the blinding whirl of events carried men off their feet; though 
in a very few days we find that there was some recovery. The 
troops, for the moment at least, were completely disorganised; 
no one knew where to look for food; no one knew how far this 
wreck of an army could collect itself again or could hope for 
effective reinforcements from Russia. The country-side was 