

1 Zismer to Budberg, 3/15 June 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 10. 

a 

CH, Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 239 

filled with stragglers and pillagers, and showed all the desolation 
that comes in the track of a lost battle. The generals were more 
than ever discredited, many were sick or wounded; it seemed 
useless to trust an army any further to blunderers such as these. 
Sir Robert Wilson remarked: “‘ If Bennigsen retains the command 
the Emperor will finally lose his throne” ;! soldiers would not 
consent to be sacrificed continually to such incapacity and mis- 
direction. Those officers who had mumbled that peace ought to 
be made, found in disaster their own corroboration; it was said 
against them that they secretly rejoiced; henceforward they were 
louder in their insistence that the war should come to an end. 
There was talk of cabals in the army, of the dangers of a Polish 
insurrection in the wake of the retreating troops, of the possi- 
bility of a peasant rising in Russia if the contest should proceed. 
We are told that of the generals only Barclay de Tolly was in 
favour of fighting still. And all the time, to complete the 
maddening psychological state of things, Prussians reproached 
the Russians with their failure to achieve the promised success, 
and Russians reviled the Prussians for their helplessness as 
allies. 

Alexander was not at St Petersburg, viewing events from afar, 
and taking his decisions in the cool of a council chamber. He 
could not quietly sit down to a problem which lay beyond far 
horizons and which he merely visualised by moving pins on a 
military map. Not in wide perspectives and through the sobering 
distances, but in its present maddening immediacy, the situation 
faced him; and he had to think out his conduct in an atmosphere 
that was strained. For he had kept within calling distance, the 
noises were humming in his ears, the catastrophe stared at him 
all day long, and he himself was in the whirlpool of the events 
that he had to consider. Quite recently he had had to move, to 
take precautions for his own safety. 

Yet his first measures when the news of the battle overwhelmed 
him are astonishing in their cautiousness. After all that he had 
heard he ordered his aide-de-camp Popov to make his way to the 
army headquarters and confirm the verdict of Bennigsen. It 

1 Wilson, Diaries, 18 June 1807, vol. 11. 

240 TILSIT -BK II. 

was as though Alexander was determined not to have his hands 
forced by his commander—he might have half-suspected the 
pacific advices of headquarters. If Popov found the situation 
as critical as had been reported, and if the Russian generals had 
“no other means of extricating” themselves, then Bennigsen 
might ask for an armistice, only—here an added touch of cau- 
tiousness—he must ask in his own name.! Bennigsen was not 
to enter into the actual discussions for the armistice for which 
he was to apply “in his own name”. Alexander left no 
loophole for his commander. Prince Lobanov—a noble of old 
standing, a man of the great days of Catherine—was entrusted 
with the mission, receiving the verbal commands of his master, 
together with the following instructions: 