

To the Czar Alexander two questions now come for considera- 
tion, representing the second stage in the course that leads to 
Tilsit. Firstly, there is the fact to be faced that Napoleon seems 
determined to secure the cession of the Prussian fortresses. 
Secondly, it becomes apparent that the Czar must definitely 
decide whether the armistice shall be followed up by regular 
negotiations for peace. All this emerges from the reports of 
what has happened in the recent discussions between the armies ; 
and perhaps it is significant that the man who travels to the 
Emperor with the despatches from the Russian headquarters, 
and so has an opportunity to reinforce their tenour in actual 
verbal conference, is none other than the head of the peace party, 
the Grand Duke Constantine. 

Undoubtedly this is an opportune moment for the Grand 
Duke, who knows what he wants; excellent chance to push a 
thought home in the mind of a Czar who is still floundering in 
mists and indecisions.* Sufficient is known to make it clear that 
Constantine did not merely offer a report to his brother, but made 
a vigorous effort to direct his deliberations, if not actually to 
force his hand. This is the occasion when he reminds Alexander 
of the fate of his father and raises fears of assassination. He says 
that if battle is offered again and the gates of the empire opened 

1 Schladen’s first Report, 21 June 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 520. 

2 Tatistcheff, Alewandre I°" et Napoléon, p. 128. 

3 Deutsche Rundschau, cx, 35, 87. Schladen’s second Report, 21 June 
1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 522. 

16-2 

244 TILSIT BK Ill. 

to the ever-victorious French, the Czar might just as well give 
every soldier a pistol and order him to blow out his own brains. 
It is significant that at this time of strain and crisis there were 
men around Alexander who were anxious not merely to offer 
him the benefit of their counsels but also to play upon his nerves. 
Constantine had already begun fraternising with the French, 
had taken pains to address Murat as “Your Highness”, had 
done everything to promote the negotiation; he would not be 
the man to minimise the activity of the peace party at head- 
quarters when he made his reports to the Czar. We learn from 
the despatches of the Prussian General Schladen that the officers 
were calling loudly for peace, and seemed determined to have it, 
whether Alexander wished it or no. 

‘“‘Tt is ineredible’’, wrote Schladen, ‘“‘how little these people guard 
their expressions, and to what extent the officers of all grades forget 
the language which befits their uniform. They roundly curse this war, 
declare themselves completely beaten. ..and say to any one who will 
listen that cost what it may, peace must be made....Kvery minute 
I am more assured that the generous intentions of the Emperor 
Alexander will fail against the force of the intrigue that is carried on 
here—of which the Grand Duke is the servile instrument.”’! 

Constantine would make good use of the support which he could 
claim to have among the Russian officers; we have good reason 
to believe that he would not moderate his language. 