

246 TILSIT BK III. 

Czar made a definite decision and sent new instructions to his 
officers; and Lobanov received powers to enter into negotiations 
for peace. 

In finally reconciling himself to the idea that he must enter 
upon such discussions, and even in agreeing to the conclusion 
of a separate armistice by Russia, the Czar by no means allowed 
it to be implied that he had any thought of deserting Prussia. 
He wrote: ‘“‘I am sure that the King of Prussia will not delay 
sending a person of confidence to represent him”.? His instruc- 
tion to Bennigsen ran as follows: 

Neither Graudenz, nor Pillau, nor Colberg belongs to me. I have 
not even any of my troops in these fortresses, therefore I cannot give 
consent to their cession. In general this demand seems to me inad- 
missible. Order Prince Lobanov to give a reply on these lines to 
Marshal Berthier and tell him to say that I sincerely share their desire 
to put an end to the effusion of blood and make peace; that the said 
Prince Lobanov was authorised by me to enter into discussions of peace 
as soon as an armistice of one month’s duration should be concluded 
allowing our troops to keep their present position. Prince Lobanov 
has received my instructions and I desire, General, that he be con- 
stantly employed on all the missions that there may have to be sent 
to the French army and that he participate in the discussions which 
you may have with those who may be sent to you on the part of the 
French Government.® 

So Grand Duke Constantine returned to headquarters; with 
what high spirits, we are left to infer; but soon after his arrival 
we discover disconcerting rumours abroad at Baubeln; it would 
seem that he had divulged some hints of the possibility of an 
interview between Alexander and Napoleon. 

The Prussian king arrived at the side of the Czar, reaching 
Sczawel soon after Constantine had left. Hardenberg says that 
he was surprised to discover the state to which things had 
developed, and relates that he found Alexander already a changed 
man.* Alexander, moreover, wore the harassed look of a person 

1 Lobanov’s full powers, dated 8/20 June 1807, are given in Sbornik, 
LXXXxIx, 26. The accompanying Instruction (p.25) is translated in Tatistcheff, 
Alexandre I° et Napoléon, p. 130. 

* Alexander to Bennigsen, 8/20 June 1807, in Sbornik, txxx1x, 25. 
3 Ibid. 4 Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 539. 

CH. Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 24:7 

torn within himself, and it was disquieting to find him talking 
of having an interview with Napoleon. Hardenberg felt that he 
had arrived just too late—that Constantine had forestalled him. 
It would seem that the Grand Duke had done something more 
than give an impulse to the Czar’s wavering mind or add the 
final arguments that brought him definitely over to the side of 
peace; perhaps Constantine’s real achievement was not that he 
induced his brother to break away from the alliance with 
England and Austria, but that he succeeded in winning his 
acquiescence to the idea of meeting Napoleon in person. 