

Work for the conclusion of an armistice of one month, during which 
the respective troops shall keep their present positions ; do not propose 
negotiations for peace, but if the French should express a desire to 

put an end to the war, reply that the Emperor Alexander also wishes 
for a pacification... .? 

Alexander takes every precaution against committing himself, 
or surrendering to the peace party at headquarters. At the 
same time he writes to the king of Prussia, and decides to 
concert measures with him.? There is no hint of an intention to 
take a separate isolated course; there is no dream, as yet, of 
Tilsit. 

Already, after this short space, men seem to have recovered 
their heads a little at headquarters, and can take stock of their 
defeat. Zismer corrects his former pitiful narration. “‘I am very 
happy to be able to announce. . . that our loss is not so prodigious 
as the rout that I saw seemed to forebode.”* Bennigsen also 
reports: 

I am happy to be able to announce that affairs are righting them- 
selves and are going better and better....The continual return of 

1 Alexander to Bennigsen, 4/16 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxxix, 16. 

2 Alexander to Lobanov, 4/16 June 1807, in Tatistcheff, Alewandre I" et 
Napoléon, p. 121; see Appendix A. 

$ Alexander to Frederick William III, 4/16 June 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxix, 
16-17. 

* Zismer to Budberg, 4/16 June 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxtx, 14. 

CH. III. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 241 

stragglers proves to me that our loss was not so considerable, and that 
there is nothing to regret except the capture of the town of Kénigsberg. 
The enemy did not dare to pursue me and has not done so yet; my 
soldiers are animated with the same courage.! 

When the Czar’s instructions reached headquarters the 
generals decided to ask for an armistice; Popov, who had been 
sent to examine the condition of affairs, agreed that it was 
necessary; and on the 18th of June Bennigsen ordered one of 
his generals to “‘inform the chiefs of the French army” of the 
step that was to be taken. ‘“‘The issue may perhaps be all the 
more salutary ”’, he wrote in a letter that was intended for French 
eyes, “‘in that there is already question of a general congress.’’? 
Murat, who received the communications from the Russian 
generals, at first seems to have suspected a ruse; but Napoleon 
was immediately informed of the overture, and very soon an 
aide-de-camp of Marshal Berthier brought a favourable reply. 
This man, a nephew of Talleyrand, reported that the French 
“were equally desirous of putting an end to the existing war’’.® 
So Lobanov passed over to Tilsit to begin his negotiation and 
enter upon discussions for an armistice with Marshal Berthier. 

The French had evidently decided to court and coax the 
Russians, and enchant them with studied politeness, and flatter 
them with their attentions. Lobanov found his path strewn with 
flowers; he received an enthusiastic welcome, was addressed in 
terms highly complimentary to himself, and was treated with 
affability. At first he stood on his guard, declaring that “‘in spite 
of the desire of Russia to put an end to the effusion of blood, she 
could not accept a peace which would be humiliating for her 
dignity, nor could she tolerate any modification whatever of her 
existing frontier”.* He was reassured in the strongest terms; 
Napoleon meditated no humiliation for Russia; the supposition 
of such a thing would be an insult. Whereupon, the terms of the 