

Even if he himself could have forgotten, there were people 
who were interested in reminding the Czar of that long agony of 
waiting when all eyes had looked for messages from England, 
and of the bitter story of an ever-promised diversion that never 
came to realisation. These people would recall to him that 
policy which the Edinburgh Review called ‘“‘our love of sugar 
islands”, by which England, forgetting her allies, had scattered 
her forces in overseas expeditions; they would remember how, 
instead of providing generously for the coalition, England had 
kept tight hold of her own purse strings. It would be impossible 
for the Czar to forget how eagerly all eyes had looked to Austria, 
how even on the eve of Friedland men had set anxious gaze 

1 Schladen’s third Report, 23 June 1807, in Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 525. 

¥ 
s 

CH. Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 245 

towards Vienna till hope had dwindled away. Perhaps the Czar 
would remember the advice he had received in the days of 
optimism after the convention of Bartenstein. Gentz, the true 
European of these days, the fervent devotee of coalitions, had 
shown that there was no choice but to make peace, since it was 
useless to try to fight without the aid of Austria. It was Gentz’s 
perpetual creed that you could not defeat the French without 
Austrian assistance,! and already in April this arch-enemy of 
Napoleon had given up all hope in the existing struggle. He 
had suggested that it might be useful to threaten the government 
at Vienna; the Czar might declare his intention of joining hands 
with Napoleon; but the Russians had refused to adopt an attitude 
that would throw the Austrians into the arms of France.” All 
these things must have returned to the mind of the Czar as he 
struggled to a decision, with a Grand Duke roaring at his side. 
And, as Prussia was a helpless burden to the coalition, an 
encumbrance and a responsibility, there must have come back 
to the Czar that old complaint: “I have no ally”. The generals, 
the Czartoryski’s, the Novossiltzovs, were all anxious to see the 
end of the war, each for his own reasons. Popov, who had been 
specially sent to the army to give an account of the situation, 
was writing: ‘““Every moment is costly, time is flying and cir- 
cumstances demand the conclusion of peace or else an armistice 
as early as possible”. Bennigsen had discredited himself, as a 
general, and even now was under suspicion because of his conduct 
in regard to the negotiation; there was little hope of finding 
salvation by confiding another army to his leadership. Moreover, 
Napoleon had made demand of Prussian fortresses and had 
declared that he would not be content with an armistice but would 
require the conclusion of peace. It would have been very bold to 
offend him in both these matters, it would have been a deter- 
mination tantamount to a willingness to renew the war. So the 

1 For Gentz’s theory that without the union of Austria and Prussia no 
plan for the curbing of France can be of any effect, see e.g. Gentz to Jackson, 
25 Sept. 1805, in M. H. Weil, D’ Ulm a Jena (1921), pp. 65 et seq. Ina letter 
to Jackson on 5 Dec. 1805 (ibid. p. 140) Gentz points out the mistake that 
had been made in the late war of ‘‘making Russia the principal actor” in the 
struggle against France. 2 F. de Martens, Recueil, v1, 419. 