

A little later we are allowed to have a glimpse of an actual 
outburst between the two monarchs. It comes from the pen of 
Princess Radziwill: 

’ When I again saw the Tsar of Russia, a year later, he told me he 
had been terrified to see the discussions between the king and 
Napoleon taking a disquieting turn. Both began to speak vehemently 
and with bitterness, and Alexander never remembered having felt 
a more poignant anxiety. 

The question was that of the restitution of Silesia. ‘‘I must have 
that province’, declared Napoleon, ‘“‘for the king of Saxony, who 
needs a free line of communication between Saxony and the Duchy 
of Warsaw....” The king was cut to the heart and cried: ‘“‘ You do 
that, to reward him for having abandoned me, for an act of desertion 
that accelerated my ruin!”—‘‘Desertion! What do you mean by 
desertion?’’, retorted Napoleon angrily, ‘“‘he only did his duty to me 
and his country.” 

The Tsar did not remember the rest of the discussion; at the time 
his only thought was how it would end....At the sight of the king’s 
red excited face and Napoleon’s pale and angry countenance, he 
resolved to cut short the interview... .° 

1 Kalckreuth to Frederick William III, 80 June 1807, in Bailleu, Preussen 

und Frankreich, 11, 590. 
2 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 1 July 1807, in Deutsche 

Rundschau, cx, 209-10. 
3 Princess Anton Radziwill, Forty-five years of my life (Eng. trans. 1912), 

p. 271. 

236 TILSIT BK III. 

It was natural that Frederick William’s subjects should have 
a regret when they looked upon the happy ease of the Czar, and 
saw Alexander and Napoleon fraternising like kindred spirits. 
It is not surprising that Kalckreuth should write to his master: 
“The Emperor of Russia is on the best of terms with Napoleon; 
Your Majesty might very easily be on the same footing”. The 
Prussians seem to have been conscious that their king had a 
manner which irritated the French Emperor, and that their 
cause was lacking in the personality which might have made it 
attractive. They had not an Alexander, so they decided to exploit 
a woman’s charm and meet Napoleon with a queen. It was 
Kalckreuth who wrote from Tilsit to ask that Queen Louisa 
should come to the seat of negotiation.1 She who had been the 
most passionate in her hatred, and had rejoiced that she was 
not compelled to see Napoleon, was called upon to intervene, 
and was expected to be charming. If the king had not desired 
it, she would not have consented to go to Tilsit, and for any 
torture that she suffered he, more than Napoleon, must be held 
responsible.? She spoke to Napoleon as a mother and implored 
him to consider her children, and perhaps this kind of dynastic 
argument, this way of considering Prussian territory as the 
family property of the house of Brandenburg, was not calculated 
to induce Napoleon to alter his political plans; though it was not 
an unsound instinct that made the queen appeal to Napoleon’s 
feeling for family. He, for his part, steeled himself against 
expected charms, and at one moment attempted to talk about 
the queen’s dress materials. The whole incident only adds to the 
impression that in these Tilsit days the Prussians consistently 
took the wrong turn, and did the forbidden thing. 