

1 Bennigsen to Alexander, 5/17 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxxIx, 17. 

2 Bennigsen to Bagration, 6/18 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxx1x, 22. For 
the congress in question see above, p. 177. 

3 Bennigsen to Alexander, 7/19 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxxrx, 23-4, 

4 Lobanov to Alexander, 19 June 1807, in Tatistcheff, Alexandre I et 
Napoléon, pp. 125-6. 

BN 16 

24.2 TILSIT BK III. 

armistice were discussed and Lobanov, to his intense surprise, 
found himself coolly asked to sign away three places that were 
not in Russian hands at all—the Prussian fortresses of Pillau, 
Graudenz and Colberg. He did not hesitate in his reply; he 
refused to assent to such terms, declared that Bennigsen himself 
had no powers to make these concessions, and returned to the 
Russian army to await the further orders of his Emperor. 
Very soon came Marshal Duroc to the headquarters of Ben- 
nigsen, to report Napoleon’s renewed decision. He conferred 
with Bennigsen and the Grand Duke Constantine, while Lobanov 
and Popov stayed up all night expecting to be called to the dis- 
cussion. Duroc announced that Napoleon would not be contented 
with an armistice, but would desire the conclusion of peace; and 
this time it would seem to be Bennigsen who was not quite 
genial, for he declared that his instructions merely had reference 
to a suspension of arms; and when Duroc reported Napoleon’s 
persistence in his demand for the Prussian fortresses, Bennigsen 
replied, if we are to trust his accounts: ‘“‘...then there is no 
further question, and we go on with the war. You told me that 
your master was desirous of treating not only for an armistice, 
but for peace. Very well. Let us negotiate for peace, and fight 
in the meantime’’.?, Bennigsen, whom all the world was reviling 
as a traitor, made bold to remind Duroc that the Czar had 
formidable resources at his disposal, and could call on reinforce- 
ments—could even make the war a national one and resort to 
alevéeen masse. 'These words may seem remarkable in Bennigsen, 
but they are quite in line with the rdéle that he was beginning to 
adopt, and they reveal the direction of his thoughts. Duroc 
expressed Napoleon’s wish for a closer connection with Russia, 
and even dropped words to show the desirability of an interview 
between thetwo Emperors. Some of these scraps of conversation 
leaked out in Baubeln, where the Russian headquarters were 
fixed, and they are confirmed in the reports of the Prussian 
representative there. This man, Schladen, heard, among other 
things, that the Russians had replied to Duroc’s advances by 

' Lobanov to Alexander, 19 June 1807, in Tatistcheff, Alexandre I° et 
Napoléon, pp. 125-6. * Tatistcheff, Alexandre I et Napoléon, p. 127. 

CH. Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 243 

saying that they thought Alexander would not be averse to 
peace, provided that no demand should be made for him to 
abandon the interests of Prussia.! Finally accounts were sent to 
the Czar, relating what had taken place. Popov complained that 
Bennigsen had excluded Lobanov and himself from the interview 
with Duroc; in spite of imperial orders the commander-in-chief 
had presumed to take things into his own hands; Popov seems 
to have had suspicions, as well he might, for this was the second 
time that he had been sent on a mission to supervise and check 
the movements of Bennigsen; but he concurred in the opinion 
that an armistice ought to be concluded.? 