

It seems ironical that while all this is taking place, Bennigsen 
should be writing to Alexander a letter like the following: 

Your Imperial Majesty may be assured that I am not exaggerating 
when I say that it was only a part of the infantry which was for a 
moment put to rout by the last charge of the enemy after the battle 
of Friedland...this rout of a part of our infantry only lasted a 
moment.... 

...Lam not sufficiently informed to be able to say if it can be done, 
but the best thing for the army of Your Imperial Majesty would be 
to fill up the regiments and to use the...officers of the militia to 
replace those who are killed or grievously wounded; then, with the 
addition of the division of Prince Lobanov, which is on the point of 
arrival, the army will be more formidable than it was when we 
resumed the offensive, and it will be in a state to begin action again 
as soon as circumstances should demand. I regard it as my duty to 
give you this assurance, Sir, in case the pretensions of Bonaparte are 
such as we cannot admit. 

...For the rest I make bold to assure Your Imperial Majesty that 
the check received in this battle has not at all lessened the courage of 
the troops. ..and if circumstances should demand it the army would 
fight to-morrow with the same courage as though the battle of 
Friedland had never occurred....I must add that...the enemy has 
suffered infinitely greater losses than ours in these different combats, 
and cannot repair them so soon, while our reinforcements come in 
daily and will very shortly put us in a position to be more formidable 
than ever to Bonaparte.! 

This quite agrees with the conversation the Russian general had 

1 Bennigsen to Alexander, 9/21 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxx1x, 27-8. 

248 TILSIT BK III. 

with Schladen, the Prussian representative, two days later, when 
he said that 

the present situation was anything but embarrassing...that there 
was really no danger except that of becoming discouraged;. . .that 
[Napoleon’s] recent combats had cost him an immense number of 
men...that it was necessary therefore that no one should lose his 
head or in any way consent to the evacuation of the [Prussian] 
fortresses...that it would be better to break the armistice on the 
spot; that he, Bennigsen, with the means that he had actually at his 
disposal, did not at all fear the reeommencement of hostilities. . .and 
that if by negotiations with Napoleon one could gain a little time 
without conceding anything, one would be in a position to collect 
one’s resources and await a definite categorical reply from Austria 
and England. 

All this is confirmed by a report of Mackenzie, the British agent, 
who visited the Russian headquarters on the 22nd of June: 
‘““The General [Bennigsen] declared...he would undertake to 
beat the enemy again and again with 60,000 men; but no one 
replied’. In this way, as the negotiation advances, we find 
Bennigsen protesting violently; perhaps he protests too much. 
It might have been a sudden surge of self-assertiveness in a man 
who felt that he had been weak—Bennigsen taking hold of 
himself and determined to be strong. It might have been—as 
appears from the interview with Duroc—that the commander, 
hearing of Napoleon’s extravagant demands, was provoked to 
a real ardour which before he had been unable to feel, was given 
an inner impulsion which had been lacking in his previous 
conduct of the war. We hear of him urging a plan to retreat into 
the heart of Russia and lure the French into the northern wilds 
far from their own country. It would seem impossible to 
resolve into a unity the successive phases in the mind of such 
a person; moods seem to succeed one another like capricious 