

1 Schladen’s Report of 23 June 1807 in Ranke, Hardenberg, 11, 469. 
Cf. Schladen’s second Report of 21 June 1807, where he writes: ‘‘ Bennigsen 

looks as though he had beaten the French and triumphed over his enemies’’. 
Ranke, Hardenberg, v, 522. 
» Mackenzie’s Report of 23 June 1807 enclosed in G. Leveson-Gower to 

G. Canning. Separate 26 June 1807. Printed in J. H. Rose, Napoleonic 
Studies, p. 157. 

. 
* 

CH. Ili. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 249 

changes of the weather; the men who led the Russians had a 
kind of startling discontinuity in their souls, and one must be 
prepared for self-contradiction and sudden rifts within a single 
personality. There is a temptation to find a too-facile continuity 
in history, and see after the battle of Friedland a simple ascending 
ladder to Tilsit; in reality the issue is the result of a conflict of 
forces, and a collision of wills. There is an interplay of per- 
sonalities who themselves are not always unities, but, repeating 
the conflict within their own spirits, are torn with irreconcilable 
moods and purposes, divided against themselves. The decision 
of Alexander to become the ally and friend of Napoleon is like 
the gradual emergence of a green shining film on the surface of 
a boiling cauldron in which a score of ingredients have been in 
perplexing effervescence. An account of that decision would be 
over-simplified if it were not written with a sort of counterpoint, 
to show the under-currents that sometimes ran against it. It 
would be untrue if it did not allow for the fluidity of events, the 
certain element of the capricious that is in people. Perhaps if 
one night the stars had only shone a little more brightly to 
awaken a more sentimental mood—perhaps if one night Queen 
Louisa had only been near to give Alexander a reminder, then 
in that mysterious borderland of the mind where such winds 
have play and subtle influence, there might have arisen a mad 
desire; the divine mission might have become once more com- 
pelling; Bennigsen might have had his way. It is easy to take 
a short cut with history and see things move evenly towards 
some great event; in reality life is more complex. In the Russian 
mind above all there seem to be mysterious fervours and subtle 
workings and strange broodings; and in Alexander himself there 
was a curious interweaving of German transcendentalism with 
all this, making character and motive more difficult to analyse. 
The question why at this moment Alexander and Bennigsen 
reversed their former réles, Bennigsen being now the optimist, 
the enthusiast for war, is a problem of psychology, a study in 
moods. Any puff of wind might have altered history. 

Prince Lobanov resumed his negotiation and the French once 
more took up their policy of flattery and smiling affability. The 

250 TILSIT BK III. 

question of the Prussian fortresses was dropped and an armistice 
was signed on the 21st of June;1 the Russian negotiator was 
admitted to the presence of Napoleon, who, we are told, was in 
high spirits and covered him with kindness, talking with him for 
two hours and bestowing compliments enough to turn his head. 
Napoleon drank the health of Alexander, declared that he had 
ever had a fondness for him, insisted that an alliance between 
Russia and France was a thing that the mutual interests of the 
two powers demanded, and swore that he had never entertained 
aggressive designs against Russia. He made some suggestion 
that the Czar ought to have some accession of territory to give 
his empire its true and natural frontier on the Vistula. There is 
even mention of his taking the map of Europe and denoting, 
with a sweep of his arm, what might be the limits of Russian 
and French dominion in two majestic empires of East and West.? 
The tale Lobanov had to tell when he returned to his master 
was like the opening of a dream. Coming to men who had felt 
dejected and desperate and beaten, it must have seemed 
magnificent release; for it meant that instead of cringing 
miserably and creeping disgracefully out of the war, Russia 
might make her peace treaty the very source of unbounded 
prestige and might find glories greater than that of victory in 
sharing dominion with Napoleon. Alexander grasped the 
splendid moment, and caused Napoleon to be informed that 
everything could be easily arranged provided that the two 
Emperors should treat without intermediaries. Marshal Duroc 
was sent from the French headquarters to propose an interview; 
and on the 25th of June the two Emperors met at Tilsit and 
embraced one another on a raft that had been built in the middle 
of the river Niemen. 