

256 TILSIT BK III. 

his ally, finally accepted the increase of territory, acquiesced in 
the humiliation of Frederick William, and became a party to 
the mutilation of Prussia.1 Adopting the main features of 
Hardenberg’s scheme—desertion of allies, friendship with 
France, co-operation against England, and the dismemberment 
of Turkey—he abandoned the idea of comprising Prussia in a 
grand “triumvirate”, abandoned it without making any overt 
struggle for it. He made in fact a more complete surrender to 
Napoleon than he had intended or imagined on the eve of the 
meeting. This was the real achievement of Napoleon in the 
conversations that took place. It was the proud consummation 
of Tilsit. For it left the two Emperors alone, arm-in-arm on a 
mountain of their own, in close mysterious intimacy and 
picturesque alliance; it enabled them to strike the imagination 
of the world with the vision of magnificent empire dividing the 
east and the west. ; 

Alexander told Frederick William, after his first interview with 
Napoleon, that he had found the Emperor, “reserved, cold, but 
polite’. We can gather that this would not seem a favourable 
time for plunging into the discussion of Hardenberg’s scheme. 
Yet Alexander talked about Prussia—enough to invite the 
remark of Napoleon, who asked him why he was so interested 
in this country—and he secured that the surrender of the three 
Prussian fortresses should not be insisted upon during the 
armistice. He also returned with an invitation for Frederick 
William to meet Napoleon on the morrow.® It would seem that 
he began well; but undoubtedly he found himself face to face 
with Napoleon’s astonishing antipathy to Prussia, and probably 
the result of the interview would be to increase his hesitation 
concerning the proposed Hardenberg policy; for, however sin- 
cerely he might accept the idea of a joint alliance—of a ‘‘trium- 
virate”, however much he may have assented to the plan of 
partitioning Turkey, he certainly felt bashful when it came to the 
point of putting the idea to Napoleon, and he must have been 

1 On Alexander’s desertion of Prussia see also Appendix C. 

*» King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 25 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 88-9. 3 Ibid. 

CH. III. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 257 

doubtful especially concerning some of the ramifications of the 
scheme. He could not show Hardenberg’s brazen face in such 
a contingency as this, and so, even while he made it understood 
that he was keeping the plan in view, he confessed that he did 
not know how to meet Napoleon with it, he dallied, waited for 
an opportunity to arise, and talked of the need of circumspection. 
It was unfortunate that Hardenberg had misread the mood of 
Napoleon and had failed to advance his own proposals with the 
delicacy they demanded; Napoleon, when he received the letter 
from the Prussian king, detected an offer of alliance, and was 
repelled by the coolness of the suggestion. It was to Alexander 
himself that he expressed his discontent, and the result must 
have been to make the Czar more guarded, more hesitant than 
ever. On the 27th of June we find him writing to the Prussian 
king: 