

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 493. 

? Queen Louisa to King Frederick William III, 1 July 1807, in Deutsche 
Rumndschau, cx, 208. 

* King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 4 July 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 216. 

? 

CH. III. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 259 

fortunate tone and gesture of the Prussians was calculated to 
estrange something in Alexander. Nothing could have made 
more glaring contrast than the demeanour of these people in the 
contingencies of the moment, set alongside their pretensions for 
the future. Hardenberg’s plan was doomed, perhaps, to stumble 
and break upon Napoleon’s irreconcilable soreness against 
Prussia, but on the eve of Tilsit Alexander had shown himself 
ready to be strong for the sake of his ally, had recognised that, 
since his friendship was important to Napoleon, he could afford 
to be exacting in return. He might have boldly demanded the 
inclusion of Frederick William in the benefits of the new system 
of policy; he might have regarded his connection with Prussia 
as more binding than the invitations of France; he might have 
put a pistol to the head of Napoleon. If he did not do this the 
Prussians were perhaps partly responsible; for they contrived 
to render themselves and their cause the most unattractive in 
the world, and they conducted themselves in a way that could 
only make their ambitions seem ridiculous. 

Not that the Czar ever ceased to feel himself the friend of 
these unfortunate people, or ever consciously set out to deceive 
the man whom he had so long overwhelmed with kindness. It 
is difficult to believe that he would have continued raising the 
hopes of the Prussians if he had actually abandoned their 
design. It would be unjust to say that he was out to make 
alliance with France whatever might happen to his ally. He 
certainly would not be able to prophesy the harshness with 
which Napoleon would treat Prussia after the peace treaties 
were signed, or guess how the settlement of Tilsit was to be 
twisted into something which he did not mean. He would begin 
at Tilsit as the secret friend of the Prussian project, having the 
private intention of bringing Frederick William into his system, 
hoping to insinuate the ideas of Hardenberg by gradual steps 
into the negotiation. As the days went by it must have dawned 
upon him that he was leaving the Prussians on one side, but there 
would seem to have been a period when he refused actually to 
face the fact. Before the clear determination of Bonaparte and 
under the spell of this man’s personality, he would allow himself 

17-2 

260 TILSIT BK III. 

to slide away from his first intentions by a quiet, almost uncon- 
scious transition. It would be easy for him to slip into a position 
in which he still felt kindly towards the Prussians, still interceded 
to secure an amelioration of their lot, but became accustomed to 
regarding them as poor victimised creatures instead of potential 
partners in the glory of Tilsit, and so allowed Hardenberg’s 
scheme to drop entirely out of sight. We do not know how much 
Alexander over-estimated his influence with Napoleon, or how 
soon he hoped that his efforts would bring the Prussians back 
to favour. We cannot estimate what mood of dejection, what 
fever of exaltation made him finally surrender in a way that he 
had not intended, to the personality of Napoleon. But one thing 
we know—and this we have good reason to be sure of—that at 
some point during the interviews at Tilsit, he lost his grip on 
externalities, some mist over his eyes blurred his vision of the 
objective world, and before he knew it he was back in the sky, 
carried on the wings of a dream, so that flimsiest promises 
seemed to him for the moment like actualities and his faith 
fixed itself on things unsubstantial as a cloud. In this state of 
mind he was contented to lull himself with the unpledged words 
of the French Emperor, and to be fed with dainty allusions to 
schemes of empire in the east. It is little wonder that he allowed 
himself to lose concrete grasp and the critical eye in the matters 
that concerned his relations with the Prussians. So the astounding 
scheme flickered out, Alexander cannot greatly be blamed.! And 
in any case it was Hardenberg who had enunciated the principle 
that “necessity knows no law”—it was he who had provided 
the reasons to justify desertion of allies—it was he who had 
dangled before the eyes of the Czar the dream of a partition of 
Turkey. 