

The idea of making an alliance with France would not 
surprise Alexander as a fantastic unheard-of thing. Napoleon 
had thrown out a vague hint through Marshal Duroc on the first 
day of the negotiation, though this might have been taken as 

1 The armistice is printed in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 29-80. 
2 Lobanov to Alexander, 21 June 1807, in Tatistcheff, Alexandre I¢" et 
Napoléon, pp. 185-6. 

CH. III. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 251 

only a disarming phrase. The Czar had recently been induced to 
think seriously about a complete reversal of policy, and had 
accommodated his mind to the idea and had actually given 
some sort of adhesion to a scheme that was based upon this, 
before Lobanov had brought his report of Napoleon’s proposals. 
The impulse had come from a different quarter. It was Har- 
denberg who had painted glowing pictures of the glory that 
would spring from a desertion of the coalition and an arrangement 
of alliance with France; he had been formulating a reconstruction 
of Europe, based upon a dismemberment of Turkey. He was 
still elaborating his plans on the day Lobanov brought the 
French offer of alliance—was pursuing his policy in the assurance 
that he had won over the Czar to the scheme. 

It is apparent that in the early days before events had come 
to precision, Alexander, accepting the proffered alliance of 
France, conceived himself as adhering to the main principle 
of Hardenberg’s scheme; he did not in any way imagine that he 
was separating himself from the Prussians. We are dealing now 
with very subtle thoughts that lie behind man’s surface conduct; 
and Alexander, following his solitary way, an autocrat respon- 
sible to no man, under no necessity of explaining himself to a 
superior, gives but few clues for the elucidation of his secret 
purposes. Yet there are some chinks in the wall that shuts him 
away from the enquirer, and if we look carefully into these we 
shail see him with the Hardenberg proposals still hanging in his 
mind, after he has had more than one interview with Napoleon. 
We shail see him even inclined to take it as an opening, as 
‘“‘something to work upon” in this matter, when Napoleon makes 
an allusion to Turkey. We shall gather that when the Czar goes 
to Tilsit he has by no means thrown aside the stagey cardboard 
policies of Hardenberg. 

Here we are brought back to the letter of the 22nd of June 
in which the Prussian king, writing to Queen Louisa, makes 
reference to “gigantic” plans that are afoot—attempts to 
rescue the defeated states from their desperate position. Har- 
denberg and Budberg, according to this letter, declare their 
joint opinion in a conference with their monarchs, and we are 

252 TILSIT BK III. 

given the unmistakable suggestion that their plans are approved 
and being adopted as the common policy of the two powers, and 
are under process of further elaboration. “These are as yet only 
general ideas”, the king adds, “but they have been com- 
municated to Kalckreuth so that he may be able to make 
tactful use of them in such a way as to learn something of the 
benevolent intentions of [Napoleon].’’! There is nothing to show 
that on the following day, the 28rd, the Prussians feel their plan 
losing ground. The instructions addressed to their negotiator on 
this date prove Hardenberg to be full of hope. Kalckreuth is 
not ordered to make definite proposals to the French or to spring 
Hardenberg’s scheme full-grown upon Napoleon; rather it is 
‘trusted to the ingenuity of the Marshal” so to manage the 
affair that the actual suggestions shall come from France; but 
Kalckreuth is instructed to sound Napoleon, to put out feelers 
particularly in regard to the partition of Turkey; he is to convey 
the hint that “it will be easy for us to come to an under- 
standing”’, he is to make it clear that Hardenberg has some 
proposals to offer and that these will be welcome to Napoleon. 
Everything is contrived, in fact, to create the impression that 
Prussia has a plan up her sleeve such as will surprise the French 
with its agreeableness if only they will consent to listen to it. 
It is assumed that the Czar is moving in step; the papers make 
reference to the fact that he shares the feelings of his ally; it is 
Alexander as well as Frederick William, it is “‘their Majesties”’, 
who think that “in half-disclosing their ideas on the subject of 
peace and in listening to those of Napoleon, the Marshal will 
easily succeed in preparing the way for a negotiation’’.2 Harden- 
berg is evidently acting upon a policy in which he feels sure of 
the co-operation of the Czar. 