

On this 23rd of June we find Alexander in receipt of Napoleon’s 
offer of friendship and alliance. He is faced with the difficulty 
of drawing up instructions for Lobanov, the man who is to treat 
for peace. It will be seen later that Alexander, while accepting 
Hardenberg’s plan of turning defeat into glorious victory by 

1 See above, p. 218. 
* Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 468. 

CH. Il, RUSSIA AND TILSIT 2538 

sleight of hand, is more sensitive than the Prussian in recognising 
the delicacy of the proposal. He seems to be anxious as to how 
much he shall disclose to the French, and how soon. More than 
one project of instructions had been drawn up for Lobanov, only 
to be laid aside; and from these preliminary drafts it is certain 
that Alexander had no intention of making sudden parade of 
Hardenberg’s programme. But though these drafts do not dare 
to base themselves upon the presumptuous principles which the 
Prussians were advancing, though they have in their totality little 
in common with Hardenberg’s suggestions, yet they contain one 
or two points that are remarkable and that seem indeed eccentric 
—points that, after Friedland, seem to belong to some bold 
imaginative policy. We see in one of the papers that Russia is 
greatly concerned to secure Hamburg and Liibeck for Prussia.+ 
Hardenberg had specified these in his remapping of Europe; 
possibly he had been even more insistent in his discussions with 
the Czar than actually appears in his writings; but it is a bold 
thing to mention the Hanseatic towns after Friedland, for in 
1806 Napoleon, even though it had been a question of peace or 
war, had refused to concede them to Prussia. There is another 
curious suggestion among the Russian projects at this period; 
we find the idea that Prussia might have Bohemia; the excuse 
being, “the duplicity with which Austria has conducted herself 
towards Russia as well as towards Prussia’’.? There is a slashing 
boldness, as of Hardenberg, in this summary disposal of neutral 
territory; one might hazard the thought that this looks like an 
interesting variant of the Hardenberg proposals—a stray spark 
struck off at a heat in the hammering-out of the Prussian 
scheme. It is difficult through all the mist of unreported con- 
ferences to trace such ideas to their source; one can only detect 
a reminiscence of Bartenstein, a cadence that fits all Harden- 
berg’s tunes, a sample of the things which the Prussians were 
perpetually putting into the mind of Alexander but which we 

1 “Quelques idées qui pourront trouver place dans les instructions du 
négociateur russe qui sera chargé de traiter de la paix.” Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 
83-7. See Appendix B on the Institutions of Lobanov. 

2 Memorandum in Sbornik, LXxx1x, 37-8. This is in the handwriting of 
Budberg; see Tatistcheff, Alewandre I° et Napoléon, footnote to p. 144. 

254 TILSIT BK III. 

must hope he did not originate himself. These sketches for an 
instruction to Lobanov show that the Russians had a strong sense 
of the importance of their alliance to the French; they seemed 
determined to sell it for value; they even talked of drawing out 
Napoleon on the subject of the Ottoman Porte.! This is of some 
importance, for as the days go by the Czar weakens, and forgets 
toremain so on his guard. Above all, the Czar was certainly true 
to Prussia; was playing no double-handed game; was determined 
to be strong against Napoleon when the interests of his ally were 
concerned, He would have no increase of territory for himself, no 
extended frontier on the Vistula, unless Prussia should be pro- 
vided with compensation.” These are the experimental ideas 
for the instructions of the negotiator Lobanov. On the 28rd of 
June they were cast aside in favour of a bolder proposal of 
alliance. It would almost seem that the flattering message 
which Lobanov had brought frorn Napoleon had determined 
Alexander to enter more fully into the policy of Hardenberg. 
Lobanov’s instruction ran: 