

Napoleon was very busy yesterday and worked above all with 
Talleyrand....The Emperor of Russia thinks he has information that 
this work chiefly concerned the projected partition of the Ottoman 
Porte, which seems to have become a favourite idea of Napoleon’s... .+ 

It is not the Prussians now who whisper their gigantic schemes 
in the ear of a receptive Czar. Alexander has found a new 
Hardenberg, and has rediscovered his Bartenstein. 

a The tragedy of Tilsit was that at a certain point in the dis- 
cussions Alexander became sincere. If, for the sake of the 
interests of Russia he had been content to forgo his feelings and 
agree to a policy of co-operation with France—if he had conceded 
this with heart ever unreconciled—there came a time when he 
forgot all play-acting, forgot to be on his guard, and became 
inwardly reconciled, like a man who has found his true home. 
Alexander’s was not a psychology that could content itself with 
compromise, however successful the compromise might be. He 
would not have been happy at the side of Napoleon if he had 

1 King Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 3 July 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 214-15. 

264 TILSIT BK III. 

remained there merely because it was profitable. Hardenberg 
had constantly urged that if there should be a reversal of policy, 
this should be carried out whole-heartedly, without mental 
reservations or attempts at half-measures. It is difficult to 
imagine the Prussians themselves, especially Queen Louisa, 
achieving the state of mind that would be necessary for this; 
but it is almost impossible to think of the Czar doing anything 
other than this. And so it came to pass that at times Alexander 
in his new alliance with Napoleon gave the appearance of a man 
who had been converted in religion rather than a ruler who had 
merely changed a policy. He seemed repelled by everything 
that reminded him of his former ways, and fell out of love with 
his old associates. It annoyed him to hear mention of some of 
his recent ministers who had thought they were furthering his 
interests by being fervent for the coalition. He did not seem to 
like to remember Razoumovski, Vorontsov, Alopeus.! They were 
men who had sacrificed Russia to a cause, and that cause a wrong 
and wretched one; they had beckoned and lured their Czar on 
a path which had proved disastrous and had never promised 
profit to the Empire; and they had made their own country a 
pawn in a game that was played for the benefit of others. 
Alexander gave vent to an indignation against England and 
Austria that was by no means a sham indignation. It was the 
recoil of a man who had come to feel that hitherto he had been 
blind. Like a converted sinner he looked regretfully back on the 
years that he had lost. He was grateful to Napoleon for winning 
him from the error of his ways. Now he had seen his salvation 
and the light had broken upon him. We find him writing to his 
sister, as one sure of corroboration and applause: “‘ What do you 
think?...I! passing my days with Bonaparte, remaining for 
whole hours alone with him’’.? But his sister could not move so 