

1 See e.g. Caulaincourt to Napoleon, No. 14, 3] Dec. 1807, in Grand- 
Duke Nicholas Mikhailovitch, Relations diplomatiques de la Russie et de la 
France, 1, 41. See also Introduction to the same work, p. Ixxi. Savary to 
Napoleon, 21 Oct. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxu, 148. 

* Alexander to Grand-Duchess Catherine, 17 June 1807, in Grand- 
Duke Nicholas Mikhailovitch, Correspondance d Alexandre I& avec la 
Grande-Duchesse Cathérine. 

¥ 

CH. Il. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 265 

quickly, she was still in the days before Tilsit, she could walk— 
she could not fly. She took the liberty of saying “what she 
thought ”— 

I will not make my peace with this peace. ..unless we secure great 
acquisitions, the Vistula...the Danube. For without these we shall 
have nothing but shame for fraternising with a man against whom 
we have rightly raised our voices in condemnation, and there will not 
be the smallest real gain or honour for Russia in return. 

A Hardenberg could bring out a reversal of policy, a new 
diplomatic scheme, if a crisis confronted him, and could do it 
impersonally, as one would solve a mathematical problem. With 
him it was a direct adjustment to a situation or a necessity, a 
conscious and deliberate reorganisation of practical issues, a 
manipulation with things outside himself; and the whole process, 
in one sense, left his personality untouched, went on so to speak 
above his head. Alexander could not rest here. Having put 
himself under such a system of policy and purposes he had to 
project himself into these, till he and they became interfused. 
He did not patch the new policy mechanically on to his political 
system, he grafted it upon himself and took it into his blood. 
What in others would have been a mere question of diplomacy, 
in him developed into a mighty issue of the soul. He did not 
merely become the calculating ally of Napoleon; he added to the 
relationship a new dimension, an extension in personality; he 
came away from Tilsit more than an impersonal ally—an en- 
thusiastic and adoring friend, priding himself peculiarly in the 
human side of his contacts with Napoleon, betraying towards 
the man that expansiveness of heart which he had once shown to 
Czartoryski and which he seems to have yearned to show to 
somebody. In the same way he had shown a friendship for 
Frederick William of Prussia which was not commensurable ° 
with the actual political alliance of the two governments. 
Tilsit did not remain for him merely the seat of a negotiation, 
a place of practical transactions; he fondled it in his memory, 
to him it was more like a sacred lover’s rendezvous; he would 

1 Grand-Duchess Catherine to Alexander, 25 June 1807, in Grand-Duke 
Nicholas Mikhailovitch, Correspondance. 

266 TILSIT BK III. 

refer to it as to some epoch in the life of his spirit, a day of his 
soul’s renewing; he would think of it essentially as a portentous 
human moment. He did not merely find excuses for breaking 
with England, did not with misgivings and reluctance declare 
war against his former ally; he became bitter and indignant and 
hostile as the French, and himself urged Napoleon to conclude 
no peace with the court of London. 