

I think I must report to Your Majesty that after a long three hours’ 
conversation with Napoleon after dinner yesterday I have hopes that 
things will turn out well, for he himself brought up the subject of 
the dissolution and partition of the Ottoman Empire. This gives us 
something to work from, but, Sire, we must move with the greatest 
precaution and prudence. Your Majesty must have confidence in 
me, and I hope to be able to serve you with that zeal and attachment 
which you know I have for you.? 

The Prussian king replies with a most gracious expression of 
trust and gratitude,? but Hardenberg begins to feel that his 
policy is not being pressed with sufficient vigour, he seeks to 
overcome the Czar’s reserve and hesitation, and takes the 
opportunity to urge his proposals more strongly. He recapitu- 
lates his suggestions in a memorandum which he desires the 
Czar to communicate to Napoleon: 

and in case His Imperial Majesty should hesitate to speak in his own 
name of what relates to Turkey (even after what Napoleon has said 
on the subject) it seems to me that he would not be in any way 

1 Alexander I to Frederick William III, 15/27 June 1807, in Bailleu, 
Briefwechsel (vol. txxv of the Publicationen aus den K. Preussischen 
Staatsarchiven), p. 158. 

2 Ibid. p. 159. 

BN a7 

258 TILSIT BK III. 

compromised if he communicated the Memorandum as my idea. This 
would perhaps at the same time have the effect of destroying 
Napoleon’s prejudices against me. 

The paper is dated the 29th of June, and proves that even four 
days after the Czar had met Napoleon at Tilsit, Hardenberg was 
still fondling his grand design and hoping by the spoliation of 
Turkey to turn Napoleon’s anger away from Prussia; but he was 
beginning to be impatient and to see how his desires were 
slipping away from him. Queen Louisa seemed to understand 
the situation: “I think that Russia has made a false step in 
being too easy—in trying to flatter, where she ought to have 
shown the utmost pride and strength”.? Frederick William 
wrote early in July: 

It would be vain to hope that the Emperor Alexander will ever 
speak to Napoleon with energy. All that he can do for me by way 
of conversation he will do,...but nothing more....In this sense 
all semblance of energy on the part of Russia has disappeared. They 

seem to resign themselves to necessity, as they say, and they are 
trying to come to business over Turkey.? 

So the Czar weakened, and every minute that he faltered and 
delayed must have made him fall still more completely to the 
glamour of Tilsit, till Hardenberg and his conspiracies faded 
away from his mind, and the voice of the Prussians ceased to be 
compelling, and the trend of affairs so fixed itself that the last 
opportunity was gone. 

The Prussians, on their side, did not make things easy for 
Alexander. The injured tone they perpetually adopted, their 
alternations of abjectness and bitter anger, their repeated 
wranglings concerning the preliminaries in negotiation, were 
sufficient to discount anything an ally could do for them. It 
must have become ludicrous to ask Napoleon to believe that 
they were anxious to bring cordiality into their relations with 
France. Besides hardening Napoleon’s heart still more, the un- 