

1 The Prussian king wrote to his minister in London of Alexander’s 
efforts on his behalf: ‘“‘Quelqu’edt été son désir de m’étre utile et de me 
donner dans cette occasion décisive de nouvelles preuves réelles de son 
amitié, il y perdit ses peines. Les négociations restérent isolées”. Der 
K6nig an Jacobi-Kloest, 19 Juli 1807, in Hassell, Geschichte der Preussischen 
Politik 1807 bis 1815, 1, 889. This would confirm the view that the real 
diplomatic issue at Tilsit was the question of the joint negotiation of Russia 

and Prussia with France, such as Hardenberg hoped to see set on foot; and 
that Alexander hoped to secure this in his interviews with Napoleon. 

> 

CH. III. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 261 

In the volume of documents relating to this period, published 
by the Russian Historical Society, there are three letters in 
which the Chancellor Budberg explains the reasons for the change 
in Russian policy that came at Tilsit.1 One is intended for Austria 
and is dated the 16/28th of June; the second is for the minister 
in Sweden and is presumably of the same date, for Budberg in 
a previous letter mentions these as though they were sent 
simultaneously; the third, which we can gather was sent later, 
was to Lord Granville Leveson-Gower, who in his own despatches 
gives the date as the 30th of June. The despatches for London 
and Vienna are a summary of the grievances of Russia, and 
excuse the defection of the Czar by blaming the apathy of other 
powers. But the one that is to inform the Swedes of the change 
of policy stands apart from these. It speaks of “‘the nobility, 
the loyalty, and the energy displayed by the King of Sweden”’, 
and adds that “whatever turn events may take, His Swedish 
Majesty may always count upon the sentiments of friendship 
and attachment which our August Sovereign has always enter- 
tained”. This, written on the 28th or 29th of June, was 
communicated as late as the 3rd of July to the acting foreign 
minister in St Petersburg, as a statement of the policy of the 
Czar.2. But the 5th article of the treaty of alliance concluded 
between France and Russia on the 7th of July, stipulates that 
if England refuses to make peace with Napoleon, under the 
mediation of the Czar, and if Sweden refuses to answer this by 
closing her ports against English shipping, recalling her am- 
bassador from London and declaring war against Great Britain, 
then Sweden shall be ‘“‘ treated as an enemy” and even Denmark 
shall be compelled to declare against her. Now it would have 
been easy for the Czar in the first place, if he had ever dreamed 
of this contingency, to fore-arm himself against the criticism 
that he was turning against an ally, whom he had so recently 
called ‘“‘noble, loyal and energetic”, and to whom he had so 
recently given renewed promises of undiminished attachment. The 
discrepancy between the Czar’s intention and the actual commit- 

1 Sbornik, Lxxxtx, 41-5. 2 Ibid. LXxxIx, 40. 
3 Ibid. LxxxIx, 61-2. 

262 TILSIT BK III. 