

You will explain to the Emperor Napoleon how deeply I appreciate 
all that he has said to me through you, and how much I wish to see 
a close union between our two nations make up for the past evils. 
You will tell him that this union between France and Russia has 
constantly been the object of my desires, and that I hold the conviction 
that it alone can secure happiness and peace for the world. An entirely 
new system must replace that which has existed up to the present and 
I flatter myself that we shall easily arrive at an understanding with 
the Emperor Napoleon, provided that we treat without intermediaries. 
A lasting peace may be concluded between us in a few days.® 

Alexander does not face the necessity of having to put down his 
plans in black and white; does not even entrust this delicate 
transaction to a minister who may bungle or misunderstand. 
Like Hardenberg in his instructions to Kalekreuth he merely 
hints that he has a plan in his pocket and that it will be easy to 
settle everything with France; and he sees the solution of his 
whole problem in treating with Napoleon “without inter- 

1 Sbornik, LXXXIx, 88. 2 Ibid. 
3 Tatistcheff, Alexandre I°” et Napoléon, pp. 148-9. 

> 

CH, Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 255 

mediaries”. When he says that “an entirely new system must 
replace that which has existed up to the present”’, and that “‘we 
shall easily arrive at an understanding with the Emperor 
Napoleon”, and that “‘a lasting peace may be concluded in a 
few days’’, he is not merely voicing the same thrill of expectation, 
he is using the same kind of language that appears in the Prussian 
documents, he is repeating what might be called Hardenberg’s 
“stock phrases’’, he is making the identical kind of insinuation 
and euphemism with which Hardenberg cloaked his scheme, and 
he is trying to give the same impression that all will be simple 
and there will be no controversy, because he has a plan up his 
sleeve and it is one which Napoleon cannot but accept. It is 
certain that Alexander for some time continued to give the 
Prussians the assurance that he was hoping to promote their 
plan of pacification; it is difficult, in the face of all the facts that 
can be recovered, to believe that he was deceiving them in this. 
At the back ef his mind—with what vagueness it would be 
hazardous to say—he held the idea of joining Prussia in an 
alliance with Napoleon, and sharing with her its benefits, and 
sealing the happy transaction with a partition of the Ottoman 
Porte. 

The matter which requires elucidation in the mysterious 
transactions of Tilsit, is not Alexander’s determination to with- 
draw his connection with the coalition; for Constantine, in the 
early days of the negotiations, had already induced this decision. 
Neither is it the Czar’s acceptance of alliance with France even 
to the point of joining in the campaign against the maritime 
pretensions of England. Hardenberg had secured this change of 
system before the Czar saw Napoleon at all. There are no signs 
that during the interviews at Tilsit Alexander was troubled in 
mind or tormented in conscience or at all involved in a struggle 
with himself on any of these matters. The thing which asks for 
explanation and gives evidence of having tried his soul was a 
much more subtle transition in his attitude towards Prussia. 
He who on the eve of Tilsit had declared that he would have 
nothing to do with Napoleon’s offer of territory and an extended 
frontier on the Vistula, unless compensation should be found for 