

ment at Tilsit, the contradiction between the impulsive generosity 
of the former and the sinister cold cruelty of the latter, show the 
kind of duality that was in the soul of Alexander. Also they seem 
to confirm the idea that Alexander, after some days at Tilsit, 
allowed himself to be drawn farther than he originally intended. 
They corroborate the thesis of this essay: that at the very end of 
June, or even later still, the Czar reached a new stage in his 
discussions with Napoleon—reached it perhaps by an uncon- 
scious transition—and came to allow his new alliance to cut him 
away from Prussia and Sweden to an extent which he had not 
previously envisaged. He learned to accustom himself to a line 
of thought which would have shocked him a little earlier. This 
means that for a few days he kept his ground even at Tilsit; 
either holding out against the enticements of Napoleon, or 
refusing to face the full implications of what he was doing; 
unless, during this time, Napoleon himself was waiting, holding 
his hand until the propitious moment should come and only 
disclosing his intentions as the Czar fell more completely before 
the novel delights of Tilsit. 

Alexander after Friedland did not leap to the great system of 
Tilsit, by one sudden flash of thought, but as he came to feel at 
home in one sort of thinking that would have revolted and 
shocked him before, he allowed the idea of reconciliation with 
Napoleon to pierce a little deeper into his mind and he pushed 
his reasoning to a further stage. Napoleon had set out to win 
him and had spared no effort to be charming. At every stage of 
the negotiations he had played generous victor to the Russians 
and had smiled beckoningly. One thing only was needed to 
complete the spell, and this was an actual interview. First, a 
desire to soften the victor’s heart and facilitate an honourable 
peace, would make Alexander desire the meeting; perhaps also 
an eager curiosity to see this wonder of the world; perhaps, later, 
an intention of creating an impression upon Napoleon and 
securing a personal triumph. Long before the actual interview 
the Czar had been moving towards Tilsit in order to be at hand. 
The two Emperors met amid pomp and parade, and for some 
days they had lengthy conversations. This was the forbidden 

CH. Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 263 

step that brought Alexander into the magic circle, for he was 
putting himself into the hands of a man who was conqueror 
above all in the personal interview, and who had a certain 
magnetism in himself that captivated the most hostile. If 
Napoleon set out to be charming Alexander was not the one to 
resist. He, the most impressionable of men, the most amenable 
to all immediate influences, simply asked to be won, to be 
charmed. Napoleon would play on his romanticisms, would 
please him with his generous gestures, and would exhaust the 
whole realm of plausibilities and illusions to capture the loyalty 
of this loyal soul. It is plain to see who was the dominant 
partner in the interviews. It is clear that Alexander did not meet 
Napoleon as an equal, as a prospective ally with whom he was 
transacting business—did not know how to be peremptory or 
rattle his sword or thunder out an ultimatum. His gullibility 
while in the actual presence of his old enemy, can scarcely be 
doubted. On the 8rd of July Frederick William writes: 