

Sweeping many things out of sight for the time being, one 
may concentrate upon the significance of the Russian alliance 
in respect to Napoleon’s peace policy. It is a question that 
narrows down still further, to the single problem of peace with 
England, since the conclusion of the Polish campaign brought 
the collapse of the continental resistance. To trace out one set 
of implications in a complex Napoleonic decision, to disentangle 
one element and examine it in isolation, is an artificial way of 

? 
» 

CH. Iv. NAPOLEON AND TILSIT 275 

splitting up the facts of history: and though it may be a necessary 
step to a fuller and more final reintegration of the past, it is only 
valid if we accompany it with a mental reservation. By our very 
act of concentrating upon it the question of peace with England 
will assume a factitious importance. We shall be compelled to 
check ourselves from saying that it is the key to the mystery of 
Tilsit. We shall be in danger of making the whole history of this 
time swing around the one principle that we have taken as the 
central object of attention. 

In the revolutions that occur in characters, in policies, in 
institutions and in thought, some threads can always be tracked 
down to vindicate the continuity of history and the persistence 
of vital principles; and if Napoleon in the summer of 1807 broke 
off one line of policy completely, he succeeded at the same time 
not merely in maintaining the continuity of a line of thought, 
and persistence in one process of action, but in carrying what had 
hitherto taken place to a climax, and in raising it to a higher 
power. Tilsit, which is in some way a shifting of centre in 
Napoleonic policy, and which in regard to some questions seems 
to come as a bomb from the sky, is at the same time in one matter 
merely the next step of an argument, the rational working-out 
of a principle already in operation, the logical conclusion of 
what has gone before. It is a further development of what, in 
the fullest meaning of the words, may be called the Continental 
System. 

Having assured himself of the mastery of the continent by 
his alliance with the Czar Alexander, Napoleon proceeded to 
turn his system of Tilsit into a stupendous instrument for war. 
He set the angle to which all the governments of Europe had to 
swerve in their contacts with Great Britain, and he made them 
give due leverage to his policy towards that power. He would 
punish the continent for England’s refusal to come to terms 
with him, and keep his army sprawled across Europe until there 
should be a settlement. No peace in St Petersburg or Vienna, 
no rest from Hamburg to Naples so long as the war continued. 
This was an ideal state of affairs to induce the governments to 
desire a maritime peace. The system of Tilsit left room for no 

18-2 

276 TILSIT BK Ill. 

more neutrality; all the powers were to combine in a grand 
boycott of Great Britain; “drive the English diplomatic esta- 
blishments out of Europe”, was to be the imperial command. 
But these things soon wriggled themselves into more arguments 
for peace. You might compel the powers to shut out British 
merchandise from their coasts; but compulsion was answered 
only by unwilling ineffective compliance. You might order the 
governments that called themselves neutral to break with the 
government of England; but the command merely produced 
declarations of war that were little more than a kind of legal 
fiction. The powers feared the retaliation of Great Britain. Some 
of them hoped to see their strength restored by England’s 
influence in negotiation. They were unwilling to show even the 
semblance of hostility towards the cabinet of London. There 
was only one course left open to them. It was not any super- 
added compulsion, it was the mere implications of the system 
of Tilsit, that urged the European states to work for the conclu- 
sion of peace; and, moved by an inner impulsion, they were often 
more earnest, more pressing, and more resourceful, than if they 
had started into action at a mere word of command. 