

Article 7 of the same treaty stated that if England made peace 
on the above terms, Hanover should be restored to the king in 
return for French, Spanish and Dutch colonies. The rest of the 
document provided for the extension of the continental system, 
and the ranging of all Europe on the side of France, in the event 
of the Russian mediation proving unsuccessful. Napoleon 
explained to the Czar that, if the war should have to continue, 
the date the Ist of December would fall conveniently for Russia.? 
This was the beginning of winter and would give an interval of 
five months before action could be taken, while in the meantime 
the British government might reconsider its decision. A little 
later Napoleon sketched out a note which would serve for the 
official announcement of the treaties of Tilsit and of the proposed 

1 Corresp. de Nap. 1°", t. xv, No. 12865. 

284. ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

mediation.! A note substantially the same was presented to the 
English foreign secretary on the 1st of August by Maximilian 
Alopeus, Russian minister in London.? 

Russia in these early years of the nineteenth century was 
unfortunate in the way her affairs were handled by her ministers 
abroad. Perhaps her fate was that of a nationality not yet 
realised; the same drawbacks are to be discovered in American 
diplomacy for a long period. In Russia there seems to have been 
difficulty in finding sufficient talent at home to work the 
machinery of state; from the time of Peter I, offices high 
and low had very often fallen to foreigners. So under Alexander 
we find Czartoryski, a Pole, and Pozzo di Borgo, a Corsican; 
the physician who attended the Emperor and was present at 
Tilsit was a British subject; and if Budberg belonged to the 
Empire he was a Teuton from the Baltic provinces. At the same 
time there was something lacking inthe way foreign affairs were 
managed from the centre. Men who are sent for service to 
capitals abroad must tend to form attachments in the place 
where they have their stay, and err by excess of sympathy for 
the point of view of the country in which they reside. But with 
Russian ministers at this period the tendency was more distinct 
than is even usual.* These envoys, like the Americans in the 
nineteenth century, seemed to surrender to the glamour of the 
courts and capitals of western Europe, compared with which 
their own St Petersburg was perhaps a little uncouth. Razoum- 
ovski became one of the Viennese, and, even when superseded 
at his official post; did not care to return to Russia. Similarly 
Vorontsov made his home in England. Having imperfect 
contacts with a distant and defective centre these ministers 

1 Corresp. de Nap. I", t. xv, No. 12884. 

2 Alopeus to Canning, 1 Aug. 1807, in Parliamentary Debates, x, cols. 
113-14 (No. 4). 

3 De Maistre in his Mémoires et Correspondance, p. 201, describes the 
suspiciousness of the Russian court in regard to foreign ministers resident 
in St Petersburg (‘‘Elle décachette toutes nos lettres’), but he proceeds: 
“Et cette méme cour souffre que ses ministres vieillissent prés des cours 
étrangéres, qu’ils y deviennent propriétaires, s’y marient, et que leurs 
dettes (ceci est curieux) y soient complétement payés par le souverain du 
lieu, enfin qu’ils y soient naturalisés par le fait”’. 