

BOOK FOUR 

ENGLAND AND THE SYSTEM OF TILSIT 

CHAPTER I 

PRUSSIAN ATTEMPTS TO INDUCE 
ENGLAND TO MAKE PEACE 

Tue king of Prussia had lost more than he had actually signed 
away in the clauses of his treaty of Tilsit; for the terms to which 
he had submitted were not a peace and a forgetting. There was 
nothing to prevent Napoleon from still further exploiting his 
downfall; there was nothing to make it certain that Napoleon 
would keep the stipulations of the treaty which he had himself 
dictated. If the Czar still stood as the advocate of his unfor- 
tunate friend, he had changed his ground in that he had ceased 
to make the welfare of Prussia the first charge upon his efforts; 
and at best he was in a position to do little more than come 
forward with an appealing gesture. He could not prevent the 
continued military occupation of Prussian territory. He could 
not induce Napoleon to treat Prussia as a power with which 
he had made peace. Frederick William could not hope to see 
Berlin until he had paid impossible indemnities. It seemed that 
the Prussians were not to breathe freely again until all Europe 
should be at peace, and the last pretext for Napoleon’s vindictive- 
ness be altogether removed. 

When a new English minister took up his residence at the 
Prussian court, Count Goltz, the successor of Hardenberg, gave 
expression to the belief that it would be “a leading object in 
a negotiation for peace that Great Britain should provide for 
the strengthening of the Prussian monarchy”’.! At a time when 
the French were draining money from the country, making 
every possible exaction, the Prussians flattered themselves with 
the hope that England would come forward with a loan to relieve 
the difficulties of the monarchy; though such a loan would merely 
have placed more money in the pockets of the French.? The 
Russian minister at Memel declared that 

the Queen and her Court and all who wish to please her, have gone to 
the point of the ridiculous in their Anglomania. To listen to them, 

1 G. Garlike to G. Canning, No. 15, 15 Sept. 1807, F'.O. Prussia 64/76. 
2 G. Garlike to G. Canning, No. 2, 26 Aug. 1807 and No. 5, 27 Aug. 1807, 
F.O. Prussia 64/76. 

280 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

there is no doubt that England, when she makes peace with France, 
will have the interests of Prussia in view above everything else.* 

Setting their hopes in this way upon England and upon a 
revision of the settlement of Tilsit, the Prussians might have 
been tempted to applaud the persistence of England in carrying 
on the war. They had reason to rejoice in the successes that 
British enterprises might obtain; they were able still to pray 
that Napoleon might come to his undoing. So we find that with 
some lack of tact they betray their joy in the expedition to 
Copenhagen, in Canning’s summary treatment of Denmark. At 
the risk of intensifying the anger of the French they show great 
favour and welcome to Englishmen in their country.? They 
cause displeasure even in Russia by allowing a British minister 
to continue at their court. The only excuse they can offer is 
that the man has not delivered his credentials and so is no more 
than a private citizen.? The Prussians, who for so long have 
been on no happy terms with Great Britain, are of a sudden 
all friendliness and creep hazardously close. They are eager to 
stand well with the one remaining government that has the 
power to extort from Napoleon a revision of the treaties of Tilsit. 
It is inevitable that they will not desire to alienate the English 
ministers and at the same time incur new dangers and obligations 
for themselves by declaring war against the power to which they 
trust for their own restoring. They have not forgotten the in- 
convenience they suffered from the blockade of a year ago; they 
have no desire to invite the retaliation of England to the closing 
of their ports. So if they are compelled to join Napoleon in the 
great war of land against sea, they will delay the moment as 
long as possible, and in the meantime they will give every indica- 
tion of friendship to Great Britain so that their complicity with 
France will be seen to be purely involuntary. They dread the 