

So the mere outlines of events at Tilsit, considered as a 
diplomatic transaction, are nothing as compared with the rich- 
ness of the moments as spiritual experience to Alexander. There 
was something in the man that is not commensurable with the 
map that we can make of the outward acts and happenings of 
his life. The whole of him did not externalise itself in actual 
deeds, in concrete facts and forms; much was wasted in spiritual 
anxieties and secret introspection and terrible searchings of soul 
—much was lost by a desolating process that was a sort of 
internal combustion. The truth is that he lived in an imperfect 
relationship with the world of actuality, and never quite found 
that world adequate to his inner mind. And, as his inner 
experience far outran his concrete life, overflowing the mould 
in which it could find overt forms for itself, there is more in his 
history than can actually register itself in tangible measurable 
facts. History must take account of this, and look upon events 
with an inward eye, ifitis to keep pace with the movement of things 
at Tilsit; the narrative must break into an essay. The effort to 
understand the Czar is more like the effort to understand a 
literary mind; the days count for little, and happenings are not 
the important matter, and it is essential to value events in their 
relation to an inner experience. A trivial incident may snarl into 
terrible importance and leap at us like a gargoyle because of its 
mysterious interrelation with an individual’s state of mind. We 
find ourselves in a world where causes seem hopelessly inadequate 
to effects. Time itself will seem violated in the way the mind of 
the man becomes reorganised to make something like a change 
of personality, all the process telescoped into one day that shows 
no sign of outward events adequate to the change. With 
Alexander, more even than with most personalities, it is necessary 

- 

CH. Ill. RUSSIA AND TILSIT 267 

not to infer the man from the deed, from the outward form, but 
to bring his whole lifetime to the elucidation of any particular 
moment, and to use the psychology of the individual as we know 
him, for the illumination of any specific act. Above all things it 
is-necessary to bring the story out of the plane of mere incident 
and event. 

That Alexander intended to make personal profit out of the 
transactions with Napoleon is a fact beyond all doubt; for 
Alexander, even when he flew away with the most far-fetched 
visionary schemes could hold one eye narrowly fixed upon the 
most definite mundane self-interests. This characteristic was like 
a black streak across his soul. When in the year 1804 he put 
forward schemes that have no comparison save with those of 
President Wilson, urging the formation of a league of nations, 
pressing the governments to join him in a crusade to end war; 
and even enunciating a principle of national “‘self-determination’’, 
he had a dark under-current of ambition and was planning to 
secure a partition of Turkey which should give Russia Moldavia, 
the Dardanelles, Constantinople, Corfu and the important 
stronghold of Cattaro on the Adriatic Sea. And if at Tilsit he 
overlooked the necessity of securing definite guarantees from 
Napoleon, still the very thing which intoxicated his mind was 
the grand prospect, the large perspective of a scheme to give 
him dominion in Turkey; and when he returned to St Petersburg 
we soon find that the more earthly, the more calculating side of 
his mind, has gained the fuller possession; he urges Napoleon 
to hasten the partition of the Porte, and shows himself energetic 
and resourceful and importunate; he is clever enough to declare 
that the Russians are more “‘realist”’ than he himself, that they 
will not be reconciled to the new alliance unless they see concrete 
advantages. Even though the French secured the tactical gain 
in the treaties, the emergence of this side of the Czar’s character 
proved that even Napoleon perhaps had illusions at Tilsit; and 
in this matter, history itself is liable to be cheated. It was not 
without reason that after 1815 the very allies of Russia began 
to fear this Alexander, as formerly they had feared Napoleon— 
suspecting that his dreams and mysticisms and apocalyptic air 