

' Tolstoy to Romantsov, 26 Oct./7 Nov. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 178. 

ba 

CH. IV. NAPOLEON AND TILSIT 273 

concluded, showed himself the more embarrassed in diplomacy 
by the documents he had signed was not Napoleon but Alexander. 
The alliance must be regarded as essentially a master-move of 
Napoleon himself. 

If Napoleon had long advertised the fact that he must find 
an ally somewhere in Europe, he had given it to be understood 
that only in the last resort would the ally be Russia. Experi- 
menting with various moves and combinations, he had not 
seriously entertained the idea of making a connection with the 
Czar. He had even dismissed the notion as fanciful, and if he 
talked of it at all, it was merely to raise apprehension in Prussia 
and Austria. His attempts to secure a separate peace with the 
Prussians had been measures of undisguised hostility against 
Russia. At Tilsit, when both Alexander and Frederick William 
were in his presence, he insisted that he had never dreamed of 
fighting Prussia but that he had promised himself to have the 
government of Berlin at his side in a war against the Czar.! If 
he tried to win over the Austrians or to entice a Sultan or to 
patronise a Shah of Persia, this was always part of a large scheme 
to make Russia the grand enemy. And for a long time he had 
laid great importance in all negotiations, whether with friend or 
with foe, upon the securing of a guarantee against the designs 
which Russia might have in respect to the Ottoman Porte. 

At Tilsit, whatever the points at issue had been, Napoleon 
abandoned his quarrel with Russia, or at least thrust it for the 
moment into the background. He shelved the designs or post- 
poned the jealousies that he had had on the whole subject of the 
Ottoman Porte. Perhaps some dream of dominion in the west, 
and enterprises in Spain, had come uppermost in his mind. 
Perhaps everything else had become subordinate to his desire 
to see the isolation of England. We may even picture the diplo- 
macy of Napoleon as moving with a certain rhythm, Russia and 
England standing as two arch-enemies whom he could never 
quite reach and overthrow in the way in which he dismissed 
Prussia and Austria; so that alternately one or the other had to 

1 Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 26 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 41. 

BN 18 

QTA TILSIT BK II. 

become the prime object of his hostility, only to leave him 
frustrate. On this interpretation the problem of England might 
be said to have come into the forefront of Napoleon’s mind in 
June 1807, driving him to make terms with the Czar. It was to 
be Russia’s turn again in 1812. But perhaps it is most true to 
say that one straightforward purpose is not sufficient to account 
for any of his great strokes of policy. In his mind everything 
was astonishingly interwoven. A number of expedients dove- 
tailed into one another, a number of plans worked into one great 
design, a mosaic of problems solved by one sweep of thought— 
that is how one is compelled to envisage a Napoleonic master- 
move. Weare guilty of a kind of Hegelian fallacy, we are imputing 
to Napoleon too much of the mind of a philosopher intent on 
unifying his thought, we are forgetting how much he made his 
decisions with the mind of a strategist, if we assume that his 
policy had one central running purpose, to which all his actions 
can ultimately find reference. He had no fixed star in his sky, 
no definite plan for the day after to-morrow to be an obsession 
to his mind, and if he had a vision of the future he purposely 
kept it vague and fluid and essentially contingent. At a crisis 
like that of Tilsit such an opportunist does not merely reorganise 
his policy in the light of one all-consuming purpose; he changes 
his actual purposes and we must make a new map of his mind. 
Napoleon merely saw in an alliance with Russia a solution to 
more of his immediate problems and an opening to larger schemes 
of aggrandisement than he could discover in any alternative 
method of dealing with the Czar at that moment. In the most 
literal meaning of the words he changed one bag of tricks for 
another, with his eye upon the contingencies of the passing day. 