

268 TILSIT BK III. 

were but the cloak for unscrupulous self-seeking. It was wrong 
to think for a moment that he was a black deceiver, a clever 
hypocrite; the higher side of his nature did not cloak or merely 
disguise the lower; each existed concurrently and in each he was 
simultaneously sincere; and the elusiveness of the man, both to 
contemporaries and to later historians, lay in the fact that he 
could change without conscious transition or evil intent from the 
most quixotic of idealists to the most bold and determined of 
self-seekers. The dreamer had a queer under-side to himself; 
just as his signature would vary from one day to another, his 
conduct, his moods, his total attitude to things would alter in 
such a way that it is misleading to look for a unifying principle 
in his life and it is an over-simplification to call him an imposter. 
Now we find him working for eighteen hours a day; now he will 
neglect even the most urgent business for months. At one time 
he is a liberal, planning to reverse the course of Russian history ; 
at another he is a dark reactionary, trembling for law and order. 
Here we find him leading a crusade against Napoleon; there he 
is adoring the man, rejoicing to call him friend. At Bartenstein 
he will forget all else in his réle of deliverer of Europe; at Vienna 
he will be willing to wreck a congress for the sake of his ambitions 
in Poland. In all these things he is equally sincere, equally 
himself, over and over again he will be heartily repentant of his 
former self; very often the two natures of the man will be con- 
founded, and it will be on the wing of some concrete self-seeking 
that we shall find him rising to vague visions which cloud his 
perception of his interests. He is unbalanced, unstable, im- 
pressionable, like a person who has never grown up. He is a 
Russian to delight the heart of Dostoevsky—‘ the man of acute 
sensibility, the man who hails not from Nature’s womb but from 
a chemical retort ”’—with a strong element of German mysticism, 
but still with the background of Russia behind that, and some- 
thing in him of the contradictions of “‘a chaotic, split, irrational 
tragic race”’. 

CHAPTER IV 
NAPOLEON AND THE SYSTEM OF TILSIT 

TaLLeyran D, writing to congratulate the victor of Friedland, 
ventured to season his compliments with a warning: 

“But it is not that I picture this victory’’, he said, ‘“‘merely as a 
matter for glory. I like to consider it as a forerunner, a pledge of 
peace....I like to think of it as the last which Your Majesty will be 
obliged to win; that is why I value it so much; for, fine as it is, I must 
confess that it would lose more in my estimation than I can say, if 
Your Majesty had to go forward to new battles, and expose yourself 
to fresh perils.’’+ 

Talleyrand had no desire to see the success pursued across the 
Niemen; and his was no outcast voice, wilfully perversely pro- 
testing. The war had out-spent the impulse; victory had come, 
but it had come late in the day; behind the broken armies of the 
Czar unrolled the unenticing north, and no one knew what 
Russia could fall back upon, in hidden reserve of power. A home- 
sickness came over the troops; “‘from Napoleon, or at least from 
the marshals, to the drummer-boys, all the army without 
exception clamoured to return to France”; according to 
Mackenzie, a British agent at the allied headquarters, there was 
a report that when a Russian negotiator reached the French lines 
he was saluted with loud cries of “vive la paix”; and it was 
observed by a French officer who accompanied Duroc on a 
mission to the Russian generals, “‘that all hands must now be 
tired by the length and obstinacy of the campaign. If the rival 
Emperors wished for another, let them fight together”’.? 