

It may be true that Napoleon himself was not given to such 
nostalgia. Perhaps he was not the man to loiter dreaming of the 
return of peace that summer-time in Europe. Yet we may take 

1 P, Bertrand, Lettres inédites de Talleyrand a Napoléon I°’, No. cccx1x. 
2 Letter of Mackenzie enclosed in G. Leveson-Gower’s “separate” 
despatch to Canning, 26 June 1807, in J. H. Rose, Napoleonic Studies, 

p. 157. 

270 TILSIT BK III. 

it that he would wish a truce to the kind of warfare he had lately 
been pursuing, that even with victory at the end of it he had 
found the campaign bleak and wasteful, and that he had fought 
his Friedland with an air of finality. When we have made all 
allowance for words of politeness and flattery that were part of 
the vocabulary, the ritual of Tilsit, we may say that he had a 
genuine respect for his Russian enemy; his self-assurance had not 
risen to the point of bigotry that it reached in 1812. He was not 
confident of the Austrians, could not hope to hold them neutral 
for ever, could not dare, perhaps, to offer them temptation in 
his rear. Even if we admit that a thought may come into a mind 
like a new star out of the emptiness, we may say that these 
elements of the political situation conditioned if they did not 
determine, at this point, Napoleon’s desire for peace; they were 
the constituent factors of the problem which evoked the new 
decision. He could not hope to dictate terms as though his armies 
were at St Petersburg. He had not, this time, struck the crowning 
blow which could enable him to dispose the situation at will, 
like an ordaining god. He had merely beaten an army in the 
field and so had produced rather the position that existed after 
Austerlitz—had creased and crumpled the wings of the Czar’s 
crusading passion, had disorganised and discredited one more 
coalition that had threatened him, and by this had won a 
certain field in which he had no further need to fear that Russia 
would intervene to thwart his imperial designs. 

Yet it may be presumed that there was to be no question of 
another Oubril. The old dilemma might arise—Napoleon to 
forgo some of his pretensions in Europe, or to drive his armies 
further into Russia. Napoleon had no intention of beating 
against these alternatives any more. No one could equal him 
in making virtue of necessity. No mind could be so flexible in 
the face of new contingencies. He would recast his map of 
Europe, reshuffle his policies, and achieve a new synthesis to 
sweep the whole range of his problems. The power he could not 
conquer he would turn into an ally. The government which had 
jealously worked to guard Europe against his ambitions, he 
would win over as accomplice. In 1806 he had suggested to the 

>? 
a 

CH. Iv. NAPOLEON AND TILSIT 271 

British cabinet something like a division of empire; England to 
hold the seas, but to leave France her supremacy on the continent. 
The system of 1807 has a different line of demarkation: Russia 
shall have the east, empire of mosque and minaret; France shall 
be left to work her will in western Europe. This is the idea of 
Tilsit, and this is the way we are compelled to rationalise it for 
ourselves, and to relate it to the purposes of Napoleon; though 
it is impossible to find out how the new inspiration, the lightning 
fusion of ideas and motives, the crowning imaginative resolve, 
flashes into the mind of a genius. Whoever was responsible for 
small elements of the settlement at Tilsit, the wide sweep of the 
are, the culminating, all-embracing thought, was Napoleon’s; 
and his was the directing mind. It was he who from the outset 
made every effort to be gracious to the Czar. It was he who so 
fixed the large lines of the peace treaties that they left him master 
of the continent. It was he who secured the present advantages, 
the immediate, palpable gains; pushing his chief concessions 
into the vagueness and remoteness of the future. 