

of ameliorating the lot of Prussia in general, and promoting his 
independence in particular”; but he did not hint that these 
problems would find an early or easy solution. “He greatly 
feared that serious negotiations for peace with France were far 
distant; he did not at this moment see a glimmer of hope.” Yet, 
if discussions should be opened and the Prussian king cared to 
dispatch a person of confidence to London, “under any guise 
whatever”’, the man would probably receive a welcome.* 

The Prussians imagined the settlement of Tilsit to be for them 
an interim one. They contemplated a future pacification in 
which their interests should not be overlooked; they hoped that 
they themselves should have a voice in its arrangement, and that 
their situation should come under revision. This hope made them 
eager to hasten the moment of final settlement. They, like other 
continental powers, hankered to see the British government 
bring its overseas conquests out of storage, and dangle them 
before Napoleon, and barter them for the welfare of Europe. 
Canning was willing to accept the principle and “take to heart 
the question of ameliorating the lot of Prussia”’; but Frederick 
William and his ministers would seem to have lost sight of an 
important element in the problem. Napoleon after Tilsit had 
greatly raised his pretensions; now, less than ever, would he 
be willing to admit English interference on the continent; the 
maritime peace, for him, was to be a private transaction between 
England and France; it was to adjust the legitimate interests 
of the two contracting powers; he would not allow it to roam 
over the whole field of continental relations; he had no intention 
of making it a revised edition of the treaties of Tilsit. 

1 Jacobi an den Kénig, 10 Feb. 1808, in Hassell, op. cit. 1, 360. It seems 
that the king’s speech at the opening of the English Parliament gave 
Napoleon reason to suspect the existence of some intimacy and secret 
understanding between Prussia and England, and the French minister of 
foreign affairs gave a hint to the Prussian minister in Paris that this had 

done harm to the Prussian cause. Report of Brockhausen, 22 Feb. 1808, 
in Hassell, op. cit. 1, 495. 

CHAPTER II 
THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 

By article 14 of the treaty of peace concluded at Tilsit, 
Napoleon accepted the mediation of the Czar for the establish- 
ment of peace between France and England, on the condition 
“that this mediation be also accepted by England within one 
month after the ratifications of the present treaty have been 
exchanged”’. 

Article 4 of the secret treaty of alliance at Tilsit ran: 

If England does not accept the mediation of Russia, or if, having 
accepted it, she has not by the Ist of November consented to conclude 
peace, recognising that the flags of all the powers are to enjoy equality 
and independence on the seas, and restoring the conquests secured 
from France and the allies of France since 1805, a note shall be com- 
municated to the Cabinet of St James by the Ambassador of [Russia] 
at some time during the said month of November. This Note. . .shall 
contain the positive and explicit declaration, that, on the refusal of 
England to conclude peace under the above-named conditions. . .the 
Ambassador of Russia will receive by December the first, the eventual 
order to ask for his passports on the said date, and to leave England 
immediately. 