

History must stand baffled when a personal conversation is 
to be recovered, and even in diplomatic transactions where the 
issues are more precise than in larger human affairs, a vagueness 
must always hang around the story when the event turns on 
direct verbal discussions. At such times we strain our eyes to 
find precision where a twilight dimness, which at once teases and 
enchants, gives us blurred contours, gives us colour but not line, 
gives us the vagueness of half-remembered things. Occasional 
scraps of the conversations at Tilsit come to us on a puff of wind; 
but lost from their larger context they may lure us on a false 
trail. So we can merely see Alexander moving mysteriously as 
the men around him saw him; we can merely have a Rembrandt 
picture with little gleams of light against a dark background. 
Perhaps there will always be people to argue that at Tilsit it was 
Napoleon who was the dupe, and Alexander the grand deceiver; 
and in discussing such a matter, it is a mistake to dogmatise too 
heavily. We know that before the Emperors met they had each 
independently decided to seek the alliance of the other; they had 
each by separate routes found the climax of their thinking in a 

272  TILSIT BK III. 

project of partition of the Ottoman Porte. If Napoleon at Tilsit 
imagined that he had secured a perpetual ally and accomplice 
in a Czar who would complacently forgo all his own interests 
in Poland and Turkey, then indeed Napoleon was the dupe at 
Tilsit. But from the vagueness and remoteness of his promises 
of Turkish partition; from the way in which, when he returned 
to Paris, he turned round and said. ‘“‘that he saw no advantage 
for France in the dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire, that 
he asked for nothing more than to guarantee its integrity” ;* 
from the absence of any sign on his part that he had the least 
intention of carrying out his promises; from the fact that it was 
the Czar who was the persistent futile beseecher in this matter, 
after the conclusion of the treaties—we can infer that Napoleon 
was luring the Czar with visions which he never for a moment 
intended to convert into actualities, that he was quite well aware 
of how some time he would be found out and would come into 
collision with Russian policy; we might safely say that he 
conceived of the arrangement as an interim one, destined to 
secure him the maritime peace which he desired and to enable 
him to consolidate his empire in the west, also perhaps to 
postpone the renewal of the more decisive conflict with Russia. 
If he dreamed that the alliance with the Czar would solve his 
western problems, once again he was mistaken; but the check 
which he received in Spain, and behind that the grim persistence 
of the British government, caused his failure here, rather than 
any half-heartedness of Russia. And when he drove his army 
to Moscow in 1812 with Prussians and Austrians at his side, he 
had found a more favourable political period for the pursuit of 
his further struggles with the Czar than the summer of 1807 
would have been, when the Prussians were ranged against him 
and the Austrians were prepared to growl sullenly in his rear, 
If there was a dupe, this must rather have been the Czar. It 
was he who thought that the partition of Turkey was “a 
favourite idea of Napoleon’s”. It was he who wrote joyfully 
to his sister: “What do you think?...I! passing my days with 
Bonaparte...”. The man who, after the treaties had been 