

288 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

for be assured that the dangers which threaten England at this moment 
infinitely exceed what we ever before apprehended.* 

It became a matter of the utmost importance to discover how 
far the Czar’s new connections and commitments implied or 
foreshadowed his complete estrangement from his former allies. 
The whole policy of Canning was directed to the solution of this 
problem. An idea was entertained that the Russians might be 
lured into a course of action which would announce a continued 
friendliness towards England, notwithstanding any engagements 
that might have been made at Tilsit. Canning looked to the 
Czar for some act that should be a “token”’. The secret articles 
of Tilsit might be communicated to the court of London. Perhaps 
negotiations could be resumed for the arrangement of a treaty 
of commerce. On the very eve of Friedland Budberg had shown 
himself willing to concede privileges to British traders,? and if 
the threads of the discussion could be picked up again, this 
indulgence might be of service, said the English minister, “in 
giving to the offer of Mediation a character of amicable inter- 
ference, and perhaps in deciding His Majesty as to the expediency 
of availing himself of such an offer”.? It was known that the 
Prussians were in dread of the retaliation that was to be expected 
from England in the event of the closing of their ports. They were 
imploring the British government to show leniency. Canning 
proved himself subtle in answering them, and put forward an 
idea that the Prussian minister could only call ‘“‘extraordinary’’. 
If Russia could be persuaded to “make a few insinuations to 
the English ministry concerning her desire to see Prussia spared ”’, 
then England “might be able to treat Prussia more leniently 
in the event of her closing her ports”.* It was an attempt to 

1 Private Correspondence of Lord G. Leveson-Gower, 11, 272. 

2 G. Leveson-Gower to G. Canning, No. 4, 19 June 1807, F.O. Russia 
65/69. ; 

* Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 29, 4 Aug. 1807 and No. 82, 12 Aug. 
1807, F'.O. Russia 65/70. 

4 Add. MSS. 32,273. Jacobi-Kloest to the Prussian king, 18 Aug. 1807. 
On the 21st of August Jacobi reported that the same proposal had been 
made by Canning to Alopeus. On the 24th of September the Prussian king 
gave an outline of the appeal he had made to the Czar as a consequence of 
the English offer. This last letter, only, is printed in Hassell, op. cit. 1, 350. 

> 
~ 

CH. Is THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 289 

test the attitude of Russia towards her two former allies. The 
Czar’s refusal to intercede for the Prussians would, said Canning, 
“only be additional proof of his total reversal of policy”’. 

But Canning would not accept a mediation that could not 
show itself friendly, would not allow Russia to intervene in the 
French war purely as the ally of Napoleon. On the 5th of August 
he gave his answer to the peace proposals of the Czar. He 
showed that England had not been reluctant to enter into 
negotiation with France. He referred to his acceptance of the 
recent Austrian mediation. He recalled the promise he had 
given to accede to the convention of Bartenstein. He mentioned 
the readiness he had shown, after the battle of Friedland, to 
join in any negotiation which the Czar should think expedient 
for the establishment of a general peace. These facts, he said, 
were proofs of the pacific intentions of his government. 