

? 
» 

CH. Il. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 285 

tended to fall all the more readily to the influences that were 
immediate; and this affected their transaction of business, until 
occasionally it seemed to amount to a transference of loyalty. 
We find in the twentieth century that President Wilson, sending 
a minister to London, will say: ‘“‘Now, be an American! Our 
men only last six months in England; then they become 
anglicised”’. In the same way we discover Alexander, with eyes 
newly opened at Tilsit, turning away from men who have served 
him for years, denouncing them for their apostasy and reproach- 
ing them with having neglected the interests of the Empire. 
This is how the imperial displeasure had come to fall upon 
Maximilian Alopeus. This man, who was almost sixty years of 
age when he was transferred to London in 1807, had served 
for many years as Russian minister at Berlin. There the 
French ambassador described him as “consummate in in- 
trigues’’. At the time of the second partition of Poland he was 
accused of acting in connivance with the Prussians, and there 
were grounds for controversy as to whether he had been in the 
pay of the ministers in Berlin, even concocting his despatches 
with their assistance.t_ An English minister once mentioned him 
as one of those foreign representatives who were “much more 
like agents of. [the Prussian] Court than like men of rank sent 
to attend to the interests of their own”’.? At the time of the third 
partition of Poland, Alopeus was again suspected of sacrificing 
the advantage of Russia to that of the government at Berlin. 
In the year 1800 he was relieved of his functions in the diplo- 
matic service at St Petersburg because Rostoptchin considered 
him “‘ Prussian in body and soul”’, And five years later, when he 
was once more resident minister in the Prussian capital, an envoy 
despatched on a special mission to that place was instructed to 
keep watch over him, and examine his actions and discover why 
the intimacy and obvious good relations which he enjoyed in 
Berlin had resulted in so little that was of any advantage to 

1 Lord, Second Partition of Poland (1915), p. 111 (note 3). Lord in this 
controversy takes the view that, although undoubtedly pro-Prussian, 
Alopeus was not actually in the pay of Prussia. 

2 Dropmore, 11, 498 (Lord Malmesbury to Lord Grenville. Private. 9 Jan. 
1794). 

286 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

Russia. The agent was ordered to send a special report to St 
Petersburg, so that the Czar might decide how much confidence 
he could place in his representative.! In those days the electric 
telegraph had not yet given governments quick control over 
their ministers. A man like Alopeus enjoyed a peculiar kind of 
autonomy at his foreign post. Perhaps it must be charged to 
the inadequacy of the Russian diplomatic service that, living 
in such an atmosphere of suspicion, Alopeus was employed until 
his sixtieth year. 

In 1807 he came to England with a reputation for industry 
and intrigue. He was known as a strong pro-Prussian and life- 
long friend of Hardenberg. The appointment was not popular. 
Englishmen distrusted everything that found breath in Berlin; 
there was an idea that Alopeus had been sent to London chiefly 
out of consideration for Prussia; he had come to exorcise that 
devil that was in Englishmen; it was even said that he had been 
appointed because the queen of Prussia implored it of the Czar. 
We soon hear that the Alopeus family have buried themselves 
in Richmond; they see little of society, and “do not get along 
very famously”. The minister himself “has no confidences 
for anybody except Jacobi’, the Prussian representative; he 
“conceals everything from other people and employs nobody 
but his confidential secretary Benckendorff, who was with him 
at Berlin”.? He ignores even Vorontsov, who might bring him 
into touch with English sentiment. Canning himself makes the 
assertion that he believes the man to be watched by an agent 
who secretly informs against him direct to St Petersburg.? This 
seems to be the reason for something unaccountably acrimonious 
in the representations of Alopeus to the British government. 