

After the peace of Tilsit the Russian government did not pay 
any serious attention to Alopeus in England. This minister, if 
he had had no other failings, was too much a man of the coalition. 
No attempt was made to inform him of the inner purposes of his 

1 F. de Martens, Recueil, v1, 358 (Instructions to Baron Winzingerode, 
16 Jan. 1805). 

2 Vorontsov Archives, xvi1, 156. 

; Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 17, 20 June 1807, F.O. Russia 
65/69. 

> 
~ 

CH. II. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 287 

court, or to put him into touch with the intimate sentiments of 
the Czar. A note was despatched to him announcing the con- 
clusion of the treaties and the offer of mediation, and he was 
merely instructed to present this to the British government. 
For the rest he was more in the dark than even Canning himself; 
was left at the mercy of garbled reports in English newspapers; 
and was at a loss when he had to decide how the Russian reversal 
of policy was to be construed and acted upon. 

The position was serious and disquieting for Englishmen, 
because Leveson-Gower, who had been sent to the Czar in 
Poland, was equally left in perplexity. The Russian chancellor 
merely evaded him while the negotiations were proceeding, and 
finally, in a letter of the 30th of June, informed him that there 
had been a change of policy. ‘“‘The conduct which has been 
pursued by your government of late”, wrote Budberg, ‘“‘is 
calculated completely to justify the determination which the 
Czar has just taken.” The air of mystery that hung around the 
proceedings at Tilsit, and the silence and secrecy of the Russians, 
filled Englishmen with apprehension.? Everything that happened 
seemed to reinforce the growing suspicions. In a private letter 
of the middle of July the English minister wrote from St 
Petersburg: 

Whilst in England Politicians are occupying themselves in squabbles 
in Parliament, and the People in following Sir F. Burdett’s Chair, 
the most deadly blows are aiming at the very existence of the country ; 

1 Alopeus informed Jacobi-Kloest, the Prussian minister in London, that 
he had not received a copy of the Treaty of Tilsit (Jacobi an den K6nig, 
8 Aug. 1807, in Hassell, Geschichte der Preussischen Politik 1807 bis 1815, 
1, 842). See also p. 348, 

2 Sbornik, LXxXxIx, 44. 

3 “Tord Hutchinson, le général Wilson essayaient d’employer leur crédit 
auprés de Strogonov, par l’intermédiaire du jeune Voronzov, sinon pour 
contre-carrer les projets politiques du moins pour savoir ce qui se passait 
au grand quartier.”” Leveson-Gower attempted at least to induce the 
Russians to refuse their assent to any peace that should not be general, 
and, having failed to see Alexander or to learn anything definite from 
Budberg, attempted to enlist the influence of Czartoryski; but this prince, 
though of the same opinion as Leveson-Gower, was helpless against the 
increasing ascendancy of the Grand Duke Constantine. M. Handelsman, 
‘‘La ‘Question Czartoryski’ a Tilsit (1807), Revwe des Etudes Napoléoniennes, 
Sept./Oct. 1923, pp. 142-5. 