

Concerning the response which the British government was to 
make to the advances of the Czar, Ross further explains: 

It is good policy, I think, to send Sir R. Wilson back; he is a 
military man, has served with the Russians, has been spoken to 
confidentially by the Emperor, and may do better than a better man. 
Nothing important is however to be left to his sole discretion. If 
Russia is sincere, it is worth while to keep her up to it by showing 
a disposition to cultivate and strengthen our former good under- 
standing; if she is not sincere or if she has only acted in this instance 
on the spur of the occasion, and even should she have relapsed into 
French politics before Sir R. Wilson returns, there will be no harm 
done; we shall be but where we were.® 

So Wilson was sent back to St Petersburg and was made the 
bearer of new instructions to Leveson-Gower. These demanded, 
as the condition of England’s acceptance of the Russian media- 
tion, first the frank communication of the articles of the treaty of 
Tilsit, secret as well as avowed; secondly the distinct explanation 
of the bases upon which the negotiation would be conducted; 
and thirdly the disclosure of the Czar’s general views of policy, 
and of any engagements into which he might have entered, 

1 Malmesbury, Diaries, 11, 48-9. 2 Ibid. 11, 50. 3 Ibid. 11, 51. 

296 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

together with a plain and decisive proof of his continued friend- 
ship towards England. As a test of the feelings of the Czar, 
Leveson-Gower was instructed to invite his mediation in the 
quarrel between the courts of London and. Copenhagen.? These 
stipulations represented the official policy of the British govern- 
ment, and were meant to measure the sincerity of the recent 
assurances of the Czar. A more pretentious reply to the com- 
munications from St Petersburg was confided to Wilson himself, 
to be transmitted direct to Alexander. 

There was a Russian minister in London—the mysterious 
Maxilian Alopeus. He had long been floundering in the in- 
comprehensible tangle of Tilsit, and had been himself waiting 
for the illumination that was to come from Russia. True to his 
former habits, the old pro-Russian had caught the atmosphere 
of his locality, was now notoriously pro-English, and was irre- 
deemably out of favour in Russia. Taking things at their face 
value he had determined to press the Russian mediation upon 
England, had wished to make it acceptable, had earnestly worked 
for peace. Now, though he had received no intimation from his 
own government, he opened his arms to the wildest madcap in 
Europe who came brimming with the confidences of the Czar. 
He joined Canning in rejoicing in the messages of Wilson and 
the new complexion of affairs; and it is interesting, in the light 
of subsequent events, to find him writing: “‘No unprejudiced 
person could help being struck by the justice of the views of His 
Majesty the Emperor, as they are expounded by Sir Robert 
Wilson’”’.? 