

The English troops in Denmark were already pledged to 
evacuate Zealand within a stated period; but when it was 
learned that the Czar was willing to connive at their further stay, 
it became important that the occupation should continue. 
Canning decided that the Prince Royal of Denmark should be 
induced to work in collusion with the British government, to 

a G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 34, 27 Sept. 1807, printed in 
Parliamentary Debates, x, col. 200 et seq. and No. 35, 28 Sept. 1807, ibid. 
col. 203 ef seq. 

* Alopeus to Lisakewitch, 18/25 Sept. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 207-8. 

> 

a 

CH. II. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 297 

accept the protracted stay of the English troops while all the 
time pretending to protest; and for the persuasion of the Prince 
Royal it was agreed that Lisakewitch, the Russian minister at 
Copenhagen, should inform him of the secret sentiments of the 
Czar, and secure his assent to the stratagem. There was no time 
for writing to St Petersburg to ask for imperial instructions to 
be sent direct to Lisakewitch, so Alopeus provided a more short 
and summary way. He himself wrote to Denmark to inform the 
Russian minister of the real aims and intentions of the Czar and 
to point out the appropriate line of action.1 On the authority 
of Englishmen he took it upon himself to declare the policy of 
his government and instruct a fellow-minister. The bearer of 
the communication was to be Sir Robert Wilson himself; who, 
having called at Copenhagen, was to make his way to the Russian 
capital. 

Before Wilson had arrived at St Petersburg, before he had 
even reached England on his outward journey, the Czar had 
revealed his true disposition. On the 10th of September, 
Leveson-Gower was informed that the secret articles of Tilsit 
-were not to be divulged, though it was asserted that they 
contained nothing of a hostile character which might make it 
necessary to conceal them from England.? A few days later the 
British minister was writing: 

The continuance of peace with this country I am inclined to 
attribute rather to the means which we possess of injuring and dis- 
tressing Russia, and the extreme unpopularity here which would 
attach to measures of hostility against England, than to any remaining 
sentiments of friendship on the part of His Imperial Majesty towards 
Great Britain. General Savary continues to be received by the 
Emperor with every mark of favour and distinction.? 

The expedition to Copenhagen provoked mutual reproaches and 
an exchange of angry notes between Leveson-Gower and the 

1 Sbornik, LXxxIx, 207 (see also, Copie d’une dépéche secréte de M. 
d’Alopéus en date de Londres, 13/25 Sept. 1807, ibid. 205). 

2 Sbornik, LXxxvitl, 177-9. 

3 G. Leveson-Gower to G. Canning, No. 23, 19 Sept. 1807, F.0. Russia 
65/70. 

298 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

Russian chancellor.1 Alexander had been deluding the English- 
men; it would seem that he had been playing with Budberg; 
Budberg at any rate conveniently disappeared from the scene, 
resigning on the ground of failing health, at the moment when 
the situation was becoming clear. 