

His Majesty trusts that the character of the Treaty of Tilsit and 
of the principles upon which France is represented as being ready to 
negotiate, may be found to be such as to afford to His Majesty a just 
hope of the attainment of a secure and honourable peace. 

In that case His Majesty will readily avail himself of the Emperor 
of Russia’s mediation. 

But until His Majesty shall have received these important and 
necessary communications it is obviously impossible that the under- 
signed should be authorised to return a more specific answer to the 
note presented by M. d’Alopeus.+ 

As August advances we discover a growing doubt in the mind 
of the Czar, something which looks like a misgiving. On the 
2nd of this month Leveson-Gower, in an official report from 
St Petersburg, declares: 

It is with pain I inform you that everything I have heard and 
observed since I came here strongly confirms the apprehension... 
that the Emperor Alexander has completely thrown himself into the 
hands of Bonaparte. ..but, whatever may be the ultimate intentions 
of this government, it appears that they are desirous of avoiding 
a quarrel with the Court of London, for the present, at least till the 
return of their fleet from the Mediterranean.? 

1 Canning to Alopeus, 5 Aug. 1807,in Parliamentary Debates,x,cols.114—15. 
2 G. Leveson-Gower to Canning, No. 2, 2 Aug. 1807, F.0. Russia 

65/69. 
BN 19 

290 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

We find Alexander defending his change of policy in a conversa- 
tion with the Swedish ambassador. He says that his armies were 
in a deplorable condition after Friedland and that Napoleon 
refused to conclude an armistice unless this should be followed 
by the negotiation of peace; that therefore there was no oppor- 
tunity for Russia to consult with her allies. He hopes that the 
king of Sweden will not persevere in the war against Napoleon, 
especially as public opinion in his country is unfavourable to 
this. The Swedish minister replies that the trading community 
will not tolerate any war with England; he goes on to say that 
this reasoning would apply equally to Russia where the language 
of the merchants in fact always constitutes public opinion. The 
Czar looks ‘‘extremely grave’’, and answers, ‘It may be so!” 
It appears that the Czar has some vague dread of the hostility 
of the court of London. The Swedish minister comes away with 
an impression that tallies with that of Leveson-Gower.+ Alexander 
might have felt secure in promising to declare war against 
England by December; it would have been war under the cover 
of winter; but now it is August and winter seems far away, and 
the tone of the British ministers is alarming. The Russian fleet 
has not yet returned from the Mediterranean. There is reason to 
be anxious concerning the fortifications at Cronstadt. And all 
the time the city of St Petersburg is voicing disapproval of the 
politics of Tilsit. 

And, if the Czar in the month of August was striving to make 
delay, the English government for its own part was not anxious 
to hasten a crisis. It was determined to give the Russians no 
pretext for any change of system. Although there was a cer- 
tainty that designs hostile to Great Britain were in contemplation, 
Leveson-Gower was ordered “to feign ignorance of what he only 
knew too well”.* An expedition was sent to Copenhagen to give 
a drastic check to the maritime policy that had been decided 
upon at Tilsit; but the ambassador at St Petersburg was ordered 