

opportunity of showing confidence to an old ally who may still be 
useful to us in the future. I am therefore of opinion that we ought 

1 G. Leveson-Gower to Canning, No. 19, 2 Sept. 1807, in Parliamentary 
Debates, x, cols. 197-8 (No. 2). 

294 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

not to refuse this request, but make the best that we can out of the 
confidential communication of the articles to England. As to the 
renewal of the Treaty of Commerce, I do not see any harm in granting 
this also. The great point which England makes of it would cause the 
mere willingness to follow up the negotiation, to have the best effect 
immediately... . Your Majesty could always drag out the discussions 
as long as you pleased, and time would bring developments which 
would regulate our subsequent conduct.* 

This was a change of tone, for Budberg had been a good. servant 
of the Tilsit cause during this recent period, and the French 
minister Savary had reported exactly a week before that ““M. de 
Budberg...has entirely come over to our system”’.? It was 
remarkable that Budberg should give his master advice of this 
character; this is no case of a document that is to be used as a 
form of propaganda or as a means of creating illusion; the idea 
of regarding England at all as “an old ally who may still be 
useful to us’, carries an ominous suggestion, and it is strange 
that it could be presented to Alexander at this moment. It is 
difficult to speak of Budberg as a good “‘ Tilsit’’ man in connection 
with all this, and it is not correct to imagine that in the change 
of tactics at the beginning of September the Czar was merely 
taking advantage of the radiant gullibility of Wilson. 

When Wilson arrived in London his messages were accepted 
only with mental reservations. Ross, the secretary of Canning, 
expressed the official attitude when he wrote concerning the 
changed conduct of Russia: 

We attribute a great deal of this mild spirit to our [Danish] 
expedition. . .it has created a great deal of apprehension at St Peters- 
burg. At Cronstadt they practise firing with red-hot shot every day. 
This change of tone may not perhaps be followed up by any permanent 
change of conduct; it may be merely for the purpose of gaining time 
and from the dread of some immediate hostility on our part; but at 
all events it will give us the winter to look about us and the chapter 
of accidents for some bickering to arise between the two Courts of 
the Tuileries and St Petersburg....The sum of all this seems to be 
either that His Imperial Majesty is already weary of his new ally 

1 Sbornik, LXxxvill, 155-6. 
* Savary to Talleyrand, 23 Aug. 1807, in Sbornik, txxxi, 34. 

" 

CH. Il. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 295 

and that the recollection of the Tilsit dinners is wearing away, or 
else (to use his own words on a former occasion) ‘il faut ménager 
lAngleterre pour le moment”’.4 

But, said Ross, 

we have only to cultivate this change of sentiment to derive from it 
in time, and that perhaps not very distant, the best possible effects. 
Budberg, I believe, had not strict justice done to him on the subject 
of the Treaty; he was on the spot, in office, and the Emperor made 
him the cat’s paw, to put his fingers in the fire. He was not much 
consulted, and disliked the peace. He insinuated to Sir R. Wilson 
that the secret articles might not be withheld from a person sent from 
here. I believe Sir R. Wilson will return in a few days. Russia is 
anxious, since the deed is done, that we should retain the possession 
of Zealand, not merely for the sake of the King of Sweden, but also 
as a security to her own frontier. She is quite aware that when we 
quit it the French will occupy it.? 