

1 G. Leveson-Gower to Canning, No. 16, Separate, Secret and Confiden- 
tial, 17 Aug. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/70. 

* Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 30 (Most Secret), 5 Aug. 1807, and 
Separate and Most Secret, 27 Sept. 1807, #'.O. Russia 65/70. 

¥ 
‘s 

CH. II. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 291 

to let no hint fall that the British government knew of the 
connivance of Russia in Napoleon’s maritime league. The 
minister was to announce that the Danish expedition was 
directed against Napoleon—not intended as a threat to the Czar. 
He received powers to call upon Admiral Gambier’s fleet for 
“an effective demonstration” against Cronstadt, in case the 
Russians took some step of a hostile character; but 

in the other, and it is hoped more probable alternative of the Russian 
Government being disposed to defer and if possible to elude stipula- 
tions hostile to this country...it is by no means the wish of His 
Majesty to press matters to any extremity on the mere fact of the 
existence of such stipulations, however clearly ascertained.” 

There was a possibility that the Russians would construe their 
treaty-engagements in the way that would be most generous 
towards England. It might even have been argued that their 
alliance with France was but a ruse and a temporary extrication. 
At the very least there was room for the hope that the passage 
of time would bring a reaction at St Petersburg. Leveson-Gower 
imagined that the “intemperance” of Bonaparte would soon 
afford disillusionment to the Czar.? And since Alexander’s sub- 
servience at Tilsit might be attributed to the personal ascendancy 
of Napoleon, Canning could not think that the infatuation would 
endure for a long period after the return to St Petersburg had 
broken the direct contact. Englishmen therefore still looked 
with confidence “‘for some token of the Emperor’s remaining 
friendship, some proof of the Equality at least with which His 
Imperial Majesty is prepared to consider the interests of both 
parties in the course of the negotiation”’.t They were soon 
rewarded by the receipt of a token more pleasing than they 
could have anticipated. 

Here struts upon the scene, irresistible but half-comic, a 
cheerful, bustling Britisher, who had caught madness from 

1 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 30, 5 Aug. 1807, F'.O. Russia 65/70. 
2 G. Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 33, 13 Aug. 1807, F.O. Russia 

65/70. 
3 G. Leveson-Gower to G. Canning, No. 22, 19 Sept. 1807, #.0. Russia 

65/70. 
4 Canning to G. Leveson-Gower, No. 32, 12 Aug. 1807, F'.0. Russia 65/70. 

19-2 

292 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

melodrama. One of the most popular and animated figures 
among the Englishmen in St Petersburg at this period was 
Sir Robert Wilson, a knight-errant born out of due time; a 
soldier and a rover, who relished a dangerous game. Man of 
many battles and charming friendships, he seems never to have 
grown out of the recklessness and erratic enthusiasms of a school- 
boy; and it would appear that he was honoured by every country 
but his own. Moving in that society of the Russian capital which 
was by no means reconciled with the Czar’s recent reversal of 
policy—moving under the jealous eye of the French minister who 
could not share his popularity—he received everywhere signs of 
regard and high esteem, and heard conversation that was friendly 
towards England. The Czar had always covered him with kind- 
ness, and, even after Tilsit, showed him unbroken affection. 
“During the whole of the dinner”, wrote Wilson, when he had 
seen Alexander in the middle of August, “‘we talked in as lively 
and unceremonious a manner as at Bartenstein.” And these 
experiences in St Petersburg prepared Wilson for the drama in 
which he was to be the central figure. 