

At the close of August and the beginning of September the 
news of the English attack upon Copenhagen and the proximity 
of the English fleet created real apprehensions in the mind of 
the Czar. From his conversations with the French minister it 
is apparent that he feared the very thing which Leveson-Gower 
had been empowered to evoke—an English demonstration 
against his shores. His one anxiety at the moment was to prepare 
the fortifications of Cronstadt, and he set to work with energy 
upon them. He made no change of tone towards Savary, but 
showed himself even reconciled to the thought that hostilities 
were being prepared against him; and he put himself into the 
arms of France. This, then, was the cause of his momentary 
change of conduct towards England; he seems to have been 
satisfied when he had had an interval for the work of fortifica- 
tion; his deception was a palpable “‘ruse de guerre”’. 

Wilson, when he reached St Petersburg on the 17th of October, 
found in official circles ‘“‘an unpleasant aspect of affairs”.? He 
communicated with the Czar,* but his letter was returned un- 
opened; so he was compelled to address himself to the new 
chancellor. Undespairing still, he could write at the end of 
October: 

I went to Count Romantsov, and had with him an important 
interview ; it lasted an hour and a half. I say important as the essential 
interests of the two great nations depended upon its issue....The 
attention of every person in the city has been attracted to my mission, 
and good or ill success will in some degree be attributed to my personal 
ability or incapacity. 

Talking to Romantsov, he began with an apology for the recent 
conduct of England; the government had been apprehensive; 
1 Sbornik, LXxx1x, 146-8. 

2 Wilson to Canning, 18 Oct. 1807, in Diaries, 11, 432. 
% Wilson to the Czar Alexander, 18 Oct. 1807, in Diaries, 11, 432. 
> 

» 

CH. Il. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 299 

it had long waited for a friendly sign from the Czar; it had feared 
that Russia would not or could not preserve her neutrality; yet 
all the time its policy of alliance with Russia had never been 
abandoned. What was desired now was that Russia should 
prove herself an independent nation. England did not seek to 
lure her back into the coalition, or to bring her into hostility 
with France; she would not break into the Franco-Russian 
connection. She did not ask for preferential treatment from the 
Czar, would not even insist on a commercial treaty, would not, 
said Wilson, require Russia to make any formal engagement at 
all. For her own part she was ready to continue the war and was 
prepared for a lengthy struggle with France, but she would fight 
alone or make alliances elsewhere. What she did ask of the Czar 
was that he should stand erect, and treat his former ally on the 
same terms as the new one. There was one way in which he could 
do this, and at the same time assert his independence. He could 
intervene in Denmark to ensure the neutrality of that power, 
and check the encroachments of Napoleon. He could enable the 
British troops that were in occupation there to remain for an 
extended period. In doing this, the Czar would be stepping no 
further than his interests demanded, for if the French were to 
occupy Zealand the actual safety of Russia would be menaced. 
In return for this “impartiality”? which was expected from 
the government at St Petersburg, England would be willing to 
make great sacrifices. She had always opposed any plan for the 
dismemberment of Turkey, and indeed she could not suggest 
such a scheme at the moment, 
but nevertheless if any arrangement could be made between Austria 
and Russia on the basis of occupying or exchanging Moldavia and 
Wallachia, which arrangement would secure the sincere alliance of 
both countries, England never would make that a cause of quarrel 
which proved the bond of a union she desired so much to establish. 