

On the 7th of September he made the following entry in his 
diary: 

On the 2nd instant I went by appointment to the Emperor who 
received me alone, and for nearly an hour talked on important 
political subjects: a conversation very interesting to England... . 
From him I went to General Budberg.. . . He conversed confidentially 
for an hour, and the conversation was also of a most important 
character. I then went to Gower; he was much pleased at what I was 

enabled to tell him, which rendered my personal appearance in England 
more interesting to ministers. 

In these conversations there was given to Wilson a glimpse of 
the inner purposes and unavowed intentions that underlay that 
new Russian policy, concerning which the Czar had always been 
so reticent. It was revealed that the Russian government had 
been seized with apprehensions and had feared the evils that 
would come to pass if Napoleon should gain a foothold in the 
north of Europe. For this reason it had made an alliance with 

1 Wilson, Diaries, 11, 365 (et seq.). 

~ 

CH. Il, THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 293 

France, though it did not contemplate a permanent connection. 
Wilson even gained the impression that the Czar was not dis- 
pleased by the expedition which had been sent against Denmark 
—that the Czar would actually welcome the continued. occupa- 
tion of Zealand by the English troops. 

Wilson’s was a happy, picturesque, vivid mind, which mag- 
nified simple suggestions and small half-betrayals of confidence 
into matters of mighty import, and high secrets of state; 
throughout this period he is found perpetually flattering himself 
that the business he has in hand for the moment is the key to the 
whole situation. If he receives the slightest hint, he puts all his 
imagination into the enlarging of it, and jumps to some grand 
conclusion, till he feels the wide world rock with the crisis that 
he has discovered. In a quixotic way he will scent an adventure, 
and ride off with a flourish. Soon after his important interviews 
in St Petersburg he was sailing proudly towards England. “My 
despatches admit of no delay”’, he said; ““England and Russia 
are deeply concerned in them.” The winds could not carry him 
too quickly. He was the bearer of the secret of Tilsit. 

But it was not merely that Wilson was informed in this un- 
conventional way of the altered disposition of the Czar. The 
ambassador in a more official interview was given a similar 
impression, though he did not report it in the same glowing 
colours. He, too, saw the “‘change in tone and temper of General 
Budberg’s conversation”, and was told that “the Continental 
Peace cannot be of long duration”’.1 Budberg, writing to his 
master, had even gone further in this new direction than the 
English ministry ever realised. He had advised his master to 
disclose the secret articles of the treaty of Tilsit to the cabinet 
of London. 

Since the secret articles have already been communicated to Prussia 
it is more than probable that England will get to know of them 
sooner or later, and we shall have gratuitously thrown away an 