

It required some weeks for such instructions to reach London 
from Vienna. Starhemberg in the meantime, like his Russian 
colleague Alopeus, had come under the spell of Canning. He 
had found his way to a deeper sympathy with the efforts of 
England and a closer understanding of her policy than his home 
government cared to show. While that government complained 
against the existing cabinet in England, he, in London, would 
argue like an Englishman and declare that “every one who 
desires to see the welfare of England would wish the present 
ministry to remain in power’’, Though he admitted that to some 
people Canning’s attack upon Denmark might seem “odious”’, 
he himself set out its virtues,* and repeatedly noted its “wisdom 
and foresight”’, and went beyond many Englishmen in expressing 
his admiration. To him the Czar’s offer of mediation was ‘“‘ vague 
and ill-worded”’, but Canning’s reply “left nothing to be de- 
sired”’; he could expect no tolerable peace until the secret 
articles of Tilsit should be divulged. He felt that the mediation 
of Austria might be more acceptable to the British government 
than the intervention of the Czar. He saw reason to hope that 
France might make some overture direct to London or through 
the Austrian minister in Paris. But no Englishman could have 
shown himself at heart more hostile to the idea of maritime 
peace than Starhemberg. No one could have expressed a clearer 
conviction of the necessity of continuing the war. His reports 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, 6 Sept. 1807 (No. 3), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

2 Ibid. 

3 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 65, 2 Sept. 1807, W.S.A. Berichie aus 
London. 

4 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 66, 4 Sept. 1807, ibid. 

316 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

bear strong marks of the influence of the English foreign secre- 
tary, and it is evident that in the conversations that took place 
in London Canning’s was the ascendant mind. We may take it 
as the opinion of the British foreign office, when Starhemberg 
puts forward the view: 

It is impossible for an impartial observer not to take alarm to some 
extent at the thought of the harm that may happen to’ England in 
the present state of things. It is beyond doubt that the malignity of 
Napoleon is about to collect its efforts against the country which is 
the object of his deepest hate; and the most dangerous weapon which 
he could employ would be the attempt to delude England with the 
semblance of peace, offered with a disinterested air as coming from 
a desire for tranquillity. 

This, said Starhemberg, would be “complete degradation”’, 
would amount to “the last act of submission of the whole of 
Europe’’. “It seems to me that so long as the fires of war burn 
in some corner of the universe there still remains a hope that one 
day success may be achieved.” England, he said, had many 
ways of causing inconvenience and disturbance to France; she 
had nothing to fear from the continuance of the war, for the idea 
of an invasion was a “chimera”; only by making peace and 
allowing Napoleon to recruit his naval power would she stand 
in danger of being faced by some future attack.1 Starhemberg, 
it is apparent, had surrendered to the whole reasoning of Canning. 
He, like Alopeus, had given his heart to the coalition. Merfeldt, 
his fellow countryman at St Petersburg, was in entire agreement 
with him. He, too, wrote to London to urge the continuance of 
the war with France.? 