

Austria was afraid, said Adair in his memoir, “that any 
attempt to re-establish, even for the purposes of peace, a good 
understanding with other powers, would draw down upon her 
the vengeance of Napoleon”. She was prepared not to have any 
foreign policy at all, save that of seeking favour with France. 
She was ready to take it as the first rule of her conduct that she 
must avoid too close an intimacy with England. 

1 Duroc to Andréossy, 18 July 1807, A.A... Autriche, t. 380. Talleyrand 

to Andréossy, 3 Aug. 1807, ibid. 
2 Stadion to Starhemberg, 6 Sept. 1807 (No. 1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 

London. 

314 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

There were reasons why the Austrians could reconcile them- 
selves to the necessity of keeping England at a distance. The 
cold reception which Canning had given to their peace proposals 
after Friedland, the withering way in which he had resolved 
these into their naked selfishness, and the haughty tone of the 
comments with which he had surrounded his reply, had created 
dissatisfaction in Vienna. 

‘Judging from extracts from the despatches to Lord Pembroke”’, 
wrote Stadion when the messages arrived, ‘‘we cannot expect much 
from the opinion and good-will of the present English ministry. The 
instructions. ..consist of bitter reproaches for the past, unpleasant 
refusals of demands which we have not made and do not wish to 
make, and counsels for the future which seem to me rather uncalled 
force 

But even if the British government had adopted an attitude 
more warm and sympathetic, Stadion recognised that there had 
come into existence a new state of affairs in which it was im- 
possible for England to be useful to Austria in the way that had 
once been contemplated. Napoleon had made his arrangements 
in Europe and it was vain to hope that he would alter these for 
the sake of peace with England. It was not expected that he 
would now restore the Austrians to their former power, even 
in return for the recovery of his lost colonies. 

Although it is none the less desirable that there should be peace 
between the Courts of London and Paris to relieve the present 
political situation, we can no longer flatter ourselves that the pacifica- 

tion can produce essential changes in what has been agreed upon in 
the Treaty of Tilsit. 

Under these circumstances it was less necessary to cultivate the 
close friendship of Great Britain. Starhemberg, while ordered 
to strive to “keep the court of St James’s in good feeling towards 
us”, was instructed to “abstain for the moment from any 

1 Adair, op. cit. p. 264. Cf. Stadion to Metternich, 8 Aug. 1807, quoted 
in Beer, Zehn Jahre Oesterreichischen Politik, p. 296. 

* Stadion to Starhemberg, 6 Sept. 1807 (No. 2), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London, 

CH. Ill. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 315 

proposition which would tend to unite us more or less directly 
with the present policy of the English Cabinet”’.1 Starhemberg 
was to adopt the rédle of observer, to watch carefully over 
Kngland’s relations with her former allies, to note especially the 
conduct of England in regard to France; but he was to evade 
any attempt that Canning might make to bring Austria into 
closer touch with Great Britain. ‘You will content yourself 
with giving general declarations of goodwill.’’? 