

1 Soltikov (acting foreign minister in St Petersburg) to Budberg, 
25 June/7 July 1807, in Sbornik, txxxvul, 74-6. 
2 Savary to Napoleon, 6 Aug. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxi11, 7-10 and passim. 

312 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

Austria and Russia, was now restless and over-anxious, and too 
good a coalition man. He made himself too ostentatiously a 
member of the English party at St Petersburg—showed more 
respect to the British ambassador than to the minister of Napo- 
leon. “If the English ceased to have a legation here”, wrote 
Savary, ‘‘M. de Merfeldt would watch over their interests”. So 
Napoleon demanded Merfeldt’s recall, and the Austrian chan- 
cellor had to complain that “Russia treats us with coldness, or 
rather with reserve’’.! 

Starhemberg in London was also an enemy of France and of 
the Tilsit system. In the early days of 1807 he had been severely 
reproved for his excess of zeal in confiding to his official des- 
patches to Vienna sentiments that were of a nature to compro- 
mise his government with France. He, also, was nervous for his 
country after the battle of Friedland, and, stepping beyond his 
instructions, he had “‘ several friendly but not official conversations 
with the Secretary of State on the possibility of our being 
attacked at some time without provocation”. Canning took the 
question seriously, and the result was a situation of some irony; 
rdles were reversed for the moment, and it was the British 
minister who urged the Austrians to keep the peace at all costs 
and avoid any differences with France. Austria could not be 
considered as having the same incontestable right to the assist- 
ance of England as if she had come to the help of Russia. “Only 
in the case of a war of self-defence in the strictest meaning of 
the words” would England give any consideration to the idea 
of helping the court of Vienna. Canning deplored that the 
Austrians had distrusted Russia more than they had feared 
Napoleon; he urged them to make a close union with the Czar; 
this was the system he desired to see established in Europe; the 
king, he said, recommended this policy, ‘at a moment when, if 
the rumours of the Continent are to be credited, he has himself 
to apprehend at least an unfriendly disposition, if not a hostile 
determination against him, on the part of Russia’’.? 

* Stadion to Starhemberg, 6 Sept. 1807 (No. 4), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

2 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 63, 8 Aug. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus 
London. G. Canning to Lord Pembroke, No. 16, 17 Aug. 1807, F.0. Austria 
7/85. \ 

x 

CH. Ili. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 313 

The government at Vienna had felt its fate hang in the balance 
when the conclusion of the treaties of Tilsit had left Napoleon 
free to deal with Austria. For a time there had been a breathless 
suspense, as men waited to learn what Napoleon’s decision might 
be. It was no question, for the moment, of coalitions and con- 
spiracies against France, of measures to check the usurper, of 
wide ulterior schemes; the Austrians held their minds feverishly 
centred on thoughts of self-preservation. The duplicity of two 
years had seemed about to receive its answering stroke; and if 
anything could be judged from the tone of the French minister, 
Andréossy, the stroke threatened to be vindictive. Then the 
silence in which Andréossy had seemed to exult, the cruel 
suspense, had broken. Napoleon declared to General Vincent 
that he was pleased with the late conduct of Austria; Duroc 
wrote to Andréossy in the same friendly spirit; and Talleyrand 
reported that the Emperor was disposed to enter into explana- 
tions with the court of Vienna on all matters that required to be 
settled.1 This meant the end of a crisis, but not the end of 
nervousness, for Austria. She could not immediately readjust 
her psychology and leap out of the tense atmosphere and lose 
her cowering dread. Everything that had happened had only 
confirmed this power in a policy based upon fear. She did not 
need a Canning to warn her against offending France; the Austrian 
chancellor quickly retorted to such advice that it was his in- 
tention ‘“‘not to give France any reasons for complaint, but to 
preserve friendly relations with her”’.? The ministers in Vienna 
shrank from making any move at all, lest their action should be 
misconstrued or resented by the French government. 