

Wilson demonstrated that France did not at heart desire the 
aggrandisement of Russia; he offered the Czar a better guarantee 
of the possession of the Turkish provinces than the one Napoleon 
had given; but he made the offer conditional upon the arrange- 
ment of an alliance between the courts of St Petersburg and 

300 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

Vienna. The alliance would be unobjectionable to Napoleon, 
since the Austrians were already neutral; but it would enable 
the Czar, even while the partner of Napoleon, to retain some of 
the connections that were the legacy of his former policy. It 
had the flavour of the old coalition. For this reason Canning 
pressed it upon the Russians, and,- with different arguments, 
urged it upon the court of Vienna. 
Talking of peace, Wilson informed the Russian chancellor 

...that if ever England consents to make cessions of some of her 
conquests, she must have an equivalent that would augment the 
barriers still remaining against the universal dominion of France— 
that indeed a general peace was not likely to be obtained until the 
powers of the Continent, and particularly Russia, had assumed the 
attitude of independent nations who would form no other than 
salutary connections and who would not suffer aggression with 
impunity. 

There is the clear, clean ring of an infant heart in the offer, that 
Wilson made in this interview, ‘‘to extricate Russia from the 
embarrassments which the treaty of Tilsit had occasioned’’. The 
language has a flavour and a fine felicity, by reason of all the 
questions that it begs. One can see that Wilson’s soul was 
generously moved by the benevolent proposals of which he was 
the bearer, and it is plain that he communicated to the overture 
something of his own fond philanthropic mood. He insisted 

that England sought no recompense, no preference, her reward was 
the restoration of confidence...that it was, however, necessary for 
Russia to act with impartiality and prove to France that she is an 
independent power...that England never could think of making 
peace with France whilst there was no prospect of diminishing her 
continental preponderance. 

Dupe of two governments, Wilson could not see to what an 
extent his whole discourse was inapplicable to the existing 
situation, and to what a degree his proposals were calculated 
to hasten and intensify the rupture between Russia and England. 

‘“T cannot promise success”’’, he wrote to Canning, ‘“‘but certainly 
the conference which I had this day seemed to interest the Count 

CH. Il. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 301 

much, and I would flatter myself that every hope of a private under- 
standing being formed is not unwarrantable....I shall endeavour to 
obtain indisputable assurances of the friendly intentions of Russia 
and then return to England.’’! 

The whole incident showed England unrepentant. Combined 
with the rash conduct which Wilson permitted himself in St 
Petersburg at this time, it brought the anger of the Czar to a 
head.? A government burning with indignation against the 
injury which had been inflicted upon the Danes did not welcome 
a proposal that asked for its connivance or participation in the 
outrage. The Russian minister communicated the overture to 
the French, and declared that the opportunity had arrived for 
the demonstration of fidelity to Napoleon.* The English minister 
began to find difficulty in securing an interview with the chan- 
cellor.t The notes that he transmitted were merely ignored.® 
Alopeus, who had leaped to welcome the thing which he was 
anxious to believe—who had sublimely congratulated the Czar 
upon the wisdom of the sentiments which Wilson had attributed 
to him-——had missed his step completely. His share in Canning’s 
conspiracy for the extension of the occupation of Zealand was 
roundly condemned. Lisakewitch alone came out of the tran- 
saction with advantage, for he had refused all complicity in the 
scheme. Within a few days the Czar, as “‘one of the guarantors 
of the tranquillity of the Baltic, which is a closed sea”’, declared 
war against England and took up the cause of the Danes, de- 
manding complete satisfaction for the injury done by British 
vessels to the mercantile interests of his subjects, and announcing 
his refusal to renew relations with the court of London until 
England should have given satisfaction to Denmark and made 
peace with the French government. ® 