

BN 20 

306 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

regard to the Continent. Her policy is more enlarged, more 
general, and more enlightened’”’.? 

Napoleon, master of the land, declared his intention of inter- 
fering in maritime affairs—of checking the extravagant claims 
of England and the various abuses of power. Canning had heard 
whispers of ‘maritime rights”, and the faintest hint of these 
was always sufficient to put an Englishman on the alert; he 
would submit to no tampering here. England and Russia, even 
when they had been allies, had not always felt at ease in this 
matter. The subject was one which could not fail to be raised 
if the Czar broke with England and if Russia and France came 
to put heads together to find common ground at Tilsit. 

So we have land-power and sea-power unreconciled, each 
claiming to interfere in the realm of the supremacy of the other. 
Ruling over two mutually exclusive worlds their conflict is like 
the clash of two different planes of existence or like some mythic 
tale of Ulysses deriding Polyphemus. The greatest army in the 
world can only stand on a giant cliff-head and shudder with rage 
and mutter ineffectual threats against the world’s greatest navy 
where the Atlantic booms below. Each power can only tease 
the other in a tantalising shadow-fight, and make lunges at 
abstractions and pursue its foe vicariously. Edicts of Milan will 
grapple with “Orders in Council”. England will pounce upon 
an island at the end of the world, and Napoleon will revenge 
himself upon Portugal. The treaties of Tilsit have not won this 
warfare from futility and frustration. Neither power is yet able 
to force a settlement upon the other by inflicting a direct and 
palpable defeat. 

The treaties of Tilsit were themselves sufficient to destroy the 
possibility of maritime peace. They made Napoleon too sure of 
the support of Russia; they intensified the arrogance of France; 
they made England haughty and alert, like a man who has 
received an affront. Canning, as well as Napoleon, had personality, 
and was streaked with veins of fire. He too could see a dramatic 
moment and meet it with a gesture—could turn governmental 

1 Wilson, Diaries, 11, 437. See also e.g. G. Leveson-Gower to G. Canning, 
No. 11, 15 July 1807, F'.0. Russia 65/69. 

a 

CHeil. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 307 

action into a kind of poetry. There was an arrogance, there was 
something proud in his impulses, which was to be chastened and 
a little tempered when he returned to office fifteen years later, 
but which at this period, flashing out in some stroke of policy, 
or becoming incandescent in a diplomatic despatch, enlivened 
the policy of the British government. All that was challenging 
in the system of Tilsit only provoked him further; and all the 
things that might have been arguments for peace merely 
confirmed his obstinacy. 

Canning belonged to the type of leader that is warm and 
intemperate, a type that was coarsened a little in Palmerston 
and further vulgarised in Lloyd George. His policy was not to 
be gnomely wise over the heads of a sleeping people, but occa- 
sionally to turn round and take men into his confidence and 
show them the point to which he was leading them—occasionally 
to whip up their passions and make them his accomplices. The 
man who called in the new world to redress the balance of the 
old was not content with manceuvring in a corner, with a diplo- 
macy of mere technique, with subtle and recondite action. He 
would seize on the grander elements of policy that could be 
communicated to the platform, he would strike an attitude that 
the people could recognise, he would do the dynamic thing. In 
this respect the expedition to Copenhagen is the clue to the mood 
of Canning in the period after Tilsit and gives the key to the 
diplomacy of England in the new state of Europe. It was 
exactly the kind of action which the Cannings and Palmerstons 
and Lloyd Georges always will take, to the disturbance of the 
graver ‘‘Balliol” type, the statesmen of the grand manner. It 
dramatised the moment. It gave a lead to the country. For it 
was a defiant gesture, a shout of derisive laughter in the face of 
the Franco-Russian conspiracy; and as such it must be remem- 
bered whenever we are discussing Canning’s attitude to the 
question of maritime peace. 