

To evade entirely this stipulation of the Treaty of Tilsit would 
certainly have been impossible; but it seems to me that we might 
have adjourned it still, and abstained from fulfilling it until we had 
seen a more decided intention of fulfilling the conditions of the Treaty 
on the part of the French Government. This was the very intention 
which Your Excellency expressed to me verbally at St Petersburg, 
and confirmed by a note addressed to me when I was on the point of 
departure. In this way we might have offered our rupture with 
England as the price of the evacuation of the Prussian States, which 
it will be very difficult to obtain now.! 

Tolstoy, Alopeus, Budberg—even while they worked for the 
“system of Tilsit”’, felt the true interests of the Empire to lie 
in the speedy establishment of peace and the avoidance of any 
rupture with England. They carried into their appreciation of 
the new policy of the Czar some of the prejudices of the old. 
They did not, like their master, ratify the new system with their 
hearts. Though they consented to work within the limiting terms 
of the new treaties—though they did not make issue over the 
actual letter of those engagements, as Czartoryski and Novos- 
siltzov had done—they quarrelled with the implications of the 
new system as these gradually unfolded; they reached a point 
at which they found that they had put a wrong construction 
upon the French alliance. 

It was the spirit in which Alexander accepted the system of 
Tilsit and opened himself to the alliance with France that 
disqualified him from the réle of peace-maker. It was this spirit 
that Canning was persistently trying to test when he sought 
from the Russian government some act that should bea “token”’. 
Canning did not cry out against the desertion of the coalition 
by Alexander, did not seek to re-kindle the continental war; if 
there had been stipulations in the treaty of Tilsit directed in a 
hostile way against Great Britain, still he specifically declined 
to make the mere signature of these the occasion of a break; and 
even in the final overture which he sent by Wilson to St Peters- 
burg he did not ask for any repudiation of the alliance with 

1 Tolstoy to Romantsov, 15/27 Dec. 1807, in Sbornik, LXxxIx, 313. 

304 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

France. He was quite prepared to acquiesce in the position to 
which the Czar had committed himself, if the Czar had made 
his engagements merely under the stress of a desperate military 
defeat; he seemed even willing to accept the situation if only the 
Czar would refrain from construing his engagements in the 
manner most hostile to Great Britain. He would have been 
happy to see the treaties of Tilsit carried out in the way Alopeus, 
or Budberg or Tolstoy would have desired. But he did insist 
that the mediation of Alexander should at least be an impartial 
one, not a veiled act of hostility or a prelude to the declaration 
of war. When we consider that at this period Napoleon was 
making a similar intervention in the war between Russia and 
Turkey, and, in the negotiation, was not proving at all indulgent 
to Russia—was, for example, inexorable in his demand for the 
evacuation of Moldavia and Wallachia—we might be tempted 
to say that the Czar was unnecessarily hostile to England, and 
that if he had interpreted the system of Tilsit as cleverly as 
Napoleon—if he had taken his stand on a merely literal fulfil- 
ment of his engagements—he would still have been able to give 
the satisfaction that was demanded by the British government. 