

Drive the English diplomatic establishments out of Europe. The 
Viennese Court stands alone; it must be forced to join the common 
cause....This expulsion of all English Ministers from the Continent 
will make a great impression in London, and will especially and 
strongly affect their trade.” 

1 Metternich to Stadion, 16 Oct. 1807, in Mémoires du Prince de Metter- 
nich, 11, 129. 

2 Napoleon to Champagny, 7 Sept. 1807, in ‘““Memorandum on the 
present state of Continental Affairs”, New Letters of Napoleon (Eng. transl. 
Lady Mary Lloyd, 1898), pp. 46-7. 

CHAPTER III 

AUSTRIAN POLICY AND THE AUSTRIAN 
ATTEMPT TO BRING ABOUT PEACE 

Anpréossy, French minister at Vienna, was a military man 
and a bitter anti-Austrian—far more bitter than Napoleon who 
at this time seems to have paid little attention to his outbursts. 
He took a cruel pleasure in recording and perhaps exaggerating 
the anguish of the Austrians in the critical weeks of July and 
August. “The news of the battle of Friedland made very little 
impression on the Court and Ministry”, he wrote. “It was not 
so with the news of the armistice...this has caused a most 
disagreeable sensation and inspires the most lively fears.’’+ 
Austria, he reported, was continuing her armaments; she was 
full of fear and loneliness, and felt that her hour had come. He 
gloated over her discomfiture. Concerning the intentions of 
France he kept up a deliberate air of mystery, hoping thereby, 
as one Englishman said, “‘to draw the Austrian cabinet into some 
decisive measure which might furnish Bonaparte with an excuse 
for turning his arms against them’’.? Andréossy’s despatches 
were written in the following strain: 

The silence which is kept towards her is giving her anxiety, and she 
feels humiliated that she, mediating power, was not warned in any 
way....It will be possible, I think, to make any demand of Austria 
that may suit the arrangements of His Majesty. The more we adopt 
a high-handed tone befitting the prodigious ascendancy which His 
Majesty has acquired, the more easily we shall obtain demands which 
in other circumstances would have been difficult to obtain or would 
have been passed over in silence... .| Austria] is afraid of her isolation. 
...They seem to wish for a rapprochement with France and are 
disposed to be condescending.® 

1 Andréossy to Talleyrand, 13 July 1807, in A[rchives du ministére des] 
A[ ffaires] E{trangeres] [Paris], Autriche, t. 380. 

2 G. Jackson to G. Canning, No. 4, 20 July 1807, F.O. Prussia 64/75. 
See also Alex. Wassiltchikow, Les Razowmovski, 11, 8™° partie, p. 131. 

% Andréossy to Talleyrand, 24 Aug. 1807, 4.4.E, Autriche, t. 380. 

CH. II. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 811 

A glance at the Austrian minister in St Petersburg would 
confirm this impression of the nervousness of the court of Vienna. 
Merfeldt also was a military man, an unfortunate diplomat to 
employ. While the treaties of Tilsit were being arranged he had 
heard rumours that Russia was to have increase of territory at 
the expense of Prussia and Austria. He had asked the acting 
foreign minister at St Petersburg to inform him of the tenour of 
the treaties; this in return for the ‘‘ unlimited confidence” which 
the court of Vienna had always given to the Czar. Merfeldt 
conjectured that Napoleon would have a grievance against his 
country, which had so often declined a French alliance; he 
insinuated that, “Whatever desire the House of Austria might 
have to remain at peace with all its neighbours, it was far from 
shrinking from the risks of a new war. The Austrian monarchy 
had perhaps never been in so flourishing a state as at the present 
moment”. Tactlessly at a later date Merfeldt addressed himself 
to the French minister Savary, and spoke with some indiscretion. 
According to Savary he was “furious” that peace had been 
made. He made wearisome demands to learn the terms of the 
arrangements. He said, “‘I confess that it is difficult for me to 
believe that you can have made a lasting peace without us”’; 
and when Savary replied that he did not know of any questions 
that remained to be settled with Austria, he declared, ‘“‘We 
cannot be indifferent to the fate of Wallachia and Moldavia’”’, 
and even made some wild references to war. “‘ Allow me to say”’, 
replied the French minister, “‘that your imagination sometimes 
makes phantoms for itself in order to have the pleasure of 
fighting them. At this moment you are already seeking a motive 
for war in a treaty that has hardly been signed.” The Austrian 
seemed discontented with the settlement of the Polish campaign 
at Tilsit. Savary referred to the neutrality of Austria. “Had 
you an indirect part in this War? Were you interested in seeing 
it prolonged?’’? Merfeldt, who had acted unwisely at a time 
when it had been important to promote good feeling between 