

Because he had started from a disposition to be unfriendly to 
Great Britain, Alexander was fully prepared to put the most 
hostile construction on any doubtful point in her policy. His 
anger existed already, hankering after an object; it sprang from 
something deeper than logic, but it was crouched and lying in 
wait for a fact around which it could explain and rationalise 
itself. For this reason the expedition to Copenhagen was the 
most unfortunate thing that could have happened. It enabled 
him to work up his mind into burning indignation on an issue 
that was entirely to his heart. He was annoyed that the enter- 
prise should have been undertaken and Russia not warned of 
the intention; as the ally of France he would be jolted and shocked 
by the challenge which was thrown down to his “‘system of 
Tilsit”’; but as the guardian of the Baltic and the north he was 
indignant that such an outrage could have been committed at 
all. The actual threat to his own coasts—the danger in which the 
fortifications of Cronstadt in particular seemed to stand—would 

CH. Il. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 805 

heighten his feeling of horror. And when Sir Robert Wilson came 
to ask him to sanction and support the crime, everything in him 
that was chivalrous, all that was spiritually proud, seems to have 
been revolted at the impudence of the proposal. If he had had 
the slightest misgivings concerning his treatment of an old ally, 
and if there had been anything uncharitable concerning England 
that he had wanted to believe, the expedition to Copenhagen 
gave him full release; it was the very thing needed to make all 
the Alexanders that were in him beat as one. Declaring against 
England, he had now no need to resort to shifty evasions, to 
flinch at his own inconsistencies, or to make a treaty with his 
conscience; he was the champion of a small neighbour, he was 
raised to a pedestal of moral indignation, and, once more on the 
side of the moralities, he could feel that his deed was good. 
But even if Alexander had stood impartial, and had offered 
a mediation that could be pleasing to the English and had 
become the father of a negotiation, it is difficult to believe that 
the result would have been different. The British government 
refused to undertake any negotiation with France unless the 
terms of the settlement were to comprise the larger affairs of 
Europe. As in the year 1806 it declined to be regarded as a 
merely maritime power, and it considered the security of the 
continent as a matter which closely concerned itself. If England 
consented to negotiate she would look upon the transaction as 
one which should convert the partial arrangements of Tilsit into 
a final ‘“‘ general pacification”. Napoleon, on the other hand, was 
willing only to discuss the matters that directly concerned the 
interests of the negotiating parties; and on this view England 
was excluded from continental affairs with the exception of 
those relating to Hanover. It irritated the cabinet of London to 
hear Napoleon reiterating his willingness to concede this German 
electorate, and implying that, this matter being settled, there 
was nothing more to arrange in Europe. When the Russian 
chancellor took up the cry, and reminded Sir Robert Wilson that 
“Vou have Hanover to reclaim”, the Englishman with grandiose 
patriotism could reply: “‘ Your Excellency must be well aware 
that Hanover does not comprise the views of England with 