

Napoleon, for his part, did not carry out his imperious 
policies and haughty designs without reference to public 
opinion. Unlike the monarchs of the ancien régime he could not 
trust to a mere inertia in the masses that would allow him to 

20-2 

308 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

govern at his mere caprice. At the same time he was not the man 
to listen from a palace window for the popular voices that might 
come from the market place. He made the people his accomplice. 
He himself would start the tune for them. In the army and in 
the state he succeeded by arts of leadership. He would seize 
upon the propaganda value of events, and catch public opinion 
at the effective moment, and exploit all the dramatic and 
passionate elements of a situation. He was not slow to see in the 
expedition to Copenhagen a signal and an opportunity. 

“I think that if the English go on in this way’, he wrote to 
St Petersburg, ‘‘we must close all the ports of Europe, even those of 
Austria, and have all the English ministers driven from the Continent. 
... If the Emperor is of this opinion we will join in making a declara- 
tion to the Austrians, who will be obliged to conform to it.” 

It pleased him to regard the Danish expedition as a demonstra- 
tion of the real intentions of England, as the type of her per- 
petual policy. The kind of moral revolt which had been raised 
against his own practices on land he was now able to turn against 
the tyranny of the maritime power. England had shown herself 
the Bonaparte of the seas. 

From this moment he ceased even to make pretence of any 
inclination for the conclusion of peace. Russia, he said, might 
regard this outrage as the answer to her offer of mediation. No 
further discussion was needed, no ultimatum such as the Czar 
had intended to give. Napoleon saw the full force of the moment, 
and blazed its moral across the length and breadth of Europe. 
For the event had challenged all that was noble and proud in 
his generous military soul, and it had put into his hands a new 
weapon against his irrepressible foe. 

We learn from Metternich how little the Emperor desired 
peace after the expedition to Copenhagen had excited his in- 
dignation. The French foreign minister disclosed the new attitude 
of his government in a conversation with the Portuguese am- 
bassador. According to him, Napoleon had decided to make no 
further attempt to come to an arrangement with Great Britain. 

This power was sovereign of the seas. The moment had come when he, 
Napoleon, wished to dominate the continent; all that opposed his views, 

CH. I. THE RUSSIAN MEDIATION 309 

all that made the least resistance, would be crushed out ; with the friendship 
of Russia, he no longer had fear of anyone; at last the dice had been 
thrown. 

It would seem that after the Danish expedition Napoleon was 
more immoderate, more arrogant than before. The event had 
provoked his worst characteristics. His expressions became more 
wild, his tone more unbalanced, his bravado more loud and 
extravagant than we have seen it hitherto. He decided to move 
a step further in the execution of the policy of Tilsit. 