

3 Starhemberg to Stadion, 27 Nov. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

* Canning to Starhemberg, 23 Nov. 1807, in Parliamentary Debates, x, 
cols. 104-5, No. 1v. Cf. G. Canning to R. Adair, 19 Jan. 1808, F'.0. Austria 
7/84. 

CH. Ill. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 327 

side failed to respond to the friendly action and produced the 
very reply that had been declared insufficient. The proper thing, 
the expected thing, at this point, therefore, was that Starhem- 
berg should at least follow out the remainder of his instructions 
and meet Canning’s evasiveness by breaking off relations with 
England. 

Instead of this Starhemberg acted again on his own responsi- 
bility. He declared that Canning’s reply 
while not coming near to what I would desire, seems to me more 
satisfactory than I had dared to hope....It seems to me that it is 

possible to perceive in these expressions, if one looks for them, a real 
opening and a disposition to listen to peace proposals... . 

The British government was insisting that before negotiations 
should be opened, the French should make an announcement of 
the principles upon which they would consent to treat. This was 
a point which the Czar himself had consistently demanded until 
the battle of Friedland had made him rush into the arms of 
Napoleon. It represented no new concession on the part of 
England, no departure from previous policy. Starhemberg 
feigned to see in it a ray of hope, and nothing more than this was 
needed to make him once more disobey the commands of his 
government. He deferred the breaking off of diplomatic relations, 
and took no steps to withdraw his mission from London. He 
decided first to communicate with Metternich in Paris and dis- 
cover whether Napoleon would meet the English demands. He 
asked the French to make an avowal of the principles upon which 
they would consent to negotiate. To his government he sent his 
EXCUSES : 

It is below the dignity of a great court to bring the affair to a 
standstill on a mere matter of punctilio—a question of who shall make 
the first overtures. The interests involved are too great for us not to 
make every attempt to attain our object....I take the liberty of 
observing to Your Excellency that if France should now make just 
and reasonable offers to Great Britain, and this power reject them 
with contempt, all Europe would see the real designs of England, and 
the present ministry would be absolutely unmasked.* 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, 27 Nov. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

328 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

Starhemberg sent a duplicate of this despatch to Metternich 
in Paris, and Metternich, after making careful modifications,} 
posted a copy, together with Canning’s note, to the French 
foreign minister who was with Napoleon at Milan. 

‘*His Majesty the Emperor Napoleon’’, wrote Metternich, ‘will in 
his great wisdom decide if he thinks he can discover in the British 
Cabinet’s reply, any motives for following up this opening. Nothing 
but the hope of being useful to the cause of peace has made our envoy 
put off the declaration of a rupture in the official form, such as he was 
instructed to give. He awaits precise directions from me. I in my 
turn ask for those of His Majesty the Emperor of the French, and 
am convinced that by this new mark of confidence I am entirely 
fulfilling the views of my court.’”? 