

Unless Napoleon should be willing to follow up the overture, 
unless England should make a more explicit declaration, and 
unless the French court should signify through Metternich its 
desire to see Starhemberg prolong his stay in London, the 
minister was to open the question straight away, and in an official 
manner, to Canning, and follow literally the instructions which 
had been sent to him at the end of October. ‘“‘His Majesty also 
desires you to mention about the demand of passports in the 
official Note. . .or simultaneously with it, at least; and he wishes 
you to allow no delay in replying, beyond two or three days.”} 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, 22 Dec. 1807 (No.1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

330 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

An accompanying despatch ordered Starhemberg to follow the 
counsels of Metternich in future; Vienna was too far distant to 
allow for communication. If the improbable thing happened and 
France really wished to renew the discussions with England, then 
Prince Starhemberg ‘must use all possible zeal” to promote the 
negotiation, following all the time the directions of Metternich. 

We have too keen an interest in seeing the re-establishment of 
general tranquillity not to desire such an event. The Emperor 
commands. ..that you make a point of fastening with zeal and activity 
upon everything which might provide a nucleus for a real rapproche- 
ment between the two belligerent Powers.+ 

This reproof was sent to Starhemberg via Paris, under a flying 
seal. Metternich showed it to the French government. The 
Russian minister in Paris saw the meaning of the severe language 
of Austria; Stadion had taken this course “probably with the 
intention of making capital out of it here”’.? 

‘““Napoleon”’, said the French minister, ‘“‘applauded the wise and 
strong conduct that the Court of Vienna had followed on this occasion ; 
it did the greatest honour to the Emperor of Austria; the Prince of 
Starhemberg, having dared to forgo the execution of the orders of 
his Court, deserved the reprimand....But it might be detrimental 
to the success of the affair for Starhemberg to be turned from the 
course he had followed; and the Emperor believed it would be more 
useful to avoid upsetting his point of view in the matter, by preventing 
despatches which might throw him into doubt, from reaching him.’’’ 

The French minister, writing to Metternich from Milan, had 
already disclosed the intentions of Napoleon. Comparing the 
reply which England had made to the latest Austrian overture 
with the answer recently given to the Czar’s offer of mediation, 
he found the “‘same method of evasion”’, he saw “‘the desire to 
gain time and to postpone an Austrian measure that is calculated 
to cause a sensation in England by no means favourable to the 
present ministry’. Canning had said that His Britannic Majesty 

Stadion to Starhemberg, 22 Dec. 1807 (No. 2), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

2 Sbornik, LXXxIx, 324. 

3 Tolstoy to Romantsov, 30 Dec. 1807 /11 Jan. 1808, in Sbornik, txxx1x, 
331. 