

“You will feel the importance of the commission which has been 
entrusted to you”, wrote Stadion. ‘‘There is no reasoning which 
you ought not to employ, no argument which should be left unused 
to make the English Ministry appreciate the only point of view in 
which this proposition can be envisaged. If on one side the welfare of 
Europe depends to a great degree on the decision which the British 
Cabinet will choose to take in these circumstances, its own position 
equally demands that it should at last put an end to a struggle... 
which will inevitably involve the destruction of England herself.” 

If the British government should refuse to give satisfaction 
on these questions or should provoke deliberate delays, then 
Starhemberg was to ask for his passports and Austria would 
break off relations with England.1 

An accompanying despatch of the same date recounted the 
private grievances of the court of Vienna against the British 
government. It referred to the injuries done to Austrian shipping 
in defiance of neutral rights. It complained of the ineffectiveness 
of Austrian protests that had been made periodically against the 
injuries. ‘‘The Court of London has for nearly a year treated us 
in this matter as though we were veritable enemies.” If the 
British government showed itself reasonable on the question of 
peace, Starhemberg was still to press this maritime issue, and 
was to demand satisfaction.? 

' Stadion to Starhemberg, 27 Oct. 1807 (No. 1), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. 

* Stadion to Starhemberg, 27 Oct. 1807 (No. 2), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 
London. } 

CH. UI. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 325 

All this was in the language of unmistakable hostility, and was 
calculated to provoke rather than to persuade. Nothing in it 
bore the mark of a sincerely mediating power, and everywhere 
there seemed a disposition to raise points of dispute rather than 
to smooth them over. But a secret and cyphered despatch was 
drawn up for Starhemberg at the same time, and was not sent 
via Paris at all, but was transmitted by a more direct route. 
This revealed the true situation of affairs. 

We have had to choose between instant war and the measure we 
have just taken. The cabinet of London might have spared us a step 
which costs as much to the heart as to the judgment of His Imperial 
Majesty, if it had chosen to enter with more friendship and more 
consideration for the well-being of Europe, into the repeated repre- 
sentations which we have been making for six months. As things are 
at present we have had to give way to the necessity of the moment. 
If I have gathered the real meaning of the last advice which 
M. Canning charged Lord Pembroke to give us I am assured that that 
Minister foresaw in some manner the extremity in which we were 
soon to find ourselves, that he felt that we ought in such an event to 
make this last submission and that he saw it was important to Europe 
and to England that our existence should be preserved intact in the 
midst of this universal political overthrow.? 