

On the 16th of October 1807 Metternich in a despatch from 
Paris describes such a dramatic moment. Napoleon at an 
audience exploded into “one of the most violent outbursts that 
he has ever made in a diplomatic circle”. The minister of 
Portugal received the first shock. “If Portugal does not do what 
I want,” said the Emperor, ‘“‘the house of Braganza will have 
ceased to reign in Europe within two months from now.” 

I will not allow a single British envoy in Europe; I will declare 
war against any power which has one two months from now. I have 
three hundred thousand Russians at my disposal and with a powerful 
ally like this I can do anything. Since the English have declared 
that they will not respect neutrals on the water any longer, I will not 
recognise them on land. 

He passed on to the ambassador of Etruria. “Your Queen is 
in secret connection with England—but I have settled with 
that.”’ To a deputy from Bremen he asked, “ How are things 
going with you?” The deputy said, “Badly sir”. “‘ Very well,” 
was the retort, “‘they will go worse even yet. Bremen and 
Hamburg are English towns; I shall know how to treat them for 
this.” Metternich did not attempt to describe the impression 

1 Bericht von Kleist, 2 Mar. 1807, in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 

1795-1807, 11, 586-9. 
2 Mémoires du Prince de Metternich, 1, 146-54; 11, 461-3. 

BN 21 

322 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

these exclamations made on all the people present, or the violent 
manner in which they were uttered.t For this episode was 
merely the prelude to an incident that more nearly concerned 
Austria. 

An hour after this disconcerting experience Metternich had 
an interview with the French foreign minister. Champagny had 
unpleasant revelations to make.. The Emperor, said he, would 
be satisfied with half-measures no longer. England had refused 
the mediation of Russia—she must be compelled to make peace. 

Only three powers are left in Europe; France, Russia and Austria. 
It is for you to contribute directly to the salutary work which the 
Emperor is undertaking. You have had reason to see for a long time 
that your flag is not respected any more than the others; the King 
[of England] has just declared that he will recognise no neutrality. 
... Russia is going to make common cause with us. All Italy obeys 
the impulse from France. There remains only you to close all access 
to the Continent....You, more than any other power, are interested 
in seeing peace and tranquillity restored, but this is impossible 
without the maritime settlement....The Emperor wishes you to say 
that if England does not give up the Danish fleet and revoke the 
principles enunciated in her latest declaration, you will recall your 
minister from London and at the same time—-say the first of December 
—dismiss the English minister from Vienna. 

Metternich protested against this demand. The Austrian ports 
were already closed to English vessels; no good would be 
achieved by making a definite declaration of war; and much 
harm would result to Austria. Metternich asked how it could 
happen that Napoleon could make this demand and yet when the 
Austrians had proposed that their “relations of friendship and 
good understanding should be grounded in the same way upon 
more decided bases”’, he had given no answer, as though he did 
not desire a more intimate alliance. 