

This is a game for powdered aristocrats, and it is to be played 
in full dress. One has pictures of dazzling nights, curtained 
rooms. One seems to hear, coming from the distance, sounds of 
music by Mozart. The whole is a world entirely over the heads 
of the mass of people, working out the web of their destiny like 
the stars. The policy and the procedure cannot be democratised. 

320 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

There is nothing communicable to the platform in the diplomacy 
of the remote arriére-pensée. You cannot take the people into 
your confidence, you cannot evoke national passion as a power 
behind you, if your immediate object of policy is an alliance with 
France, and your secret ultimate aim is war. You cannot make 
a public cause out of a policy of ‘‘mental reservation”. So it is 
useless to expect from Vienna a significant and revealing gesture 
such as Canning would give at times; the last secret of Austrian 
policy is rather to be caught in an almost imperceptible flicker 
of the eye that conveys something from Metternich to the 
Russian Tolstoy, when Napoleon’s back is turned. The rulers 
of Austria were unwilling to make the people their accomplices. 
They knew too well that if they made war itself national and 
popular, and called upon their subjects to help them against the 
French, they would be raising at their very doors a monster that 
would be more terrible to them than Napoleon himself. They 
were not yet reconciled to this. 

Such was the situation, and attitude and character of the 
power which Napoleon, after he had heard of the expedition to 
Copenhagen, decided to call out of its persistent neutrality into 
the war against England. 

In October 1807 Napoleon was in violent mood. Portugal had 
dared to show defiance; England had made the surprise attack 
on Denmark. Man of giant angers, the Emperor did not know 
how to meet a thwarting, and made an undignified outburst in 
public. Lord Whitworth had seen such a display in 1808, had 
found Napoleon “‘evidently under very considerable agitation’’, 
speaking “‘loud enough to be overheard by the two hundred 
people who were present”’, and conducting himself ‘‘ with the 
most extreme impropriety...the total lack of dignity as well 
as of decency”’.! Kleist had had a similar experience during the 
recent campaign; Napoleon “really had the appearance of being 
greatly disturbed; and it made him distracted and caused him 

* Lord Whitworth’s despatch of 14 Mar. 1808, in O. Browning, England 
and Napoleon in 1803, pp. 115-17. 

: 
» 

CH. III. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 321 

to keep on repeating the same thing”’.! Metternich was to be 
confronted with the same violence at Dresden in 1818—dramatic 
boasts, explosive threats, wild ejaculations of a man who “allowed 
his anger to carry him away”.? Napoleon found it useful to 
make his name terrible to Europe, and had a policy of intimi- 
dating diplomats; but it is a mistake to regard such demonstra- 
tions as always consciously contrived; they belong to an 
unreclaimed tract in the personality of the Corsican, the some- 
thing ungovernable in his nature, a wildness at the seat of his 
mind. These noisy and petulant outbursts would recur at times 
to shock a well-bred Talleyrand, and ruin the impressiveness 
and the fine finish that had been upon the courts of more royal 
days. They betrayed a weakness or distress of Napoleon himself 
in the contingencies of the hour. 