

It becomes evident at this point that, like Starhemberg in 
London, Metternich himself is anxious to see the conclusion of 
peace between England and France, in order that his country 
may be liberated from the dilemma in which it is placed—in 
order that it may avoid the declaration of war which Napoleon 
has ordered to be made against England. But the government 
of Austria, like that of Russia, is ready to move more quickly 
than its servants abroad, is more anxious to prevent anything 
that might give the faintest shadow of offence to France, and 
is more disposed to hasten the quarrel with England. This is 
illustrated by the reproof which Starhemberg receives from 
Vienna, when it is learned that he has taken it upon himself to 
disregard the extreme tenour of his instructions. The Emperor 
of Austria is so severe that Tolstoy, the Russian minister in 
Paris, is soon found declaring: “it is a thing certainly not out 
of keeping with all the queer antics of fate in this century to see 
France checking Austria in her resentment against England”’.? 

The Austrian government was greatly perturbed by the 
conduct which its minister Starhemberg had taken upon himself 
to follow. It did not imagine that Napoleon was anxious to make 

1 The despatch is printed (with marginal notes of the alterations which 
Metternich made) in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 287-9. 

2 Metternich to Champagny, 4 Dec. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 286-7. 

3 Tolstoy to Romantsov, 29 Dec. 1807/10 Jan. 1808, in Sbornik, txxxix, 
324. 

CH. III. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 329 

peace or to have the question of a negotiation so pressingly 
pursued at London. It had had from Metternich the report of 
the warlike and intemperate language which the French Em- 
peror was using in regard to England. It had been anxious to 
show Napoleon its readiness to join his continental policy and 
break off relations with the court of London—had ordered 
Starhemberg, in case England gave satisfaction on the prime 
question of a negotiation, to pick a further quarrel on the private 
maritime grievances of Austria. Muchas Austrian interests might 
require the conclusion of a final peace, Starhemberg, by taking 
his pacific rédle too seriously, had compromised his government, 
had made it appear that his country was a slow and unwilling 
partner in the confederacy against England. He had put the court 
of Vienna in the danger of receiving a swift rebuff from France. 

“*Once it was determined to transmit an official Note on this subject, 
this diplomatic document ought of necessity to have comprised the 
whole of the demands which you were instructed to give’’, wrote 
the Austrian chancellor. j 

‘““Mr Canning had a right to say in his reply that what Your 
Excellency is insisting upon in your Note is nothing but a repetition 
of our former overtures on the same subject, and that he therefore 
could only repeat...the same declaration he made to you at that 
time....And you, Prince, must recognise for yourself that a note 
from that Cabinet, merely a duplicate of those which England has 
already addressed to us and to Russia, could not be in any way 
satisfactory.” 