

Stadion at the same time explained to the English minister Adair 
“that no concession which His Imperial Majesty had been 
called upon to make during the whole course of his reign, 
affected him more deeply than the measures which had been 
extorted from him upon this occasion”’.? 

Starhemberg was alarmed when he received the commands 
from Vienna. He had approved of the reply which England had 
given to the Russian mediation; he had applauded the “ wisdom 
and forethought” of the Danish expedition; he had declared 
that it would be disastrous for Europe if Canning should make 
peace with France. He sought counsel of his Russian colleague 

1 Stadion to Starhemberg, 27 Oct. 1807 (No. 3), W.S.A. Weisungen nach 

London. 
2 R. Adair to G. Canning, Separate, 25 Nov. 1807, F.0. Austria 7/84, 

Printed in Adair, op. cit. p. 291. 

326 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

Alopeus,? and the two put heads together. They decided that the 
Austrian overture, presented in the hostile terms in which Count 
Stadion had drawn it up, would only defeat its own ends. 

‘IT know too well”, wrote Starhemberg, “‘the sort of pride and 
even of violence which always characterises the English Ministers of 
whatever party, and I could not fail to see how necessary it was 
not to give them a direct affront....The faintest show of menace 
would have destroyed all hope at the very start.” 

Starhemberg’s official overture to Canning therefore was em- 
bodied in a note that omitted any point likely to cause offence.” 
In particular, it made no mention of Denmark. 

I did not hide from [Mr Canning] at the same time in my conversa- 
tions, that we were making the demand of reparations to Denmark 
an essential point... . The verbal reply of the Secretary of State “‘that 
if negotiations were commenced they would bring up the question 
of Denmark, which would enter into the general settlement’’, seemed 
to me too definite and too sincere for me to lay stress in my Note 
upon an object which at the present moment would have given the 
signal for an immediate rupture. It would have been considered that 
we wished to dictate terms in an imperious manner.® 

Canning in reply to the vague note of Starhemberg merely 
renewed his previous protestations of a desire for peace. He 
affected to regard the overture as a repetition of Austria’s 
previous proposals.* But the court of Vienna had distinctly 
declared that the kind of pious assertions, which Canning had 
hitherto given, would by no means satisfy its demands; and since 
its minister in London had already taken the liberty of diluting 
the sense of his instructions and softening the peremptory nature 
of the commission that was entrusted to him, it was not to be 
expected that that court should feel contented if Canning on his 

1 “As I know for certain’’, wrote the Prussian minister in London. 
Jacobi an den Konig, 29 Dec. 1807, in Hassell, Geschichte der Preussischen 
Politik 1807 bis 1815, p. 356. 

2 Starhemberg to Canning, 20 Nov. 1807, in Parliamentary Debates, x, 
col. 104, No. 111. 