

Metternich, though he protested against the demand, could 
not recommend his government to resist, but wrote: 

Every reflection on the communication which the present report 
puts forward, seems to me to be rendered superfluous by the positive 

1 Metternich to Stadion, 16 Oct. 1807, in Mémoires du Prince de Metter- 
nich, t. 11, pp. 129-80. 

CH. Ill. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 323 

fact that Napoleon, scorning all moderation and even policy, has made 
it understood that he would accompany the official demand...with a 
declaration of war, in the event of our refusal. I can vouch for this 
assertion....There has recently been a total change in the methods of 
Napoleon ; he seems to think that he has reached a point where moderation 
is a useless obstacle. The peace of Tilsit and the extreme weakness of 
the Emperor Alexander, could not but bring him to this point... .Of 
all the continental powers we are the one most directly and immediately 
menaced....On this occasion more than on any other the fury of 
Napoleon will have no limits; and his thirst for universal dominion 
could not be better served than by our coming short of satisfying 
his desires. 

The court of Vienna which had already resolved to make no 
hesitation in answering to the wishes of Napoleon, and indeed 
had no intention of braving the fury of France, did not remain 
indifferent to the force of Metternich’s words. 

In the last week of November Starhemberg in London re- 
ceived an angry despatch from Vienna. It was dated the 27th 
of October and had been sent to England via Paris so that it 
might come under the eyes of the French government. It began 
by enumerating the successive attempts which Austria had made 
to promote the peace of Europe; it deplored the failure of the 
mediation that had been offered before the battle of Friedland 
and complained of the unfavourable welcome which Canning 
had given to the further overtures that had followed the battle. 
By rejecting the good offices of Russia, and by making the attack 
on Denmark—an outrage which indeed had never been satis- 
factorily accounted for—England, said Stadion, 

seems to have announced far and wide, her intention of removing all 
possibility of a pacification, and of refusing to do anything to restore 
tranquillity to Europe...and if the British court has not once and 
for all renounced any thought of uniting and identifying her interests 
with the cause of Europe, it ought to be convinced on its own account 
of the disastrous consequences of this conduct. 

It was impossible to calculate the evils which would result from 
the policy of Great Britain, the despatch went on to say; but 

1 Metternich to Stadion, 16 Oct. 1807, in Mémoires du Prince de Metter- 
nich, t. 11, pp. 128-386. 

21-2 

324 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

things had reached the point at which the court of Vienna felt 
itself compelled ‘“‘to insist more peremptorily than ever on 
learning the real intentions of the Cabinet or St James’s in this 
matter, and on impelling it if possible to sentiments more just 
and more conformable to the situation”’. Starhemberg therefore 
was to address himself ‘‘for the last time, and officially”, with 
a ‘‘formal proposition” to the English ministry. He was to 
secure a sincere declaration of England’s willingness to negotiate 
for peace; and “‘as a preliminary guarantee of its intentions”’, 
the British government was to renounce completely the hostile 
measures recently taken against Denmark and to cancel the 
declarations that accompanied these. 