

The Austrian minister in Paris worked more closely to the 
intentions of his government than either Starhemberg or Mer- 
feldt. After Austerlitz Napoleon, exercising that same felicity 
of choice as when he proposed Stein to succeed Hardenberg, had 
fixed upon Metternich for this post. Gentz wrote to this man, 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 65, 2 Sept. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus 
London. 

* Caulaincourt to Napoleon, No. 115, 12 June 1808, in Grand-Duke 
Nicholas Mikhailovitch, Relations diplomatiques de la Russie et de la France, 
I, 186. 

? 
a 

CH. II. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 317 

for the diversion of historians, ‘‘ Your nomination to Paris was 
a blow to me, and I have not yet been able to recover from it. 
...A soul so pure and elevated as yours ought never to have 
come into contact with the seat of so many crimes and horrors”’. 
This soul so pure and elevated, picking its way not too disdain- 
fully among the contaminations of the French capital, burned 
with inner hatred of Napoleon. Metternich handled the policy 
of Austria with the subtlety and resources of a diplomat born 
to the technique. It was he who negotiated the treaty of 
Fontainebleau which settled various questions that had been in 
controversy between the courts of Paris and Vienna. He did 
not like the treaty, fought bitterly to secure better terms, and 
felt that his work needed apology; but whenever he had raised 
a protest he had been silenced by ugly threats from France. 
“T have unfortunately been only too well able to see at every 
moment of the negotiation that not only has Napoleon ceased 
to know any bounds, but he has completely thrown off his mask.’’! 

Napoleon for almost a year had been pressing for a treaty of 
alliance with Austria; it had taxed the ingenuity of the ministers 
at Vienna to evade the question and postpone such a commit- 
ment until hostilities should have come to an end. It was now 
Austria’s turn to be suitor, and it was the work of Metternich 
to urge her cause. There were rumours that a partition of Turkey 
had been discussed in the conversations at Tilsit, and it was a 
point in the policy of Stadion to see that the Ottoman Porte 
should not be dismembered; but in case Napoleon chose to carry 
out such a scheme Austria had no intention of permitting the 
exclusive partnership of Russia in the affair; she was anxious 
to have a share of the spoils. If the harshness that had been 
shown in the negotiation for the treaty of Fontainebleau could 
be taken as an index of the treatment that was to be expected 
from Napoleon, the court of Vienna could have little hope that 
France would welcome its proposal of more intimate friendship. 
It could congratulate itself that, at last, it had settled all 
doubtful controversies with Napoleon, and that “‘no question of 

1 Metternich to Stadion, 12 Oct.1807, in Mémoires du Prince de Metternich 
(2nd ed. 1880), 11, 125. 

318 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

any importance was left open’’. But, once the idea of an alliance 
had been tentatively put forward in Paris, it was the opinion of 
Metternich that “it is due to our dignity that we should wait 
until France makes a move”’.* 