

Yet behind arriére-pensée lurks deeper arriére-pensée, and 
every purpose is lined with mental reservation. In examining 
the diplomacy of Austria, we can never be sure that we have 
reached the last filtering, and discovered the final irreducible 
element. When Tolstoy, the Russian minister, comes to Paris to 
take charge of the new policy of the Czar, we find that Austria 
has a still lower stratum of hidden ulterior motive. Metternich 
fastens himself upon his Russian colleague, assures himself that 
Tolstoy is at heart a servant of the coalition, and makes the man 
his confidant. It would seem that there are quiet nudgings and 
secret whisperings between these two ministers, almost under 
the very eyes of Napoleon. Metternich will say: 

We all have, and can have, only one end, that of preserving our 
integrity in the midst of the general overthrow....The Emperor 
Napoleon will caress you to-day, only to fall upon you to-morrow; 
he will do as much with Austria; we shall both of us have to carry 
on an eternal struggle against his subversive designs... . 

Tolstoy will reply: ‘‘I am entirely of your opinion....I do not 
know what these people wish to do with me, but they are fools 
if they think that I shall be their dupe”. Metternich’s conclusion 
will be that: “‘We have more chances than any other power in 
Europe of being intact when the great day comes for putting an 
end to this state of affairs—a state that is essentially precarious, 
because against nature, and against civilisation”’.? Austria, then, 
is waiting silently, waiting fearfully, for one culminating moment. 
She is cursed still with an unreconciled heart, and behind all 
thoughts of alliance with Napoleon she has a remote hankering 
after a new coalition. 

1 Metternich to Stadion, 12 Nov. 1807, in Mémoires du Prince de Metter- 
nich, 11, 128. 

2 Metternich to Stadion, 12 Nov. 1807, in Mémoires du Prince de Metter- 
nich, 11, 1386-9. Cf. Sbornik, LXxxrx, pp. 252-5. Tolstoy to Romantsov 
(Particuliére et secréte), 27 Nov./9 Dec. 1807. 

CH. III. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 319 

Merfeldt in St Petersburg may walk in the shadow of a British 
ambassador, and have undignified controversy with the minister 
of Napoleon, and, in the face of the Tilsit system, show an air 
of grievance that is out of season. Starhemberg in London may 
rigidly persist in avowed hatred of Napoleon, and may take his 
prejudices from Canning until he seems to become a mouthpiece 
for English official policy. But the diplomats in Vienna will be 
cold and formal in their relations with England, eager and 
friendly towards Napoleon, earnestly working for the alliance 
of France. They are prepared to cover up their true antipathies, 
and they will only betray their hatred by some evil glance when 
Napoleon is not looking. Recondite and impassive, proceeding 
obliquely and always on tiptoe, trusting to subtlety and pure 
technique, they are men of the ancien régime; one can see the 
handkerchief and the pinch of snuff. In their high abstract 
world these diplomats are like the giants of the financial market, 
using a specialised science and terminology, pursuing thought 
in dry categories of their own, and utterly forgetful of the farmer 
with his corn, the worker at his loom, the small shareholder at 
his desk, over whose heads the abstruse speculation is carried on, 
like a kind of fatality, remote and sinister. Austrian diplomacy 
works with a point fine as an etching-needle, and is gloriously 
conscienceless, and is not tortured by a misgiving. It has subtle 
nuances and courtly euphemisms and polished artifice to cover 
and cushion cynical purposes. Metternich in Paris serves its ends 
better than Merfeldt or Starhemberg. He gives it its true tone 
and flavour. He will secure state secrets by making love to a 
sister of Bonaparte. And there is an atmosphere in it all that 
Englishmen come to associate with the name of Metternich, as 
something malevolent and jesuitical—the shadow of the Holy 
Alliance. 