

Metternich’s recondite policy of peace with mental reserva- 
tions, and Austria’s cool cautiousness, were not the course that 
would appeal to Canning, hasty emotional man, “all nervous 
and a-quiver”. The treaties of Tilsit had found him masterly 
and unrelenting; in the mediation of Russia he had detected 
veiled hostility and even direct deception; he was not thereafter 
disposed to put faith in vague peace moves engineered from Paris. 
He complained, as he had always done, that France persisted in 
refusing to avow the basis upon which she would negotiate. It 
did not placate his fiery heart when Starhemberg argued that this 
was a proof of Napoleon’s good faith, that France was merely 
unwilling to raise preliminary discussions which might wreck the 
negotiation before the plenipotentiaries had come together. The 
Austrian minister described Napoleon’s eagerness for peace, 
declared himself ready to provide passports for English pleni- 
potentiaries and communicated with members of the opposition, 
in order to reinforce his case. 

“T cannot omit to say”, he reported, ‘‘that the secretary of state 
has appeared to me to be struck at times with the force of my argu- 
ments, and even embarrassed for a reply to my redoubled objections 
...and I have noticed him resorting to the most weak of pretexts to 
account for his refusal.” 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, 22 Dec. 1807, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

CH. III. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 335 

But impatience and unpleasantness resulted from this argu- 
mentation. It became dangerous for Starhemberg to remain in 
London, if he could have nothing with which to justify the course 
he was pursuing. On the 1st of January he made official com- 
munication of the proposals he had been authorised to make; 
drawing up the note, as he informed his government, in the most 
moderate terms that were possible, “in order not to ruin every- 
thing by too much energy or hastiness”, and “to put the 
English ministry completely in the wrong before Parliament”’.4 

On the 8th of January Canning wrote a reply which the 
irritated Austrian called “very long, very diffuse, and very 
ungracious, as well as badly drawn up’’.? He declined to avail 
himself of the opening that France had given. Napoleon had 
refused to declare the principles upon which he intended to 
negotiate. A hostile capital, like Paris, was an unsuitable place 
for the meeting of plenipotentiaries. England would not make 
any arrangement with France unless her allies should be com- 
prised in it. Finally, the overture was defective in form. 

‘“The overture of Prince Starhemberg...”, wrote Canning to 
Adair, “*...was made by him without the knowledge or sanction of 
his court, and simply on a suggestion of one of the French ministers, 

which is believed to have been conveyed in a rather unofficial form 
to Count Metternich at Paris.’’* 

The Austrian minister, having received the English reply, 
immediately wrote to ask for an interview with the foreign 
secretary. Canning, at this time in a bad state of health, was 
away in the country when the letter arrived; but the under- 
secretary Hammond had been instructed to open his corre- 
spondence, and he replied to the Austrian. “Mr Canning’’, he 
wrote, ‘‘...considers the subject which he has been discussing 
with you to be of so delicate and important a nature as to render 
it desirable that all communications respecting it should be made 