

1 Alopeus to the Czar Alexander, 6/18 Mar. 1808, in Martens, Recueil, 
x1, 151. 

2 Sbornik, UXxx1x, 445. 

3 Ibid. 452. 

4 “Projet de lettre de M. d’Alopeus a Lord * * * 4 Londres, rédigé par 
M. de Champagny.” The letter is printed in P. Coquelle, Napoleon and 
England (Eng. transl.), 1904, in a chapter headed, ‘‘A curious document 
(September 1808)”, p. 183. M. Coquelle, however, seems unaware of the 
movements that were taking place around Alopeus in March 1808, and so 
he has no context for the letter. He places it rather as a ‘‘preamble” to the 
proposals of Erfurt, and so puts it six months too late. There is a reference 
in the letter to Smirnov, as the bearer. There is a remark to the effect that 
England is “‘in a position to save the King of Sweden who will otherwise 
lose his whole country this summer”. Further, Alopeus. himself left Paris 
early in April. The letter can only be dated March 1808. It is to this letter 
that Napoleon refers in his note to Champagny, ‘“‘ce mars 1808”, printed 
in Fournier’s Life of Napoleon (Eng. transl.), 1, 520, No. 17. 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 343 

which Alopeus was to sign and transmit as his own message. It 
was addressed to an English lord, though the name of the lord is 
not inserted; but it was evidently really intended for the eyes 
of Canning himself. 

After some enquiries about the health of “‘My Lord’’, the 
letter attacks the problem of peace: 

After all I have seen and heard in England I feel compelled to break 
my silence. 

My first idea was to communicate with Mr Canning in person, but 
I fear he might think that in view of the actual state of affairs I should 
not be justified in addressing him directly. 

The financial position and resources of this country are far more 
prosperous than is believed in England, and everything prompts one 
to think that the prolongation of the war is not only a misfortune for 
the Continent, but, in addition, most disadvantageous to your 
country. Peace will have to be made some day, and each delay will 
be to your disadvantage. 

From this opening we can gather that Alopeus is being made to 
say something which would have no force if it came from a 
Frenchman. He had been under a cloud of late, because of his 
notorious anglophile tendencies, so the message, coming from 
him, would be likely to have more weight in London. The last 
time he had seen Canning they had been whispering secrets 
together; now, in this letter, he is to resume the touch of in- 
timacy, and return the confidences of Canning, keeping up that 
anglophile air. So he is to pass a stealthy tip to the British, and 
say that peace is a more urgent necessity for them than they 
thought. The letter is simply a way of exploiting the credit which 
Alopeus was thought to have in England. “I have had the 
privilege of an hour’s interview with the Emperor”’, the document 
continued, ‘‘and told him that the basis which I thought would 
be acceptable in England would be that of the Uti possidetis and 
the admission of the allies to a Congress.”’ Then the letter 
described how Napoleon accepted the uti possidetis, or perfect 
reciprocity, each power giving compensation, “pound for pound, 
ounce for ounce”, for every piece of territory it abandoned. 
Napoleon for his part would give up Hanover, Portugal, and 