

Starhemberg sent a long justification of his conduct to his 
government at Vienna, explaining how little he had departed 
from the intentions of his government.® It is interesting to see 
that he called Alopeus—of all people—to bear witness to his good 
policy. Certainly his decision to depart from the original tenour 
of his instructions was made after consultation with this man. | 
**T thought it best to give him every confidence’, wrote Star- 
hemberg; and the old intriguer did not cease to assist with his 
‘advice and good offices”, even after the Russian government 
had ordered him to break off diplomatic relations with England. 
He declared that he would have disobeyed the positive instruc- 
tions of the Czar and would have withheld the declaration of 

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, 26 Jan. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 
2 Réflexions sur la Paix avec |’Angleterre, 4.A.E. Angleterre, t. 604. 
3 Starhemberg to Stadion, 4 Feb. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

BN 22 

338 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

war, in order to be able to lend official support to the Austrian 
overture, but that he was prevented from taking this course, 
since the British government had already learned of the rupture. 
It was Alopeus who counselled moderation and patience; 
advised Starhemberg, even at the end of the negotiation, to 
postpone the demand for his passports; and even recommended 
him to make some delay before using them, when they had 
actually been obtained. ‘‘ Perhaps he would have preferred me 
not to leave London so promptly as I did.’’ When the harassed 
Austrian at a perplexing moment writes to his government that 
he “‘does not know how to be thankful enough” for Alopeus, 
we who know the wily Russian can conjecture what had taken 
place; and we can see it as all the more significant in the light 
of one final episode which remains to be examined—and in which 
Alopeus is the central figure. 

CHAPTER IV 

ALOPEUS MAKES A FINAL EFFORT 
ON BEHALF OF PEACE 

Vrenna declared war, and the Austrian minister left England 
—and Alopeus still stayed on. He alleged the sickness of his 
wife, but the Czar smelt more intrigue and flew into a passion 
and told him to quit England, bag and baggage, without delay. 
Tolstoy in Paris took the side of Alopeus and wrote to say that 
the Czar was more severe than Napoleon himself—that Napoleon 
indeed was quite content for Alopeus to stay in London, that it 
would be useful to find out what happened at the opening of the 
English parliament. 

Before he left the country the Russian minister had several 
conversations with the English secretary of state. At the request 
of Canning he reported these directly to the Czar and begged 
that Romantsovy, the chancellor, should not be informed of them. 
Canning, making his declaration of policy, began by saying that 
France, and not Russia, was the real enemy of England. 

“It has been constantly our system to contribute to the greatness 
of Russia. ..”’, he said. ‘‘This system will be invariable if she [Russia] 
will return to her former principles; in the contrary event I do not 
conceal from you that we shall adopt a system diametrically opposed 
to the old one. It will then be to our interest to limit the power of 
Russia and to work as much against her interests as we have been 
concerned till now to advance them. If we really have to renounce 
the continental system we shall make peace with France, abandoning 
the Continent to Bonaparte. ..in that case he will no longer contest 
our Empire of the seas.’ 