

> 
= 

CH. Ill. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 333 

a maritime peace which should rescue England from her dan- 
gerous isolation, and should disarm Napoleon at a time when his 
power seemed irresistible and so should relieve the burdens of 
the European states. Thus we find Metternich writing: 

Let the British ministry think seriously about the step it is taking; 
the bows are drawn as tightly as possible; few of the states of the old 
Hurope have escaped the prolonged scourge of the maritime war; 
two of them, only, remain strong, powerful, intact. Let England not 
wait for new complications and evils which are too easily to be fore- 
seen and which will weaken the last supports of the old order of things. 
Let her make peace or at least negotiate. Months gained now are 
worth years at any other time or under other circumstances. 

Many things, thought Metternich, made the moment opportune. 
The Russians “‘by every motive of commerce and existence” 
were interested in seeing the establishment of peace. England 
would find in Austria an intermediary whose sole desire was for 
the immediate establishment of a tolerable if not a stable con- 
dition of things. 

When will a negotiation with France be renewed under such auspices 
if the present opportunity is allowed to slip?... 

Let the English ministry above all things not bring the affair to a 
halt on preliminary questions, such as the announcement of bases 
prior to the assembly of negotiators. It will be impossible to defend 
your position in London, Prince, if in place of the sending or the 
positive announcement of the arrival of negotiators, there is a mere 
desire to continue pourparlers.+ 

At a later date Metternich added in a further private and secret 
despatch: “‘The British ministry will be very foolish if it does 
not lend itself to a negotiation”’.? Starhemberg, in the meantime, 
had been working in London to prepare the way for further 
measures. He was pleased to think that at least his conduct had 
not met with impetuous reproof from Napoleon. “The courier’s 
delay gives hope that he will bring overtures from France, and 
I am bold enough to flatter myself that these will not be rejected 
if they are at all reasonable.’ Canning, indeed, had said ‘‘that 

1 Metternich to Starhemberg, 26 Dec. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 308-10. 
2 Metternich to Starhemberg, 10 Jan. 1808, in Sbornik, LxxxIx, 335. 

334 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

a counter-proposal would certainly be sent from England if the 
French proposals gave any sign of there being a real desire for 
peace”’.t It now became the business of Starhemberg to be the 
apologist of the French proposals, to point out how acceptable 
they were, and to make a pathetic fight for a cause against which 
he had recently written with so much eloquence and con- 
viction. 

Between this man and the English foreign secretary there 
ensued a wearisome argument on the question of a negotiation 
with France. It quickly developed into an unpleasant kind of 
duel with futile fencing and evasiveness on both sides. Before 
it was finally abandoned it had produced irritation between the 
two ministers, and even something that seems like an estrange- 
ment. 