

‘**But why stop at this Latin phrase”’, he said to Alopeus. ‘“‘Let 
us say this: that if England desires peace and does not intend to 
procrastinate—I hate delays—I shall not refuse it. It must be of 
importance to them that Portugal be re-established—very good. That 
is no sacrifice. Pondicherry—very well! A mere island, a village! 
Malta, the cape of Good Hope; granted! Hanover—if the King of 
England clings to it—readily! Swedish Pomerania—let it return to 
the Swedish King; but Finland,” said Napoleon to the Russian 
Alopeus, ‘‘ Your Master needs it; it is too near to St Petersburg.’ 

Napoleon insisted, it would seem, that there should be no delay 
in communicating with the ministers of London. Smirnov, who 
had belonged to the mission of Alopeus, prepared himself for a 
return to England, ostensibly to discuss the situation of Russian 
prisoners, really to bear a letter which would convey the views 

1 See Sbornik, LXxx1x, 332-4 for references to Napoleon’s desire to have 
copies of the Moniteur sent to England. 

2 Champagny to Caulaincourt, No.7, 9 Mar. 1808,in Grand-Duke Nicholas 
Mikhailovitch, Relations diplomatiques de la Russie et de la France, vit, 27. 

3 Martens, Recueil, x1, 150. It seems that Alopeus gave the Prussian 
minister in Paris to understand that Napoleon had a pronounced desire for 
peace but that the British government was determined to continue the war, 
in Hassell, Geschichte der Preussischen Politik 1807-1815, 1, 498. 

342 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

of France on the subject of peace.! For a fortnight the matter 
was gravely discussed. On the 29th of February the Russian 
minister in Paris had written to his government to explain how 
important it was that Russia should not be excluded from the 
negotiation.2 On the 18th of March he returned to the theme. 

M. d’Alopeus cherishes the highest hopes and thinks that the 
propositions of the Emperor Napoleon will determine the British 
Government to set negotiations on foot. I only ask you now to draw 
up the instructions and full-powers necessary for our participation 
in the affair, and it is of the utmost importance to send them from 
St Petersburg as promptly as possible. As it cannot be foreseen just 
now whether the seat of the negotiation will be London or Paris it 
seems to me essential that you should send at the same time similar 
full-powers for a plenipotentiary who may have to go to London. 

Tolstoy, in fact, could not resist another opening for the ex- 
pression of his political views. “It is only in a rapprochement 
between France and England that I can as yet see any possible 
chance of dragging Russia out of the situation she is in.’’® 

In the archives of the French ministry of foreign affairs there 
is a curious letter that reveals the mind of Napoleon at this 
period.* It is the missive that Smirnov was to have carried to 
London in March 1808, in reply to the opening made by Canning. 
It was written by the French foreign minister, and carefully 
corrected by Napoleon; it exists in three drafts; it was a letter 