

CH. III. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 331 

was as willing to negotiate with France as he had always been, 
that a fresh declaration on this matter was unnecessary, but that 
he was quite willing to give it. 

‘*‘But did England desire peace when she rejected the mediation 
of Russia?” wrote Champagny. ‘“‘...The English ministry does not 
say it wishes for peace. It makes its willingness to enter into 
negotiations depend on a thousand conditions; it desires a peace 
which will establish on equal bases the respective interests of the 
powers taking part in the war, a peace conformable to the fidelity 
which England owes to her allies (has England an ally in Europe 
now?)—a peace which will provide for the security and tranquillity 
of Europe....When England expresses her desire for peace we are 
therefore entitled to ask for proofs. In the present situation, let her 
prove her sincerity by naming plenipotentiaries to treat for peace 
with France and Russia. Prince Starhemberg might in that case 
remain in London, and he will be authorised to deliver passports to 
these ministers, so that they may cross over to the continent.” 

The whole French declaration was drawn up in a manner hostile, 
provoking and proud. Napoleon did not break off the discussion ; 
he allowed everything to depend upon the next movement of 
the British government; he was determined to put England in 
the wrong; that is why he threw upon Canning the burden of 
declining to send plenipotentiaries to Paris. The note stated that 
if Austria would join hands with those powers which had declared 
against England, this step, ‘“‘taken in the same month as that of 
the emperor of Russia, would be the very thing to scatter per- 
fidious hopes and open the eyes of the English people to its true 
situation”’.! The edict of Milan, dated the 17th of December and 
containing a renewed attack on English trade and on the remnant 
of neutrality that still existed in Europe, confirms the idea that 
at heart Napoleon had no desire for peace, no intention of making 
concessions that would conciliate the court of London. Metter- 
nich spoke truly, in transmitting the French note to England, 
when he said that Canning would have to be very careful in his 
choice of plenipotentiaries. 

Metternich was anxious to make it plain to Napoleon that 
Austria was completely entering into the views of France. When 

1 Champagny to Metternich, 15 Dec. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 300-3. 

332 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

he despatched the French note to London, he sent to Starhem- 
berg a statement of his own views, taking care to catch the mood 
of the French government, and writing in an unfriendly strain. 
‘“‘It seems to me essential”, he declared, ‘“‘that when you acquit 
yourself of the honourable commission with which you are charged you 
should at the same time declare positively that the refusal to send 
negotiators furnished with full powers sufficient for treating, will be 
the signal for the immediate demand for your passports.”’! 
But he accompanied this ostensible and official instruction with 
a private and secret letter that was not allowed to come under 
the eyes of the French. “‘ Your Highness will see at first reading”’, 
it began, “‘that my despatch of the 23rd December is drawn up 
in an offensive manner. It was in fact intended to be shown to 
M. de Champagny.’” In this more intimate letter we are justified 
in finding the real sentiments of Metternich on the subject of 
maritime peace; for his arguments are earnest and cogent, and 
they dovetail into the whole system of his views at this period. 
Metternich was anxious to see peace in Europe for the moment, 
in order that Napoleon might have no pretext for further ex- 
ploitations of his military supremacy. His desire was to see the 
powers acquiesce in the settlement of Tilsit, and end the universal 
chaos by making an interval in the contest; but it was only a 
case of stooping to conquer, the enemies of Napoleon would be 
quietly gathering power, and some future contingency would call 
out a coalition once more. It was in conformity with this design, 
this last lurking arriére-pensée of the Austrians, that Metternich, 
writing privately to Starhemberg at this moment, should press 
England to make peace—a peace riddled, it is true, with mental 
reservations, and resting on secret hostility—and should use 
every argument to prove that this policy was for the enemies of 
France the highest opportunism. The fact that after the ex- 
pedition to Copenhagen, Napoleon showed himself little disposed 
for a settlement, seemed only to confirm Metternich in his 
fundamental idea that the event most disadvantageous to France 
in the contingencies of the moment would be the conclusion of 
1 Metternich to Starhemberg, 23 Dec. 1807, in Sbornik, LXxXx1x, 306-7. 
» Metternich to Starhemberg, 26 Dec. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 308-10. 