

1 Starhemberg to Stadion, 5 Jan. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 
Starhemberg’s note to Canning (1 Jan. 1808) is printed in Parliamentary 
Debates, x, cols. 105-6, No. v. 

2 Starhemberg to Stadion, 10 Jan. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

Canning’s note is printed in Parliamentary Debates, x, cols. 106-8, No. v1. 
3 G. Canning to R. Adair, 19 Jan. 1808, F'.0. Ausiria 7/84. 

336 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

solely in writing.’’! Starhemberg gave the appearance of be- 
coming more and more irritated. He decided to make it known 
verbally and unofficially to the British government that he 
proposed very soon to ask for his passports. Before doing this 
he played his last card, and wrote to Metternich: 

If at the present moment you could send me propositions and a 

basis of peace to offer to England, together with an authorisation 
for my conduct such as would silence all objections, the ministry, 
already embarrassed for excuses for its present conduct, could not 
go on refusing to enter into negotiations. It would be worthy of the 
generosity of Napoleon for him to make this last offer for the general 
good of Europe.” 
But Metternich was now as peremptory as his government, 
requiring the instant departure of the Austrian mission from 
London, if England did not accept the clear alternative of sending 
plenipotentiaries to Paris. On the 16th of January he made 
it known that Napoleon expected the final break with England 
to take place by the 21st. Before this announcement arrived, 
Starhemberg had abandoned his efforts and had decided to leave 
England.* 

He was not convinced, even yet, that the possibilities of the 
situation had been exhausted. He was still obsessed with the 
idea that peace was the superlative object, and that his business 
was to promote a negotiation. But perhaps he was conscious 
of having lost favour with Napoleon, and desired to restore his 
credit; for his arguments took more and more a turn hostile to 
the British ministers. He asserted that “if France had seriously 
desired it” she could have induced the English ministry to 
negotiate, and “might still do so to-day”’.4 He cited Canning’s 
own words as his justification: 

As soon as the Basis of negotiation shall have been satisfactorily 
ascertained and an unexceptionable Place of Negotiation agreed upon, 
His Majesty will be prepared to name Plenipotentiaries to meet those 
of the other Powers engaged in the War; but his Majesty will not 
again consent to send his plenipotentiaries to a hostile Capital. 

1 Hammond to Starhemberg, 9 Jan. 1808, F'.O. Austria '7/87. 

2 Starhemberg to Metternich, 10 Jan. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 
3 Starhemberg to Stadion, 21 Jan. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

4 Starhemberg to Stadion, 4 Feb. 1808, W.S.A. Berichte aus London. 

CH. Ill. AUSTRIA AND ENGLAND 337 

But even if Canning should prove still intractable, Starhemberg 
continually played with the idea of ‘“‘forcing the ministry to 
treat”. He had been careful to communicate his overtures to 
members of the opposition in England—to Grenville, Holland, 
Grey and Sheridan. He had noted the embarrassment of 
Canning at times, and had talked of “having the ministers 
completely unmasked”’. He declared: ‘‘The opening of parlia- 
ment provides the means of destroying the only obstacle, and 
annihilating the prejudice that the present ministry has incul- 
cated throughout the country, that Napoleon does not seriously 
wish to see the end of the war”.+ He announced his intention 
of pointing out all this to the French Emperor, if he could secure 
an interview as he passed through Paris: Metternich in the same 
way had talked of “‘calling the English ministry before the 
tribunal of public opinion”. The Austrians and the French at 
this period were paying watchful attention to the stability and 
strength of the existing cabinet in London. In the French foreign 
office archives there is mention of a scheme to offer England a 
treaty of commerce in order to seduce the British traders and 
place them in opposition to the warlike policy of their govern- 
ment.” Napoleon had good reason to work for the overthrow of 
Canning. 