

1 For the Czar’s dissatisfaction with Alopeus, see e.g. despatches of 
Caulaincourt printed in Grand-Duke Nicholas Mikhailovitch, Relations 
diplomatiques de la Russie et de la France, 1, 28, 161, etc. 

2 Alopeus to the Czar Alexander, 14/26 Feb. 1808, outlined and quoted 
in F. de Martens, Recueil [des Traités et Conventions conclus par la Russie], 
x1, 147-9. The conclusions of Martens in regard to these despatches of 

Alopeus cannot be maintained; but his actual citations of documents may 
be trusted, as they are confirmed by the rest. of the evidence concerning 

this episode. 
22-2 

340 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

Napoleon should have the land; England should have the ocean. 
And then where would the Russians be? Canning put this for- 
ward as a threat, and the fact is of some importance; it was a 
piece of menace that he had persistently used since his very first 
days at the foreign office. England would make peace if pressed, 
but she would leave the continental nations to deal with Napoleon 
as best they could. 

Then, on the eve of the departure of Alopeus, one would have 
said that Canning was keeping his threat. Under the seal of the 
greatest secrecy, he made a declaration, protesting that this 
embodied the most intimate sentiments of the British govern- 
ment on the subject of a maritime peace. He would prefer, he 
said, to continue the war, rather than make a peace that could 
not be lasting, but he was willing to admit “the uti possidetis and 
perfect reciprocity”? as the basis of a negotiation, and he gave 
Alopeus to understand that he would enter into immediate and 
direct discussions with France on this understanding, without 
the intervention of any other power. The Russian minister was 
enchanted. ‘This, Sire,’ he wrote to the Czar,.‘‘is the secret 
of the Cabinet of St James’s. Mr Canning in confiding it to me 
demanded that on my word of honour I should communicate 
it to no one but Your Majesty.”’} 

Napoleon in Paris awaited the arrival of Alopeus with some 
interest, for it was known that the man would have something 
to disclose concerning an English peace. Before his arrival, in 
fact before the Austrian negotiation had quite come to an end, 
the French government had, for some reason, made a more 
plausible pretence of a desire to enter into negotiation. When 
Napoleon returned to Paris at the new year the representatives 
of foreign powers found him “penetrated with a desire for 
peace”. He seemed alarmed to learn that his hostile and pro- 
voking note to Metternich on the subject of the Austrian 
overtures, had been forwarded to England.* On the 7th of 
January an article in the Moniteur expressed the French govern- 

1 Martens, Recueil, p. 149. 
* Tolstoy to Romantsov, 29 Dec. 1807/10 Jan. 1808,in Sbornik, LXXXIX,324. 
3 Sbornik, LXxx1x, 824-5. 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 341 

ment’s desire to achieve a maritime settlement, a willingness to 
remove some obstacles to an understanding, and a conciliatory 
disposition on the vexed subject of maritime rights.! If Napoleon 
had adopted a provocative attitude in his statements to Metter- 
nich, turning the negotiation into such a course that England 
was bound to reject his proposals and Austria was bound to 
declare war against her, he seemed now to have some reason for 
pretending to hold a more serious desire for peace. When 
Alopeus reached the French capital he had long interviews with 
both the Emperor and the minister for foreign affairs; and he 
“was treated with a distinction rarely accorded to foreign 
ministers”’.?, Napoleon was astonished with the information that 
he brought and did not conceal his pleasure. It seemed that he 
was anxious to take advantage of the situation. He gave it to be 
understood that on the conditions outlined by Canning, on the 
principle of “‘uti possidetis and perfect reciprocity”, peace could 
be signed immediately. 