

344 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

Swedish Pomerania, in return for colonies captured by 
England. 

Consequently in my opinion, you are in a position to save the King 
of Sweden, who will otherwise certainly lose his whole country this 
summer... .The Emperor’s attitude has appeared to me to be sincere, 
for he expresses no desire for any elaborate negotiations, notes, or 
discussions. I believe that if you are at one with him, he is determined 
to bring matters to a speedy conclusion, or, if no understanding can 
be arrived at, to continue the war by every means in his power.... 
Before bringing my letter to a conclusion, my Lord, I am to notify 
you of a circumstance which is, in my opinion, of the utmost import- 
ance. This country will make no difficulty in sending a confidential 
agent to London to treat there, unless you prefer to send a repre- 
sentative to Paris yourselves. 

Probably Alopeus never saw this letter, or discovered how he 
was to be used by the French government. Certainly the letter 
was never sent. Napoleon suddenly became silent. On the 2nd 
of April Alopeus interviewed the foreign minister. 

‘He has got nothing out of the man’’, wrote Tolstoy, ‘‘except the 
certainty that all hope of a peace with England is at an end, M. de 
Champagny has said to him that he imagined [Napoleon] would not 
for the moment follow up the idea he had had of renewing a negotia- 
tion with the British Government. In consequence M. d’Alopeus 
proposes to leave Paris shortly.’ 

And if that was all Alopeus could learn of the failure of the 
peace effort and the reasons for the reversal of policy, history 
cannot hope to know very much more. 

It is a strange episode, and one would like to understand it. 
Canning, in putting forward his views to Alopeus at all would 
seem to have made a considerable retreat from his former 
position. Even Napoleon was surprised. The English minister 
affirmed that he would conclude peace on terms which Napoleon 
had been seeking to force upon the country ever since the battle 
of Trafalgar. This compromise, this principle by which England 
was to have the sea, Napoleon the land, each negotiating on the 
basis of actual possession, was in fact much more acceptable to 

1 Report of Alopeus, 19/31 Mar. 1808, in Martens, Recueil, Bl yal 59) bis 
? Tolstoy to Romantsov, 22 Mar./3 Ap. 1808, in Sbornik, Lxxxrx, 490. 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 345 

France than the idea of dividing empire with the Czar, Russia 
to have the east and France the west. It is strange that Canning 
should feel himself reduced to the acceptance of such a basis. 
One is tempted to pause a moment. Perhaps he did not feel 
himself so reduced. Nothing goes to show that he had really 
weakened. One is struck by the fact that all this was an excellent 
thing with which to frighten the Czar, that it was the precise 
thing with which Canning had threatened Alopeus shortly 
before, and that all which passed in the interview in question 
was really meant for the Czar’s private ear. Perhaps it was not 
so much Napoleon who was subtle and clever at this period, 
making a cat’s paw of Alopeus. Perhaps the whole transaction 
was a ruse on the part of the English minister, a trick to frighten 
the Russians. If so, it is interesting to see how it succeeded. 
The Czar, when he knew that Napoleon had an idea of making 
peace with England, was overcome with panic. The Russian 
chancellor mooned and fretted like a discarded lover, and showed 
himself peeved and petulant. They quite granted the fact that 
Napoleon intended to take account of Russian interests in the 
arrangement, but this did not calm them in the least. They 
adopted an injured tone, they pestered the French ambassador 
for news, and they had no rest until they knew that the whole 
matter was at an end. Altogether they stood out in defence of 
the system of Tilsit, as though Napoleon had made attack on it. 
They set forth the praises of the alliance, as though they felt that 
France was deserting them. They took up Napoleon’s recent 
sayings, and his Tilsit vocabulary, and condemned him out of 
his own mouth. “It seemed possible that France would come to 
terms with England,” said Romantsov, “but if Russia had to 
continue the struggle alone she was prepared for it and would 
prove that she could sustain it more easily than England.”? 
The French made excuse that Alopeus was at the bottom of 
this transaction. The Czar need have no fear since everything 
was to be worked through a Russian minister.1 But it was 
insisted at St Petersburg that the minister was dishonest. The 