

1 Champagny to Caulaincourt, No. 14, 13 May 1808, in Grand-Duke 
Nicholas, Relations diplomatiques, vi1, 38. 

346 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

favourable reception that was given to Alopeus in Paris was 
unwelcome; the Russians declared the man unworthy. The Czar 
roundly stated, ‘‘ Alopeus is a liar’’.? 

“As to peace with England,” said the chancellor to the French 
ambassador, ‘‘the Emperor Napoleon has a genius so far above 
everybody else’s, that I must not criticise his intentions; but I think 
all the same that I must recall what I have already said to you; the 
English do not wish for peace; it is not in their interests to make peace 
at this moment; the ministry has a profound desire for war, and the 
Emperor Napoleon is wrong if he thinks he can draw this Cabinet 
into a pacific disposition. Perhaps some arrangement will result from 
the propositions that have been put forward, but it would only be 
an armistice....To force England to a durable peace needs large 
measures, as the Emperor said some time ago. It will be the sway of 

circumstances, not the rule of reason that will make her consent 
WO boca 

‘““We must move perfectly together”, said the Russian chan- 
cellor. And Caulaincourt said that the Russian minister showed 
himself at heart more disturbed, more distracted than he actually 
expressed in direct terms. He was moderate in his definite 
utterances, but a lurking feeling of deeper dissatisfaction pierced 
through at times.? 

The English government did not guess the existence of a real 
hostility like this, on the part of Russia; and though it did not 
welcome the ambitious designs which the Czar might have against 
the Ottoman Empire, it did not wish to make these an obstacle 
to friendship. Hence Canning’s persistent attempts to prove to 
Russia that England was more anxious than France to promote 
the extension of Russian power. The idea that the Czar’s declara- 
tion of war was a “legal fiction’’, a merely “ostensible” act of 
hostility, an unwilling fulfilment of a promise exacted at Tilsit, 
persisted in a strange fashion in England. At a time when 
Austria and Prussia, though breaking off relations with the 

1 Despatches of Caulaincourt, in Grand-Duke Nicholas, Relations diplo- 
matiques, e.g. 11, 22, 81, 44, 103. 

* Caulaincourt to Champagny, No. 92, 26 Ap. 1808, in Grand-Duke 
Nicholas, Relations diplomatiques, 11, 95. 

$ Caulaincourt to Champagny, No. 92, 26 Ap. 1808, in Grand-Duke 
Nicholas, Relations diplomatiques, 1, 95. 

. 
a 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 847 

court of London made avowals of secret friendship; at a time, 
moreover, when the representative of Russia in London was 
“English” in his real sympathies and no lover of the “Tilsit” 
system, and so was likely to read his own sentiments into the 
intentions of his government, it was perhaps natural that Canning 
should divine “‘mental reservation” behind the dramatic de- 
clarations of hostility that were issued from St Petersburg. But 
when in 1809 Austria found herself at war with France and 
renewed her connection with England it is curious to see Star- 
hemberg, returning to London again, instructed to say that the 
British cabinet was treating this question in ‘a mistaken fashion 
—that if it wished to win over the Russians, it must send an 
English fleet to the Black Sea or the Baltic;! it is curious to see 
Starhemberg replying a few months later that the English 
cabinet seemed decided at last to abandon its former attitude 
to Russia, and it is significant that we find him adding: 