

* Lobanov to Alexander, 19 June 1807, quoted in Tatistcheff, op. cit. 
p. 126. 

be 
of 

APP. A THE CONDUCT OF ALEXANDER 363 

a renewed reproof from the Czar by actuaily excluding Lobanov 
and Popov from the interview altogether. From these facts 
I should gather that Bennigsen, and perhaps his generals, were 
distrusted by the Czar; that Bennigsen was to be responsible 
for the armistice but that Popov was to be the person to say 
if the step was necessary and Lobanov was to be the man to 
do the actual treating. Further, from the “lettre ostensible” 
which Bennigsen sent to Bagration, as well as from the subse- 
quent interviews, I should infer that if anybody was to be 
deluded it was the French. This is confirmed by the fact that the 
Czar described the application for the armistice as an “‘épineuse 
négociation ”’ 2 

In regard to Lobanov’s full powers it must be said in the first 
place that the text of them does not seem to have been dis- 
covered. It might even be argued that their mention in Lobanov’s 
instructions was in respect to the negotiation for the armistice, 
and had no reference to the conclusion of peace; particularly as 
Lobanov himself was interpolated into this affair so that his 
position was not quite conventional. In any case one is entitled 
to ask why Lobanov should have to be provided with full powers 
afresh on the 20th of June—for these do exist?—and further 
why, if these were being given to him for a second time, it should 
have been found necessary to give him an explanation of their 
tenour in his accompanying instructions. Lobanov is informed 
on the 20th that the powers given to him at this date “are 
similar to the declaration which served as full powers for Oubril”’ ; 
as though it were necessary to assure him that they are ade- 
quate.4 What is interesting to see is that Oubril’s “full powers” 
authorised him to enter into “pourparlers” with the French 
government and to sign a treaty sub spe rati,> but when he 
concluded his treaty in July 1806 he was declared to have 
exceeded not only his instructions but his powers.® It is stranger 
still to find that Lobanov’s powers of the 20th of June did not 
even come up to those of Oubril, after all; they were a mere 
authorisation to “enter into pourparlers,” and they were without 

1 Popov to Budberg, 20 June 1807, quoted in Tatistcheff, op. cit. p. 128. 
Alexander to Bennigsen, 20 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxx1x, 24-5. 

2 Alexander to Bennigsen, 16 June 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxrx, 16. Ba- 
gration betrayed the trick by informing the French that Bennigsen was 
acting under imperial orders. 3 Printed in Sbornik, LXxxtx, 26. 

4 Alexander to Lobanov, 20 June 1807, in Sbornik, LXxx1Ix, 25-6, trans- 
lated in Tatistcheff, op. cit. pp. 129-80. 

5 Sbornik, LXxxi1, 364. 6 Jbid. pp. 457 and 460. 

364 THE CONDUCT OF ALEXANDER APP, A 

any reference to the conclusion of a treaty.1 One may ask what 
the “powers” given to Lobanov on the 16th must have been 
like, for at this date Alexander was showing a far more definite 
appearance of caution. We know what Alexander said on this 
subject; and this, which was unknown to Lenz, is the most 
damaging thing that can be urged against him. Writing to 
Bennigsen on the 20th he said: ‘‘ Prince Lobanov was authorised 
by me to enter into pourparlers for peace’’.2. Thus, if Lobanov 
was given any “powers” at all, then, they were similar to the 
ones given to him on the 20th, and we are left to wonder why 
they should have to be repeated on that date, and why it was 
felt necessary to explain without too much accuracy that these 
latter were similar to those of Oubril. In any event these facts 
would seem to confirm the thesis that Alexander, even down to 
the 20th of June, was playing for time, was trying to do some- 
thing which if necessary could be disavowed. This is further 
strengthened by the fact that it was the French who were de- 
liberately made to believe that Bennigsen was responsible for 
the armistice. Considering that Lobanov’s “full powers” were 
never used, and that they were evidently intended for a con- 
tingency that did not arise, I can only guess that they were 
perhaps given to him on the 16th because at a moment when the 
need of an armistice seemed desperate the Czar was afraid that 
it might be refused unless it could be shown that Russia was 
ready to treat for peace? It is all the more difficult to believe 
that Alexander was making a conscious betrayal of the Prussians 
on the 16th when it is realised that on this very day he wrote to 
Frederick William: “It will be necessary for us to meet and to 