

* Caulaincourt to Champagny, No. 938, 27 Ap. 1808, in Grand-Duke 
Nicholas, Relations diplomatiques, 11, 108. 
» Sbornik, Lxxxvitt, 58-61. See also Corresp. de Nap. I’’,t. xv, No. 12846. 

* 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 849 

indeed it would be salutary and useful if the place were in French 
hands. In this way, by the illusions which Napoleon fostered 
at Tilsit, the Czar was to a certain extent disarmed. 

Russian policy in the hands of Romantsov, the new chancellor, 
became, however, more realistic. Romantsov had always set his 
eyes upon the Turkish provinces. The Czar, removed from the 
enchantments of Tilsit, began to show a tenaciously self-seeking 
under-side to his character, which Napoleon had not discerned. 
He generously fulfilled his treaty engagements and eagerly 
declared war against England, but, in his relations with Turkey, 
he proved an intractable ally. He denounced an armistice that 
had been concluded, he persisted in the occupation of Moldavia 
and Wallachia, and he neglected to provide his minister in Paris 
with the necessary powers for the negotiation of peace. The 
Turks could not fail to see the hostility of this course of conduct, 
and if they should become convinced that Napoleon was an 
accomplice in these actions, they would quickly hold out their 
arms to the English. In November 1807 the alliance was already 
becoming strained; Napoleon himself was astonishing the Czar 
by his harsh treatment of the Prussians, and was inviting re- 
proaches from St Petersburg by his continued occupation of 
Prussian territory. He made use of the letter of the treaties of 
Tilsit, to confound his. ally. He declared “that he, for his part, 
saw no advantage to France in the dismemberment of the 
Ottoman Porte, that he asked for nothing better than to 
guarantee its integrity”’;! but if the Russians should persist in 
their refusal to evacuate the Principalities, he offered to admit 
this breach of the treaties on the condition that he should 
receive compensation in Prussia, and hold Silesia and its fort- 
resses.2. The proposal was calculated to alarm the Russians, for 
the French army in Silesia would be dangerously near their 
frontiers. It was a proposal which the Czar refused to entertain, 
and it gave him an opportunity to make a display of fidelity 
towards Prussia. He announced that he would lose hope that 
he had placed in his secret treaty with Napoleon, if the future 

1 Tolstoy to Romantsov, 26 Oct./7 Nov. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxrx, 178. 
2 Sbornik, LXxXx1x, 178-9. 

350 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

of the Turkish provinces were made to depend upon the fate of 
the Prussian monarchy. 

The French attitude to the Turkish question was disclosed on 
the 12th of November in the instructions that were drawn up 
for Caulaincourt, the newly-appointed ambassador to St Peters- 
burg. The fall of the Ottoman Empire might be inevitable, the 
letter admitted; but it was important that it should not be 
accelerated; it was necessary, in fact, to postpone the event until 
the conclusion of the war with England, lest the English should 
seize Egypt and secure the richest spoils of the partition. “‘The 
true desire of the Emperor at this moment is that the Ottoman 
Empire should remain in its present integrity and should live 
at peace with Russia and France.” Caulaincourt, the instruction 
continued, would find it imprudent to alarm the Russians by 
roundly refusing their desires; such a course would only induce 
the Czar to seek an agreement with Austria. The question was 
rather to be postponed. Alexander would remember the agree- 
ment which had been reached at Tilsit, that the Turkish enter- 
prise should only be undertaken after the two Emperors had 
come together in a further interview. “‘This ancient project of 
Russian ambition is a bond which may hold Russia to France, 
and from this point of view it is necessary to guard against the 
danger of destroying her hopes.’ Napoleon thought for the 
moment to lure the Czar from his preoccupations—attempted 
to turn Russia’s ambition towards Finland. He would have 
found it useful to conclude peace with the English, in order to 
relieve himself of a certain dependence which he was compelled 
to place upon the Russian alliance. We find him beginning to 
make vague advances to the Austrians. “‘ You must seek to gain 
time,”’ he instructed his minister at St Petersburg, “but you 
must do this with sufficient art to prevent the delay from having 
a disagreeable effect upon the court of Russia.”’ 