

Bientot plus de Guerre! 
Tous les Rois sont morts 
I] n’y a que l’Angleterre 
Qui résiste encore. 
Tiggi Riggi Dong Dong La Beauté, 
Tiggi Riggi Dong Dong ah c’est beau!” 
(Airlee, Lady Palmerston and her times, 96.) 

CH, Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 357 

tem has gripped the whole of Europe; land and sea are at war; 
and each side seems unrelenting. It appears that Napoleon has 
now made the maritime power the object of his concentrated 
attention, that he is collecting the strength of a continent in 
order to show what Land can do against Sea. But this very 
month sees a new thunderbolt hurled upon the scene; the 
question of Spain comes to the fore. Spain, although nobody 
realises it as yet, brings a fresh element into the whole problem, 
commences a new period in the Napoleonic era, and alters the 
whole meaning of the wars that are being waged against the 
usurpations of France. Therefore, though history never breaks 
off and never leaves any threads hanging loose and unconnected, 
this month of April 1808, when the isolation of England seems 
achieved and the last efforts of Alopeus have failed, is a con- 
venient place at which to close a chapter of the Napoleonic story. 

APPENDIXES 

APPENDIX A 

THE CONDUCT OF ALEXANDER ON 
THE 16TH OF JUNE 1807 

Max Lenz has put forward the view that Alexander imme- 
diately after the battle of Friedland determined upon a betrayal 
of Prussia.t The thesis is based upon the fact that Lobanov, 
on the day after the battle, was instructed not merely to treat 
for an armistice but to pursue the following course of conduct: 

Do not propose negotiations for peace, but if the French should 
express a desire to put an end to the war, reply that the Emperor 
Alexander also wishes for a pacification, and in case the French ask 
if he has powers to negotiate, show the full powers signed by the 
Emperor.” 

Lenz has re-written the history of these days with this pre- 
occupation and he has interpreted Lobanov’s instruction so as 
to make the 16th of June the real day of decision. He leaves no 
room for the crisis of the 20th of June’ and the struggle which 
the Grand-Duke Constantine was supposed to have made on 
behalf of peace at this later time. The whole story in this way 
becomes so much different from the narrative in the present 
work, where it is suggested that the Czar allowed himself rather 
to slide into a desertion of his ally, that some examination of it 
seems necessary. 

Bennigsen, immediately after Friedland, wrote: ‘I should 
think it necessary and prudent to begin some negotiations for 
peace, if only to gain time and repair our losses’’.4 Zismer wrote 
that the situation was worse than Bennigsen had dared to 
describe. The Czar, when he received the news, adopted a 
cautious policy; he distrusted his commander, and in particular 

1 Max Lenz, Tilsit (Forschungen zur Brandenburgischen und Preussischen 
Geschichte, vol. v1, pp. 181 et seq.), especially pp. 195-6. 

2 Alexander to Lobanov, 16 June 1807. This document is printed in 
Tatistcheff, Alexandre I® et Napoléon (1891), p. 121, but is not to be found 
in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, in which many of the documents which Tatistcheff 
quoted from manuscript have since (i.e. in 1893) been published. See also 
above, p. 240. 