

* * * * * * 

After Tilsit it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the 
personality of Napoleon takes a turn for the worse, and that he 
is spoilt by too much power. The British attack on Copenhagen 
aroused his most violent moods, and the Czar encouraged his 
arrogance by showing too great readiness to serve his system. 
Contemporaries confirm the idea that his manner now became 
more domineering than ever; there were undignified scenes at 
diplomatic circles. Napoleon at this time was at the height of 
his power—feeling himself able to count only too much on the 
subservience of his ally—and the result of this situation seems 
to have been that he thought he could live without any diplomacy 
at all. Since the continent was at his feet it would appear that 
there was no power which he had need to be diplomatic with. 
So he bullied everybody alike, rattled his sword, and gave the 

1 Tolstoy to Romantsov, Particuliére et Secréte, 26 Oct./7 Nov. 1807, in 
Sbornik, LXxxix, 185. 

23-2 

356 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

direct word of command to all the world, without any delicate 
manceuvrings or diplomatic circumlocutions. He attacked Por- 
tugal, directed the Czar to make war on Sweden, drove the 
British missions out of Europe and invaded the papal states. 
One might say that he lacked a Talleyrand to turn all these 
things into something more diplomatically inoffensive; one 
might also say that Talleyrand was right in smelling danger at 
this period. Napoleon afterwards confessed that his mistake in 
regard to Spain at this time was precisely in this failure to cover 
himself by more plausible diplomatic manceuvre; “the immorality 
of it”’, he acknowledged, “‘ was too patent”. After Tilsit we have 
the Grand Empire, and everything is done in the heaviest 
imperial manner; but by spring 1808 it had become clear that 
one power could not be treated in this fashion. This power was 
the ally, Russia. It was not that, Napoleon consented to sur- 
render his point in regard to the Ottoman Porte; but in con- 
nection with this matter he saw the need for finesse; and, in this 
sense of the word, he consented to be diplomatic once again. 
Russia, at any rate, did not belong to the Confederation of the 
Rhine. Perhaps Napoleon, even in this was too late. It would 
seem that from this point Alexander begins in some subtle way 
to escape. Certainly at Erfurt in September 1808 the Czar is a 
different man and no longer consents to be deluded by talk of 
a partition of Turkey. 

In April 1808 Italy, Germany, Holland, Austria, Portugal, 
Spain and Denmark are held in Napoleon’s imperial system; 
Russia and Turkey are allies; and Sweden is being brought to 
surrender. It is the isolation of England;1 the continental sys- 

1 Lord Palmerston, writing from Havre in September 1827 says: ‘The 
Douaniers and some of the civil inhabitants seem to be great Bonapartists. 
I was amused with a little boy of about eight years old whom I heard 
screaming out a song as he walked along the street and the words of which 
I collected to be: 