

I have had much trouble before I have been able to induce the 
British Ministry to take vigorous measures, for in spite of the 
incontestable proof it has had daily for some time of the hostility of 
the Court of St Petersburg it could not persuade itself that Russia 
was sincere in her alliance with Napoleon and has for a long time 
nursed the hope of leading her back to a system more conformable 
to her real interests. ? 

Russia was incensed against England; but at the same time, 
this was not the full explanation of the fear which came upon her 
in March 1808 when she heard that France was flirting with 
peace negotiations. The French ambassador saw the larger 
reason for her attitude, and reported it to his government. 
Russia, he said, was half afraid that “the eagerness which 
[Napoleon] displayed for this negotiation was motived by a 
desire to elude in that way the arrangements that had been made 
concerning Turkey”’.*? It was the Czar himself who said: “When 
we have settled things in Turkey and India, this will force 

1 Instructions to Starhemberg, 15 Ap. 1809, W.S.A. Weisungen nach 

London. 
2 Starhemberg to Stadion, No. 27, 20 July 1809, W.S.A. Berichte aus 

London. 
3 Caulaincourt to Champagny, No. 92, 26 Ap. 1808, in Grand-Duke 

Nicholas, Relations diplomatiques, 11, 95. 

348 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

England to make peace”’.! Alexander was as eager as Napoleon 
for the Franco-Russian alliance, and the policy it implied. He 
was still exulting in the phrases of Tilsit. But he was not blind- 
folded any longer. He was not willing to be a dupe. He had come 
to earth and was objective and critical. In a moment he was 
prepared to believe that his ally was planning to evade him. He 
was a partner less docile, less amenable, than Napoleon had once 
imagined. And his eyes were fixed upon the one tangible piece 
of advantage that the alliance with France had promised him. 
The Czar had carried away from Tilsit the happy anticipation 
of extended empire, the vague prospect of acquisitions in Turkey. 
But he had pledged himself in a solemn treaty to accept the 
mediation of France in his war with the Ottoman Porte, and 
to withdraw his troops from the Principalities of Moldavia and 
Wallachia. It is apparent that Napoleon had not fettered himself 
by any grave commitments. There was indeed a clause in the 
treaties, which declared that if the Turks refused to accept 
Napoleon’s mediation or to conclude a satisfactory peace, France 
and Russia should make common cause against them, and 
deprive them of provinces in Europe; but Napoleon knew that 
the Turks would submit to his dictation, in order to prevent the 
French from joining hands with the Russians against their 
empire. Having convinced the Czar that he was ready to take 
part in the dismemberment of Turkey he was in astrong position; 
for nothing could have more successfully calmed the jealousy 
which the Russians had persistently shown in regard to his 
activities in the Near East. He was now able to move his troops 
in those regions, without fear of hostility and suspicion at 
St Petersburg. He was able to explain to the Czar that the 
possession of Corfu had never been important to the interests of 
Russia, save for the purpose of checking French designs in that 
part of the Mediterranean; that, now, when the two Empires 
had come into partnership, “‘the motives which Russia had for 
retaining this distant possession, existed no longer’’;? that 