

“Tf an army of 50,000 men,” it said, ‘“‘ with Russians, Frenchmen, 
and perhaps a few Austrians, were to make its way into Asia, through 
Constantinople, it would not reach the Euphrates without making 
England tremble....I am ready in Dalmatia; Your Majesty is ready 
on the Danube. One month after we have made our arrangements 
the army might be on the Bosphorus.’’+ 

Alexander’s eyes travelled down new vistas, and widened to 
larger perspectives. Having read this letter he was content to 
forgo immediate designs in Moldavia and Wallachia, and forget 
his previous importunity; he was content to pass the days in a 
discussion of hypothetical plans and partitions, and the building 
of castles in the air, with Caulaincourt; he was willing to surrender 
once more to the complacent moods and exaltations of Tilsit 
—even though Caulaincourt insisted that he had no powers to 
treat for anything, even though Napoleon had avoided all 
commitments, even though it was agreed that nothing could be 
resolved until the two Emperors should have met again in per- 
sonal interview. The letter was intended to evoke once more the 
dreamer in Alexander, to perform the same magical feat that 
Napoleon had achieved by actual contact with the Czar; it was 
a dynamic appeal to the non-rational side of the Russian. 
Caulaincourt lent himself to the discussion, made wearisome 
argument on the subject of Constantinople, but took care always 
to assert that the projects should remain purely hypothetical. 
Napoleon himself made advances to Austria, succeeded in 
arousing resentment against any plan for the dismemberment 
of the Ottoman Porte, and prepared to conjure the demon of 
1 Sbornik, Lxxxvitl, 456-8. : 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 353 

jealousy between the courts of Vienna and St Petersburg. The 
whole scheme was but a piece of entertainment contrived for 
the amusement of a fretful Czar. On the 9th of March new orders 
were drawn up for the minister Caulaincourt, instructing him 
to avoid any open rejection of plans that the Russians might 
have for the partition of Turkey, urging him to refrain from the 
absolute refusal of co-operation, but reminding him that careful 
examination was to be made of the consequences that would 
follow the execution of such designs, and ordering him to attach 
much importance to these ulterior matters. 

Since France cannot lend herself to the execution of such designs 
without the violation of treaties by which she is bound, she must not 
do this lightly and she is justified in asking for herself such advantages 
as shall be compensation for those which she allows. This matter, 
therefore, cannot be the result of a sudden determination, but must 
be the object of an important negotiation.! 

Napoleon recalls a previous engagement, remembers a former 
treaty, finds that he has a conscience. He is already making his 
withdrawal and stirring up new topics that will bring delay. This 
is on the 9th of March, and at this moment Alopeus is in Paris, 
preparing to return to England with proposals for a negotiation. 
Napoleon is flirting with peace overtures from Canning, and 
thinking of a back-door escape from the system of Tilsit. This 
will be the end of victories on the Euphrates and expeditions to 
India and oriental designs. It is easy to see why the Czar is 
troubled and tormented by this last indiscretion of Alopeus. It 
does not matter that Napoleon changes his intentions and 
refuses to proceed with the question of peace with England. On 
the 2nd of April, he is on his way to Bayonne, and once more the 
Turks can breathe freely. 