

Alexander, the dreamer, had become a man obsessed. In high 
places at St Petersburg there were still members of the English 
faction, to whisper that he was a tool. In Paris there was a 

1 Instruction for Caulaincourt, 12 Noy. 1807, in Sbornik, txxxvutt, 
292-302. 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 351 

minister, Tolstoy, keeping malevolent eye upon the movements 
of Napoleon. It seemed that Alexander was apprehensive lest 
he should be compelled to stand before his subjects and confess 
that he had been duped by the French. Russian society had 
learned with a shock of the war with England, the blockade 
promised to be detrimental, merchants saw the prospect of 
ruined trade, producers feared the loss of foreign markets for 
their goods, prices were rising, the exchange was adverse. It 
was necessary that the Czar should offer some tangible advantage 
that would bring his new policy into favour, and present his 
subjects with compensation for the evils of this unpopular war. 
Savary wrote: “The Emperor and his minister, Count Roman- 
tsov, are the only true friends of France in Russia... .The nation 
would be quite ready to take up arms again and make new 
sacrifices for a war against us”’.1 Alexander became nervous, 
irritable—would storm against the French minister one day, 
feebly caress him the next. It was necessary, he said, to show 
that the French had not a monopoly of the advantages that 
resulted from the system of Tilsit; France herself was interested 
in seeing that the alliance should become popularised in Russia. 
The French minister remembered the frequency of palace 
revolutions in this dark autocratic empire, recalled the summary 
treatment that an obstinate Czar might expect. When spring 
should come and clear the frosts away and Russia should lose 
her immunity in the war with England, discontent would become 
still louder. Alexander was already beginning to show some re- 
luctance in the fulfilment of his engagements and Savary and 
Caulaincourt had both taken alarm at the situation. The Russians 
would give way, said Caulaincourt, if Napoleon should insist 
upon the evacuation of Moldavia and Wallachia, “but that 
would be the end of confidence, though not the end of the alliance. 
We should no longer find, however, that enthusiasm and good 
feeling which makes the Czar try to anticipate the wishes of the 
Emperor [Napoleon]”.? It seemed that Napoleon would be 
compelled to give way for the sake of the alliance, and would 
be driven into acquiescence in the Russian designs upon the 

1 Sbornik, UXxXxvill, 327. 2 Ibid. LXxxvIill, 386-90. 

352 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK Iv. 

Principalities. Yet this was a concession which implied a be- 
trayal of the Turks; it might throw the Porte into the arms 
of the English. 

Napoleon evaded the dilemma by his famous letter to 
Alexander of the 2nd of February 1808, and by his mysterious 
instruction to Caulaincourt, which was afterwards destroyed. 
The letter was conceived in the spirit of Tilsit, and expressed 
in the language that the Czar most loved to hear. It is a letter 
not to be read before sunset: 