

During the whole of this period it is the policy of Napoleon— 
a policy not fundamentally changed at Tilsit—to preserve the 
integrity of the Ottoman Empire, to thwart the aggressive 
designs of Russia and to prevent the assertion of British in- 
fluence at Constantinople. The most blind and battered power 
in Europe, the one which most helplessly lay open as the obvious 

1 Sbornik, LXxxvitt, 525-30. 

BN 23 

354 ENGLAND AND TILSIT BK IV. 

prey of an adventurer such as Napoleon, the very empire which 
might have been fixed upon as the first and most likely to 
crumble and fall in an upheaval like that which opened the 
nineteenth century, was the one which seemed to remain almost 
unscathed while Prussias and Austrias were toppling, and its 
integrity was regarded with a special kind of sanctity by the 
man who brushed the Holy Roman Empire aside, and made a 
prisoner of the Pope. The military despotism that emerged from 
the French Revolution and did so much to sweep the remnants 
of feudalism out of Europe, showed singular solicitude for an 
abuse that was more ramshackle and more crusty than me- 
diaevalism, and solemnly called upon the world to take off its 
hat to an institution which was more disturbing to the continent 
—which could less justify its existence—than the petty German 
potentates who had been so easily written off the map. Certainly 
it may be said that if Napoleon could not possess Constantinople, 
it most suited his interests to see the city remain in the hands 
of the Turks. But if we consider his early expedition to Egypt, 
his desire to turn the Mediterranean into a French sea, his 
gradual encroachments in the Balkan regions, his ambition for 
Constantinople, his oriental dreams and his perpetual concern 
with plans for the Near East, we may infer with M. Driault that 
Napoleon desired for himself this Ottoman Empire, which seemed 
fated to be a prize for European brigandage. His ambition was 
to possess it, without the inconveniences of a partition, without 
the necessity of allowing the partnership of Russia and Austria, 
and perhaps England. Romantic though he might seem, he had 
something in his imagination that took the classic mould. Under 
him warfare had the antique ring; he caught inspiration from the 
Roman eagle; his was the last day when the Arc de Triomphe 
actually signified something and had a real relevance to the 
experience of men. Empire for him meant unique dominion, 
meant Rome, meant the possession of Constantinople. And 
Russians to him were the barbarians pressing ominously upon 
the Empire from the north—hordes from the depths of Asia, 
from inaccessible lands, from unapproachable fastnesses. When 
he said they were a menace to Europe, he was making the picture 
that an old Roman might have made if he had felt the roll of 

CH. Iv. THE EFFORT OF ALOPEUS 355 

those waves of population that broke upon the frontier from the 
north of the Danube. When Talleyrand, after Austerlitz, 
proposed that the Austrians should be conciliated and that their 
attention should be turned to plans of extension on the side of 
Turkey, he was working in a smaller realm of ideas than his 
Emperor who was perpetually thundering that the Russians 
were the enemy of mankind. It was not the Austrians whom it 
was desirable to shoulder out of the west; it was not they who 
were to commence the dismemberment of Turkey. The Russian 
Tolstoy, watching suspiciously in Paris, divined the intentions 
of Napoleon. “He wishes to turn us into an Asiatic power, to 
throw us back upon our ancient frontiers and to carry his rule 
into the heart of our provinces....It is impossible to foresee 
where his voleanic imagination will drive him.’’! The alliance of 
Tilsit was not for him, as it was for the Czar, a pleasant haven in 
which to drop anchor, a state of felicity that had no misgiving 
save the thought that it might come to an end. It was a tem- 
porary combination, and an interlude. It was a condition of 
momentary poise. It was a weapon which Napoleon chose in 
June 1807 because it was the most useful thing that lay to hand. 