

1 Article five of the armistice concluded between the French and Russian 
armies on the 21st of June, 1807, provided that the two Emperors should 
send ‘‘Plenipotentiaries furnished with powers necessary for negotiating, 
concluding and signing a definitive peace”. Sbornik, LXxxtx, 80. 

2 Sbornik, UXxx1x, 24-5 (my italics). 

5 This interpretation is confirmed by Bennigsen’s letter (p. 201, above) 
advising Alexander to negotiate in order to gain time; cf. p. 290, above, 
where the Czar says that Napoleon refused an armistice unless there should 
be a negotiation for peace. See also Lobanov’s instruction (p. 361). It is 
true that the instruction to Lobanov was not communicated to the Prussians, 
and Frederick William was not informed that the Russian negotiator had any 
orders to enter into pourparlers for peace. Alexander’s letter authorising 
Bennigsen to propose an armistice was sent to the Prussian king with 
the words “armistice” and “‘en votre nom” underlined, though there was 
apparently no underlining in the original (Lenz, op. cit. p. 194; Ranke, 
Hardenberg, v, 518; ef. Sbornik, uxxx1x, 16). But Alexander wrote at the 
same time to Frederick William to say: ‘‘It is cruel for me to have to give 

» 

APP. A THE CONDUCT OF ALEXANDER 865 

come to a common determination’’,! and that on the 20th he 
wrote to Bennigsen: “I am sure that the King of Prussia 
ie not delay sending a person of confidence to represent 
im”, 

Above all, it is not possible to reject the traditional view that 
the Grand-Duke Constantine on the 20th of June made his great 
effort to persuade Alexander to conclude a definite peace. Lenz’s 
thesis demands that the famous arguments and threats of Con- 
stantine should be put back to a time before the news of Fried- 
land had arrived, a time when they were unsuccessful. The 
Grand-Duke himself placed the date “after Friedland” and 
“before the interview”; he says “immediately afterwards we 
concluded the armistice and the peace”? This limits the date 
to the 20th, which Hardenberg’s own accounts confirm. And 
Schladen, upon whom Lenz relies, says that Constantine re- 
turned to headquarters on the 21st with the news that Alexander 
had decided to desert England.§ 

up even the hope of being as useful to you as my heart had wished”, and 
Frederick William was not given a false view of the situation. Alexander 
called the Prussian king to him, and though he displeased his friend by 
making the appointment within the Russian frontier (see above, p. 215), 
I cannot think that he could have had any intention of discouraging 
Frederick William from meeting him; the news he had received from Fried- 
land is sufficient to account for his decision. It is not possible to believe 
that Alexander seriously tried to hide anything from the Prussians, for at 
the earliest moment after Frederick William had reached the appointed 
place of meeting the Czar revealed to him the whole situation and made it, 
clear that there would be negotiations for peace (Frederick William to 
Queen Louisa, 21 June 1807, in Deutsche Rundschau, cx, pp. 32-3; Ranke, 
Hardenberg, 111, 456). 