

He did come into controversy with Napoleon on a matter that 
touched his self-interests, and this was in reference to the 
acquisition which he made in the district of Bialystok. The 
territory had formerly belonged to Prussia, but since that time 
the Grand-Duchy of Warsaw had been agreed upon, and the 
district of Bialystok was on the eastern frontier of this new 
state. If Alexander had refused to annex this land, Prussia 
would not have retained it, for it did not in the least approach 
her new frontiers. Alexander differed with Napoleon on the 
question of the “natural limits”’, but this was a quarrel with the 
Duchy of Warsaw and Napoleon treated it as such.? The debate 
reveals something of the Czar’s tenacity in matters of self- 
interest; but this makes only more remarkable his refusal to 
take Memel. It is the confusion of this episode with the more 
important question of the Elbe and the lower Niemen that has 

1 Sbornik, tuxxxvitl, 70-2. 

2 Cf. Driault, Tilsit, p. 185: “Il est vrai que lorsqu’ Alexandre demandait 
quelque chose pour la Prusse & louest de lElbe, il espérait lui-méme 
s’approcher davantage de la Vistule’’. 

* According to the Czar’s account the dispute began only on the 5th of 
July (Sbornik, uxxxvitt, 71). The Czar states his case in this letter of the 
6th and Napoleon provides his ‘‘mezzo-termine” in his letter of the same 
date (ibid. p. 68). 

y 
*~ 

APP. C ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA 379 

caused some historians to misjudge the Czar in respect to his 
treatment of Prussia at this period. 

It does not seem that even in the peace-treaties Alexander 
definitely deserted or betrayed his friend. The real betrayal was 
a more subtle one. He allowed Prussia to be excluded from the 
benefits of the alliance. He did not dare to make his own 
alliance with France conditional upon the admission of Prussia 
to the splendid scheme. Since—apparently through weakness— 
he failed in this, the rest followed like a remorseless piece of 
machinery. The Czar was in a weak position for conducting the 
Prussian negotiation. Napoleon, after all, was the conqueror 
of this country, he could present the fait accompli, he could face 
Alexander with power. He took his stand upon the principle 
he had adopted in November 1806, that Prussia was his by 
right of conquest, that Prussia had no rights, that Prussia had 
nothing with which to make a bargain in negotiation.? If any- 
thing at all were restored to Frederick William, this was a gift; 
it came of Napoleon’s grace; it was easy to say that it was con- 
ceded as a favour to Alexander’ Alexander admitted this point 
of view which was calculated to flatter his self-importance, and 
in accepting the favour he conceded Napoleon’s first principle: 
that Prussia had no rights.4 This was a kind of subtle betrayal— 
but it was this type of betrayal that the Czar really did make 
at Tilsit, and not the more deliberate and conscious sort. Further, 
Alexander seems to have been shocked from the start by Napo- 
leon’s astonishing antipathy to Prussia, and he may have been 
more ready to consent to the terms finally dictated to this 
country in that these certainly came as a relief after the original 
drastic proposals. If he took the district of Bialystok into his 
empire I can only regard this as a further tactical victory for 
the French; it could not possibly be argued that Prussia lost 
anything by this rectification of the Russian frontier which was 
made at the expense of the Grand-Duchy of Warsaw; but 
Napoleon knew that he would be out-manceuvring Alexander 
if he could persuade him to take land that had formerly belonged 
to Frederick William. 