

376 ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA APP. C 

ment like his own, and since he was doubtless interested in 
embroiling the Czar with his Prussian friends, I cannot share 
the feeling of some other writers that there is even any inherent 
improbability in all this. Napoleon was quite capable of sug- 
gesting aggrandisement to his clients or his friends. 

We do not know the precise nature of Alexander’s reply on 
the following day, for it is really embodied in his notes upon a 
projected treaty.! But we can gather something of its character 
from Alexander’s covering letter, which said, ““My demands are 
moderate, they are disinterested, since I only plead the cause 
of an unfortunate ally”’.2. We can gather a little more from the 
reply which Napoleon made either to the Czar’s letter or to the 
same proposals which the Czar had previously put forward in 
conversation, At one point he writes: “To call Prince Jerome 
to the throne of Saxony and Warsaw would in an instant over- 
throw all our good relations”. He was rejecting a suggestion 
from Alexander about which nothing very satisfactory is known?; 
but from the general idea as it is referred to in this sentence one 
would infer that the proposal was intended to bribe Napoleon, 
and to induce some further concessions. It seems also, from this 
letter, that Alexander had accepted the offer of the Niemen and 
had specified the compensation to be received by Prussia on the 
left bank of the Elbe.* 

But Napoleon in this letter of the 4th of July, is changing his 
ground again. The whole point of his disquisition is that Prussia 
must be contained between the Elbe and the Niemen. Alexander 
has accepted the increase of territory at the expense of his 
friend; but Prussia is to be compensated partly in Poland and 
partly by a piece of Saxon territory taken from the right bank 
of the Elbe. Napoleon has withdrawn his previous offer. 

Alexander was still dissatisfied, so two days later Napoleon 
proposed “a mezzo-termine” on all points. Russia at this 
moment was demanding 200,000 souls to the left of the Elbe 

1 Alexander to Napoleon, 4 July 1807, in Sbornik, txxxvii1, 61-2. 

2 Ibid. 

* Handelsman, op.cit.p.131; Waliszewski, Le regne d’ Alexandre I" (1923), 
p. 233, which seems to me very doubtful; Driault, op. cit. p. 184, where it is 
allowed that Napoleon was making a great pretence of moderation to the 
Czar, that he was giving the appearance of sacrificing the idea of a marriage 
between Jerome and the heiress of Saxony, and that he was claiming to do 
this for the sake of the Russian alliance, when in reality he had decided 
a year before to marry Jerome to Catherine of Wiirtemberg. 

“ Corresp. de Nap. I@, t. xv, no. 12,849. 

bs 

APP. C ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA 377 

for Prussia. Napoleon’s compromise is interesting, for it was 
embodied in the secret articles of Tilsit. 

If Hanover, at the conclusion of peace with England, comes to be 
joined to the kingdom of Westphalia, then lands on the left bank 
of the Elbe to the extent of three to four hundred thousand souls will 
be restored to the king of Prussia.? 