

1 Sbornik, UXxXx1Ix, 16-17. 

2 Ibid. p. 25. 

3 The conversations of Constantine on this subject are reported by 
Lesseps in a despatch to Talleyrand of 22 Aug. 1807 (Sbornik, LXxxvuil, 
121) and in a later one of 4 Nov. 1807 (ibid. p. 278). Constantine’s statement 
to the Czar to the effect that if he did not make peace he had better tell 
his soldiers to put their pistols to their own heads, is reported by Lesseps 
in the latter despatch, not, as is stated by Lenz, op. cit. p. 190, note 4, and 
Vandal, Napoléon et Alexandre I’, 1, 50, in the despatch of 22 Aug. 
1807. 

4 Lenz, op. cit. p. 190, note 4, admits that Constantine did not see 
Alexander between the 14th and the 20th of June. See also Ranke, Harden- 
berg, 111, 456; v, 539. 

5 Postscript to Schladen’s First Report of 21 June 1807 (Ranke, Harden- 
berg, v, 522). It is true that Chlebowsky told Schladen that Constantine 
already at Tilsit, ic. on the 13th of June, had warned Alexander of the 
fate of his father; cf. Lenz, op. cit. p. 191, note 1. 

366 THE CONDUCT OF ALEXANDER APP. A 

Finally, if Alexander had made his resolutions on the 16th, 
would Popov, who knew his intentions, have written to Budberg 
on the 20th: “‘ With an astute and enterprising enemy one must 
take the most decisive measures in the case of peace as well as 
in war. In God’s name lose no time. The proof that Bonaparte 
desires peace is the sending even of Duroc at midnight’??? 

1 Popov to Budberg, 20 June 1807, quoted in Tatistcheff, op. cit. p. 128. 

APPENDIX B 

THE INSTRUCTIONS TO LOBANOP, 
JUNE 1807 

Iw Sbornik, uxxxix (Publications of the Imperial Russian 
Historical Society) are two undated documents which contain 
suggested instructions to a Russian negotiator after Friedland. 
Both are apparently in Budberg’s hand, but the shorter one, 
printed as a “Memorandum,” consists of brief jottings con- 
jectured by Tatistcheff to be notes of an interview with Alexander, 
and possibly even written at his dictation!; while the longer one 
is more finished and elaborate so that Tatistcheff has assumed 
it to be an actual instruction that was drawn up for Lobanov?. 
Tatistcheff even takes the view that this longer paper represents 
the changes which Budberg was able to make in the Memo- 
randum, the twist he was able to give to the Czar’s intentions, 
in the process of redaction over which he had charge; and he 
infers from this a divergence of policy between the sovereign 
and the minister. 

The longer document is headed: “A few ideas which might 
find a place in the instructions of a Russian negotiator’’; it is 
in the form of notes, of separate paragraphs; it has neither 
address nor signature; it refers.to “‘a Russian negotiator” but 
neither to Lobanov nor to anybody else by name; and if it is 
an enclosure to an official instruction the more formal document 
which might be expected to accompany and explain it has never 
come to light. 

Bcth of these papers contemplate the difficult negotiation 
which a defeated power must anticipate when it meets the 
victor’, and both of them are concerned almost entirely with 