

On the 22nd of June Budberg and Hardenberg placed ‘‘com- 
bined proposals”? before the King and the Emperor, and Fre- 
derick William said that “‘ gigantesque”’ plans were being formed 
but that these were as yet only general ideas.? Some time later 
on the 22nd—how late we cannot tell—Hardenberg completed 
his scheme, worked out the whole synthesis and put his ideas 
into writing.4 On the evening of the 22nd Alexander moved 
forward to Taurrogen,® where on the following day Lobanov 
himself appeared and supplemented by word of mouth the 
report he had given of his interview with Napoleon.* On this 
23rd of June—perhaps even early on the 24th’—Lobanov’s 
actual instruction was drawn up and it is easy to see that this 
document is out of all relation to the two drafts that have just 
been examined. Alexander is now no longer reticent on the 

1 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 462. 

2 “Duplicité avec laquelle ’Autriche en a agi envers la Russie comme 
envers la France.” Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 37. 

3 Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 22 June 1807, in Dewische 
Rundschau, cx, 35. 

4 Hardenberg dates the document ‘“‘Sczawel 22 June 1807” (Ranke, 
Hardenberg, 111, 461). He prefaces the scheme with the following words: 
“Den 21 und 22 Junius wurden mehrere Konferenzen theils zwischen dem 
Herrn von Budberg allein, theils im Beisein der beiden Monarchen gehalten, 
davon ich das Resultat, wie hier in zwei Stiicken folgt, zusammenfasste. 
Er wurde vorgelesen, nochmals erwogen und dann als die anzunehmende 
Grundlage der anzugehenden Unterhandlungen festgesetzt”’. Ranke, Har- 
denberg, 111, 458; cf. Frederick William’s account quoted above, p. 218. 

° Deutsche Rundschau, cx, 36. Ranke, Hardenberg, 11, 467. 

° Tatistcheff, op. cit. pp. 189-40. 

7 The document is undated: Sbornik, Lxxxtx, 31; ef. Lenz, Tilsit, 
p. 225, note 2. 

. 
= 

APP. B THE INSTRUCTIONS TO LOBANOV 371 

subject of an alliance with France; he talks about nothing else; 
he speaks of his desire for the cordial union of France and 
Russia. When he thinks of the alliance he no longer envisages 
Napoleon as making an unfriendly demand for the closing of 
Russian ports against English shipping. He declares that Russia 
is about to adopt “an entirely new system’. He speaks as 
though he himself has a great design. It is obvious that to him 
the idea of the alliance comes as the solution of the problem of 
peace; peace under his scheme will be an easy matter, he says, 
provided the two emperors treat without intermediaries.1 The 
whole idea is utterly different from the assumptions upon which 
the two previous drafts were made; for there it was explicitly 
stated that a peace-treaty was sufficient for the present, and that 
an alliance with France, if it came at all, was to be discussed as 
a separate question afterwards. It is interesting to see that 
Hardenberg also drew up his instruction for the Prussian nego- 
tiator at Taurrogen on the 23rd and wrote: “‘Leurs Majestés 
[i.e. both Alexander and Frederick William] pensent qu’en 
faisant entrevoir leurs idées sur la paix et en entendant celles de 
Napoléon, le maréchal parviendra aisément a préparer les voies 
a une négociation dont il resterait chargé de concert avec le 
baron de Hardenberg”’.2 Hardenberg and Alexander both had 
some scheme to divulge to Napoleon—some scheme which they 
were not quite satisfied to leave to intermediaries. Both were 
determined to go to Tilsit to fascinate Napoleon with a grand 
design. Hardenberg certainly thought that his scheme had been 
accepted by the Czar® and it does not seem possible to believe 
from Alexander’s general conduct at this time that he was 
practising a conscious deception. It was not until the 25th 
that it became apparent how relentless was Napoleon’s hostility 
to Prussia, and how hopeless was Hardenberg’s desire to take 
a personal part in the negotiations. It would seem that Alex- 
ander had accepted the main idea of the Hardenberg proposals, 
when these had been finally worked out. Perhaps the verbal 
reports of Lobanov had convinced him of the possibility of the 
scheme, and so clinched the matter. Frederick William III and 
Hardenberg, though they afterwards lamented the Czar’s weak- 
ness, did not accuse him of treachery in this matter. 