

In consenting to-day to give the king of Prussia compensation on 
the left of the Elbe. . .the Emperor Napoleon desires Russia to receive 
the limit of the Niemen.® 

From this letter it appears that when Alexander told the 
Prussian king that 600,000 souls would be restored to him on 

1 Frederick William to Queen Louisa, 30 June 1807, in Deutsche Rund- 
schau, cx, 206. 2 Tbid. 

8 Goltz to Hardenberg, 2 July 1807, in Bailleu, Preussen und Frankreich, 
1m. 590-1. 

4 See above, pp. 11, 14, and 75. 3 

5 Note to Alexander, 3 July 1807, in Sbornik, txxxvitt, 57-8. Omitted 
from Corresp. de Nap. I®, t.xv; see no. 12,846. In connection with this 
letter it is interesting to remember that Lobanov claimed to have heard 
Napoleon describe the Vistula to be the true boundary of Russia (see above, 
p. 250), and that there is the evidence above mentioned (see note 2, 
p. 873 above) to suggest the offer of the Polish provinces of Prussia by 
Napoleon to the Czar. If these accounts are all accepted Napoleon would 
appear to have been very anxious to make Alexander share in the dis- 
memberment of Prussia. 

? 
a 

APP. C ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA 875 

the left of the Elbe, either he was misinforming his friend for 
some reason or he was under a misapprehension himself. The 
latter seems to be the truth for this note came to Alexander 
under a covering letter from Napoleon which opened with the 
explanation: “I send Your Imperial Majesty two notes. ..in 
order to clear up a misunderstanding which appears to have 
taken place in our conversation’! Also it is plain that in the 
note itself Napoleon is for the first time revealing to Alexander 
that he had not intended granting anything to Prussia on the 
left bank of the Elbe, and that he is in a subtle way apologising 
for this fact. 

Further, it appears from the note that it was Napoleon who, 
after all, desired Alexander at this time to annex Memel and 
push forward to the Niemen.? Napoleon is endeavouring to 
persuade his friend. He seems to be raising the subject for 
the first time. He is writing as though the Czar needs some 
inducement. He is actually ready to give Prussia her desire if 
Alexander will only take Memel; and unless Alexander will 
consent to the annexation Prussia shall be kept behind the Elbe. 
Since Napoleon was vindictive against Prussia, since it was his 
policy to make an ally commit himself to a piece of aggrandise- 

1 Napoleon to Alexander, 3 July 1807, in Corresp. de Nap. I®, t. xv, 
no. 12,846, and Sbornik, txxxvitl, 56-7. 

2 Cf. J. Holland Rose, Life of Napoleon I (1924), 11, 131-2. I cannot agree 
either with the same writer in footnote 1, p. 132: “‘Tatistcheff (pp. 146-8 
and 163-8) proves from the Russian archives that these schemes were 
Alexander’s and were in the main opposed by Napoleon. This disproves 
Vandal’s assertion (p. 101) that Napoleon pressed Alexander to take the 
Memel and the Polish districts”. The former reference to Tatistcheff alludes 
to the drafts made for an instruction to a Russian negotiator before 
Alexander had thought of himself as the ally of Napoleon. These have been 
dealt with in Appendix B. They prove only that Alexander at that time 
would have liked Memel and that he must have found the offer of it a 
temptation, and that he was ready to make an exchange of territory with 
Prussia in order to acquire it. Alexander, however, at that time did not 
know how Prussia was going to be treated by Napoleon. The second 
reference to Tatistcheff (i.e. pp. 163-8) does not bear the construction placed 
upon it. Tatistcheff provides certain materials but does not come to any 
conclusion or express any personal opinion on the problem. On pp. 162 
and 163 he does give references to Napoleon’s note of 3 July “on the ex- 
tension of the Russian possessions to the mouth of the Niemen”. I have 
tried to show below that the question of the Bialystok region was a 
separate matter in the negotiations. Vandal, Napoléon et Alexandre I°", 
1, 101, seems, however, to be incorrect when he asserts that “‘le Tsar avait da 
repousser plusieurs fois ce cadeau presque offensant” (i.e. the Niemen 
frontier). 