

1 Sbornik, LXxx1x, 87-8, Mémorandum; cf. Tatistcheff, Alexandre 1¢7 
et Napoléon, p. 144, footnote. 

2 Sbornik, LXxx1x, 33-7; Tatistcheff, op. cit. p. 144. 

3 This is apparent e.g. from the fears which are expressed concerning the 
demands Napoleon might make; from the care which is taken to sum up 
the advantages Napoleon will gain from the mere fact of being at peace 
with Russia; and from the intention which is shown of bargaining with 
France and fixing a price, for example, upon the recognition of Joseph as 
king of Naples. The Russians are preparing to negotiate with a victorious 
enemy; they are not contemplating a negotiation in which the idea of 
alliance is already taken for granted. 

368 THE INSTRUCTIONS TO LOBANOV _ aApp.B 

the question of a peace-treaty. If they mention the idea of an 
alliance they say that this is not a matter for the peace-treaty 
and that it is a question which must be brought up at a later 
date!. They seem to acknowledge the possibility that Napoleon 
may suggest the conclusion of an alliance; both of them express 
an apprehension that Russia may be required to close her ports 
to English shipping; and the longer document shows a serious 
fear that Napoleon may demand the accession of Prussia to the 
Confederation of the Rhine. The fact that they speak of the 
alliance of France in these terms, that is to say, in its aspect as 
a form of servitude to Napoleon, proves that both documents 
are drawn up in a spirit that is very reserved if not unfriendly 
to the idea. In any case the significant matter is that these 
documents relate only to the problem of peace and definitely 
set out to limit the negotiation to this problem. In their whole 
purport they are utterly inconsistent with the actual instruction 
which we know that Lobanov received on the 23rd of June. 
Even if that instruction had not rendered them superfluous by 
basing itself on the principle that the two Emperors should 
negotiate “‘ without intermediaries,”’ it is clear, as will be shown 
below, that neither of these drafts has any relation to the state 
of affairs envisaged in the instruction. The two documents are 
rejected schemes for a peace-treaty; the very form in which 
we have them is a confirmation of the fact; they were superseded 
by the 23rd, and they probably belong to the 21st or 22nd of 
June when we know that Budberg was discussing the problem 
of peace with Hardenberg.? 

The longer document seems to be the earlier. In reference to 
the integrity of Russia it says: ‘“‘D’aprés les dispositions que 
Vennemi a manifesté lors des premiéres propositions d’armistice 
qui lui furent faites, il ne parait nullement qu’il veuille contester 
ce point capital”’.8 This is the kind of phrase which shows that 
a person is not quite assured. The sentence could not have been 
written after Lobanov’s report of his interview with Napoleon 
had been received; for that report gave the precise assurance 

1 Sbornik, uXxx1x, 35, 88. 

* See above, p. 218. This would tend to be confirmed by the fact that 
the longer paper speaks of “‘instructions for a Russian negotiator” and 
does not mention any minister by name. Hardenberg gives the impression 
that the question of negotiators was discussed at this time and that the 
Russian choice was still open. He speaks of “‘the Russian plenipotentiary”. 
Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 462. 