

Considering the fact that article 7 of the Treaty of Alliance 
concluded at Tilsit stipulated that Hanover should be restored 
to England if the British government accepted Napoleon’s 
terms*; considering also that in the period after the treaties 
were concluded Napoleon always made capital out of the fact 
that he was offering George III the restoration of his electorate,* 
it is impossible to believe that this ‘“‘mezzo-termine” was any- 
thing but a defeat for Alexander. 

Napoleon in the same letter, however, did grant the Czar’s 
desire that Prussia should have an increase in her Polish terri- 
tory, so that she had a continuity of possession between Berlin and 
K6nigsberg. Napoleon also wrote: “As to the exchange of Memel 
for a portion of Saxony, that does not create any difficulty’’.® 

On the important question of the left bank of the Elbe 
Napoleon had no real concession to make. It would seem that 
before this final letter reached its destination,® the Czar had 
already written his own letter which is also dated the 6th of 
July, and in which he makes two proposals that concern the 
present problem. In the first he asks that Napoleon 

in return for the evacuation of Moldavia and Wallachia, the cession 
of the principality of Jewer, of Cattaro and of the Seven Isles,’ will 

1 Sbornik, LXxxIx, 59. 2 Corresp. de Nap. I@, t. xv, no. 12,862. 

3 Sbornik, CXxxIx, 62. 4 See above, pp. 305-6. 

5 Corresp. de Nap. I, t. xv, no. 12,862. 

6 Tatistcheff, op. cit. p. 168. This is confirmed by a comparison of the 
two letters. 

7 All these cessions were actually made by Alexander at Tilsit, and are 
to be found, respectively, in article 23 (p. 57), article 17 (p. 56), secret 
article 1 (p. 58) and secret article 2 (p. 58, of Sbornik, LXxxrx), so that it 
would appear that these points were conceded by Alexander in any case, 
and that he was promising Napoleon nothing new. Alexander begins this 
paragraph of the letter: ‘‘I have shown the Emperor Napoleon that I was 
ready to acquiesce in his plans and cede the principality of Jewer and the 
Seven Isles, but he will recall at the same time how pronounced was my 
wish to use these cessions for the amelioration of the lot of an unhappy 
ally”. Alexander, in this way, put himself in a weak position at Tilsit by 
promising a concession and leaving himself with nothing but the wish for 
the quid pro quo. (See above, p. 258, and below, pp. 379-80, on the 
weakness of Alexander in negotiation.) 

378 ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA APP. C 

ameliorate the lot of the king of Prussia by a restoration of 200,000 
souls on the left of the Elbe, including the old March and the rest of 
Magdeburg, and Halberstadt, which the Emperor himself admits that 
he promised to me.... 

In the second he says: 

As to Memel and that region, I am ready to renounce it; and Saxony 
will therefore retain the equivalent which she was to have ceded to 
Prussia. 

Alexander originally accepted the region of the Niemen at a 
time when Napoleon had made this annexation the condition 
of any restitution to Prussia on the left of the Elbe. It would 
seem a possible and even probable interpretation of his final 
letter to say that he was willing to abandon the line of the 
Niemen in the region of Memel, if by this sacrifice he could 
induce Napoleon to make a concession on the left bank of the 
Elbe. At any rate he was determined not to have Memel, if 
Prussia were not given the promised restitution; he declined to 
admit the Saxon territory as an equivalent. I cannot interpret 
these facts in the sense that Alexander interceded for Prussia 
merely in order to obtain Memel.? 