

1 Frederick William to Queen Louisa, 30 June 1807, in Deutsche Rundschau, 
cx, 206. Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 492. 

2 On this question see Handelsman, Napoléon et la Pologne (1909), 
pp. 128-80; and Hans Delbriick, Die Frage der Polnischen Krone und der 
Vernichtung Preussens in Tilsit (pp. 315-36 of Studien und Versuche zur 
neueren Geschichte, Max Lenz gewidmet). 

3 Napoleon afterwards wrote in a note to Alexander, that “in proposing 
to retain Silesia for himself or for a prince of his house he said at the time 
that he did not see any difficulty in departing from the basis already 
adopted, namely the cession of the countries on the left of the Elbe”. 
Note of 3 July 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxvut, 58. That Napoleon was not 
prepared to restore all the Prussian territories in this region at this time is 
proved by a letter written by Frederick William to Queen Louisa on the 
30th of June: ‘“‘ Nor has he [Napoleon] dropped his demand for the Prussian 
provinces beyond the Elbe” (Deutsche Rundschau, cx, 206). 

4 See the account of an interview between Frederick William and 
Napoleon (as reported by the Czar to Princess Anton Radziwill), p. 235, 
above. 

5 Deutsche Rundschau, cx, 206. 

6 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 492-4; see above, pp. 222-3, 227-8, 257-8. 

7 Handelsman, op. cit. p. 128. De Bray reported: ‘‘As for Silesia, the 
Emperor [Napoleon] wished to give it to Jerome and offered in return to 
recognise the Emperor Alexander as king of Poland” (ibid. p. 130). 

374 ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA APP. C 

demand for the Prussian provinces beyond the Elbe, though he 
will grant the restoration of some 600,000 souls in the different 
districts there”’.1 At this period the discussions were still by 
word of mouth,? but Frederick William in person had secured 
nothing from Napoleon, and neither of his plenipotentiaries had 
been allowed even to see Talleyrand? 

The negotiation reveals itself to us again on the 8rd of July, in 
a Note from Napoleon to Alexander, and as this note not only 
created a further problem for the Czar but is the solution of 
many of the difficulties of this period, its meaning is important: 

It is the policy of all states to work for the acquisition of natural 
limits... .It is to be desired that the treaty which gives peace to the 
continent...should assign to [Russia] her natural limits. To the 
north of the Prussian states the Niemen seems to trace the boundary 
of Russia. The loss which Prussia would suffer by the cession of what 
she possesses north of the Niemen would be a small matter and 
the Emperor Napoleon would consent to leave at the disposition of 
the Emperor Alexander the equivalent on the left bank of the Elbe 
for any sacrifice which Prussia would make on the right of the 
Niemen. 

After the battle of Jena the king of Prussia made the surrender of 
all his possessions on the left bank of the Elbe.* This is what the 
Emperor [Napoleon] has always understood, and when he proposed 
to keep Silesia for himself or for a prince of his house he said at the 
time that he saw no difficulty in departing from the basis already 
adopted, namely the cession of the countries to the left of the Elbe. 