

3 Sbornik, LXXxIx, 33. 

APP. B THE INSTRUCTIONS TO LOBANOV 369 

that the integrity of the Russian empire would be respected.? 
It arrived on the 22nd of June on which date Kurakin reported 
its contents to the Empress-Mother and expressed his jubilation 
in regard to this very question of Russian territorial integrity? 
The shorter Memorandum omits this point altogether, and 
would seem to have been compiled after Lobanov’s letter had 
been read. This view is confirmed by the fact that while the 
longer document contains no mention of the extension of Russia 
to the Vistula, the Memorandum runs: “‘ Frontiére de la Vistule. 
La Russie ne peut laccepter qu’en autant que la Prusse serait 
dédommagée’’’; as though the Vistula had actually been offered 
by France. Lobanov in that same report of the 21st of June had 
announced that Napoleon desired Russia to have the Vistula. 
The shorter Memorandum, therefore, seems to come after the 
reception of Lobanov’s letter. The longer document seems to 
represent an earlier stage in the discussions. 

The Memorandum contains what seems like an appendix on 
the subject of an alliance with France. Though it asserts that 
for the present it would seem sufficient to conclude peace, it 
mentions the idea of drawing out Napoleon on the subject of 
Turkey; and though it shrinks from the idea of the closing of 
Russian ports to English shipping at the moment, it suggests 
a possible combination with Sweden and Denmark, a league 
“qui mettrait la Baltique a couvert de toute insulte et qui 
pourrait méme forcer les Anglais 4 adopter des principes plus 
libéraux’’.* It is possible to believe that this “‘appendix” is an 
afterthought; it is difficult to believe that the idea of an alliance 
with France, a partition of Turkey and a maritime crusade 
against England was introduced into this Memorandum as an 
independent suggestion totally unrelated to the Hardenberg 
proposals which were being formed on that very 22nd of June. 
It may be inferred from this “appendix” that the Czar was 
rather doubtfully flirting with some ideas that the Prussian 
minister had put forward. The two Russian drafts, indeed, are 
very favourable to Prussia. Alexander, planning a difficult 
peace-treaty with France, had not lost his solicitude for his ally. 
It is remarkable that the longer document suggests that Ham- 
burg and Liibeck should go to Prussia. The idea seems exceedingly 

1 Lobanov to Alexander, 21 June 1807, in Tatistcheff, op. cit. pp. 135-6. 
2 Kurakin to the Empress-Mother, 22 June 1807, ibid. pp. 136-8. 

3 Sbornik, LXxxIx, 37. 

4 Sbornik, LXXxIx, 38. 

BN 24 

370 THE INSTRUCTIONS TO LOBANOV _ aApp.B 

bold; it appears as part of the Hardenberg proposals.1 The 
shorter document contains the still more extravagant question 
as to whether Bohemia could not be given to Prussia; and this 
bold handling of the map of Europe, and the pretext that is 
put forward for the idea?, as well as the fact that the scheme 
once again is in favour of Prussia give colour to the suggestion 
that Hardenberg may have been making still more of his facile 
redistributions of territory. We know that on the 21st and 22nd 
of June the Russian and Prussian ministers were not working 
entirely in isolation. It seems safe to say that these two Russian 
drafts are either suggestions or notes of discussions which were 
made at this period, and that they were compiled before atten- 
tion had been fully given to the possibilities which an immediate 
alliance with France might offer. 