

1 Alexander to Lobanov, 23 June 1807. See above, p. 254. 
2 Ranke, Hardenberg, 111, 463. 
3 See above, pp. 251-2. 

24-2 

APPENDIX C 

ALEX ANDER’S DESERTION OF PRUSSIA 
AT TILSIT 

Tue Russian army concluded a separate armistice with the 
French on the 21st of June 1807 and article 3 of this armistice 
provided that a similar convention should be concluded sepa- 
rately between the French and the Russian troops and that in 
the four or five days which this would require, no hostilities 
should be committed against the Prussians.1 But this does not 
mean that Alexander left his friends to take care of themselves. 
Napoleon, negotiating with the Prussian plenipotentiary Kalc- 
kreuth “absolutely refused to withdraw his demand for the three 
fortresses”? which he had originally: stood out for, but, says the 
Prussian king, the Czar “had the good fortune after a very 
keen struggle to secure that the three fortresses in question 
should not be handed over to the French during the period of 
the armistice’? 

The same process was repeated in the case of the negotiations 
for peace. It might be asserted that Alexander deserted the 
Prussians and broke the convention of Bartenstein®; but at Tilsit 
“there was no negotiation with Prussia. She was passive, like 
Poland’. The truth was that she had previously placed her 
fate in the hands of the Czar,® and the Czar after Friedland had 
to make decisions on behalf of both powers. It was Alexander 
who conducted the negotiation in the interests of Prussia. It 
was he who secured the concessions Napoleon made. 

In regard to this negotiation, particularly in its later stages, 
a further point of discussion has been raised. It has been asserted 
that the Czar’s earnest intercession for his friend was made with 
the definite view of securing certain particular Russian ambitions. 
It is necessary to examine the problem that here arises. 

1 Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 29-30. 

2 Frederick William III to Queen Louisa, 25 June 1807, in Deutsche 
Rundschau, cx, 88-9. 

3 Lenz, Tilsit, p- 195 et passim. 4 Driault, Tilsit, p. 186. 

s Hardenberg realised this, and regarded it as the policy of Prussia (see 
above, p. 77). The fact is apparent also in the language of the Czar, imme- 
diately after Friedland (see above, pp. 214-15). 

a 

APP. C ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA 373 

Under Napoleon’s first scheme for a partition of Prussia 
Silesia was to be taken from Frederick William and given to a 
French prince.1 It seems also that for some reason Napoleon 
offered Poland to the Czar, or perhaps proposed to make the 
Prussian provinces of Poland into a kingdom for Constantine. 
In these circumstances, however, Prussia was to receive back 
some of her territory on the left bank of the Elbe, though she 
surrendered the rest of her possessions in that region.2 An 
intense struggle with Napoleon took place as a result of these 
proposals. Both the Czar and the Prussian king* took part in 
it and it was at this period that Frederick William wrote of his 
friend: “ L’Empereur de Russie qui souffre mort et martyre...”’.5 
On receiving the news of this plan Hardenberg made the second 
version of his famous scheme and suggested that the French 
prince should be given Switzerland instead of Silesia.6 It is 
evident that Alexander refused to agree to this dismemberment 
of Prussia, and would not accept even Poland at this price.’ 
On the 29th of June he informed the Prussian king that he 
““was making little progress with (Napoleon). In the last resort 
Bonaparte dropped his demand for Silesia which he had in- 
tended giving to Jerome’’, but, says Frederick William, “he 
makes a further demand of South Prussia and New East Prussia 
(i.e. the Polish provinces) for Saxony. Nor has he dropped his 