

1 See above, pp. 256-60. 2 See above, pp. 29 and 178. 

3 Article 4 of the Treaty of Tilsit, in Sbornik, Lxxx1x, 52. 

4 Alexander afterwards said: ‘‘I was a witness at Tilsit of the things which 
[Napoleon] accorded to the King of Prussia at my instance” (Savary to 
Napoleon, 9 Sept. 1807, in Sbornik, Lxxxu1, 63), and later still: “It was 
only out of grace that he did it, since the success of his armies permitted 
him to do anything” (Savary to Napoleon, 6 Dec. 1807, ibid. p. 242). 

380 ALEXANDER AND PRUSSIA APP. C 

Finally Napoleon secured perhaps the greatest victory of all. 
Having conceded certain restitutions of territory to the house of 
Brandenburg there remained the question as to when the French 
armies should evacuate the lands now recognised as belonging 
to Frederick William. Though the Russians bound themselves 
in the Treaty of Tilsit to evacuate Moldavia and Wallachia, 
Napoleon, on his own confession persuaded the Czar to leave 
the evacuation of Prussia to be settled in a subsequent con- 
vention. Champagny, giving Napoleon’s account, wrote: 

The Emperor Alexander will recall that it was with intention that 
this term was not fixed for the Prussian provinces as it was for 
Wallachia and Moldavia; it was with the view of not losing all the 
chances that the future might offer, and so that we might be ready 
for any opportunity. We limited ourselves therefore to saying that 
a convention would determine this period. The convention was not 
made between France and Russia; therefore Russia has nothing more 
to require from France.! 

Napoleon evidently secured Alexander’s assent to his scheme 
by dazzling him with the Oriental Design; and in this way again, 
perhaps, the Czar made a subtle betrayal of his friend. The 
convention that was afterwards concluded is interesting, for it 
fixes the dates for the evacuation of the Prussian places and 
says that “On the first of October all Prussia will be evacuated 
up to the Elbe’. In article 4, however, everything that was 
given with the one hand is taken away with the other: ‘“‘The 
above disposition will be carried out at the stated times provided 
that the contributions levied upon the country have been paid”’.? 
From the negotiation of this convention Russia, as Napoleon 
said, was excluded. ‘Russia could not have intervened in the 
question of the evacuation of the Prussian provinces without 
intervening also to press the payment of the contributions, and 
this was an obligation which it did not suit her to take upon 
herself.” So Russia was kept out of this discussion by the 
threat that it would implicate her in Napoleon’s financial 
exactions, and the French were able to say that even the execu- 
tion of the convention was a matter in which the Czar had no 
right to interfere. 

1 Champagny to Savary, 8 Nov. 1807, in Sbornik, txxxi11, 212. 

2 Sbornik, LXxx1x, 116-17. 

8 Champagny to Savary, 13 Oct. 1807, in Sbornik, cxxxvut, 236-7. Cf. 
Napoleon’s Note to Champagny, 9 Oct. 1807, ibid. p. 225, omitted from 
Corresp. de Nap. I@, t. xvi. 