14The legal norms were derived from roman and canon law, the law of the church, and together constituted the so called
Common Law (Gemeines Recht), not to be confused with the British law system, which is also named common law. It was a
mixture of customary law and traditions and was executed by local rulers, the church or judges appointed by them.
15The motives for occupying a particular region have been twofold, as Acemoglu et al. (2011) note accurately. First, in order
to defend France against Prussia and Austria, the territories in-between the Empires were strategically important. Second, the
French revolutionaries wanted to enlarge the territory of the Empire to its natural borders: the Rhine, the Atlantic Ocean and
the Alps, (Doyle, 1990, p. 199). The revolutionary leader Danton proclaimed on January, 31st 1793: “The limits of France are
marked out by nature. We shall reach them at their four points: the Ocean, at the Rhine, at the Alps, at the Pyrenees.” (quoted
in Doyle (1990, p. 200).
7
1813) and Hesse-Kassel (1808-1814). In the indirectly controlled states of the Confederation of the
Rhine, Napoleon “pushed for the adoption of the Code” (Arvind and Stirton, 2010). Of those states only
Baden finally adopted the Code Civil in 1810, motivated by the fear of a potential Napoleonic influence
and incorporated in a larger agenda of defensive modernization (Acemoglu et al., 2011).
Crucial for the continuation of the Napoleonic institutions after 1815 was the reallocation of previously
occupied regions at the Congress of Vienna in 1815. As a result of the Congress, several of the old rulers
regained their power, rolling back the Napoleonic institutions in regions such as Brunswick, Saxony,
Hanover and Hesse-Kassel. Where territories were allocated to states that could not offer an alternative
civil code, as in the case of the Bavarian Palatinate given to Bavaria, those territories were commonly
allowed to keep the Code Napoleon (see Stein, 2004). Only in the case of Prussia that gained power
over regions in the West of Germany, in particular the territories of Westphalia and the Rhineland, things
were slightly different. While the Prussian rulers forced its new province of Westphalia to abandon the
Code Napoleon and to apply the Prussian Civil Code, the ALR, the neighboring province Rhineland was
allowed to keep the Napoleonic institutions (Stein, 2004). The Rhineland was in a special situation as
it has been part of the French Empire and as such had been applying the Code Civil for a much longer
time before 1815. The continuation of the Napoleonic institutions in this part was supported by “reformminded Prussian officials" that “played a crucial role in ensuring that [it] was not immediately swept
aside", (Rowe, 2003, p. 281). Although the continuation was also favored by local elites, who came to
acknowledge the value of the French institutions and who saw in the Code Civil a protection against
arbitrary authority of the new unknown rulers from the East, (Rowe, 2003, p. 281), they were not in the
position to decide. Importantly, the power to decide about the continuation of the Code Civil ultimately
lay in the hands of the new autocratic rulers and was therefore independent of the population’s opinion.
As a result, the Code Civil existed throughout the 19th century in the Rhineland (given to Prussia),
consisting of the areas West to the Rhine river and small parts on the right bank of the Rhine, formerly
belonging to the Duchy of Berg, the Bavarian Palatinate (given to Bavaria), the part left of the Rhine
belonging to Hessen-Darmstadt, as well as Baden.16,17 Figure 3 pictures the distribution of civil law in
Germany throughout the 19th century. Besides the regions using the Code Civil, most of the remaining
German regions either sticked to common law or applied the Prussian ALR throughout the 19th century.
Figure 3 about here
16Table B.1 in the Appendix lists the number of years the Code Civil was in place per territory.
17In the Rhineland only the districts Essen, Duisburg, Muehlheim (Ruhr) did not keep it.
8
Figure 4 shows the years the Code Civil was in place in a territory before 1900.
Figure 4 about here
The Code Civil altered the existing law in several dimensions, of which two stand out: First, it granted
equality before the law to all men, removing any form of privileged treatment for nobilities in front of the
court. This implied that the same rules applied to everyone, independent of income and status (Lyons,
1994, p. 95). This principle does clearly differentiate the Code Civil from all other legal sources at that
time. Although the ALR also contained the principal of equality before the law, in practice it was not
enforced. The Partimonialgerichtsbarkeit, the privilege of the landlords to administer the law, was still
allowed and practiced commonly in Prussia and in the rest of Germany. Equal access to an impartial
law increased law enforcement. It was furthermore fostered by the reformation of the entire judicial
procedures and the installation of new courts of appeal, as well as commercial courts.18
Second, the Code Civil guaranteed property rights and commercial freedom, including a “modern conception of property ownership” (Lyons, 1994, p. 96). All individuals were granted absolute rights of
ownership and starting a business only required a business license from the local city administration
(Becker, 1985). Sperber (1992, p. 38) describes the civil liberties established by the Code Civil as having
been exceptional in early 19th century Germany. While the institutional reforms also included the reformation of the administration and the removal of old elites, compared to the Code Civil those were of
subordinate importance. As Rowe puts it, the “Napoleonic rule, far from making Rhinelanders used to
authoritarianism, endowed them with a new set of institutions that blunted it. Chief amongst these was
the law.” (Rowe, 2003, p. 281)
2.2 Social Consequences
As a result of the Napoleonic occupation the entire social system that had been predominant for hundreds
of years was reformed and altered almost over night, with the aim of a more equal society. As the
historian Martin Lyons notes:
[...] the abolition of privilege also removed the social barriers which had prevented the bour18In the territories left of the Rhine for example, ordinary people were appointed as Justices of Peace (JP), being in charge
of pre-trial settlements of minor cases. They were in particular appealed in labor conflicts in a more and more industrialized
society (Haferkamp), settling disputes in the market about the quality of work between masters and manufacturers, as well as
those between masters and journeymen or apprentices, who often broke contracts and left their masters on their own (Sperber,
1992, p. 55). “Courts would provide a remedy by ensuring the exact fulfillment of [...] contracts”, writes Sperber (1992, p. 56)
and refers to the manufacturing tribunals, which provided a form of “industrial mediation” between manufacturers, workers
and journeymen (Sperber, 1992, p. 55)
9
geoisie from buying land, and deterred the nobles from engaging in industry and commerce.
(Lyons, 1994, p. 235)
In particular in the Rhineland the transformation was drastic, from a region characterized before the
Napoleonic occupation as a “particularly old-fashioned, pre-absolutistic, feudal system"19 (Nipperdey,
1983, p. 78), to being “ well advanced socially to the rest of Germany"20, (Nipperdey, 1983, p. 78). This
happened, because "the French law and his idea of a society made up of free and equal property owners
have penetrated the civil movement"21, (Nipperdey, 1983, p. 79).
Thus, the Napoleonic reforms laid the foundation for a modern society, in which a greater share of the
population was able to acquire property, to engage in trade and commerce, which was backed up by a
strong centralized legal institution. Birth was not anymore decisive for social status, since “ownership
of property in a free market” became the “main criterion for social stratification” (Sperber, 1992, p. 33).
Comparing the Rhineland to the rest of Prussia, Sperber describes Prussia as a far less progressive kingdom, with social structures and institutions “too different from those [...] along the Rhine” (Sperber,
1992, p. 38). While in the Rhenish territories, “the tone was set by the bourgeois elite of bankers, merchants, manufactures, rentiers, lawyers and notaries” (Sperber, 1992, p. 38), i.e. a large and important
bourgeoisie and middle class, the nobility was still highly influential in Prussia. This enlarged access to
the market and the participation of a greater share of the society resulted in more economic growth in the
affected regions (Acemoglu et al., 2011).
3 ESTIMATING THE EFFECT ON CONTEMPORANEOUS SOCIAL CAPITAL
This section estimates the impact of the Napoleonic institutions on survey data outcomes related to trust
and cooperation in current day Germany. I start by analyzing the association between the Code Civil
and current social trust in a sample of 16 historical territories covering almost the entire current Federal
Republic. To remove heterogeneity in characteristics potentially affecting the outcome variables, I then
restrict the sample to a border sample separating regions that applied the Code Civil for on average over
90 years from regions that applied it for only about 5 years. Next, I create a fictitious treatment by moving
the border to further test the existence of a “true" treatment effect. To address the concern of a violation
of the independence of the treatment with pre-treatment social capital levels, I finally compare mean
19Author’s translation.
20Author’s translation.
21Author’s translation.
10
differences between the treatment groups of pre-treatment characteristics mattering for social capital and
discuss alternative explanations.
3.1 Contemporaneous Data
Measures for contemporaneous social capital levels in Germany are created by using survey data from the
German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) (Wagner, Frick, and Schupp, 2007). The SOEP asked questions
about personal attitudes in the years 2003 and 2008. I only make use of the 2003 wave, as it includes
a richer set of control variables. The outcome variable I am primarily interested in is interpersonal
trust. In the survey, respondents have to evaluate (“totally agree”, “slightly agree”, “disagree slightly”,
“totally disagree”) the following three statements related to interpersonal trust: “On the whole one can
trust people”, “Nowadays one cannot rely on anyone”, and “If one is dealing with strangers, it is better
to be careful before one can trust them”. I recode the variables on a scale from 1 to 4, such that the
highest value is assigned to the highest level of trust. The variable Trust is then computed as the average
out of the individual scores for each question. To undertake robustness checks I also construct two
additional variables measuring norms of cooperation. The SOEP asks respondents about the perceived
behavior of others with respect to fairness: “Do you agree that most people... a) exploit you if they had
the opportunity or b) would attempt to be fair towards you?”, as well as with respect to helpfulness:
“Would you say that for most of the time, people... a) attempt to be helpful? b) or only act in their own
interests?”. Out of those questions I construct two binary outcome variables, labeled Fair and Help, such
that the value 1 indicates a higher level of perceived fairness, respectively willingness to help. As Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2010) show for the WVS, answers from social value survey questions concerning
trust reflect the beliefs of the sender about the trustworthiness of the receiver. This is perfectly relevant
here in order to elicit the updating and persistence of beliefs following a exogenous legal change. As the
