note that only for the number of years the French Army was present in a territory there exists a statistically significant difference. Treated regions were significantly longer occupied by the Napoleonic
Army, which thus had more time to install the institutions properly. Second, treated regions are located
closer to Paris, a characteristic important for whether a region was actually occupied or not.27 Third, the
number of territories from which the regions were created is larger in the treated regions. Changing the
institutions and going back to old institutions after the Napoleonic occupation was therefore much more
costly in the light of the integration of those many small states.28 The comparison of the urbanization
measures suggest that the treated regions were less urbanized before 1800. The literature on the determinants of social capital usually claims, that protestantism is favorable for social attitudes and cooperation
(Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002; Tabellini, 2008). Thus, there exists a difference, while not significant, but
unfavorable for social capital levels in the treated group. While I report the same comparisons for the
regions of the border sample in column (3) and (4), the interpretation is not very meaningful given the
tiny sample size.
Next, I investigate city level data taken from Jacob (2010) for a maximum of 364 cities located in the
sample territories. Results are shown in the lower panel of Table 8. The data contains information about
whether the city was a free city, belonged to the Hanseatic Trade Cities, or was the seat of a bishop. I add
a fourth variable identifying the existence of universities before 1800. In the spirit of Guiso, Sapienza,
and Zingales (2008a) and Jacob (2010), past institutional characteristics associated with the free cities
and the associated creation of norms of cooperation could have led to divergences in social capital levels
before 1800. However, neither the treated nor untreated group had on average significantly more free city
states. As important as the free cities might have been the presence of the Hanseatic Cities, a corporation
27In contrast, one could reasonably assume, that, because of the closeness to France, people in the Western territory were
much more in favor of the Revolutionary ideas when it break out in 1789, and thus much more involved in political activities,
such as being member of Jacobin clubs. This was not the case. In the Rhineland for example, “there were hardly any local
Jacobins or self-styled patriots sympathetic to the Revolution” (Doyle, 1990, p. 352) compared to other parts of Germany, and
even if, these groups were small and consistent only of “scattered individual activists” (Sperber, 1992, p. 489).
28That a unified legal code made the integration of additionally gained territories easier was also emphasized by several
scholars (see e.g. Becker, 1985; Arvind and Stirton, 2010).
20
where cooperative cultural traits potentially have been fostered through its trade activities. Jacob (2010)
for example finds that former Hanseatic cities show higher levels of social capital today. However, a the
t-test indicates, significantly less of the cities in the treated regions were Hanseatic cities. A further city
characteristic that is a positive correlate of social capital is the presence of a bishop. Again, I do not find
any significant differences between treated and untreated cities. The same holds for the presence of early
universities.
This simple exercise gives suggestive evidence that there was no clustering of important observable
determinants of social capital in the treated regions. The most plausible explanations for the persistence
of the Code Civil in some regions are thus the French occupation, as well as political factors, keeping in
mind that the role of initial cultural differences cannot entirely be ruled out.29
3.8 Alternative explanations
I briefly discuss three alternative reforms Napoleon undertook that my treatment variable could capture,
besides the effect of the Code Civil.
Education The educational reforms initiated by the French Emperor, particularly in the Rhineland,
aimed at rearranging the school system to become free, equal and secular, introducing new school types,
and teaching French as the territories’ official language (Rowe, 2003, p. 120). This was the theory. In
practice, however, the reform was a failure. Shortage of teacher and money led to the decay of the school
system.30 With regard to higher education, the only academy created was the law school in Koblenz
(Rowe, 2003, p. 137). When Prussia took over the territory of the Rhine, it pushed back the leftovers of
the French rule, adapted the school system to the Prussian, and opened universities as in Bonn to educate
new bureaucrats for the Empire (Rowe, 2003, p. 134).
Administration Another Napoleonic reform consisted in the introduction of the civil administration
and its centralization. The new Prussian rulers, however, reformed the local and provincial government
immediately after the takeover of the Rhineland in April 1815. While the very local administration
29Arvind and Stirton (2010) research the question, what makes a region keep the Code Civil after the Napoleonic invasion.
They find that there is no single factor explaining the reception of the legal Code. Rather a set of factors was responsible,
including amongst others direct French control, and the number of territories the region gained in 1815. Direct French control
is surely an important factor, as well as the number of years the Code Civil was in in force before 1815. Those aspects made it
more costly to abandon the Code Civil afterwards.
30In the Rhineland three forth of the population could not read and write in 1814 and regular schooling was an exception
(Schmenk, 2008, p. 232)
21
system was continued, i.e. on the level of the mayoralty, superior administration levels were adapted
to the Prussian one, which itself had introduced a civil administration under its reformer Stein in the
meantime (Rowe, 2003).
Political Rights Changes in the elite structure might have led to a new balance of power and an increase
in citizens’ political rights. As the Rhineland was given to Prussia, its citizens ended up having the same
political rights as other Prussians. While the Prussian King promised to introduce a constitution and to
introduce a supra-regional parliament in 1815, he did not keep it. The lack of political rights is consistent
with recent data collected.31
These examples suggest that only the Code Civil endured the immediate period of French occupation
and could therefore impact beliefs in the long-run. Furthermore, the results of the both the complete and
border sample hold true even within Prussia, that is holding those variables constant
4 TRADE EMPLOYMENT AND SOCIAL CAPITAL IN 19TH CENTURY
PRUSSIA
The results from the previous estimations have shown that regions that applied the Napoleonic institutions throughout the 19th century have higher levels of trust, more than 200 years after its installment.
However, 200 years is an enormous time span, and other shocks happening had the potential to destroy
or to generate social capital. The following section thus has two aims: It first aims at giving support
for the proposed channel going through economic cooperation, and second to show immediate spillover
effects on cooperation outside the work environment. It will do so by looking at employment in trade,
manufacturing and craft, as well as at 19th century associational participation within a sample of Prussian
counties.
I will begin by investigating a possible link between the Napoleonic institutions and employment in
trade, manufacturing and craft in 19th century Prussia. It is reasonable to expect the Code Civil to
having had a positive influence on commercial activities. Already Adam (Smith, 1776, p. 862) stressed
the importance of institutions for “[c]ommerce and manufactures [to] flourish”, Milgrom, North, and
31Tabellini (2010) measured the constraints of the executive on the regional level in 1800 and 1850 on scale from 1 (no
constraints) to 7 (democracy) and reports for both dates a value of 1 for the Rhineland and 2 for Baden. This is very much in
line with the quality of other German regions at that time, ranging from a minimum of 1 to a sample maximum of 3 (Bavaria)
and and an overall maximum of 4 (Bremen, Hamburg).
22
Weingast (1990) emphasized the role of the medieval merchant courts for the evolution of interpersonal
exchange, De Long and Shleifer (1993) those of constraints on the executive for city growth and more
recently Cantoni and Yuchtman (2012) show that legal training in Universities and subsequent evolution
of legal institutions was causing greater market activity in medieval Germany. Closest to this paper is
of course Acemoglu et al. (2011), who established a relation between the Napoleonic institutions and
urbanization rates. I use the share of people working in trade related jobs, such as goods or money
trader, as a proxy for trade in mid-19th century Prussia. Trade, however, only measures the last step
of the production chain and therefore underestimates economic cooperation. To capture broader effects
on economic interaction, I include additionally employment in factories and craft. Trade, manufacturing
and craft professions naturally require not only a high degree of cooperation and trust, but they also profit
the most from a third party enforcement institutions.
As work-related cooperation increases, cooperation outside the workplace should be affected, too.
Outside-workplace cooperation basically includes all cooperative actions outside professional activities
that do not have the aim of an (immediate) economic payoff. This includes the participation in associations, or other forms of voluntary or political engagements characterizing an active civil society.32 Three
main forms of associations existed in 19th century Prussia. Those were the singer clubs, the gymnasts,
and the shooters (often jointly referred to as the “cloverleaf”) (Klenke, 1998, p. 20). Those clubs were
engaged in all kinds of community life, especially important for organizing big folk festivals (Klenke,
1998, p. 20). The markmen’s festival (Schützenfest), organized by the shooters were attracting sometimes hundreds of people. Data is available for two of the three kinds of associations, used as a proxy
for social capital in the 19th century. In particular, I look at the number of gymnast clubs in a crosssection of Prussian counties. Gymnast clubs have another interesting feature I will make use of. Besides
being a sports association in which people where doing gymnastic exercises, they were also providing
a public good, as volunteer gymnast fire departments (Turnfeuerwehren) were created out of them. As
such they are the predecessors of contemporaneous volunteer fire departments. Since gymnasts were
in good shape, they were best suited to do the demanding job of a firemen at that time, which required
to run the hand-operated fire-engine and climbing into houses. Thus, many gymnast clubs created fire
departments where members worked voluntarily as firemen. The second data set being used is listing
the foundation of shooting associations from 1700 to 1900 for each county in the two Prussian provinces
Rhineland and Westphalia. I will analyze the development of shooting associations in the neighboring
32Associational membership has been used in several contributions to proxy for contemporaneous and historical levels of
social capital. The idea that social capital can be measured by the degree of associational activity goes back to Putnam (1994)).
23
regions Rhineland, which kept the Code Civil, and Westphalia, which did not. One would expect a
positive association between the Napoleonic institutions on the number of associations created.
4.1 Historical Data
