treatment should only affect measures related to cooperative attitudes, I additionally construct a measure
of the strength of family ties as a counterfactual. I use the frequency of family visits as a proxy for the
importance of the family. Individuals with strong family ties are likely to visit their family members
more often. The related question in the SOEP asks “Please indicate how often you take part in each
activity: Visits to and from family members and relatives”. The variable is measured on a 5 point scale,
where 1 indicates “daily”, 2 “at least once a week”, 3 “at least once a month”, 4 “seldom”, 5 “never”.
That is a higher score of the variable Family indicates weaker family ties.
The geographical level up to which individual observations can be located regionally is the county level.
11
This geographical level is equivalent to the NUTS 3 level of the Statistical Units of the European Union
and includes more than 400 regions.22 To control for other influences of social capital I will include several individual control variables, such as the respondent’s age and its square, dummy variables indicating
the gender of the respondent and whether the respondent was unemployed in the last year or not, as well
as the household income in the last month. To account for the legacy of the former Communist regime
in Germany I add another dummy that takes on the value 1 if the respondent lived before 1990 in the
former East of Germany. Education is controlled for using six different indicator variables for schooling and distinguishes between having no school degree at all, having attended a 9 year middle school
(Hauptschule), a 10 year middle school (Realschule), a 12 year secondary school (Fachhochschulreife)
or having obtained the highest secondary school degree after 13 years of school (Abitur). Furthermore,
I control for five categories of religious affiliation which are protestant, catholic, any other Christian
religion, a different religion that is not Christian or none religious affiliation at all. Since my focus of
attention lies on the intergenerational transfer of individuals’ beliefs from their ancestors that have lived
in the particular historical territory many years ago, ideally I would like to consider only individuals for
which I can identify the historical territory of their ancestors residence during the 19th century. Unfortunately, the SOEP data does not provide information about the location of ancestors. The second-best in
order to reduce a possible bias caused by migration is to delete foreigners, that is non-German citizens as
well as second generation immigrants, from the sample. These individuals most likely share a different
culture, traditions and norms that are linked to their country of origin.23
Table 1 about here
The current location of each individual is matched with the 16 historical territories for which historical
data is available, i.e. historical territories are matched to current districts. Historical borders match
remarkably well with current district borders and cut only through very few districts. Current districts
that straddle a historical border will be assigned to a historical region depending of the historical location
of the districts current capital. As historical controls I include the territories urbanization rate in 1850
to control for mere historical income differences across territories, the initial urbanization rate and the
share of protestants in 1800, the longitude and latitude of the territories’ capital and its distance to Paris.
The source for the historical data is Acemoglu et al. (2011).24 Table 1 provides summary statistics for
22Because of the confidentiality requirements of the data on this detailed regional level it was accessed via a remote access.
23Against the deletion of immigrants one could argue, that past institutions persisted and influenced beliefs and values of all
citizens today. However, this is not the channel that is proposed here. In contrast, I argue that past institutions affected beliefs
and values in the past, and these attitudes persisted until today. See also Algan and Cahuc (2010) for the correlation between
trust of immigrants and trust in the home country.
24Table B.1 in the Appendix gives the territories included in the sample and the treatment.
12
the individual data for both the complete and the border sample. After the deletion of immigrants and
those territories, for which historical data is not available, more than 15000 individuals are observed and
included in the complete sample.
3.2 Complete Sample Analysis
I will begin with estimating the effect of the Code Civil for current trust keeping a sample including all
German regions.
The following model is regressed:
Yi,d,h = α + δ ∗ civilh + X
0
i,d,h
∗ β + ui,d,h(1)
where Yi,d,h measures one of the social capital related outcomes of individual i living in district d, belonging to historical territory h. civilh measures the number of civil years in historical region h before
the year 1900. The matrix Xi,d,h contains a list of individual controls, specified above.
Table 2 about here
Results of the regressions are displayed in Table 2. Column (1) shows the basic correlation between the
Code Civil and individual trust, only controlling for macro-region fixed effects for the four macro-regions
north, south, east and west. The coefficient is positive, and significant on the 1% significant level. Thus,
individual trust is increasing in the number of years the Code Civil was used. This finding is robust to
using cooperation and fairness as outcome variables in columns (2) and (3). I then add individual controls
(age, age sq., gender), economic controls (household income, unemployment dummy), 5 categories of
educational attainment and 4 categories of religious denomination. As it is visible from column (4), the
coefficient of the Code Civil treatment decreases slightly - both in its significance and magnitude. Having
applied the Code Civil for one standard deviation of about 37 years increases trust by 0.015 in absolute
terms, a 98 year treatment increases trust by on average 0.04, or 8 percent of a standard deviation of trust.
In column (7) I regress the same model but now using the proxy for family ties as dependent variable.
Since the link proposed here goes from institutional quality to cooperation and not to other attitudes,
such as attitudes towards family, I do not expect to find a significant correlation. Indeed, as column (7)
shows, the coefficient of interest is positive, but not significant. Next, I control for historical determinants
on the territory level. In particular, I include the urbanization rate and the share of protestants in 1800,
13
the urbanization rate in 1850, the longitude and latitude of the historical territory, and the distance of its
capital to Paris. The share of protestants has been shown to be a good proxy for educational attainment
(Becker and Woessmann, 2009) and protestantism goes along with values favorable for cooperation
compared to catholicism (Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002; Tabellini, 2008). Controlling for past influences
almost doubles the magnitude of the coefficient and increases its significance for all outcome variables,
as shown in columns (8) to (10). Having applied the Code Civil for a standard deviation of 37 years goes
along with 0.06 of a standard deviation higher level of trust, while 90 years go along with an increase
of 0.17 of a standard deviation in trust. To put this magnitude in relation, switching from catholicism to
protestantism increases individual trust on average by 0.006 of a standard deviation, being unemployed
reduces trust by 0.22 of a standard deviation, while having lived in the former GDR reduces trust by a
coefficient of 0.15 of a standard deviation in trust.
3.3 Robustness of the Complete Sample
I will perform additional regressions in the framework of the complete sample to show the robustness of
the results in different sub-samples. Restricting the sample provides furthermore a possibility to mitigate
possible endogeneity concerns related to the adoption of the Code Civil. In the first specification I will
drop the historical territories Baden and Saxony, which choose to adopt the Code Civil - although this
choice was severely constrained in the case of Baden. The finding of a positive, significant effect is robust
to this specification, as column (1) in Table3 show. Next, only regions are kept in the sample that either
adopted the Code Civil through Napoleonic occupation, adopted it voluntarily or at least prepared its
adoption, as the two members of the Confederation of the Rhine Bavaria and Hesse-Darmstadt, did. The
idea is to compare places that almost got the Code Civil, with those having actually adopted it, removing
regions from the sample that rejected the Code Civil completely and did not consider its application.25
Thus, the sample is characterized by a lower degree of heterogeneity in the adoption decision. I still find
a positive, significant effect in column (2).
Table 3 about here
Going one step further, I consider only regions that adopted the Code Civil either voluntarily or prepared
to adopt it. This leaves me with the regions Baden, Bavaria and Hesse-Darmstadt. All three regions
where never directly occupied by Napoleon, but indirectly connected to the French Empire through the
25The classification of whether a region considered the Code’s adoption is taken from Arvind and Stirton (2010)
14
Confederation of the Rhine, and as such pushed by the French Emperor to adopt its institutions. As
column (3) shows, Baden, the region that has actually adopted the Code Civil has significantly more trust
today. The estimated coefficient in column (4) shows that there exists a positive relationship between
the years of the Code Civil was in place and trust in a sample of regions that actually applied the Code
Civil for at least some years. This indicates that it is not the pure adoption of the Code Civil, but the
duration which matters for long-run changes in beliefs. Moreover, within a sample of regions that all
were occupied by the French Army in column (5) I find the same positive relationship between having
the duration of the Code Civil and trust today. While possibly all occupied regions experienced the same
Napoleonic effects of the occupation, those in which the Code Civil was used after the Napoleonic retreat
show higher trust today. Finally, within Prussia the positive association holds true (see column (6)), i.e.
holding kingdom characteristics constant from 1815 on.
3.4 Identification
Up to this point this section has established a robust positive association between the application of an
impartial legal enforcement institution in 19th century German regions and trust in different samples.
Two explanations can potentially account for this finding: First, treated regions were characterized by
higher levels of social capital before the treatment took place. In other words, the treatment was not
distributed independently of the initial culture. In that case, the results from the estimation only picks
up path dependencies reflecting pre-treatment differences. Second, regions started out with comparable
levels of social capital and the Napoleonic treatment influenced social capital levels positively, i.e. there
existed a causal effect.
In the following paragraphs I will show that the evidence from a border sample (3.5 and 3.6) and the
comparison of pre-treatment characteristics (3.7) point overwhelmingly towards the second explanation,
that is a true treatment effect. Treatment in this historical experiment contains the adoption and continuation of the Code Civil. The evaluation of the historical literature, as described above, suggests that the
selection and occupation of the territories by the French Army was not driven by economic or cultural
