---
source_url: "https://d-nb.info/1152137301/34"
final_url: "https://d-nb.info/1152137301/34"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "5b4f69923855fbc8a683c7965f5d2171c974408296a52e784668cf30e61cf031"
title: ""
content_kind: "page_text"
---

SOEPpapers
on Multidisciplinary Panel Data Research
Law and Social Capital: 
Evidence from the Code Napoleon 
in Germany
Johannes C. Buggle
566
2013
SOEP — The German Socio-Economic Panel Study at DIW Berlin 566-2013
SOEPpapers on Multidisciplinary Panel Data Research 
at DIW Berlin
This series presents research findings based either directly on data from the German SocioEconomic Panel Study (SOEP) or using SOEP data as part of an internationally comparable 
data set (e.g. CNEF, ECHP, LIS, LWS, CHER/PACO). SOEP is a truly multidisciplinary 
household panel study covering a wide range of social and behavioral sciences: economics, 
sociology, psychology, survey methodology, econometrics and applied statistics, educational 
science, political science, public health, behavioral genetics, demography, geography, and 
sport science. 
The decision to publish a submission in SOEPpapers is made by a board of editors chosen 
by the DIW Berlin to represent the wide range of disciplines covered by SOEP. There is no 
external referee process and papers are either accepted or rejected without revision. Papers 
appear in this series as works in progress and may also appear elsewhere. They often 
represent preliminary studies and are circulated to encourage discussion. Citation of such a 
paper should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be requested from 
the author directly.
Any opinions expressed in this series are those of the author(s) and not those of DIW Berlin. 
Research disseminated by DIW Berlin may include views on public policy issues, but the 
institute itself takes no institutional policy positions.
The SOEPpapers are available at
http://www.diw.de/soeppapers
Editors: 
Jürgen Schupp (Sociology)
Gert G. Wagner (Social Sciences, Vice Dean DIW Graduate Center)
Conchita D’Ambrosio (Public Economics) 
Denis Gerstorf (Psychology, DIW Research Director)
Elke Holst (Gender Studies, DIW Research Director)
Frauke Kreuter (Survey Methodology, DIW Research Professor)
Martin Kroh (Political Science and Survey Methodology)
Frieder R. Lang (Psychology, DIW Research Professor)
Henning Lohmann (Sociology, DIW Research Professor)
Jörg-Peter Schräpler (Survey Methodology, DIW Research Professor)
Thomas Siedler (Empirical Economics)
C. Katharina Spieß (Empirical Economics and Educational Science)
ISSN: 1864-6689 (online)
German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP)
DIW Berlin
Mohrenstrasse 58
10117 Berlin, Germany
Contact: Uta Rahmann | soeppapers@diw.de 
LAW AND SOCIAL CAPITAL: EVIDENCE FROM THE CODE
NAPOLEON IN GERMANY∗
Johannes C. Buggle†
Sciences Po, Department of Economics
First version: May 22, 2012
This version: July 2, 2013
Abstract
Do legal institutions affect norms of cooperation? Using the introduction of the Code Napoleon during
the Napoleonic Wars in Germany as a historical experiment, I show that a positive shock to the quality
of legal institutions can increase social-capital long-lastingly. I find that individuals living in regions
where the Code Napoleon was used display higher levels of interpersonal trust in the data of the German
Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). This result holds true conditional on past development levels, as well
as in a less heterogeneous border sample, separating regions that applied the Code Napoleon from those
that did not. Artificially moving the border and comparing regional pre-treatment characteristics support
the interpretation of a causal treatment effect. In addition, I show immediate effects of the Code Civil on
novel measures of 19th century social capital. The analysis of historical employment data furthermore
suggests economic cooperation to be a potential mechanism for the relationship between legal institutions
and social capital.
Keywords: Institutions, Long-Term Persistence, Social Capital.
JEL-Classification: N43, O10, P48, Z10
∗
I am grateful to Yann Algan for his ongoing support and encouragement. I thank Francesco Amodio, Davide Cantoni,
Pauline Grosjean, Marc Sangnier, Andrei Shleifer, Guido Tabellini, Joachim Voth and seminar participants at the FRESH
Meeting London, the UPF Reading Group on Persistence, the Spring Meeting for Young Economists 2013, and Sciences Po
for very helpful comments and discussions at different stages of this project. Valuable research assistance was provided by
Ferdinand Lutz and Malte Syman. I wish further to thank the DIW Berlin for making the SOEP data available, as well as the
GESIS Leibniz Institute for Social Sciences. All errors remain my own.
†Contact: 28 Rue des Saints-Pères, 75007 Paris, e-mail: johannes.buggle@sciences-po.org.
1 INTRODUCTION
Social capital levels across and within countries are highly correlated with the quality of past and contemporary institutions (Putnam, 1994; Tabellini, 2008 and Tabellini, 2010; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales,
2008a; Algan and Cahuc, 2013).1 However, empirical findings of a causal impact of impartial enforcement institutions on norms of cooperation are almost non-existent. Identification is particularly difficult
as initial cultural norms of a society starkly influence the shape of its institutions. In this paper I make
use of a historical experiment during which a legal institution was imposed from outside to identify
the persistent impact of law on social capital. This historical experiment, the introduction of the Code
Napoleon in parts of 19th century Germany, constituted a dramatic positive shock to the quality of existing legal institutions. Centered around the most modern legal code at that time and establishing a third
party enforcement institution with the principle of equality before the law, the Napoleonic institutions
“encouraged the liberation of the individual from corporative bonds and the establishment of a civil society" (Fehrenbach, 2008). My findings, estimated on the micro-level within a country, show that regions
that used the Napoleonic Civil Code throughout the 19th century display on average higher levels of
social capital.2 This supports the description of the positive social effects of the Code Napoleon and its
legacy persisting to the present day.3
My analysis contributes to the recently emerging literature emphasizing the weight of history and particularly historical institutions for current beliefs.4 However, it differs from the latter in two important
dimensions. First, rather then applying a broad definition of institutions, this paper considers a specific
type: the law. In line with recent theoretical models (e.g. Tabellini, 2008; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales,
2008b), I expect impartial legal enforcement institutions to affect trust as they promote individual cooperation with anonymous others.5
Initially, in a society characterized by weak law enforcement, social and
1
In a cross-section of countries one can observe a strong positive association between the quality of the legal system and
trust, as Figure 1 displays. Countries protecting individual property stronger and in which courts and judges are independent and
impartial display higher levels of interpersonal trust. This does not merely mirror an income effect, since the positive association
is robust to controlling for income and education (see Figure 2). It cannot be deduced, however, that there exists a causal link
going from the quality of the legal system to interpersonal trust. It is equally likely, that countries, in which individuals trust
each other to a higher extent, also have stronger preferences for protecting property and value more an impartial and independent
jury.
2Throughout this paper I apply a broad definition of “social capital” encompassing different measures used in the literature,
such as individual beliefs as well as outcome measures.
3The long-run consequences of the law for economic outcomes has been intensively documented by scholars researching
different legal origins. See for example López-de-Silanes et al. (1998) and La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008).
4See Nunn (2012) for a comprehensive summary of the literature relating history and culture.
5
In the Appendix I propose a simple model of the type suggested by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008b), introducing
a third stage in the trust game, in which a court enforces contracts. The model enables me to make the cooperation decision
contingent on the quality of the enforcement institution. The model predicts, that increasing the quality of the law will lead to
more investment and higher levels of cooperation. Institutions can overcome the “no-trust-no-trade" equilibrium.
2
economic interaction are discouraged as individuals have high incentives to cheat. This contrasts with
an environment where legal enforcement is strong, and individuals, risking punishment by the law, are
incentivized to cooperate. In a nutshell, in the second state of the world trust will emerge as a by-product
of cooperation experienced in economic and social interactions.6 The reason why shocks affecting trust
can manifest itself until today, is that beliefs transmitted inter-generationally from parents to children
incorporate experiences made in the past in different institutional environments. A second distinctive
feature of this paper is that it analyzes a change in the quality of the law that has not been created by the
individuals for which it applies, but that has been imposed from outside. In other words, compared to
existing contributions correlating past institutions with current social capital, my identification strategy
is based on a rare historical experiment characterized by an exogenous change in the legal quality. Such
historical experiment creates furthermore an ideal setting for studying the effects of institutions on culture, as it accounts for the long-term dimension necessary for observing substantial changes in beliefs
over time. This important time-dimension is usually absent when analyzing current legal reforms or in
experimental designs.
The introduction of the Code Napoleon is characterized by a drastic movement from a weak of rule of
law to impartial legal enforcement in parts of 19th century Germany. The Code improved enforcement
by establishing establishing universal access to the law, commercial freedom and an impartial judicial
system. Using micro data from the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP), I show that those regions in
which the Code Napoleon was introduced display higher levels of social capital related attitudes today.
I start by comparing all regions that have used the Code Civil in the 19th century to regions that did not
apply it, taking the number of years the Code Civil was applied before 1900 as the treatment.7Importantly, the positive association does not reflect simple differences in 19th century regional development
levels. It is robust to condition on historical controls, such as measures for past urbanization rates.
While the results suggest an effect of the Code Civil on contemporaneous levels of trust, there exist alternative explanations that could account for the positive association observed. First, differences in the
initial social structure in regions applying the Code Civil might drive the results, if, for example, regions
with high initial social capital were more likely to be treated.8In this case, rather than identifying a
treatment effect, the estimation would just pick up a path dependency of initial conditions. One draw6Supporting cooperation is, however, not the only channel through which the law can influence social capital. Legal rules,
e.g. the principle of equality, can potentially spread on a more direct way into the society and become moral norms over time.
7
In 1900, a unified Civil Code was installed in all German provinces, the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch.
8
