factors, but by geo-political motives. Equally important for the identification strategy is the question why
regions that adopted the Code Civil did not continue its application after 1815. The historical sources
give rise to the interpretation that the continuation largely depended on the outcome of the political bargain at the Congress of Vienna and the level of reform-mindedness of local autocratic rulers, most likely
at conflict with the preferences and values of their citizens.
15
However, the treatment arguably is spatially clustered, as regions close to France have been more likely
to be treated.26 That implies that the complete sample specifications compare possibly heterogeneous
regions, geographically as well as culturally. Comparing a region located at the Baltic Sea with a region
in the South-West of Germany is problematic in several ways. Cultural differences might have been
fundamental, in a sense that those regions started out with different levels of social capital in the early
19th century. Differences in local characteristics, such as of geographical nature, e.g. the access to the
coast, and the paths of economic development undertaken are further potential influences of cooperation.
I would therefore like to compare more homogeneous, that is more closely located, regions.
I therefore restrict the sample to a border sample of individuals living in regions within a 50 km corridor
from the border, separating regions that applied the Code Civil for more than 90 years from those that
applied in only few year. This sample thus reduces heterogeneity in fundamental pre-treatment characteristics, as closely located individuals can - in the absence of a treatment - be expected to express
relatively similar norms and values.
The border sample has two further interesting features, as it first defines the treatment only for regions
that adopted the Code Civil for a long time. If the institutional and legal reform had an effect on culture,
a slowly moving and hard to change variable, it is more likely that the effect of the Code Civil needed
several years to disperse. Indeed, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008b) estimate, that a shock requires
about 75 years (2 to 3 generations) to have a long-lasting effect on social capital. The timespan of
the longest adoption of the Code in the sample, more than 90 years, fits very well to this estimation.
Furthermore, the border specification allows to analyze effects within current Federal States. Being a
federal republic, Germany has transferred some of its administrative duties to the sixteen federal states
(Länder) that are, for example, in charge of the education system, but more relevant in this context the
police and court system. It is possible that current differences in the functioning of local institutions
influence social capital, and thus potentially bias the results.
3.5 Border Effects
The border sample analysis compares regions having applied the Code Civil on the East (left) side of the
border with regions having used either common law or the ALR on the West (right) side of the border. On
both sides of the border those regions are included in the border sample whose centroids have a maximal
26In the complete sample I partially account for this by controlling for the distance to Paris and measures for the longitude
and latitude.
16
GIS measured distance of 50 km to the border. Figure 5 displays the spatial distribution of the treatment.
Figure 5 about here
In contrast to the the complete sample analysis, it is more natural to define the treatment as a dummy
variable that takes on the value 1 if the region is located on the left side of the border, and 0 otherwise.
I will refer to the first group as the treated and the latter as the untreated. The treated group kept the
Code Civil on average more than 90 years and thus significantly longer than the regions on the right of
the border. Summary Statistics for the border sample are also displayed in Table 1.
Table 4 about here
Table 4 shows the results of the regressions conducted. The first regression includes all border locations,
even those located in Federal States without within state treatment variation. The coefficient of the
treatment border controlling for individual controls is positive and significant on the 1 percent level.
Individuals living in the treated regions, have on average a 0.04 higher level of trust. To be able to include
Federal States fixed effects, I restrict the sample so that only federal states with within variation in the
treatment remain. Consequently I keep only counties located in the territories Rhineland, Westphalia,
Mark, Baden and Wuerttemberg. In column (2) an identical model as in column (1) is regressed, this
time using the restricted sample. The results are comparable in magnitude, although with a coefficient
of 0.05 a bit higher and significant on the 1 percent level. Column (3) to (4) show the robustness of
this result using the other two social capital related questions as outcomes. Column (5) to (7) include
controls for religion, education, economic controls as well as Federal States fixed effects that account for
unobserved heterogeneity on the federal state level. The treatment variable stays positive and significant
for all outcomes. The magnitude of the effect for trust (0.049) is larger then the influence of the personal
controls and religion, but smaller then the effect of education and economic controls. Having applied
the Code Civil results in about 0.1 of a standard deviation higher trust today. When the same model is
regressed using family values as a counterfactual attitude, I do not find a significant difference between
treated and untreated regions. This again supports the peculiar impact of the quality of institutions on
cooperation. In column (9), only the two historical regions Rhineland and Westphalia are compared,
thus excluding Baden, and Wuerttemberg. The exclusion follows the same reasoning as in the complete
sample analysis, as Baden, which did not directly adopt the Code Civil through French occupation,
is dropped. It is a particularly interesting specification as it allows to identify within Prussia effects,
as both, Rhineland and Westphalia were part of Prussia after 1815. In other words, holding all other
17
common Prussian characteristics constant, the estimation produces a positive and significant coefficient.
Finally, column (10) includes urbanization in 1850 as a control. The result is robust to include alternative
historical controls, one by one, as shown in Table 5. Including those controls leads the coefficient to
decrease slightly, as well as its significance. The weaker results can be attributed to the limited regional
variation in this specification with only 5 historical territories.
Table 5 about here
I find very similar results in a standard spatial regression discontinuity design, controlling for the distance, its square and distance interacted with the treatment variable, as shown in Table 6.
Table 6 about here
3.6 Moving the Border
In this subsection I conduct a falsification exercise similar to Becker et al. (2011a). The goal is to support
the identification of causal link, i.e. to show that the treatment effect found in the previous subsection
does not reflect a general West-East pattern, but a genuine treatment effect. To generate a false treatment
the border is moved twice. The first time it is moved outwards, that is to the North-East. This allows
to generate a placebo treatment comparing individuals living in regions unaffected by the true treatment
on both sides of the border. Then the border is moved inwards, that is to the South-West, so to compare
regions that have been treated on each side of the border. In both cases one would expect to find a nonsignificant treatment effect. For the outwards shift because there did not exist a true long-term Napoleonic
treatment. For the inward shift because actually treated regions should be similar with respect to trust
levels. I construct two new borderlines, each being the joint outline of the regions included in the original
border sample. For the inward shift this is the common outline of the treated, for the outward shift this is
the common outline of the untreated group. I then follow the procedure above and include regions that
are located within a 50 km band on each side of the border, only keeping federal states having within
state variation in the placebo treatment. Regions on the left to the border are considered as having been
treated by an improvement in the law enforcement. See Figure 6 for a graphical representation of the
regions included in the different samples.
Figure 6 about here
18
If the results found in the previous section are due to the true treatment moving the border and performing
the same regressions as above should not display an effect of the fictitious treatment variable on social
capital outcomes. Since no treatment took place in the regions that are placebo treated, they should not
differ significantly in the outcome variables.
Table 7 about here
Results from this falsification test are shown in Table 7. Columns (1) to (4) display the results from moving the border outwards, columns (5) to (7) respectively the results from a moving the border inwards. As
it can be seen from columns (1), the one border movement suggests no statistically significant difference
in the way people trust between placebo treated regions and controls. The coefficient is already small and
increases further when state fixed effects are included in column (2). Controlling for other influences on
the individual level only leads to a change in the sign of the treatment coefficient in column (3). Finally,
including historical controls for initial shares of protestantism and urbanization rates do not change the
result, as shown in column (4).
The finding of a non-significant treatment effect holds true for regressions of the treatment generated
from moving the border inwards. While the coefficient of the fictitious treatment variable is now constantly negative, it is still insignificant, as shown in column (5). This is robust to including Federal States
fixed effects in column (6), to control for further covariates in column (7) and for historical controls in
column (8). This exercise allows to infer that only in the original border specification, using the correct
border treatment, there exists a positive, significant and positive treatment effect for regions on the left
of the border. Hence, the falsification tests and the original results suggest a peculiarity attributable to
the Napoleonic influence.
3.7 Comparing Pre-Treatment Characteristics
While the border sample already cancels out much of pre-treatment heterogeneity, it is still possible
that differences in initial regional characteristics drive my results. Ideally I would like to observe and
compare regional pre-treatment levels of social capital. Since this is not possible given the lack of data,
comparing pre-treatment characteristics that have been shown to be able to explain social capital levels in
different contexts is the best feasible alternative. For this purpose I assembled data on several dimensions
having been identified in the literature to matter for social capital levels and at the same time might give
further insights about the reception of the Code Civil. For some variables this data is only available at
19
the provincial level, and the limited number of observations make statistical tests inaccurate and to be
interpreted carefully. Other variables are available on the city level such that common statistical mean
comparison tests can be meaningfully interpreted. Table 8 reports the pre-treatment mean comparisons
of those variables.
Table 8 about here
For the variables on the territory level and the complete sample shown in column (1) and (2), one can
