The detailed historical data sources and the variables constructed out of them are listed in the following.
Trade Occupation, Income, Religion, Education, Population in 19th century Prussia The first set of
data covers employment shares and controls to be used on the county level in 19th century Prussia.
Starting in 1816, the Royal Prussian Statistical Office collected throughout the 19th century data on
population, education, religious denomination, occupation, and tax income. Several different waves of
the Prussian Statistics are used and combined. For measuring the development of the trade sector in 19th
century, I use the data on occupation gathered in 1849. The data lists the number of people working
in trade related jobs, such as wholesaler, mercer, spice-trader, or broker, and other occupations, such
as civil servants or servants “for the convenience of the lordship”. My measure of trade occupations,
Trade, divides the total number of people working in trade related jobs by the county’s population. I
also use the per capita share of individuals employed in factories, except mills, in 1849 as a measure
of industrialization, following Becker, Hornung, and Woessmann (2011b). I label this variable Factory.
Furthermore, the variable Craft gives per capita share of employment in craft, and encompasses jobs as
baker, tailor or music instrument maker. TrFaCr combines the previous three variables. Counterfactuals,
on which no effects are expected, are the number of people working as civil servants as a share of the
population, and the number of male servants per capita. Several controls taken from the 1864 dataset
are included, such as the share of Protestant and Jewish population, the share of females, the number
of elementary schools per capita. Following Becker and Woessmann (2009), the counties’ income tax
per capita in 1878 will proxy for per capita economic prosperity. The source of the data is Becker et al.
(2012), who compiled the data from the original Prussian statistics. Furthermore, I assign to every county
its geographic location, that is a measure for longitude and latitude.33
Gymnasts and Volunteer Fire Departments The source for the gymnasts clubs and the fire departments
is the Second Statistical Yearbook of German Gymnast Clubs (Zweites statistisches Jahrbuch Deutscher
Turnvereine) from 1865 (Hirth, 1865).34 It lists all German gymnast clubs existing at that time and
33Table B.2 in the Appendix lists the territories included in the sample and the treatment.
34See Data Appendix for further information.
24
furthermore provides information on whether the club had a fire department, and if yes, the number of
firemen. From this data, I construct the per capita amount of firemen per county, Firemen p.c., as a first
measure of social capital, and second the total number of clubs per county, labeled No of Clubs.
Shooting Associations As a last measure of social capital for 19th century Germany, I use a dataset
for the two Prussian provinces Rhineland and Westphalia that contains the number of German shooting
associations (Schützenvereine) founded per county from the Middle Ages to 1939 at a yearly level.35
I use the years from 1700 to 1900. The source is Plett (1991), who gathered this data by directly by
surveying current day shooting clubs about their year of foundation. In the data, a club is reported to
exist in year t, if its date of foundation falls in this year.
Summary Statistics for the variables generated out of the historical data sources are displayed in Table 9.
Table 9 about here
4.2 The Impact on Trade, Factory and Craft Employment
Table 10 displays the regression results of estimating the following model:
Yc,p = α + δ ∗ codec + X
0
c,p ∗ β + uc,p (2)
where Yc,p gives the relative occupational share in county c located in Prussian province p. The variable
codecis a dummy indicating whether county c used the code civil or not. X
0
c,p
includes the controls listed
above.
Table 10 about here
Counties applying the Code Civil are associated with a significantly higher occupational share in trade,
see column (1). Conditionally on other controls, adopting the Code Civil goes along with an increase
in the trade share by 0.004 in absolute values (column (2)), or about 0.66 of a standard deviation in
trade. Treated regions also have higher levels of industrialization, as measured by the per capita share
of employment in factories (column (3)) and a higher share craftsmen (column (4)). The effects are
equally large, as adopting the Code Civil increases factory and craft employment by about 50 percent
of the relevant standard deviation. They are furthermore comparable both in magnitude and significance
35See Data Appendix for further information.
25
to those using the composition of trade, factor employment and craft as dependent variable in columns
(5) and (6). Making use of the counterfactuals, I run the regression with the share of civil servants
and servants as dependent variables. The regressions, see columns (7) and (8), report non-significant,
negative associations between the Code Civil and the employment share in the civil sector, as well as the
per capita share of servants.
4.3 The Impact on Gymnast Clubs and Volunteer Fire Departments
To assess the impact on the number of gymnast clubs and firemen, the following model is regressed:
Gc,p = α + δ ∗ codec + X
0
c,p ∗ β + uc,p (3)
where Gc,r,p is one of the following dependent variables measured in county c in province p: Member
p.c. gives the per capita share of members in gymnast clubs. Firemen p.c. gives the per capita share of
voluntary firemen per county. Member gives the total number members in gymnast clubs. Firemen gives
the total number volunteer firemen per county. The variable codecis a dummy indicating whether county
c used the code civil or not. X
0
c,p
includes the controls listed above.
Table 11 about here
As Table 11 shows, there exists a positive correlation between the Code Civil and gymnast club membership, as well as volunteer firemen departments. Columns (1) and (2) indicate that in counties applying
the Napoleonic legal code, the per capita share of club members and firemen is higher. Switching from 0
(no Code) to 1 (adopting the Code) increases the participation in gymnast clubs per capita by on average
about 35 percent of its sample mean. The number of volunteer firemen per capita increases by a magnitude of on average 20 percent of the sample mean for regions that adopted the Code Civil. This finding
is robust to using total numbers of members and firemen, as columns (3) and (4) show, and population is
controlled for. When education and the share of females are included in the regression, the coefficients
of interest stay significant on the 10 percent significance level in column (5), as well as in column (6).
Finally, regressions of the social capital measures on economic cooperation display a strong positive
correlation of membership in gymnast clubs, as well as voluntary participation as firemen, with trade and
factory employment. Table 12 shows this correlation in columns (1) to (6), which is robust to including
potential covariates in columns (7) to (12).
26
Table 12 about here
4.4 The Impact on Shooting Associations
To test empirically if the Napoleonic treatment in the Rhineland resulted in a higher number of shooting
clubs founded per year compared to Westphalia, I use the foundation dates of shooting clubs available
in a panel of 128 districts and an annual time period from 1700 to 1900. I aggregate the data on the
district level into four different periods composed of 50 years, i.e. 1700 – 1750, 1750 – 1800, 1800 –
1850 and 1850 – 1900.36 I run a set of binary regressions - equivalent to simple t-tests - comparing the
mean number of clubs founded per province per period. Results are shown in Table 13 .
Table 13 about here
The results indicate that both provinces did not differ significantly in the average number of clubs founded
during the period from 1700 to 1750. However, starting from the second period I find a significant
differences between the two provinces. From 1750 to 1800 on average an addition of 0.3 shooting clubs
per district were founded in Westphalia. The negative difference aggravates in the period between 1800
and 1850. Only from 1850 onwards, a the sign of the mean difference changes and gets positive. From
1850, more clubs were founded in the Rhineland using the Code Civil then in the neighboring province
of Westphalia.37 The same pattern shows up when the lagged cumulative number of clubs per district
is controlled for in Panel B. On the one hand should be cautious generalizing those results, as the type
of association is particular. An explanation for the spike in the number of clubs founded in Westphalia
in the years from 1800 to 1850 could, for example, be the high number of veterans returning from the
Napoleonic wars. On the other hand, the evidence shows roughly the expected pattern. While before
1800 there was no or even a negative different in associations in the Rhineland vs Westphalia, this trend
turns during the 19th century.
4.5 Summary: Trade and Associations in 19th century Prussia
This section using historical social capital supports the findings described in section 3. Although each
regression by itself might have drawbacks, as they do not account for unobserved heterogeneity on the
36The reason for aggregating the data rather than running a panel regression comes from the concern that in a panel regression, serial and spatial correlation potentially bias the estimation results. With only two cross-sectional units for which the
treatment varies, and thus only two potentially cluster, clustering is in this case not a feasible option to account for this. See
also Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2003).
37Running regressions with panel data produces the same results.
27
county (or province) level by applying county level (or provincial level) fixed effects as two of the regressions use cross-sectional data, the overall picture points in one direction: Those Prussian counties that
belonged to the province of Rhineland and that kept the Code Civil, have had both a higher share of people engaging in impersonal trade, factory work and craft, and at the same time more engagement in civic
associations. Assuming that all counties started out with comparable characteristics before Napoleon
imposed the Code Civil to those regions, the increase in institutional quality causally impacted trade and
associational participation. Those effects give a rational for the observed differences in contemporaneous
differences in trust.
Lastly, one could ask if there is evidence that cooperation persisted. Putnam (1994) for example shows
remarkable persistence of associational participation in Italy between 1900 and 1970 by using comparable measures of club membership. To elicit persistence of cooperation, I therefore regress individual
responses for Trust on the employment shares, as well as per capita firemen and gymnast membership in
19th century Prussia.
Table 14 about here
Table 14 displays that only the employment shares can explain current trust significantly (see columns
(1) -(6)). Both, firemen and membership do not show any significant association. One explanation for the
latter might be that the share of people that were actually engaged in historical associations are relatively
low and that historical and current indicators of social capital used are quite different. The positive
association between current trust and past employment holds even when the entire set of individual
controls is included in the regressions (see columns (7) - (12)). It seems that, consistent with my initial
hypothesis, economic exchange played an important role for generating trust.
5 CONCLUSION
This paper provides evidence that impartial legal enforcement institutions can increase norms of trust
