Indeed, my identification strategy requires the adoption of the Code Civil to be uncorrelated with initial social capital
levels.
3
back of the complete sample regressions is the comparison of heterogenous regions that undertook very
different paths of socio-economic development even before the treatment. To reduce heterogeneity in
the sample, I then compare only regions located at a maximal distance of 50 km to a border. This border
separates those regions that kept the code for about 90 years from those in which the Code was either
never introduced or dismissed in 1815, after the Congress of Vienna. The results confirm the findings
from the complete sample analysis: Treated regions exhibit higher levels of trust in the SOEP data. This
is remarkable, as one would expect - in the absence of any treatment - spatially closely located individuals to be relatively similar in their attitudes. Indeed, a falsification test confirms this presumption. When
the border is moved artificially outwards to the North-East or inwards to the South-West and a placebo
treatment constructed, individuals in placebo treated regions do not show significant differences in trust
levels.
I try to dismiss further doubts about the independence of the treatment with pre-treatment regional characteristics by comparing regional pre-treatment means of a set of variables identified by the literature
as historical determinants of current levels of social trust. Treated and untreated regions turn out to not
differ significantly with respect to those dimensions.
Arguably, the period of Napoleonic occupation did not only alter the law. In addition, the administration,
as well as the educational system were changed and old elites removed. My treatment variable, which
acts like a regional fixed effect, might rather proxy for the legacy of those changes. While I cannot
control quantitatively for all unobserved regional heterogeneity, those factors are likely of subordinate
importance compared to the legacy of the Napoleonic Code Civil. This is for a simple reason: Unlike
the other reforms Napoleon introduced, the Code Civil lasted even after the Napoleonic retreat in 1815
for several decades. While possible, it is not very probable, that the short run-reforms were the main
driver of the long-run change in beliefs. Historical evidence I will present supports this interpretation.
Moreover, the results hold true even within a the formal borders of the Prussian kingdom, in other words
holding kingdom characteristics constant.
The second part of the paper aims at shedding light on a possible channel and the immediate effects of
the Napoleonic institutions on cooperation in the 19th century. I first look at potential effects on economic cooperation, focusing on sectors in which people interact frequently in business relations and rely
on trust and reciprocity, such as in trade, factory employment and craft. Indeed, treated regions show
a higher fraction of the population working as traders, factory workers or as craftsmen. To further test,
whether cooperation inside the work environment spilled over on cooperation outside the work-place, I
4
gathered two different measures of 19th century social capital. First, I collected data on memberships
in gymnast clubs (Turnvereine) and the per capita share of volunteer firemen in associated volunteer fire
departments on the county level and find them to be positively associated with the treatment. Second,
I make use of a panel dataset measuring the number of shooting associations (Schützenvereine), having
been founded between 1700 and 1900 per county in the neighboring provinces Rhineland and Westphalia. The panel data allows me to run regression yielding, that the number of associations increased
significantly faster in the second half of the 19th century in the treated province Rhineland compared
to its neighbor Westphalia. As this paper is one of the rare papers using additionally social capital data
from the 19th century, it allows to discuss briefly persistence in the last part of the paper.9
This paper relates and contributes to several strands of the literature broadly researching the effects of
institutions, culture and its interrelation. The first strand emphasizes the “deep-roots” of social capital
levels we observe today. It goes back to Putnam (1994), who argued that differences in social capital
between the North and South of Italy can be explained by the institutions associated with free and independent medieval city states in the northern part of Italy. This hypothesis is empirically tested and
proven to be valid by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008a). In the same spirit, Tabellini (2010) finds
in a sample of 69 European regions that past institutions in the 18th century measured by the constraints
on the executive are highly correlated with trust levels today. While those contributions characterize
past institutions broadly as democracy, my approach departs from this definition as it considers a legal
enforcement institution, and thus contains a precise mechanism for the observed positive relationship
between past institutions and beliefs. The paper closest in its methodology is Becker et al. (2011a), who
research the persistent impact of living in the Habsburg Empire, a kingdom characterized by its efficient
administration. Focusing on individuals living in an area within 200 kilometers of the Empire’s former
border, the authors find individuals living in its former territory today to show more trust in institutions.
Apart from historical institutions, other historical shocks have been found to alter norms and beliefs of a
societies’ inhabitants long-lastingly. Examples include the African slave trade, (Nunn and Wantchekon,
2011) and the surveillance apparatus in the former Communist Germany (Jacob and Tyrell, 2010).10,11
9Further evidence for the persistence of a particular cultural attitude, antisemitism, in Germany has been described by
Voigtländer and Voth (2012)
10Interesting in the context of this paper, Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) hypothesize, that the slave trade did not only
deteriorate social capital, but also paved the way for expropriate governmental institutions and a lax rule of law. In particular,
they identify the weak legal system to be an important factor of the persistence of mistrust in the affected regions. Unconstrained
political leaders are not forced to act trustworthy, and people can misbehave without being held responsible. Hence societies
are stuck in an equilibrium of distrust and bad institutions
11Aghion et al. (2010) provide further evidence for a potentially detrimental role of the state for trust in the case of extensive
regulation.
5
Several theoretical contributions have tried to explain the persistence of cultural norms that has been
documented empirically. The seminal contribution was made by Bisin and Verdier (2001). In their model
parents transmit cultural traits to their children taking into account their future expected payoff. Tabellini
(2008) builds on this model, and studies the determinants of cooperation and the evolution of norms
over time. In his model, an exogenous shock to the quality of the enforcement institution, that reduces
the loss of being cheated in a prisoners dilemma game, increases the scope of cooperation. Tabellini
further argues, that when individuals can choose institutions by participating in the political process,
good institutions will be reinforced. Shocks to the quality of institutions in the past are amplified by their
affect on culture. Not values, but beliefs are the dimension of social capital Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales
(2008b) model to be passed from parents to children in a framework of an overlapping generations model.
The model gives a rationale why differences in social capital originating in history are still observable
today.12
My paper is also related to contributions researching the short-term effects of punishment and contract
enforcement on cooperative behavior (see for example Fehr and Gächter (2000) for experimental evidence; Fisman and Miguel (2007) for evidence from a field experiment). Most recently Cassar, d’Adda,
and Grosjean (2012) gathered interesting evidence for a causal link from institutions to norms of cooperations from experiments conducted in Italy and Kosovo.
Finally, my findings add to the analysis of the economic consequences attributed to institutions in general (see for example Smith, 1776; Milgrom, North, and Weingast, 1990; De Long and Shleifer, 1993;
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001; La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008; Cantoni and
Yuchtman, 2012) and the Napoleonic institutions, as described in Acemoglu et al. (2011), in particular.13
A shortcoming of this fascinating literature describing strong and persistent links between institutions
and aggregated development is the lack of a detailed understanding of the channels going from institutions to economic outcomes. The results presented here do not only reinforce the interpretation of a
positive impact on cooperation and trade, but potentially provide one of the channels through which (exogenously imposed) institutions can be favorable for economic growth: individual norms of cooperation.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a brief description of the historical context needed for
the empirical part. Section 3 assesses the effects of the Napoleonic institutions on current social capital
outcomes, both in a sample of complete Germany and in a border sample. Section 4 shows the effects
12Empirical evidence of the intergenerational transfer of values can be found in Dohmen et al. (2012).
13Another strand of the literature disputes the fundamental role of institutions for economic development. See for example
Glaeser et al. (2004) for the debate on the importance of human capital versus institutions.
6
on trade, industrialization and social capital in 19th century Prussia. Section 5 concludes with a note on
institutions, social capital and growth.
2 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND: THE CODE CIVIL IN GERMANY
2.1 French Occupation and Institutional Reform
At the time of the French Revolution in 1789, Germany was fragmented into more than 300 states (Grab,
2003, p. 85) and its social organization characterized by feudal institutions privileging the nobility and
the clergy, (Grab, 2003, p. 86). The entry into professions and economic activities was to a large extent
controlled by guilds restricting economic freedom. Germany’s legal system consisted of a plurality of
legal norms that differed often from town to town even within the same political territory.14 Peasants
did not enjoy equality before the law, as they were subject to different courts and laws then the nobility
(Acemoglu et al., 2011). Written legal codes did not exist at the end of the 18th century, except for the
Codex Maximilianeus Bavaricus Civilis in Bavaria and the Allgemeines Landrecht (ALR henceforth) in
Prussia, both of which allowed and practiced commonly the Partimonialgerichtsbarkeit, the privilege of
the landlords to administer the law.
The French influence started with the occupation, and in 1798 the annexation, of the Rhineland, the entire
German part west of the Rhine. To defend the French Empire against Prussia, Napoleon subsequently
invaded large parts of the current German territory and by 1812 controlled directly or indirectly most of
it, with the exception of Prussia and Austria.15
With the French occupation the Code Civil was introduced in the Rhineland, the Bavarian Palatinate and
the part of Hessen, left of the Rhine and remained from 1802 to 1900. In 1901, the first civil code for the
entire unified Germany, the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, replaced it. In several other states that fell under
direct control of the French Empire the Code was in place for only few years. This states include Westphalia (from 1810-1815), Brunswick (1808-18014), Province of Saxony (1808-1815), Hanover (1808-
