VOL. 101 NO. 7          ACEMOGLU ET AL.: CONSEQUENCES OF RADICAL REFORM              3291



(Prussia, Bavaria). Our main measure of economic prosperity across these polities
is the urbanization rate of the area, defined as the fraction of the population living in
cities with more than 5,000 inhabitants. Paul Bairoch (1988, ch. 1) and Jan de Vries
(1984) argue that only areas with high agricultural productivity and a developed
transportation network could support large urban populations. Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2002) present evidence that in both the time-series and the cross-sec-
tion there is a close association between urbanization and income per capita before
as well as after industrialization.
   Urbanization rates at the level of preunitary German polities are computed
based on city size data from Bairoch, Jean Batou, and Pierre Chevre (1988),
and on historical reconstructions of total populations based on various sources.
Details on the construction of these data are given in online Appendix B.
Urbanization rates after 1850 are obtained from the official statistical compila-
tions of the German Empire. In addition to urbanization, we also use data on
the sectoral composition of employment for 64 German districts for the years
1849, 1882, 1895, and 1907 (from Harald Frank 1994). The share of employ-
ment in industry is a good proxy for industrialization and thus enables us to
check whether the patterns we see in the urbanization rates are associated with
changes in industrialization.

                                  B. Other Variables

   Our “treatment” is defined as the number of years between 1792 and 1815 that
the polity in question was under French occupation. We consider years in which the
French had direct control over these territories or installed republics and principali-
ties directly dependent on French directives; we exclude years and months of pure
military invasion and control, such as for example in the case of Prussia. Table 1
lists all 19 polities considered in our dataset, sorted by their treatment status. To the
extent that some of these areas implemented modernizing reforms under pressure
from France (e.g., through the implicit or explicit threat of invasion), our treat-
ment coding works against our hypothesis. Nevertheless, our two-stage least squares
strategy will correct for this potential bias by instrumenting for our index of reform
with the measure of French treatment.
   We construct an index of reforms in Germany, both to show the impact of the
French occupation on institutional reforms and as the right-hand-side variable in
our instrumental-variables strategy. Historical sources (see online Appendix D for
details) allow us to code the nature and timing of some of the reforms that took
place. We focus on the enactment of the French civil code, the restructuring of agri-
cultural relations and the abolition of guilds. We interpret these reforms as an index
for the overall “package” of institutional reforms, which also includes changes in
areas that are less easy to classify, such as the nature of state administration and
tax collection, or the secularization of church lands (the latter was relevant only for
Catholic territories). Table 1 reports the incidence of reforms in Germany, as repre-
sented by the first date of implementation.
   Column 2 shows the date at which the different polities introduced a written civil
code that guaranteed equality before the law. The French civil code (Code Napoléon)
falls under this category, but so do the Saxon civil code of 1863 and the German civil
