3290                        THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                DECEMBER 2011



guilds were abolished (Blanning 1983), paving the way to a relatively free labor
market. Equally important were the legal changes. For example, the French created
a commercial court in Aachen in 1794 and followed with similar courts elsewhere in
the Rhineland (Jeffry Diefendorf 1980), which were to play an important role in the
creation of commercial and industrial businesses in the years to follow.
   Although Napoleon was an Emperor seeking to solidify his control, ruthlessly
when necessary, he nonetheless continued to implement the reforms initiated by the
revolutionary armies (see Grab 2003; Owen Connelly 1965; J. Stuart Woolf 1991).
Napoleon saw the imposition of the civil code (Code Napoléon) in the areas he con-
trolled as his most important reform (Martyn Lyons 1994). Kisch emphasizes the
economic importance of this (1989, p. 212): “When the many strands of commercial
legislation were subsequently consolidated in the Code Napoléon, the Rhineland
(on the left bank) was not only given a most up-to-date legal framework, but also
a system of government in close harmony with the needs of a buoyantly industrial-
izing society.” The Rhineland was transformed from an oligarchy-dominated area
to one open to new businesses and new entrants. Similar reforms were also system-
atically introduced into the German satellite kingdoms, such as the Kingdom of
Westphalia, and the Grand Duchy of Berg.
   In practice, Napoleon’s institutional legacy outside of France is complicated,
especially since he was more inclined to compromise with local elites at some times.
Nevertheless, in most places there was a genuine attempt to continue and deepen
the reforms brought by the Revolution. The motivations for these reforms seem to
have been several. First, Napoleon had been deeply involved with the reforms of the
revolutionary period and shared the ideological commitment of the early reformers.
Second, like them, he wished to build a series of buffer states around France. Finally,
reforms such as abolishing the political control of the elite, feudal privileges, and
introducing equality before the law undermined existing elites and made it easier for
Napoleon to establish control over the areas he conquered.
   After the final collapse of Napoleon in 1815 the institutional reforms implemented
over the previous 25 years suffered various fates. In the Rhineland, whose largest part
was assigned to Prussia as a consequence of the Congress of Vienna, the new local
elites successfully fought to preserve French institutions, such as the civil and com-
mercial codes. Prussia itself was inclined to continue on the path of reforms begun
under French rule (see Herbert A. L. Fisher 1903). The presence of a new elite created
by the reforms and determined to hang onto them was a key factor. In other places,
where the old ruling dynasties returned to power, such as in Hanover, Brunswick,
and Hesse-Kassel, most reforms were rolled back. A return to the status quo ante
was functional to the rulers’ need to rely on ancien régime institutions to support
their claim to power. In our econometric analysis in Section IV we specifically code
reforms throughout the nineteenth century to examine this issue empirically.

                                       II. Data

                               A. Outcome Variables

  We consider 19 distinct preunitary polities in Germany, which represent either
independent states in nineteenth-century Germany, or provinces of larger states
