VOL. 101 NO. 7                  ACEMOGLU ET AL.: CONSEQUENCES OF RADICAL REFORM                                3287



   We investigate the economic consequences of the French Revolution and the
reforms that were imposed on certain German polities as a consequence of the
Revolutionary Wars. Parts of Germany, primarily the west and northwest, were
invaded, ruled directly by France or through satellite states, and reformed, while
the south and the east were not. We first investigate the reduced-form relationship
between our definition of “French treatment,” the length of French occupation (in
years), and our main proxy for economic prosperity, urbanization rates. There is no
evidence of a negative relationship. Instead, many of our estimates show signifi-
cantly faster growth of urbanization in treated areas during the second half of the
nineteenth century.3
   We then use data on the timing of institutional reforms across German polities to
investigate the effect of invasion both on various institutional outcomes and on long-
run economic development. We show a strong association between institutional
reforms and French invasion (or control). Using this relationship as a first stage,
we then estimate instrumental-variables models, which indicate sizable effects of
institutional reforms on subsequent growth. The purpose of this two-stage strategy
is twofold. First, it allows us to distinguish the effect of the exogenous component
of reforms from endogenous, “defensive” modernization. Second, it enables us to
provide a test of the hypothesis that the effects of French invasion worked through
the institutions that they imposed in the occupied parts of Germany. Overall, our
results show no evidence that the reforms imposed by the French had negative eco-
nomic consequences. On the contrary, evidence from a variety of different empirical
strategies shows that they had positive effects.
   Crucially for our identification strategy, parts of Germany did not choose the French
institutions, but those institutions were imposed on them first by the Revolution and
then by Napoleon.4 Moreover, territorial expansion by French armies did not target
places with a greater future growth potential. Instead, it had two major motives.
The first was defensive, especially in response to the threat of Austrian or Prussian
(or later British) attempts to topple the revolutionary regime. The second was ideo-
logical, as the French sought to export the revolutionary ideals to other countries,
and at the same time tried to establish France’s “natural frontiers.”5 In any case,
the purpose of the institutional reforms of the French Revolution was not to foster
industrialization per se, though they may have achieved this objective as a byproduct
of their major goal of destroying the grip of the aristocracy, oligarchy, and the clergy
on political and economic power.6 Therefore, to a first approximation, we can think

    3
      The working paper version of our study (Acemoglu et al. 2009) reports cross-national, Europe-wide evidence
consistent with this pattern and also explores different definitions of “French treatment.”
    4
      In most cases, there were local Jacobin (local radical) forces in the countries occupied by the French armies,
but the presence of such forces did not play a major role in determining which countries and cities were occupied
by the French. See, for example, William Doyle (1989, chapter 9).
    5
      The revolutionary leader George Danton stated: “Les limites de la France sont marquées par la nature, nous
les atteindrons des quatre coins de l’horizon, du côté du Rhin, du côté de l’Océan, du côté des Alpes. Là, doivent
finir les bornes de notre république” (speech to National Convention, January 31, 1793; quoted in Timothy C. W.
Blanning 1983, p. 2).
    6
      It is unlikely that the French could target areas with greater industrialization potential or that reforms were
made specifically to encourage industrial growth. In fact, most likely no one at the turn of the nineteenth century
could have anticipated the new technologies that were to arrive a few decades later (see the discussion in Joel Mokyr
2003). The exception to this statement is textiles. By 1800 the British and others had established some new tech-
nologies that increased productivity (e.g., in spinning) by an order of magnitude. Textiles are an important part of
the economy in the Rhineland, discussed below, but there is no evidence that the French changed institutions in the
