American Economic Review 101 (December 2011): 3286–3307
http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.101.7.3286




                          The Consequences of Radical Reform:
                                The French Revolution†
                                  By Daron Acemoglu, Davide Cantoni,
                                 Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson*


         In this article we exploit the variation in institutional reform created by the French
      Revolution in Europe, in particular within Germany, to investigate the consequences
      of radical, externally imposed reforms on subsequent economic growth. After 1792
      French armies occupied and reformed the institutions of many European countries.
      The set of reforms the French imposed in the territories that they conquered were
      extensive and radical; they included the imposition of the civil legal code, the abo-
      lition of guilds and the remnants of feudalism, the introduction of equality before
      the law, and the undermining of aristocratic privileges. The long-run implications
      of these reforms are of interest both for historical reasons and also because they
      are related to current debates on institutional change. For example, the view that
      “designed” and externally imposed institutions are unlikely to foster economic
      progress would suggest that the French Revolution should have significant negative
      effects.1 In contrast, the view that oligarchies, entry barriers, and restrictions on trade
      in labor and other markets were the main impediment to growth in Europe at the
      turn of the nineteenth century would suggest that the revolutionary reforms should
      have unleashed more rapid economic growth in affected areas (Mancur Olson 1982;
      Acemoglu 2008).2



          * Acemoglu: Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge,
      MA 02139, and CIFAR (e-mail: daron@mit.edu); Cantoni: Seminar für Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Ludwig-Maximillians-
      Universität, Ludwigstr. 33/IV 80539 Munich Germany (e-mail: davide.cantoni@lrz.uni-muenchen.de);
      Johnson: Sloan School of Management, MIT, 50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02139 (e-mail: sjohnson@
      mit.edu); Robinson: Department of Government and IQSS, Harvard University, 1737 Cambridge St., Cambridge,
      MA 02138, NBER and CIFAR (e-mail: jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu). We thank Jared Diamond, Robert Dixon,
      Niall Ferguson, Tim Guinnane, Peter Hall, Philip Hoffman, Joel Mokyr, Sheilagh Ogilvie, Winifred Rothemberg,
      Jesus Villaverde, John Wallis, Peter Wilson, participants in the American Economic Association, the International
      Society for New Institutional Economics, and the Verein für Socialpolitik annual meetings, and seminar audi-
      ences at Australian National, CIFAR, Harvard, Melbourne, Paris School of Economics, USC, and Yale for their
      comments. Leopoldo Fergusson, Camilo García-Jimeno, Tarek Hassan, Jutta Hoppe, and Michael Kapps provided
      excellent research assistance.
          †
            To view additional materials, visit the article page at
      http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.101.7.3286.
          1
            Friedrich Hayek (1960) argued that institutions cannot be designed and have to evolve organically (and that this
      was the major reason for the inferiority of the civil code), and a recent literature has claimed that institutions have
      to be “appropriate” to the specific circumstances of countries (e.g., Daniel Berkowitz, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-
      Francois Richard 2003a; Berkowitz, Pistor, and Richard 2003b; Dani Rodrik 2007). Rafael La Porta et al. (1998)
      emphasize several inefficiencies associated with the French civil legal code.
          2
            These issues are also related to the classic historical debate about the extent to which the institutions of the
      ancien régime impeded capitalism and economic growth and whether the French Revolution played a constructive
      or destructive role in European political development. The historical debate about the consequences of the French
      Revolution is also about its impact on political institutions and democracy, which is beyond the scope of the current
      article.

                                                              3286
