3288                                  THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                  DECEMBER 2011



of the imposition of the institutions of the French Revolution as an “exogenous treat-
ment” and investigate the economic implications of radical institutional reforms.
  The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section I provides an overview of
the history of the French Revolution and the subsequent invasion of Europe by the
French. Section II discusses our data. Section III provides reduced-form evidence
on the association between various measures of French occupation and our proxy
for economic development, urbanization, across German polities. Section IV uses
data on the nature and timing of institutional reforms to document the relation-
ship between French occupation and these reforms and to estimate instrumental-
variables models. Section V concludes, while several details on data collection and
construction are contained in the online Appendices.

                                            I. Historical Overview

                                    A. Europe before the Revolution

   Before the French Revolution, much of Europe was dominated by two kinds of
oligarchies: the landed nobility in agriculture and the urban-based oligarchy control-
ling commerce and various occupations.7 By the end of the eighteenth century, feu-
dalism in its most rigid form had disappeared in many parts of Europe, but several
attenuated variants of unfree labor relations in the countryside persisted. Serfdom
still continued in much of Eastern Europe (see Jerome Blum 1978), while it had
been replaced by various forms of taxes and tributes to landowners in other areas,
which could nonetheless be quite onerous and inhibited the creation of flexible labor
markets.8 For example, in the Rhineland, the first area in Germany to come under
French control, an attenuated form of serfdom (Grundherrschaft), which severely
restricted freedom of movement, was still practiced (Blanning 1983). Moreover,
various rights of the nobility and clergy created a very unequal political and eco-
nomic situation in rural areas. These groups were frequently exempt from taxation,
were subject to separate laws and courts, and enjoyed the right of taxation of the
peasants under their control.
   The urban oligarchy was perhaps even more pernicious to industrialization.
Almost all major occupations were controlled by guilds, significantly limiting entry
into those professions by others and often restricting adoption of new technologies
and business practices. Several examples of guilds preventing innovation are pro-
vided by Herbert Kisch (1989), Sheilagh Ogilvie (2004), and Erik Lindberg (2009).
In the major cities of the Rhineland, Cologne and Aachen, the adoption of new
textile (spinning and weaving) machines was significantly delayed because of guild



Rhineland specifically because they foresaw great potential in the manufacture of cloth. Naturally, this does not rule
out the possibility that the areas occupied by the French had greater potential for industrial growth for other reasons.
    7
      This historical overview draws on Doyle (1989), Robert R. Palmer (1959), Palmer (1964), Georges Rudé
(1988), Blanning (1983), Blanning (1986), Blanning (1996), David Gates (1997), Alexander Grab (2003), Charles
J. Esdaile (1996), Esdaile (2001), and Geoffrey Ellis (2003).
    8
      Since one could be concerned that including Eastern Europe in the sample leads the control group to be very
heterogeneous, in the empirical work we show that all our results hold when we restrict our sample to Germany
west of the Elbe river.
