VOL. 101 NO. 7                 ACEMOGLU ET AL.: CONSEQUENCES OF RADICAL REFORM                               3289



restrictions.9 In addition, many cities were controlled by a few families for many
generations, amassing wealth at the expense of potential new entrants with greater
ability or better technologies.

                           B. The Revolution and its Effect on Europe

   The first war between revolutionary France and the major European powers—
the so-called War of the First Coalition—did not break out until 1792. Contrary
to almost everyone’s expectations, the armies of the new Republic were victori-
ous in an initially defensive war. France’s borders were thus expanded with an eye
towards creating an effective buffer between the new Republic and the hostile mon-
archies of Prussia and Austria. The French quickly seized present-day Belgium, the
Netherlands, and also much of modern-day Switzerland. By 1795, the French had
firm control over the Rhineland (the left bank of the Rhine); in 1802 it was officially
incorporated into France.
   After Napoleon’s takeover, the French impact spread much more widely throughout
Europe. In Germany, where the direct control of the revolutionary armies had been
limited to the Rhineland, Napoleon constructed a string of satellite buffer states on
France’s northeastern border. The Peace of Lunéville (February 1801) led to a massive
reorganization of the territories that constituted the Holy Roman Empire. Hundreds of
independent states, ecclesiastical territories and free imperial cities vanished and were
consolidated into a cluster of larger kingdoms, principalities, and duchies; ultimately,
their number shrank to fewer than 40 states (Grab 2003). Most of these states except
Prussia were brought together in 1806 in the Confederation of the Rhine.
   At the same time, Napoleon proceeded to reorganize the territories in northwest
Germany into satellite states under his control. The Duchy of Berg on the right
bank of the Rhine was formed in March 1806 (ruled by his brother-in-law Joachim
Murat), the Kingdom of Westphalia (ruled by his brother Jérôme) in August 1807,
and the Grand Duchy of Frankfurt in February 1810 (Napoleon’s stepson, Eugene
de Beauharnais, was supposed to inherit it). These were run by the French and per-
sisted until the collapse following Napoleon’s invasion of Russia. During this period
Napoleon also took over parts of Northern Germany, including in December 1810
the annexation into France of the plains of Lower Saxony (later part of the Kingdom
of Hanover) and the Hanseatic cities of Hamburg, Lübeck, and Bremen.

                                        C. Institutional Changes

  Many of the most radical institutional changes both in Europe in general and
within Germany were undertaken during the invasion of the French revolutionary
armies. While the impact of the French on the Rhineland during the 1790s remains
controversial, especially because of the great deal of plunder and the resulting
resentment by the local population mentioned above (see, e.g., Blanning 1983;
Doyle 1989), the importance of the revolutionary reforms in Rhineland is not in
question. Most significantly, between 1795 and 1798 the seigneurial regime and the

  9
    Differing views, supporting the efficiency of guilds, have been expressed, e.g., by Stephan R. Epstein (1998).
On this debate, see also Ogilvie (2007).
