3304                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                             DECEMBER 2011



French borders: the French revolutionary armies, and later Napoleon, invaded and
controlled large parts of Europe, including areas of Germany, where they undertook
essentially the same radical political, legal, and economic reforms as in France.
However, invasion also came with chaos and the exploitation of the occupied ter-
ritories. This article is an attempt to gauge the long-run consequences of the French
Revolution, considering the radical institutional reforms imposed on neighboring
countries as a quasi-natural experiment.
   We find no evidence that areas that were under French occupation experienced
less rapid development. On the contrary, all of our evidence points to more rapid
economic growth as proxied by urbanization in areas that underwent the radical
institutional reforms brought by the French Revolution, especially after 1850. We
also presented additional evidence suggesting that the primary channel of influ-
ence of French occupation was likely to have been the institutional reforms of the
Revolution. These findings are interesting not only because they provide a historical
appraisal of the economic impact of the French Revolution, but more importantly
because of their implications about the consequences of radical institutional reform.
Scholars have disagreed on the effectiveness of externally imposed radical institu-
tional changes. The French Revolution is a clear example of a large-scale, radical
and “designed” institutional change. In this light, our findings support the centrality
of institutional differences for comparative economic development. More important,
the results are inconsistent with the view that externally imposed, radical, and “Big
Bang” style reforms can never be successful. On the contrary, the evidence supports
our hypothesis that the institutions of the ancien régime, in particular feudal land
and labor relations, urban oligarchies and guilds, and lack of equality before the law,
impeded prosperity, and that the radical institutional reforms that removed these
barriers paved the way for industrialization and economic growth.
   Naturally, all of these findings have to be interpreted with caution for several rea-
sons. First, the evidence we present is fairly clear that institutional changes imposed
by the French Revolution did not have any negative effects, but the positive effects
are significant only in some specifications. Second, our analysis was limited to the
available historical data. Third, results from one historical episode cannot always be
extrapolated to other eras.19 Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that our findings do sug-
gest that radical institutional reforms can have long-run beneficial consequences, at
least in certain historical contexts. This conclusion, if valid, raises the question: why
did they work when other externally imposed reforms often fail? One possibility is
that this was because the reforms were much more radical than is typically the case.20
The French reformed simultaneously in many dimensions and weakened the pow-
ers of local elites, making a return to the status quo ante largely impossible. Even
when some prerevolution elites returned to power after 1815, there was a permanent
change in the political equilibrium. This scope and radicalism of the French reforms
are common with the postwar reform experiences in Germany and Japan and stand



   19
      Moreover, even if the imposition of French institutions did spur long-run growth, this would not mean that
they were “welfare enhancing” since they were imposed by force, they entailed various short-run and medium-run
costs, and, most importantly, French occupation created major distractions and human suffering.
   20
      See Acemoglu and Robinson (2008) for a model in which limited reforms can be counterproductive.
