VOL. 101 NO. 7          ACEMOGLU ET AL.: CONSEQUENCES OF RADICAL REFORM              3303



where ujt is urbanization, dt and δj are time effects and polity fixed effects.
   The results of estimating (4) using (3) as the first-stage relationship are also shown
in Table 6. Panel A shows the OLS relationships for comparison. In the OLS, there
is a positive and significant association between our reform index and urbanization
in all specifications reported in Table 6.
   Panel B reports the 2SLS estimates of (4). For our baseline setup, column 1 shows
an estimate of ϕˆ = 0.290 (standard error = 0.102), which is highly significant.
Interestingly, this coefficient is of similar magnitude to the OLS estimate, which
suggests that three biases likely to be present in the OLS could be canceling each
other. The first of these biases is that the timing of reform is endogenous, which
will lead to an upward bias. The second is that many of the “control” polities also
underwent reforms, perhaps in response to the French threat, causing a potential
downward bias. The third is that the OLS coefficient might be subject to consider-
able (downward) attenuation, both because the extent of reform is measured with
error and also because, conceptually, our reform index is only a proxy for a broader
range of institutional reforms undertaken during this era.
   Column 2 estimates the same model on the same sample, but now using all
post-1800 interactions (i.e., the ∑ τ∈ post ατ × dτ × Ij terms in terms of equation
(1), where this set  post includes 1850, 1875, and 1900) as instruments. This not
only enables us to have a stronger first stage, but also, because we have more instru-
ments than endogenous variables, we can perform an overidentification test for all
of these interactions being jointly valid instruments. Econometrically, this is just a
standard overidentification test. Economically, it amounts to testing whether we can
reject the hypothesis that the effects of the post-1800 time interactions with French
occupation work primarily or solely through the reforms index (and thus through
the institutional changes that the French imposed). To perform the overidentifica-
tion test, we use the Huber-White variance-covariance matrix without clustering,
since this corresponds to smaller standard errors and thus stacks the cards against
our hypothesis. The p-value of the overidentification (F-)test reported at the bottom
shows that we comfortably fail to reject the above-mentioned hypothesis. This gives
some support to our interpretation that French occupation impacted urbanization
in German polities in the second half of the nineteenth century mainly through the
institutional reforms that it imposed.
   Column 3 estimates the same model as in column 1, now in an unweighted regres-
sion. The 2SLS estimate is now smaller, 0.204, with a larger standard error, and is
thus significant only at 10 percent. In columns 4 and 5, we include polities to the east
of the Elbe, and the 2SLS coefficient estimates are very similar to the corresponding
estimates of columns 1 and 3.
   Overall the results in this section are broadly consistent with our interpretation
that occupation by the French induced significant institutional reforms and that
these reforms paved the way for more rapid economic development, particularly in
the second half of the nineteenth century.

                               V. Concluding Remarks

  The French Revolution of 1789 started a complex process involving, among
other things, radical institutional changes. This process of change did not stop at the
