3298                                 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                               DECEMBER 2011



  Overall, these results show no evidence of a negative effect of French occupation
on German polities. On the contrary, the estimates, and particularly the joint signifi-
cance tests of post-treatment years, suggest that polities occupied and reformed by
the French experienced more rapid urbanization, especially after 1850. This is not
surprising. French reforms were accompanied by the disruptions caused by inva-
sion and war, and this often had quite destructive and exploitative aspects (see, for
instance, Blanning 1983, Blanning 1986).16 Thus, the short-term impact of French
invasion may well have been negative. But this is uninformative about the long-run
economic impact of Revolution-imposed institutional changes. The most plausible
hypothesis is that the major role of the reforms was in creating an environment con-
ducive to innovation and entrepreneurial activity. This environment mattered most
in the dissemination of the Industrial Revolution, which took place in Continental
Europe in the second half of the nineteenth century.17 Our evidence of positive
effects in the second half of the nineteenth century is consistent with this hypothesis.

                                               B. Robustness

   Table 4 investigates the robustness of our basic reduced-form results. In column 1,
we drop the coal-producing region of the Ruhr (corresponding to the former County
of Mark), since the presence of coal might have created a differential growth advan-
tage in the second half of the nineteenth century. The results are very similar to the
baseline estimates.
   Columns 2–6 add a full set of interactions between each of our year dum-
mies and various time-invariant characteristics that may have caused divergent
development paths. In column 2, for example, we include interactions between
the year dummies and fraction of the population of the area that is “Protestant”
(i.e., ∑ τ ητ × Dτ × Protestantj ). Column 3 instead includes a full set of year inter-
actions with latitude to check whether our results could be due to time-varying
effects of geography. In both cases, the inclusion of the sets of covariates has little
effect on the magnitudes of our estimates (though with the latitude controls, the
effects are no longer jointly significant at 5 or 10 percent).
   More importantly, columns 4 and 5 include a full set of year interactions with
longitude and with the distance to Paris. Since areas further west and closer to
Paris are more likely to have been occupied by French forces, these interactions are
important to check whether our exclusion restriction—that years of French presence
are uncorrelated with other potential determinants of differential growth during the
nineteenth century—is valid. Reassuringly, the positive effects in 1875 and 1900 are
now both larger and more precisely estimated. The time interactions with longitude
and distance to Paris are themselves jointly significant at the 10 percent level or

   16
      Though it is possible that our urbanization measure fails to capture the short-run destructive effects of the
French wars, the working paper version of our work (Acemoglu et al. 2009) reported cross-country evidence show-
ing similar results with Maddison’s estimates of GDP per capita.
   17
      This argument is similar to that of Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (1997) and Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (2002) who argue that the divergence of institutions in colonial societies, which took place
between 1500 and 1800, had little economic impact until the age of industry. David Landes (1969 chs. 4–5) points
out how the catch-up of continental Europe took place concurrently with the expansion of advanced industrial tech-
niques to areas beyond textile manufacturing, in particular to railway construction, iron production, and chemical
industry.
