VOL. 101 NO. 7                    ACEMOGLU ET AL.: CONSEQUENCES OF RADICAL REFORM    3301



occupied by the French by 1849, though these differences are not statistically sig-
nificant. They become larger and statistically significant by 1882 and remain so
until 1908. This evidence therefore corroborates the pattern that emerges from the
urbanization data, suggesting that there was more rapid industrialization in areas
that underwent more significant reforms because of French occupation and invasion.

                           IV. Institutional Reforms and Economic Growth

   In this section, we first use the data we collected on institutional reform across the
German polities to document the relationship between French occupation and (the
timing of) reforms, thus establishing a firm link between French control and dimen-
sions of institutional reforms that we can measure. We then use this relationship as
the first stage for a two-stage least squares (2SLS) strategy, where we estimate the
effect of an index of institutional reforms on growth during the nineteenth century.
This 2SLS strategy has three distinct advantages. First, it enables us to show a simple
link between institutional reforms and growth in the nineteenth century. Second, the
reduced-form evidence is difficult to interpret because some of the control polities,
such as Baden or the provinces of Prussia east of the Elbe, also underwent institutional
reforms, in part in a process of “defensive modernization” in response to the threat of
further French domination in continental Europe. The 2SLS estimates will be more
readily interpretable. Third, this strategy will enable us to conduct overidentification
tests to investigate whether we can reject the hypothesis that the effects of French
occupation are working primarily or solely through the institutional reforms.

                          A. French Occupation and Institutional Reforms

   Table 1 and Figure 1 depicted our overall reform index and illustrated the rela-
tionship between our various reform measures and years of French presence. To
summarize the relationship between the reform index and French occupation more
succinctly and in a way that can be used as the first stage for our 2SLS strategy, we
posit the following simple regression equation:

(3)                      Rjt = dt + δj + ψ × t × Tt>1800 × Ij + ηjt ,


where Rjt is the value of our reform index for polity j at time t; dt and δj are time
effects and polity fixed effects; as usual, Ij is our treatment variable, years of French
presence, and ηjt is a disturbance term. The variable Tt>1800 is a dummy for post-1800
dates (1850, 1875, and 1900), so that t × Tt>1800 is a linear time trend that turns on
after 1800 (and is equal to 0 before then).18 Intuitively, this form implies that the
longer it has been since a polity has undergone French occupation, the higher its
reform index will be. This functional form is reasonable given the process of reform
in Germany, which started earlier in areas under French occupation but, by the late
1800s, spread similar reforms to the rest of Germany.


  18
       To simplify the interpretation of coefficients, time t is divided by 1,000.
