8 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

of the Cuban missile crisis. A more fruitful way to proceed is to ask what
could have worked out differently if we introduce easily imagined variations
into the causal matrix of history. Might the murderous tyranny of Stalin
have been averted if Trotsky had not gone duck hunting, caught a cold, and
missed a key politburo meeting or if Bukharin had been a savvier politician?
Might World War IL have been nipped in the bud if British opponents of
appeasement had had one or two additional cabinet seats during the Munich
crisis? And might World War III have been triggered in October 1962 if
Kennedy had followed the advice of his more hawkish advisors and imme-
diately ordered air strikes against Soviet missile sites in Cuba?

‘These idiographic counterfactuals are not idle exercises in social-science
fiction; they are a useful corrective to simple deterministic forms of theory.
They compel us either to abandon determinism by acknowledging the role of
chance or to abandon simplicity by acknowledging that factors outside the
purview of our deterministic models—viruses, skillful or inept leadershi
group dynamics, a well-timed or ill-timed persuasive argument—can de-
cisively alter the course of events.

Beyond their heuristic contribution to social science theory, idiographic
counterfactuals are an integral part of the process of passing moral judgment
on individual leaders and even entire political systems such as Marxism-
Leninism. We rely on them in attributing responsibility (Hart 1961). Would
‘a reasonable person, confronted by these circumstances, have acted differ-
ently? Should a particular leader be praised for performance above the norm
(spectacular prescience or courage) or condemned for performance below
the norm (stubborn refusal to recognize trends apparent to others or cow-
ardly failure to protest immoral conduct)? Neville Chamberlain, John Ken-
nedy, Nikita Khrushchev, and Lyndon Johnson are all, in a sense, in the
docket with their reputations as wise leaders hanging in the balance on coun-
terfactual judgments of what they could or should have done at certain junc~
tures in history.

2. Nomothetic Theory-Testing

Whereas idiographic investigators are interested in conceivable causes that
they can readily imagine taking on different values within a specific histori-
cal context, nomothetic investigators usually show little or no concern for
the plausibility of switching the hypothesized counterfactual antecedent on
or off in any given context. From this perspective, counterfactuals are the
inevitable logical by-products of applying the hypothetico-deductive method
to an historical (nonexperimental) discipline such as world politics. When-
ever we combine a well-defined Hempelian covering law (say, relating
‘money supply to inflation) with well-defined antecedent conditions (the Rus-

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 9

sian economy in January 1992), we can deduce specific counterfactual con-
clusions (e.g., if the Russian central bank had adopted this or that monetary
policy, then, ceteris paribus, inflation would have taken on this or that
value). Note that these counterfactuals are in no way constrained by the
historical plausibility of the Russian central bank adopting one or another
policy. The counterfactual “predictions” follow from the context-free logic
‘of macroeconomic theory, not from the context-bounded logic of what was
psychologically or politically possible at that juncture in Russian history.
Adopting Fearon’s (Chapter 2) terminology, these nomothetic counterfac-
tuals invoke miracle causes. Even if our theory requires us to posit an ex-
‘tremely implausible hypothetical world, we do what our theory tells us to
do, The goal is not historical understanding; rather, itis to pursue the logical
implications of a theoretical framework. For instance, Kiser and Levi (Chap-
ter 8) note that influential sociological theories of revolution imply that if
there had been a large, educated middle class in the France of 1789 or in the
Russia of 1917, revolution would not have occurred, Russett’s (Chapter 7)
democratic-peace hypothesis implies that if all states in the twentieth century
had been democracies, war would have been less frequent. Keohane’s
(1984) theoretical work on regimes claims that if international regimes did
not exist, there would be markedly less international cooperation. Waltz’s
(1979) structural neorealism implies that if we transformed a multipolar state
system (e.g., pre-World War I Europe) into a bipolar one, the stability of
the system would have increased