

Then, in the third and final twist to this story, Napoleon invaded Russia in June 1812, making Russia and Britain allies once again. Britain, like France after Tilsit, was thus obliged to steer a course between antagonizing Russia and violating its commitments to Persia, with its best option being to broker a settlement of the conflict between the two. The Russians had been periodically interested in finding a negotiated settlement since the setbacks of 1805-6 and as recently as 1810, when Alexander Tormasov, who had replaced Gudovich as commander after his unsuccessful siege of Erevan, and Mirzā Bozorg Qāʾem-maqām had sought to arrange an armistice (Donboli, pp. 411-16; Atkin, p. 122). Yet the Russians were unwilling to make serious concessions in order to end the war, and the Persianswere also less than eager to settle since from their point of view the war was not going all that badly. Ouseley, however, realized the awkwardness of having Britain’s resources deployed against its Russian ally and that the situation for Persia was likely to worsen once Russia was freed from the struggle with Napoleon. He was thus receptive to Russian requests to act as an intermediary and sought ways to pressure the Qajars into accepting a settlement. He proposed revisions to the Definitive Treaty, scaled back British military involvement (leaving two officers, Charles Christie and Lindesay Bethune, and some drill sergeants with the Persian army), and threatened to withold payment of the subsidy promised to the Qajars (Watson, p. 165; Atkin, pp. 136-37; Ingram, 1992, pp. 176-79; Wright, p. 15).

In February 1812, N. R. Ritischev assumed command of the Russian forces and opened peace negotiations with the Persians. Ouseley and his representative at the talks, James Morier, acted as intermediaries and made various proposals to Rtischev, but they were not accepted (Atkin, p. 141). In August, ʿAbbās Mirza resumed hostilities and captured Lankarān. After news arrived that Napoleon had occupied Moscow, the negotiations were suspended (Ramażān 1227/September 1812). Then, on 24 Šawwāl 1227/31 October 1812, while Ritischev was away in Tbilisi, the general Peter Kotliarevski launched a surprise night attack on the Persian encampment at Āṣlānduz (q.v.), which resulted in the complete rout of the army of ʿAbbās Mirzā and the death of one of the British supporting officers (Christie). As it also became increasingly apparent that Napoleon’s offensive in Russia had failed disastrously, the Russians were emboldened to pursue a more aggressive campaign in the Caucasus. In early 1813, the Persian fortress at Lankarān fell and its garrison was annihilated, enabling the Russians to occupy most of Ṭāleš again (on this phase of the war see Watson, pp. 165-68; Baddeley, p. 88; Pakravan, pp. 152-54; Atkin, pp. 99, 112, 138-39). Although Fatḥ-ʿAli Shah and ʿAbbās Mirzā wanted to fight on after these setbacks, they eventually had to yield to Ouseley, who assured the shah that either the Russians would make territorial concessions or the British would continue the subsidy they had promised (Atkin, pp. 143; Ingram, 1992, p. 179).