

The treaty of Golestān was naturally a great disappointment for the Persians and was bitterly opposed by officials such as Mirzā Bozorg. Although Persia had performed reasonably well in the war prior to Āṣlānduz and had counted heavily on Britain to protect its interests in the negotiations, it had not only had to recognize the Russian position in Georgia but give up any claim to authority over the khanates of the eastern Caucasus and make other major political and economic concessions. These losses were very difficult for the Qajars to accept, partly because of the religious fervor they had unleashed by encouraging the Shiʿite ulama to declare the struggle against Russia a holy war and partly because the war had not given them an accurate picture of the force Russia could bring to bear on the Caucasus frontier when it did not have to contend with a larger European conflict. The unsatisfactory terms of the treaty, combined with Ouseley’s failure to persuade the tsar to moderate the territorial provisions as he had indicated he would. as well as continued arguments over the vacillating British promises of subsidies and support, created friction between Persia and Britain. At the same time, the treaty vastly increased the role of Russia in the political and economic affairs of Persia while not fully satisfying the territorial ambitions of the Russians, particularly those of their governors and military officers in the Caucasus.

The most serious immediate defect in the Treaty of Golestān was the ambiguity of its territorial arrangements—for example, regarding the district of Ṭāleš, where it was left to the mutually appointed commissioners to “determine what mountains, rivers, lakes, villages, and fields shall mark the line of frontier.” Even the boundaries specified in the treaty were subject to revision if one of the contracting parties held that they had “infringed on” territorial possessions claimed under the principle of the status quo ad presentem. This virtually guaranteed that territorial disputes would in fact continue after the signing of the treaty, as indeed they did. One of the most hotly contested areas continued to be the area between Lake Gokča and Erevan, and the Russian military occupation of the Gokča district in 1825 precipitated the second Russo-Persian War of 1826-28 (Watson, pp. 206-7).

### Bibliography

Detailed bibliographies and references to archival and other primary sources may be found in the works by Atkin and Ingram (1992).

Muriel Atkin, Russia and Iran: 1780-1828, Minneapolis, 1980.

John F. Baddeley, The Russian Conquest of the Caucasus, London, 1908, pp. 57-91.

George A. Bournoutian, “Ḥusayn Qulī Khan, Sardar of Erevan: A Portrait of a Qajar Admin istrator,” Iranian Studies 9, 1976, pp. 163-79.

Idem, Eastern Armenia in the Last Decades of Persian Rule, 1807-1828, Malibu, Calif., 1982.

Idem, The Khanate of Erevan under Qajar Rule, 1795-1828, Costa Mesa, Calif., 1992.

J. Campbell, “The Russo-Persian Frontier, 1810,” Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society 18, 1931, pp. 223-32.