

 Immunity to drought and proximity to the sea had helped to preserve the population of the Montaňa from the demographic setbacks of the seventeenth century, and by 1808 the merindades of Pamplona and Estella were among the most
densely settled rural areas in Spain. 4 By that date, however, the population of the Montaňa had ceased to expand. Partly, this was the result of the disruptions caused by the French occupation of 1795 and the economic
dislocations of the war with England. 5 The essential reason for demographic stagnation in the Montaňa, however, was that the region had experienced no fundamental social and technological change to raise agricultural or
industrial productivity. Steady growth had, therefore, created a condition of overpopulation relative to the Montaňa’s fixed resources. 6

 Indeed, to maintain its vital equilibrium, the Montaňa had begun to export people. Under the prevailing system of rigid primogeniture, younger children had to emigrate or accede to life under the tutelage of an older sibling. In
this system, young men were especially likely to emigrate—to America, to Madrid, and to the agro-towns of the Ribera, where paid agricultural labor was seasonally available. 7 The English blockade of Spain and Spanish America
after 1796 had curtailed the option of emigration to America, and the economic contraction caused by the blockade made work in Madrid and the Ribera more difficult to find as well. What the French found in the Montaňa in 1808,
therefore, was densely populated, rugged country full of young men with no prospects. Thus, the availability of men for Mina’s army of guerrillas was the result, in part, of a particular economic and demographic conjuncture in
the Montaňa.

 Climatic differences also helped to create a very particular type of agriculture and human geography in the Montaňa favorable to guerrilla war. The wet, steep land of northern Navarre was ideally suited to small farms. On a
small plot in the Montaňa, intense labor combined with generous rainfall could redeem the intrinsic deficiencies of the terrain. The tendency was, therefore, toward small, subsistence holdings, which, in turn, helped to disperse
the population over the countryside. Indeed, the town—with the exception of Pamplona—was a structure historically alien to the area, and people lived instead in small settlements and even in isolated farmhouses. The Montaňa
contained 700 individual poblaciones, almost as many as in all Andalusia (753). An average of 207 people lived in each of the settlements of the Montaňa, and hundreds of villages had populations of 50 or less.

 In contrast, small holdings could not compete well in the dry Ribera, since farmers of small plots had difficulty surviving even a single year of drought. The solution there, as in most of Spain, was extensive agriculture, the
construction of irrigation projects, and the application of paid gang labor, all of which encouraged a concentration of landowner- ship. 8 This agricultural regime, by requiring concentrations of labor and by generating
commercial surpluses, encouraged the growth of towns. The Ribera merindades of Navarre were even “urban” by contemporary standards. In Tudela, for example, 28,112 people lived in only 27 towns, an average of 1,041 in each. The
city of Tudela had a population of 7,295, Corella 3,935, and Tafalla 3,347, and 25 other towns had populations between 1,000 and 3,000.