

 Another of the Montaňa’s assets for war was the relative lack of social differentiation that existed there. One indication of this was, paradoxically, the large number of nobles in the region. The census of 1796-97 counted
19,010 nobles in Navarre, equal to 7-8 percent of the population, a high figure by almost any standard. The vast majority of these nobles lived in the Montaňa. West of Pamplona, in the valley of Larráun, for example, 80 percent
of the population was noble; to the north of the capital, in the valley of Baztán, the figure was 60 percent, and in the Pyrenees of Sangüesa around 30 percent. In the Ribera, on the other hand, only about 1 percent of the
population was born noble. 12

 The value of a thing, however, falls when it is superabundant, and in northern Navarre, thousands of hidalgos, the lowest degree of noble, were barely distinguishable from the peasant commoners among whom they lived. In the
Ribera, a hidalgo normally possessed enough property to avoid engaging in trade or manual labor. In contrast, the hidalgos of the Montaňa (and of the northern Spanish littoral generally) worked as tavernkeepers, cobblers,
blacksmiths, and carpenters. 13 Foreigners readily noticed the lack of social stratification associated with nobility in the region. The muddling of the line between nobles and commoners inspired one French observer to ask
whether the institution had any purpose in a region “where a crowd of muledrivers is noble; where domestic servants, when they come of age, display the pedigrees of their ancestors.” 14

 It would have been more fruitful to ask what purpose nobility in the Montaňa did not serve. It did not, for example, serve as an important source of discontent as it did in the Ribera and in most of Spain south of the Ebro-Duero
demarcation. In these regions nobles were a special interest attracted to the French government by promises to quell popular revolution and to redistribute upward the spoils of war. 15 In the Montaňa this tactic was not possible.
The hidalgo of northern Navarre was farther from the rich noble of Madrid or Seville than he was from a common peasant.

 In these conditions the concept of derogation—the loss of nobility through the exercise of ignoble trades—had little meaning. Nobility was not always defined by an officially executed title, nor was it so easily lost. The
Montaňa, like much of the Basque-Cantabrian region, had remained free from “contamination” by the Moors, and nobility was considered to pass through the blood and to belong inalienably to all native inhabitants, regardless of
their economic role or station in life. In the Montaňa entire villages, even whole valleys were populated almost exclusively by the noble born. As a result, the people developed a sense of racial and moral superiority to other
Spaniards, and this sense of distinction helped to engender a strong feeling of community. Put another way, the Navarrese hidalgo’s primary allegiances were likely to run vertically into the local community rather than
horizontally across the noble estate. This fact is extremely important. At decisive moments, fear and loathing of the populace brought Castilian and Aragonese nobles together in solidarity against the resistance movement and in
favor of the regime imposed from above by the French. The nature of nobility in the Navarrese Montaňa prevented this from happening.