

 Spain may be said to have invented guerrilla war. The word guerrilla, or “little war,” which before 1808 described the usual skirmishes fought by detachments and screening units of regular armies, became transformed during the
war with France and entered the military lexicon carrying the meaning familiar in the twentieth century: the irregular war of civilians against the occupation forces of a foreign power or an unpopular regime. By mid-1809 it had
become clear that neither the Spanish nor the Anglo-Portuguese armies could drive the French from Spain. Spanish patriots learned, therefore, to accept the consequences of a militarized population and to embrace the new warfare.
An editorial of the day enjoined people to enlist with the guerrillas: “From now on you must show a renewed martial vigor, aided by a novel system of war unknown to military tacticians. It is necessary to counter these ‘warriors
on a large scale’ with war on a small scale, with guerrillas and more guerrillas.” 5

 Armed peasants made chaos of French communications and performed other tasks of value to both English and Spanish regular forces. Partisans scoured the countryside of French spies and sympathizers and brought a continuous stream
of information to the Allies. 6 The guerrillas also effected a kind of psychological warfare in which the French had to be constantly on the alert, while the Allied armies could rest securely in the midst of a vigilant peasantry.
The guerrilla war was a long and demoralizing nightmare for France. In the regions of insurgency, where each peasant was a potential guerrilla, there could be no campaigning season, no safe havens, no truces. Everywhere and
always there existed the possibility of a hostile encounter. 7 This constant terror made the Spanish war uniquely exhausting to Napoleon’s armies and ruined their effectiveness in battle. Occupation troops in guerrilla war are
rapidly demoralized—and morale among French soldiers in Spain was notoriously low. Fresh replacements, however, lacked the training and experience to match the hardened forces of the insurgents. As the fighting dragged on in
Spain, the French faced an ever bolder guerrilla movement forged by years of struggle and infused with the confidence that comes from an almost daily train of small victories. By 1811 the best guerrilla forces were able to face
equal numbers of French troops and defeat them in battle.

 Success in guerrilla war, however, is not measured only by the number of battles won and the effect of espionage and terror. Guerrilla war is, above all, about controlling the fruits of the rural economy. In Spain, the
guerrillas denied the enemy systematic, peaceful contact with much of the countryside, making the collection of taxes fitful, costly, and, in some areas, impossible for the French. In guerrilla country, the French governed only
where they actually had troops in place. When these troops were withdrawn, the territory reverted to the guerrillas, becoming valueless to the French, if not a positive drain on their resources. War in Spain did not pay Napoleon
as it had in other parts of Europe. On the contrary, guerrilla action made the occupation of Spain a constant burden and made the Spanish war unwinnable.