

 I must not forget the support and friendship of my colleagues at the Georgia Institute of Technology or the help of my friends in the Atlanta Seminar on the Comparative History of Labor, Industrialization, Technology, and
Society. The constant intellectual stimulation provided by this environment I could not do without. I would also like to thank Professor Renato Barahona, Professor Owen Connelly, and Professor Michael Fellman for their helpful
reading of the manuscript.

 Finally, I wish to thank my wife, Professor Andrea Tone, for the gift of love, which makes everything possible.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/06_halftitle.xhtml =====
The Fatal Knot The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain

 THE FATAL KNOT

 Navarre, 1808-1815

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/07_introduction.xhtml =====
The Fatal Knot The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain

 Introduction

 That unfortunate war destroyed me; it divided my forces, multiplied my obligations, undermined my morale. . . . All the circumstances of my disasters are bound up in that fatal knot .—Napoleon Bonaparte on the Spanish war,
Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, 1823

 I N 1808 NAPOLEON seized Spain, ending an alliance with the Spanish Bourbons that dated back to 1796. By the summer of 1808 French troops occupied Madrid and the most important forts in the country. The Bourbons, their armies in
disarray, were forced to abdicate, and Napoleon turned Spain over to his older brother, Joseph. Spain seemed the easy prize Napoleon had predicted it would be.

 The Spanish people, however, proved more resilient than its government and armies. With their cities occupied, their royal family deposed, and half of their ruling elite co-opted by the Bonaparte regime, Spaniards formed a
revolutionary government, raised new armies, and initiated a war of liberation against France. The English took advantage of the Spanish resistance to place an expeditionary army in Portugal, and during the next six years,
English, Portuguese, and Spanish forces battled France in Iberia when most of Europe lay prostrate before Napoleon. As the emperor himself later observed, it was the long, costly war in Spain that led to his destruction.

 Napoleon sacrificed 300,000 men in Iberia. 1 As damaging to France as the number of casualties, however, was the burden of maintaining large numbers of troops in the peninsula for six years. From 1810 to 1812 Napoleon had
400,000 men in Spain and Portugal, and he maintained an army of some 250,000 in Spain through 1812. 2 In contrast, Wellington’s English troops never numbered more than 60,000, and Spanish and Portuguese forces, though large, were
poorly led and by themselves no real threat, especially after 1809. How, then, did the Allied forces avoid destruction by Napoleon’s host?

 The answer to this riddle is that the Allies never faced the bulk of Napoleon’s armies. Most of the time, French troops were not fighting Wellington or the Spanish regulars. Rather, they were assigned to the occupation of a
nominally pacified Spain, where a guerrilla insurgency threatened the French regime at its roots. 3 Spanish guerrillas forced Napoleon to expend hundreds of thousands of French troops in occupation duties, eliminating the
emperor’s numerical superiority over the Allies. In the summer of 1811, for example, the French used 70,000 troops to maintain the lines of communication in the zone of guerrilla activity between Madrid and the French border.
Many of the men diverted to this task had been intended for Marshal Masséna at one of the war’s most critical junctures. Masséna lost Portugal, while his reinforcements chased guerrillas fruitlessly around Navarre, Aragon, and
other northern provinces. 4 The implications of French military dispositions in garrisons, requisition parties, convoy duty, and antiinsurgency units rather than in facing Allied concentrations cannot be mistaken. Guerrillas, in
symbiosis with the regular Allied armies, destroyed Napoleon’s regime in Spain.