

 The guerrillas gained wide fame for their ability to defy imperial troops and taught European nationalists that, under certain circumstances, popular forces could be as effective as professional armies. In Spain, Europe
witnessed a new movement that, by bringing previously disfranchised strata of society into the political and military arena, had the potential to liberate the Continent. The lesson that resistance to Napoleon might continue even
after military defeat was learned as far afield as Austria and Russia. 8

 Despite the importance of the guerrillas in shaping Spain and Europe, historians have paid scant attention to them. In England and France, the historical literature has always focused on Wellington and Napoleon, and the
guerrillas have been considered a sideshow, little more than bandits. 9 Even in Spain, where scholars have at least acknowledged the importance of the insurgency, there has never been a clear notion of who the guerrillas were or
why they fought. Spanish patriots portrayed the resistance as a unanimous, nationwide, and irresistible movement, and said the guerrillas fought for king, country, and the Catholic faith. In turn, this interpretation became
embedded in the historiography. 10 In fact, however, it is based on a set of myths.

 First, guerrilla warfare was not a unanimous, national effort. Although small parties of guerrillas operated throughout Spain during at least part of the war, the heart of guerrilla country can be more closely defined than this.
The greatest of the insurgent armies operated in northern Spain, from Upper Aragon through Soria, Navarre, Rioja, the Basque provinces, parts of Old Castile, Asturias, Leon, and Galicia. It was in this region that the famous
Empecinado earned his name and the guerrilla-priest Merino gained his evil reputation. In the center of this band of insurgent territory, Navarre, under Francisco Espoz y Mina, produced the largest and most effective guerrilla
army in Spain. Thus, guerrilla war was in large measure particular to northern Spain, above all to Navarre and the surrounding provinces.

 This work focuses on Navarre, because it produced the most perfect guerrilla movement in Spain. Mina gained a virtual monopoly of military force in Navarre and Upper Aragon, established a court system, took over the tariff
operations at the borders, and exacted contributions from the population. For a time, therefore, a guerrilla army governed the region. Even in Navarre, however, guerrilla war was not ubiquitous and unanimous. In a general sense,
this proposition hardly needs defending, since only a minority of the population in any war actually engages in battle or directly aids the combatants. Yet, the myth of unanimity has prevented historians from asking the basic
questions: who fought and who supported the guerrillas? I will argue that even in the guerrilla stronghold of Navarre it was a particular social class in a special rural setting in the northern half of the province that produced
effective guerrilla resistance and that many Navarrese remained quiescent or collaborated with France.