

 For administrative purposes, Navarre under the old regime was divided into five merindades, roughly equivalent to counties, but geographers customarily divide Navarre into two regions, the North, or Montaňa , and the South, or
Ribera. (The merindades were Pamplona and Sangüesa in the North, Tudela and Olite in the South, and Estella, which lay partly in the Montaňa and partly in the Ribera.) Topography is the foundation for this division. The Pyrenees
and the eastern marches of the Basque-Cantabrian mountain range create distinct northern and southern hemispheres in Navarre. The line running from the Sierra of Leyre in the East through the Sierras of Izco, Alaiz, Perdón,
Andía, Urbasa, and Santiago de Lóquiz, and terminating in the Sierra of Codés in the West, defines the boundary between the “Two Navarres.” North of the Leyre-Codés line the land is typically over 2,000 feet above sea level, in
some places as high as 7,000 feet. To the south the mountains flatten out into a gentler landscape of valleys and plains.

 The elevation of the Montaňa does not make it particularly remarkable: even Madrid is as high. But Madrid lies in the center of a high plain, whereas the Montaňa of Navarre is a land of dramatic precipices, gorges, hidden
valleys, and box canyons with their secret exits. This land, so suited to the requirements of partisan warfare, was the first of many factors that made northern Navarre, together with contiguous and similar areas of northern
Aragon and the Basque provinces, a nightmare for French troops. Mountains provided a last refuge to the guerrillas, who could always seek temporary asylum in heights that were impassable to French cavalry and artillery units.
Geography thus partially negated the technological and organizational superiority of the French. By guarding key passes and occupying strategic heights, the guerrillas could even eliminate the numerical advantage enjoyed by their
enemies. By contrast, the French could more easily hold the open landscape of southern Navarre, which gave the edge to cavalry and artillery. 2

 The French never felt secure in the Montaňa, where straggling or drawing duty in a foraging detachment could bring an inglorious death. 3 Rough terrain, though, was just the beginning of their difficulties. The Montaňa possessed
a particular demography, economy, politics, culture, and even language (the Leyre-Codés line corresponded to the southern limit of Basque) that set it apart from the Ribera and from most of Spain and that gave the region special
motives and aptitudes for guerrilla war.

 The origins of the Montaňa’s peculiarities are partly climatic and partly historical. The climate in Navarre is, of course, intimately linked to physical relief, for the mountains do more than create a broken terrain; they also
act as a barrier to the moisture-laden breezes blowing from the Cantabrian Sea. Against this wall, the wet ocean air exhausts itself, giving northwestern Navarre, parts of which receive seventy-nine inches of rainfall a year, a
maritime climate. South of the mountain barrier, in the rain shadow of the Cantabrian massifs, southern Navarre is a dry plain, receiving only fifteen inches of rain a year in some places and depending on irrigation from the Ebro
River and its tributaries. In few areas of the world does such a strong pluviometric contrast occur over such a small distance.