

 The suitability of the Ribera to large estates had been reinforced by historical circumstances. As they had done in all the territories of the Western Empire, the Romans brought a system of production based on slave labor and
latifundia to the Ebro basin, which was the northern borderland of effective Roman power in the region. Urban life followed the latifundia, as estate owners and their laborers lived in cities. This system was maintained by
successive Visigothic and Moslem conquerors, whose political power always closely followed the old parameters of urban settlement established by Rome. The Reconquest of the Ribera in the Middle Ages by the Kingdom of Navarre
increased the concentration of landownership and the growth of towns in the region. In the lands taken from the Moslems, the Navarrese monarchs, unhindered by a concern for the inhabitants, parceled out vast estates to the nobles
and church. Thus, the urban pattern of settlement created by Rome and favored by the climate survived into the Napoleonic era. Great lords, residing in the towns, owned all of the land. Also in the towns, though in less
comfortable surroundings, were the propertyless agricultural laborers.

 These historical pressures had, to a large degree, passed over the Montaňa. In the foothills of the Pyrenees and the Cantabrian mountains, Rome had encountered the decisive boundary to the expansion of the slave economy.
(Pamplona was an outpost in the unsubdued Basque Montaňa.) Neither had the Visigoths and Moors been able to absorb the Basque people. Even the medieval monarchs of Navarre had failed completely to transform the tribal Montaňa
into a feudal society. Thus, while a system of large estates based successively on slave, serf, and paid labor had existed in the Ribera since ancient times, the Basques in the Montaňa had been left to achieve a system of
landownership centered on the small, family-sized exploitation.

 In the Montaňa people lived in caseríos, the typical dwelling of the Basques. 9 The caserío was a large house, usually built of stone. It was designed to contain the family, the animals, the tools, the harvest—in fact,
everything belonging to the household. In the Pamplona and Lum- bier basins, the heart of the Navarrese Montaňa and of the guerrilla war, caseríos tended to be grouped in hamlets and small villages. CaseríOs are impressive
structures, even today. They can seem more like fortifications than homes, and, to French soldiers, the caseríos lent the Montaňa the appearance of a country covered with innumerable small citadels. 10 In fact, they could be and
were converted to this use by both the guerrillas and the French.

 The dispersion of the population in small villages and hamlets gave the Montaňa an important fighting edge. 11 To tax this population, the French had to send small detachments into each village, but this made them vulnerable to
guerrilla attack. The solution was to send in a larger force, but this was not cost effective, given the limited money and goods that could be raised in a small municipality. Thus, the French never succeeded in maintaining their
presence in the land of the caserío, which was so well suited to the guerrilla strategy. On the other hand, dominating the Ribera, where the population was concentrated in a handful of towns, was an easier task. Even areas of the
Ribera that did contribute volunteers to Mina’s army, could not themselves, by the very nature of their human geography, be the site of armed guerrilla struggle.