

 Second, loyalties to king, country, and religion do not begin to describe the motivations of the Navarrese guerrillas. People in pacified areas of southern Spain no doubt loved their nation, faith, and royal family as much as
the Navarrese, yet they did not produce a powerful guerrilla movement, while Navarre did. The fact is that the guerrilla genius of the Navarrese did not flow from superior patriotism or piety, but from the nature of rural society
in Navarre. The dispersion of the population, the unarticulated peasant economy, and the tradition of strong village government were some of the factors that contributed to the success of the Navarrese guerrillas. To understand
the insurgency, therefore, this work will examine the peasant world of Navarre, which gave birth to and nurtured the guerrilla forces.

 This peasant world in 1808 was almost entirely Basque-speaking. It might seem tempting, therefore, to associate Basque ethnicity or some peculiar Basque historical experience with guerrillerismo, the notion that some people are
more naturally suited to guerrilla warfare than others. However, there is no reason to believe that ethnicity ever determines warlike tendencies, nor did the Basque people have any special tradition of guerrilla resistance to
central authority in the early modern period that could account for a cultural disposition to combativeness. The Basque region became associated with Carlism and guerrilla warfare in the nineteenth century, but that tradition was
anchored in the experience of the Napoleonic occupation, not in any secular history of resistance predating 1808. Therefore, “Basqueness” can form no part of any rational explanation for the success of the Navarrese guerrillas.

 Finally, Mina’s army was no juggernaut, and victory was not inevitable. The record is clear: the guerrilla movement went through several phases of disintegration and reconstruction, and its success owed much to the chance of
battle, politics, and personality. For this reason, a social history of Navarre is insufficient to explain the power of the insurgency there. Only by consulting the chronological record can Mina’s victory and the nature of the
guerrillas’ contribution to Napoleon’s downfall be understood. This work is, therefore, both social history and narrative.

 The first two chapters are a portrait of Navarre in 1808 and an analysis of the conditions that fostered guerrilla warfare there. The remaining chapters recount the Napoleonic invasion, describe the career of Mina and his
guerrillas, and explain the success of the insurgency as a function of both structural features of Navarrese society and the contingencies of politics and war.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/08_chapter.xhtml =====
The Fatal Knot The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain

 1 Guerrilla Country

 N AVARRE LIES IN the shape of a rough diamond wedged between France to the north and Castile to the south. To the east is Aragon and to the west the Basque provinces. From the northern tip of Navarre to the southern measures
just under 100 miles, and at the widest point from east to west the distance spanned is about 75 miles. 1 Despite its limited size, Navarre possesses a more varied landscape and climate than many larger territories. Spain is
famous for its continental variety, from the cool, moist mountains of Cantabria and the chill plateaus of Castile to the gardens of the Levant and the deserts of Murcia. Navarre mirrors these vast differences and concentrates
them even further within its small territory, a fact that has earned the province the nickname “Little Spain.” The modern visitor to Navarre can in an hour’s drive go from green hills and leaden skies in the Northwest to brown
lands under a high canopy of blue in the South.