

 There were additional reasons why noble status distinguished its owner less in the Navarrese Montaňa than elsewhere. It is true that even the poorest hidalgo in Navarre enjoyed certain privileges that set him apart from
commoners, including the right to be addressed as Don or Dona and to display coats of arms, the privilege of carrying weapons in public, exemption from arrest for nonpayment of debts, and access to certain offices. These rights
were not inconsiderable. However, the main institutions from which nobles drew their wealth and power—the seigneurial jurisdiction, or señorío, and the entail, or mayorazgo —barely existed in northern Navarre. The number of
señoríos was high in Spain, amounting to some 50 percent of all municipalities. 16 Around Madrid and Valencia señoríos accounted for between 60 percent and 70 percent of all towns and villages and for 86 percent in the province
of Guadalajara. In Navarre, however, property burdened with señorial dues and rents was extremely rare. Only thirty-eight towns and forty-three villages, amounting to 10 percent of all settlements, fell under señorial
jurisdiction in Navarre. In addition, most of these señoríos were extremely small, often amounting to no more than one or two dwellings. Thus, señoríos accounted for 10 percent of all villages, but less than 1 percent of the
population lived under señorial jurisdiction. 17

 The mayorazgo allowed nobles (as well as wealthy commoners) to protect properties from seizure, sale, and division. These entails varied in size from great latifundia in Andalusia to small plots in the Basque country. 18 As with
the señoríos, the greatest number of mayorazgos in Navarre as well as the largest and most valuable existed in the Ribera, whereas in the Montaňa they were of little consequence. For example, a survey conducted in 1802 revealed
no mayorazgos in the valley of Ergoyena just northwest of Pamplona. In the village of Echarri-Aranaz, also in the Northwest, there was one “very old and poor” entailed estate, whose exact location, size, and value nobody seemed
to recall. 19

 Finally, senores in the Montaňa tended to lease their land to peasants at very low prices. The reasons for this are simple. Since there was little commercial development in the Montaňa due to an absence of urban markets, and
since excess population tended to migrate from the region, land values remained steady, and there was no pressure to raise rents. Indeed, tenants sometimes paid entirely symbolic sums to their overlords, as if in mere memory of
ancient señorial ownership, and typical rents in the region ran between 2 percent and 6 percent of the value of an average harvest. 20 This was one of the reasons why the Bonapartes’ abolition of señoríos in 1809 received less
than an enthusiastic response in the Montaňa. 21

 The situation in the Ribera was entirely different. In the city of Tudela, 77 individuals, mostly nobles, in a population of 7,572 controlled all of the land. They directly exploited 67 percent of the arable land, some 7,400
acres, and leased out the remaining 3,000 acres to 250 individuals. About 11 percent of this total (1,180 acres) was locked up in 23 entails owned by 19 nobles. 22 In Corella, 16 nobles held 445 acres in entails, amounting to
12.5 percent of all the arable land. The remaining 3,112 acres was shared between these and 49 other proprietors, and most was exploited directly. 23