

 Instead, most people in the Montaňa were peasant farmers who owned their own land. In Navarre as a whole, labradores, or peasants who worked their own or rented land, outnumbered jornaleros, or day laborers, by three to one.
This already made Navarre unusual. In Spain as a whole there were more jornaleros (53 percent) than labradores (48 percent). Looking more closely at the figures for labradores in Navarre, one finds that 70 percent owned the land
they worked, while only 30 percent were leaseholders. This situation was reversed on the national level, where some 60 percent of the labradores rented land and only 40 percent were proprietors. 59

 These figures become even more suggestive when they are broken down within Navarre. For example, while the ratio of landed peasants to day laborers (3:1) was remarkable enough at the provincial level, in the Montaňa the
proportion rose to 9:1. In the merindades of Pamplona and Sangüesa only 7 percent of the active population was identified as landless laborers. 60 In many areas there were no landless peasants. Aspiroz, a village of 298
inhabitants in 1786, showed 298 peasant proprietors, 205 of whom were nobles. (It is notable that women and children were listed as nobles and proprietors.) In the village of Echauri 98 percent of the arable land was worked by
its owners. There were a few leased properties, but these were small plots at prices averaging between 2 percent and 6 percent of the value of the harvest. With land so easy to come by, landlords could not charge more to their
tenants. There were no day laborers in Echauri. 61 When one considers that most of the over 14,000 nobles in the region were socially in the same class as peasant proprietors, it becomes clear that the Montaňa of Navarre was the
land par excellence of the small farmer.

 One of the mechanisms that kept land prices down in the Montaňa and helped to underpin the wide property distribution was an arrangement known as the carta de gracia. Through the carta de gracia peasants were able to supplement
their own ancestral possessions by acquiring the usufruct of others in exchange for the payment of onetime “purchase” prices. 62 The true owner of a plot sold in carta de gracia was allowed to recover his property by refunding
the usufruct owner the cost of the land plus improvements. This, however, occurred much less frequently than might be expected. 63 There was little incentive for landowners to spend money reconstituting their estates from lands
previously sold in carta de gracia. Stagnant or declining population and the absence of markets for agricultural products made commercial exploitation of land unattractive in the Montaňa. And because so many people owned land
outright, it was difficult to find tenants for leaseholds: people were unwilling to pay rent for any but the very best plots of land. 64 Proprietors with more land than they could work directly or with widely dispersed lands that
could not be leased were therefore satisfied to obtain what they could from sales in carta de gracia, which at least allowed them theoretically to recover ownership at a later date.