

 These figures on the distribution of the clergy within Navarre are not without implications for patterns of piety in the province. In the Montaňa an unusually large priesthood administered the sacraments. In the Ribera there
were simply too few pastors to say mass, a circumstance that must have resulted in a lack of even the rudiments of Christian instruction for many people, a situation not uncommon in other European nations, where churches failed
to keep pace with growing urban populations. At the same time, regular and “other” secular clerics, who in the popular imagination were often depicted as burdens or parasites on society, led to anticlerical sentiment in the
region. 37 The call to arms in defense of the church was, therefore, less likely to receive a response in the Ribera than it was in the Montaňa.

 In addition, the church, like the nobility in Navarre, possessed more land in the Ribera than in the Montaňa. In Tudela, for example, 4 percent of the arable was owned by six convents for men and four for women, and almost 20
percent of the urban dwellings were in the hands of the clergy. In Corella 10 percent of the arable was owned by two convents for men and two for women. 38 Between the convents and the cathedral chapter, 10 percent of the urban
property in Corella was also in the hands of the church. 39 It is no shock, then, that the city of Tudela favored the seizure of convent property in order to release land on the market. French reforms that promised to do just
that could hardly inspire resistance. On the contrary, some Ribereños, at least, had long fought for a repartition of church lands. 40

 In contrast, the church owned proportionally less property in the Montaňa. 41 In the village of Echarri-Aranaz, for example, there was only half an acre belonging to the church, and in the valley of Ergoyena the clergy had not a
single acre. 42 Sometimes villages in the Montaňa even maintained control over part of the clergy’s income. In Echauri, the priest accepted what he was given from the rental of four acres of municipal land specifically set aside
for the support of the parish. 43 The point is, most people in the Montaňa did not have contact with clerics who were also their landlords, and this made it easier to imagine defending the spiritual church.

 As was the case with properties belonging to secular lords, ecclesiastical senores leased land to peasants for very small sums, usually under censo enfiteutico. The censo was a type of feudal copyhold that allowed peasants to
acquire the usufruct of a piece of land, for which they paid a “purchase” price as well as a yearly sum, almost always payable in kind, to the seller. The censo lands were inheritable, passing through families for generations
without experiencing rent increases. Indeed, peasants with church lands paid such low rents that they had become virtual coproprietors, in almost as enviable a position as those who owned property outright. 44 Promises to
redistribute such lands on the open market, which would have led inexorably to rising land values and rents, held very little attraction for peasants in the Montaňa. However, censo lands rented for more in the Ribera than they
did in the Montaňa. The presence of urban markets and the high quality of the irrigable land along the Ebro had caused the price of land and rents to inch upward in the Ribera. 45 And because the church collected higher rents in
the Ribera, especially on irrigated land, people there were more likely than people in the Montaňa to perceive the church, or elements of the church, as economically exploitative. This, in turn, would affect the willingness of
peasants to answer the church’s call for an anti-French “crusade” in defense of Catholicism.