

 The considerable resources of the church corresponded to the important role it played. Hospitals, charity, and education absorbed a large part of the total income. What remained provided a livelihood for 16,675 priests (.16
percent of the population), 39,489 other secular clergymen (.38 percent), and 71,487 members of the regular clergy (nearly .69 percent), for a combined total of 1.23 percent of the population.

 The church in Navarre supported a larger proportion of clerics, especially parish priests, than the church in Spain as a whole. In 1786 there were 762 priests, accounting for more than . 34 percent of the population, over twice
the proportion of priests in the rest of Spain. An additional 1,748 other secular clergymen, many of whom performed little or no function within the church, made up another .77 percent of the population, also more than twice the
national average. And 1,875 members of the regular clergy, most of them men and 70 percent of them mendicants, accounted for another .82 percent, a figure close to the Spanish average. Thus, ecclesiastics were almost 2 percent of
the population in Navarre, a proportion half again as high as that for Spain. 32

 Despite the number of people it supported, the church in Navarre absorbed a considerably smaller percentage of the agricultural product and owned much less property, proportionally, than it did in the rest of Spain. Tithes
brought 17.2 million reales in an average year between 1803 and 1807, equivalent to 11 percent of Navarre’s agricultural product. 33 The church possessed señorial rights over only three towns and one village in Navarre. The
regular clergy owned 22 square miles of land, and the secular clergy owned 9 square miles, less than 1 percent of the surface area of Navarre, compared with 8 percent in all Spain. 34

 As in the matter of noble status, religious differences between the Two Navarres, Montaňa and Ribera, mirrored the differences between Navarre, as a whole, and the rest of Spain. In the Montaňa, priests formed a relatively large
proportion of the population (. 5 percent), but the presence of the regular clergy was light (.3 percent). In the Ribera, the reverse held true: priests were rare (.1 percent of the population), while the presence of monks and
nuns (1.3 percent) was everywhere evident. So common were regular clerics in the merindad of Tudela that they almost equaled the number of regular clerics in all the rest of Navarre, excluding the city of Pamplona.

 The Ribera also supported a large proportion of “other” secular clerics (.8 percent of the population), which doubtless included some genuinely pious men and women, but which in large part consisted of hundreds of people who
performed little discernible function in exchange for their tax-free status and other benefits. 35 This class of clergy appeared as parasites and served to cast doubt and discredit on the truly devoted servants of the church. In
the Montaňa only .4 percent of the population fell into this category. 36