

 The Ribera suffered in another way from the swarm of “other” secular clergymen. Many of these people were not really clerics at all, but wealthy laymen who held land under the umbrella of obras pias and capellanías, categories
of church property that could be manipulated by laymen to entail estates under church protection and to exempt the crops produced on the estates from taxes. 46 The amount of arable possessed by capellanías was not enormous, from
about 1 percent in Tudela to 3 percent in Corella, but this often included some of the best land. 47 As a result, Bourbon programs to seize and sell these kinds of properties met with enthusiasm among some Ribereños and were
extremely successful there. 48 When the French extended nationalization programs to other forms of church property, it took little convincing to get buyers of former obras pias and capellanías to put their money down on
additional lands seized from the church. 49 There is no adequate study of the process of ecclesiastical disentailment in Navarre during these years. What is evident, however, is that this kind of land reform in Navarre, whether
it was carried out by Godoy, Bonaparte, or Mendizábal in the 1830s, never provoked popular resistance. 50

 The evidence produced so far with respect to the church in Navarre suggests a number of reasons why people in the Montaňa would have been willing to fight for their religion, while people in the Ribera would not have been. The
Montaňa was well ministered, and peasants maintained an intimacy with their priests remarkable to contemporary observers. 51 French soldiers passing through Navarre were amazed to find priests “playing billiards, smoking, and
drinking liquor in public houses.” 52 The rough piety of the Montaňa, in which priests mixed naturally with their parishioners, may have shocked some French observers, but it was an indication of the survival of a religious
sensibility still capable of producing a crusade.

 At the same time, the absence of regular orders and greedy “other” secular clergy, as well as the scarcity of church lands in the Montaňa, had not generated the kind of anticlerical sentiment that was already evident in the
Ribera and in many other areas of Spain. The French program to dissolve monasteries, abolish whole categories of clergy, and seize church property would not have been understood in the Montaňa, where most people knew the church
through their priest, who was no more than the “first among the parish poor.” 53 In this situation, French reforms could only have appeared as vandalism and an offense to piety.

 The nature of the nobility and clergy in the Montaňa was conducive to social cohesion, and this helped the region produce a guerrilla insurgency. More important, however, was the character of the rest of the population. In
Navarre, 91 percent of the population belonged to the so- called third estate, a term that expressed a legal distinction rather than a social reality, since within the third estate there existed the greatest variety of conditions.