

 Most people in both the Montaňa and the Ribera depended on agriculture. Excluding nobles and clerics, whose numbers and resources— also mainly agricultural—have been considered apart, 68 percent of the remaining population that
had an occupation in Navarre either exploited a plot of land directly, worked for wages on land belonging to someone else, or raised livestock. About 17 percent of the active population comprised artisans, and just over 9 percent
worked in domestic service. Those constituting the remaining 6 percent were divided among military and government personnel (1 percent each), doctors, lawyers, and other professionals (2 percent), commerce and industry (1
percent), and students (1 percent).

 These figures show that Navarre did not deviate much from the Spanish norm. The percentage of people in agriculture was identical; the proportion of artisans, students, merchants, and manufacturers was slightly smaller; and the
proportion of domestic servants was a bit greater. How-ever, the distinguishing mark of Navarrese society was, once again, the absolute difference between the Montaňa and the Ribera in terms of the social and occupational
structure of the population.

 The proportion of students, merchants, professionals, royal servants, and military personnel was 2 percent lower in Navarre than in Spain as a whole. It was lowest of all in the merindad of Pamplona, somewhat higher in Sangüesa,
Olite, and Estella, and approached the national average in Tudela. The weakness of these professions in the Montaňa meant that clerics, as sources of information and leadership, had few rivals in their communities. On the other
hand, the relative strength of these groups in the Ribera supplied a natural constituency to the collaboration, for the professional classes, including officers in the Spanish army, were everywhere in Spain among the first to
pledge allegiance to the French government. As will be seen, in Tudela, men like the erudite and flexible José Yangüas y Miranda would quickly make peace with the occupation, in the hopes of reaping political and economic rewards
from the Bonaparte regime. 54

 Artisans were overrepresented in the Ribera. The Ebro valley produced textiles, soap, aguardiente , and licorice, on a scale that employed significant numbers of people. Of course, the Montaňa was not devoid of industrial
activity. Textile production was important in Estella and Sangüesa, and the mining of iron and copper had been carried out on a small scale for centuries in the region. But fewer people in the Montaňa, especially in the merindad
of Pamplona, made their primary living from mining or manufacturing. 55 Indeed, there were even some rather large villages in which almost nobody seemed to work outside of agriculture. For example, in Echarri-Aranaz there were
only 14 people working full time in industry in a population of 774. 56

 Industry was not really booming anywhere in Navarre. The crafts used old techniques, shops were small, productivity was low, and Navarre exported almost nothing. 57 An indication of the primitive nature of Navarrese industry was
the preponderance of master artisans over apprentices and other employees by a ratio of two to one. Especially in the Montaňa, manufacturers were normally craftsmen employing one or no apprentice and producing for small local
markets. 58 The guild organization was as yet unchallenged in the Montaňa. Neither the horizontal integration of the putting-out system nor the development of factories had any place in the region. There was, in other words,
nothing like an industrial proletariat or even a proto-industrial work force in the Montaňa.