

 The contrast with the Ribera could not be starker. Day laborers there far outnumbered peasants who owned or leased land, by as much as 4:1 in the merindad of Tudela, where 50 percent of the active population was listed as
jornaleros. There were tenant farmers, but land was hard to come by and prices were relatively high, so that even tenants were forced to work as day laborers to supplement their income. In Corella, where a few families controlled
almost all of the land, there was not a single case of a leasehold peasant who did not also have to work at least part of the time as a day laborer on one of the big estates. 65

 The nature of the Ribera made it easy for the French to dominate. A handful of families owned all of the land. The French squeezed these families for taxes and requisitions and rewarded them with church property and a measure of
public power. In contrast, the average person in the Ribera had nothing. Men worked for a wage, either in industry or agriculture. To such a person, it was irrelevant whether wages were supplied by a pro-Bourbon or pro-Bonaparte
boss or landlord. Most men were jornaleros, unemployed for months at a time, begging or tramping great distances to find work in agricultural slow seasons. 66 Such men were extremely vulnerable. What could make them risk
everything to defend the order of things against the French? The church was not likely to inspire Ribereños to die for it, and even if someone wanted to resist the French, with what resources could he do so? Most Ribereños faced
the French occupation naked, and only extraordinary circumstances could have led such people into the guerrilla movement.

 Things were quite different in the Montaňa. Here most people owned enough land outright to avoid working for a wage or renting. Industry was primitive, almost nonexistent in places, so few people depended on wages. Thus, there
had been no developments in industry or agriculture to occasion any significant social differentiation. Almost everyone was a farmer or dependent of a farmer. The nobility was not a class apart that could be used by the French to
control the population, nor were most people conscious of vassalage as a burden to be removed. The church was represented for most people by the parish priest, who lived and worked among the peasants as an equal. Thus, there was
nothing in the French program to attract peasants in the Montaňa or induce them to collaborate.

 On the contrary, as the following chapter will argue, peasant proprietors in the Montaňa had special means and motives for resisting the French. Each of thousands of small farmers was forced to make a political decision every
time he faced the tax collectors and the foraging parties of the enemy. Taking up arms against the French, he was protecting his or his family’s ancestral home, lands, and way of life. And he could afford to resist because there
were always relatives to manage the family farm during his absence. As a result of these factors, the region was ungovernable for the French. The economic independence of the peasantry in the Montaňa, its dispersal over the
countryside, and its close relations with the village clergy and local hidalgos were some of the major factors placing the peasant proprietors of the Montaňa in a position thoroughly to frustrate the occupation. In addition,
however, there were other features of life in the Montaňa, including a long tradition of self-government, that prepared the people for guerrilla war.