

 Urban property in the Ribera was also concentrated in few, usually noble, hands. In Corella the noble family of Virto de Vera owned 11 percent and the Marqués de Santa Cara 5 percent of all urban dwellings. Most remaining houses
were owned by just a handful of people, many of them interrelated, and this forced the vast majority of the population to rent. 24 In the Montaňa, on the other hand, many more dwellings were occupied by their owners. For example,
only ten individuals in the village of Echauri owned more than one house, and over 42 percent of the dwellings were occupied by their owners. 25

 The weakness of the señorial regime and the lack of correspondence between nobility and wealth in the Montaňa narrowed the fundamental social division between commoners and nobles so characteristic of the old regime in the
Ribera and in most of Europe. Few peasants paid any form of feudal rent; those who did paid low rents; and in some areas, most peasants were themselves nobles. Noble privilege had been exploited by Napoleon to divide conquered
peoples in Europe and to help consolidate a ring of satellite kingdoms around France. 26 This same strategy was also effective in much of Spain, including the Ribera of Navarre, where elites feared the mob more than the French
and were easily induced to collaborate. 27 Mina recalled in his memoirs that he had received no help from any titled noble, owner of a mayorazgo, or wealthy individual. 28 In the Montaňa, however, where mayorazgos were rare and
where most nobles did not even have officially executed titles much less vast property or wealth, Mina found many supporters. Thus, the nature of nobility in the Montaňa allowed the area to meet the challenge of the French
occupation from a position of unity and strength.

 The church in Navarre occupied a position similar to the nobility. It had less wealth and property but a heavier presence, especially in the Montaňa, than the church in the rest of Spain. For this reason, the church in Navarre,
like the noble estate, produced less social division than it did in the rest of Spain. Navarrese clerics enjoyed the same valuable privileges, including exemption from some taxes, as clergy elsewhere. However, the two greatest
sources of revenue for the church—the tithe and rents from property—were much less lucrative in Navarre than in Castile and Aragon.

 It has been estimated that in nineteenth-century Spain the church skimmed off half of the net agricultural product in the form of the tithe. 29 In addition, the Spanish church not only preserved its medieval jurisdictions or
señoríos ecclesiásticos, it had, like the nobility, taken advantage of the penury of the Hapsburg monarchy in the seventeenth century to acquire new ones. A total of 9 cities, 375 towns, and 2,299 villages and hamlets were
señoríos of the church, the equivalent of 14 percent of all Spanish municipalities, a large figure by European standards at the time and a source of chagrin to reformers in Madrid. 30 The church possessed 16,000 square miles of
land, or fully 8 percent of the entire surface area of Spain and 18 percent of the arable. These properties generated 565 million reales a year in rent, the second largest item of income in the church’s budget after tithes. 31