

 The Montaňa, just as it produced a greater variety of crops than the Ribera, also had more kinds of livestock and in greater numbers. Most families kept pigs, the commonest source of meat, and goats, which could convert leavings
and the grasses of the mountains and commons into milk, cheese, and meat. There were also a large number of cattle and oxen, used for milk, meat, and labor. By contrast, pigs and goats were rare in the Ribera, and oxen were
practically unknown. In the valley of Echauri there was an ox, cow, horse, goat, or pig for every 1.5 people, compared with one of these animals for every 13 people in Corella. 5

 Sheep were important in both the Ribera and the Montaňa. 6 In the Ribera, however, sheep were kept by relatively few individuals in vast flocks, whereas in the Montaňa many peasants had small flocks. For example, in Corella four
nobles owned almost half of the total number of sheep in the city, and sixteen individuals owned 95 percent of the sheep. 7 In contrast, the top four ranchers in Echauri controlled only one- fourth of the stock of sheep, while
there were dozens of individuals with small herds. 8

 Despite the subsistence orientation of farming in the Montaňa, social and technical factors peculiar to the region had created an efficient agriculture there. As seen in the previous chapter, most families in the Montaňa had
access to land. Peasants owned, or more rarely rented, land in small strips located in different, open fields. This ensured each family the opportunity to plant a variety of crops in different soils and locations and prevented
any one person from monopolizing the best land or losing everything in an extremely localized disaster—the unpenning of sheep, for example. The division of the land in this way was a reasonable and time-honored system. While
agricultural reformers were trying to increase productivity by enclosing land and by introducing new techniques, peasants in the Montaňa, maintaining their primitive land distribution and employing ancient methods, farmed more
efficiently than most in Europe. Seed yields on the best land were 1:8 or higher, and average yields of 1:6 were reported in Echarri-Aranaz. 9 By comparison, average yields in France were on the order of 1:5, in Germany 1:4, and
in White Russia 1:3. 10

 Climate was partly responsible for this high productivity. Steady rainfall and mild weather meant that two crops could be grown each year. By alternating crops of wheat and maize with crops of legumes, it was less necessary to
rest the land. And the large numbers of livestock provided the fertilizer necessary to replenish the soil. 11 These advantages were reinforced by the social organization of labor. Widespread private ownership in small communities
had produced a hardworking peasantry notable for its devotion to the land and its use of cooperative labor arrangements. 12 It was this social advantage, above all else, that helped produce such high yields in northern Navarre,
not the application of capital or any technical advance.