

 Madrid, to cement its control over Navarre, had tried to overthrow this system, pushing for the abolition of open elections in favor of the procedure of insaculacion , in which officials were randomly selected from among a pool
of men qualified by their property to hold office. 44 With this reform, Madrid sought to create municipal oligarchies, which could be more easily managed. The system had already been adopted in much of Castile and Aragon, but in
Navarre tenacious resistance by the foral government limited insaculacion to large towns and cities. Thus, most of the Ribera followed the new procedure, making government by the veintena, or council of twenty oligarchs, the norm
in places like Tudela and Corella. Local elites, therefore, dominated the political process in the Ribera. The Montaňa, on the other hand, preserved its democratic local government in all but the largest cities. 45

 Municipal governments had great powers under the passive viceregal regime that existed before 1808. Municipalities fixed wages and prices. They were responsible for most essential services, including the milling of flour and the
supply of basic commodities, as well as roads, schools, and local law enforcement. The way in which municipal governments managed local services illustrates the survival of a “moral economy” in the Montaňa. The contracts given to
the baker, miller, innkeeper, or any one of the other local artisans were long and detailed legal documents that demonstrate how towns and villages constrained the acquisitive urge of their denizens.

 The wine seller, for example, was allowed by contract to take only a customary level of profit. He paid the community for the right to do business, and he could not cease in his duties during the period of the contract without
paying stiff fines. Privilege and duty were integral parts of any enterprise. On feast days and holidays the wine had to be supplied at no profit to the community. The quality of the product was closely monitored and the use of
grapes or wine from outside of the community was forbidden, so long as any of the local product remained. At the same time, the wine seller was assured that no competitor could market wine in the community. Thus, the wine seller
was conceived as a service provider to the community rather than as a merchant. His sphere for individual initiative was extremely limited, but at least he was secure in his niche. In effect, the closed society of the Montaňa
provided individuals with security in place of opportunity.

 The array of powers possessed by municipalities was truly astounding. Local governments selected their priests and arranged for their payment. They controlled settlement and residence within the municipal boundaries, denying
communal privileges to anyone they felt might upset the community. They allocated the tax burden communicated by the Diputación and handled conscription locally. They regulated planting and the harvest, dealt with local
disturbances, and jealously controlled the ability of travelers to enter the village freely, especially vagabonds, gypsies, or other outsiders. 46