

 In contrast, the city of Corella, run by a closed group of noble families, found it inconvenient to pay for exemption from military conscription. The most common complaint of the city was over the surplus of laborers and the
presence of a large number of destitute beggars within the city limits. Corella even encouraged its young men to enlist: over 10 percent of the armed forces drawn from Navarre came from Corella, which contributed well over
one-fifth of its military-age male population to Spain’s defense. 55

 In times of subsistence crisis, the democratic structure of local government in the Montaňa provided a brake on the acquisitive urge and a check on the severity of crises. In 1789 there was a shortage of grain in the valley of
Echauri, as elsewhere in Spain. A junta of all the regidores from the valley met to resolve the problem by purchasing wheat and corn from local sources and even from abroad, through the port of San Sebastián. The purchase and
transportation of the grain from the port were handled by a resident of Pamplona, who was told to offer seventeen reales per robo of wheat, well above the price in a normal year. The price of the grain was elevated even more by
the cost of transportation and the wages that had to be paid the purchasing agent. As a result, the cost per robo came to over twenty-two reales, of which the municipality paid 47 percent out of the town rents. The final price to
people in Echauri was only twelve reales, scarcely more than the price in a normal year. 56

 In the Ribera, on the other hand, merchants often managed, against the wishes of the foral government, to export grain to Castile, even when harvests were short in Navarre. 57 A certain amount of grain might be set aside for
relief. 58 Most of the time, however, the seasonal migration of workers from the Ribera to the cities of Aragon and Castile alleviated the responsibilities of the municipal government during the critical months of unemployment. 59

 The French gained access to the wealth of the Ribera simply by dominating the commercial and political elites, who were often glad to cooperate. Poor and landless Ribereños, on the other hand, had no reason to defend a
constitution that did nothing for them. Ribereños had been demobilized and disenfranchised at the municipal and provincial level under the foral regime, and they were not likely to rise in support of such a system. Although, as
will be seen, there were some young men from the Ribera who joined the resistance movement, especially in the summer of 1808 and after May 1812, it was the Montaňa that contributed the vast majority of the men and supplies to the
guerrilla army.

 In the Montaňa, foralism had brought great benefits and motivated people to defend Navarre against France. At the same time, democratic foral and municipal institutions empowered and mobilized Montañeros and proved to be another
obstacle for the French occupation. The pressure of French imposts tended to unite rather than divide people in the Montaňa, who were able to raise taxes through consensus rather than force, and who were able to delay the
extraction of grains and animals through their control of local administration. Thus the fueros both motivated and mobilized people in the Montaňa. Moreover, under foral law, the Montaňa had developed some special resources with
which to fight the French. Montaneros were heavily armed, both because hunting remained a common right, not a noble privilege, and because smugglers used weapons against the fiscal agents of the state. They knew secret paths to
escape royal soldiers and police, and they knew how to construct makeshift boats and rafts to cross the Ebro River. All of these resources of the Montaňa would be marshaled against the French after Napoleon occupied Spain in the
spring of 1808.