

 Aside from the material advantages they afforded, the fueros also had a strong emotional appeal in Navarre. In the abstract, they had few detractors. Even those Ribereños who would have liked to see a free market in grains and
the opening of trade with Castile and Aragon agreed with the small farmer of the Montaňa on the value of exemptions from royal taxes. Equally important, Navarrese believed that the constitution of Navarre, in which the king
governed by compact with the Navarrese people, was a model for all Spain. The Navarrese were proud of this fact. In 1811, a Navarrese representative in Cádiz extolled the constitution of Navarre as the embodiment of the popular
sovereignty missing in the rest of Spain since the time of the Hapsburgs. All Castile and Aragon had to do was to reclaim that which the Navarrese had never lost, their natural and legitimate right of self-government. 39 In
reality, the vaunted sovereignty of the Navarrese people did not go very far. Yet, what mattered was that people believed in the idea of a sovereign Navarre. In the struggle with France, the Navarrese had more to defend than
other Spaniards, for among other things they were fighting for an ancient and tested constitutional government.

 The strength of the foral issue in Navarre was not fully understood inside France, where opinion was from the first in favor of the abolition of regional privileges. When it leaked as early as the spring of 1808 that the French
had designs on Navarre and that they would certainly abolish the foral system, there was immediate reaction from Navarrese leaders. Miguel Izquierdo wrote to Madrid in the spring of 1808 describing the horror Navarrese would feel
should they lose their traditional liberties. 40 Joseph Bonaparte’s advisers warned him that Navarre would fight if its fueros were threatened. In 1810 Miguel Azanza, a Navarro and the most important member of Joseph’s entourage,
even made a special trip to Paris in part to warn Napoleon against consummating his plan to make Navarre another French department. In the War of Independence, where the combatants fought for a complex of personal, religious,
dynastic, national, and regional issues, it is difficult to sort out and assign values to the various motivating factors. The trepidation of Spanish collaborators over the French plan to abolish the fueros, however, argues
strongly for the influence that the foral and regional question had among the Navarrese. 41

 Under the foral constitution, municipalities in the Montaňa were surprisingly democratic and powerful. This too was a source of great strength to the guerrillas. In the Montaňa, municipal government was exercised by a community
council open to all heads of households. Municipal offices were rotated among council members, so that every head of household eventually participated directly in government. In Echauri, which selected a treasurer and three
regidores (town councillors) each year, twenty-eight men filled thirty-two possible vacancies from 1793 to 1800. 42 These individuals included relatively wealthy men, like Francisco Jauregui, the owner of one of the greatest
flocks of sheep in the valley, and the rich labrador, Bavil Armendariz, who owned twelve houses in the village of Echauri, but also peasants of more humble means, like Gabriel Irujo, who owned a small house and whose stock of
animals amounted to two goats. 43