

 Again, the exception proves how important the separate customs system was to the Navarrese. In 1717 the Bourbons had tried to extend Spanish customs to the Pyrenees. However, within a few years, as harassment of royal customs
officials reached warfare proportions and smuggling absorbed previously legitimate trade, the customhouses along the Pyrenees border of Navarre cost more money to defend than they were able to collect. In 1722 Madrid admitted
defeat and returned the operation to the Navarrese, withdrawing Spain’s customs border back to the Ebro River. 31 This was a sign of the power of foral issues in Navarre.

 Those who profited most from the separate customs were the Navarrese engaged in the illegal transit of French products into Spain. The number of people who made their living from smuggling, while impossible to count accurately
due to a lack of documentation, was probably higher than in any other Spanish province judging from police records and from the observations of contemporaries. 32 One result of smuggling was the widespread availability of
weapons, though this was no doubt also related to the continued economic importance of hunting in much of Navarre. 33 In the early nineteenth century Navarre had more guns per capita than any other province. The availability of
weapons also had its effect on the rate of crime, which was higher in Navarre than in any province except Madrid and Logroño. 34 Indeed, in border regions of Navarre, like Roncal and Salazar, there existed a frontier atmosphere
in which a large part of the population handled firearms and lived outside the law, either smuggling or having economic relations with smugglers. The possession of small arms and the habituation to lawlessness was an important
resource for the guerrilla resistance after 1808, when being an outlaw and a patriot became one in the same thing. In the guerrilla army of Navarre, smugglers acted as soldiers, guides, and, ironically, as Mina’s own customs
officers. 35

 Thus, the foral constitution both empowered the Navarrese and gave them something worth defending. In addition, the foral government ensured its own popularity through specific legislation to control prices and commerce. Among
other things, Pamplona limited the extraction of grains and other staples from Navarre. When harvests fell short in Spain, Navarrese producers felt great pressure to export cereals to Castile and Aragon, where dearths generally
hit harder, causing prices to rise more than in Navarre. The Diputación, however, prohibited grain exports in bad years, consistently favoring consumers over the big producers in the Ribera. 36 In this way, the government acted
to close the door on the acquisitive spirit of landowners and merchants who could have gouged consumers in both Navarre and in the rest of Spain during times of shortage.

 Local governments too were able to control the price of staples. During shortages, they fixed prices locally. They used public funds to purchase cereals from abroad and prohibited local farmers who had good harvests from selling
outside of the community. 37 These controls on industry and commerce were a constant source of irritation to big landowners and merchants in the Ribera who saw the future of Navarre as a supplier of cash crops for export. 38 But
such measures also buttressed the position of small farmers and landless laborers, ensuring the popularity of the foral government among most people.