

 Primogeniture had other favorable effects on the Montaňa. Regions that did not practice primogeniture often suffered from extreme mini-fundism, as had occurred in Galicia, where land was divided, leased, and subleased to so many
heirs that most peasants there had barely an Irish level of subsistence. In Navarre primogeniture preserved a relatively prosperous peasantry with good-sized estates. The Mina family, for example, possessed a house and
outbuildings with eighty-eight acres of land. 17 Of course, younger children, unless they could marry an heir or heiress, were disinherited by this system and had to emigrate, join the clergy, or turn to other pursuits outside
agriculture, including war.

 All of these factors created in the Montaňa a prosperous peasantry that produced rich harvests of grains and livestock, and sufficient oils and wine to meet its own needs. The region could have exported some crops, but actually
exported very little. The wide distribution of property ensured this. Neither feudal nor market mechanisms for extracting surplus production, in the form of rents or underpaid labor, respectively, had ever really penetrated the
Montaňa. With the products of agriculture distributed among 100,000 independent producers and among myriad sites of production, most of Navarre’s agricultural wealth was consumed at or near the production site. 18 There was,
then, little means for extracting wealth from the peasants in the Montaňa. 19

 This feature of the Montaňa was one of the greatest obstacles for the French regime and a great source of strength for the guerrilla movement. The peasants’ control of production placed them in direct conflict with the taxing
and requisitioning apparatus of the French government. In the Ribera, the French could force taxes and requisitions from a few big landowners. These collections cut into profits, but they did not threaten the lives of the landed
elite. Moreover, the French compensated landowners in the Ribera with access to power and nationalized properties. In the Montaňa, the French were forced to send agents with armed escorts into hundreds of villages to raise
contributions. What they exacted from such villages directly affected the subsistence of individual property holders. As will be seen, the initial point of attack for the guerrillas was against French requisition parties in
villages in the Montaňa, and it was by protecting such villages from French exploitation that the guerrillas gained the allegiance of the peasantry.

 Peasants in the Montaňa not only had motives for resisting the French, they also had the means. Because the Montaňa lay outside feudal and market systems of extraction, the cost of living was lower there than anywhere else in
Spain. Wine, for example, cost 4 reales a cántaro, the lowest in the whole country, where the average price was 13 reales. The price of wheat in Navarre from the 1780s to 1807 ranged from 7 to 25 reales per robo, again the lowest
in Spain, where the average (in 1799) was 48 reales. 20 The limited profits that could be obtained from agriculture also depressed the price of real property. Grain land around Pamplona could be paid for with the income from two
harvests. 21 And the price for an acre of tierra blanca (unirrigated, unplanted, open-field land) could be as low as 20 to 30 reales, a few weeks wages for a day laborer. 22 The price of housing, the greatest cost for most
peasants, was much lower in the Montaňa than in the Ribera. Many Montañeros owned their homes, and those who rented did not pay much. In the valley of Echauri the average rent for a house was 88 reales, compared with 170 reales
in Corella and 253 reales in Tudela.