

 In this situation, peasants were able to preserve their real property and to accumulate movable property at a remarkable rate. On 30 January 1800 officials in Echauri, on a writ from the Royal Council in Pamplona, entered the
house of a local proprietor, Francisco Azanza, in order to seize his remaining property in payment of a debt he owed to another proprietor. Azanza owned a large array of furniture: fourteen chairs and two small benches, two large
tables, four chests, and one mirror, among the items remaining in the house. He even possessed five paintings, items of impossible luxury for peasants in most of Spain (and the highest priced goods in the house). In the kitchen
were a large number of pots and pans, ceramic casseroles, pitchers, plates, cups, utensils, and a tablecloth. 23

 In the house of more prosperous peasants, aside from the valuable tools (layas, spades, plows, yokes, etc.) and the livestock, the range of household goods was wider and the quality higher. For example, the proprietor of
Ansorena, a caserío in Echauri, had a large assortment of linens, woolen blankets, pillows of wool and cotton, and rugs; in the kitchen were damask tablecloths and napkins, curtains, and surprisingly rich utensils, including a
set of silverware, salt and pepper shakers of silver, and a large number of plates, bowls, and other dishes of tin; the furniture included eight tables, a bookcase with books, whose titles were not, unfortunately, inventoried,
seven chests, seven regular chairs and seven Muscovy chairs, and a desk. 24 These possessions were far beyond the means of any day laborer, indeed, beyond the means of most peasants in Europe. They provided the peasant proprietor
of the Montaňa with a stake in society worth protecting and with the means to survive the disruptions to production resulting from the absence of men in the guerrilla campaigns.

 Thus, the economy of the Montaňa was both essentially subsistence-oriented and, oddly, rich. Industrially, the Montaňa was unquestionably backward, with part-time artisans producing inferior goods for local sale and barter. On
the other hand, the Montaňa produced agricultural surpluses, which, though not spectacular, at least remained in the hands of the peasants, who could, therefore, accumulate property and movable goods.

 Observers lionized the peasants of the Montaňa for their work ethic, independence, and relative material wealth. 25 Theirs was not a miserly autarky, but rather a splendid isolation. However difficult life might have been in the
land of the caserío, farming was more productive, housing better, and the people better fed. Some foreign observers even thought they detected in the Montaňa that mythical rural middle class so desired by agrarian reformers of
the Enlightenment. 26

 It is not the purpose here to portray the life of the peasants of the Montaňa as one of ease. On the contrary, only through unusual industry and application were they able to maintain themselves under the natural and
technological conditions then prevailing. Yet, if their lives were as difficult and short as peasants in most of Europe, they were also less brutish. Montaneros possessed a margin of subsistence far superior to that of peasants
in most of Europe. It was in this margin that the guerrillas survived and flourished. The peasant world of the Montaňa was, to borrow Mao’s phrase, the “congenial sea” in which the guerrillas found nourishment. The nature of the
economy and society in the Ribera, on the other hand, left it vulnerable to French control.