

 The peculiar political constitution of Navarre also contributed to the strength of the guerrilla movement in the province. Navarre was one of the few regions in Spain that had maintained its ancient constitution, or fuero,
including the preservation of its regional congress, or Cortes, the most representative governing body in Spain before the revolution of 1808. Along with the other “foral provinces”—Álava, Guipúzcoa, and Vizcaya—Navarre used its
autonomous institutions to gain a measure of control over taxation, tariffs, public spending, and military levies, and to preserve customary laws that were less rigid and paternalistic and more communally oriented than the Roman
and Gothic law that had been adopted in Castile and Aragon. 27

 The fueros of Navarre originated in the Middle Ages as a pact between the king and the “people” for military service and contributions in the effort to oust the Moslems from the Ebro valley. In return for this service, the
monarchs pledged to maintain Navarre’s extensive privileges, including important customary laws and the right to protest the least infraction of any of these laws. In practice this meant that Navarre possessed institutions
empowered to negotiate a social compact with each successive monarch, who had to pledge fidelity to the fueros in return for continued contributions from Navarre.

 Navarre was governed by a viceroy, Royal Council, Cortes, and Diputación. The viceroy was named by the king and exercised the king’s executive functions in Navarre. 28 The Royal Council was Navarre’s judiciary. The seven members
maintained, in consultation with the Cortes or Diputación, the right of sobrecarta, a kind of veto power over royal measures deemed to be contrafueros, that is, violations of the fundamental law of Navarre. Since by law four of
the seven councillors had to be Navarrese, the Royal Council, though an appointive body, could defend Navarre’s interests against Madrid.

 The Cortes was divided into three estates: ecclesiastics, nobles, and commoners. The three met together for debate but voted in separate chambers. Resolutions required majority passage in each chamber, thus practically ensuring
the veto of any resolutions that threatened to disturb established power relationships. The popular branch was formed of the thirty-eight municipalities (nominally representing 36 percent of the population of Navarre) that,
through their size, wealth, and importance, merited a seat in the Cortes. They were far outnumbered by the members of the clergy and nobility with seats in the Cortes, so that the balance of power lay not in the cities but in the
first two estates. This ensured that representation from the Montaňa dominated proceedings.

 Most of the time, the powers of the Cortes, including the right to collect taxes and to recruit for the army, were invested in the Diputación, a permanently standing committee elected by each Cortes upon its dissolution. The
Diputación was presided by the bishop of Pamplona, and included six other representatives: two from the noble estate, two from the city of Pamplona with one vote between them, and two from other municipalities, again with one
vote. This structure ensured that urban interests got a hearing while at the same time reserving final power for the nobles and the bishop of Pamplona, whenever they should wish to operate in concert. In the Diputación, too,
representatives from the Montaňa had the final word.