

 One of the most valuable foral rights was control over taxation. The Diputación levied taxes and disbursed most of the revenue locally, helping to create the appearance of prosperity and order for which Navarre was famous. 29
Madrid received its revenues from Navarre in the form of an annual gift. Before granting the gift, however, the Navarrese could raise grievances over contrafueros. Once these were rectified, it would put the machinery of tax
collection into motion. Spanish monarchs, so as not to threaten the already thin flow of money from Navarre, were careful to avoid contravening the Navarrese fueros. The exception proves the resilience of the foral constitution.
In 1796 the Spanish government initiated an offensive against the taxing powers of Navarre, but this was so ineffective that during the first decade of the nineteenth century the crown actually spent more in Navarre than it
extracted. In effect, Navarre was exempt from its fiscal duties toward the central government at the time of the French invasion.

 The fueros exempted the Navarrese from war except in defense of Navarre. In 1803 and again in 1806, after heated battles with Madrid, Navarre was finally forced to relinquish this privilege and accede to military levies.
Nevertheless, the full levy, by which the government was supposed to be able to recruit one out of every five men of military age, was not obtained from Navarre. In 1803, the province contributed 800 men, and in 1806-7 another
1,498 men, the only “blood contribution” made by Navarre to the Spanish military in the prewar era. Again, any threat to this fuero, whether from Madrid or Paris, was likely to meet staunch resistance.

 One of Navarre’s most valuable privileges was its separate customs border. In the rest of Spain, the Bourbons had created a single, national market, and they had restricted the importation of finished manufactured goods and the
exportation of raw materials in an attempt to encourage industrial development. Navarre, however, controlled its own borders and was exempt from these restrictions. Thousands of Navarrese depended on the sale of raw materials,
especially wool, to France. Thousands more made money by importing finished goods from France and reexporting them (illegally) to Castile and Aragon. The export of wool was particularly important to the monasteries of the
Montaňa, which enjoyed enormous power within the Cortes and the Diputación, and could veto any proposed change in the constitution. Drovers depended on the carrying trade, and consumers in general benefited from cheaper French
manufactures. The city of Pamplona, well represented in the Cortes and Diputación, was one of the great entrepôts for French goods in Spain and stood opposed to any reform of the customs border. Finally, the foral government as a
whole grew fat on its tariff revenues and was unwilling to give them up. 30 In short, there were powerful interests in Navarre prepared to defend any threat to its foral right to a separate tariff border. As a result, the
Bourbons avoided threatening this aspect of the foral constitution.