

 Indeed, peasants in the Montaňa employed the most ancient agricultural implement in Europe, the neolithic laya, a kind of spade, rather than (or in addition to) the plow. The laya was used exclusively by the Basques. The small
size of the plots and the steep terrain made this ancient technology more practical than the plow. The Romans in their day had already viewed the laya as an atavism, yet the advantages it offered ensured its use right into the
twentieth century. For one thing, the laya was cheap. Anyone could own a set of them. Access to costly plows and draft animals was one factor that had worked to stratify European peasants, but in the Montaňa the laya allowed
poorer peasants to compete with their richer neighbors, and this reinforced the egalitarian tendency of society in the region.

 One of the most important facts about the laya was that it required communal labor. Two or more families including several generations of men, women, and children worked together, first on one family’s land, then on another’s.
This communal arrangement placed a premium on interfamilial cooperation and helped to knit communities together in ways nothing else could. 13

 A further important attribute of the laya was the way it helped to empower women. Since Roman times, visitors to the Basque region had remarked, with either pleasure or horror, that women there seemed to have a great deal of
power. Some scholars have even called Basque society “matriarchal,” though this doubtless overstates the evidence. However, it is reasonable to say that the laya removed some of the obstacles for women in agriculture. Although
using the laya was extremely arduous, it did not require the same kind of strength or the domination of animals that plowing did. The control of draft animals and tillage is an important factor in man’s dominance of woman in
agrarian societies. Women in the Montaňa faced no such labor disadvantage, and this may have helped to confirm their equality in other spheres as well—for example, in inheritance customs.

 Peasants in the Montaňa practiced strict primogeniture. This meant that the eldest child, whether male or female, inherited. Thus, women had equal access to the land. 14 Moreover, even after marriage, a woman retained control
over her property. When she died, her landed possessions, minus the funeral expenses and any dowry she had brought to her husband’s family, reverted to her parents, sisters, brothers, or other relations. 15 The most important
aspect of the laya and of women’s place in Basque society from the perspective of the guerrilla war was that women in the Montaňa were accustomed to inheriting land and taking an active part in all of the processes of production,
including tillage. Therefore, the absence of a large number of men—whether they were working in the Ribera or fighting the French—did not entail the disruption of agricultural production. The situation in the Ribera was very
different. There was almost no wage work for women and children in the agro-towns of the Ribera. If the young men from such communities had suddenly taken to the hills, it would have spelled economic collapse and brought disaster
to those left behind. 16 In other words, the labor system in the Montaňa favored guerrilla war, whereas that in the Ribera discouraged it.