

 Soon, however, it became apparent that D’Armagnac was just one of several commanders given orders to seize Spanish forts. On 28 February General Duhesme occupied the citadel of Barcelona and the fort at Montjuich. On 5 March
General Thouvenot installed himself in San Sebastian. By 18 March, when the French took control of Figueras, the most important Spanish fortresses in the North had fallen at no cost to the French. Still, the government in Madrid
was too docile to object even to this pattern of treachery. King Charles IV proclaimed that the armies of his “close ally” Napoleon occupied Spanish strong points in order to protect the country from England, and he asked local
authorities to maintain tranquillity at all costs. 10 In Pamplona, the initial displeasure of the people was allowed to dissipate, and the sullen crowds that had at first milled about the central plaza dispersed, leaderless.

 The ease with which the French occupied the key strongholds of northern Spain must be understood in the context of almost a century of Franco-Spanish relations. After the Peace of Utrecht in 1715, Spain fell within the French
orbit, as the Spanish Bourbons maintained a “Family Pact” with their cousins in Paris. The French Revolution, paradoxically, served to increase Spain’s dependence on France. Initially, of course, the Spanish king, Charles IV,
along with half of Europe, sought to destroy the regicides in Paris, and he brought Spain into the First Coalition in 1793. Spanish forces penetrated French territory at either end of the Pyrenees, but the success was temporary.
In 1794 the Convention’s armies rolled back the Spanish, especially on the western front, where Basque nationalists in Guipúzcoa and Navarre greeted the revolutionary troops as liberators. 11 With French troops as far west as
Bilbao and as far south as the Ebro River, and with separatist and republican conspiracies surfacing in the Basque region and even in Madrid, the Spanish government had little choice but to sue for peace on any terms. Negotiating
for Spain was the prime minister, Manuel Godoy, an army officer who held power by virtue of his influence over the weak king, Charles, and his queen, Maria Luisa. By the Treaty of Basel, signed on 22 July 1795, Spain returned to
the French camp, and in the following year, the two countries concluded a formal alliance at San Ildefonso. The treaties earned Godoy the title “Prince of the Peace” and confirmed his position as the court favorite and virtual
ruler of Spain for most of the next twelve years. After 1795 Godoy’s political future and the future of the country were tied more firmly than ever to the destiny of France.

 Friendship with France, in the polarized international climate of the time, meant certain war with England, but such a prospect was far from unpopular in Spain. England was the traditional enemy, the modern Carthage, threatening
Spanish interests around the globe and occupying Spanish territory in Gibraltar. War with England, however, cost a great deal more than anyone anticipated. The English navy cut Spain off from America, especially after the
destruction of the Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in 1805, initiating the decolonization of Spain’s overseas possessions. The loss of revenue from the silver ships and customs wrecked government finances, and declining trade erased
the economic growth of the eighteenth century, as the most advanced areas of Spain were cut off from overseas markets and sources of raw materials. 12 Spaniards were, of course, aware of the evil times that had overtaken the
country. Some had identified the alliance with France and war with England as a major source of the evil, and a pro-English cabal had formed around the Bourbon heir, Prince Ferdinand. 13 Yet, against popular anti-English
sentiment and against the overwhelming force of Napoleon, the Spanish government had little choice but to remain friendly toward France.