

 In effect, the Spanish representatives succeeded in modifying some of the most revolutionary aspects of the document, expanding the original 68 articles to 146, with additions securing the status of the church, the statist
structure of the national Cortes, and the protection of noble and regional vested interests. 28 The final statute was probably an adequate compromise whose provisions could have formed the basis for Spain’s transition from feudal
monarchy to constitutional government. The weakness of the Bayonne constitution, however, lay in the nature of its origin, powerfully symbolized for Spaniards in the conspicuous presence of French infantry at the ratifying
ceremony. 29 The fact that the statute was forced upon the nation by a foreign power working through an extraordinary and unrepresentative body condemned the work completed at Bayonne from the beginning. Bayonne did not set the
stage for a new era of constitutional government. Rather, it revealed the imperial rhetoric of progress and rational government for what it was: a cover for French dominion in Spain.

 The statute of Bayonne was, in any case, rendered irrelevant by a pandemic of rebellion that swept Spain in late May and early June 1808. The abdication of Ferdinand, coming on the heels of news of the dos de Mayo in Madrid,
touched a central nerve in the body of Spain causing a nationwide revolt against French rule. In cities all over the country, mobs demanded that their officials step down or join them in proclaiming Ferdinand king. Provincial
governments that proved too wedded to Godoy and the old order or too timid to oppose Napoleon were swept aside and replaced by revolutionary juntas. In other areas, the old elites were co-opted into or even led the revolution.
This was the case in Asturias, one of the first provinces to rise against France.

 The governor-general of Asturias, Alvaro Florez Estrada, one of the greatest leaders of the generation of 1808, had been in Madrid on 2 May and returned to the provincial capital, Oviedo, on 9 May with an eyewitness report of
the uprising. News of the abdication in Bayonne arrived shortly afterward. Pressured by a riotous crowd in Oviedo, but also backed by elements of the local nobility and bourgeoisie, which had a reputation for liberalism and
Anglophilia, Flórez Estrada and his friends declared Ferdinand king on 23 May, formed a junta of resistance, and established relations with England. Thus, in Asturias, local leaders absorbed the revolutionary impulse and guided
it along an orderly path. 30

 In Valencia, news of Ferdinand’s abdication arrived early on 23 May and led to the formation of a revolutionary junta later that same day. In Valencia, however, the process was much more violent than in Asturias. A mob several
thousand strong marched through the streets on 23 May wearing red cockades and carrying banners painted with the image of the Virgin Mary, a mixture of revolutionary and traditional symbols revealing the dual nature of the
Revolution of 1808. The demonstration started peacefully, but turned ugly when civic leaders, who feared the working-class crowd more than they feared the French, refused to declare Ferdinand the rightful king. In response, a
popular coalition swept aside the old government, and public order quickly degenerated. According to one of the leaders of the revolt, “the entire nobility” was suspected of treason for the “apathy and egoism” with which they had
initially responded to the crisis. The result was a butchery of over 300 suspected collaborators and French nationals that nearly sidetracked the resistance. In the end, however, Valencians succeeded in mobilizing themselves for
war. The guilds were formed into militias, regular and secular clergy were mobilized, and deserters, smugglers, and convicts were granted amnesty if they agreed to enlist. 31