

 By the end of April things had come to a head. The violence had provoked Joachim Murat, Napoleon’s supreme commander in Spain, to mobilize his troops. On 30 April Murat, ignoring the objections of the governing junta, ordered
Francisco de Paula, the last Bourbon heir, shipped to Bayonne. That day and the next, people filled the streets and milled about the royal palace, waiting for a signal. Some begged members of the junta to distribute arms, but
this they refused to do. Even in the supreme crisis, giving arms to the mob was instinctively abhorrent to Ferdinand’s supporters. Instead, they ordered Spanish troops to their barracks to prevent them from joining popular
demonstrations and circulated a proclamation calling for an end to disorderly gatherings in the Puerta del Sol and other public places. This order had no effect, however, and on the morning of 2 May the crowds in the streets were
larger than ever.

 The rising of dos de Mayo began at nine o’clock. A small group of Ferdinand’s supporters raised the cry that the French were about to cart off the last members of the royal family. A crowd formed at the royal palace, stopping
the carriage intended to transport Francisco de Paula to France. To cries of “death to the French,” the growing mob surged through the streets looking for victims. A number of French soldiers were killed in the first instants,
but Murat counterattacked with overwhelming force. The people of Madrid fought with the weapons available to them—knives, scissors, awls, stones, and some firearms—but French grapeshot and cavalry quickly cleared the streets.
Meanwhile, a pocket of resistance by Spanish regulars in the artillery park of Monteleon was taken. By midafternoon, the revolt was over.

 The rising of 2 May was doomed to fail from the start. Madrid had a population of 176,000 people, but Spanish troops in the capital numbered only 3,000. The French had in or around the city 36,000 soldiers. Indeed, it is
possible that the French had wanted an uprising all along so that they could set an example by crushing it. 22 The rebellion of 2 May developed beyond French expectations, however, and led to heavy losses on both sides. According
to Grouchy, between 400 and 500 Madrileños died in the fighting. 23 Among these were 80 civilians executed by the French during the night of 2 May and the morning of 3 May. 24

 The French also suffered casualties. A French eyewitness claimed the loss of 500 men, but this is probably too high. 25 Grouchy reported only 150 casualties, 14 of them fatal. Moreover, a third of the injuries were light wounds
from tiles and rocks. Most of the deaths and the most serious casualties occurred during the assault on the Spanish artillery park, while the action of the mob in the streets was not terribly devastating. For example, the
legendary horror of boiling water poured down upon the French troops apparently resulted in only one superficial burn. 26

 The rising was a military failure but a political turning point. It was news of the events of 2 May that persuaded Napoleon to drop all niceties and force Ferdinand to abdicate. The French show of power on 2 May convinced
Ferdinand’s junta, the Council of Castile, and the municipal government of Madrid to accept Joseph as their new king and to participate in the pacification of the country. 27 During May Napoleon matured plans for a constitutional
assembly in Bayonne to be opened on 15 June. Invitations were extended to some 150 Spanish notables. Ultimately, ninety delegates arrived to pledge fidelity to Joseph and to discuss and ratify a constitutional statute drafted
beforehand by the French. Many of the provisions of the statute, such as the abolition of torture and the suppression of the Inquisition, were long overdue in Spain and met with little opposition. Others, like the threat to
regional autonomies, promised to subvert the most sacred Spanish traditions. On such matters as these, the deputies were not willing to act merely as ciphers. Some warned Joseph and Napoleon that they would meet stiff resistance
unless certain demands were met. These included the preservation of the church and its property, a guarantee of the territorial integrity of Spain, the protection of noble and regional privileges, and the lowering of taxes.