

 The emperor exacted a high price from his friends: an embargo on trade with England and the provision of men and money to the imperial war effort. The Spanish contribution to this alliance, or Continental System, was heavy.
First its navy, and then a force of 15,000 infantry, was placed at the disposal of France. After the disaster of Trafalgar, even the submissive Godoy began to chafe at the cost of the French alliance. In 1806 France began what
most observers anticipated would be a difficult campaign against Prussia, and Godoy took advantage of the moment to try to break with Napoleon. Godoy ordered a general mobilization against France. Unfortunately, Napoleon made
quick work of the Prussians, finishing them off at Jena even as he became aware of the Spanish betrayal. Godoy tried to patch up relations with the emperor, but the damage was done. The Spanish government had shown that it was an
unreliable ally. When Napoleon knocked Russia out of the war at Fried-land in 1807, the day of reckoning was at hand for Godoy and Spain. In secret protocols attached to the Treaty of Tilsit, the Russians agreed to allow Napoleon
to take over Spain, Portugal, and Gibraltar in exchange for a free hand in Turkey. 14

 Napoleon needed a pretext to place troops on the soil of his Spanish allies, and he found it in the problem of Portugal. Portugal was England’s last ally in western Europe and the only piece missing in Napoleon’s Continental
System. If France could take Lisbon, England would be isolated from the Continent and the hegemony of France sealed. Given England’s dominance at sea, the only way to place French troops in Portugal was to march them overland
through Spain. Napoleon gained the frightened approval of the Spanish government for this project by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, signed on 27 October 1807. 15 Within a few months, 30,000 French troops had driven the Portuguese
royal family, together with English nationals, from Lisbon. Yet, the imperial divisions continued to pour across the Pyrenees. By February 1808 there were 100,000 French soldiers in the peninsula, most of them in Spain for
“security” against an English attack. For Napoleon, it was an irresistible step to use these troops to occupy strategic points inside Spain, above all the northern fortresses and Madrid. This was the background to the seizure of
the Ciudadela and the other Spanish fortresses in the spring of 1808.

 Napoleon expected the conquest of Spain to be a quick affair of a few marches, little more than a “military promenade.” 16 The Spanish government was in Napoleon’s pocket, and even if Spain’s armies resisted, they could never
keep the field against the French. In late March, however, events in Spain took an unexpected turn. The inaction of the king and Godoy in the face of injuries like those suffered at Pamplona had given further impetus to an
undercurrent of dissatisfaction with the government. It had long been rumored that Godoy had insinuated himself into the queen’s bed and even into the royal succession. This added to Godoy’s unpopularity, not least with Prince
Ferdinand. At last, the faction grouped around Ferdinand became exasperated with the weakness of Charles and Godoy. On 18 March a crowd led by members of Ferdinand’s cabal and supported by the royal guard carried out a bloodless
palace coup in Aranjuez, where the government had relocated to escape French scrutiny. A mob invaded the royal residence and forced Charles to dismiss Godoy and to abdicate in favor of Ferdinand. All across Spain, people tore
down public portraits of Godoy in celebration. The new object of the crowd’s affection, Ferdinand VII, “the desired one,” was proclaimed king amid millenarian expectations. 17