

 In July the Aragonese junta dispatched Andrés Eguaguirre and Luís Gil to organize Navarrese volunteers whose task would be to divert French troops from the siege of Zaragoza. 18 Gil conducted a small operation in Ujüé, near
Sangüesa. Ujüé, a remote village atop a dry plateau in eastern Navarre, was especially suited to Gil’s purposes. The place had become an unlikely center of rebellion after a group of peasants from Ujüé robbed a French officer and
his wife near Tafalla. Later, the officer’s description of the crude mountain people he had seen and of their coarse language left no doubt that he had been accosted by people from Ujüé. On 17 July a French column arrived to
punish the village. However, the local population had escaped into the deserted mountains that surround the village. Remaining behind was the priest of Ujüé, Casi-miro Javier de Miguel, who used his knowledge of the French
language to preserve himself from harm and to persuade the French not to set fire to the village. He was not, however, able to protect five other individuals, people too old or too sick to flee. Four were run through and killed
and one wounded by the French troops, who were infuriated by the desolation that greeted them in Ujüé.

 The village had been denuded of everything useful to an army. In a practice that other villages would follow when faced with the approach of French forces, the people of Ujüé had stripped their homes of all livestock and food.
Even the water supplies in the houses had been dumped into the streets, making the village, situated on top of a hill in the middle of an arid highland, uninhabitable for any extended period of time. As a result, the French were
unable to tarry or rest. Could they have foreseen the village’s and Miguel’s later active role in the guerrilla war, they would surely have burned Ujüé and arrested its priest.

 Thus, at the point Gil entered the stage, Ujüé was already mobilized. Gil ordered the men of Ujüé to Carcastillo, at the southern foot of the plateau on which the village was situated. There they were to be assigned to units of
a volunteer army that was being gathered from villages throughout the region of Sangüesa. A band of armed peasants led by the regidor of Ujüé duly marched into Carcastillo. Once this force had assembled, however, Gil found that
he had too many people for his resources and that they were too poorly trained to undertake a regular action against the French. Gil was unable to envision or lead a guerrilla campaign. Instead, he sent the volunteers back to
their villages, each group accompanied by a regular soldier who was to provide training to the peasants. The impact of this decision by Gil has never received the praise it merits. By sparing untrained peasants from the certain
destruction of a regular battle with French troops and by providing for their training, Gil helped to create a reservoir of personnel for Mina, who would later recruit heavily in the Ujüée-Sangüesa region.

 The second official sent to Navarre, Andrés Eguaguirre, attempted a more ambitious project than Gil. Despite Eguaguirre’s lack of military experience, General Palafox had granted him the rank of colonel with the authority to
organize an army in occupied Navarre. In July Eguaguirre headed to Estella, which he judged a propitious area in which to begin recruiting for his so-called Volunteer Mobile Musketeers of Navarre. Estella had been the most
enthusiastic city in the aborted revolution of May and June. Many Estellans had fought in Tudela and had returned home with arms and a taste of combat. At first Eguaguirre achieved some measure of success, at one point commanding
an army of some 800 men. Now, after weeks of rebelling in a vacuum, Estella finally attracted a French response. After driving off the first French assault, Eguaguirre retreated into the mountains northwest of Estella in order to
avoid a second, more serious attack by the French. For the next two months, Eguaguirre’s army operated in the rugged country northwest of Estella, with its center of command in the remote hermitage of Santiago de Lóquiz. Estella
secretly continued to supply this force, which otherwise would have starved in the mountains of Allín, until it was driven out of hiding on 9 September. 19