

 Thus, despite the threat of federalist dissolution and class violence, the revolutionary juntas survived, prospered, and, by the fall of 1808, constituted a unified national government in the Central Junta. The Central Junta
contained some of the finest minds and greatest leaders in Spain, and men like Blanco White, Cienfuegos, Martínez de la Rosa, and Quintana projected a radical vision of Spanish society into the plans and pronouncements of the
revolutionary government. “Providence” had created an opportunity for the nation to recover the freedoms lost to the Hapsburgs in the sixteenth century. But to the Liberals of 1808 the revolt was about more than just the recovery
of ancient dignity. Spain would achieve a new degree of liberty even as it struggled for independence, and it would become “the envy and admiration of the world.” In this new Spain, laws would be based on the consent of the
governed, people would be free to publish and worship as they wished, and the structures of feudal society would be eliminated. The “paralysis of arbitrary rule” that had consumed the country from within would be replaced by a
government based on the “general utility” of the majority. 52 Over the next six years, the Liberals wrote these ideals into legislation, first within the Central Junta and after 1810 within the Cortes of Cádiz, where the Spanish
Enlightenment would achieve its highest political expression. In the summer of 1808, however, the more pressing requirement was to mobilize the nation against the Bonapartes.

 The French forces in Spain were placed in immediate jeopardy by the risings in the provinces. In June armed peasants began to patrol highways and to watch city gates even in regions occupied by French troops. The period in which
an individual French officer or an unescorted stage could travel freely through the country was over. 53 The spirit of resistance returned even to Madrid, which had seemed cowed after the defeat of 2 May. Once again, Madrileños
congregated in the public squares, now sporting the red cockade of revolution. 54

 In addition to a sullen capital and a hostile countryside, the French also faced a growing military threat from Spanish regular forces. During May and June the juntas began piecing together an army from remaining Bourbon units
and from new conscripts. The junta of Cádiz captured the French squadron in the harbor and with it an important arsenal that included 442 cannon, 830 tons of powder, 1,429 muskets, 100,000 balls, 1,000 swords, and almost 4,000
prisoners. 55 In June the juntas of Seville and Granada raised large, if untried, armies of recruits, reinforced with veterans who had deserted their units. How dangerous these armies were the French could not guess. Certainly,
General Dupont, entrusted with the invasion of Andalusia, did not perceive the peril of leading 20,000 troops over the Sierra Morena and into the valley of the Guadalquivir. In late June Dupont wrote from Cordoba that he did not
believe stories of insurgent armies in Seville and Granada. 56 Dupont learned the extent of his error on 19 July when he ran into 35,000 Andalusian troops at Bailén. After a desultory series of maneuvers in unbearable heat, the
French placed themselves in an untenable position, and the Spanish made prisoners of the entire force after having done battle with less than half of it.