

 It was also Galicia that first opened the eyes of some French commanders to the difficulty of their situation in Spain. Marshal Soult left an eloquent testimonial as to what he faced in Galicia. “This province is in constant
ferment,” wrote Soult. The resistance of civilians promised to “make warfare in this country extremely bloody, infinitely disagreeable, and seemingly endless.” A long struggle would be necessary, Soult informed Joseph, before
anything of value could be gained in Galicia. 6

 The success of the Galician campaign convinced the Spanish government to embrace guerrilla warfare as the means to national salvation. In the summer and fall of 1808, when Spain still had ostensibly strong armies to field, the
Central Junta had discouraged the formation of guerrilla parties. 7 The junta had feared that the existence of guerrillas would encourage desertion from regular units. By December 1808, however, it had become clear that Spain
could not keep an army in the field against the French. The ambush of French stragglers and small detachments, the isolation of enemy garrisons, and the disruption of French administration were the most effective means of
resistance available after December 1808.

 Accordingly, the Central Junta issued a series of decrees giving legal existence to the guerrillas. On 28 December 1808 the junta passed its first “Reglamento de Partidas,” establishing procedures for the organization of
guerrilla parties throughout Spain. On 1 January 1809 the junta issued a “Manifesto of the Spanish Nation to Europe” justifying the mobilization of civilians. The manifesto described acts of incredible savagery perpetrated by
French troops against Spaniards. French soldiers had profaned Spanish homes “with the rape of mothers and daughters, who had to suffer all the excesses of this brutality in sight of their dismembered fathers and husbands, [while]
their children were pierced with bayonets and carried in triumph as military trophies.” Convents and monasteries had been sacked, and the rape of nuns and murder of monks had become routinized. Religious houses and churches were
converted into barracks and brothels. The French were discovered to be “bandits not soldiers, ferocious monsters not men, against whom every means of vengeance, every method of extermination, no matter how horrible or
unprecedented they might seem, were authorized.” 8 On 17 April 1809 the Central Junta authorized the formation of the corso terrestre, or “land pirates,” and ordered all able-bodied males in occupied territory to form guerrilla
bands.

 Many of the guerrilla parties in 1809 were formed by dispersed regular troops and led by officers from the defeated Spanish armies. In the area southwest of Zaragoza, three officers, José Joaquín Durán, Ramón Gayán, and Pedro
Villacampa, commanded 3,000 to 4,000 troops by the winter of 1809. 9 General Juan Diaz Porlier, “the little Marqués,” was authorized by General La Romana and the junta in Oviedo to begin operations with two regiments in Asturias.
10 Julián Sánchez, who would operate a guerrilla party in the mountains of Léon, got his start as a cavalry sergeant fighting around Salamanca with General Del Parque. 11 Yet, most of the units formed of dispersed regulars were
reintegrated into the Spanish army by the spring of 1810. 12