

 Meanwhile, the French had prepared a force of some 4,000 men under General Lefèbvre-Desnüettes to deal with the Zaragozan rebels. To reach Zaragoza, the French had to pass through Tudela, the second city of Navarre, located on
the Ebro River fifteen miles north of the border with Aragon. Palafox hoped to check the French advance at Tudela, and on 31 May he offered to send men and arms to the city. The gift was at first rejected by the municipal
government, which had no wish to be sacrificed for the good of Zaragoza. 12 There were some in Tudela, however, who desired a battle, and when the details of Palafox’s offer leaked to the public on 2 June, a crowd formed in the
streets and demanded that the municipality put up a fight. 13 The mob forced city officials to retreat to the house of a town notable, José Yangüas y Miranda. There a special junta of community leaders was convened. On 3 June
this junta apparently yielded to the revolutionaries and promised to accept Palafox’s aid and attempt to block the passage of the Ebro.

 The city had exactly three days to prepare a plan of battle, not much time in any case, but the junta dragged its feet, and Tudela was left almost defenseless. On 6 June peasants reported a French column just a few miles away.
This was Lefèbvre-Desnöettes’s force, which had just crushed the rebels in Logroño on 4 June. At the last minute, 2,000 recruits from Zaragoza arrived, joining a thousand ill-armed young men from Tudela and its hinterland behind
hastily erected barricades. Just before the battle, the junta tried to sue for peace, but its efforts were spoiled by the Zaragozans, who initiated the firefight on 8 June. Once the battle started, the French swept the Spaniards
aside and quickly forced the city to surrender. Lefebvre reported only two French soldiers killed and a few wounded. The Spanish suffered twenty-four casualties, with most of the defenders escaping to Zaragoza. The junta of
Tudela quickly went over to the French and reestablished calm.

 The conditions of both the resistance and the surrender of Tudela reflected the incomplete development of the revolutionary forces. According to the governor of Aragon, Tudelans “lay indolent” during the crisis and their leaders
were “debased by intrigue.” In fact, Tudelan patriots, unlike those in Zaragoza, had failed fully to overthrow or co-opt the existing government, dooming all efforts at mobilization. Lukewarm leaders like Yangüas maintained the
real power in Tudela and never intended to offer resistance. As in Madrid on 1 May the junta refused to distribute arms. Five hundred rifles that had arrived from Zaragoza just before the French attack were never distributed.
Thus, the French faced a poorly armed opponent that had, with the exception of the Zaragozan troops, received no training. On 8 June the Tudelans simply melted away, and officials were able to do what they had been waiting days
to do—hand over the town to the French. Tudela was rewarded with a thorough sacking. 14