

 The Spanish victory at Bailén proved to be of enormous importance. It was the first time an imperial army had surrendered. Bailén, even if it was a fluke, dispelled the aura of invincibility that had come to surround imperial
troops. Napoleon’s supporters in Spain wavered, and some found their patriotism. 57 News of the battle caused an exodus from Madrid, as people flocked to join the insurrection. 58 On 24 July the Royal Council informed Joseph that
it considered the statute of Bayonne a dead letter. 59 After Bailén, growing Spanish armies began moving north to threaten Madrid, and the exposed position of the French forces in Iberia became evident. In Lisbon Junot’s army of
some 25,000 negotiated terms of surrender at Cintra and was evacuated, courtesy of the British Navy, to the French Atlantic ports. Moncey’s army of 9,000, impossibly bogged down in the Valencia plain, which had been flooded to
protect the city, abandoned its mission in the Southeast. Valencia would not fall until 1812. Joseph evacuated Madrid on 30 July, earning the nickname “King of the Eleven Nights,” and French troops, government officials, and
collaborators crowded the northern routes, retreating to a position behind the Ebro River and reconcentrating in the Basque provinces and Navarre.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/11_chapter.xhtml =====
The Fatal Knot The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain

 4 The Failure of Revolution in Navarre

 D URING THE SUMMER of revolution in 1808 Navarre was one of the quietest provinces in all Spain. The city of Pamplona was incapable of producing a revolt like the dos de Mayo in Madrid or a revolutionary movement like that in
Valencia. The conservative bourgeoisie, resident nobility, and rich clergy of the viceregal capital made spontaneous disorder of any kind difficult to sustain. 1 In addition, the presence of some 2,400 French troops and their
Spanish auxiliaries entrenched in the Ciudadela discouraged resistance. 2 Finally, the collaboration of government officials in Pamplona robbed the rebellion in Navarre of any central direction. The viceroy and provincial
government, or Diputación, followed French directives with unnecessary relish in 1808, functioning as the nexus between the occupying power and the people and calling for cooperation with France in achieving the “regeneration” of
the nation. 3

 Outside of the capital, there were some signs of resistance. The town of Estella, in particular, was the scene of an early uprising against the French. On 25 April Estella learned of Ferdinand’s predicament in Bayonne. Crowds
appeared in the streets wearing the red cockade, but, as elsewhere, it was news of Ferdinand’s abdication that precipitated open rebellion. On 1 June a mob forced the city council to dissolve, and two days later a new council
purged of collaborators circulated a proclamation to the surrounding countryside calling on people to rally to the defense of Estella. 4 The viceroy in Pamplona sent in constables to arrest the rebel leaders, but they were driven
off, after a short skirmish in which one of the constables was killed.