

 With the fall of Tudela, the insurrection in Navarre, such as it was, collapsed. There were several reasons for the lack of initiative and success by Navarrese rebels during this early phase of the war. The first was the
province’s strategic importance. The security of the whole French operation in the peninsula depended on the domination of Navarre, since the French used the passes of the western Pyrenees to resupply and reinforce their armies
in Portugal and in most of Spain. The French took special pains, therefore, to prevent resistance from gaining a foothold in the region. 15 This was easy to do in 1808, when it was a matter of dealing with isolated urban
revolutions, as in Logroño and Tudela. Thus, until the middle of 1809 and the rise of the first important guerrillas in the countryside, Navarre was relatively quiet, and French soldiers considered themselves lucky to draw duty
in Navarre, which reminded some of their experiences in the easily pacified Rhineland. 16

 The second factor working against the Navarrese was, ironically, the Spanish victory at Bailén and the subsequent French withdrawal north of the Ebro. From August to November, when most of Spain was liberated, Navarre and the
Basque provinces became Napoleon’s staging ground for the reconquest of the peninsula in the winter of 1808-9. In the last half of 1808, therefore, the French had 100,000 troops in Navarre, making resistance impossible.

 Finally, the government in Pamplona showed itself an eager participant in the suppression of rebellion. In other provinces battles had first been fought with local elites, either to co-opt them into new power structures or to
oust them entirely from the government, before revolutionary juntas could be installed. In Navarre this civil struggle was resolved in favor of old Godoyites and supporters of the French regime, as in Corella and Tudela, due to
the presence of French troops and the successful action of collaborating officials, or afrancesados. As a result, no alternative leadership developed in Navarre until the middle of 1809, when guerrilla armies learned to act on
their own authority. In the meantime, however, the initiative to resist France had to come from outside Navarre, especially from Zaragoza.

 After the fall of Tudela, Zaragoza was the only center of serious resistance in north-central Spain. From mid-June to mid-August, French troops laid siege to the city. Zaragozans knew that the key to raising the siege lay in
Navarre. The forces sent against Zaragoza entered Spain through the Navarrese towns of Irún and Roncesvalles and fed upon the rich grain lands of Navarre before descending to the Ebro River valley. To interdict these supply
lines, the junta of Aragon tried to organize guerrilla resistance in Navarre.

 In the mountains of Roncal and Valcarlos there had already been signs of unrest, triggered by mounting French requisitions. Working the western Pyrenees and the Aragonese border around Sangüesa were half a dozen armed bands, led
by men with colorful pseudonyms like the Pesoduro and the Malcarado. 17 None of the Navarrese parties was strong enough, however, to accomplish more than hit-and-run operations against French stragglers and small convoys, and the
junta of Aragon decided to send its own agents to Navarre to try to provide the rebels with better leadership.