

 Meanwhile, Estella’s plea for support from its neighbors received little response. In Viana, a special junta of priests and other leaders sidetracked popular demands for a distribution of arms. 5 In Corella, the “lower orders of
the city” and “people without education” tried to overthrow the municipal government in the first week of June, but a group of “enlightened subjects” was able to reestablish order. The role of Corella’s clergy in calming the
populace was especially noteworthy, once again illustrating the ambiguous role of the church in the Spanish resistance. 6 Officials in a number of other towns also took active measures “to impede the mobilization and arming
proposed by the city of Estella” and proudly reported the fact in letters to Pamplona. 7

 The failure of revolution in the rest of Navarre condemned the efforts of Estella to isolation and collapse. Estella finally raised three companies of men, armed with shepherds’ hooks, old swords, and some rusty firearms.
Barricades were erected in the streets, and all was made ready for a French response. 8 By itself, however, Estella was not a worthy military target, and the French ignored the city. Thus, there was no revolution of 1808 in
Navarre, and effective rebel leadership had to come initially from outside the province, especially from nearby Zaragoza.

 The situation in the Aragonese capital was very different from that in Navarre. In the first place, Zaragoza was still free of French troops in the spring of 1808. Also, Zaragoza had long been a bastion of support for Ferdinand,
and the city had greeted the fall of Godoy and Charles at Aranjuez with jubilation. 9 In late April and early May, news of Ferdinand’s mistreatment in Bayonne produced profound resentment in Zaragoza and generated an
insurrectionary climate in the city.

 Zaragoza, like much of Spain, was gripped by a millenarian mood, rooted in a profound sense of national decadence, the result of economic contraction, bad harvests, and military and political humiliation. 10 People believed that
evil was afoot and that only Ferdinand, like a modern Moses, could lead the country to better times. On 17 May a miracle in the cathedral of Zaragoza galvanized the city. At the midday mass a crown appeared—some said out of a
cloud above the cathedral, others said surrounded by palms above the altar—with the unlikely inscription: “God supports Ferdinand.” The clergy took advantage of the miracle to incite the populace to insurrection. They proclaimed
the miracle a sign that the Holy Virgin of the Pilar of Zaragoza had granted protection to patriots. Any soldier wounded fighting the French was ensured 100 years relief from purgatory. Anyone killed would be reborn three days
later in paradise. Murat was said to have been arrested in Madrid, and Ferdinand was rumored to have returned in disguise to lead a holy war against France. The day of deliverance was apparently at hand. 11

 On 24 May Ferdinand’s abdication became public knowledge in Zaragoza. Students and clerics called for an uprising, and a mob wearing cockades and led by a local surgeon took the military governor hostage and seized the castle of
the Aljaferia, which contained an enormous arsenal of 25,000 rifles and 80 pieces of artillery. On 2 6 May the armed crowd marched to the country estate of José Palafox y Melcí, a longtime supporter of Ferdinand, and brought him
back to Zaragoza as their leader. Palafox was installed at the head of a governing junta drawn from members of the old government, the military, and the clergy. The junta adopted the red cockade, defusing its revolutionary
symbolism and identifying the new government with the insurrection. During the following days retired officers and soldiers as well as new recruits poured into Zaragoza. By 29 May 4,500 troops were drilling on the outskirts of
town, and thousands more joined this force in the first days of June.