

 Javier Mina promised volunteers eight reales a day in wages, far more than the one real that Gil and Eguaguirre had been able to offer in the previous year. These wages were paid from the tithe, which the corso appropriated
wherever it went, demonstrating how little the guerrillas were motivated by a desire to defend church property against the French “atheists.” Soldiers were also promised daily rations of bread, meat, and wine, and the right to
profit from booty and the ransom of prisoners. In every village and town in Navarre Javier and the priest of Ujüé appointed spies, often the priest or mayor, who received regular wages, some as much as the volunteers themselves.
25

 On 7 August 1809 with just twelve men the corso engaged in its first action, capturing ten French artillerymen foolish enough to travel alone on the road from Tafalla to Pamplona. With the captured arms, Javier doubled his
following. By the end of the month, uniting a few of the smaller bands in Monreal, halfway between Idocín and Otano, Javier already stood at the head of some 200 volunteers.

 Javier’s activities at first centered on capturing convoys and small detachments. The guerrillas traveled from one end of Navarre to another to obtain arms, munitions, horses, and money. In early September the corso raided sixty
mules from the garrison of Puente la Reina just southwest of the capital. In the middle of the month, now with 300 men, Javier shifted his operation to the region of Inún, where he captured a convoy transporting Spanish prisoners
of war to France. Some of these prisoners joined the corso, and with his augmented force, Javier returned to the familiar territory east of Pamplona. There some of the men of Roncal, breaking their armistice with the French,
joined the corso. Among these recruits was Gregorio Cruchaga, who would become Javier’s second in command.

 Most of the weapons and uniforms used by the volunteers in these early months were captured from the French, but Pamplona also supplied clothing manufactured in the city and smuggled out by the undertaker, Miguel Iriarte, and
the vicar of the hospital, Clemente Espoz, Francisco Espoz y Mina’s older brother. These two hid the uniforms beneath the bodies carted from the hospital to the cemetery outside of the city gates. The clothing was then taken to
Badostáin, a village just east of Pamplona, where the priest Andrés Martín, who became the first historian of the Division of Navarre, saw that they were delivered to the guerrillas. 26 These details are significant, because both
English and French sources often assumed that the guerrillas were created and sustained by English money and supplies. In Navarre, the greatest center of guerrilla warfare, this was never the case.

 Mounts were more difficult to acquire. The unwritten rules of guerrilla war said that any foot soldier who could procure a horse automatically entered the cavalry. The guerrillas became consummate horse thieves, stealing from
the French, from each other, and from private citizens. Entering the valley of Aézcoa in October, the corso “liberated” eighty-five horses. 27 With these a cavalry force of some 100 men was added to the 300 infantrymen under
Javier. In late October the corso headed back to the region south and east of Pamplona. There the guerrillas seized a munitions convoy, captured a mail courier, and took thirty-seven French prisoners. These were transported, as
usual, by secret paths to Lérida, thence to Valencia, the patriot stronghold in southeastern Spain.