

 The old Diputación, now in hiding outside of Navarre, reacted with horror to Javier’s success. “Gangs of armed peasants,” complained the deputies, “under the name of guerrilla parties” had entered Navarre and had “trampled over
people of distinction and insulted many whom even the most rebellious soldier would venerate.” The guerrillas compromised Navarrese towns and their officials, and this led to French reprisals and the demoralization of local
leaders. Worse still, in the eyes of the former governors of Navarre, these guerrilla bands had begun to requisition goods, something not to be tolerated in peasants. The deputies saw the guerrillas as little more than bandits
and predicted their destruction by the French. 28

 The attitude of the Diputación toward the insurgents revealed the limits of the deputies’ patriotism and imagination. Their main concerns remained the maintenance of social order and the protection of private property. The
deposed government, incapable of mobilizing Navarre itself, had clearly not grasped the nature of guerrilla warfare. 29 In this they were not alone. Neither the French nor the Central Junta had yet fully realized the importance
of the guerrillas. That compromising municipal authorities and elites and exposing them to the possibility of French reprisal might be one of the essential preconditions of successful guerrilla warfare—so long as this were
combined with victories over the occupation forces—had not entered the military consciousness.

 In November Javier joined up with guerrillas from Rioja under Cue-villas, a smuggler of some fame in the area, to attack 800 French troops stationed in Los Arcos. This was the first large-scale engagement of guerrilla forces in
Navarre outside of Roncal. Altogether Javier commanded some 700 troops reinforced by hundreds of local peasants, which he used to drive the French back to Estella after a sharp engagement in the mountains of Sansol on 20
November. The French lost 50 dead and 100 wounded, while the guerrillas lost 8 dead and 40 wounded, according to a Spanish source. 30

 The casualty figures from this first major action serve to indicate the effectiveness of partisan tactics. The French possessed two major advantages over the guerrillas. They had an effective cavalry, and they brought superior
firepower, especially field artillery, into battle. The guerrillas could neutralize these advantages, however, by avoiding battle except under the most ideal circumstances.

 The first requirement for guerrilla victory was proper terrain. In a set battle on flat land, French armies, with their excellent cavalry and artillery, could overcome even experienced infantry. For the untrained insurgents,
lacking sufficient screening cavalry, with no artillery, and short of lances, muskets, and munitions, to be caught in open country would have meant instant annihilation. The guerrillas therefore traversed plains at night, on the
run, and only when in dire need. On the few occasions when the guerrillas were trapped in open terrain, French victory was the inevitable result, as will be seen.