

 Miguel was not, however, a good choice to lead the resistance. He could not inspire others to fight, because he himself did not participate in combat. Military leadership fell to others. 18 For a time, it seemed that the
Roncalese might provide that leadership. Already in late 1808, the wealthy Gambra brothers had formed a band of some fifty men in the valley of Roncal that engaged the French on several occasions and even succeeded in chasing off
a small garrison stationed in Aoiz. In March 1809 the Roncalese attacked a French convoy of prisoners being transported from Zaragoza to internment in France. Among the men they liberated were Navarrese who had fought in Aragon
and a recently elevated brigadier general, Mariano Renovales. Renovales took charge of the Gambra band and galvanized a spectacular rising in Roncal. His army of peasants sealed the valley off from the rest of Navarre, beating
off successive French invasions and inflicting over 1,000 casualties on the French. In July the French in Pamplona made a truce with Roncal, promising to leave the valley alone in exchange for a contribution in sheep and a pledge
of nonbelligerency. 19 Having successfully defended their valley, the Roncalese appeared uninterested in taking the war to the French in the rest of Navarre. This task was left to Javier Mina, the younger relative of the more
famous Espoz y Mina.

 Martín Javier Mina y Larrea was the son of prosperous small farmers living in Otano, a small village at the foot of the Sierra of Alaiz, about half way between Ujüé and Pamplona. 20 When the French took the Ciudadela, Javier was
an eighteen-year-old seminary student who had just transferred his studies from Pamplona to Zaragoza. Javier had demonstrated with the other students in favor of Ferdinand when the news reached them of the coup at Aranjuez. 21
After participating in the uprising of Zaragoza, Javier returned to Navarre and began working as a spy for Miguel.

 In the fall and winter of 1808 Javier joined the resistance in Aragon, and in February 1809, he witnessed the final tragedy of Zaragoza from the heights outside the city. 22 Returning to Navarre, Javier joined a handful of close
friends in Pamplona. With the blessing of Miguel, he decided that he would set about unifying some of the existing guerrilla bands under his authority. By August, Javier Mina had succeeded admirably in his project and stood at
the head of his own corso terrestre.

 Javier Mina’s initial following included Don Félix Sarasa, a well-to-do farmer from a village just outside Pamplona and the “most closed-minded Basque that ever lived.” Sarasa could neither write, read, nor speak Castilian, but
in the Basque villages around the capital, he was known as a shrewd merchant, who never missed an opportunity to sell the produce of his ample farm at every market and fair. Sarasa eventually took over the customs operations set
up by Espoz y Mina in 1810. 23

 Also joining Javier Mina were Lucas Gorriz, who would become a regimental commander under Espoz y Mina, and his brother José, who headed the Treasury of the Division of Navarre, again despite an inability to read anything more
than a catechism, which he “read” from memory. Espoz y Mina himself, whose native Idocín lay only a few miles east of Otano and who was therefore in close contact with his nephew in the summer of 1809, also followed Javier from
the first day. Espoz y Mina later recalled this group with some regret: Lucas Górriz was killed in action during the war; José Górriz was shot by the forces of the Restoration for defending the Constitution of 1812; Sarasa was
imprisoned by the Restoration from 1816 to 1820, lost his fortune, and saw his children reduced to poverty. Mina was captured by the French in 1810, imprisoned in France until the end of the war, exiled by the Restoration, and
eventually killed in action fighting for the independence of Mexico. Espoz y Mina was condemned by the Restoration to spend a third of his life in exile, although his reputation, unlike that of the other four, was ultimately
rehabilitated. During the summer of 1809 these men, three of whom knew nothing beyond the use of the laya and pruning knife, embarked on a career that would for a time give them almost absolute power in Navarre. 24