

 In December 1809 Javier set up headquarters in Los Arcos, a hilly area in southwestern Navarre little frequented by French troops. The interval gave his men a needed respite. The corso numbered some 500 infantry and 150 cavalry,
but many were new recruits who lacked military training. In Los Arcos Javier saw that they received rudimentary instruction, organized the corso into companies, selected a staff of officers, and created the flag that would remain
in use for the next five years. Gregorio Cruchaga was made second in command, Lorenzo Calvo, a former infantry sergeant, was placed in charge of the infantry, and Seve-rino Iriarte, an ex-cavalryman, took command of the cavalry.
Javier’s force was rapidly passing from a small, irregular formation struggling to survive, into an ordered and disciplined body made up partly of dispersed or retired soldiers and operating, at least part of the time, on
instructions from a regular commander, General Areizaga. 31

 The interval in Los Arcos lasted only a short time, until late December, when Suchet took charge of coordinating a new round of persecution against the corso. The enemy forces occupying Navarre had already been increased
substantially. The French had reinforced churches, convents, and caseríos of robust construction with earthworks, ditches, and wooden palisades, converting them into small fortresses stocked with supplies. In April 1809 D’Agoult
had fewer than 2,500 troops in Navarre, but by midsummer that total had gone up to nearly 4,500 to counter the growing guerrilla threat, and by December thousands more were added. Some of these troops were, of course, dispersed
in garrison duty. 32 Their absence was made up, however, by the presence of thousands of troops from outside Navarre who joined the hunt for Javier in December 1809. All told, by January 1810, some 10,000 French troops were
attempting to corner Javier’s elusive “land pirates.”

 Among the generals who intervened in Navarre were Suchet and Harispe. Harispe would be one of the guerrillas’ most determined and successful opponents throughout the war. He was a native of the border town of Baigorry, making
him practically Navarrese. Since he spoke Basque, he was able to gain the confidence of some of the villages in the Montaňa, something no other French commander succeeded in doing.

 With such strong forces pursuing him, Javier Mina began the new year running from one end of Navarre to another, from Los Arcos, to Lumbier, to Roncal. In the fastness of the mountains, Javier learned that Suchet had brought up
troops from Aragon and from the garrisons in the Ebro valley to work in concert with Harispe and D’Agoult in order to seal off the Roncal valley. Throughout the war, it was the great fortune of the guerrillas that they could
usually avoid pursuit merely by passing into a neighboring province. Communications were too poor and French commanders were too jealous of their autonomy to undertake joint operations. The concerted persecution of January 1810
left Javier puzzled. This was the first time French forces under separate commands worked together against the corso. Javier narrowly escaped encirclement in Roncal and passed quickly to the other side of Navarre, to the
mountains of Dicastillo, pursued closely by the French. Finally, with enemies swarming all around, Javier dispersed his forces, hiding his armaments in the mountains and sending most of his troops back to their homes. A few
remained united in small bands hidden in the mountains west of Estella. Javier Mina himself, with six bodyguards, took cover in the mountains of Álava and western Navarre. The numerous French columns thus found themselves
operating in a void and had to let up in their persecution.