

 The reappearance of Javier caused general excitement among the men. Unfortunately, the return of their leader, now a captain in the army, coincided with the departure of Miguel, the spy-priest of Ujüé, who was the secret power
behind the corso. Miguel’s status as the head of the corso’s espionage and supply system had become common knowledge within Navarre, and inevitably the French began to hear rumors about a priest who was running a ring of spies.
With his position compromised, Miguel found it necessary to abandon Navarre. He sought and obtained selection to represent the province in the national Cortes scheduled to assemble in Cádiz. On 2 March Miguel left Navarre. Less
than a month later, and as a result of a failure of intelligence, something that had never happened under Miguel, Javier fell into French hands. 35

 During the short time left to him, Javier continued to operate in the region of Aibar and in northwestern Aragon. Reuniting 600 infantry and 100 cavalry, the corso battled the garrisons in Ejea and Zuera and attacked French
columns traveling between Pamplona and Aragon before running out of ammunition and seeking refuge once again in the region just east of the capital. During these last engagements, Javier’s troops killed eighty of the enemy,
according to the records of the second regiment. In Labiano and Aranguren, Javier rested his forces.

 On the morning of 28 March Javier received notice that French troops had discovered his position and were fast approaching from Pamplona. Whether he had come to believe overmuch in his own legend of invulnerability, or whether
he had misjudged the capacity of his new adversary, Dufour, Javier remained in Labiano until the last moment. Not knowing that the French had already occupied the heights behind Labiano before entering the village, Mina attempted
to escape into the hills on horseback with only a few men. There he was surprised, had his horse shot from under him, received a saber wound, and was taken prisoner.

 Javier Mina’s career may be assessed from several different perspectives. On the one hand, the toll he took on French troops was not that high. According to the records of the second regiment, during the life of the corso, the
guerrillas killed 211 French soldiers, wounded 280, and captured 114. During the same period the guerrillas lost 34 killed and 129 wounded. 36 While these numbers seem unimpressive, it is still notable that the French considered
Navarre unpacified territory in March 1810 and that men dreaded duty against the Navarrese guerrillas. 37 In addition, the guerrillas had diverted French troops from the western front, contributing to the stalemate in Portugal
and western Spain. In December 1809 and January 1810 some 10,000 troops were occupied chasing the guerrillas from the Estella region to Sangüesa and into the eastern Pyrenees. For a time in late January and early February 1810
there were perhaps 20,000 troops holding down Navarre, which had not seen regular Spanish soldiers since October 1808. In March additional units of French gendarmes received permanent assignment in Navarre. (Other companies were
sent to the neighboring Basque provinces and Upper Aragon, also heavily affected by Mina and other guerrillas). Meanwhile, the French did not have sufficient numbers to take Valencia, and an army wasted away in Portugal for lack
of reinforcement.