

 Finally, guerrilla resistance caused the French to spend a great deal of money on Navarre. Until the spring of 1810 Paris paid the cost of occupation, but as the guerrilla war heated up, the growing drain on his finances
infuriated Napoleon, and he directed his lieutenants in Navarre to do whatever was necessary to make the war feed itself. This directive resulted in punitive new taxes in March 1810, as will be seen. These taxes were so high that
villagers simply could not meet their allotments. To avoid imprisonment, they fled to the guerrillas, becoming “patriots” by default. Thus the guerrillas indirectly ensured that more and more Navarrese would join the resistance
out of exasperation with the fiscal policies of the French regime.

 If one traces the movements and battles of the corso, one can obtain a good picture of the “home base” maintained by the guerrillas and, conversely, of the areas they considered too dangerous to remain in for long. The places
most frequented by Javier’s troops were in three regions. Most important was the area between Sangüesa and Pamplona. When pressed by the French, this base was extended north into the Pyrenees, especially into the valley of
Roncal, but sometimes as far west as Burguete and Roncesvalles. This was the region best known to Javier, Espoz y Mina, and Cruchaga, and all of the recruits from Ujüé to Roncal. The second most frequented area was Estella and
the country west of Estella, both an important scene of operations and one of the regions most supportive of the corso. The guerrillas were saved more than once by hiding in the mountains of Lóquiz and Andía. The third area was
less a home base than a convenient point of attack. The region of the Carras-cal, a narrow place in the Pamplona road south of the French garrison at Tiebas, was the site of numerous guerrilla ambushes, and remained a dangerous
stretch of road throughout the course of the war. On only one occasion did the corso penetrate the heart of the Ribera, but the foray into Tudela in the fall of 1809 was only partly successful, and the guerrillas actually
suffered more losses than they inflicted in the action.

 This orientation toward the Montaňa is further illustrated by a consideration of the geographic origin of the guerrillas. A detailed study of the personnel in the guerrilla army of Navarre will be undertaken in chapter 9. It is
appropriate at this point, however, to note that the chroniclers of the Division of Navarre identified Ujüé, Roncal, the Lumbier basin, Estella, Los Arcos, and the Pamplona basin as the regions that contributed the most men to
the corso. This confirms a picture of the guerrillas as men of the Montaňa.

 Despite Javier Mina’s capture in March 1810, it was clear to the French that the occupation of Navarre was not going well. Navarre had been forced during the first two years of warfare to contribute over 12 million reales in
taxation. 38 Yet, the government in Pamplona still required subsidies from Paris, and the military governor was forced to resort to ad hoc requisitions, which inflamed the resistance more. The failure of the occupation was a sign
of Javier’s success and of the impossibility of governing Navarre from Madrid or from Paris. Napoleon therefore set up in Navarre an autonomous government by the measures of 8 February 1810. (At the same time, the French also
created independent military districts in Álava, Catalonia, Guipúzcoa, and Vizcaya.) A month later Napoleon sent Navarre a new governor-general, Georges Dufour.