

 Thus, the French attempt to terrorize civilians backfired from the start. Even in Pamplona, French “justice” served only to fan the fires of resistance. In October 1809 the French shot three men discovered manufacturing
cartridges in a church and hung them up for public view in Pamplona. This act was intended to humble the city, but instead it caused a riot that briefly threatened the French hold on Pamplona. On the night of the hangings, three
grenadiers failed to make it back to their billets in the Ciudadela. The next morning they were discovered hanging in place of the three executed patriots, and on the chest of one of the soldiers was attached the following
notice: “Vous pendez les notres. Nous pendons les votres.” (You hang ours. We hang yours.) In response, D’Agoult ordered fifteen monks, selected for their popularity and influence, from among the fifty-seven then imprisoned in
Pamplona, to be executed and strung up in public view for twenty-four hours. The people of Pamplona collected 20,000 francs to ransom back the condemned men, and an unruly crowd surrounded the French governor’s house to force his
hand. Their cries for clemency were ignored, however, and the fifteen men died on the scaffold after French troops twice drove back an ugly mob with their bayonets. 56

 Dufour continued the work of D’Agoult, collecting data on men absent from their homes and suppressing political dissent. Dufour had the heads of families who could not account for absent children and grandchildren arrested and
fined. The penalty for any such absence was set at a minimum of 200 reales a month. Failure to pay resulted in deportation. Every Sunday priests were required to read these regulations from their pulpits, failing which they too
were arrested and deported. 57 Dufour, having received a lukewarm response to his offer of amnesty, gave his commanders orders to execute guerrillas upon capture, without trial, and to hang their bodies in trees along the nearest
main roads. 58

 These measures, combined with the military defeat of the corso, brought the French in the spring of 1810 as close as they would ever come to pacifying Navarre. Villages were repeopled by inhabitants who had earlier fled to the
guerrillas. Officials “ventured at last to give open support” to the government. Towns began to accept the protection of French troops, to inform on insurgents, and to solicit and obtain arms with which to defend themselves. 59

 The winter and spring of 1810 was the low point of the guerrilla resistance everywhere. The French used information supplied by civilians to catch and destroy a band led by the Estellan Carrasco. 60 French cavalry overtook the
Empecinado in the plains near Cuenca and killed 180 of his men. 61 Suchet practically cleared Aragon of guerrillas, and Lérida, the last focus of resistance in Catalonia, was taken. 62 Suchet formed six Spanish companies to fight
against the guerrillas, and the Aragonese began to look on a “steady and regular occupation” as a way to escape the vigilance of the guerrillas. 63 In Fuentes and Huesca the garrison commander Marc Desboeufs even became popular.
Desboeufs “played cards with the bourgeois and the priests and handball with the peasants.” The poor called him “father” and the children “cried with joy” at the sight of him. It was as close as the French came to a welcome in
the lands north of the Ebro River. 64