

 As a result of this situation, popular support for the war was faltering precisely in regions dominated by the Men of the Idea. 75 This was certainly the case in Navarre in the spring of 1810. In addition to the crimes committed
by Echeverría and other local guerrilla chieftains, the province was also infiltrated by numerous such bands roaming north from Castile and Aragon. The Empecinado, the Capuchino, Cuevillas, and other less savory guerrilla chiefs
brought their forces into the vacuum left by the destruction of the corso. The province, in the words of Mina, was a “picture of horrible demoralization” and chaos. 76 The Navarrese quite naturally began to accept the French view
of the partisans as bandits and sought French aid against guerrillas like Echeverría. 77

 Two events from this period indicate the depths to which the resistance had sunk. The Marqués de Ayerbe, an aristocratic relative of Palafox and a patriot of unimpeachable integrity, had formed an ill-starred conspiracy for the
rescue of Ferdinand in Valençay as early as the summer of 1809. After receiving little encouragement from the junta, Ayerbe suffered the loss of the ship that was supposed to deposit him secretly on the western coast of France.
Ayerbe had no choice but to risk a crossing of the Pyrenees in Navarre.

 In the early summer of 1810 (the exact date is not known), Ayerbe and a captain in the Spanish army entered Navarre traveling as two peasants, “Ti’o Lorenzo” and “José.” They were stopped, however, around Tafalla by a detachment
of guerrillas of uncertain connections. Because Ayerbe and his aide carried French passports to facilitate their mission, they were suspected as traitors. Their disguises, intended to fool the French, probably incensed their
captors. The bearing and accent of Ayerbe also suggested the possibility of an easy prize in the ample saddlebags. And in fact, the marqués was carrying a large sum of money that he hoped would help secure the release of
Ferdinand. This money was his undoing. Ayerbe and his aide were taken to Andosilla, where they were stabbed to death and buried in a shallow grave dug in a corral and covered over with a dung pile. Their bodies were discovered
after the war and returned to Zaragoza. Thus did the resistance lose a capable leader to the Men of the Idea. 78

 Shortly afterward, an even more horrible incident showed how literally demoralized the guerrillas had become. A guerrilla band, possibly a detachment from the Empecinado’s party, entered Villafranca in August 1810, during the
period when Mina was still far from having established his ascendancy in Navarre after the capture of Javier. The guerrillas captured five of the fifteen grenadiers stationed in the town along with a local woman who had made the
mistake of marrying one of the French soldiers. The woman was stripped, tarred, and beaten as she was led, mounted backward on a mule, through the town with a notice attached to her back reading “whore of the French.” On the
following day she was placed in a wooden cage in the town square to witness the death of the five grenadiers. The unlucky captives were buried alive with only their heads above the ground, while the Spanish troops took turns
trying to hit their heads with a large wooden ball. When the last “goal” had ceased to cry out, the game was over. The poor woman, after having one of her ears cut off—a torture commonly practiced by both sides— was carted to
Puente la Reina, where she was nailed to the church door until she bled to death. 79 Two years of seeing men shot, hanged, and impaled in roadside trees had led to a complete breakdown of ethical norms of conduct. And the terror
was to become much worse and more systematic before things improved.