

 The situation in April 1810 placed a premium on these character traits. What the guerrillas needed was order, someone who could discipline men who had abandoned the patriotic war to engage in robbery. The Men of the Idea whom
Mina inherited were a dangerous lot, forcing Mina to maintain a constant ring of bodyguards around his person. But Mina was temperamentally suited to this situation. If anyone could succeed with such men, it was the layador from
Idocín.

 In addition, the very name of Mina, which Espoz now added to his own, recalled the success of Javier’s corso. Javier had brought order to Navarre, and some Navarrese had begun to wish for nothing more than order, even if it had
to be imposed by the French. This was the great danger for the insurgency. It was crucial that Mina eliminate his less idealistic rivals to avoid alienating the population. The men who rallied to Mina in May no doubt understood
the psychology of the moment and the suitability of Mina to resolve the situation. However, even with the men of Sádaba, Górriz, and Cruchaga, Mina was still too weak to proceed immediately against the strongest of his rivals.
Instead, he began his first tentative campaign against the French.

 At the head of a small but growing band from April to July, Mina engaged the French three times in the region between Pamplona and the Guipúzcoa border, once near Sangüesa, and four times in the area around the Carrascal. Mina’s
theater of operations thus coincided with that of his predecessor, except for the increased activity in the far northwest. In these encounters, the French lost 201 killed or captured according to the records kept by Mina, and the
guerrillas lost 40 killed and 93 wounded. 20 French records confirm the plausibility of these numbers. Indeed, they suggest that losses to the guerrillas were much higher than Mina ever suspected. Dufour reported 77 killed, 235
prisoners of war, and 54 deserters in the three-month period, as well as a rising number of troops in hospital beds. 21

 Already Mina’s combat record rivaled that of the old corso. As the new band’s fame spread, Mina began to attract recruits. From a following of some 500 in early May, Mina’s party increased to nearly 1,200 infantry and 200
cavalry by early July, surpassing the maximum force ever gathered by Javier. The principal points of recruitment, following the readherence of Cruchaga’s Roncalese and of the band raised by the Górriz brothers, were Lumbier and
Echauri, which the guerrillas used as bases during much of June and July. 22

 Mina’s strategy derived from Javier’s. The ambush of convoys accounted for six of the eight battles that occurred during these three months. Such encounters, by their very nature, almost never went awry. One French convoy of 105
men gave up without offering resistance near the Carrascal. Another, composed of sixty men, was wiped out after seeking cover in a hermitage in the mountains north of Pamplona. As the guerrillas had learned, most of these French
escorts were too exhausted, ill-prepared, and undermanned to resist a surprise attack.