

 Dufour’s strength in Navarre was at its height. In addition to the thousands of troops under his command, he had companies of French gendarmes at his disposal, and he could call on Suchet’s garrisons in Upper Aragon and in the
upper Ebro valley. 65 The collapse of the corso allowed Dufour to send forces into areas that had been guerrilla preserves under Javier Mina. Villages that had been too loyal to Javier or that continued to show signs of
resistance were burned with resin torches that the French carried for this purpose. 66

 Dufour also felt strong enough to embark on the second part of his mandate—the fuller exploitation of Navarre’s economic resources. In March and April Dufour decreed a series of new taxes to raise over 22 million reales, almost
one-fourth of Navarre’s gross agricultural production. The enforcement of these exactions was not automatic, however, and it is unclear how much was actually collected. Of Dufour’s first tax of 3.3 million reales, almost a third
still remained uncollected in 1811. 67 Despite these difficulties, French prospects seemed bright in April 1810. As a result of the application of terror, military force, and a dose of good luck, the guerrilla movement in Navarre
had been reduced to a low state not seen since the collapse of Eguaguirre’s Mobile Musketeers in 1808.

 In April 1810 Navarre entered a period of anarchy and civil war. The province was covered by dozens of marauding bands, hardly worthy of the name of guerrilla armies, which fought each other and the civilian population for the
decreasing pile of loot represented by Navarre’s overtaxed economy. In truth, the anarchy of civil war and brigandage had always lain just below the surface of the movement, despite Javier Mina’s attempts to impose order. 68
After the capture of Javier Mina, the greatest check to anarchy was removed. Petty tyrants roamed the province grabbing whatever they could from churches, monasteries, municipal buildings, and private residences, and in some
cases forcing young men to join their parties, a practice that neither Javier Mina nor Espoz y Mina ever had to adopt. It was, to borrow Temprano’s phrase, the era of “every man for himself.” 69

 Bandit chieftains elevated their robberies to the status of a (not very sophisticated) theoretical system: they called the new pattern of individualized “warfare” by the simple name of the “Idea.” Andrés Martín chronicled the
breakdown of the movement and the birth of the “Idea” in the spring of 1810. “There were some,” wrote Martín, “who wanted to preserve their liberty and their idea. Hence they took their name— the Men of the Idea. These men wanted
one thing but destroyed it with another. They wanted to fight for their country without submission; they wanted to conquer without obedience; they wanted a perfect militia without discipline. This was impossible and
contradictory.” 70

 The Men of the Idea believed that in nature no person was subordinated to another. In their view, all power structures that subverted the natural equality of men were equally corrupt and contemptible. Guerrillas who believed in
the Idea therefore opposed village, province, and nation almost as much as they did the French government. In the matter of warfare, the Men of the Idea believed that the energy of the people could best be harnessed by giving
each individual free reign to grab whatever portion of power and territory he could forcefully dominate. The French would be faced with a hundred separate bands moving like shadows across Navarre and subsisting entirely on spoils
of battle. This “perfect militia” would melt into the hills at the approach of the enemy to emerge later in harassing operations against stragglers and lines of communications.