

 When Dufour could not gain adherents in Navarre, he turned to terror in order to command obedience. In truth, Dufour inherited a system of terror begun by his predecessor, General D’Agoult. In July 1809 D’Agoult had required
municipal officials to procure the names of those absent from their homes. If the French captured some “bandit, or so-called volunteer of the people,” who had not been reported missing, then a fine of 4,000 reales would be levied
against the municipality failing to report. 48 D’Agoult had also decreed that anyone with a son fighting for the insurgents would have to present at his cost a man fit for service in the French army, and anyone discovered absent
from his home for an unauthorized period of time would have his goods and property confiscated. 49

 The effectiveness of these regulations can be guessed from the Dufour administration’s need to reiterate substantially the same code in March 1810. Under Dufour, however, the penalties for violating the regulations were severer.
Those absent from their homes were assumed to be guerrillas and were subject to execution upon capture. Priests and alcaldes (mayors) who did not supply names were turned over to military commissions, specially formed for the
purpose, to undergo deportation proceedings. Clerics suspected of stirring up resistance were arrested and deported. 50 Fortunately, Dufour was able to enforce these measures only in areas either occupied by or within easy reach
of a garrison.

 D’Agoult had passed strict regulations against political activity and had created a new police force to back them up. Under D’Agoult, Pamplona and the other towns of Navarre became deserted and somber places. Beginning in 1809
the Navarrese were signed into government registers and required to take an oath of allegiance to the new regime. The French prohibited meetings of more than a few people and suspended public holidays. Handball courts and bull
rings were closed. In each venue the French detected, under the guise of sport and spectacle, the occasion for a volatile mixing of people from different social classes and political persuasions in a patriotic ambience. 51 Under
the watchful eye of the police the population of Pamplona had even abandoned its daily paseo, or promenade. 52 One French eyewitness took the desertion of the streets as an indication of the “superstition, fanaticism, and
enslavement” of the people, though it indicated only the latter. Indeed, the city had taken on the air of a prison camp. Those who ran public houses or rented rooms were required to report the names, professions, places of birth
and residence, and the purpose and length of their guests’ presence in Pamplona. Travel anywhere required a passport, which had to be presented to city officials and to innkeepers. 53 All of these practices, begun by D’Agoult,
were continued by Dufour.

 D’Agoult had reserved the harshest treatment for captured insurgents, and here too Dufour continued his predecessor’s practices. Because the French viewed the guerrillas as bandits, they felt no compunction about denying Spanish
captives the rights due to prisoners of war. For example, in the struggle for Roncal in the summer of 1809, captured Roncalese were taken to Pamplona and executed without trial. Their bodies were left to hang for days in trees
outside the eastern city gate, facing the valley of Roncal, so that anyone approaching from that direction might be reminded of the fate awaiting captives. 54 Roncal’s response was the simple “no importa” that was to become the
watchword of the Spanish resistance. Indeed, that autumn Roncal contributed Javier’s second in command, Cruchaga, to the corso terrestre, along with one of its largest and most experienced contingents of troops. 55