

 Mina was not a dominant figure in the life of Idocín before the war. He had, after all, only just come of age in 1806 and had no inheritance. 15 Indeed, Mina’s name showed up only once in records generated by the local notary
before the war. On the other hand, this one citation is extremely significant. Mina, immediately before the French invasion, led a group of six youths in an attack on Don Eusebio Garcés de los Fayos, señor of nearby Lecaun.
Unfortunately, the records are silent on the precise outcome of these events. Mina’s band was apprehended, and he certainly spent time in jail in Monreal, but the length of the incarceration and the sort of judgment rendered are
unknown. It is possible that these events indicate some leadership qualities not apparent in other historical records. The gang of six Mina led against los Fayos prefigured the gang of like number from which Mina reconstituted
the guerrillas of Navarre, and it is possible that he already exercised some charismatic attraction on his peers. This may help to explain the willingness in 1810 of superior military talents like Cruchaga and Lucas Górriz, the
latter known to Mina since before the war, to accept his leadership with such alacrity. 16

 Another personal characteristic that aided Mina was his personal integrity, which seems to have spread to his followers. It is well known that, despite enjoying full authority to collect church rents, custom duties, taxes, and
requisitions, neither Mina nor his lieutenants came out of the war with anything more than the humble means with which they entered it. 17 In many ways, Mina was even puritanical. For example, neither during the war nor in his
later career did he allow anything like a camp following to develop. 18

 Another quality that gave Mina the ability to lead the Navarrese guerrillas was his cruelty. A partisan war like that fought in Navarre led to the sacrifice of many innocent victims. The French were old hands at using terror to
intimidate subject populations. To survive, the guerrillas had to outdo the French, executing captured Spanish “renegades” and punishing anyone who tried to remain neutral. By 1812, as we shall see, Mina was able practically to
eliminate collaboration. Men who had entered the French service carrying messages, carting food, driving animals, or enforcing edicts were killed, kidnapped, mutilated, or despoiled of their property. The French found that
nothing they could do inspired as much fear as Mina did. Even when the French threatened prison and death for cooperating with Mina, men forced to carry messages for the occupation ran immediately to the guerrillas once out of
the enemy’s grasp. This sort of control over the civilian population was one of the keys to Mina’s success. Yet, to dominate the population in this way required a person who could enforce his will in an unswerving and brutal
manner. This came easily to Mina.

 The general revealed more than he intended about this side of his personality in a story he related as an aside in his memoirs. Throughout the war, but especially during the first year, it was the practice of the guerrillas to
retain any captured military prize. Capturing a lance qualified one to be a lancer; taking a good musket increased one’s status in the infantry; the most coveted prize was a horse, since it meant immediate entry into the cavalry,
a more prestigious, safer, and less physically demanding branch of military service. While still serving as a common soldier under Javier, Mina captured a French mount better than any then in the corso’s cavalry. One of Mina’s
superiors, neglectful of the “Idea” which must have animated even Mina in that early epoch, decided that the horse should be his. Mina was offered an exchange of any horse in the corso, but “between the debt owed by a subordinate
and my own desire for the animal, I decided to incapacitate the horse in order not to suffer constantly by seeing it the property of another.” 19 Mina recalled the episode as a lesson of how a commander should not act toward a
subordinate, but we need not limit ourselves to this interpretation. The horse was a victim, like many others to come, of Mina’s cruel pride. On the other hand, it was this kind of clear-cut action taken without remorse that
helped Mina to rise from an obscure follower of Javier to ruler of all the guerrillas of Navarre in a few months’ time.