

 Reille’s first act was to assess the situation in Navarre. His initial dis-patch from Pamplona is worth some attention, since it describes the mood of gloom that had descended upon the French occupation that summer. 36 The
situation, he wrote, was “worse than he had imagined.” Two days before his arrival, a convoy of 360 men had been wiped out in the Carrascal with almost 200 men captured by Mina. The guerrillas numbered 2,500 infantry and 300 to
400 cavalry. Worse still, Mina had obtained so many weapons from French deserters and prisoners that the size of his army was expected to grow even more rapidly in the months ahead. Guerrilla successes had emboldened them and
raised the spirit of the province. In contrast, French troops were so discouraged that they hardly had the heart to fight.

 The guerrillas had destroyed the customs system and disrupted tax collection, so that the French could “obtain nothing except by armed force.” This further alienated the population. And even people who longed for pacification
could not be induced to cooperate with the French because the insurgents had “inspired terror everywhere.”

 In combat, Mina gained an advantage by knowing French troop movements perfectly from the intelligence sent by “the young men in the villages.” When pursued, the insurgents could divide up and take to the mountains, so that they
fought only when they had the advantage. In marching Mina’s men made twelve leagues in the time the French made six. The guerrillas were “really the masters of the country,” while the French mastered only the “points they
actually occupied.” In six months of fighting, at times using 12,000 troops, the French had captured just “four men” and succeeded above all in feeding the rebellion through random violence fed by frustration. To do anything
Reille said he would need 12,000 infantry, preferably Basques or other troops used to mountain fighting, and 1,000 horse.

 Reille’s recommendations could not be acted upon in time to save him from two humiliating defeats during the first week of his command. On 31 July near the Carrascal pass the men of the corso surprised a French column of 2,560
and drove it back to Pamplona. In the encounter, the guerrillas killed forty and captured thirty, while losing seven dead and thirty-five wounded. Of the captives, nineteen were “renegade” Navarrese, who were executed on the
spot. 37 It was this practice that moved the French governor to continue the routine execution of captured guerrillas. 38

 The next engagement was even more costly to Reille’s forces. On 3 August the corso attacked the 300-man garrison in Puente. Characteristically, most of Reille’s forces were in the wrong place. On this occasion, they were far to
the west scouring the mountains of Urbasa and Andía, which the guerrillas had just evacuated. Mina and his men had left the mountains during the night and had marched until dawn to catch the garrison in Puente unaware. Still
having no artillery but safe in the knowledge that the nearest French troops were many miles away, the guerrillas leisurely collected dried vines and brush to burn out the garrison. The fire killed 70 before the remaining 230 men
surrendered. 39 Reille’s account of the event differed slightly: he reckoned the loss at 50 killed and 198 captured. 40 In all, through August, Mina caused some 1,570 French casualties while studiously avoiding serious losses
himself. 41