

 The French ignored Mina and the cavalry, however, and brought 13,000 troops to the valley of Salazar, where they thought to bottle up Cruchaga. But the north-south valleys that run to the French frontier and that seem to an
outsider isolated one from another had their secret exits known only to local inhabitants, and Cruchaga and his Roncalese knew this part of Navarre well. Passing over high paths that had, in Mina’s words, scarcely ever been
traversed by man, Cruchaga escaped encirclement and returned to the mountains west of Sangüesa. After a short night’s rest, the troops were moved again, marching for a day and a night without stopping. The guerrillas had traveled
116 miles in two days. By this feat of endurance, Cruchaga had created enough space between his men and the French to cross the plains of southern Navarre, ford the Ebro, and join Mina in Soria. The French cavalry caught up just
as the last guerrillas reached the other side of the river, where Mina was waiting. Here the exhausted French abandoned the chase. During the remainder of the month of September, the corso stayed in the mountains of Soria before
retreating on 28 September farther south to Molina in Aragon.

 With all of his forces resting in Molina, Mina further elaborated the command structure of the corso. First, he renamed it the Division of Navarre. Second, he created subordinate officers within each of the three battalions into
which he divided his army. Mina dispatched messengers to Cádiz with the news of his deeds and asked for formal recognition of his Division. He did not receive a reply for almost a year. 46

 In the second week of October 1810, Mina decided to emerge from hiding to attack the garrison at Tarrazona, a few miles from Tudela. Here, on 11 October, the Division suffered a significant defeat that prepared the way for its
near destruction at Belorado a month later. Because of the terrain and the quality of their cavalry, the French at Tarrazona were able to force the Division to adopt a regular line. Mina’s small cavalry was asked to hold off
1,200 French hussars in open country while the infantry sought high ground and a back door. The result was a slaughter of the insurgents. Among the many wounded were Cruchaga and Mina, the first slashed in the skull, the second
shot through the leg. The fighting degenerated into an Iliadic struggle by the Navarrese to save their fallen leaders. The result was a confused and precipitous retreat, with the stragglers mopped up by the French cavalry. It was
not to be the last time that the misfortunes of a captain destroyed the order and resolve of the Division. 47

 From mid-August to mid-October the Division had shrunk by half. Many men had purposely stayed behind in Navarre to wait for a more propitious juncture. After Tarrazona, Mina returned home with the remnants of the cavalry. His
object was to reunite some of his dispersed men and reopen the war in the Montaňa of Navarre. The bulk of the infantry that he left behind hid in the mountains of Aragon, Soria, and Rioja, trying merely to survive by avoiding
contact with the thousands of troops pursuing them and sealing them off from Navarre.