

 Reille put his new mechanism of repression to work immediately in a series of punitive expeditions against civilians. Reille had two sources of intelligence to aid him in this project. He benefited from the returns of the
demographic and economic surveys begun under his predecessors. As one would expect, the surveys were never completed for every locale, but they nevertheless constituted powerful tools in the hands of the police. An even more
important source of information, one of Reille’s own projects, was a community-level survey of men who had been absent from their homes without explanation. These lists, again missing for most communities, began to reach Reille’s
hands in late 1810 and early 1811. The arrest of civilians by the French police followed.

 There are two sources of information that make it possible to quantify the police repression to a certain extent. The first is the prison entry book kept in Pamplona’s Recoletas convent, which had been converted into a prison
during the war. This book showed that 2 percent of the population of Navarre had passed through the Recoletas. Almost 80 percent of the prisoners were eventually released, 17 percent were deported to France, and 2 percent died in
jail or were executed. The jailer recorded the place of origin for 48 percent of the inmates. Most (82 percent) of these prisoners came from the Montaňa. The French hit especially hard in Estella, Falces, Huarte, Lárraga,
Mendigorria, Olite, Pamplona, Puente la Reina, and Sangüesa. Only 2 percent of the prisoners came from the merindad of Tudela. 9

 As large as the total number (3,323) of prisoners is from the Recoletas, it represents only a fraction of those detained by the French. Suspects were sent not only to the Recoletas but to prisons located in Logroño and Zaragoza,
and it is likely that some Ribereños, in particular, would have been incarcerated there. There were also a number of smaller jails in places like Irurzun. Fortunately, the Recoletas data can be supplemented by a second source of
information. In 1817 communities in Navarre were asked to complete a survey indicating, among other things, the numbers of civilians arrested by the French during the war. The responses are startling. 10 We know, for example,
that in the valley of Echauri, which showed only 8 inmates in the Recoletas, the French actually imprisoned, deported, or killed 259 people. 11 Similarly, Erroz was supposed to have lost 7 of its residents to the Recoletas, but
local data show that 38 people were actually incarcerated either in Pamplona or Irurzún. 12

 If such proportions were to hold for other areas not represented in the Recoletas data, then the global numbers for people imprisoned or deported by the French would be enormous indeed. Unfortunately, compliance with the survey
was uneven. In the merindad of Pamplona 56 percent of the communes responded, representing 53 percent of the population. In Estella 49 percent of the population was represented in the responses, in Sangüesa 44 percent, in Tudela
42 percent, and in Olite only 31 percent. Flawed though the survey was, careful handling of the data on its own terms does produce certain trends and conclusions about the nature of the French repression.