

 For once, a French proclamation was not far from the truth. In fact, the disaster in Castile completed a long process of disintegration that had been affecting the guerrilla movement since September. By the end of October, the
Division had virtually ceased to exist. Many of Mina’s men had been disabled with the fatigue of constantly hiding in the mountains. Many more had simply abandoned the cause, some at Mina’s instructions, to wait for better times.
As the remnants of the Division scurried through the mountains of Aragon and Castile, inside Navarre enthusiasm for the war waned, and civilian authorities began to seek a modus vivendi with the occupier.

 The reasons for the decline of the Division and of civilian support in this period are not difficult to discover. Reille had brought great political resources as well as military might to bear against the guerrillas. One of his
first acts, on 4 August, had been to abolish the French-style Council of State that Dufour had established and to replace it with a revamped Diputación. Reille, evidently appreciating the importance that the Navarrese placed on
the preservation of their traditional autonomous institutions, publicized these new arrangements widely.

 However, Reille appointed the members of his new Diputación, considerably mitigating his claim to have reestablished a “national representation” for Navarre. 2 There were six deputies, one from each merindad and one for
commerce, but in fact all six had important ties to the world of trade. The mercantile interests of the new deputies corresponded well to their function, which was spelled out for them in instructions received from Reille. The
Diputación was simply meant to assess and collect taxes. 3 It was significant that four days after the establishment of the new body, Reille decreed an additional tax of 8,621,000 reales. 4 In the months to come, the deputies
showed themselves worthy of Reille’s trust, for they proved infinitely more capable of levying and collecting taxes than Dufour’s council had been. 5 Thus, the new Diputación, by regularizing revenue collections, contributed to
the relative pacification that was achieved during the first months of Reille’s tenure.

 Along with a more efficient administration came a more liberal use of terror. Reille had captive insurgents routinely hanged along roadsides in order to demoralize the population. On 11 October two guerrillas were executed in
this manner. Two days later the French found two of their own hanging in trees on the outskirts of Pamplona. Reille answered this reprisal with one of his own, replacing the French corpses with eight freshly executed insurgents
whom he had been holding. In his commentary on the episode, Reille noted that he had declared his intention to hang four brigands for every French soldier killed. And when he ran out of captured guerrillas, he promised that he
would find a new supply of victims among the noncombatants, a promise he was soon to fulfill. 6

 To carry the terror to civilians, Reille required a more effective police force and military tribunal. He established both under the direction of Jean Mendiry. On 18 August 1810 Mendiry’s competence was outlined in a decree
published and posted throughout the province. Mendiry was to have authority over “crimes against the state,” which covered a broad range of activities, including the expression of opinions or the publication of works antithetical
to the regime. Cooperation with the insurgents or communication with them in any form also came under the purview of the new organization, as did the “seduction” of imperial troops and “any deed or word” that denoted
“disaffection, disapproval, or disobedience” to the government. 7 Mendiry placed agents in churches, taverns, handball courts, and street corners. He became the most hated symbol of the occupation. 8