

 At about this time Mina discovered, almost by accident, a tactic ideally suited to this kind of warfare and one which almost always ensured success. In his earliest battles, a shortage of ammunition forced Mina to engage the
French immediately in hand-to-hand combat. The first time such a tactic was used, in one of the Carrascal ambushes of June 1810, Mina had only one cartridge per man. Dividing his force in half, he had one group fire and charge
with the bayonet, while the others stood in reserve in case it became necessary to cover a retreat with another volley. Much later, even during times when the Division was well-supplied, Mina continued to use this procedure in
his ambushes of French columns and convoys. It produced two desired results. First, casualties against better-armed but less enthusiastic French conscripts could be held to a minimum by proceeding immediately to the bayonet.
Second, engagements could be terminated rapidly, an important consideration, since the presence of additional enemy forces in nearby garrisons meant that the French might always turn a defeat into a victory or a rout into an
ordered retreat. 23

 It was important to the guerrilla strategy to eliminate enemy garrisons. In the early summer of 1810, however, this was a task still beyond the means of the corso, which possessed no artillery. The one attack on a garrison in
this period ended disastrously. When Mina surrounded the garrison at Oyarzun, the French simply remained inside picking off twenty-four killed and fifty wounded before Mina realized the futility of the venture.

 The French had many such fortified places. They had taken over convents and caseríos at every strategic point, and had constructed their own forts along the remoter stretches of road between Pamplona and the French or Guipúzcoan
border. Once the guerrillas acquired artillery, these latter sorts of garrisons were the first to fall. In 1810, however, the French could not be challenged inside their forts. 24

 Mina was finally powerful enough by July to embark upon the elimination of his last rivals. Pascual Echeverría was the first victim. Echeverría, with a following of 400 men, was still the corso’s main competition in the summer
of 1810. 25 But Echeverría, like Eguaguirre and Sádaba before him, had made the mistake of alienating civilian support without offering any protection from French troops. His band was particularly loathsome to the people of
Estella, who had been forced not only to provide daily rations to Echeverría’s soldiers but also to turn over resources from the town’s shops and industries. 26 It was as a welcome guest, therefore, that Mina entered Estella on
13 July to meet with Echeverría, who was cantoned there. After a brief encounter in Echeverría’s lodgings, Mina had his rival taken prisoner before any of his band could respond to save him. Together with five of his most devoted
followers, Echeverría was escorted to the monastery of Irache, where all six men were shot by a firing squad. The people of Estella poured into the streets to celebrate Echeverría’s demise, while his troops served to swell Mina’s
own following. At this time also, 136 Aragonese guerrillas arrived, drawn by Mina’s fame, to join the corso. 27