

 The detentions also tended to occur in waves, normally when the French captured a town defended by the guerrillas or when they decided to act on the lists of volunteers and their relatives that local officials and collaborators
had been ordered to supply. It was in the smaller localities near the capital that the French used these lists to enact their vengeance fully. In the village of Erroz, located on the main road from Pamplona to Guipúzcoa, the
French killed, deported, or imprisoned 28 percent of the population, and nearby Beasoain lost 30 percent of its people. 18 Belas-coáin, with some 220 inhabitants had 80 people taken away to prison and 2 deported, the equivalent
of 37 percent of its population. 19 These villages, located in the strategic and vulnerable region west of Pamplona, straddled the routes taken by the guerrillas between Andía (or the Basque provinces) and the Pamplona basin. As
a result, they came to supply resources, intelligence, and, as shall be seen in chapter 9, a great number of volunteers to the Division. However, they paid a heavy price in the form of French terrorism. In similar fashion, Lorca,
on the royal road between Puente and Estella, saw almost 20 percent of its people sent to prison. 20 In general, these trends reinforce what we know from the Recoletas data and what we have learned about Mina’s choice of battle
sites and about the regions in which the Division sought refuge. Guerrilla country lay in north-central Navarre and it was in this region that civilians suffered most from the actions of the French police.

 Scrutinizing the data in another way reinforces this conclusion. It is notable that in the merindad of Tudela, Fitero was the only city to report the imprisonment or deportation of a significant number of civilians. While this
seems an unlikely circumstance, it is supported by the scarcity of prisoners from Tudela in the Recoletas. 21 Moreover, even Fitero’s losses pale next to that of any number of small villages in Echauri, Olza, or certain other
mountain valleys. Again, of the deaths reported in the merindad of Tudela, most occurred in the city of Tudela as a result of the battles fought there on 8 June and 23 November 1808. They were not actually associated with the
terrorism of the counterinsurgency. 22 Thus we are confirmed in the belief that the resistance, at least judging by the tangible evidence of police repression against it, hardly made itself felt in the Ebro valley.

 In the merindad of Olite, the towns most affected by the police measures of the French were Mendigorria, Olite, Santacara, and Ujüé. The last of these municipalities ought to be grouped from a geographic, social, and economic
point of view with other villages of the Montaňa. The first lies along the northern fringe of the Ribera and, moreover, became a common stopping point for the guerrillas in their journeys from the mountains of Estella to those of
Sangüesa. Only Olite and Santacara appear somewhat surprising. This trend is duplicated in the Recoletas data, where most of the inmates from the merindad of Olite came from the battle zone between Ujüé and Estella.