

 Soon Mina was able to return to the offensive. During a sweep through Upper Aragon, Mina surprised and took the garrison at Exea (his own chronicles say it was the garrison of Ayerbe) and then wiped out a relief column sent out
from Zaragoza. Of 800 men in the column, the guerrillas killed 197 and captured the rest, save for 3 French horsemen who escaped to report the disaster. 57 The prisoners were transferred to the third and fourth battalions who
took them to the Biscay port of Motrico and handed them over to the English, along with fifty-one additional prisoners—the entire Motrico garrison—captured along the way. In exchange, the guerrillas acquired from the English a
valuable cargo of weapons, including their first piece of artillery. 58

 Mina set up his headquarters in Santa Cruz de Campezo in Álava in late October, again moving east to Sangüesa in early November, where he was allowed to exist for almost two months unmolested by Reille’s forces in Pamplona.
During this time, the Division took no action inside Navarre, though it continued to make its presence felt in Upper Aragon, engaging the French twice and causing 270 casualties, while absorbing few losses. 59

 Even more than the previous year, when Reille’s lack of activity during the late fall and winter of 1810-11 had allowed the Division a chance to recover from Belorado, the respite afforded the guerrillas in the late fall and
winter of 1811-12 proved the undoing of the occupation. It was Marshal Suchet’s campaign in the southeast that provided this breathing space for Mina. Suchet had borrowed Reille to command any troops that could be spared from
Aragon and Navarre for the siege of Valencia. As a result, the region was left thinly garrisoned. By December 1811 there were only 6,396 troops to occupy Navarre, over half of them in garrisons and almost 800 in the hospital. 60
Aragon was even more vulnerable: the garrison inside Zaragoza had been reduced to a mere 1,600 men. 61 Once again, the symbiosis between the regular armies and the guerrillas could not be clearer. Mina knew that he would face
token resistance, especially in Upper Aragon, thus his concentration on the region in this period. Suchet eventually forced Valencia to submit and was able to redirect troops to Aragon and Navarre, but by then Mina had become the
master of the region.

 That winter, Mina cut communications between France and Aragon. He even forced Napoleon to mobilize the national guard in order to prevent incursions into France. This was an especially sensitive matter, because some of the
border settlements in France had been discovered aiding Mina, supplying him with food and even guides to help navigate the French side of the Pyrenees. 62 In December General Louis Nicolas Abbé was placed in charge of the reduced
number of French troops inside Navarre. As on previous occasions, the change of command proved an advantage to Mina, because for a time Abbé had to focus on administrative matters rather than on seeking combat. The result of all
this was that the guerrillas experienced their most successful recruiting drive ever in the winter of 1811-12. Thus, despite having lost about 1,000 men during the campaigns of 1811, the Division of Navarre was able in January
1812 to field more men than it had before Lerín. On the other side, the French, though they had maintained the offensive during 1811, had lost well over 2,500 men. 63 Even during the most difficult year of its existence,
therefore, the insurgency had remained effective against the French. And as the year 1812 began, there were fewer occupation troops than there were guerrillas, opening the way for a Navarrese offensive.