

 The French decided after the humiliation in Álava to act in concert once again. General Bessières, who commanded the military district of Biscay, loaned Navarre thousands of troops. In all, as many as 20,000 men, under the
veteran generals Cafarelli, Harispe, Pannetier, Arnaud, Severoli, Abbé, and Bertholet, entered Navarre. 45 On 13 June the first four battalions of the Division were intercepted and surrounded in the plains north of Tafalla by two
columns of a combined strength of 7,000 infantry and 800 cavalry. Mina lost 200 killed and wounded, and his men set out in a dozen directions to return to their homes and fields. 46 Others found refuge where they could. The
second battalion was divided among Roncesvalles, Salazar, Roncal, and Upper Aragon. The fourth battalion remained in the northwest, near Guipúzcoa, where most of its personnel originated. The first and third battalions sent some
elements west to the region of Echauri, some east to Lumbier. The Division was not able to reunite again until the end of July. 47

 Facing no challenge from the guerrillas, the French police were able, in the summer of 1811, to vent their rage over Arlabán. Mendiry sent hordes of civilians to the jails of Pamplona and executed dozens of “spies” and parents
of the guerrillas. Reille described these measures in a letter of 11 July. “Three days ago,” he wrote, “I had 40 of the brigands held in the Ciudadela shot, and I have declared that the 170 still there will be held hostage” in
case further object lessons became necessary. 48 Andrés Martín described with more emotion the atmosphere this terror produced in the city of Pamplona.

 In the streets people hear the heartrending cries of their friends taken to prison and torture. If they flee the city, they see the high gallows on which innocent Spaniards hang. Everywhere, there is nothing but prison, exile,
and death. And in this terrible situation, the expression of grief is forbidden. A simple complaint or glance of compassion is cause enough for imprisonment. People lose their humor. They avoid gatherings, are deprived of
friendship, and give themselves over to silence and pain. 49

 One unintended result of Reille’s focus on the repression of civilians was that it gave Mina another needed respite. And Mina used this time to extend his presence more deeply into Álava and even into Guipúzcoa and Vizcaya.
Since 5 June Mina’s Division had become nominally integrated into the Seventh Army, under General Mendizábal. With the only effective division in the region, Mina was given sway over Álava (which he already partially controlled
through the fifth battalion) and was authorized to support the incipient guerrilla army of Antonio Jau-reguí, “el Pastor,” in Guipúzcoa. He was also directed to coordinate his efforts with those of the Vizcayan guerrilla Longa,
and for all of these reasons he absented himself in Vizcaya from 4 July until 21 or 22 July. 50

 When Mina returned, he called all of his troops together for an attack on a French column moving through Piedramillera, in the foothills west of Estella. On 23 and 24 July Mina’s 4,000 men drove Pannetier’s 2,000 men back into
Estella, after killing 150 and capturing 16. The Spanish had fewer casualties, according to Mina, but many were wounded, including Gregorio Cruchaga, who suffered his third serious injury since the beginning of the war. 51