

 No doubt complete data that included returns from Tafalla, Corella, and some of the other big Ribera towns would show that a larger number of Ribereños suffered the consequences of the French terror. We know from the Recoletas
data that at least forty-six people from Tafalla went to prison in Pamplona who were not reported in the 1817 survey. Yet, the absence of data from cities like Corella and Tafalla, which were not notably involved in the fighting
at any point during the war, is more than made up by the lack of information on places like Baztán, Salazar, and Valcarlos, the last being one of the earliest centers of the resistance. Thus, while complete returns would have
shown a much larger number of civilian casualties and incarcerations in Navarre as a whole, it is unlikely that the proportions would have changed much between the merindades or between the Montaňa and Ribera.

 The effect of Reille’s repression, combined with the absence of the Division as it ran from the remotest regions of Navarre to the mountains of Castile and Aragon, was that the ardor of the civilian population cooled in the fall
of 1810. Reille’s peroration to civilians after Belo-rado to join the French cause produced a number of defections from the patriot side. The chronicler of the third battalion recorded the mood of the time. Along with the
military defeat of the Division, the continuous persecution of civilians had “cowed the spirit” of Navarre. Officials had succumbed to the French by turning in weapons and informing on young men who had taken up arms. Apparently,
many believed that the guerrillas would never return. 23

 Already in mid-October 1810, however, Mina was back in Navarre recovering from the wounds he had received at Tarrazona. He soon discovered that his absence in Castile had caused civilian confidence in the guerrillas to wane.
Mina gave one of his officers, Ramón Ulzurrún, the task of locating and reenlisting demobilized and disheartened troops to let civilians know that the guerrilla movement had not been entirely destroyed in Castile. In late October
Ulzurrún was able to bring Mina a small band of men reconstituted from dispersed volunteers. 24 With these men Mina returned to his original hit-and-run tactics.

 A French detachment penetrated Monreal in late October to arrest demobilized volunteers and their families. Mina received news of this French action in time to warn Monreal, and the result was that the demobilized guerrillas in
the town were forced by the anticipated French crackdown to reenlist in the Division. In this way, Reille’s terrorism backfired and resulted in a fillip of new troops for Mina, which he used to defend Monreal. The French
detachment was easily driven off. Another French force had been given a similar mission in Aibar and had succeeded in making some arrests. Mina attacked this detachment on its return to Pamplona and freed all of the prisoners,
again incorporating them into his Division. These actions rejuvenated the spirits of patriots and caused collaborators to waiver. 25