

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/15_chapter.xhtml =====
The Fatal Knot The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain

 8 The Guerrilla Kingdom

 B Y DECEMBER 1811 Mina had not only succeeded in rebuilding the Division after its discomfiture at Lerín, he had even begun to widen the war into Upper Aragon. Marshal Suchet had just cleared Upper Aragon of its main guerrilla
force with the capture and execution of the partisan Larrodé, known as the Pesoduro. Larrodé’s torture and death demonstrated the pathological treatment meted out by the French, and especially by Suchet, against the guerrillas.
The French cut off Larrodé’s hands while he was still alive and nailed them up for public viewing before dragging him to the scaffold. Then the French botched the hanging, the rope breaking several times before on the fourth try
Larrodé died.’ 1

 Larrodé’s successor, José Tris, nicknamed the Malcarado, had made himself thoroughly detested by December 1811 with his extortions. 2 Also damning were Tris’s connections to the French, which became known only in April 1812,
when he nearly succeeded in delivering Mina into enemy hands. 3 Mina was not yet aware of the extent of Tris’s corruption, however, and when he passed into Aragon with three battalions and the cavalry in late December 1812, he
tried to operate in concert with Tris.

 As he had done the previous fall, Mina went after the garrisons, which had been depleted by Suchet for his campaigns in Valencia and Almeria. The garrison at Zuera fled at the news of Mina’s presence in the region, and on 7
January 1812 after a five-day siege the 200-man garrison at Huesca surrendered, even though the mine placed to blow up the fortress was apparently far from ready. 4 With these successes, the Navarrese spirit of resistance caught
hold in Upper Aragon, and the basis was laid for an Aragonese battalion, the sixth in the Division, to be formed that spring.

 During his absence in Aragon, Mina had left behind only the fourth battalion to secure Sangüesa and his return route to Navarre. General Abbé tried to take advantage of this situation by dispatching a force of some 2,000 men
including a column from Aragon under Cafarelli to surprise the fourth battalion. However, Mina arrived with the first three battalions and the cavalry, some 6,000 men in all, just as Abbé approached. The presence of the united
Division took Abbé by surprise, and he was forced to adopt a defensive position against an army three times the size of his own.

 The battle of Rocaforte on a height just outside of Sangüesa on 11 January proved to be the most important action since the surprise at Arlabán. Not only was it an important guerrilla victory, it was also the first action
witnessed by a senior officer of the Spanish army, for General Gabriel Mendizábal, the commander of the Seventh Army and Mina’s immediate superior, had arrived to meet with Mina just before the battle. Mendizábal had come, in
part, to communicate to Mina his promotion to brigadier general, and he just happened to be on hand to see the Division destroy Abbé’s column.