

 For once the French possessed fewer horse, since Mina was able to use Mendizábal’s cavalry in concert with his own. The guerrillas also enjoyed a decisive edge in experience, since most of the French were recent conscripts.
However, Abbé had occupied a commanding height, and he possessed field pieces that initially caused confusion among the guerrillas. After almost five hours of inconclusive firing, Mina, who still lacked ammunition for a long
battle, ordered a bayonet charge. This tactic, given the strong French position, surprised Mendizábal so much that he thought the Navarrese were deserting to the enemy. However, Mina’s troops soon revealed their experience in
hand-to-hand fighting and overran the French position, capturing the artillery. The guerrillas inflicted 6 00 casualties, while losing half that number. Abbé escaped to Pamplona with the remnant of his army and was unable to
leave the city for several weeks. 5

 The battle of Rocaforte initiated a new phase in the guerrilla war. Operating by themselves, the French forces in Navarre could no longer take the offensive. Indeed, they could barely garrison Pamplona, Tafalla, Tudela, and the
five other places they still held after abandoning the regions of Estella and Sangüesa. After Rocaforte, the French were the quarry rather than the hunters, French guards had to remain constantly alert in their posts even on the
outskirts of Pamplona, and mail couriers had to be sent out with escorts of 600 men. 6

 Mendizábal was witness not just to an important victory but also to the greatest atrocity ever perpetrated against the French by Mina. There were no prisoners at Rocaforte, because Mina had them executed on the spot. The number
killed in this way is not recorded, nor is Mendizábal’s reaction, though judging from his subsequent enthusiasm in Mina’s behalf he could not have been too dismayed. Indeed, as a result of the battle of Rocaforte and Mendizábal’s
lobbying for Mina, the government raised him to the rank of field marshal soon afterward.

 The order to kill captives had been issued by Mina on 14 December 1811. It read, “French officers and soldiers captured with arms or without them in the course of battle or not will be hanged and left along the main roads.” 7
Rocaforte was the first chance to implement this new policy. It had been common practice for the guerrillas to execute captured Spanish traitors, and the French had frequently killed captured insurgents, but the execution of
French captives was not normal for Mina. Previously, captured French were taken to prisons in Valencia. Mina’s new policy of rigor, however, was a response to the escalating ferocity of the French regime as it entered its death
throes.

 After the disaster of Lerín, the French operated with impunity against demobilized partisans and their relatives and sympathizers. On 8 July Reille had forty imprisoned volunteers executed in Pamplona in reprisal for Mina’s
execution of captured “chacones,” as the guerrillas called Spaniards serving under French colors. In August Reille had twenty-two “brigands” and their “ferocious” captain executed in Pamplona. Larrode’s fate in Exea has been
recounted already, but sixty-nine men captured with him were also executed. On 27 October sixteen guerrillas captured in Araquil were shot in the field. We will never know the true number of volunteers shot in this way by the
French. The mass graves depicted in Goya’s etchings suggest that many insurgents must have disappeared without a trace. 8