

 This pattern remained consistent until the end of November. The guerrillas caught Abbé five times trying to exact contributions in the Pamplona basin. On each occasion Abbé was forced back into the city with heavy losses. In
October and November the French lost 887 killed and captured, and hundreds more filled the hospital beds in Pamplona. On the day after a particularly bloody battle on October 11 the hospitals in Pamplona admitted 548 wounded
French soldiers. Yet Abbé had no choice but to continue making these sorties, since the garrison had been reduced to living practically from hand to mouth by the blockade. Since the previous December the guerrilla blockade had
been growing daily more complete, so that peasants no longer dared even consider bringing supplies into the city. Finally, the only way to get food was to send out columns thousands strong, and even then they were not safe. It
was particularly demoralizing, complained Abbé, for these requisition columns to return empty-handed, as they so often did, after battling all day with the guerrillas. 46

 In these months also the sixth battalion increased its hold on Aragon. In a series of ambushes against convoys and columns traveling between the northern garrisons, the Aragonese killed 139 of the enemy and captured 39. At the
same time, the fifth battalion operating now in Guipúzcoa and several observation corps along the French border reported killing another 227 French soldiers and capturing 14.

 In late November Mina passed into Aragon with elements of the first two battalions and part of the cavalry, raising the number of troops there to some 3,500 men. 47 In a month of operations he destroyed a column from Ayerbe,
menaced the garrison in Huesca, and attacked another column outside of Jaca, killing 248 and capturing 72. During the entire year, from the capture of Huesca in January 1812, the guerrillas had killed or captured at least 5,500
French troops, not considering those incapacitated with wounds or illness.

 The year 1813 was one of sieges and of operations conducted in combination with regular units under orders from Wellington or one of the other Allied commanders. As the Allied armies advanced, the French withdrew over a period
of several months through the territory controlled by the Division of Navarre, making the presence of the guerrillas more important than ever, as they disrupted the retreat, pinned down thousands of troops that would otherwise
have entered the fight against Wellington, and mopped up the last pockets of resistance in the Pyrenees. During the last several months of fighting, the altered circumstances forced Mina to abandon the strategies and tactics of
the “heroic” phase of the guerrilla war in order to fulfill, none too brilliantly, the broader objectives of the Allied offensive.

 The last full year of war in Navarre began with Mina’s return from Aragon in January 1813. With five battalions and the cavalry again encamped around Puente la Reina, the insurgents were situated to reimpose a total blockade on
Pamplona. Marshal Bessières from San Sebastian assessed the situation in a letter sent to the French minister of war. Supplies in Pamplona were running out and Abbé would soon have to abandon Navarre if he did not receive a
reinforcement of at least 20,000 men. The army under Mina had become “so numerous and war-hardened that General Abbé is incapable of facing it, in spite of having under his orders a Division of some of the best of the Emperor’s
troops.” (This is an exaggeration, since a good number of Abbé’s men had been conscripted in December 1811.) Abbé’s ability to administer the province was “absolutely nil,” according to Bessières, and the wisest course of action
would be to admit defeat in Navarre and withdraw. 48