

 Mina now placed most of his troops in and around Puente la Reina in order to sever the tie between Pamplona and the Ribera. From Puente they could strike east to the Tafalla road, or west towards Estella, if Abbé attempted to
pass that way toward Castile. During the rest of July Mina, who had reopened his wound in the battle outside Vitoria, did not lead the battalions in any actions. The sixth battalion in Aragon and the fourth stationed around
Roncesvalles remained active, however. In July the Aragonese destroyed a detachment sent to escort a group of patriot sympathizers to prison in Huesca, and attacked another detachment from Huesca and two from Zaragoza, killing
ninety-five of the enemy and capturing sixty, while suffering only twenty-eight casualties. The fourth battalion drove a column trying to requisition sheep in Val-carlos into the city of Roncesvalles, killing fifty-eight and
taking eight prisoners. The fifth battalion was active around Vitoria and fought as far afield as Guipúzcoa. In September a new center of insurrection was born when men in Mina’s customs service began to undertake their own
military operations. In Baztán they killed sixty French and captured eighty-six in two separate ambushes.

 The real focus of the insurgency, however, remained in Mina’s camp in Puente. From August to December 1812 the French could hardly stir from Pamplona without attracting the attention of the guerrillas in Puente. The fighting
drew ever closer to the capital, as the insurgents established control in all of the villages of the Pamplona basin. For the French, even to forage for food and fuel an hour from the city became a perilous undertaking.

 On 10 August the first and third battalions besieged the garrison stationed in the fort known as the “Casa Colorada,” located almost within gunshot of the city walls, killing forty-nine of the men inside. On 13 August in an
action in Astráin Mina recovered seventy sacks of grain, which were redistributed to the populace. Three days later, a French column of 1,400 was forced to return to Pamplona before it could even begin to requisition. And on 19
August occurred what Mina called “Abbé’s day of humiliation,” when the first, second, third, and fifth battalions smashed a column of 3,200 men on the Tafalla road near Tiebas. Abbé had ordered grain from Tudela brought up to
Tafalla so that he could personally escort it into the capital. Not only did he lose this cargo of grain and a shipment of weapons, he abandoned 320 dead on the field of battle. Hundreds more were wounded, including Chacón, the
most famous of the turncoats. Chacón died and was buried in Pamplona soon after the battle. 45

 On 29 August the French attempted to cut wood in the Tajonar, a mountain just south of Pamplona. Abbé emptied the capital of his best troops to accomplish the job, but Mina heard of the project and attacked Abbé with three
battalions and his cavalry. The guerrillas drove the French, minus both their firewood and the carts they had brought along to transport it, back to Pamplona, after inflicting forty-five casualties. To dramatize the changed
balance of power in Navarre, Mina formed his battalions into columns, holding them within sight of the city walls for several hours, to taunt the garrison. In this and the other actions during July, August, and September, the
guerrillas killed 1,144 and captured 213.