

 Mina’s men enforced the blockade with zeal. One of the guerrillas in charge of stopping communications to Pamplona sent a note to Mina that Yangüas saw during his captivity: “My general,” it read, “I have taken a poor lemon
seller and I have hanged him from a tree, for certain reasons.” 33 No further justification was required. Selling lemons to the weakening populace and garrison in Pamplona was punished by death, for it was only by strict
adherence to the blockade that the guerrillas could deny the French any sustenance in Navarre. By April the alcaldes and regidores who had previously bowed to French pressure and carried letters for the enemy began to desert to
Mina. 34 Clearly, it was preferable to risk losing one’s property and family in a just cause than to face certain death or mutilation at the hands of the insurgents.

 The blockade of Pamplona was one of Mina’s most brilliant moves. As the noose tightened around Pamplona, the French had to send out huge forces to forage and to cut firewood. This created opportunities for the Division to
surprise the French while they were exposed in nonmilitary duties. No doubt the population in Pamplona and its environs suffered greatly, especially since the harvest of 1811 had fallen short anyway. But the suffering of the
capital was a sign that the Division had effectively denied the French access to the resources of the countryside.

 In April 1812 Mina performed perhaps his most important coup. The Division was still vastly outnumbered and had not been reunited at full strength since early March. Mina leaked information to the French that the Division was
about to reunite in Aragon, and some 15,000 French troops passed into the neighboring province to prevent it. Meanwhile, Mina concentrated his first, fourth, and fifth battalions at Arlabán, determined to deliver a surprise blow
to the French, just as he had a year before.

 Early on the morning of 9 April the guerrillas stationed themselves in the pass, where they surprised a convoy from Vitoria. As usual, there was a shortage of ammunition. This time, each volunteer had two cartridges, but using
the usual bayonet tactics, only one shot was actually used. In less than an hour of hand-to-hand fighting the convoy was taken. The Division killed or captured 800 French and rescued 405 Spanish prisoners of war, according to
Navarrese sources. French sources said the number of prisoners rescued was 300, but concurred that only 150 men of the regiment escorting the convoy escaped to the fort at Mondragon and another 55 wounded straggled back to
Vitoria. 35

 Later that month, Mina did indeed pass into Aragon. On 22 April in concert with José Tris he captured a convoy containing the payroll for Pamplona valued at 80,000 reales. Soon afterward he discovered the treachery of Tris at
Robres and killed his rival, the whole incident perhaps taking place as a result of fighting over the spoils from the convoy. In any case, with Tris gone, Mina reorganized the Aragonese contingent, or sixth battalion (first of
Aragon). This was the real purpose of all of the trips into Upper Aragon during the past six months: to extend the influence of the Division eastward. Within a year Mina would have two battalions operating in Aragon.