

 Noncombatants also suffered from the terror. In Tafalla eleven “bad subjects” were shot that fall, and in Pamplona fourteen priests, monks, and other “bandits” faced the firing squad on 2 October. In Aibar the priest and five
others were shot, eight died in Sangüesa on a single day in October, and twenty-two were hanged or shot in Estella, atrocities all recorded by Reille.

 Many more were arrested than were executed, of course. As early as August Reille had complained that his jails were too full, that at most he needed to keep 200 prisoners on hand for public executions. But the arrests continued.
From early September to mid-October Reille arrested nearly 600 parents of guerrillas, and planned to “burn their houses” and have “some of the worst shot.” The jails became overcrowded, and Reille had to begin the mass
deportation of prisoners. Over the next few months hundreds were sent to prisons in France. On a single day in October Reille deported 300 civilians, who he suggested should “finish their days in some distant dungeon,” because
they were bandits and would always be enemies of France. 9

 Abbé only increased the terror when he took command in November. On 3 December Abbé announced that twenty “bandits” held in Pamplona, together with all of the imprisoned relatives of the insurgents, would be executed. On 4
December twenty-two people were hanged in Pamplona, and on the following day eleven more were executed in Estella for the crime of being related to volunteers. Four days later Mendiry had seventeen more soldiers and seventeen
relatives of insurgents shot. Their bodies were hung on either side of the Tafalla road at a point a few miles south of Pamplona. 10

 It was in response to all of this that Mina decreed his own brand of terror. Before the killings at Rocaforte, Mina had established a prison for French captives in the valley of Roncal. These men became the scapegoats of the
guerrilla terror. When the French executed a Navarrese official, four French officials died. When they killed an enlisted man, Mina had twenty French soldiers executed. 11 The actual number of French prisoners killed in this way
is unknown, but the atrocities, according to Mina, achieved their purpose: they caught the attention of General Abbé. Inspired no doubt by the knowledge that many more of his men were falling into the hands of the resistance than
the other way around, Abbé finally stopped treating the men of the Division and their relations as if they were criminals. Mina thereafter returned to the system of giving quarter to captured enemy troops, lessening the climate
of barbarity (at least between the combatants) during the last year of the war. 12

 As a result of the battle of Rocaforte, Mendizábal became a believer in Mina and his Division, obtaining for him official recognition of his growing sway over Álava and Upper Aragon. 13 With Abbé confined to Pamplona, Mina could
now station his troops safely in Estella, Lumbier, and Puente la Reina, where they rested for fifteen days and attracted new recruits. Meanwhile, however, events elsewhere threatened to undermine all of these achievements.