

 On 9 January Suchet finally took Valencia. This was potentially a great blow to the guerrillas, for by 1811 they obtained much of their weapons and ammunition from Valencia. In the early days of the movement, in 1809 and 1810,
guns and munitions stolen from the French or smuggled out of Pamplona had been enough. Shops were set up to make repairs to the weapons as needed, and Mina established “factories” in the Pyrenees to produce extra shot and powder,
but the insecurity of these operations prevented them from expanding to cover the needs of the Division as it grew in late 1810 and 1811. The Spanish forces in Valencia, however, had managed to supply Mina’s thirst for weapons.
Indeed, Mina’s contacts with Valencia were for months at a time his only connection to the wider war. Now that Valencia was in enemy hands, the supply line of both weapons and information was severed. 14

 Fortunately for Mina, he found a new source of munitions almost immediately. As early as 1810 the British Royal Navy had turned the Bay of Biscay into an English preserve, making coastal traffic almost impossible for the French.
15 The English were able to make occasional drops to the guerrillas in Asturias, Santander, and Vizcaya in exchange for prisoners. Mina had already tested this source of supplies once in 1811, and now he established regular
contacts along the Biscay coast. 16 Through the small ports at Motrico and Zumaya the Division began to acquire the weapons and ammunition it needed to nearly double in size after 1812. As for clothing, the Division supplied its
own picturesque uniforms throughout most of the war. The guerrillas wore brown pants and jackets and high top hats. Then in March 1813 the English also began to supply uniforms. 17

 Mina could not always exchange prisoners for supplies but had also to make cash payments to the English. The money was plentiful, though, since by 1812 Mina had nearly absolute control over the Navarrese border crossings and
customhouses, except Irün, which was heavily guarded by the French. Mina estimated that he had 200 men working for him in these border posts. 18 Their initial task, under Félix Sarasa, the well-connected farmer from Artica, was
to eliminate smuggling and banditry. 19 Smuggling was easily ended, because some of the guerrillas had themselves been smugglers and knew how and where to interdict illegal trade. Banditry was eliminated after Mina defeated the
Men of the Idea in the spring of 1810. Indeed, it appears that Mina succeeded in controlling the borders and highways of Navarre to a degree only dreamed of by Spanish governments both before and after the war. By 1811 commerce
within Navarre had become safer than anywhere in the peninsula, provided one paid Mina’s tolls. The Division earned about 3 million reales a year from its tolls, enough to pay for its uniforms and ammunition as well as to pay the
troops’ salaries. 20

 The fall of Valencia freed up Suchet, and this was potentially a much greater threat than the loss of supplies from the city. Immediately, Suchet dispatched a column of 1,800 infantry and 50 cavalry under General Soulier, who
swept into Sangüesa in early February. Soulier’s column, known as the “Infernals” to denote their effectiveness in counterinsurgency, had already fought a successful campaign against the Empecinado. Soulier expected to cut down
the insurgents in Navarre as he had in Castile and southern Aragon. Mina, however, could reckon almost 7,000 men by February. Even discounting those operating in Álava and Aragon, he was still able to bring 4,000 troops against
Soulier. On February 5 the Division attacked the Infernals in Sangüesa, forcing them to form square and retreat to Sos, the fortified birthplace of Ferdinand the Catholic just across the border in Aragon. The French suffered 600
casualties before finding refuge inside the fortress. 21 An intercepted letter from Soulier to Suchet described the state of the Infernals after the battle, as well as the quality of the Navarrese troops. Soulier reported that
his column had “lost over 600 men and is no longer able to do battle with the insurgents of Navarre. I confess to your excellency in all honesty that the brigands of this kingdom merit the name of veteran soldiers. They can
compete with the best of our armies, for the continuous battles and victories have made them lose their fear of us.” 22