

 Although priests and monks played less of a military role in Navarre than in other provinces and religious ideals did not figure as highly in the Navarrese resistance as they perhaps did for the national politicians or followers
of the Crusade, this does not mean that religious motives were absent in Navarre nor that priests and monks did not play a part in the resistance. We know from specific examples that they did. What it means, rather, is that
French outrages to religion were not sufficient by themselves to account for the guerrilla movement. Other factors must have been involved. Taking up the leads left to us by Mina and the military chronicles, we must consider the
other ways in which the French turned civilians into enemies.

 Defense of the Nation and Fueros

 Historians traditionally consider nationalism and loyalty to the person of Ferdinand VII, even more than religious sentiment, to be the main inspirations behind the Spanish resistance. The ease with which Napoleon turned
Württembergers against Swabians and Bolognese against Romans within the German and Italian “nations,” highlighted for contemporaries the degree of national unity with which Spain responded to the French invasion. It became
commonplace, especially inside Spain, to point to this contrast as the basis for the Spanish success against Napoleon.

 This patriotic view was expressed in the ultraliberal newspaper, the Semanario Patriotico, in October 1808. “If the nations France has assaulted in its delirium had truly been nations,” wrote the poet and editor Quintana, “they
would have easily contained France: the French installed a depraved and corrupt government in Spain, and we devoured it.” Napoleon’s international crusade could have no appeal, the argument ran, inside a country like Spain with a
highly developed sense of national identity. 32

 Certainly, the circumstances of Ferdinand’s deposition and the treachery of the occupation were enough to injure the pride and focus the national awareness of Spaniards. That pride and identity had been developed over many
centuries. Spain’s history of expansion and self- definition against the Moors and the people of America, followed by the traumatic experience of decline and defeat at the hands of the northern powers, make it possible to speak
of a well-developed sense of nationalism in Spain even before the Napoleonic invasion. Of course, competing regional loyalties remained as strong as ever, but the national separatism of the Basques and Catalonians and the
federalist movement in other regions attained full force only toward the end of the nineteenth century. Thus, even in collaborationist Barcelona, the French experienced nothing like the enthusiastic reception they had in, for
example, Milan.

 Nevertheless, if a sense of national outrage is to be entertained as an explanation for the resistance, it remains to answer why the Navarrese were more nationalistic than the people of Barcelona, Granada, and other locations
where the resistance was weak. The Navarrese themselves claimed that they were by nature the greatest patriots in Spain, but for historians such a position cannot be accepted at face value. It is possible, however, to maintain
that special circumstances in Navarre or peculiar actions taken by the French in Navarre generated unusually intense feelings of loyalty to Spain, to the Bourbon monarchy, and, above all, to Navarre itself.