

 The most courageous action in March involved none of the battalions but rather a small observation team of fifteen men stationed in Vera de Bidasoa. The commander of this unit, Fermín de Leguía, decided he could storm the
important coastal fortress of Fuenterrabía, located only a few miles from the French border, with his small following. On 11 March, using a grappling hook improvised from ropes and nails, Leguía and a companion scaled the walls
of the fortress, captured the lone sentinel, and let the rest of their party in the front gate. Together they disarmed the remaining troops (most of the garrison slept in houses in town) and began to destroy the castle. The
Navarrese spiked three large cannon, tossed 4,100 balls into the sea, and removed what they could of the smaller firearms for their own use before setting fire to the interior of the castle. By the time the flames and explosions
woke up the French in the town of Fuenterrabía, it was too late either to catch Leguía or to stop the fire. The destruction of the fortress in Fuenterrabía by fifteen men was one of the most heroic events of the war. Even as Mina
was learning to use regular battlefield tactics and to besiege forts with artillery, it remained characteristic of the guerrilla struggle that spontaneous, isolated acts were sometimes the most dramatic. During the first three
months of 1813, the guerrillas had killed or captured 2,777 French troops.

 Good news reached Spain in January 1813. Napoleon had met disaster in Russia. On 17 March 1813 Joseph abandoned Madrid for the last time. There ensued a long march of enormous and well-defended columns laden with the spoils of
war and trailing a mob of afrancesados, the talented human booty whose loss was one of the most enduring wounds inflicted by France on Spain. The columns passed through Burgos and on to Vitoria, where Joseph planned his last
stand against the Allies. The guerrilla strongholds in Aragon, Navarre, and the Basque country soon became overrun by thousands of French troops in retreat. General Clausel brought 13,000 infantry and 1,200 cavalry into Navarre,
where they joined Abbé’s 5,000 troops in pursuit of Mina. The size of these forces would seem to have fulfilled Bessières’s requirements for the occupation of Navarre. Yet, even with over 19,000 troops, the French could not
occupy the province.

 In contrast to the situation after Bailén, when the province had also been inundated with retreating troops, there was no collapse of the resistance in April 1813. In fact, the first action by Clausel’s men was an utter
disaster. Clausel placed 5,000 soldiers in Lodosa, a large town on the Ebro River. Of these, 1,100 under Colonel Gaudin were dispatched a short distance north to Lerín (the site of the guerrillas’ greatest defeat) in order to
collect contributions. Mina, who had independently ordered a reunion in Lerín for the same day, found himself perfectly placed to surprise the French detachment.

 Mina attacked Gaudin with the second battalion, elements of the sixth, and the cavalry. The troops remaining in Lodosa were neutralized by a cordon established to prevent anyone escaping Lerín to seek assistance. As a result,
Mina annihilated Gaudin’s column, killing 462 and capturing 635. Only three men, including Gaudin himself, succeeded in escaping on horseback. Even after they reached Lodosa, however, there was no attempt to pursue the Division
and rescue the captives. The cowardice of the commanding officer in this engagement, the inability of the rest of Clausel’s forces in Lodosa to join the fray, and the fact that 60 percent of a large column was forced to surrender
to the guerrillas were signs of the waning military capacity of the French.