

 In the first place, Navarre’s position on the frontier with France may indeed have lent a particular edge to national sentiments in the province. Peter Sahlins has argued, from his study of Cerdañá, that nationalism is sometimes
invented in border regions before it is established in the metropolis. 33 In Navarre, even more than in the Catalonian borderlands, people developed a strong and precocious national identity, both as Navarrese and as Spaniards.
Navarre maintained commercial, cultural, and linguistic ties with the French Basque provinces, but there was never any question that the people of Navarre were oriented toward Spain. Thus, in times of national disintegration,
Navarre never experienced anything like the popular, separatist revolts in Catalonia in 1640, in Granada in 1648, and throughout Andalusia in 1651. Nor had there been plots like those hatched by the Duke of Medina Sidonia to
create a separate kingdom in Andalusia in 1641, or by the Duke of Hijar to take Aragon out of the Spanish union in 1648. In the eighteenth century the separatist movement that found support in the Basque provinces made little
headway in Navarre, as indeed Basque separatism in the twentieth century has found little resonance among the Navarrese. Similarly, the federalism of the nineteenth century that as early as 1809 had caused a governmental
breakdown in Andalusia passed over Navarre. Even the “rebellion” of the Navarrese in the First Carlist War, far from constituting a threat to the territorial integrity of Spain, had as its expressed purpose the reconquest of
Castile for the “legitimate” Spanish monarch and the “true religion.” Thus, within the Spanish nation, it is indeed possible to identify Navarre as one of the most fervently loyal provinces. 34

 Navarre remained loyal to Spain partly because Madrid was pledged to uphold Navarre’s fueros. The importance of these local privileges in the economic and political life of the province has already been discussed in a previous
chapter. Navarre had much to be pleased with in its position inside the Spanish state, so that the defense of that state also implied the defense of the Kingdom of Navarre and of the merindad, valley, and village. Setting out
from this point of view, an even stronger argument can be made for the importance of nationalism, broadly understood, as a principal motivating force in the insurgency.

 The French armies that occupied northern Navarre in 1794, found, it is true, enthusiastic support among certain sectors of the community in Pamplona. But then the regime of Charles IV and Godoy had proved hostile to Navarrese
interests. To deal with mounting deficits in the 1790s the Spanish government had tried to circumvent Navarre’s exemptions from taxes and customs duties. It is understandable, therefore, that some people in the city of Pamplona
might have perceived little to choose between Revolutionary Paris and autocratic Madrid.

 By contrast, after March 1808 most Navarrese viewed Napoleon with suspicion and attached all of their hopes to Ferdinand, a perceived supporter of regional privileges. Where the French had found some collaborators in the 1790s,
they found enemies in 1808. Even in Pamplona, Mina could count on more fifth columnists inside the city than the French could count adherents. 35 The untried Ferdinand was deposed so quickly that he had no opportunity to alienate
public opinion and disappoint the millenarian expectations attached to his name. There was no question that people preferred the unknown quantity of Ferdinand to the certainty of imperial violence at the hands of the Bonapartes.