

 Politicians in the Central Junta were happy to accept any assistance the church could provide, but at first they were unwilling to see the clergy armed. Indeed, the government circulated instructions insisting that clerics might
resist so long as they stopped “short of spilling blood.” The bishops forbade members of the clergy to use weapons or to take lives. 10 Despite such discouragement, however, some priests and monks joined guerrilla bands in 1809.
Finally, in December 1809, the Spanish government decided to recognize this fait accompli and set about regulating the clerical guerrilla movement, or Crusade. It was a sign of how desperate the government was at the end of 1809
that it directed “all ecclesiastics, even parish priests, to consider taking up arms.” 11

 Ironically, just as the government accepted the arming of the clergy, the Crusade began to wane in importance. During 1810 the government continued to receive reports from priests and monks in small formations like the
“Exterminating Legion” in Aragon and the “Volunteer Defenders of the Faith and Nation” in Asturias. By the end of the year, however, most of these groups had been destroyed by the French, demobilized, or absorbed by more
successful, secular guerrilla parties. 12

 What explains the resistance of some clerics and not others? In Galicia the clergy in the cities collaborated with the French, whereas the rural clergy favored the resistance. 13 This suggests that the fact of belonging to the
clergy was not in itself what determined the likelihood of a cleric’s resistance. Rather, it was the overall environment within which a particular cleric operated.

 In most urban environments, for example, Madrid, Granada, and Málaga, most ecclesiastics actively supported the French regime. In the larger cities, especially in the South, the church had long since attached itself to the
interests of the rich and had surrendered popular leadership, such as it was, to other urban elites. Indeed, the clergy in much of Andalusia had already lost its grip over the popular classes, and within a few generations its
members were supplanted by the priests of anarchism. 14 The primary relationship of the church hierarchs to the people was often exploitative, since they were themselves members of the landed elite. It is understandable,
therefore, that the clergy in such areas feared the French less than they feared the Spanish population. It is notable that the popular fury of crowds in the urban revolutions of 1808-9 vented itself indiscriminately against
clerics, all of whom were perceived as part of the same oppressor class with nobles and French sympathizers. In general, therefore, clergy in urban areas, and in southern Spain generally, collaborated with the French more than
clergy in rural areas and in the North; and this collaboration had nothing to do with the status of the clergy as such but with the environment in which they operated.

 In Navarre, as in the rest of Spain, French troops behaved as if they were charged with the de-Christianization of the province. French soldiers lodged inside convents found they could express their hatred of the church and
collect valuable booty at the same time without any fear of reprisal from their superiors. In July 1808, 150 French troops were housed and fed in the Convent of San Francisco in Tafalla, and when they left, all of the sacred
images were smashed up, and the valuable silver objects used in the mass were missing. 15 This kind of episode was liable to occur wherever French troops passed in Navarre, since they routinely treated the buildings of the
religious orders even before expropriation as if they already belonged to the state for use as barracks. For example, the Carmelite Convent in Sangüesa, used as a hospital and barracks, was destroyed during the war by French
troops lodged there. 16