

 Some areas contributed heavily to both sides. The valley of Echauri, for much of the war the home base of the fourth battalion and a favorite refuge for the insurgents, held receipts for nearly 836,000 reales contributed to the
French. 53 Yet, during 1810 and from late 1811 on, the guerrillas succeeded in isolating Echauri from Pamplona, and Mina received 587,000 reales in rations from Echauri. Over the course of the war Echauri gave the French 466
reales per capita and the guerrillas 327 reales. Considering the region’s proximity to Pamplona, this is a small disparity, indicating the success of the insurgency in the area. 54

 Finally, there was no simple equation between the level of misery created by French exactions and the enthusiasm of the population for the insurgency. For example, no one from hard-hit Iriberri volunteered to serve with the
Division, and heavy requisitions in Corella and Tudela did not lead to any special resistance there. 55 On the contrary, the constant French presence in such places made it difficult for young men to join the insurgency. In
contrast, the communities that contributed most men to the guerrilla war—like Echauri, Lumbier, Roncal, and Ujüé—-escaped the inroads of French requisition parties at least part of the time and certainly after late 1811, by which
time Mina had acquired the strength to protect what was his.

 The answer to any particular area’s enthusiasm is clearly a product of a more complex set of factors, of which the economic impact of the French occupation was just one. French pressure and violence elicited different
responses—including enrollment in the guerrilla army—depending on the internal structure of the community affected. The next section of this chapter analyzes the way two communities, the village of Echauri in the Montaňa and the
city of Corella in the Ribera, reacted to the fiscal demands of the French government.

 The Differential Response of Echauri and Corella

 Under the Bourbons the Diputación had been empowered to raise money. The actual job of assessing and collecting taxes, though, was decentralized. The Treasury in Pamplona assigned an amount owed by each merindad, then the
merindades determined the contribution owed by each municipality, but it was up to the communities to draw money from a combination of municipal assets and taxes. These arrangements left the real power of taxing in the hands of
ancient corporate structures: the merindad and commune. The French regime did not have the time or the power to alter this system completely. It sought to fill municipal offices with its own creatures, but the threat of guerrilla
reprisals made this difficult. Except in the larger cities, therefore, the old community councils still had the task of dividing the tax burden among the people as they saw fit.

 Money could be raised through proportional taxes, head taxes, taxes on consumption, loans from individuals or the parish, or the alienation of community assets. It all depended on what interests were represented in the community
council. As described in chapter 2, the structure of these councils differed widely between the Montaňa and the Ribera. It is now time to see how these councils raised taxes in actual practice.