

 In the Ribera people had always been more ambivalent about the value of the fueros. It had long been argued that the Ribera stood to profit more from access to the Castilian market than from autonomy. Even Ribereños, however,
must have reacted with horror at the prospect of becoming, in an age of costly transportation, a southern appendage of highly developed France. It did not help the Ribera to have the fueros abolished if it remained cut off from
nearby Castilian markets.

 Everyone could agree also on the advantages of Navarre’s limited military obligations toward Madrid. While in theory, Navarre under French rule was subject to conscription equally with other military districts, the French
recruited very few soldiers in Navarre and never took the step of impressing men who might have been guerrilla or rebel sympathizers. The repeated rumors of French conscription, however, demonstrated the sensitivity of the
Navarrese on this subject.

 Every French effort to reform society in Navarre created more enemies than friends. The seizure of church land, for example, brought no advantages in a province where members of the clergy, far from monopolizing land and wealth,
were perceived as good neighbors. Similarly, the abolition of señoríos created no groundswell of support for the French. Above all, the abolition of “feudalism,” which included Navarre’s foral rights and privileges, caused
chagrin in a people who had thrived for centuries in the interstice left by the weak absolutism emanating from Madrid. Perhaps more than all of these factors, however, it was France’s naked exploitation of Navarre to feed the
occupation that created a climate favorable for guerrilla warfare.

 The Plunder of Navarre

 Tax exemptions were probably Navarre’s most valuable foral privilege, but of course such exemptions ended as soon as French troops occupied the province. The French requisitions of food, labor, animals, and transport that began
in the spring of 1808 generated immediate unrest. In the years that followed, requisitions and taxes grew and threatened to ruin the economy. Sometimes the connection between French fiscal pressure and resistance was obvious. The
revolt of Roncal was triggered by an attempt to requisition sheep, and in towns like Ujüé the French had to abandon attempts even to register the granaries, much less collect grain, due to the opposition encountered. Indeed, it
is possible—leaving aside any considerations of offended religious, nationalist, or provincial feeling—to explain the fervor of the resistance in Navarre as a response, at least in part, to unsupportable French exactions. So to
complete the picture of French political failure in Navarre, it is necessary to look more closely at the effect of taxes and requisitions.

 Thanks to the excellent work by Joseba de la Torre, we know that the French regime collected over 152 million reales in taxes and requisitions during the period 1808 to 1814. 45 This figure represented over 40 percent of
Navarre’s normal five-year agricultural and industrial output. 46 And times were not normal. The effects on productivity of five years of executions, sackings, burnings, losses of livestock, and other depredations, though
impossible to measure, must have been great. In a province accustomed to receiving more inputs from Madrid than it sent out, such a burden, impossible to maintain over the long haul in any case, appeared criminal.