

 The information available on the number of civilians killed and imprisoned adds to the picture of massive involvement in the Montaňa. The areas of greatest police repression corresponded almost exactly with the areas that
contributed the largest numbers of volunteers. Over 50 percent of those killed or imprisoned by the French police in Navarre were from the merindad of Pamplona, and the western half of the Pamplona basin contributed the bulk of
these victims. Sangüesa supplied 7 percent and Estella 21 percent of the civilians killed and arrested by the French. Only 9 percent of the victims of the French police came from the merindad of Olite, and only 3.5 percent were
from Tudela.

 Thus, the vast majority of the victims of the French police, as well as the volunteers identified in the survey of 1817, came from the land of the caserío and village in north-central Navarre. By itself, this suggests that it
was the independent labrador of the Montaňa who formed the basis of the resistance. Separate data taken by the French in 1812 reinforce this impression. Mendiry gathered information for four villages in the valley of Echauri.
These included Arraiza, Echarri, Echauri, and Ubani. All four reported only fifteen volunteers with the Division of Navarre, an obvious underestimate. 72 Of these, twelve had been born within the villages reporting and the other
three were all born within the valley. These were not outsiders or people on the margins of society. Their average age was twenty-nine, so that we can assume they were not hot-headed youths working as hired hands while waiting
for their inheritance. More decisively, fourteen were listed as independent landowners and one was named a hacendado (big landowner). This excludes the possibility, in Echauri at least, that the guerrillas were landless peasants.
Unfortunately, these statistics exist only for a few locations and are not collected together within the archives. To assemble information for a number of different areas would be useful, but the data that could be obtained would
still be partial, since villages and towns clearly reported only a few of those who had joined the insurgents. Nevertheless, these bits of information are one more clue as to the identity of the insurgents. Most came from the
Montaňa. Most were probably small landowners, young but not necessarily dependent, and not newcomers or outsiders.

 Hints left by contemporaries offer one final source for analyzing the background of the Navarrese volunteers. Mina identified his followers as “respectable” farmers, and he contrasted his men with the “undisciplined” men from
the Ribera and from outside Navarre who fought with the likes of Echeverría and Tris. 73 On the other end of the spectrum, Mina noted the complete absence of titled or wealthy men among his followers. 74 His closest collaborators
were the owners of small farms, who were neither poor nor rich. Félix Sarasa, the “closed minded” and illiterate Basque farmer/merchant from Artica ran the customs. The Cruchagas were a family of hidalgos from Roncal who brought
the men of that valley into the resistance. Mina himself was from a family of well- to-do farmers. His brother was vicar in the hospital in Pamplona (until his death in Portugal on a mission for the Division), and his youngest
sister was married to the administrator of the house of charity in the city. Javier’s family had possessed the wherewithal to send their son to a seminary.