

 Corella’s plan was more fully realized in other cities. Wherever the communal and municipal lands were alienated, the result was poverty, depopulation, and social violence, as exemplified in the case of Olite. Beginning in the
War of Independence, Olite’s town fathers sold off practically all of the city’s lands to pay off war debts. A few big landowners, who promptly removed themselves from the city and became absentee lords, came to control the local
economy, and as a result, Olite lost population during the nineteenth century. It was only after a long and bitter struggle that the community recovered some of its assets. 69

 Communities like Echauri possessed both the means to resist the French and a social configuration conducive to solidarity against the enemy. Municipal councils that governed communities in the Montaňa represented their
populations. There was little scope for popular displeasure with a local government in which all heads of households had a role. Indeed, one of the regidores of Echauri worked for Mina and was ultimately executed for it by the
French. Communities like that in the valley of Echauri produced the largest number of guerrillas, as will be shown, supplied the food, clothes, and other requirements of the Division, and became the home bases for Mina’s
regiments. They were able to do so because solid community institutions acted systematically to shelter individuals from the French regime.

 In contrast, the city of Corella, with its closed municipal government, collaborated openly with the French. The notables of Corella eagerly participated in the plunder of the nationalized church and municipal lands, and they
hoped for nothing so much as the survival of a regime favorable to their material interests. 70 The enormous fiscal demands of the government in Pamplona served to divide rather than unite Corella, as the city corporation passed
the cost of the occupation on to laboring folk through taxes on food and basic necessities. The result was that the people were crushed under the combined weight of the occupation and the collaboration of local elites. Resistance
in such circumstances, always difficult anyway in an urban setting, became nearly impossible. Taking up arms in Corella had to be, in effect, a personal choice, bordering on social banditry, rather than a community affair,
underwritten by municipal authorities and local elites.

 Who Were the Guerrillas?

 There is a great deal of evidence to suggest that the guerrillas were men from the Montaňa. Most of the battles were fought in the Montaňa. In times of trouble, the guerrillas sought safety in the Pyrenees or in the mountains of
Sangüesa and Estella. And the data on requisitions and taxes indicates that the French controlled the cities of the Ribera and the communities lying on major arteries, while the guerrillas controlled the rural spaces of the
Montaňa, where the French could penetrate only for brief, punitive raids, without ever establishing credible government.