

 There can be no doubt that people in Navarre perceived separation from Spain as ruinous. Navarrese officials, by and large, resisted efforts to break with Madrid and many were dismissed or transferred to other posts as a result.
Officials in Pamplona pleaded with Joseph not to abandon Navarre. The Navarrese, they said, wished to remain within the Spanish monarchy and could be “of the greatest use” to Madrid. The people had on the whole shown “submission,
love, and loyalty” to Joseph and should not be punished for the crimes of a few “small armed bands.” 40 It was this “unequivocally pro-Spanish attitude of the foral corporations of Navarre” that distinguished them from officials
in, for example, Catalonia. 41 That Navarrese chose to sacrifice their careers in order to preserve Navarre’s independence was ominous for the French occupation.

 Afrancesados in Navarre understood how unpopular they would be if Navarre was annexed to France. They were placed in an awkward position by the February 1810 decrees and by the subsequent annexation scare. 42 Joseph sent Miguel
Azanza to Paris for the emperor’s wedding, but his presence was also designed to give him, in Joseph’s name, a last chance to convince Napoleon that carving Spain up would cause his supporters to jump ship. 43 Both Joseph and
Azanza understood that autonomist feelings in Navarre were too strong to be decreed out of existence and that concessions to national pride would have to be made if there was to be any hope of pacification. By contrast, in
Catalonia the decrees of February met little armed opposition, and it was for this reason that Napoleon felt safe enough to go ahead with annexation of that province in 1812.

 The Navarrese were devoted to their autonomy within the Spanish monarchy out of immediate self-interest as well as out of patriotic sentiment. The economic interests of the Navarrese, particularly of the Montaňa, tied them to
the preservation of the decentralized Bourbon monarchy. The enormous value to Navarre of a separate customs border, control of taxation, and exemption from various services and contributions has already been discussed. The
French, of course, sought to curtail these very privileges. They had the same fiscal reasons for doing so as Godoy, and they achieved similarly poor results.

 In October 1809 Joseph abolished the thirty-three internal customs barriers along the borders of Navarre, at the same time promising to enforce penalties against running contraband. 44 This measure promised to undermine an
important sector of the economy. It spelled the loss of enormous revenues from customs. In addition, Pamplona’s fair in July as well as its weekly market were based in large part on the resale of French merchandise. The economies
of Roncal, Salazar, and the other Pyrenean valleys were locked into the export of raw wool to France and the importation and trade in cheap French textiles and other manufactures. Finally, the enormous contraband industry in
Navarre was threatened with destruction by the new laws. These factors no doubt lent an edge to the foralism and patriotism of the Navarrese in these zones.