

 The use of terror against the enemy is normally considered an integral part of guerrilla tactics. In fact, however, it belonged as much to the tactical repertoire of the counterinsurgency forces as it did to the guerrillas. The
insurgents were always anxious to obtain the enemy’s recognition as legitimate military personnel in order to secure the right of quarter. Thus, for example, they were always more likely than the French to provide medical
treatment for enemy wounded and take prisoners for later exchange. Only for a few months after December 1811 did Mina systematically execute captured combatants, until he had convinced Abbé to grant consideration to captured
guerrillas. The guerrillas did, however, use terror against collaborators. The “chacones” who fought for the French were summarily executed, and even civilians forced to supply services or information to the French faced
draconian justice. From this point of view, the guerrilla war was really a civil war fought within the War of Independence.

 Among the innovations introduced into the French army under Napoleon was his elevation of the notion that “war must feed war” to the dignity of a sacred maxim. The principle that an army must live off the territory through which
it passed meshed perfectly with another of Napoleon’s military innovations: the mobile corps, each a complete fighting force with infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which were supposed to move independently of a commissariat and
spearhead Napoleon’s offensives. Reinforcing this system, Napoleon had directed that imperial troops be trained to march at a pace never approached by any of his enemies—until the guerrillas of Navarre taught his infantry the
true meaning of a forced march. These rather simple organizational changes had underpinned many of Napoleon’s most brilliant victories in Europe. In Navarre, however, they proved inappropriate. It was not the case in Navarre, as
it was in some Spanish provinces, that French armies had difficulty raising supplies because the local economy was too poor. On the contrary, Navarre produced huge yearly surpluses of grain and other agricultural products,
enough, in fact, to supply thousands of insurgents for five years. Thus, the sense of Colbert’s adage that large armies starve in Spain and small armies are swallowed up must be modified to describe the French predicament in
Navarre. There was no shortage of food and other supplies, but the guerrillas prevented the French from obtaining them. The Division of Navarre won the battle over the harvests, the most characteristic aspect of guerrilla warfare
and the greatest blow to the French regime.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/18_endnotes.xhtml =====
The Fatal Knot The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain

 Notes

 Abbreviations

 AAT
 Archives de l’Armée de Terre, Paris

 AGN
 Archivo General de Navarra, Pamplona, Navarre

 AHN
 Archivo Historico Nacional, Madrid

 AMA
 Archivo Municipal de Corella, Navarre

 APE
 Archivo Parroquial de Echauri, Navarre