

 As the guerrillas had extended their influence in 1812, the French courts had ceased to function in most of Navarre. Mina had therefore created a special Tribunal to take over judicial responsibilities. The primary task of the
Tribunal had been to enforce the blockade of Pamplona, but it had also taken over all of the other duties normally carried out by the royal courts in peacetime. In July 1814, despite the royal order of 25 June and the complaints
of the Diputación, the Tribunal continued to operate. This particularly dismayed the towns formerly dominated by the French, where the justice administered by the Division tended to be both cruel and swift. The Diputación began
to receive complaints against the Tribunal and decided to order Mina to dismantle it. In justification of its continued activity, the Tribunal sent a long letter to the Diputación and Rosello on 28 July. All the towns and
villages “including the city of Tudela,” added the author of the letter, “have recognized this Tribunal as supreme and legitimate.” Almost everyone with a seat in the Cortes, as well as most alcaldes had come to the Tribunal to
settle disputes since 1812. Surely, thought the judges, these facts justified the court’s continued existence. 4

 As the Diputación was quick to point out, however, these circumstances justified nothing. Only the king in Cortes could legitimately establish a new judicial body. And on 2 August 1814, Ferdinand had issued a direct order
disbanding the Tribunal. Thus, the Diputación felt justified in rejecting the “long-winded” and “weak” excuses of the Tribunal, and it once again ordered its dissolution. The correspondence makes clear that both the deputies and
the men appointed by Mina knew quite well that at stake was the question of who or which bodies could claim sovereignty in Navarre.

 Despite the hostility of both the king and the provincial authorities, the Tribunal continued to operate in August on direct orders from Mina. Among its other “crimes,” the Tribunal sought to punish municipal officials who
neglected to deliver requisitions to the Division and to collect debts left over from the war. 5 These activities resulted in a flood of letters demanding that the Tribunal be outlawed. On 18 August the Diputación wrote a furious
letter to Mina. “With what right” did his court function? asked the deputies. “Under the rights granted by yourself. And how and from whom did you obtain this attribute of sovereignty?” 6 The issue had been placed squarely in
front of Mina, and he found himself unable to answer the Diputación. In the face of opposition from Madrid, Pamplona, and dozens of municipalities, Mina finally ordered the dissolution of the Tribunal on 22 August.

 The next dispute involved the right of the Division to collect contributions in Navarre and ultimately to remain in existence. The government in Pamplona had already denied its responsibility to help the guerrillas obtain
supplies. Now, on orders from Madrid, it required that the civilians mobilized in irregular formations during the war be dispatched to their homes. 7 Mina chose to interpret this order as not applying to himself and his men,
since the wartime government had recognized the Division of Navarre as a regular formation. This was open defiance of the government, which specifically denied the Division regular status. Mina dispatched officials to reenlist
his dispersed troops, not only in Navarre but in Álava, Guipúzcoa, and Aragon. Officials there suddenly found their territories “invaded” by a force from Navarre, which began forcibly to impress young men. The foral government of
Álava wrote to the Navarrese Diputación complaining that “Marshal Mina, who must be aware of these sovereign decisions [the king’s order demobilizing guerrillas], is bent on evading them and breaking them through armed force.” He
was insisting that the men of his Division “were not included under the rubric of partisans or guerrillas but were reputed to be regiments of the line and light infantry.” This showed that “Marshal Mina still maintains his spirit
of domination from the war.” 8