

 The people of Navarre had ample reason for hating the French government. The French taxed and requisitioned in a way that ensured popular hostility. In addition, France threatened to destroy the church and the foral government,
institutions that were both generally popular and, in the latter case, of economic benefit to the majority of the population. Guarding villages from French columns sent to gather supplies was an important part of the guerrillas’
strategy. As part of this strategy, the insurgents had to discipline individuals and towns that were discovered collaborating, thereby ensuring the belligerency of most of the population. In performing this task, the guerrillas
functioned as much like a police force and a judiciary as an army.

 The success of the guerrillas in Navarre was not the result of a unanimous patriotic or religious impulse. During the first year of the war, Navarre was one of the quietest provinces in Spain as most provincial and municipal
officials chose to collaborate with the French. It was only during the summer of 1809, after the old elites had been eliminated from the scene and the predatory nature of the French government had become evident, that the
insurgency became really widespread in Navarre.

 There was nothing inevitable, however, about the outcome of the struggle. Under the corso and the Division of Navarre, the guerrilla movement passed through several cycles of dissolution and reconstruction. During the first
phase of Mina’s campaign, lasting almost two years from his rise to power in the spring of 1810 to December 1811, the guerrillas suffered two crushing defeats at Belorado and at Lerín and were frequently on the defensive, chased
at intervals by 10,000 to 20,000 enemy troops. At the worst times, the guerrillas hid in the mountains north and east of Pamplona or in the high plateaus west of Estella. As French armies approached to encircle the guerrilla
positions, Mina’s men broke out by secret paths, crossed the plains of central Navarre in forced marches, and hid again in the mountains on the other side of the province.

 This pattern repeated itself throughout this supremely difficult period. The most dangerous moments, from the middle of August to early December 1810 and the months of February to late March and June to October 1811 were spent
in flight and hiding. This phase was punctuated by brief and limited offensive operations, when the guerrillas united to hit specific targets, as with the first ambush at Arlabán. Most of the time, however, they remained
dispersed in order to give the French as many elusive targets as possible.

 Broken into companies, the guerrillas melted easily into the surrounding population. This allowed them to requisition without overburdening the people in any one area. As a last resort, even the companies were dissolved, each
individual returning to his village to await more favorable times. Most of the guerrilla bands in Spain that had made the transition to disciplined armies lost the ability to disappear among the civilian population. They
gradually became dependent upon support from the government, or, as was the case with the Empecinado, became appendages of the regular army and ceased to operate as guerrilla forces. 15 It was one of the great strengths of Mina’s
army that it achieved the highest degree of discipline, ultimately including recognition as a regular division, and still preserved its early independence, flexibility, and close ties to the villages that sustained it. This
achievement allowed Mina’s forces to recover from blows so severe that they would have spelled the end of guerrilla parties organized differently.