

 With feeling in the province, and now even in neighboring provinces, turning against Mina, more and more towns denied requisitions to the Division’s agents. With the Tribunal disbanded, draconian justice was meted out to such
recalcitrant municipal officials as if they were “collaborators.” 9 In August and September from Milagro, Villafranca, Andosilla, and Mendigorría—Ribera towns that had escaped guerrilla control during most of the war and that had
received rough treatment by Mina after the war—complaints poured in about the extortions carried out by the Division. 10 Things were quickly coming to a head.

 In September a royal decree sought to defuse the situation by ordering Mina to evacuate his troops into Aragon. But the corresponding instructions from Pamplona to Mina’s superiors never reached their destination. The
Diputación’s courier was waylaid by Mina’s men outside of Olite on the night of 25 September. That night Mina decided to strike against Pamplona. 11 A large portion of the Division had been reassembled, and the majority was
placed in Puente la Reina. From Puente Mina marched north with the first battalion and elements of the fourth. This time, however, not all of his troops were willing to follow him. The soldiers given the task of carrying the
ladders that were to be used to scale the city walls were the first to realize what their objective was. Officials in these units began to call on their men to desert. Mina sought to defuse their rebellion by appealing directly
to the destitute troops, bypassing their unwilling company commanders. He explained that his efforts to obtain recompense for them had failed with the viceroy and the minister of war. They would have to take by force what was
their due. “Take heart, boys,” Mina announced, “we’re going to get rich.” 12

 This argument was insufficient, however, to reanimate most of the volunteers. At around six o’clock on the morning of 2 6 September, most of the men returned to Puente. At nine o’clock a courier reached Pamplona from Puente to
tip off the viceroy, the Conde de Ezpeleta, of Mina’s plans. Shortly afterward, Mina and his remaining followers attempted to enter Puente in order to try once again to gain the confidence of the rebellious troops. Only when the
men fired upon him from the windows did Mina realize that the game was up. He fled to France, which, ironically, was now willing to shelter him. In the days that followed, the goods belonging to the Division were seized by the
government.

 Mina’s lieutenants either fell into the hands of the police, fled across the border, or proclaimed themselves for Ferdinand VII. On 3 October Cruchaga submitted with the cavalry and Barrena with the second and sixth battalions.
In Aragon, the third battalion submitted a few days later. 13 The history of Mina’s rebellion helps to illustrate an important point about the guerrillas who became Liberals under the Restoration. There is nothing inherently
Liberal about any of the demands made by Mina and his officials, either with regard to the Tribunal, the right of the guerrillas to continue requisitioning, or the status of the Division as a regular corps. In the history of the
guerrilla struggle, the men of Navarre had not demonstrated a knowledge of any ideological program, unless the “Idea” of 1810 can be considered an ideology. Yet, the claims made by Mina in 1814 struck at the heart of the
monarchy. Mina and the other guerrillas had performed a military role of transcendent importance to the very existence of the Spanish state, and they perceived compensation in the form of pay and honors as their just reward. In
the case of the dispute over the Tribunal, this compensation was even to include political privileges. Perhaps, under the influence of years of Liberal propaganda, Mina’s men thought they had a right to political power.