

 The widespread ownership of land in the Montaňa was another key. In the first place, it was the precondition for the democratic town council. Second, the tools, animals, and products of Navarre’s agricultural economy were
distributed among thousands of proprietors. This made tax collection a war in itself and gave the peasants all the motive they needed to take up arms.

 It was also important that peasants constituted the leadership as well as the rank and file of the guerrilla movement in Navarre. The strategy of defending villages from French extortion came naturally to such men. And it was
this strategy that undermined the occupation at its base. Likewise, only a popular army could have collected the requisitions and custom duties that were the lifeblood of the resistance, and only a popular Tribunal could have
enforced compliance with the blockade of Pamplona that ultimately brought Abbé’s troops to their knees.

 Napoleon’s “open wound” in Spain had been inflicted through a combination of English, Portuguese, and Spanish efforts. But it was the insurgents, and among them especially the Division of Navarre, who ensured that the wound did
not heal over. Combat against the insurgent population of Navarre was an extremely bloody and demoralizing affair. Forcing much of the population to adopt a belligerent attitude, especially with the declaration of the blockade of
Pamplona in December 1811, the guerrillas raised the violence in Navarre to a level that brutalized the French occupier. In Spain, as in other colonial encounters, the occupation troops forced to attack or despoil hostile
civilians eased their consciences by convincing themselves that they were at war with a racially and morally inferior opponent. The enemy was rendered subhuman in the French propaganda, authorizing individuals to perpetrate
barbarities they would never consider normally. Military rules were forgotten in a war of extermination, and sound military judgment was sacrificed. Thus, unchecked French violence fed the hatred of the population, securing a
never-ending source of insurgents.

 The guerrilla war in Navarre destroyed French morale in a number of other ways as well. Those assigned garrison duty in Navarre lived in constant hunger, fear, and frustration. Fantin des Odoards, garrison commander at Puente
del Arzobispo, expressed the predicament faced by all garrisons stationed in guerrilla country. According to Odoards, “only the same hunger that drives the wolf from the woods” could convince his men to venture out in search of
supplies. When an isolated garrison finally received the help needed to track down and overwhelm its antagonists, the guerrillas were able to resume a faceless existence, melting into the local population. Among such people,
there was for the French “neither winter quarters nor any secure haven” and “rest [was] possible only for the dead or the victorious.” 16 As a result of these factors, the level of French casualties from disease, exhaustion, and
sheer depression was extremely high in Navarre.