

 These problems were the more acute for Mina because he found himself challenged in recently reoccupied areas like the Ebro valley by men who had done nothing to liberate the country and who yet claimed the right to reassume
their customary positions at the summit of Navarrese society. The loyalty that the men of the Division had come to expect from the villages and towns had turned to hostility, and it was channeled and led by the old array of
elites who had done so much to allow the French to install themselves in Navarre in the first place. 1 During the war years, the towns had often received rough treatment from the guerrillas, and in the postwar period they sought
to pay back the armed peasants of the Division for their wartime insubordination. This conflict was quickly resolved in favor of the towns. The restored municipal and provincial authorities were able to erase all memory of the
guerrillas and to reimpose their own vision of society as an ordered, hierarchical organism.

 Adding to Mina’s problems, the troops themselves had begun to lose heart. For seven months they had fought less than brilliantly in sieges in Aragon and southern France. They were not accustomed to such long absences from home
nor to continuous mobilization in the long periods between actual battle. In the guerrilla war it had been possible to return home, or at least to disperse in safe cantonments, between engagements. This was not the case in the
offensive operations the guerrillas were called upon to undertake in 1813-14, and the boredom and economic hardship of regular military life must have seemed a cruel reward for their years of service.

 Moreover, the bureaucracy for raising contributions was no longer operating effectively, since it was expected to compete with the requisitioning apparatuses of the English and Spanish armies. Mina pleaded with the Allied
military government in Pamplona to help him raise money and supplies, but to no avail. At the same time, the system of frontier customhouses collapsed, eliminating Mina’s main source of hard cash. 2

 As the troops became desperate for food, clothing, and pay, they grew unruly. By the summer of 1814, anonymous broadsheets began to appear urging the guerrillas to return to their homes. Thousands of men followed these
suggestions, and the Division began to disintegrate. Meanwhile, Mina was in Madrid begging the restored government of Ferdinand VII to recognize his corps as a regular division, as the revolutionary government of Cádiz had done.
Mina obtained an audience with the king but ultimately failed in his mission. Ferdinand’s reaction to the peasant “king” of Navarre was to haughtily dismiss him. In late July, Mina hurried back on his own initiative to try to end
the desertions. 3

 During July the reinstalled Diputación and the military governor in Pamplona, Antonio Rosello, instigated another conflict with the Division. A royal order of 25 June 1814 required that offices and governing bodies not extant in
1808 should cease in their functions. Based on this order, the Diputación sought to reacquire all of its prerogatives, even against the still functioning administrative bodies set up by Mina. The first area of conflict was over
the administration of justice.