

 Such an attitude went against everything for which Ferdinand VII stood. His government was based on the absolute sovereignty of the king, constrained only by those customary institutions and laws that had existed before the War
of Independence. The mobilized, armed peasants of Navarre, with a court and a system for collecting contributions, were a threat every bit as serious as the Liberal politicians who were being purged with such cruelty during this
very period. The guerrillas were therefore spurned as a danger to the closed society Ferdinand was attempting to constitute. Most of the guerrillas were happy to return to their prewar occupations, especially since the regular
pay, booty, and rations of wartime were not forthcoming in peace. For Mina this was not an option. Having tasted absolute power, he could not return to a life as a simple layador working on his mother’s (later his sister’s)
estate. As a result, he fell by default into the Liberal camp. During the next twenty years, his services to the Liberal cause meshed with his struggle to regain the status he had briefly enjoyed during the War of Independence.
And the acceptance of much of the Liberal program during the reign of Queen Cristina in the 1830s spelled his own triumph and the rehabilitation of the guerrillas’ reputation.

 Guerrillas played a major role in the defeat of Napoleon in Spain. The contribution of the guerrillas of Navarre by itself had an enormous impact on the course of the war. For those who measure military success by a body count,
a simple total of the French troops killed or captured by the Navarrese is impressive enough. The French lost hundreds of men to the first guerrillas, especially to Renovales and the Roncalese. These last, by themselves,
inflicted over 1,000 casualties in the summer of 1809. The corso terrestre under Javier Mina accounted for at least 358 killed or captured. And under Mina the guerrillas killed or captured at least 16,745 the enemy, and the total
number of French losses including those wounded during six years of fighting could not have been less than 50,000. 14 This figure is about three-fourths of the number of casualties produced by Wellington in all of his battles.
Clearly, if the object of war is to inflict as many casualties as possible on the enemy, then the guerrillas of Navarre played a key role.

 Casualties in battle, though, do not begin to tell the whole story of the insurgents’ contribution. The primary purpose of the guerrillas was not to inflict casualties. Nor was it to perform auxiliary tasks for regular units,
however indispensable such services may have been in particular situations. The function of the guerrillas was to occupy French troops in duties far from the main battlefields. The guerrillas did not necessarily seek to achieve
this objective by presenting themselves for combat. Instead, they denied the French access to the resources of the countryside and forced most of the occupation troops to struggle for mere survival. In guerrilla country, the
French were kept busy wresting rations and fodder from a sullen and hostile population. It was the objective of the guerrillas to protect these civilians, to channel their hostility, and to engage their services, as spies,
couriers, and volunteers.