

 41. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, el guerrillero, p. 85. Napoleon once claimed that with two generals like Suchet he could have held on to Spain. Suchet’s success was partly the result of his savagery. When he mopped up the patriot
stronghold of Lérida in April 1810, he sacked and burned the town, levied a punitive fine of over a million pesetas, and shot twenty-six residents on suspicion of sympathy with the guerrillas. During the next four years the
pattern established by Suchet was followed exactingly as 204 more people were executed in Lérida. Gras y de Esteva, “Notas sobre la dominacion francesa en Lérida,” p. 90. For Napoleon’s views on Suchet, see Gómez de Arteche, La
Guerra de la Independencia , 6:20.

 42. Pérez Goyena, Ensayo de bibliografía, p. 185. Some said that Dufour had Javier sign a letter telling his followers to lay down their arms in exchange for his life and amnesty. The only evidence that such a letter was
actually composed and signed appears in a sensational exposé written by one of the guerrillas’ most violent enemies. See Saint- Yon, Les deux Mina. The other, circumstantial evidence, is that Javier was, in fact, spared and
imprisoned in France, a most generous proceeding considering the usual practice of exemplary cruelty against captured insurgents. Such clemency appears inexplicable unless one assumes that Javier collaborated to save his skin.
Nevertheless, there can be no firm conclusion in this matter until such a letter is discovered.

 43. Dufour might have foreseen the failure of amnesty from the experience of his predecessor. The previous October D’Agoult had offered amnesty and a doubloon for any guerrilla who surrendered his arms within twenty days. Pérez
Goyena, Ensayo de bibliografía, p. 169. On that occasion the Navarrese had answered with a bold stroke, the invasion and sack of Tudela.

 44. Among these efforts, in the summer of 1809, Joseph had required all government officials to be reconfirmed in their offices after taking an oath of allegiance. This requirement could not be enforced in Navarre. Gaceta de
Madrid, 20 August 1809.

 45. These included four regiments in Andalusia, four in La Mancha, one in Soria, and one in Murcia. Gómez de Arteche, La Guerra de la Independencia, 10:69-71. Such regiments, however, proved to be untrustworthy. One regiment
from Leon deserted en masse in 1809 with all of its arms and baggage, and this made Joseph cautious about using his Spanish troops. Napoleon Bonaparte, The Confidential Correspondence , Napoleon to Joseph, 21 February 1809.
Indeed, the fear of mass desertion touched even the “Joseph Bonaparte Regiment,” an elite force, which was supposed to be sent to France in 1810 for later action in northern Europe. The project was abandoned because Joseph feared
that sending the regiment through Navarre would be tantamount to a free gift of personnel and equipment to Mina. Letter of 28 May 1810 from Juan Kindelán to Gonzalo O’Fárrill. AHN, Estado, legajo 3003.

 46. AHN, Estado, legajo 42, no. 259. Recruits from Catalonia became especially active in counterinsurgency efforts against Mina. The French placed these Catalonian turncoats in the first ranks to take advantage of their
reputation for ruthless abandon in battle, a reputation stimulated, no doubt, by the knowledge that they would be killed if captured in battle by the guerrillas. The Catalonians usually fought better than the best French troops
and became known in Navarre as the “butchers of the French army.” Adjutant I., Souvenirs de la Guerre , p. 108; Mercader Riba, Barcelona durante la ocupación francesa, pp. 190, 219. In general, the number of Spaniards fighting
with French units or in counterguerrillas decreased during the course of the war. For example, after 1810 Suchet could form no new regiments in Aragon, and even the Catalonians began to enlist with Mina rather than with the
French by the end of the year. Alexander, Rod of Iron , pp. xviii, 98, dates the decline of enthusiasm for Suchet in Aragon to early 1810, but this seems too early. Ironically, the French seem to have made little effort to
organize their own antiinsurgency units. In December 1809 a French officer stationed in Tudela volunteered to raise and command a “counterguerrilla.” His band of fifty intrepid volunteers slipped out of the city in the early
morning and were not seen again in Tudela until July 1810. By that time they had passed through several provinces and engaged the guerrillas seventy-seven times, inflicting enormous casualties on the enemy, according to the
commander. Adjutant I., Souvenirs de la Guerre , p. 18. Yet, this type of initiative was extraordinary, although competent guerrilla fighters, like General Hugo in Castile, did emerge during the war.