m7 P. B. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

‘COUNTERFACTUAL MORALITY TALES

Mental simulations can compel people to acknowledge embarrassing or even
shameful inconsistencies in theit application of moral rules. The paradig-
matic example is the identity-substitution thought experiment that manipu-
lates either the perpetrator or victim of a deed and asks the audience to
contemplate whether they had the same emotional reaction to what actually
happened as they would have had to various hypothetical events. For in-
stance: “If Bosnians were bottlenosed dolphins [Rwandans white, Chech-
nyans Lithuanians .. . ], we never would have tolerated the slaughter of
innocents so long.” Insofar as the audience detects a discrepancy in their
reactions to the two scenarios, and insofar as the audience firmly believes
that the mentally manipulated cause should be irrelevant, the audience will
deem the discovery of a differential emotional reaction to be a disturbing
fact about themselves. Moreover, the thought experiment is easily translated
into an actual experiment. For example, survey researchers often perform
actual identity-substitution experiments to gauge the influence of “socially
undesirable” causes of policy preferences that, it is assumed, people would
not be willing to acknowledge if they were asked directly (Sniderman,
Brody, and Tetlock 1991),

COUNTERFACTUAL CONSISTENCY PROBES

Here the mental simulation reveals contradictions between causal beliefs that
may have previously coexisted peacefully within a belief system. The para-
ddigmatic example is the syllogism that traces through the logical implica-
tions of one set of beliefs to the point where the contradiction becomes
undeniable. For example:

If you really believe that there is so much indeterminacy at the micro level (bat-
tles, firms, bureaucratic subunits of government), you cannot plausibly argue for
so strongly deterministic a position at the aggregate or macro level (wars, econ-
‘omies, government decision:

If you commit yourself to an extreme structural-realist position that denies any
significant causal role to domestic politics in shaping properties of the international
system, then you would have to believe that even if the Soviet Union had been a
democracy in 1945, the Cold War would still have occurred.

‘The thinker then has the dissonance-reduction options of changing one or
both sets of beliefs, introducing new cognitions that neutralize the contradic~
tion, or disengaging from the simulation exercise by simply ignoring the
contradiction (cf. Abelson 1959; Festinger 1957).

It is important to be explicit about the likely long-term impact of repeated
counterfactual-consistency probing of expert belief systems. Certain belief

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 15

systems are much more vulnerable to this type of conceptual challenge: spe-
cifically, belief systems organized around strongly deterministic claims (if x,
then y must occur) and strongly exclusionary claims (x and only x influences
y). The greater vulnerability can be traced to the greater ease of generating
and justifying “could” versus “would” counterfactuals. A “could” counter
factual merely requires showing that there is at least one plausible story
about a possible world in which x did not automatically lead to y or in which
some other cause, 2, also influenced y. By contrast, an unqualified “would”
counterfactual requires showing that an outcome would have occurred in all
possible worlds that pass some threshold of plausibility. ‘The burden of proof
is obviously much higher in the latter case.

COUNTERFACTUAL EXERCISES AS DEBIASING TOOLS AND MEANS OF
STIMULATING THE IMAGINATION

Retrospective scenario generation is mental simulation in which the goal is,
to prevent premature cognitive closure induced by certainty of hindsight
Some scholars (e.g., Weber 1949) have long suspected, and cognitive psy-
chologists have recently demonstrated (e.g., Fischhoff 1975; Hawkins and
Hastie 1990), that “outcome knowledge” contaminates our understanding of
the past. Once people learn the outcome of an event, they not only perceive
that outcome as more likely ex post than they did ex ante (which might be
defended as a rational Bayesian updating of subjective probabilities), they
often fail to remember their ex ante assessment of what was and was not
likely to happen. Backward and forward reasoning in time are, in this cogni-
tive sense, deeply asymmetrical

Counterfactual thought exercises can check the “creeping determinism” of
certainty of hindsight. Asking people to think of how things could have
worked out differently becomes a means of preventing the world that did
‘occur from blocking our views of the worlds that might well have occurred
if some antecedent condition had taken on a different value. Indeed, there is
1a small “debiasing” literature in experimental psychology that assesses the
usefulness of encouraging people to imagine that the opposite outcome oc-
curred (Fiske and Taylor 1991). There is also a small literature in literary
studies on the concepts of sideshadowing, foreshadowing, and backshadow-
ing in narratives that makes a strikingly similar normative point (M. A.
Bernstein 1994; Morson 1994). Sideshadowing calls attention to what could
have happened, thereby locating what did happen in the context of a range
of possibilities that might, with equal or even greater likelihood, have taken
place instead. Sideshadowing serves as a valuable check on foreshadowing
(the tendency, in extreme form, to reduce all past events to harbingers of the
future) and backshadowing (the even more insidious tendency to judge hi
torical actors as though they too should have known what was to come).

