168   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



and sustained by the traditional oligarchs. The non-occupied territories, still
ruled by these oligarchs, were unable to carry out the necessary reforms. In
the ACJR model, defensive reforms meant delayed and attenuated reforms –
with long-term negative consequences for industrialization. When the correct
dates are applied, there is nothing left of the alleged horizontal transmission
hypothesis.7
   The more substantive part of our challenge to the ACJR story concerns the
empirical content of the specific reforms under consideration here. Specifically,
we question the implied behavioral implications of a suite of institutional change
imposed by a foreign power that enters a large and complex political space.
Moreover, when that occupying power then abandons the greater part of that
polity – in this case after a mere 3–6 years – it cannot be a surprise if those
new institutions (laws) turn out to be of dubious instrumentality for enduring
behavioral change. Institutional change is not like a light switch that is flipped
on, and then off – and then on again, or off again. New institutions (rules/laws)
can indeed be issued, overturned, and then re-issued at will. However, the crucial
behavioral question – are those quick changes dispositive for human behavior
– must also be part of credible econometric analyses. It also bears mention
that formal institutions – laws – that are enacted, and then overturned or
rescinded (or re-enacted) are not correctly classified as ‘informal’ institutions.
Such institutional jiggering is a sign of political and legal incoherence. The so-
called ‘informal’ institutions – durable and habituated patterns of interaction –
carry on while the formal rules of a society become irrelevancies.
   We now turn to a brief discussion of the three institutional reforms alleged to
be central to the influence of the French treatment.

The civil code
The imposition of the French civil code meant that the privilege-based order
of the Ancien Régime would no longer constitute the source of the law. The
evidence suggests that Napoleon rather quickly lost interest in this particular
institutional imposition. In fact, by 1810 Napoleon was satisfied if his demands
for more troops were punctually met by his German allies. An official enquiry of
the Rheinbund states about the further introduction and enforcement of the Civil
Code was rebuffed by Napoleon indicating that the Code did not ‘fit’ Germany.
Further efforts to adapt existing legislation to the Code in the Rheinbund states
thus came to a halt (Fehrenbach, 1997, p. 54). In fact, there was an escape
clause that allowed the aristocracy to reintroduce the seigniorial system through
legislation. Under German conditions, the revolutionary Civil Code could be used

    7 Recent German historiography explicitly rejects the ‘defensive reforms’ narrative. So-called
‘defensive’ reforms were often more radical than what Napoleon was able to achieve (Kopsidis and
Bromley, 2014). In fact, important institutional change began in a number of polities during the 18th
century and this head-start enhanced the speed with which some Napoleonic reforms were subsequently
embraced.
