164   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



   can do with the aid of collective power (capacity or right), and what they
   cannot expect the collective power to do in their behalf (incapacity or liability)
   (Commons, 1924, p. 6).

   It must be clear, therefore, that when ACJR write of imposed institutional
reforms in the French treatment area – and subsequent ‘defensive’ reforms in
the control areas – they can only have in mind this constellation of ‘dualities’
(right – duty; privilege – liability); (Bromley, 1989, 2006; Hohfeld, 1913, 1917).
With this clarification as to the content of institutions, it must now be clear that
simply turning on and off – imposing and then rescinding and then re-instating –
these legal relations is a more challenging proposition than seems apparent from
reading ACJR’s account of Napoleon in Germany.
   The conceptual core of the ACJR theoretical apparatus concerning
institutional change is found in four specific reforms that the authors claim were
imposed in the eight (of 19) territories annexed or controlled by France beginning
in the early years of the 19th century. Table 1 reproduces the territories (polities)
used by ACJR in their econometric models.2 The eight occupied territories
contained, in 1750, approximately 38 percent of the total German population.
But the French ‘treatment’ across these eight polities varied considerably. Two
polities (Rhineland and Palatinate) – containing only 14 percent of the population
of these ‘treated’ parts of Germany – were occupied for a period of 19 years.
However, in contrast to this heavy presence, the vast majority of the ‘occupied’
population – the remaining 86 percent – resided in the other five polities that were
occupied for 6 years, and Hanover that was occupied for a mere 3 years. In other
words, only 5 percent (14 percent of 38 percent) of the German population was
exposed to direct French occupation for more than 6 years. For the vast majority
of Germans the French were an absent or ephemeral factor in daily life.
   The causal agent in the ACJR theory of German industrialization is their ‘re-
form index’. This alleged causal agent was derived by simply adding up the total
number of years prior to 1850 that each of the four reforms is claimed by the au-
thors to have been in effect, and then dividing this total number of years by four.
   There are three territories of interest: (1) occupied areas receiving the French
treatment; (2) ‘control’ (unoccupied) areas west of the River Elbe; and (3)
‘control’ (unoccupied) areas east of the River Elbe. These two control polities
are claimed to have introduced ‘defensive’ institutional reforms long after those
same reforms had been imposed – and then reversed – in the treated areas. The
four institutional changes claimed to be causal of German industrialization after
1850 are: (1) abolition of privilege-based law and the imposition of the Civil




  2 The original Table 1 from ACJR (2011) is reproduced in the on-line supplemental material. The
URL is: http://www.millennium-economics.com/supplementary-material.htm
