Journal of Institutional Economics (2016), 12: 1, 161–190
 Millennium Economics Ltd 2015 doi:10.1017/S1744137415000223
 C
First published online 2 July 2015




The French revolution and German
industrialization: dubious models and
doubtful causality
                                 ∗
MICHAEL KOPSIDIS
Leibniz Institute of Agricultural Development in Transition Economies (IAMO), Halle (Saale), Germany
                                     ∗∗
DANIEL W. BROMLEY
Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA


   Abstract. We challenge the ‘big-bang’ approach to economic history offered by
   Acemoglu et al. (2011). The creation story in dispute is the French Revolution and
   the subsequent French occupation of a very small portion of Germany. We show
   that the four institutional reforms claimed to have spurred German
   industrialization have been incorrectly dated. These corrections nullify any
   explanatory power of the ACJR econometric model. Moreover, even with the
   corrected vintages, their identification strategy is undermined by a flawed
   ‘explanatory’ variable – ‘years of reform’. We show that this variable simply
   enters their model as a year trend and explains nothing except the passage of time.
   We develop a fixed-effects model to capture the overlooked role of coal
   production that began in several regions shortly after 1840. This model offers a
   credible account of German industrialization and urbanization. Most economic
   change is, after all, continuous. Big-bang intrusions are of doubtful efficacy.


1. Introduction

Economic historians face the challenge of discerning plausible causal structures
from a variety of empirical evidence collected from manifold sources. Over the
recent past, some economists have taken an interest in the role of institutions as
central to the quest for understanding the past. In the literature, these claimed
causal factors take various forms – the rule of law, honest elections, strong
property rights, colonial rule by ‘good’ countries versus ‘bad’ ones, and impartial
judges. It has even been claimed that institutions can be turned on and off at will
– at which point individual behaviors are assumed quickly to switch back and
forth, depending.
   Our immediate interest is a recent effort to re-write modern German
history using several elaborate econometric specifications. The empirical work
of interest is the paper by Acemoglu et al. (2011) (hereinafter ACJR) on
∗ Email: kopsidis@iamo.de
∗∗ Email: dbromley@wisc.edu


                                                                                                       161
