                            The French revolution and German industrialization 163

   We first challenge the exact dates – and the empirical (legal and behavioral)
coherence – of the four reforms that constitute the independent variable (years
of reform) in the ACJR model.1 Once the four institutional reforms are correctly
dated and properly understood, we show that they fail to support a claim
of ‘big-bang’ institutional change. A larger issue is the flawed econometric
model underpinning their identification strategy. Neither the horizontal nor
temporal effects of the French treatment offer a credible account of German
industrialization that began around 1850.
   Finally, we show that this failure then opens the way for a straightforward
and theoretically tractable model of economic change in 19th century Germany
that is consistent with prevailing accounts of German industrialization. There is
no need to re-write German history.


2. The problematic French treatment
We share a commitment to understanding the role of institutions in economic
history. But some institutional changes make direct contact with essential
economic processes, while other institutional changes have only an indirect
bearing on matters of commercial concern. Clarity in this regard is essential
if plausible explanations of economic change are to be produced by empirical
research (Nelson and Sampat, 2001). The central aspect of our challenge to
ACJR concerns the dating (vintages) of institutional change in Germany under
the claimed influence of the French. This challenge highlights the important
distinction between the two distinct categories of institutions: (1) durable
customs and habituated patterns of interaction; and (2) legal parameters that
are the conscious creation of political leaders in a continual quest to create
– and then update as conditions warrant – the formal (codified) structure of
authoritative rules that constitute behavioral incentives and sanctions (Bromley,
2006). The first category of institutions will often be referred to as ‘informal’. The
paper by ACJR is not concerned with these durable behavioral attributes for the
simple reason that customs and habits are not amenable to imposed alteration by
foreign invaders – especially when those invaders remain for a very short period.
   Rather, the ACJR paper concerns the second category of institutions – the
legal (codified) parameters that carry the weight of collective authority. Notice
that these legal parameters are collective rules that define socially acceptable
individual and group behavior, and that this legal scaffolding necessarily
constitutes sets of dual expectations. Following Commons, we regard institutions
as indicating what:
  . . . individuals must or must not do (compulsion or duty), what they may do
  without interference from other individuals (privilege or liberty), what they


  1 See also Kopsidis and Bromley (2014), Wegner (2014) and Zweynert (2010) on ACJR.
