                         The French revolution and German industrialization 167

to the French treatment, when added to our sum of 71, and then divided by four
not three, yields the ACJR reform index of 28.25 for Westphalia.
   Our corrections to this flawed historical accounting reveal that the Civil Code
was introduced in Westphalia in 1810 and was never ‘turned off’. In fact, Prussia
never returned to the economic and legal Ancien Régime after 1815. This change
yields 40 (not 5) years of legal reforms that affected the economic realm in the
same way as did the Civil Code. With this correction, we see that the reform
index for Westphalia is 106/3 = 35.3 (that is, 40+25+41 = 106/3). Similar
modifications occur for all of the shaded entries in Table 1.
   Rectifying those mistakes serves to change the average reform index for Panel
A by just 0.4 years in 1850 (from 32.41 to 32.8). However, in the two control
polities, ACJR assigned very late reform dates (or short-duration dates as in
Westphalia and others). These artificially late dates of institutional reform (or
suspended reforms) is based on – indeed necessitated by – their theoretical model
suggesting that the French treatment in the occupied territories brought rather
immediate institutional change that was then only reluctantly and belatedly
adopted throughout the other 11 ‘untreated’ polities. This is the so-called
horizontal transmission process discussed above. We say it is ‘necessitated by’ the
ACJR theory because their conceptual model is one of direct treatment (imposed
reforms) and then ‘defensive’ catch-up reforms elsewhere. ACJR call such reforms
‘defensive’ as if to suggest they were only reluctantly and incompletely adopted
out of fear that if local leaders did not quickly impose specific reforms the French
would then invade and do it for them.
   Consider now the corrected vintages for the two control regions – West Elbe
and East Elbe. For Panel B (the West Elbe control), the corrected dates indicate
that institutional reforms occurred much earlier than claimed by ACJR, thereby
increase the average reform index from 16.31 to 28.5 – an increase of 75 percent.
Our corrections to the flawed ACJR historical accounting mean that these five
polities undertook institutional reforms much earlier – averaging 12 years earlier
– than recorded by ACJR. We see here a rather curious horizontal transmission
process at work, and a similar process at work in Panel C (east of the Elbe).
Here, our corrected dates increase the claimed ‘reform index’ from 25.1 to 32.0
– a jump of approximately 28 percent.
   In other words, the two control regions, containing over 60 percent of the
total German population, and lacking the occupation and imposition suffered
by the eight treated polities, turn out – once correct reform dates are recorded
– to have an average reform index that closely approximates the reform index
for the treated polities. In other words, the three institutional reforms under
consideration here had the same duration in which to do their alleged good work
in the two control regions as compared to the eight polities receiving the imposed
French treatment. Recall the core theoretical proposition of ACJR which holds
that the imposed reforms in the eight occupied polities occurred much earlier
and in a more radical way – thus clearing out the obstacles to growth erected
