162   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



the French ‘treatment’ in a small part of Germany in the early years of
the 19th century. These authors argue that the claimed beneficial effects of
French occupation on German industrialization and GDP growth were quite
accidental. The French ‘treatment’ had two central purposes. First, there
was the defensive motivation – to hold their enemies (Austria, Prussia, and
England) at bay. Second, the French move to the east had an ideological
purpose – to export modern (Enlightenment) ideas to a geographic space
that was considered to be ‘naturally French’ yet remained in the firm grip
of pre-modern institutions. There was, evidently, an urgent need to destroy
the Holy Roman Empire and ‘ . . . the grip of the aristocracy, oligarchy,
and the clergy on political and economic power (Acemoglu et al., 2011,
p. 3287)’. As a result, institutional arrangements in the French-annexed
territories on the left bank of the river Rhine – and in the adjacent newly created
French-controlled satellite states – were transformed and the non-occupied
provinces within Germany (considered the ‘control’) then launched so-called
‘defensive’ reforms to bring their institutional arrangements into harmony with
the territories under direct French control. We see here an example of an alleged
‘horizontal transmission’ of institutions across space.
   The authors claim to have discovered ‘ . . . a strong association between
institutional reforms and French invasion (or control) (Acemoglu et al., 2011, p.
3287)’. The ACJR research calls attention to two empirical questions: (1) was
the very brief duration of French occupation in a distinct minority of German
territory, a plausible cause of the degradation in the grip of the aristocracy,
the oligarchy, and the church?; and (2) was degradation of the aristocracy, the
oligarchy, and the clergy in the early part of the 19th century plausibly causal with
respect to industrialization and urbanization that began in Germany 50 years off
into the future? Unlike the alleged horizontal transmission of new institutions
mentioned above, we now encounter a different form of transmission. In this
case, it appears that new institutions waited the better part of 50 years before
producing their claimed beneficial effects.
   These matters are central to the econometric strategy deployed by ACJR
to distinguish between the ‘imposed’ institutional reforms at the hands of the
occupying French, and the defensive reforms undertaken in other polities that
escaped direct control. These authors conclude:

   . . . the effects of French invasion worked through the institutions that they
  imposed in the occupied parts of Germany. Overall, our results show no
  evidence that the reforms imposed by the French had negative economic
  consequences. On the contrary, evidence from a variety of different empirical
  strategies shows that they had positive effects (Acemoglu et al., 2011, p. 3287).

   Our purpose here is to show that the ‘variety of different empirical strategies’
deployed by these authors does not yield credible support for their flawed
theoretical model and its econometric counterpart.
