166    MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



3. Varieties of institutional reform4

There are two problems at the core of the ACJR ‘reform index’: (1) the exact
dates at which those reforms are claimed to have been adopted (their vintage);
and (2) the nature and content of those institutional reforms.
   To start with the most obvious problem, consider the claimed vintage of
the abolition of serfdom – either brought about by Napoleon in the occupied
territories or defensively eliminated as a result of the so-called French treatment.
ACJR date this reform from as early as 1783 in Baden, to as late as 1832 in
Saxony. Surprisingly, the authors then admit that serfdom had ceased to exist
throughout Germany prior to the arrival of Napoleon. Why would ACJR assign
dates of attribution for an institutional regime that the French had no role in
abolishing? Eliminating serfdom’s demise from the ACJR model leaves only three
institutional reforms that might be attributed to the French: (1) the imposition
of the civil code to replace the privilege-based legal order of the Ancien Régime;
(2) agrarian reforms; and (3) abolition of the guilds. The problem with these
remaining institutional reforms is that ACJR very often assign vintages that are
at odds with accepted German historiography. Therefore, in Table 1 we provide
corrected dates for 31 of the 57 observations that were incorrectly assigned
(dated) by the authors.5
   First, notice that there are only three (not four) reforms that can be attributed
to the French – the Civil Code (column 3), agrarian reform (column 4), and
abolition of the guilds (column 5). ACJR date the imposition of the Civil Code
(abolition of the Ancien Regime) in Westphalia as occurring in 1810 and lasting
until 1815 when it was reversed. According to ACJR, this institutional change
did not reappear until 1900. Summing the years in which these three reforms are
alleged to have been in place in Westphalia yields a reform index (the row sum) of
24.7 (5 years for 1810–1815 of the Civil Code, plus 25 years for agrarian reforms,
plus 41 years for abolition of the guilds). The sum of these three durations
is 71 years, and when divided by 3 yields a reform index for Westphalia of
23.7. Table 1 of ACJR (see on-line materials) shows a reform index of 28.5 for
Westphalia because they incorrectly considered the abolition of serfdom as a
discrete reform even if it was only a minor and inseparable part of the entire
agrarian reform package to abolish the manorial system. Indeed, during the
centuries before Napoleon, serfdom in Westphalia had been relaxed to such an
extent that, practically speaking, it had ceased to exist.6 That 42 years of ‘credit’



    4 For a more complete account of the nature and timing of institutional reforms in Germany, see
Kopsidis and Bromley (2014).
    5 See the on-line Appendix A for elaboration of our construction of Table 1.
    6 Note that ‘defensively modernizing’ Prussia officially declared the end of serfdom one year earlier
in 1807 (Table 1, Panel C). It is therefore incorrect for ACJR to date the official end of serfdom in Prussia
as 1811 (Kopsidis and Bromley 2014, p. 13).
