                          The French revolution and German industrialization 169

to redefine seigniorial privileges as acquired private property indistinguishable
from ordinary capitalist land rent. Ironically, to stabilize his Empire by satisfying
the demands of the old and new Napoleonic aristocracy, it was Napoleon himself
who pushed the ‘seigniorial counter revolution’ which preserved the seigniorial
system in southwest Germany until the revolution of 1848.
   There were three closely connected processes at work. First, there was legal
equality between so-called noble and non-noble individuals. Second, there
emerged uniform enforcement of the rule of law regardless of one’s ‘station’
in life. Third, the legal system began to address a capitalist-based system of
unfettered markets – especially with respect to land and labor. Of course different
institutional reforms can have similar impacts on industrialization and economic
growth. For instance, unfettered factor markets, economic freedom, and the
‘rule of law’ can be established by introduction of the Civil Code. However, in
Germany, the same effect was realized by the Prussian Oktoberedikt of 1807, and
the parallel reforms in other German states – most importantly Bavaria. Another
means were new constitutions establishing the rule of law and abolishing (noble)
privileges that were introduced in the south German states around 1820. The
third means was the establishment of the German Customs Union – the Deutsche
Zollverein – in 1834 (Keller and Shieu, 2013). This legislation rendered all pre-
modern regulations of factor and commodity markets irrelevant. The revolution
of 1848 abolished the last legal remnants of the privilege-based society of the
Ancien Régime and fully established the rule of law throughout the entirety of
Germany
   Therefore, the assignment by ACJR of 1900 as the date of the introduction
of a civil code in most German states ignores the much earlier adoption of a
suite of institutional innovations establishing economic freedoms and a uniform
rule of law. As a matter of historical accuracy, the most important and decisive
institutional reforms had already taken place by the middle of the 19th century.
The 1900 vintage used by ACJR reflects the fact that Germany was a federal state
and all members of the federation had to agree to the new federal code. But, as
above, it had been adopted rather earlier in all jurisdictions. In fact, most German
states had introduced modern business and banking laws, and deregulation of
mining and financial markets, five decades before the nation-wide adoption of
basic principles of economic freedom.
   Ironically, in the French controlled German satellite states there was no
adjustment of German institutions to the revolutionary Code. Rather, it was
the other way around – the seigniorial system was incorporated into the Civil
Code (Fehrenbach, 1983). The conservative interpretation of the Code, refined
in the French state of Westphalia, was swiftly accepted by the ruling nobility in
all Rheinbund states (Berding, 1973). Following Napoleon’s defeat in 1815, the
newly founded Deutsche Bund (German Confederation), a loose confederation
of all German states, acknowledged these seigniorial agreements in article 14 of
the German Federal Act. Indeed, it required several massive peasant rebellions
