178   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



5. Reconsidering economic change in Germany

A credible account of German industrialization and urbanization cannot emerge
from the theoretical and econometric models advanced by ACJR. In fact, any
account that ignores coal mining and smelting will miss the mark. In introducing
coal as plausibly explanatory of industrialization, we are acknowledging
the long-held consensus of virtually every historian of Germany’s industrial
emergence.13 It is coal, and not the claimed institutional reforms of the French,
that did the necessary work beginning in 1850. But some may wish to suggest
that Napoleon deserves credit for German coal mining – that is, that coal mining
is endogenous. To address these issues, we must consider the institutional milieu
in which the emerging German coal industry was embedded.

The institutional setting
We start by noting that only two regions of Germany show any activity associated
with coal before 1840. The first of these is in Zwickau (Kingdom of Saxony),
while the other is in the Ruhr basin around Dortmund (Westphalia).
   Secondly, given the primitive condition of transportation networks, the
localized production of coal – its mining – had to surpass a certain threshold
in order for it to be moved by barge to urban areas where labor was available
for large-scale industrial uses. In fact, the literature on the emergence of the
Ruhr industrial area prior to the 1840s makes clear that early coal mining did
not contribute to urbanization but rather served to magnify the density of the
rural population in a growing number of scattered settlements occupied by small
peasant miners (Bergmannskötter). These rural mining enclaves were situated
between the small towns prevalent in the Ruhr area at that time (Bronny and
Dege, 1990, pp. 102–104). In fact, throughout the 18th century, coal mining
in the Ruhr was mostly a secondary activity for peasants seeking extra cash to
supplement meager agricultural incomes (Kuske, 1949, pp. 113–118). Towns in
the Ruhr basin did not expand beyond their medieval core until the 1840s, while
the density of the rural population increased dramatically.
   In the 1840s, Essen and Dortmund comprised the largest towns in the Ruhr
basin numbering 6,000 and 7,000 inhabitants, respectively (Fischer, 1972, p.
161). The negligible urbanization impact of early coal mining was further
reinforced by the fact that at the end of the 18th century, and in the early years
of the 19th century, most mined coal from the region was simply exported down
the rivers Lippe and Rhine, thereby offering little impetus to the emergence of
domestic industry. Data for 1787–88 indicate that two thirds of the Ruhr area’s
coal production was exported to the Rhineland and the Netherlands (Kuske,
1949, p. 116).


   13 The English-language historians of Germany – prominent among them Alexander Gerschenkron
– have long held views similar to their German-language counterparts.
