                          The French revolution and German industrialization 177

Figure 1. Probability of suspended reforms, given French Presence.




– in the effect of Zit onXit means that the estimate of β in the second stage
regression cannot be reliably specified. In other words, there is no consistent
connection of the instrument (French presence) to the treatment variable (years of
reform).
   The failure of monotonicity means that some polities experience more years
of reform – they are early reformers – with longer French occupation, yet others,
with the same French presence, are late reformers. Such contradictory results
are not surprising. Intuitively, particular polities will react differently to foreign
occupation depending on the specific circumstances.
   We see yet another manifestation of inconsistency in the ACJR approach
when we focus attention on the reversion of institutional change. In Figure 1,
we show the probability of reform suspension conditioned on the number of
years of occupation. Notice that polities with 0 or 19 years of occupation never
suspend reforms, while polities with 3 or 6 years of occupation have a positive
probability of suspending all types of reforms. Once again, the instrument
(French presence) is not a consistent – reliable – indicator of the treatment
(years of reform). As a result, the ACJR econometric model – even when the
corrected reform vintages are incorporated – does not reflect the impact of French
occupation on German industrialization and urbanization. Rather, the sort of
vintage model on display here simply captures the random impact of common yet
unobservable characteristics for polities sharing a given value of fpresence (the
instrument).
   The above econometric detail should be sufficient to alert historians and
others interested in institutional economics that the ‘variety of different empirical
strategies’ on offer by ACJR serve to obscure the dubious efficacy of the
French in Germany. It is now time to offer a plausible explanation of German
industrialization.
