174   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



serfdom? When is official abolition of urban guilds really effective, and how does
one separate those effects from other institutional reforms?11
   These difficult empirical problems doom efforts such as those of ACJR to
identify four separate institutional changes, and then to anchor those changes
in a particular polity at a specific time. But more serious problems loom for
both the ACJR theoretical model – imposed and then ‘defensive’ institutional
change – and their econometric strategies predicated on that model. First, we
have already shown that institutional changes in the 11 non-treated polities of
Germany generally occurred at the same time – and thus had the same time to
effect change – as was the case in the polities subjected to French occupation.
Our corrected vintages in the two control regions have the effect of increasing the
reform indices in the two control regions – and in several polities these reforms
in the control region occurred before reforms in the treated region. To stress
the point, some polities in the control regions show earlier and more durable
institutional changes than do polities in the ‘treatment’ region. This result runs
counter to the ACJR theoretical model.
   The more serious flaw in the ACJR econometric model, however, concerns
the very notion of implied causality between the vintage of a particular
institutional change and altered behaviors capable of producing industrialization
and urbanization nearly one-half century off into the future. Notice that it would
make no difference to the ACJR econometric model if the events coded at specific
times by us or by ACJR – rather than depicting particular institutional changes
– had been the declaration of three new public holidays taking effect in each
polity. On this view, it should be obvious that the ACJR model would be unable
to distinguish between the sudden announcement of these particular holidays –
or one of their three institutional reforms. Would it follow that the establishment
of three public holidays at different dates in the 19 polities was implicated in
boosting industrialization beginning in 1850? In the absence of a clear causal
model, the ACJR claims of causality are illusory.


4. Confronting the ACJR econometric model
Consider now the econometric model at the heart of the ACJR theoretical
approach. They deploy a standard two-stage least-squares model of the form:
                                  Yit = αi + δt + βXit + εit                                     (1)
where Yit is the dependent variable (urbrate), αi and δt are fixed effects and time
effects, respectively, Xit is the treatment variable of interest (yearsref ), and εit
is an error term. Given usual concerns of potential correlation between Xit and

   11 Voigtlander and Voth (2012) document the difficulty in identifying ‘standardized’ institutional
arrangements as distinct from ‘locally sanctioned’ institutional arrangements – in this case medieval
anti-Semitism.
