                          The French revolution and German industrialization 173

the demise of urban guilds, the reforms also upset socio-economic relations
within the heartland of the Prussian monarchy: (1) the close nexus between
the military/tax system and the distorted division of labor between urban and
rural areas was destroyed. Regional specialization came to be determined by
market forces; and (2) mercantilist regulation and governmental control of
industrial production was abolished to foster a more competitive domestic
market.
   It was not until after the revolution of 1848 that we find evidence
of fundamental institutional reforms to abolish obstacles to the expansion
of a market-based industrial economy. This is especially true for capital
markets and public finances. In early 19th century Germany labor was quite
abundant, while industrial capital was exceedingly scarce. These circumstances
undermined the significance of early liberal reforms (Tilly, 1966a, 1966b,
1980, 1990). Additionally, it must be kept in mind that between 1815 and
1914, virtually all important commercial institutional change – deregulation of
capital markets and mining, the introduction of central banks, modern business
laws, and trade liberalization – brought about institutional convergence (in
today’s European Community it would be called ‘harmonization’) throughout
Germany.

Summary
The foregoing discussion highlights two important issues in historical research
on institutions and institutional change. The first problem is to identify the
exact date at which a particular institutional change becomes dispositive for
human behavior. That is, the mere passage of a new law in a polity with
limited communication and enforcement mechanisms does not immediately
translate into altered behaviors. Moreover, institutional change throughout the
German territories had always been a continual process of experimentation
and revision. Economies are always in the process of becoming, and the
essential role of institutions is in both reflecting and parameterizing that
becoming. In 18th and 19th century, Germany – and thus in the absence of
a powerful centralizing state–localities (including regions and ‘kingdoms’) were
semi-autonomous polities responding to local as opposed to ‘national’ exigencies.
Very often, formal (codified) acknowledgement of institutional change came after
new habits of interaction had ‘settled down’ after having demonstrated survival
value.
   The second problem in dating institutional change, and then attributing
plausible behavioral responses, is the intricate connectivity of all customary and
legal relations. The institutional architecture of a nation – state cannot be ‘carved
at the joints’. Where, exactly, does the dissipation of the privilege-based legal
order of the Ancien Régime – and its putative replacement by a far-reaching
civil code – stand as a distinct institutional reform from a gradual relaxation
of seigniorial relations and the historic burdens and reciprocated privileges of
