                          The French revolution and German industrialization 171

Agrarian reforms
Two points must be kept in mind when assessing the sharp conflicts surrounding
legislation to abolish the seigniorial system: (1) it is not possible to differentiate
between obligations pertaining to the ‘person’ of the subservient peasant and
obligations pertaining to the land because the personal status of a peasant –
which in the worst case was serfdom (Leibeigenschaft) – depended on the legal
status of the land she or he cultivated; and (2) under the seigniorial system, the
property rights of dependent German peasants differed substantially between
simple tenancy for years without any property rights in the land – or weak
ownership rights (lassitisches Recht) – and nearly full peasant property rights.
In many cases, this included the right of free hereditary ownership and sale
(Erbzinsrecht). Even east of the river Elbe, most dependent peasants had strong
ownership rights in their farms by the end of the 18th century.
   The reforms changed a number of agrarian institutions (Agrarverfassung).
The seigniorial system was characterized by shared property in land between
lords and peasants (lordly dominium directum or direct ownership, and peasant
dominium utile or proprietary possession). The dominance of shared property
rights defined the essential difference between a seigniorial system and a
capitalist system of land tenure based on undivided private property. In only
a very few German regions did ownership mean full private property rights
for the manorial landlords. Instead, the distribution of property rights varied
considerably between manorial landlords and peasants. These variations in
turn determined rents and labor services rendered by the peasants to the lords.
Furthermore, the feudal rent was not based on the profitability of farming but
reflected the regionally differentiated balance of power between landlords and
peasants. The feudal rent could include rents in kind, rents in money, or rents
in terms of labor obligations. Moreover, the legal status of a parcel of land
– demesne or villein land – determined the degree of personal freedom of a
peasant, as well as the quality of the peasant’s property rights in the land being
cultivated. The freedom of a peasant to leave ranged between full freedom and
the obligation to remain in the lord’s territory (Schollenpflichtigkeit).
   Prussian reformers considered agrarian reforms aimed at abolishing the
manorial system, and deregulation of industrial production, as the two essential
elements of a comprehensive rural development strategy for the backward
heartland (Altpreußen) east of the Elbe (Vogel, 1983). The reformers saw rural
manufacturing and economic growth as the key to broad-based development
(Vogel, 1983). Prussian reformers were the first in history to embrace a multi-
sectoral strategy of rural development – an approach that was well-suited to rural
Prussia where three quarters of the population – land-poor sub-peasants – barely
survived in a region devoid of non-agricultural employment (Vogel, 1983).
   The Prussian reforms emerged from the understanding that towns and rural
areas in the Prussian east were poor (compared to the West) because the existing
