176    MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



Table 2. Four models of years of French presence and years of reform

                                       ACJR Vintages          Corrected Vintages

Dependent variable: yearsreform      (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)

D0 t = 0 years                       0.735∗∗∗               1.000∗∗∗
D3 t = 3 years                       0.655∗∗∗               1.000∗∗∗
D6 t = 6 years                       0.717∗∗∗               1.000∗∗∗
D19 t = 19 years                     1.000∗∗∗               0.954∗∗∗
D(q>0) t = all years > 0                          0.045                  −0.01,168

∗ , ∗∗ , ∗∗∗ indicates significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All regressions include time

and polity dummy variables. For the four models see Table 2a–2d in the on-line Appendix.


larger than for the occupied polity of Hanover [yearsref orm |fpresence =
 0 > yearsref orm| fpresence = 3], while the opposite holds for the other 3
unoccupied polities. A comparison of unoccupied polities and polities with 6
years of occupation shows a similar lack of consistency.12
    Now consider Models 3 and 4 depicting identical regressions using our
corrected vintages from Table 1. Notice that Model 3 has identical trends
(coefficients) for fpresence = 0, 3, and 6 years, but now the coefficient (trend)
for fpresence = 19 years is lower than it is for the other 3 groups. The
results for Model 4 still show the coefficient for ‘occupied vs. unoccupied’
being insignificant, but the sign has switched to negative. With the corrected
vintages, fpresence >0 is associated with lower trends for years of reform. Neither
Model 2 nor Model 4 is significant so we should not make too much of these
differences. But the results suggest that the ACJR econometric model – even with
our corrected vintages – yields inconsistent results.
    These inconsistencies are obviously problematic for the ACJR identification
strategy. The results are problematic because Xit is an ordered treatment intensity
variable and therefore the instrument for Xit must meet several requirements if β
is to be given a causal interpretation. One obvious requirement is monotonicity.
That is, if Zit > Zj s , then (a) Xit > Xj s or (b) Xit < Xj s ∀i, j , s, t (Angrist and
Krueger, 1999). This implies that in order to identify the causal impact of
treatment intensity (duration of institutional change, or years of reform) without
additional conditions, monotonicity requires that higher values of the instrument
– years of French presence – will always result in either higher or lower values
of the treatment variable (years of reform). Notice that in the absence of this
restriction, the potential presence of polities for whom the instrument (French
presence) is associated with both increased and decreased treatment (reform
index), respectively – for a given value of Zit – means that the impact of the
treatment cannot be identified. This lack of consistency – causal coherence

    12 We point out that ‘occupied’ means that the polity received the ‘French treatment’ while the absence
of the ‘French treatment’ meant that the polity was ‘unoccupied’.
