170   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



to end this institutional blockade that had been created by Napoleon (Dipper,
1996a; Fehrenbach, 1983, 2008; Wehler, 1987).
   Perhaps the most important reason why French reforms did not have any
lasting impact on Rhenish agricultural development is that even under the
old regime, emerging commercialization, growing market orientation, and the
gradual individualization of agriculture had advanced very far – farther perhaps
than in any other German region – by the time of the French ‘treatment’.8 During
the 18th century, the seigniorial system had been nearly abolished, or else peasant
duties had been transformed into a pure land rent (Rentengrundherrschaft). In
most parts of the Rhineland, peasants had been granted nearly full property
rights in their farms long before the Napoleonic reforms. Moreover, in some
Rhenish regions, manorial lords had become ‘agrarian capitalists’ even before
the revolution by transforming all of their seigniorial tenancies into short-term
leases.
   These early changes fail to support the image of any pre-capitalist institutional
rigidity of pre-revolutionary German agriculture in the Rhineland much in need
of ‘modernizing’ French reforms. Indeed, these indigenous institutional changes
suggest quite the opposite. The seigniorial system had been undergoing gradual
disintegration for a rather long time (Dipper, 1980; Grüne, 2011; Konersmann,
2001, 2002, 2004, 2006; Kopsidis and Lorenzen-Schmidt, 2013; Mahlerwein,
2001; Schultheis-Friebe, 1969; Weidmann, 1968). The Archbishop of Mainz had
abolished the last remnants of serfdom in 1787 – two years before the French
revolution (Blanning, 1974; Fehrenbach, 2008). Actually, Napoleon’s policy
prevented abolition of the seigniorial system in the French-controlled model
states and the other Rheinbund states comprising most of Germany west of the
river Elbe and east of the river Rhine prior to 1815. This Napoleonic deterrent
persisted until the revolution of 1848 in most of south- and southwest Germany.
   With this historical clarification, it is curious for ACJR to imply that once
the French had imposed their new institutional arrangements the Rhineland was
soon ‘ . . . transformed from an oligarchy-dominated area to one open to new
businesses and new entrants. Similar reforms were also systematically introduced
into the German satellite kingdoms, such as the Kingdom of Westphalia, and the
Grand Duchy of Berg (Acemoglu et al., 2011, p. 3290)’. Moreover, the authors
allege that Napoléon was deeply committed to the revolutionary reforms and
considered his grip on power to be dependent on abolishing the ‘ . . . political
control of the elite, feudal privileges, and introducing equality before the law
(Acemoglu et al., 2011, p. 3290). This claim finds little support among scholars
of German history.


    8 Formal agricultural research did not begin until around 1800 but had little effect on the industry
until the end of the 19th century. Only after World War I did the impact of such research become
significant. During the entire 19th century, agricultural change was driven by individual innovation and
experimentation – mostly carried out by large farmers.
