172   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



mercantilist system restricted rural growth. Prussian reformers grasped the idea
that an expanding domestic market required improved rural incomes and that
this would then break the cycle and create positive feedbacks in which both
rural and urban growth would become closely linked and mutually re-enforcing.
Prussian reformers rejected the idea that the growth of one sector could only be
achieved at the expense of the other (Harnisch, 1976, 1978; Vogel, 1983).9 As
early as 1800, full peasants had become a minority in the purely agrarian regions
east of the Elbe. Rural industries were completely lacking and so it was essential
to provide employment opportunities in rural areas to make use of the abundant
underemployed rural labor (Dipper, 1996b; Kocka, 1990; Peters, 1970).

Abolish guilds
By the end of the 18th century, guilds throughout Germany had lost their ability
to organize and control industrial production, and to prevent the rise of new
types of firms – except for traditional artisan shops. They may not have been
formally abolished, but their operational component was very much weakened.
In addition, unlike the industrial western provinces, the tax system of the agrarian
east Elbian regions – which comprised the Prussian rump state after 1807 –
enforced the concentration of industrial production in small towns.
   The Peace of Tilsit (July 9, 1807), followed by the Oktoberedikt of October
9, 1807, paved the way in Prussia for full freedom of enterprise, especially
several laws between October 1810 and September 1811 bringing the abolition
of: (1) all exclusive privileges to carry out a business. This included the complete
disempowerment of guilds (Zunftverfassung) and the revocation of countless
royal monopolies for certain manufactures, enterprises, and merchants; and (2)
all requirements to use only certain commercial enterprises (seigniorial lords’
mills and inns), or the obligation to buy and sell at particular markets. A
simple trade certificate was now sufficient to start a business (Ziekow, 1992).
Only in Prussia – very far-removed from the influence of the French – was
there unconditional freedom of enterprise for urban and rural areas (Vogel,
1983).10
   In addition, the government’s Fabriksystem upheld license requirements
for any industrial enterprise outside of the guild system. Manufacturers who
managed to obtain a valuable license often acquired monopoly rights and
other preferential treatment. It is no surprise that established industrialists, the
beneficiaries of this mercantilist ‘industrial policy’, did not support economic
freedom – including free trade (Rohrscheidt, 1898; Schmoller, 1898; Vogel,
1983; Ziekow, 1992). The economic reforms of 1810–11 not only accelerated

    9 Interestingly, the development mantra of the 1960s held that rural areas could be neglected in order
to foster industrial growth in towns and larger urban areas.
    10 After severe peasant riots in September 1811, the smaller of the two French model states – the
Grand Duchy of Berg – tried, with Napoleon’s approval, to abolish all feudal lord’s commercial privileges.
However, local authorities and landlords ignored the decree and it was not enforced (Fehrenbach, 1983).
