186   MICHAEL KOPSIDIS AND DANIEL W. BROMLEY



  the view that externally imposed, radical, and ‘big-bang’ style reforms can
  never be successful. On the contrary, the evidence supports our hypothesis
  that the institutions of the Ancien Régime . . . impeded prosperity, and that
  the radical institutional reforms that removed these barriers paved the way for
  industrialization and economic growth (Acemoglu et al., 2011, p. 3304).


    They then speculate why radical institutional reforms ‘worked’ in this case,
and so very often fail to work elsewhere. Their answer, by now familiar, is that
these reforms were much more sweeping and radical than is the normal case –
that is why ACJR refer to them as ‘big-bang’ reforms. Sensing the dangers that
lay down this path, the authors quickly retreat into a call for more research.
Had they not prevaricated, they might well have ended up appearing to support
invasions of various ‘failed states’ in order to make them exemplars of democracy
and prosperity.
    There seem to be two messages in the ACJR paper – one message is aimed
at economic historians, while the other message is aimed at those devoted to
bringing economic development to languishing and dysfunctional economies.
We opened by applauding the increased interest in institutions as important for
understanding economic history. But we cautioned that clarity in that research
program demanded precision in understanding the meaning and empirical
content of ‘institutions’. Unfortunately, the field of institutional economics
remains conceptually entropic. Recall that entropy refers to dissipated thermal
energy that is unavailable to do work. Entropy is the degree of disorder or
randomness in the system. It would be difficult indeed to find a more fitting
metaphor for the conceptual mélange associated with the term ‘institutions’.
Coherent research on the role of institutions in economic history will be
impossible in the absence of conceptual clarity concerning the precise meaning
of institutions, and their role in economic change (Bromley, 1989, 2006).
    The second message of the ACJR project is more problematic. Indeed, it is
potentially dangerous because it moves beyond description – ‘here is why country
X did (or did not) develop during the 19th century’ – and enters the fraught realm
of prescription. We have already seen that ACJR, with a few caveats, are willing
to propose that ‘radical institutional change’ just might be the sine qua non for
countries now languishing under the suffocating influence of certain malevolent
protectors of some Ancien Regime. In fact, the now-discredited ‘Washington
Consensus’ was precisely this brand of imposed radical institutional reform. The
record of success with such imposed institutions is not encouraging (Bromley
and Anderson, 2012; Rodrik, 2006). It is not difficult to understand why. The
list of desired – even ‘necessary’ – institutions lacks causal structure. We see in
those reforms nothing but induction at work: ‘Become like us (institutionally)
in the industrialized world and then you too shall be rich’. The descriptive and
prescriptive elements of the ACJR approach come together when, with more
careful specification of the empirical foundations of their model, and revising
