                               The French revolution and German industrialization 179

   By the early 1840s, things began to change. First, the advent of railroads
created an immediate need for coal power. Then, the gradual emergence of steel
production – obviously related to the emergence of the railroads – induced a long-
lasting and stable need for coal. It is now well accepted that in order to reduce
transport costs, both mining and smelting had to be concentrated in regions
with easy access to coal (Krieger-Boden, 1995; Weber, 1922). Agglomeration
economies explain the emergence of the Ruhr area into one of Europe’s major
industrial belts – easy access to large coal deposits determined the regional
pattern of German industrialization after 1840 (Fremdling, 1985; Holtfrerich,
1973; Tilly, 1990, 1991). However, coal suitable for coking – a necessity for the
emergence of a steel industry – was only available in deeper layers. Therefore, it
was not until after 1830 – with English technical assistance – that a breakthrough
beyond heavy clay into deeper coal seams became possible in Germany. This
technical breakthrough, unattached to Napoleon, in turn fueled the mutually
reinforcing expansion of both coal production and steel in the Ruhr basin
(Fischer, 1972, p. 164).
   These geological and technological aspects of early coal mining serve to
minimize any possible endogeneity of coal mining and Napoleon. An additional
deterrent arises in the realization that throughout Germany, as in the rest of
Europe, all mineral deposits were owned by the state. Government mining
authorities not only supervised coal mining, they actively controlled the sector.
It was not until after 1850, with the introduction of a new Prussian mining law
in 1865, that the strict control of coal mining was abolished. Similar reforms
occurred all over Germany during that time (Fischer, 1972, pp. 139–178). In
summary, there is no credible evidence that the date of the emergence of coal
mining, and its subsequent development, might be endogenous in any model of
urbanization brought about by industrialization.
   Figure 2 reminds us that coal mining can only get started and prevail over time
– regardless of prevailing institutional arrangements – where Mother Nature has
randomly laid down thick veins of carbon residue.14 Only three polities would
become, by 1900, major coal-producing polities – Mark, Rhineland, and Silesia,
two of which were in the occupied polities.15

Modeling economic change in Germany16
The development of a more comprehensive model of economic change in
Germany, of which heavy industry is but a localized part, requires that we
move away from the three regions at the core of the ACJR model. Those specific

    14 The map excludes the important coal fields in the far-east (Silesia).
    15 The on-line Appendix Table 3 depicts metric tons of coal extraction 1850–1900. In addition to
data on total coal production, on-line Appendix Table 4 shows the share of total employment, by polity,
engaged in mining and smelting.
    16 Data for the following analysis come from the two data sets used by ACJR, plus our own
calculations.
