                                The French revolution and German industrialization 183

German economy were altering the economic landscape at the regional (polity)
level (Figure 3).18
   In the three polities comprising ‘early industrializers’ (Rhineland, Mark,
and the Kingdom of Saxony), the labor force in 1850 was equally divided
between agricultural employment (avg_shagremp) and industrial employment
(avg_shindemp). It is also noteworthy that in the early industrializers we see
industrialization without serious urbanization (avg_urbrate). We also see that
by 1900, the share of the workforce in agriculture in the early industrializers
was approximately one-half the rate in the other three groups of polities. It is
also plain that by 1900 the earlier industrializers were the only polities in which
the share of workers in agriculture was less than those in industry, and this
by a factor of 1/3. Regions whose industrial development was well advanced
at the eve of the French Revolution, and which were well endowed with coal,
easily became the early industrializers and thus comprised the leading regions
of German industrialization. Nothing speaks in the direction of any impact of
French occupation on German urbanization and industrialization.
   These substantive pre-conditions of economic change must be considered
in a model seeking to account for German industrialization. In addition to
acknowledging the role of coal, we introduce a fixed-effects panel regression
with urbanization rate as the dependent variable, and with total coal production,
the share of total workforce in industrial employment, and the share of total
workforce in agricultural employment (in each polity). The results are shown in
Table 4.
   In Table 5, we show the results of four fixed-effects models that exclude
the share of workers in industry – the least significant variable in the above
model – and focus just on regional variations associated with coal production
and agricultural employment.19 Model 1 concerns the average effect of coal
production across all 19 polities. Model 2 shows the regional implications of
coal mining, with ee being the excluded region. Model 3 shows the average
effect of the share of agricultural employment on urbanization rates across all
19 polities, while Model 4 shows the regional implications for urbanization rates
as affected by the share of agricultural employment in each region. As above,
East Elbia (ee) is the excluded region.
   In Models (1) and (2), we see results from a regression of the urbanization rate
on the quantity (metric tons) of coal mined. Model (1) includes a single coefficient
on coal, while Model (2) includes interactions between coal and dummy variables
indicating assignment to one of the four regional groups in Table 3. This


   18 Data for these figures and our estimations come from the on-line appendix to the original ACJR
paper.
   19 Coal production was re-scaled (divided by 1,000,000) to render the coefficients easier to grasp.
The coefficients for coal therefore represent the contribution to urbanization rates for a 1,000,000 metric
ton change in extraction.
