                         The French revolution and German industrialization 185

specification allows for heterogeneity in the impact of coal production on
urbanization. Model 1 indicates a positive relationship between coal and the
urbanization rate. Model 2 offers regional specificity as to where coal had
an impact on urbanization. Results indicate coal production had a statistically
significant impact on urbanization for polities in the early industrializer (ei) and
southwest (sw) group; for ei polities, an increase of 1 million metric tons of coal
mined was associated with an 0.872 (that is, 0.206 + 0.666) percentage point
increase in the urbanization rate, while for polities in the sw group a similar
increase was associated with a 0.912 (that is, 0.206 + 0.706) percentage point
increase in the urbanization rate.
   In Models 3 and 4, we report the results from regressions of the
urbanization rate on an alternate indicator of industrialization – the share of
total labor employed in agriculture. Model 3 indicates that, unsurprisingly,
a decline in agricultural employment was associated with an increase in
the urbanization rate. Model 4 indicates the negative relationship between
agricultural employment, with the relationship being strongest for the early
industrializers (ei) (0.897 + 0.618 = 1.515) and the East Elbia (ee) group (0.897).
Unsurprisingly, the negative relationship between agricultural employment and
the urbanization rate is weakest for the southwest group, where economic growth
came relatively late, and reliance on agriculture remained quite strong.


6. Economic history as prescription
Acemoglu, et al. suggest that their work offers convincing evidence that specific
areas of Germany subjected to ‘radical institutional reforms’ at the hands of
Napoleon enjoyed rapid and regionally differentiated industrialization after
1850. Our re-estimation of the ACJR model – corrected for their flawed reform
vintages – shows nothing of the sort. More seriously, their use of instruments
to identify the coefficients in their econometric model is flawed. The incorrect
historical evidence adduced by ACJR, comprising the empirical core of a flawed
econometric model, offers nothing that should cause historians of German
industrialization to change their mind.
   If one believes that urbanization is a plausible proxy for industrialization,
we offer a straightforward model of German urbanization consisting of three
explanatory variables: (1) the share of employment in agriculture; (2) the share
of employment engaged in industry; and (3) coal extraction. We believe our
account will find resonance with economic historians.
   Our concerns for the credibility of the ACJR project are heightened by the
claimed implication for ‘radical institutional change’. The authors summarize
their work by arguing:

  In this light, our findings support the centrality of institutional differences
  for comparative economic development . . . .the results are inconsistent with
