

Since for the ‘system’ to work it had to mobilise the whole of continental Europe, Napoleon had to bring Russia over to his side.(The 24th Bulletin de la Grande Armée reveals a little of the results of Napoleon’s planned ‘system’: “The British did not want to make peace. They will do so, but France will have more states and coastline in her federative system”. 31 October, 1806, Correspondance, 11135.) In order to do that, he had to separate Russia from Britain, still defensively allied since the fallout after Austerlitz. Napoleon knew that Britain and Russia’s alliance was one of ‘inconvenience’, that they were difficult partners, superficially friendly but resolutely pursuing their own agendas, and that their strategic aims rarely coincided (indeed they more often clashed). Napoleon also knew that Alexander had no love for the British. The Russian emperor (along with most of the rest of Europe) was particularly frustrated with British arrogant behaviour on the seas which involved seizing cargoes and searching ships, in short acting as though sea belonged to them.

And so with the aim of forcing Russia into an alliance in order to seal off the continent and to deprive Britain of her last major continental ally, the emperor decided to take war to the Russian troops stationed in Poland aiming to take advantage of Polish support and resources and in order to discourage Austria from intervening in the conflict. (In his letter to Sultan Selim (dated 11 November, 1806, Correspondance, 11232) he remarks “I am looking for the Russians and am taking the fight to them” (“Je les cherche et vais au-devant d’eux”).) As for Austria, though she was neutral and unarmed, Napoleon nevertheless wrote to Eugène asking him to set troops on the Austrian border to discourage any rash Austrian behaviour. (Correspondance, 4 November, 1806, N°. 11172.) However, despite the long-term strategic goals of the Napoleonic ‘system’ (which, it must be said, remained hidden to everyone apart from the emperor himself), on the local level in that November of 1806, the Russian troops positioned on the leaky Poland/Prussia frontier were a threat to the French spread out through Prussia. In tactical terms, if Napoleon had let Bennigsen take the initiative he would have been poorly placed.

In addition to taking the Russians on in Poland, Napoleon also contacted the Sublime Porte in an attempt to agree a treaty; the aim was to employ diversionary tactics, threatening Russia’s southern borders. At this time Alexander was in fact heading for war with the Ottoman empire. Russia and the Porte had a treaty whereby the replacement of the hospodars (vizirs) of Moldavia and Wallachia had to have both party’s consent. The Sultan had however replaced the hospodars with own candidates. Russia used this technical issue as pretext for confrontation, although its real fears were that a Franco-Ottoman alliance would close the straits to Russian shipping. Since the Porte was not prepared for war, it backed down. But the Tsar insisted on more concessions and carried out the planned Russian occupation of Moldavia and Wallachia in November – Alexander and foreign minister Budberg thought that the occupation was necessary in order to preserve Russian influence at Constantinople, to bring the Sultan to heel and finally to attempt to bring Balkan Christians (including Serbs) over to the Russian side. The Sultan replied by declaring war on Russia on 22 December. This declaration of war was certainly emboldened by letters from Napoleon. In a letters dated 9 and 11 November 1806, (Correspondance, N°s. 11216 and 11232.) one to Cambacérès and the other to the Sultan Selim, Napoleon notes that with all the Russian troops in Poland, this would be the best time for the Turks to send troops to Choczim and to the frontiers of the Dniester so as to repossess Moldavia and Wallachia. The clear general aim was to try to split the Russian army in two, and to establish good relations with Turkey with the aim of threatening British interests in the Middle and Far East.