                                                               PREFACE          xi

North before the convening of the French Estates-General and the storming of
the Bastille in 1789. The changes of these years would be crucial to the evolution
of modern Scandinavia.

   The rendering of foreign terms, personal and place names from an earlier
time is invariably problematical. Without entering into lengthy explanations, let
me simply say that I have sought a pragmatic middle way between the usages
of the period and present-day orthography and form.
   The Selected Bibliography contains only what I consider the most basic
works, while giving a certain emphasis to those available to non-Nordic scholars
in English, French, and German. All translations are my own, unless otherwise
noted.
   Many persons played their parts, directly or indirectly, in this work. Robert
R. Palmer, Jerome Blum, and Franklin D. Scott long ago encouraged me in
directions manifested here. Over the years, Sten Carlsson, Georg Norregard,
Kare D. Tonnesson, Goran Rystad, Michael Roberts, Stewart Oakley, Raymond
E. Lindgren, Jorgen Schou-Christensen, Michael F. Metcalf, J. R. Christian¬
son, H. Peter Krosby, John Ervin, Jr., and the late Peter A. Munch in particular
gave encouragement, criticism, advice, and ideas important to my widening
insight and understanding.
    I received much welcome assistance from various institutions, above all from
the Royal Library in Stockholm and from the Morris Library at Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale, where with his usual wizardry Charles Holliday
managed to provide the most unlikely materials through interlibrary loans. Lisa
Lee and Lorie Allen expertly prepared the manuscript on a word processor
under Vincent A. Lacey’s technical coordination. Lillian J. Wonders of the
University of Alberta in Edmonton, Canada, was my expert cartographer.
    Permission to make use of material from certain of my earlier publications
has been graciously granted by: Twayne Publishers, Boston, for Count Hans
Axel von Fersen: Aristocrat in an Age of Revolution (1975); by Eighteenth-
 Century Studies, for “Gustav III of Sweden and the Enlightenment,” 6 (1972),
 1-34; by the William [ Mary Quarterly, for “Sweden and the War of American
Independence,” 3rd ser., 23 (1966), 408-30; by Scandinavian Studies, for “The
Swedish Succession Crises of 1809 and 1810, and the Question of Scandinavian
Union,” 42 (1970), 309-33, and “Late Gustavian Autocracy in Sweden: Gustav
IV Adolf and His Opponents, 1792-1809,” 46 (1974), 265-84.
    I am deeply indebted to the National Endowment for the Humanities for a
fellowship making possible a year’s research at the beginning of this project and
for underwriting a part of the publication costs, to the Swedish Council for
Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences for a generous publication
