X      PREFACE

 extent reflected economic transformations, in both agriculture and industry,
 which by 1760 were entering their dynamic phase. Whereas political revolution
 centered in France, economic revolution centered in Great Britain. The influ¬
 ences of both radiated out into the European world, tending ultimately toward
 the same basic restructuring of society.
     By the early 1760s, the Enlightenment was at its zenith. Everywhere, the
philosophes made bold to proclaim, the light of Reason was breaking through
 the clouds of obscurantism. French speech, thought, and manners seemed to
 carry all before them in the cosmopolitan world of taste, refinement, and ideas.
 Yet signs of a growing Counter-Enlightenment were already apparent. Religious
 pietisms and secular mysticisms were on the rise, while the Pre-Romantic mood
 in literature and the arts exalted the emotions, individuality, and local distinc¬
tiveness, in rebellion against classical canons and French cultural hegemony.
    How did these developments, between the Seven Years’ War and the end of
the Napoleonic conflict, affect that large corner of northern Europe known as
Scandinavia, or often simply as “the North” (Norden)? Little has ever been said
about the region in historical writing on Europe as a whole in this crucial period,
even though it can add much to our understanding of the era. Historians in the
Nordic countries have tended to write for each other, or at least for their com¬
patriots, in their own languages. Among them, strong traditions of meticulous
monographic research utilizing original sources, while producing admirable his¬
torical literatures, have meanwhile discouraged broad, synthetic, or speculative
studies of a type often congenial to French or Anglo-Saxon scholars. They have
thus not attempted any regional survey or comparative history of their lands dur¬
ing this era.
   With a license reserved-perhaps-for the outsider, I have sought in the pres¬
ent study to provide such an overview, with emphasis upon lines of development
common to the European world of the time. While examining ways in which
such developments proceeded from local conditions and traditions, it endeavors
to trace the impact in Scandinavia of impulses from the larger world beyond.
In so doing, it draws parallels and comparisons between the different Nordic
lands, as well as between Scandinavia as a region and the West as a whole. Since
the involvement of the Nordic states in the wider European arena of diplomacy
and war is already the most familiar part of the story, the focus is principally
upon internal and inter-Nordic developments.
   From all of this emerges that the Nordic countries-in no lesser degree than
the rest of the Western world-underwent the great transformations of the era,
even though never occupied or reorganized by Revolutionary or Napoleonic
France, and though not yet experiencing an industrial revolution on the British
model. The main initiatives, moreover, were already well under way in the
