 12      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 between forty and forty-five thousand tons annually, almost all of it through
 Stockholm and Gothenburg (Goteborg). The greater part went to Great Britain,
 which up to mid-century received 75 to 90 percent of its imported bar iron from
 Sweden. Thereafter Russia gained an increasing share of the British market, but
because this market was expanding rapidly Swedish exports there did not de¬
crease until after 1800. The Stockholm government carefully regulated the iron
industry to keep down the consumption and cost of fuel and to limit supply to
hold up prices on the European market.16
    The smaller Norwegian iron industry could not compete abroad with Sweden.
In 1730 the government in Copenhagen granted it a monopoly in Denmark and
in Norway itself. It thus provided for the needs of the domestic market.
    Copper was produced at the great Swedish mine at Falun and in smaller
amounts at Roros in Norway, although by the eighteenth century the yields of
both were falling off from earlier levels. At Sala in Sweden and Kongsberg in
Norway small amounts of silver were also mined.
    Mercantilist theory drew rigid distinctions between rural handicrafts, the
production of urban artisans, and manufactures. Of the three forms of produc¬
tion, the first was unquestionably of greatest importance in supplying the needs
of the population. The governments sought, however, to keep rural handiwork
out of trade, in favor of the urban artisans and especially the manufacturers who
produced for the market.
    Town craftsmen produced a wide variety of wares, including most of those
 luxury or semi-luxury items intended for the small middle- and upper-class
 market. Characteristically they were organized into guilds, with strict qualifi¬
cations for entry and limited numbers of masterships. Guild craftsmen often felt
hard pressed by the competition of rural crafts, foreign imports, and, not least,
domestic manufacturers, and sought vigorously to protect their interests.
    The term manufacture applied not so much to methods of production as to
a form of entrepreneurial organization outside the guild system. Numbers of
skilled workers—still employing basically handicraft techniques—worked with
tools and materials, and in buildings, provided by the entrepreneur. Products
included above all textiles, also glass, metalwares, munitions, and processed
sugar and tobacco. Preliminary stages of production, particularly of textiles,
were often carried out by cottage workers in the countryside.
    Manufactures enjoyed the particular favor of the governments for the produc¬
tion of military necessities and substitutes for costly foreign imports. They were
protected by high tariffs, granted monopolies and tax benefits, supported by sub¬
sidies and loans, and foreign entrepreneurs and skilled workers were encouraged
to settle in the Nordic lands. Yet their position was precarious in competition
with both rural and urban handicrafts, and foreign wares usually of better qual¬
ity. Tariffs and import bans had little effect, since widespread smuggling could
not be prevented. Manufactures, in the strict eighteenth-century sense, never
