                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                          13

came to employ more than a tiny fraction of the population—in Sweden not over
1 percent at its height around 1760—nor to produce more than a small part of
the total goods consumed. During the last decades of the century Scandinavian
manufactures largely languished.17
   The greatest profits were to be gained through trade, which in keeping with
mercantilist principles was strictly regulated in the interests of the towns and
royal treasuries. Towns were categorized according to their trading privileges:
from the staple town, which enjoyed monopolies on the most important com¬
modities of foreign trade, to the provincial market town, privileged to trade with
the surrounding countryside, to the secondary market town, which could only
conduct business for merchants in the local market town.
    The most lucrative forms of commerce were reserved for the great merchant
houses and privileged trading companies of the two capitals. Copenhagen
monopolized trade with the Danish overseas colonies; as home of the Danish
East India Company, founded in 1732, with Canton in China; and with Finn-
mark in northernmost Norway, Iceland, the Faeroes, and Greenland. The Danish
government strove to make Copenhagen the commercial emporium of the North,
from which valuable colonial wares, such as sugar, tobacco, tea, and Chinese
porcelain, were reexported to other European destinations. It enjoyed special
tariff privileges for foreign goods in transit. Stockholm held staple rights for the
foreign trade of all of northern Sweden and Finland lying around the Bay of
Bothnia, thus controlling the export of nearly two-thirds of Sweden’s bar iron
and almost all of the Stockholm tar, which came mainly from western Finland.
    After the capitals, certain leading provincial towns enjoyed favored status.
 Gothenburg handled most of the remainder of Sweden’s iron exports and was
the home of the profitable Swedish East India Company, established in 1731,
 which like the Danish company traded with Canton. In Norway, Christiania
 (Oslo), Bergen, Trondheim, and Christiansand carried on a lively export of fish
 and timber. Flensburg was the leading trade center for the duchies of Schleswig
 and Holstein, and Altona, on the Elbe, enjoyed free-port status to compete with
 neighboring Hamburg. Stralsund, in Swedish Pomerania, and the Swedish port
 of Wismar, on the Mecklenburg coast, held special privileges for their areas.
    None of the provincial towns in Denmark proper or in Finland enjoyed such
 favored status or prosperity. They were simply market towns, as were most of
 those in Norway, Sweden, and the German provinces. On Iceland, the Faeroes,
 and Greenland, which had no real towns, all trade was carried on by factors for
Copenhagen merchants.18
   Within the Swedish monarchy there was relatively little exchange of domestic
goods between Sweden and Finland, since both produced largely the same
things. Within the Danish monarchy there existed a more complex balance. Den¬
mark exported most of its grain surplus to Norway, for which Norwegian tim¬
ber, iron, copper, glass, and fish covered only a part of the balance; the rest was
