 4      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 or together, into “the kingdom.” Their internal consolidation under the sole
 rule of the Danish royal house meanwhile took centuries to complete; not until
 the eighteenth century were the last autonomous enclaves liquidated. Since the
 accession of Christian I in 1448, the Danish crown was held by the house of
 Oldenburg. With the extinction of the ducal line in 1667, the small ancestral
 county (Grafschaft) of Oldenburg, with the county of Delmenhorst, fiefs of the
 Holy Roman Empire west of the Weser River, also passed to the Danish royal
 line. The Swedish monarchy acquired western or ducal Pomerania and the port
 of Wismar on the Mecklenburg coast, likewise as fiefs of the empire, during the
 seventeenth century.
   Finally, the Danish monarchy was also a colonial power on a modest scale.
 During the seventeenth century it had established trading posts and colonies in
India, on the Guinea coast of West Africa, and in the Virgin Islands in the West
Indies. In 1721 the Norwegian pastor Hans Egede recolonized Greenland, where
the old Norse population had died out by the fifteenth century.1
   Scandinavia lies on Europe’s northern periphery. It extended in the eigh¬
teenth century from around 54 degrees north latitude on the Holstein border to
71 degrees at the North Cape, from about 33 degrees east longitude on Finland’s
north Karelian frontier to 24 degrees west on the outermost tip of Iceland. Oslo,
Stockholm, and Helsinki lie at roughly the same latitude as Cape Farewell on
the southern tip of Greenland. Nearly a third of peninsular Scandinavia lies
above the Arctic Circle.
   Within this vast region there are immense variations of topography and cli¬
mate, from well-tilled and densely populated landscapes of the middle European
type to great areas of western Europe’s most undisturbed wilderness. Denmark,
with the Scandinavian possessions in North Germany and Sweden’s southern¬
most province of Skane, represented the richest agricultural region. Most of
Sweden and all of Finland lie fairly close to sea level, though the terrain is often
broken and rugged. Norway is a mountainous region, with an average altitude
nearly twice that of Europe as a whole. Iceland and the Faeroes are treeless, sub-
Arctic islands.
    By European standards, much of the Scandinavian world is a hard environ¬
ment. Yet it also contains valuable resources. Most important in the preindus¬
trial age was arable land, which varied greatly in extent, distribution, and qual¬
ity. It is presently estimated to comprise about 75 percent of Denmark’s area,
 10 percent of Finland, 9 percent of Sweden, and only 3 percent of Norway, al¬
though what may be considered cultivatable is naturally open to varying inter¬
pretation. Outside Denmark, Skane, and the German provinces, the principal
agricultural regions were located in south-central Sweden, in southwestern Fin¬
land; and around Oslo and Trondheim Fjords in Norway. Most of Finland and
Sweden, and much of Norway, is covered by coniferous forests, which here
reach more northerly latitudes than anywhere else in the world, while hardwood
