6       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

  the railroad age. Water was everywhere the chief medium of transport, both
  internally, via lakes, rivers, and coastlines, and externally, between areas sepa¬
  rated by seas. Sweden had better communications with Finland across the Baltic
  than with Norway over the “Keel.” Mountainous Norway was united above all
  by its coastal seaways and by easy communications with Denmark across the
  Skagerrak. Winter, however, largely changed this picture, for while Norway’s
 harbors remained generally ice-free, Sweden’s and Finland’s Baltic seaports
 were frozen, and the Sound was blocked by ice floes for varying periods. Snow
 and ice, meanwhile, greatly improved transport overland on sledges, which
 could carry heavier loads than could be moved over rutted and often muddy
 roads during warmer times of year. Regulated systems of relay stations and inns
 provided for the movement of government officials, travelers, and mail.
     At present the combined population of the five Nordic countries comes to
 about twenty-two million. By way of contrast, the Netherlands and Belgium,
 occupying a total area less than one-eighteenth as large, have a combined popu¬
 lation slightly exceeding Scandinavia’s, the last-named, taken as a whole, being
 Europe’s most sparsely inhabited region. Except in Denmark, population den¬
 sity per square mile is markedly below the European average. In the eighteenth
 century Scandinavia’s population was far smaller. In 1735 the Danish-Norwe-
 gian monarchy had some 1.4 million inhabitants; in 1749 the first regular census
 to be taken in any European country showed Sweden-Finland to have around 2.2
 million. Thus in 1750 Scandinavia still had something under four million inhabi¬
tants, or less than one-fifth of its present population.5
     Latitude, terrain, resources, climate—all played their part in determining
both the numbers and distribution of Scandinavia’s population. It was concen¬
trated most densely where arable soil was most plentiful and the climate within
tolerable margins: in Denmark, Skane, and the German territories; in the fertile
regions around the great lakes in south-central Sweden and in southwestern Fin¬
land; along Oslo Fjord and the valleys leading down to it, and around Trondheim
Fjord; in scattered river valleys, coastlands, fjords, and islands, closed in by
sea, mountain, or forest. Much of Norway’s rugged mountainous interior
remained unpopulated, except for herdsmen on their upland pastures in summer;
the greater part of the country’s population lived close to the long shoreline.
Except for scattered settlements along the coasts, the northern two-thirds of
Sweden, northern Finland, and Norwegian Finnmark were still practically unin¬
habited, aside from a handful of nomadic Lapps grazing their herds of reindeer
and the occasional wandering fur-trapper. Throughout the century Iceland had
only some 50,000 inhabitants, and often fewer, in scattered farmsteads around
the coast.6
   At such northerly latitudes the human ecology was extraordinarily sensitive
to small variations in climate. Throughout Scandinavia frequent crop failures
exercised a periodic check on population growth. For Europe as a whole it has
