                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        7

been estimated that during the eighteenth century each decade included, nor¬
mally, one year of crop failure, two bad years, five average, and two good. For
Finland during the same period there were on the average two years of crop
failure, three bad years, four normal, and not always one good year per decade.
Iceland, on the sub-Arctic margin of habitable Europe, represents the extreme
example. In 1808 the Icelandic scholar Magnus Stephensen counted no fewer than
forty-three bad years on the island during the eighteenth century; fourteen of
these years brought serious losses of population and livestock. It will be noted
in what follows how periods of social and political unrest coincided with crop
failures and famine.7
    Diseases took their toll. Tuberculosis seems to have been almost endemic.
Periodic epidemics carried off large numbers of persons weakened by hunger
in times of shortage. Stockholm lost one-third of its population from the plague
in 1711-12. Smallpox carried off a third of Iceland’s population in 1707. Live¬
stock was also affected. Beginning in 1745 Denmark in particular was ravaged
by murrain, which within three years killed some 300,000 cattle.8
    Famine and disease typically followed the ravages of war. Finland, as Swe¬
den's borderland against its archenemy, Russia, was particularly exposed. By
the end of the Great Northern War in 1721 Finland’s population had been re¬
duced by about one-quarter through death, emigration, and the loss of part of
Karelia.9
    Restrictive government policies, forbidding the division of farms, suppress¬
ing trade or seafaring among the peasantry, and establishing the monopolies of
privileged towns or corporations over the commerce of entire regions, often
tended to keep conditions depressed.
    Nonetheless, the population of Scandinavia grew fairly steadily from the end
of the Great Northern War. By mid-century it became evident that famine, dis¬
ease, and war were no longer as destructive as they had formerly been, while
agrarian reforms and humanitarian efforts in the later eighteenth century stimu¬
lated further growth. By the beginning of the nineteenth, Scandinavia’s popula¬
tion had increased by over a quarter since mid-century, from under four to over
five million. Within the two states it was especially noteworthy that Finland’s
population had more than doubled since 1749 and increased its share within the
Swedish monarchy from 17 percent to 26 percent, while Norway’s was half
again as large as at the beginning of the century and now only 5 percent smaller
than that of Denmark proper.10

    During the eighteenth century the Scandinavians still provided for their mate¬
rial needs in ways generally closer to those of their medieval ancestors than of
their present descendants. More than four out of five supported themselves by
cultivating the soil or in related rural occupations. Peasant farming followed
immemorial ways, providing for the cultivators’ subsistence, and little else.
