                     THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         5

forest extends from Denmark into parts of central Sweden and southern Finland
and Norway. Today forests cover some 67 percent of Finland, 56 percent of
Sweden, 25 percent of Norway, and 8 percent of Denmark.2 Everywhere they
provided vital resources: fuel; material for buildings, ships, furnishings, and
implements; products for export; rough grazing for livestock; game, fish, and
wild berries; reserves of land—especially in Sweden and Finland—for an on¬
going process of internal colonization. In addition to lakes and rivers, the Baltic,
North Sea, and Atlantic provide valuable fishing grounds. Sweden possessed
plentiful iron ore, some copper, and even silver, as did Norway in smaller
amounts.
   Within its vast latitudinal and longitudinal range, the climate of Scandinavia
varies greatly, from comparatively mild in Denmark and the German territories
to sub-Arctic beyond the Polar Circle. The Gulf Stream, passing between the
British Isles and Iceland, sweeps along the Norwegian coast toward the Barents
Sea, which gives the entire region milder temperatures than elsewhere in the
world at comparable latitudes. Except in the interior of Iceland, and in limited
mountainous areas in Norway and northernmost Sweden, there are neither
glaciers nor permafrost. Yet the effects of the Gulf Stream are considerably
modified by both terrain and longitude. Denmark and the lower-lying coastal
regions of southwestern Norway have the most temperate climates in Scandi¬
navia. In much of Norway and Iceland, however, altitude lowers temperatures,
whereas the mountain barrier of the “Keel” shields most of Sweden from the
milder maritime climate on the Norwegian side. Both winter and summer tem¬
peratures are generally more extreme in Sweden than in coastal Norway, and
Finland, lying nearer the Eurasian land mass, shows still greater variations.
Much of northern Scandinavia lies beyond the climatic frontier for settled agri¬
culture.
   At such high latitudes there are considerable seasonable variations in hours
of daylight and darkness. At 60 degrees north latitude, approximately that of
Oslo, Stockholm, and Helsinki, the sun is below the horizon for some nineteen
hours at midwinter and above it the same number of hours at midsummer. At
Hammerfest, Norway, at approximately 70 degrees, the sun never rises for
some two and a half months in winter and never sets for the same length of time
in summer.3 Winters in Scandinavia are proverbially long and dreary, summers
short and intense, when long hours of daylight compensate for the brevity of the
growing season.
   There have been long-term climatic fluctuations in Scandinavia. Winters,
especially during the second half of the eighteenth and early nineteenth cen¬
turies, tended to be more severe than they have since become. Continuous
meteorological records kept in Sweden since 1760 indicate a substantial modera¬
tion of winter temperatures over the past two centuries.4
   Seasonal change profoundly affected the pattern of communications before
