                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         11

farming. Some peasants along the main roads kept licensed inns and posting
stations. In certain districts textile and other manufacturers employed peasants
in cottage industries. Otherwise they everywhere practiced a wide variety of
traditional crafts, most notably in the forest districts. Despite the governments’
repeated efforts to prevent or at least limit it, peasants in many areas carried on
a lively trade in the products of their handicrafts, often ranging far afield. In
places, peasant seafarers carried on a good deal of trade on their own account.
Manors provided much part-time work. From certain of the poorer regions,
there was a seasonal migration of peasants to towns, to work at various menial
occupations.
    In large parts of Sweden, Finland, and southeastern Norway, the characteris¬
tic combination was farmer and woodsman, and often craftsman as well. In the
coastal districts throughout Scandinavia, it was farmer and fisherman, and some¬
times seaman.
    Outside of agriculture, forests provided Scandinavia’s most important prod¬
ucts: sawn timber, ship’s masts and spars, Stockholm tar for ships’ rigging,
charcoal for ironworking. Most of these commodities were consumed at home;
Norway provided for most of Denmark’s and virtually all of Iceland’s and the
Faeroes’ needs for timber. Forest products, however, also provided valuable
exports abroad. Thanks to ice-free Oslo Fjord and the long North Sea sailing
season, southeastern Norway (Ostlandet) was the principal timber-exporting
region. Here lumbering was organized on a large scale, with the sawmill owners
of the coastal towns employing peasants in the hinterland to cut and transport
timber. In Sweden and Finland, naval stores—masts, spars, and Stockholm
tar—were the principal forest exports.
    Fishing was carried on everywhere, in inland lakes and rivers as well as at
sea, providing an important part of the domestic diet. There was a good market
for dried and salted fish abroad, particularly in Catholic southern Europe. Cod
from the great fishing banks off northern Norway constituted by far the greatest
part of Scandinavia’s export, whereas herring from both the North Sea and Bal¬
tic provided for much of the domestic consumption. The Danish government
gave considerable attention to the Norwegian fisheries. Because of monopolistic
trade policies, however, Iceland and the Faeroes were unable to exploit their rich
fishing grounds for direct export.
    Iron mining and processing was an important industry in Sweden; to a lesser
degree also in Norway. Ironworks were widely distributed throughout south-
central Sweden, wherever they had access to both ore and charcoal; in Norway
they were almost all located in forest-rich 0stlandet in the southeast. The iron¬
works comprised small rural industrial communities providing much part-time
employment for peasant charcoal-burners and carters within a wide radius.
    Sweden was one of Europe’s largest iron exporters and Swedish bar iron
enjoyed a high reputation for quality. Between 1735 and 1780 Sweden exported
