 10      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 farmsteads, often amounting to hamlets with their clusters of dwelling houses
 and outbuildings; yet especially in the poorer districts of the west, their arable
 lands were likewise often intermingled.
     Otherwise, Scandinavia was notable for a degree of individual landholding
 unparalleled in most of Europe. In parts of the German provinces, such as the
 Ditmarschen in Holstein and the North Friesian Islands, as well as in much of
 Sweden, Finland, Norway, Iceland, and the Faeroes, the individual farm with
 more or less compact holdings was the rule rather than the exception. Even
 within a particular district there could be much variation in this respect. Individ¬
ual holdings were most common where arable land was widely scattered and
where wastelands had most recently been settled.
    Whereas European mercantilist thought was typically concerned with mining,
manufacture, and trade, the Scandinavian governments were ever mindful of the
importance of agriculture. Laws and ordinances throughout the century sought
to ensure adequate labor for cultivation, to prevent or permit transfer of land
from one legal category to another, to encourage productive or discourage
wasteful use of resources, to promote the internal colonization of reclaimable
wastelands. In 1735, at a time of depressed agricultural prices, the Danish
government banned the import of foreign grain into Denmark and southern Nor¬
way, establishing a virtual monopoly for the Danish manorial proprietors. It also
took vigorous action to end the cattle epidemic of the 1740s and 1750s. In Swe-
den-Finland attempts were made to overcome excessive fragmentation of village
holdings through the enclosure ordinances of 1757 and 1762 (Storskifte), which,
if they failed to have very much effect in the following decades, aroused much
interest throughout northern Europe and provided an important precedent in the
future.14
   Despite the best efforts of the government in Stockholm, however, Sweden
and Finland could no longer produce enough grain for their own growing needs
as early as the 1680s, and thus had to import some grain, mainly from Russia,
throughout the century.15 Norway raised an even smaller part of its grain supply,
whereas Iceland and the Faeroes produced no grain at all. Denmark and Schles¬
wig-Holstein could, however, normally produce enough to fill these needs,
while leaving some surplus for export abroad. But bad crop years often affected
the entire region, in which case Norway and the Atlantic islands in particular
suffered serious deprivation.
   Except in some ol the richer agricultural areas, the Scandinavian peasant was
seldom only a farmer. His environment provided both pressures and induce¬
ments to work at a variety of supplementary occupations as well. The forest gave
numerous opportunities: for felling and floating timber, for burning charcoal,
for hunting, fishing, and berry picking. Haulage by cart, sledge, and boat, for
local ironmasters, grain merchants, and sawmill owners provided much part-
time employment. On the coasts fishing was everywhere a vital supplement to
