 8      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

What necessities the household could not fashion for itself out of wood, birch-
bark, wool, linen, or leather, could most often be obtained from rural craftsmen,
themselves small cultivators, in exchange for products of the land. Rents and
dues, tithes, and taxes were payable largely in grain, timber, or days of labor.
Local officials of the crown, pastors of the Lutheran state churches, even much
of the military and naval establishments were compensated through the tenure
of house or cottage with land in specified amounts, which the occupant culti¬
vated or leased out for his support.
   In such a society relatively little money changed hands. Artisans in provincial
market towns exchanged their wares and services largely in barter for foodstuffs
and raw materials, and local merchants, often themselves landowners in the sur¬
rounding countryside, were much occupied with trade in grain, cattle, fish, or
timber.
     The level of development in Scandinavia was not unlike that of Europe as a
 whole. Still, it would have to be reckoned among its less dynamic regions. In¬
 deed, mechanisms for exchange, compensation, and the support of public func¬
 tions without recourse to money were surely more elaborately developed there
 than in most parts of Europe by the beginning of the eighteenth century. Only
 limited areas of activity had risen—or were rising—above the basic subsistence
 and barter level, into the market economy and the cash nexus. In agriculture,
 the cultivation of manorial demesne lands created in places islands of capitalist
 enterprise in the traditional countryside, as did iron works, especially in Swe¬
 den, and timber exploitation, particularly in Norway.
    The governments, eager to increase their revenues in specie, encouraged and
 protected those activities most closely geared to cash profits in a market econ¬
 omy , above all those that could provide directly for the needs of armies and
 navies, increase exports, and reduce imports. These included in particular min¬
 ing and other extractive industries, manufactures, and overseas trade. The larger
cities with their merchant oligarchies, especially the capitals, Copenhagen and
Stockholm, were treated with particular solicitude. From the 1730s both Den-
mark-Norway and Sweden-Finland followed strongly mercantilistic policies.
    Agriculture was everywhere the basic activity, occupying the great mass of
the population. Forms of landholding varied widely. In Denmark at mid-century
about 84 percent of the land was held by some 750 manors belonging to private
proprietors, or in some cases municipalities or foundations such as the Univer¬
sity of Copenhagen. The rest was the property of the crown, was attached to
parish churches, occupied by towns, or held by a small number of peasant free¬
holders. Most land in the German provinces likewise fell under manorial con¬
trol. In Sweden the land was divided roughly equally at the beginning of the cen¬
tury between the crown domain, manorial (frdlse) land, and peasant freeholds.
Only around 9 percent of Finland belonged to private manors, located mainly
