                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                       9

in the southern coastal districts. They were likewise relatively few in Norway.11
Throughout the northern two-thirds of Sweden, most of Finland, and northern¬
most Norway they were practically nonexistent, as they also were on Iceland and
the Faeroes.
    In Denmark and the German provinces, as well as in Skane and parts of
south-central Sweden, extensive tracts of good arable land permitted demesne
farming on some scale, utilizing labor from tenant farms and crofts. Such culti¬
vation could employ more rational and productive methods than the peasant
farms; it thus produced most of the necessary surplus for the towns and, in Den¬
mark, for the needs of Norway, the Atlantic islands, and overseas colonies.12
    Yet only a small part of the land consisted of demesne; even in Denmark,
it amounted to only some 13 percent around the middle of the century. The rest
consisted of peasant tenancies. Much demesne land in Scandinavia was more¬
over leased out. The wide dispersal of arable land frequently made demesne
farming impracticable; many manors consisted of widely scattered tenant farms,
whose proprietors were essentially rural rentiers.
    By far the greater part of the land was thus everywhere held in the form of
peasant farms, whether under tenancy or freehold. Only relatively small
amounts of their produce, collected as land rents, tithes, or taxes, or bartered
or sold in a nearby market town, were available for consumption outside the
immediate area. Their principal arable crops were grain—mainly rye, oats, and
barley—cultivated in rotation, generally leaving each field fallow every second
or third year. Yields were meager, even in Denmark usually only around four
times the seed planted on good peasant land.13
    In most regions livestock raising was as important, or more so, than arable
farming. Extensive areas beyond the cultivated fields provided wild hay and
rough grazing for cattle, sheep, and goats, which in summer were often taken
to summer pastures far from their home farms. In northernmost Norway, Ice¬
land, and the Faeroes, the climate made grain culture virtually impossible and
the only field crop was hay for the winter feeding of sheep, cattle, and horses.
In much of Scandinavia the available fodder was nonetheless insufficient to
maintain more than a limited number of animals through the long winter. Little
selective breeding was possible, and domestic animals were small and unproduc¬
tive by later standards.
   In common with most of Europe, much of Scandinavia practiced age-old
systems of communal land allocation, in which the holdings of farms were inter¬
mixed. In Denmark, the German provinces, and much of Sweden and Finland,
most peasants lived in compact villages, surrounded by open fields in which
each farm held one or more strips of plowland, beyond which lay meadows,
pastures, forests, wastelands, and fishing waters held in common. In Norway
the compact village was practically unknown. The peasants lived on scattered
