                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                       15

would be employed again on various occasions down to the end of our period,
wreaking periodic havoc in economic life.
   As the Nordic lands were increasingly drawn into an international market
economy fraught with financial hazards, there was a growing tendency by the
later eighteenth century toward the concentration of wealth in the hands of the
greater entrepreneurs, both rural and urban.

   Just as the Danish monarchy presented western Europe’s widest contrasts of
topography and climate, it also offered its broadest spectrum of social condi¬
tions, from the highly corporatistic society, of the central European type, in
Schleswig-Holstein, through the less elaborate structure of Denmark, to the
sturdy peasant societies of Norway, Iceland, and the Faeroes. Yet friction be¬
tween these diverse elements was dampened by a royal absolutism which allowed
no corporate role in the government of the realm to any of them. In Sweden-Fin-
land circumstances were more uniform and contrasts less extreme. The political
representation of the Estates, however, gave social distinctions a more immedi¬
ate significance and led earlier to social conflict. Although conditions in Swe¬
den's small German territories in Pomerania and Wismar resembled those in
Denmark’s German lands, their populations were far smaller.
   Following the introduction of Christianity, a nobility of the European type
had evolved in the Scandinavian North during the High Middle Ages. Its repre¬
sentatives in the eighteenth century were unevenly distributed. They were most
heavily concentrated in the German provinces, Denmark, Skane, and the fertile
south-central provinces of Sweden; more thinly spread in the rest of the southern
one-third of Sweden (the regions of Gotaland and Svealand) and in southern Fin¬
land; and virtually absent—except in certain official posts—throughout Swe¬
den’s northern two-thirds (Norrland), most of Finland, and all of Norway, Ice¬
land, and the Faeroes.
   Outside the German territories, nobility in Scandinavia showed certain dis¬
tinctive features. Monarchical power had been relatively strong during the
Middle Ages, and a free peasantry had remained the direct subjects of their
kings. Thus apart from some of its trappings, feudalism never really developed
in Scandinavia. Nobles might be powerful on the basis of their own alodial
lands, but the holding of service fiefs never became hereditary and a pattern of
subinfeudation never developed.
   Although the Danish and Swedish nobilities had wielded great political power
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, they had been curbed in the later
seventeenth century by their monarchs, with the support of the nonnoble orders,
and largely replaced or diluted by new service nobilities. The process was not
unlike that which transformed the Russian nobility around the same period and
indeed provided inspiration for it.
   The era of noble dominance (“Adelsvceldet”) came to an end in Denmark
