 22      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 work their own holdings, especially in the busiest seasons. When laboring on
 the demesne, peasants could be subjected to degrading corporal punishment by
 the landlord’s bailiff.
     To be sure, conditions were seldom as bad in every respect as they could be.
 The proprietor’s need to keep his tenancies filled with reliable tenants provided
 a strong, practical motive for moderation.35 A certain number of peasants were,
 moreover, able to obtain so-called free passes from their landlords, usually for
 payment; some, indeed, eventually became proprietors themselves, in which
 case they were often reputed to be hard taskmasters. Yet abuses were all too
 common, and it is not surprising that the Danish peasantry, especially on Sjael¬
 land, had a reputation for listlessness and irresponsibility.
    The island of Bornholm was unique because by 1744 all its peasant farmers
 were freeholders. Noble manorialism had indeed never existed there. Aside
from Bornholm s approximately 1,100 peasant freeholds, there were only some
600 freehold farms in the rest of Denmark at mid-century. Yet the meaning of
freehold (selveje) could vary considerably and at this time was often more or less
synonymous with hereditary tenancy (arvefceste). The peasant freeholder could
still be subject to the local manorial court and pay a perpetual annual fee or
render labor services to a former manorial landlord for his holding. Outside
Bornholm and Amager, he was also bound to his district—although not to a land¬
lord—by the stavnsbdnd.36
    In addition to the peasant farmers (gardmcend) and their families, the peas¬
 antry included various other categories. Farms and manors employed numerous
 hired hands, both male and female, who were generally lodged and fed by their
masters. Cotters (husmcend) were provided with a cottage, with or without a plot
of land, on a terminable lease, in exchange for at least part-time work on the
farm or manor. Inderster rented lodgings on a farm, taking such occasional work
as the neighborhood provided. Rural paupers received some minimal support
from the parish. Under the stavnsbdnd the demands upon the tenant farmer were
often so great that many peasants did their best to avoid having tenancies forced
upon them. Peasants frequently circulated from one category to another during
the course of their lives.37
   In the duchies, Schleswig and Holstein, conditions varied more widely. In
eastern Holstein and southeastern Schleswig, serfdom (Leibeigenschaft) pre¬
vailed. The serfs were legal dependents of their lords, without codified rights
under the law. They held tenancies at the lord’s pleasure and performed heavy
and arbitrary labor services (Frohndienst). Tenant farms did not enjoy the same
protection as in Denmark, and their absorption into the demesne lands proceeded
much further, resulting in large latifundia.
   In western Holstein and most of Schleswig, however, the great majority of
the peasantry was free and in some areas peasant freeholders were numerous.
Meanwhile much of the peasant population consisted of cotters and landless
