                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         17

privileges fell increasingly into the hands of nonnoble proprietors. Axel Linvald
noted that between 1730 and 1766 the number of farmsteads in Denmark owned
by bourgeois proprietors increased from 33.5 to 42.5 percent, their total share
of the assessed agricultural land grew from 22.9 to 30.9 percent, while roughly
half of the land in noble ownership was held by members of the new nobility
of recent burgher or foreign origin. One-third of Sweden and about 9 percent
of Finland consisted of privileged manorial (fralse) land of various types, to
which, at the beginning of the century, the nobility had exclusive legal right. In
practice, however, they had already lost some of this land by 1723, when other
persons of quality (standspersoner)—excluding the peasantry—were formally
allowed to purchase most forms of manorial land. By 1760 some 15 percent of
it in Sweden had passed into nonnoble ownership, and much of the remainder
belonged to nobles of recent origin.22
    In both monarchies at mid-century the top positions in administration, in the
officer and diplomatic corps, and at court were monopolized by the nobility. No
commoners sat on state councils or held rank in royal entourages. But below this
level men of nonnoble status vied vigorously and generally successfully with the
lower nobility. The Scandinavian kingdoms were no longer expansive European
powers. Their aristocracies were now faced with mounting competition for land
and state employment from the nonnoble orders, while custom made it difficult
for them to enter other walks of life.
    By around 1760 there were signs in Scandinavia, as elsewhere in Europe, of
a growing aristocratic reaction in defense of noble exclusivity and status. In both
the Danish and Swedish monarchies old traditions of hostility toward the nobility
meanwhile lingered on from the conflicts of the seventeenth century and earlier.
Characteristically the nonnoble classes, and particularly the peasantry, looked
to their kings as their guardians against the pretentions of the nobility. Accord¬
ing to a contemporary, meanwhile, Frederik V’s failure in October 1760 to cele¬
brate the centennial of royal absolutism was taken by the burghers of Copen¬
hagen as confirmation “that we no longer have any king and that the nobles twist
and turn him as they will.”23
   Both monarchies had their state Lutheran churches, whose clergy enjoyed
corporate status and in effect comprised an element of the bureaucracy. In Swe-
den-Finland it was represented by its own Estate in the Riksdag. Although open
to outside recruitment, the clergy tended to consist largely of an oligarchy of
established clerical families. Few nobles or burghers sought ordination, while
peasants’ sons who did so seldom rose to the higher levels of preferment.24
   Non-Lutherans were few and only gradually came to enjoy some measure of
tolerance, largely because of the economic advantages to be gained by allowing
the immigration of skilled foreigners. Religious freedom was permitted in the
free port of Altona in Holstein, for instance, and a colony of Moravian Brethren
would be established at Christiansfeld in Schleswig in 1772. By this time Mora-
