 20       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

     The Danish government showed a certain paternalistic concern for the peas¬
 antry, not least since it payed the land tax. The crown prohibited, in 1682,
 further incorporation of tenant farms into manorial demesnes, an injunction peri¬
 odically repeated, though frequently enough circumvented, during the eigh¬
 teenth century. In 1702 Frederik IV took the unprecedented step of abolishing
 vornedskab for peasants born in the affected area after 1701, the first real at¬
 tempt at peasant emancipation in Europe.31
     This reform proved immature, however, since the real root of the peasant
 problem was the manors’ near monopoly of agricultural land, which reduced the
 peasantry to a dependent class of tenant farmers and hired laborers, even without
 vornedskab or where it had never existed. In return for their tenancies, most
 peasant tenants paid an initial fee (indfaestning) upon assuming their leases, as
 well as an annual quitrent in natura or in money, and generally provided varying
amounts of labor (hoveri) to the proprietor’s demesne (hovedgard).
    The situation for both proprietors and peasants worsened with the severe agri¬
cultural depression of the 1720s and early 1730s. Proprietors had difficulty in
filling vacant tenant farms and were much concerned over loss of labor through
free migration. This led to the establishment of the stavnsband in 1733 by
Christian VI: the male peasant was stavnsbunden, or “place-bound,” forbidden
to leave the manor where he resided from his fourteenth to his thirty-sixth year
without the proprietor’s permission. Its official purpose was to keep men of
military age within their districts throughout their period of liability for con¬
scription into the militia.
   Militarily the stavnsband made little difference, for the regular Danish
units—as opposed to the Norwegian—consisted of recruited, mercenary troops
and relatively few peasants were called up for militia service. It was far more
significant for the manorial proprietors, whose interests it clearly served. As
they were empowered to designate men for conscription on their manors, they
could use this threat to pressure peasants into accepting vacant tenancies, often
on onerous terms; although militia service normally involved only brief training
on Sundays, it was feared and hated by the peasantry.
    Unlike the old vornedskab, the stavnsband applied to all of Denmark, except
the islands of Bornholm and Amager. Proprietors continuously urged its exten¬
sion. Already by 1746 it was extended from the ninth to the fortieth year; in
 1762 its lower limit was set at four years. There were even attempts to include
women under it, but this was hardly necessary for their mobility was effectively
limited by the restrictions on male peasants.32
   The stavnsband was a characteristically mercantilistic measure in its concern
for the wealth of the state and view of the individual as a cog in the economic
machine. The state’s immediate concern was the agricultural depression; thus the
stavnsband must be seen in connection with the closing of Denmark and south¬
ern Norway to foreign grain imports in 1735 and a temporary lowering of the
