                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         23

laborers, especially in the areas with serfdom and large estates.38
    The peasantry of Norway was juridically free and consisted largely of free¬
holders. The early eighteenth century was a good time for the Norwegian peas¬
antry, in contrast to the Danish. During the 1660s the government had sold off
much crown property, principally to merchants, officials, and other nonpeas¬
ants. After the end of the Great Northern War, it sold off most of its remaining
 landholdings in Norway, this time largely to peasants. During the agricultural
depression of the second quarter of the century much of the former crown land
purchased earlier by persons outside the peasant class was sold off to peasant
buyers, who took advantage of depressed land prices. Thus, whereas the sale
of crown lands in Denmark and the Duchies at this time profited mainly the
manorial proprietors, the number of Norwegian peasant farmers who owned
their land increased from around one quarter in the mid-seventeenth to three-
quarters in the mid-eighteenth century, by which time about two-thirds of the
land belonged to those who cultivated it. Whether this was mainly due to govern¬
ment policy in selling off crown lands or to low land prices during the agricul¬
tural slump has been argued by Norwegian historians.39
     It was the pride of the Norwegian peasant freeholder that his farm, if heredi¬
tary property, was protected by odel right, according to which it could not be
sold outside the family without its common consent, and could be repurchased
from an outside buyer upon demand of a family member at the buyer’s purchase
price within twenty years. Under the asetesret, the farm passed undivided to the
nearest heir, who in turn provided compensation or support to the others. These
ancient rights preserved peasant land in peasant hands, providing a protection
without parallel outside Scandinavia, but could cause economic problems by
obstructing the circulation of property on an open market and the raising of
credit against collateral.
    Peasant freeholding was most widespread in the richer and more populous
0stlandet and Trondelag regions, whereas tenancy remained common in the
poorer districts in the west and north, as well as in Norway’s only entailed noble
manors, the countships of Laurvig and Jarlsberg, and the barony of Rosendal.
Since 1687 life tenancy was mandatory in Norway. Rents remained fixed at
relatively low levels, while only the fee payable upon assuming a tenancy could
be raised, providing the landowner with his principal return. In the absence of
manorial demesne farming, the tenant (leilending) usually owed no labor service
and could devote himself entirely to his own farm. Most worked farms occupied
by their families for generations, some leased large and profitable holdings, and
many held land under both leasehold and freehold. Indeed, before the division
of farms among heirs was legally permitted in 1769, and even thereafter, the
ownership of a single farm was often shared by several persons, who were en¬
titled to portions of its produce and responsible for parts of its land tax. The
status of the cultivator was thus determined more by the size and prosperity of
