 14      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

made up through the export abroad of Norwegian timber and fish, and the
freight services of Norwegian shipping. Thus whereas Norway provided the
main market for Denmark’s products, Denmark could offer only a limited outlet
for Norway’s, which therefore comprised the monarchy’s principal native ex¬
ports. Iceland and the Faeroes meanwhile exchanged their raw wool, knitwares,
eider down, and fish for Danish grain and Norwegian timber. Schleswig and
Holstein formed their own separate tariff area within the monarchy—except for
a few enclaves, of which Altona was the most important—and were largely
oriented toward the Hamburg market.
   Scandinavian trade, both domestic and foreign, was mainly waterborne,
hence the vital importance of shipping. Norwegian shippers enjoyed a particular
advantage over those in Baltic ports because of their longer sailing season from
ice-free harbors and the shorter distances to western Europe, especially Great
Britain, Scandinavia’s principal trade partner. Norwegian ships could thus
normally make at least two round trips to Britain during the season.19 The same
factors also largely account for Gothenburg’s importance in Sweden’s trade.
Both governments sought to protect native shipping. The Swedish Produktplakat
of 1724, modeled on the British Navigation Acts, required that foreign ships
carry to Sweden only products of their countries of origin. The Danish trade
monopolies largely served the same purpose. Meanwhile the wars of the late
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gave a great stimulus to neutral Scandi¬
navian shipping.
    The greatest weakness of the Scandinavian economies lay in the area of
money and finance. Although they produced some copper and small amounts of
silver, they lacked sufficient bullion for a wide metallic base, as well as trade
balances that could accumulate it from abroad. Hence the extensive use of bar¬
ter, payment in kind, and compensation for public services in natura and
through crown tenancies. Hence also the regular issue of paper money in both
states by the middle of the eighteenth century, to supplement specie.
    Already in 1668 the Swedish state took over a private banking house that had
failed, thus founding Europe’s first national bank. A central bank for the Danish
monarchy was established in Copenhagen in 1736. Credit remained in short
supply, however. The banks in Stockholm and Copenhagen tended to compound
the problem by favoring the large merchant houses of the capitals at the expense
of the provinces. It was in particular a recurrent source of irritation to Norwe¬
gian merchants that Copenhagen, in keeping with its centralizing, mercantilistic
policies, repeatedly refused to allow a separate bank for Norway. Swedish iron
and Norwegian timber exporters commonly operated on credit extended to them
by their foreign trade partners.
   Worse than the tightness of credit was the instability of the currencies, partic¬
ularly after 1760. Under the financial strains of the Seven Years’ War both
governments issued quantities of unbacked paper money. The same device
