                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        19

identity, encompassing not only the old burgher estate, but also a variety of non¬
noble persons of quality and, to a degree, certain elements of the clergy and even
of the lower bureaucratic nobility which shared similar interests and outlooks.
This development first manifested itself clearly in Norway, where in the virtual
absence of a native nobility, the town merchants, manufacturers, civil and mili¬
tary officials, and clergy formed a common upper class— “de konditionerte ” or
“persons of condition"—as distinguished from the urban and rural masses. By
the 1760s middle-class awareness was developing markedly in Sweden and Fin¬
land.27
    The towns contained only a small part of the population. In Denmark this
amounted as late as 1801 to about a fifth, in Sweden in 1805 to less than a tenth
of the total; on Iceland, the largest community, Reykjavik, had at that time only
some 300 inhabitants.28 Within the towns, only a minority belonged to the
burgher estate, or even the more broadly defined middle classes. The rest con¬
sisted of apprentices and journeymen, domestic servants, unskilled laborers,
seamen, and enlisted military personnel, as well as paupers, orphans, and crimi¬
nals, for whom the municipalities made some minimal provision. There were
 also migrant laborers from the countryside and in places a certain number of un¬
 naturalized foreigners, among them Jews or other non-Lutherans, especially in
 Holstein.
    Everywhere, however, the peasantry comprised the great mass of the popula¬
 tion, and the greatest cleavages within Nordic society were those separating the
 peasants from those above them in the existing hierarchies. Of no less signifi¬
 cance, Sten Carlsson has shown that the conditions of the peasantry—legal,
 economic, and political—were never farther apart in the different Scandinavian
 lands than they were by the middle of the eighteenth century.29
    In the mid-eighteenth century conditions were probably worst for much of the
 peasantry of the German provinces, who were serfs, Leibeigne of the East
 Elbian type. In Denmark male peasants were bound to the manors through a
 form of virtual serfdom, in fact if not in name. In Norway, Iceland, and the
 Faeroes, they were both juridically free and largely freeholders. The same was
 true in Sweden and Finland, where the peasant freeholders were also repre¬
sented by their own Estate in the Riksdag.
   Once again, it is the Danish monarchy that offers the greatest contrasts. In
Denmark proper, the peasantry had been free—as it was in the other Scandina¬
vian lands—until the agricultural depression of the fifteenth century, when the
practice of vomedskab developed on the islands of Sjaelland (Zealand), Mon,
Falster, and Lolland. Under this system, a male peasant could not leave a manor
without his lord’s consent and was obliged to take over a vacant tenant farm at
the lord’s demand. From the same time there also took place a constant expan¬
sion of manors at the expense of peasant freeholds, so that by the mid-eighteenth
century only about 3 percent of the peasants were freeholders.30
