 18      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 vians were already distinguishing themselves as missionaries in Denmark’s
 overseas colonies. More important than the small numbers of non-Lutherans
 were widespread pietistic influences among the clergy and laity of the state
 churches themselves.
    To the burgher estate belonged all who held citizenship rights in chartered
 towns, including merchants, municipal officers, and master craftsmen. Its mem¬
 bers enjoyed privileged monopolies on most forms of trade and production for
 trade within their specified areas.
   The estate had its own internal hierarchy. First came the powerful and
wealthy merchant oligarchies of the capitals, Copenhagen and Stockholm, which
controlled the lion’s share of overseas trade and of finance, followed by the
smaller elites of the main provincial centers also engaged in foreign trade:
Gothenburg, Christiania, Bergen, Trondheim, Flensburg, Altona. Closely
associated with and largely deriving from them were the magistratures of these
towns. Below these levels were the mass of middling and smaller merchants, in
both the larger centers and the smaller provincial towns, and the manufacturers,
who generally operated on a modest scale. At the bottom were the craft masters,
generally organized into guilds.
    While the burghers tended to be socially ambitious, they were also jealous
of their own distinctions and privileges, which they everywhere defended
against encroachment. The great merchant families of the leading towns were
closely knit through ties of business, blood, and marriage, and were often of
foreign extraction. The wealthiest of them could rival the high nobility in opu¬
lence and style of living. Many owned manors in the countryside, and in Den-
mark-Norway, they indulged their vanity by purchasing honorific personal titles
of the German type, such as etatsrdd or justitsrdd.
    Within the burgher estate there were cleavages between different categories
of merchant, between merchant and artisan, and between merchant and magis¬
trate. In smaller provincial towns, however, they lost much of their import. Here
the distinctions between merchant, artisan, and town official were less clear-cut.
No guilds existed in many of the smaller localities, although their craftsmen
might sometimes be affiliated with those in larger centers.25
    Aside from those who enjoyed actual burgher status, there were elements,
both urban and rural, that in a terminology soon to evolve would be recognized
as “middle-class” and which included a variety of persons not legally belonging
to any of the traditional estates. In Sweden they were referred to as ofralse
standspersoner, “nonnoble persons of quality,” and included many landown¬
ers, ironmasters, manufacturers, and government officials. Here they were of
particulai significance, since they were prominent in the economy, administra¬
tion, and society, yet were excluded from political representation in the Riks¬
dag.26
   During the century there were signs of an emerging sense of middle-class
