 16       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 when the Estates of the Clergy and Burghers combined at the Diet of 1660 to
 give Frederik III and his posterity full and undivided sovereignty. The king and
 his immediate successors mistrusted the old nobility of Denmark and Schleswig-
 Holstein, which was excluded from power and responsibility, and thereafter
 declined rapidly. Already by 1700 most of its lands had passed into other hands
 and many of the old families were impoverished. In Norway the last remnants
of the proud medieval nobility sank into the peasant class.
    The old Danish and Norwegian nobility had recognized no internal distinc¬
tions. In 1671, however, Christian V created a new high nobility of counts and
barons (lensgreve and lensbaroner), to serve largely as an ornamental court
noblesse as at Louis XIV s Versailles and endowed with special privileges on
their manorial domains (lensgrevskaber and lensbaronief) of requisite size. In
the same year there was established a table of ranks for the civil and military
establishments, conferring personal or hereditary nobility upon the highest cate¬
gories of officials. Both the small high nobility of counts and barons and the
larger nobility of rank (rangadet) contained few persons from the older nobility
and consisted almost entirely of persons drawn from the burgher and clerical
classes, and of foreigners, above all Germans.20
    In the Swedish monarchy, events followed a similar course in 1680, when the
Clerical, Burgher, and Peasant Estates of the Riksdag conferred absolute sover¬
eignty upon Karl XI, thus breaking the power of the nobility. The government
thereupon reclaimed those crown lands that had been lost to the nobility since
the beginning of the century, thereby reducing the total effective landholdings
of the nobility by about half in Sweden and Finland. Although the older nobility
remained active in state service, they could not fill heavy demands, especially
for military officers, during the wars of Karl XII. Following the warrior-king’s
death and the end of royal absolutism in 1718, large numbers of nonnoble of¬
ficers and bureaucrats were ennobled by the crown and accepted or “intro¬
duced” into the House of the Nobility (Riddarhus), the Noble Estate of the Riks¬
dag. In the conflict within that Estate between the older and the newer, service
nobility, the latter gained the upper hand by the 1730s. In Sweden, as in Den¬
mark, the leading aristocrats of the eighteenth century were thus relatively new
men and likewise often of foreign extraction.21
    In both monarchies the nobility supported itself partly through landowner-
ship, partly through state service, which in turn was frequently rewarded, espe¬
cially in Sweden-Finland, through the holding of service tenures of house and
land on the crown domain. Those who were owners of manors (hovedgarde,
saterier) enjoyed certain privileges, which, however, were attached to the land
rather than the person. The most important of these were exemptions, under
certain conditions, from the land taxes on the manorial demesne itself.
   Throughout the century there was growing pressure from the nonnoble
classes upon these traditional noble preserves. Manorial lands with their tax
