                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         21

land tax. Under the conditions of that time, increased agricultural production for
the market was expected only from a more intensive cultivation of the manorial
demesne lands. Within a few years production and prices did indeed rise, al¬
though it remains a matter of dispute to what extent this was due to the govern¬
ment s drastic measures in the early 1730s or to rising population and generally
improved conditions throughout Europe.33
    At the same time, the stavnsband is a sign of the government’s administrative
weakness. Despite the king’s theoretical absolutism, the bureaucratic machine
was still so undeveloped that it had to make use of the proprietor class to fulfill
basic public functions at the local level, and was thus bound to accommodate
its interests. The proprietor’s responsibilities included providing candidates for
conscription into the militia and collecting the land tax for all the peasant tenant
farms on the manor. If these tenancies comprised at least 200 tonder hartkom—
the basic fiscal unit of land—the manor was designated as “complete,” which
exempted its demesne from the land tax. (For countships and baronies, much
of the land in peasant tenancies was also exempt.) If his tenant farms fell vacant,
the proprietor remained personally liable for their taxes. He was meanwhile for¬
bidden to incorporate them into the demesne or to reduce their number. Noble
proprietors and those with special royal dispensations were authorized to main¬
tain their own manorial courts and to appoint the pastors of local churches under
their patronage.34
    The Danish peasants’ lot in the mid-eighteenth century was unenviable.
Manorial tenancies were normally granted for life, which was binding on the
tenant, although his landlord could find reasons enough to evict him for real or
alleged violations of his lease. When a tenant died, the landlord had first claim
upon his estate to compensate himself for outstanding debts or for deteriora¬
tion-real or alleged—of the tenancy, and his widow and children could be
evicted to make room for a new tenant. Peasant families could thus be bound
to poverty, generation after generation.
    Labor services varied greatly in nature and extent, but they tended generally
to become increasingly onerous up to the final decades of the century. The
spread of market-oriented agriculture encouraged the establishment of new
manors and the enlargement of existing ones, together with widespread, often
complex transactions to consolidate scattered demesne lands and to cluster close
around them the peasant tenancies providing labor for their cultivation. This
labor increased in amount as landlords brought under the plow previously
untilled demesne holdings. The burden became greater still as the crown confis¬
cated many remaining peasant freeholds for tax defaults, then sold them to
private proprietors, enlarging their demesnes while reducing the numbers of
peasant farms paying taxes and supplying labor. Unspecified and unlimited labor
obligations frequently compelled peasant farmers to keep hired hands and extra
horses they could ill afford, while they themselves might be hard pressed to
