32         THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760


pay off the national debt following the Great Northern War. Sale of crown
properties continued to reduce the standing debt until as late as 1754, but both
Christian VI and Frederik V were lavish in their tastes, as attested by numerous
monumental buildings and royal residences in and around Copenhagen. Chris-
tiansborg palace, begun in 1733, is estimated to have cost as much as all the
landed property on Sjaelland was worth during the years of its construction. Such
luxury expenditures could be justified in mercantilist thought on grounds that
they stimulated the circulation of money within the realm. But not surprisingly,
the standing debt rose rapidly after 1754.58
     Sweden and Finland comprised a single, unitary kingdom. Here too a royal
absolutism was established, under Karl XI in 1680, a generation later than in
Denmark-Norway. At the Riksdag of that year, mounting social conflicts led to
the lower nobility combining with the Clerical, Burgher, and Peasant Estates to
overwhelm the high nobility which had dominated the state council (rad). The
Riksdag declared the king’s authority limited by no law. There followed, as
noted, a large-scale reappropriation (reduktion) from the nobility of previously
alienated crown lands. The civil and military establishments were rationalized,
the bureaucracy strengthened, and its higher functionaries ennobled. Yet just as
the Swedish king had never been as limited in power during the seventeenth
century as the Danish, “Caroline autocracy” was never as complete in practice
as Danish absolutism. Karl XI preferred to work with, rather than abolish, the
Riksdag, which had played a far more active role in the past than the Danish
or Norwegian Estates. It retained the right to approve taxes under normal cir¬
cumstances and gradually expanded its limited sphere of action.59
     The ruinous Great Northern War and the sudden death of Karl XII without
a direct heir in 1718 brought an end to Swedish absolutism and a powerful re¬
action against it. The Riksdag seized the initiative. In 1719-20 it accepted the
late king’s younger sister, Ulrika Eleanora, and her consort, Fredrik of Hesse,
as reigning monarchs, subject to their acceptance of a new constitution osten¬
sibly intended to restore an earlier, traditional balanced polity of crown, council,
and estates. In actuality, the royalists soon had cause to complain that the king
was reduced to a kind of “Venetian doge.” He could administer the kingdom
only through the council, which was set at sixteen members, where he could cast
two votes in case of an even split; he was otherwise bound to the majority deci¬
sion. Under such circumstances he could hardly play an independent role.
     Until the 1730s it appeared that the council had regained its old and powerful
role in government. It governed with wide discretionary powers between riks-
dagar, and its members were in principle appointed for life. Yet from the begin¬
ning its membership represented the dominant faction in the Estates. This prin¬
ciple was firmly established by 1738, when a new faction, which called itself
the “Hats,” gained ascendancy. The Hats arraigned most of the old “Cap”
