24       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

the farm he tilled, rather than by the terms of his occupancy.40 Below the peasant
farmers, both freeholders and tenants, there were numerous cotters, hired
hands, day laborers, and paupers.41
   The proud Norwegian hereditary freeholder—the odelbonde, whose family
farm was protected by law and custom—was the ideal of eighteenth-century
Danish agrarian reformers, just as the oppressed Holstein serf was its opposite.
Yet among the landless elements of the peasantry in Norway the same ideal
freedom did not apply. Unlike in Denmark, the backbone of the Norwegian part
of the army was the territorial militia, while Norwegian farmers, like Danish
landlords, feared a dearth of farm laborers during the first half of the century.
An ordinance in 1754 therefore required that young, unmarried men who did
not cultivate land take service for not less than a year at a time within their own
parishes, which they were forbidden to leave without permission from the royal
bailiff to ensure recruitment for the army.42
   Within the peasantry there were thus marked social distinctions between a
kind of “peasant aristocracy” of old, prosperous, and respected families and the
mass of small farmers, cotters, and landless laborers. The greatest cleavage
within Norwegian society was, however, that which separated the peasantry as
a whole from the upper class of merchants, officials, and clergy, which was
largely of Danish, German, or other foreign derivation. Toward them, the Nor¬
wegian peasants felt a hostility and suspicion that in Denmark, the duchies, and
Sweden-Finland was reserved largely for the nobility. The peasantry in their
often remote settlements lived as much as possible within their own world: their
basically self-sufficient economy, the communal management of their own
affairs according to custom, their ancient and elaborate culture. The attitude of
their own leaders was well expressed by the peasant chieftan Trond Laurpak,
who proudly claimed, “Frederik is king in Denmark, but I am king in Bjerk-
reim!”43
   On Iceland and the Faeroes the peasants were likewise free, although a much
larger proportion were tenants than in Norway, and, on Iceland at least, under
harder terms. Slightly over half the Icelandic farms were peasant freeholds; the
remainder belonged to the crown, the bishoprics of Skalholt and Holar, the
parish churches, and charitable funds. Rents were fixed, but during bad years
tenants were frequently evicted for nonpayment, and they were often heavily
burdened with labor services to the landlord or bailiff. Extensive subleasing of
landholdings frequently increased the tenants’ obligations.44
   Conditions for the peasantry in Sweden and Finland were basically uniform,
and lay somewhere between those prevailing in Norway and in Denmark. The
peasantry was juridically free, but many peasant farmers were tenants, on either
limited or lifetime leases, on noble manors, which comprised about one-third of
the land. Tenant farmers paid a fee upon assuming their tenancies and a yearly
rent, usually in produce. Those close to the manorial seat could also be required
