                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         33

councillors on charges of misuse of power under the constitution before a Riks¬
dag commission, which dismissed them, after which they were replaced by
leading Hats. This process of licentiering would be repeated as Riksdag major¬
ities changed in 1765, 1769, and 1771. Despite the legal fiction of dismissal for
cause, former councillors normally retained the title and pension of the position
and could be reappointed to the council with later changes of regime. There thus
evolved a kind of parliamentarianism in Sweden, without parallel outside Great
Britain.60
   The ultimate power during Sweden’s “Era of Liberty” (1718-72) thus re¬
sided in the Riksdag, which continually widened its jurisdiction. It legislated and
had complete control of state finances. A flourishing system of Riksdag commit¬
tees formulated policy and reviewed in minutest detail the performance of the
council and government departments. Of central importance was the so-called
Secret Committee (Sekreta utskottet), which concerned itself with vital matters
of state security and finance, and evolved into a kind of “shadow cabinet” be¬
hind the council. Standing deputations watched over the administration between
riksdagar, normally held every three years. On repeated occasions, special Riks¬
dag commissions intervened directly in administrative matters or held inquests
on politically suspect persons. The Riksdag determined the royal succession in
1719-20 and 1743.
  The Riksdag was composed of four Estates: the Nobility (Riddarskap och
Adel), the Clergy (Prastestand), the Burghers (Borgarstand), and—unique in
Europe—the Peasants (Bondestand). Of these, the Noble Estate was by far the
largest and most influential, with proud constitutional traditions tracing back to
the Middle Ages.61 It consisted of the headmen of each of the “introduced”
noble families in the kingdom, or their authorized proxies, altogether well over
a thousand in number, although attendance was usually much smaller. In the
seventeenth century it had been divided into three classes, each with one vote
within the Estate, giving predominant power to a small high aristocracy of
counts and barons, which had likewise dominated the council. This class divi¬
sion was abolished in 1719, allowing each member his individual vote, while
the mass ennoblement of nonnoble officers and bureaucrats from the preceding
war years soon flooded the Riddarhus, or House of the Nobility, with new men.
The old “noble aristocracy” was thus overwhelmed by the new “noble democ¬
racy,” to use Hugo Valentin’s terms, most decisively with the Hat victory of
173 8.62 Indeed, one may carry Valentin’s insight further and perceive the begin¬
ning of the dissolution of an aristocratic order in Sweden within the Noble Estate
itself. The Nobility elected its lantmarskalk, or speaker, at each Riksdag. It pro¬
vided half of the 100-man Secret Committee—which nonetheless voted by
Estate—the other half being divided between the Clergy and the Burghers.
   The Clerical Estate consisted of the bishops and elected members for each
