                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         31

the free port of Altona, the Duchies formed their own tariff area, separate from
the kingdom.
   The old Schleswig-Holstein Estates, which had been powerful in the sixteenth
century, fell into abeyance during the seventeenth; a last rump session of the
Prelates and Nobility was held in 1711. The Schleswig-Holstein Ritterschaft,
consisting of the old, established nobility throughout both duchies, nonetheless
maintained its corporate existence throughout the century and beyond, holding
periodic convocations and addressing repeated petitions for the preservation or
increase of its privileges to the king in Copenhagen. In the absence of the defunct
Estates, the Ritterschaft considered itself the guardian of the ancient rights and
privileges of the duchies.57
   There were, as seen, separate military establishments for Denmark, Norway,
and the duchies. In all three territories peasants were conscripted on the basis
of one man per designated area of farmland (Icegd) to serve in the territorial
militia. The difference was that whereas in Norway and the duchies the armies
consisted principally of the militia regiments, in Denmark its core was composed
of recruited, regular units, composed mainly of German mercenaries from out¬
side the monarchy. Whereas the territorial troops lived on the land in their
respective districts, meeting periodically for regimental training, the regular
troops were permanently garrisoned in the capital and other towns and for¬
tresses. The navy was a common institution, with regular cadres that could be
filled out through maritime conscription in certain towns and districts, especially
in Norway; the greater part of its personnel was indeed Norwegian.
   Finance was always the greatest weakness of the Danish state, as it was in
most of Europe. Its principal revenues derived from the regular land taxes,
excise duties, tolls, tariffs, and income from the royal domain. At times these
were augmented by extraordinary levies. Denmark bore the heaviest fiscal
burden. It was lighter in Norway, which raised and maintained its own territorial
troops; the government in Copenhagen was moreover always wary of stirring
up discontent among the free Norwegian peasantry, whose loyalty was essential
to defend their land against Sweden. Norway provided about one-sixth of the
state revenue. In the duchies taxes were also generally lighter, owing to local
privileges. Yet even in Norway and the duchies the burden could be onerous
enough, considering the multitude of local levies and separate fees for the ser¬
vices of local officials, as well as the scarcity of money and credit.
   From around 1730 until the early 1750s, the state budget varied between four
and four and a half million rigsdaler annually, of which about half a million went
to the king’s privy purse. Altogether about a million rigsdaler went to the sup¬
port of the royal family and court establishment; military and naval expenditures
were the next largest item, followed by the civil administration, and thereafter
by subsidies to economic and cultural enterprises.
   Frederik IV had retrenched administrative costs and sold off crown lands to
