 30        THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760


 after Norway was increasingly welded into a unitary administrative system with
 Denmark. The position of statholder, or viceroy, for Norway, still important at
the beginning of the eighteenth century, sank into insignificance and remained
 unfilled much of the time. Many of the top positions were held by Danes, Hol-
steiners, and Germans, whereas few Norwegians advanced into the higher posts
of the central government in Denmark.55
      Yet there still remained some differences. Great disparities in physical condi¬
tions, economy, and above all, social structure led to the establishment of similar
but nonetheless separate law codes for Denmark in 1683 and Norway in 1687.
During the eighteenth century the Norwegian bureaucracy developed an increas¬
ing corporate sense, and even those of its members who were not themselves
Norwegians by origin often identified enthusiastically with specifically Norwe¬
gian interests. The Norwegian army remained administratively separate from
the Danish and thus, particularly during wartime, a focus for Norwegian
sentiment.
      The only part of the kingdom to have a bureaucracy and clergy that were
virtually all native-born, except for the stiftamtmand himself, was Iceland. Few
outsiders had any desire to be posted there, and few could understand the lan¬
guage.56
      In the duchies the administrative situation was more complex. Here the
Danish Royal Law of 1665 did not expressly or in practice fully apply because
of Holstein’s connection with the Holy Roman Empire and Schleswig’s “indis¬
soluble union” with Holstein, and since only parts of both duchies were under
the Danish crown at that time; most of the remainder belonged to a younger,
rival line of the Oldenburg house, the dukes of Holstein-Gottorp. The Danish
kings were thus constrained to tread lightly in matters of local privilege.
   In the Great Northern War, Denmark gained complete control of Schleswig
by 1720. Frederik IV evidently wished to incorporate the duchy outright into the
kingdom but was prudent enough to settle for a local administration for Schles¬
wig, separate from his holdings in Holstein.
   Between 1720 and 1773 Holstein was divided among the “royal portion”
(Holstein-Gliickstadt), the lands of the duke of Holstein-Gottorp, mainly in the
southeast around the ducal capital at Kiel, certain territories administered jointly
by the king and the duke, and a couple of small autonomous enclaves acquired
by the king by mid-century.
   Schleswig     and   the   royal   parts   of   Holstein—like   Oldenburg-Delmen-
horst—had their own governing institutions under the German Chancellery in
Copenhagen, at times the duchies also had their own statholder, who nonetheless
played a relatively minor role. They had their own systems of law, Jutlandic in
Schleswig, Germanic in Holstein. They maintained their own regiments, and
Holstein was obligated to provide forty cavalrymen and eighty infantrymen to
the Reichsarmee in the event the Holy Roman Empire went to war. Except for
