28        THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760


devolved upon the government bureaus, or kollegier, where de facto heads
emerged to take control. The more important of these sat on—or were eventually
taken into—the royal council (konsejl), which became the real locus of power,
with the king giving his more or less automatic consent to its proposals. This
transformation from a personal to a bureaucratic absolutism was completed
under Frederik V (1746-66), who, though handsome and popular, was lazy and
debauched, and after the first few years degenerated into a hopeless alcoholic.
     Both kings continued to fill the council and top administrative posts with
foreigners, above all with Germans from outside the duchies. This became in
time less a matter of principle than of convenience and personal connections, as
Germans already in Danish service secured appointments for their relatives and
friends. The language of the court, the army, and much of the administration
was German under Christian VI and Frederik V. During Frederik V’s entire
reign only one Dane and one Holsteiner sat on the royal council.
     Nationality as such meant little to cosmopolitan eighteenth-century states¬
men, and the Germans were on the whole well chosen, capable, and dedicated.
Denmark-Norway thus drew upon a greater reservoir of abilities than it itself
could provide, while offering—together with much of the rest of Europe—a
welcome field for underemployed talents from the smaller German principali¬
ties. After 1751 the dominating figure on the council was the Hanoverian Baron
(later Count) Johan Hartwig Ernst Bernstorff, the foreign minister, who worked
smoothly with the Mecklenburger Count Adam Gottlob Moltke, Frederik V’s
favorite, a conscientious and astute “gray eminence.” They and their peers
were representatives of an aristocratic bureaucratism, which stressed the mon¬
arch’s need for stable institutions, dependable councillors, and the nobility as
intermediaries between himself and the mass of his subjects.52 In R. R. Palmer’s
terms, the Danish council—even though composed mainly of foreigners—was
evolving into a kind of “quasi-constituted body,” essentially self-recruiting,
noble in origin, and imbued with an appropriate philosophy to justify its posi¬
tion.53 It performed conscientiously and with all due deliberation, keeping the
ponderous wheels of administration turning. It was not, however, given to rapid
and decisive action or to daring innovation.
   The king and council ruled over the entire monarchy. Immediately under
them, the kollegier had both regional and functional responsibilities. The Danish
Chancellery was charged with administrative and judicial matters in the king¬
dom, that is to say, the whole monarchy except for the German provinces, for
which the German Chancellery fulfilled the same functions. The president of the
German Chancellery also served ex officio as foreign minister until 1770, and
in fact most of the time until 1797. The other government departments, such as
the Exchequer (Rentekammer), the Board of Trade (Kommerskollegium), and the
Army and Navy Boards, had jurisdiction in their fields over the monarchy as
a whole.
