                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        25

to perform labor services. The situation was worse in this respect in the south¬
ernmost Swedish provinces of Skane and Halland, which had been part of Den¬
mark until 1658, than elsewhere in Sweden and Finland. Here labor service pro¬
vided almost entirely for the cultivation of extensive manorial demesnes; it was
not clearly fixed in amount, as elsewhere in the kingdom, and was often arbi¬
trarily increased and harshly enforced. Much of the manorial tenantry in Sweden
and Finland meanwhile lived on widely scattered tenancies, unaffected by labor
services, which were commuted to fees. Such tenants were often prosperous,
and after it became legally possible in 1789, many bought their farms to become
freeholders.45
   About a third of the land belonged to the crown, following the reduktion or
repossession of previously alienated domain in the 1680s. Peasant tenants on
crown lands paid their rent directly to the treasury. During much of the century
they were permitted to purchase their tenancies, which they did in large
numbers.
    The remaining third of Sweden at the beginning of the century belonged to
 peasant freeholders, who paid the land tax and, like crown tenants, could be
 called upon to perform limited labor service on roads and other public projects.
 Peasant freeholders and crown tenants were represented in the Riksdag by their
 own Peasant Estate. As elsewhere in Scandinavia, there were nonetheless limits
to the peasant freeholder’s rights of ownership, which did not apply to land-
owners of other classes. These included restrictions on their hunting and forest
rights, and until 1747 on their right to divide their farms. Although other com¬
 moners were permitted to acquire outlying manorial lands in 1724, this privilege
 would not be extended to the peasantry until 1789. At times they were debarred
 from purchasing crown land. The most serious encroachment upon their free¬
dom was the regulations limiting the number of farm laborers they might em¬
ploy. According to a statute in force until 1747, these went so far that a peasant
farmer was forbidden to keep his own grown or half-grown children at home
if their number exceeded by more than one the number of hired hands allowed
for his farm. Not until 1789 could the peasant farmer hire as many hands as he
wished. The peasants nonetheless widely circumvented the legal restrictions on
their freedom, so that their eventual abolition largely followed the actual state
of affairs.46
    Population growth was reflected most strongly in the relative increase of the
cotter (torpare) and landless elements of the peasantry. Throughout the century,
and beyond, unemployed, landless peasants could be compelled by statute to
take work with local farmers under year-long contracts, on pain of being placed
in workhouses. Their maximum wages were strictly limited, and in upper Norr-
land and Finland laborers were forbidden until 1766 to leave their districts {Ian)
to seek employment elsewhere. The master was allowed to administer “moderate
corporal punishment” to his hired folk. Here, as elsewhere in Scandinavia, fear
