                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        29

   The kingdom and the duchies were divided into administrative districts,
stifter, further divided into amter, under stiftamtmcend and amtmcend, respec¬
tively, the latter represented in subdistricts by royal bailiffs and clerks. The
parish clergy, in the Danish monarchy as elsewhere, also fulfilled public func¬
tions, especially with respect to education and the gathering and dissemination
of information. In Denmark and the duchies, manorial proprietors handled basic
administrative and often judicial matters on their own estates. Especially in
Norway and among the free peasantry in the duchies, there was a certain amount
of parish self-rule; here too, peasant lensmcznd were entrusted with keeping the
peace and enforcing the government’s edicts.
   During the century there was a tendency for the government to replace the
traditional magistracies of the towns with appointed mayors (byfogder), and
even where older municipal forms persisted, the burgomaster (borgmester) and
councillors (radmcend) were responsible to the local amtmand. Still, the towns
retained some vestiges of their old liberties, even where the magistracies had
disappeared, through their “elected men” (eligerede mcend), who represented
the citizenry and reviewed administration and finances in their municipalities.
   If the king’s theoretical power was limited by God alone, his effective power
depended upon the quality of his officials. Until well into the century this often
left much to be desired. Influence and connections played their role in appoint¬
ments; many offices or “expectancies” were simply sold to the highest bidder;
and there was much “lackeyism,” the practice whereby bureaucrats rewarded
their own personal retainers with minor government posts. Salaries were gener¬
ally pitifully inadequate for the lower functionaries, who were often dependent
for their compensation upon fees for their various duties. There could thus be
a fair amount of corruption. This was a particular problem in Norway, partly
because the local officials were far from the central government, partly because
the proud Norwegian peasantry were quick to remonstrate, often by sending
delegations to the king in Copenhagen. Yet the situation was improving. Chris¬
tian VI required that no one be appointed to a judicial post without examination
by the faculty of law at the University of Copenhagen. Conditions of service
gradually improved, and the worst abuses were gradually being eliminated.
   The position of Norway within the kingdom was somewhat ambiguous. From
1380 until 1536, it was clearly a separate realm, in dynastic union with Denmark
(and much of that time, with Sweden-Finland as well). In the latter year, how¬
ever, the Danish royal council decreed that henceforth Norway should “neither
be nor be called a kingdom in itself’ and that it formed an integral part of the
Danish realm. Yet this policy had not been publicly stated nor was it consistently
carried out.54 The Norwegians themselves never ceased to consider their land
a separate kingdom under the Oldenburg house. The Norwegian Estates ac¬
cepted absolutism separately for Norway in 1661, at the same time urging un¬
successfully the establishment of various special Norwegian institutions. There-
