26       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 of a lack of agricultural labor and military manpower during the century ex¬
 pressed itself in oppressive mercantilistic legislation and a growing gap between
 the propertied and unpropertied elements of the peasantry.47
    Swedish Pomerania, together with Wismar, had a population of around
90,000 in 1721 and 100,000 in 1800, most of which consisted of peasants. Like
Holstein, it remained a fief under the Holy Roman Empire, which perpetuated
its existing social structure. The Pomeranian peasants were serfs, under condi¬
tions evidently more oppressive than in Holstein. They were bound to their
manors, although their lords could move, exchange or even sell them at will.
They could marry only with their lords’ consent and were under the jurisdiction
of manorial courts in all civil and criminal matters. Peasant tenants were bur¬
dened with heavy labor services, amounting usually to four days’ work per
week, sometimes more, on the demesne. They could be evicted at any time from
their tenancies, which occurred frequently with the growing practice, through¬
out northern Germany, of expanding the demesne by incorporating tenant farms.
Increasing numbers of Pomeranian peasants were thus reduced to landless
laborers.48
     In comparing peasant conditions in the North, we must beware of overly
 facile generalizations. Manifest contrasts at the level of the farmholders, free¬
hold or tenant, should not distract from a high degree of similarity in the status
of the landless classes, everywhere subject to legal restraints.
     We should also realize that it is all too easy to judge peasant conditions from
 a Western liberal perspective, simply equating personal liberty and freehold
 property with overall well-being. A tenant farmer with a sizable, indivisible
 tenancy, even if bound to the manor, was often more prosperous than the owner
 of a small, unproductive freehold, subject to divided inheritances.49 Johannes
 Steenstrup argued in 1888 that the Danish peasant enjoyed greater protection
under the law than his English counterpart in the eighteenth century; more
 recently Olaf Klose described the peasants under the juridically more onerous
Leibeigenschaft in Schleswig-Holstein as less oppressed and more independent
 in their behavior than the Danish peasants under the stavnsband. Jerome Blum
estimated manorial labor services in Denmark and especially Holstein to be the
heaviest in any of Europe’s “servile lands.” Fridlev Skrubbeltrang holds, mean¬
while, that a more productive agriculture protected the rural population against
famine better in Denmark than elsewhere in Scandinavia, and Eli F. Heckscher
recognized that a meager and insecure food supply was the price Sweden-Fin-
land paid for the freedom of its peasantry.50
   Scandinavian society—outside the German provinces—presented a distinctive
profile. For all its local differences, this was at once more archaic and more
“modern” than that of continental Europe as a whole. It was distinguished by a
small nobility, never really feudalized and virtually absent from entire regions,
where it was replaced at the top of society by essentially middle-class elites; an
