                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        27

urban element weak in numbers and in corporate organization outside the two
capitals: above all by a peasantry with ancient traditions of freedom, which
remained the direct subjects of their monarchs under the protection of the laws,
despite varying limitations on their actual freedom by the mid-eighteenth
century.


   Neither of the two Scandinavian states was a fully unified, national state in
the eighteenth century. The Danish monarchy, or rather the lands of the Olden¬
burg house, was indeed something of a showcase for early modem European
dynasticism and colonialism, comprising a conglomeration of territories held
under differing titles and historic claims, governed by different administrative
structures and laws. Sweden-Finland formed a juridical and administrative
unity, but this did not include the German territories of Swedish Pomerania and
Wismar.
   The complexity of the Danish state was reflected in the terminology applied
to it. “The Monarchy” (Riget) referred to the state in its entirety; “the Duchies”
(Hertugdommeme or die Herzogtiimef) to Schleswig and Holstein, although not
to Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, which were geographically separate; and “the
Kingdom” (Kongeriget) to Denmark and Norway, including the old Norwegian
tributary lands of Iceland, the Faeroes, and Greenland; there were also “the
Colonies” in India, West Africa, and the West Indies.
   In October 1660, when the three Danish Estates convened in Copenhagen,
the Clergy and Burghers combined against the Nobility to declare the king
hereditary and in effect to vest him with full sovereign power. The Norwegian
Estates followed suit in 1661. Thus ended the long period of noble domination
in the kingdom since the sixteenth century, and the Danish and Norwegian
Estates consigned themselves to oblivion. The change in regime was confirmed
by the Royal Law (Kongelov or Lex Regia) of 1665, the most uncompromising
statement of royal absolutism of its time, which proclaimed the monarch respon¬
sible to God alone. Thus, from one of Europe’s weakest rulers, the Danish-
Norwegian king became its theoretically most absolute, at least within the King¬
dom proper.51
   The basic features of Danish absolutism were concentration and uniformity.
All authority emanated from the king, through the central administration in
Copenhagen. This was organized collegially and largely staffed with foreigners
to prevent any individual from gaining undue influence over the monarch or the
old nobility from recovering its power. Local administration was standardized,
and the laws were codified in Denmark and Norway.
  Personal absolutism reached its height under Frederik IV (1699-1730). His
immediate successors were, however, no longer up to the burden it imposed.
Christian VI (1730-46) was well-meaning and industrious, but physically weak
and prone to lose himself in detail. Increasingly the business of government
