34       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

diocese, normally fifty-one in all, presided over by the archbishop of Uppsala.
Although curates without parishes of their own were permitted to elect represen¬
tatives, few of them ever sat in the Estate.
    The Burgher Estate comprised the representatives of Sweden’s and Finland’s
 101 towns, of which Stockholm sent ten—among whom the speaker, or talman,
of the Estate was traditionally elected—Gothenburg sent three, and the re¬
mainder one or two each. Because smaller towns often combined to send a com¬
mon representative, the Estate usually numbered between eighty and ninety
members. In Stockholm, which by the 1760s had some 40 percent of Sweden’s
entire urban population, elections to the Burgher Estate were indirect, within a
number of separate occupational groups; in other towns they were usually direct.
Graduated voting rights favored the wealthier burghers.
    Members of the Peasant Estate were elected, usually indirectly, by all peasant
freeholders and crown tenants. They generally numbered some 150. Although
they elected their own speaker, the influential secretary was appointed by all
four Estates together, and the Peasants did not sit on the Secret Committee or
participate in the selection of state councillors. It was argued that they lacked
the judgment and experience necessary for such matters of state, but their lead¬
ers had acquired much of both by the 1760s.
    Legislative proposals could be presented to the Riksdag either by the council
or by its own committees. Usually after considerable lobbying between the
Estates, each of them would vote internally, then cast its corporate vote. For
ordinary legislation, a majority of three Estates was required; in matters of cor¬
porate privilege and, from 1766, constitutional amendments, the unanimous vote
of all four Estates, provisions that anticipated the proposals of Louis XVI’s gov¬
ernment at the royal session of 23 June 1789, the cornerstone of the political pro¬
gram of the French Counterrevolution in the years that followed. Although
much admired by the European political thinkers of the day, the Swedish system
was unwieldly, even less adapted than the Danish bureaucratic absolutism to
rapid, decisive, or innovative action.63
    It has often been held that the Riksdag, in its turn, was essentially the organ
of the bureaucracy, taken in the widest sense. Officeholders were prominently
represented in the Estates: the Clergy were all public officials by definition; a
large part of the Nobility, generally around 80 percent, were officers or bureau¬
crats; and the Burgher Estate regularly consisted largely of magistrates, usually
the majority before 1756. The Peasant Estate meanwhile consistently excluded
all but bona fide peasants from its membership. Yet clergymen and military
officers, who were compensated with rural service tenures, were as much agri¬
culturalists as officials, and urban magistrates were generally directly involved
in the economic life of their towns or closely associated with it through family
connections. No common bureaucratic esprit de corps developed across class
lines and officeholders within different Estates often counteracted each others’
