                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         39

accomplished. Only here and there in Scandinavia were modest peasant schools
 established and kept alive by persuasive parish pastors or enlightened landlords.
 Many of them consisted of no more than an ambulatory schoolmaster, and they
 imparted only a bare minimum of literacy and religious instruction. The peasant¬
 ry showed little desire for parish schools, especially where they themselves had
to pay for them, on top of all their other obligations to the state. Yet this did
 not imply hostility toward literacy or even a certain degree of learning as such,
 as the high level of home instruction indicates. And despite everything, the
 numbers of rural schools did increase throughout the century.71
    The towns had their own elementary, or “trivial,” schools for the burgher
 class and often schools for poor children, maintained by charity or connected
 with orphanages and workhouses, and oriented toward teaching useful handi¬
 crafts. In addition, various individuals, including regular schoolteachers in their
 free hours, kept private schools for paying pupils.
    Latin schools, primarily for boys preparing for clerical careers, were located
 in cathedral towns, and were small in both staff and enrollment. In the Danish
 monarchy several moribund Latin schools were closed or amalgamated in the
 1750s. leaving twenty in Denmark but only four in Norway. Iceland’s two cathe¬
dral schools were combined by the end of the century into one, where in 1811
 an English visitor found only three masters and “twenty-three or twenty-four”
 scholars. Sweden had eleven Latin schools, or gymnasia, Finland only one.72
The primary concentration of cultural life in the metropolitan lands, Denmark
and Sweden, and especially in the capitals is evident. Wealthier noble and
burgher families were often instructed by private tutors, and where possible the
Grand Tour through Europe’s capitals with his tutor was the climax of a young
nobleman's education.
    In the Swedish kingdom there were universities at Uppsala, Lund, and Abo
(Turku), the last in Finland. Educational policy was more centralized in the
 Danish state, where the University of Copenhagen served the entire kingdom.
Lack of a university of their own was a growing grievance among the Norwegian
upper classes, first voiced already at the last meeting of the Norwegian Estates
in 1661. The German provinces had their own universities, at Kiel (which until
 1773 lay in Holstein-Gottorp territory) and in Greifswald in Swedish Pomerania.
    All were small, and only Uppsala achieved any European prominence, above
all thanks to the work of the great Carl Linnaeus and his circle of young natural¬
ists. Linnaeus’s ennoblement under the name von Linne in 1757 was symptomatic
of the governments’ mercantilistic interest in forms of learning useful to their
national economies. The natural sciences were especially favored, an area in
which several other Swedes, such as Carl Wilhelm Scheele. Anders Celsius, and
even Emanuel Swedenborg, also distinguished themselves. Increasingly the
universities prepared young men for bureaucratic, as well as clerical, careers.
In both monarchies there were schools for military and naval cadets, and a
