                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                          35

interests. A growing concern over bureaucratic influence nonetheless began to
make itself felt in the Riksdag by mid-century, most notably in the Burgher
Estate, which would play an important role in the political conflicts of the
1760s.64
    Since the 1680s the Swedish central administration, like the Danish, was col-
legially organized. The Kanslikollegium, or chancellery, dealt both with foreign
affairs and with a wide range of administrative, judicial, and ecclesiastical
matters. Other kollegier were charged with finance, commerce, and the armed
forces. The kingdom was divided into lari, or administrative districts, each
under a landshovding appointed by the central government, served by various
local functionaries. Manorial proprietors possessed no civil authority. Local
affairs in the countryside were largely managed by village and parish councils,
and peasant jurymen served at the sessions of the district court. The towns were
administered by elected burgomasters and councilmen. Except at the higher
levels, the purchase of civil and military posts was common: under the informal
ackord system, practiced mainly in the military, the government appointed to the
position, but the appointee compensated his predecessor for it, providing a kind
of primitive pension system. Regular pensions were first instigated for the mili¬
tary in 1756 and for the civil service in 1778. Under the vigilance of a free
political system there appears to have been relatively little corruption among the
bureaucracy, in contrast to the Riksdag, where bribery and influence-monger-
ing, especially by foreign powers, was all too common in the Era of Freedom.
    Administrative complaints were most frequent in Finland, owing mainly to
relative isolation from the capital, excessively large districts, and many officials’
ignorance of the Finnish language. The central government held firmly to the
ideals of centralization and uniformity, but it could not disregard special Finnish
circumstances, in particular Finland’s exposure to attack by Russia and the
devastation caused by the Russian wars of 1700-21 and 1741-43. Special Riks¬
dag commissions deliberated on Finland’s defense and economic development,
and the Finnish riksdagsman frequently banded together in matters affecting
their part of the kingdom. Both the Finnish regiments and the Finnish civil
administration were staffed mainly by Finns, who developed a growing corpo¬
rate sense throughout the century. Finland’s position within the Swedish mon¬
archy is strongly reminiscent of Norway’s in the Danish, with the notable differ¬
ence that Finns were often found in the highest positions in government and at
court in Stockholm.65
   Aside from a few recruited, regular units, the army was composed of national
territorial regiments, which were quartered in their rural districts and met peri¬
odically for training. Under Karl XI’s military organization of the 1680s, offi¬
cers lived on landed service tenures, cavalrymen were allotted the taxes from
certain farms, infantrymen and naval ratings were provided with cottages and
small plots of land by groups of farms for their maintenance. The navy was
