36      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

divided into the high seas fleet and the “army,” or skerry, fleet, the latter com¬
posed of oared galleys for operations among the Baltic islands and inlets.
   As in Denmark, state finances were a weak point. Revenues derived from the
same sources, especially the regular land tax, which the Riksdag could supple¬
ment with extraordinary levies when required. Despite the construction of the
present royal palace in Stockholm, completed in the 1750s, expenditures on the
royal family and court were relatively modest compared with Denmark. The
greatest expenses were military, for whereas Denmark kept out of war after
1720, Sweden was twice drawn into armed conflict in the middle decades of the
century.
    Swedish Pomerania and Wismar were not parts of the kingdom proper but
fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire. The king of Sweden was represented by a
governor-general in Stralsund, local interests by a council (Landrat) and the
provincial Estates (Stande), consisting of delegates of the nobility and the char¬
tered towns.66 As in Holstein and Oldenburg-Delmenhorst, the connection with
the empire perpetuated local and corporate privileges and immunities, with a
considerable measure of self-government.

   International relations in the Nordic world were dominated in the eighteenth
century by rivalry between the two Scandinavian states and the interests of the
greater European powers, particularly Russia. Since the breakdown of the
Kalmar Union in 1520, Denmark and Sweden fought repeated wars, in which
Sweden had succeeded by 1658 in expanding to its present natural frontiers to
the south and west—the “Keel” and the coast—through the conquest of several
old Danish and Norwegian provinces. In its struggle Sweden found useful sup¬
port from the dukes of Holstein-Gottorp, whose territories in the duchies pro¬
vided a bridgehead from which to attack Denmark from the rear. Denmark in
turn found willing allies in the Russian tsars, who could attack Sweden in Fin¬
land. Similarly, Sweden could attack Denmark in Norway—or itself be attacked
from there.
   Denmark accepted the role of a second-class power after failing to regain the
lost provinces in Sweden while holding Norway and gaining the Holstein-Got¬
torp lands in Schleswig during the Great Northern War. Henceforward its policy
was devoted to maintaining peace, acquiring the ducal portions of Holstein, and
securing Norway against future Swedish designs.
   Although Sweden, too, was no longer a major European power following the
Great Northern War, much of the aristocracy was unprepared to recognize this
change. The Hat party, which arose during the 1730s, followed a belligerent
policy of expansion with French support, involving Sweden in unfortunate wars
with Russia in 1741-43 and with Prussia in 1757-62.
   The dukes of Holstein-Gottorp meanwhile sought support against Denmark
from both Sweden and Russia. Their grievances provided St. Petersburg with
