                   THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        41

Germany, and Switzerland those of preromantic sensibility. Their impact was
generally felt a decade or more after their first appearance in the lands of their
origin, but once introduced they could spread rapidly within the small and
closely knit Scandinavian literary and artistic circles. French influences clearly
dominated in Sweden-Finland and were relatively stronger in Norway, with its
close maritime connections with the West, than in Denmark, where Germanic
impulses were particularly prominent, especially after mid-century. English
ideas gained currency largely through French or German translations or popular
writings. Upon each other, the Scandinavian countries meanwhile exercised less
cultural influence, although Ludvig Holberg was widely enough read in Sweden-
Finland and Swedish science and technology were followed with some interest
in Denmark-Norway.75
    The Norwegian-born Holberg, who spent most of his life in Denmark and
was made a baron in 1747, occupies a position in Scandinavian letters in the
eighteenth century comparable only to that of the Swede Linne in natural sci¬
ence. Although he was also a historian, political thinker, moral philosopher, and
even metaphysician, he is chiefly remembered for his spritely satirical come¬
dies, in a style reminiscent of Moliere, on the pretentions of the “powdered
wigs” (“Parykkerne”) and the lighthearted insouciance of the lower classes.
For all his classicism, his characters embody much of the specifically Danish
national psyche.
    German-language literature also had its place in eighteenth-century Scandina¬
via, inspiring a growing preromantic moral earnestness. Friedrich Klopstock
came to Copenhagen in 1751 and stayed for nineteen years as a pensioner of the
Danish king, dominating the literary scene following Holberg’s death in 1754.
The Schleswiger, H. W. Gerstenberg aroused the interest of the Germanic world
in Old Norse mythology.76
    “How innocent, indeed naive, was not all of literary life, if we compare the
time of my youth with the present,” wrote the Dane Henrik Steffens in the
 1830s; “The general trend of the popular writers was, however, to improve
morality.”77 The didactic tone dominates, whether in the satiric or the senti¬
mental genre. The spirit of the times stressed reason, progress, the general good,
and Scandinavian literati were well acquainted with the European literature of
the enlightenment. Addison and Steele with their Spectator, Montesquieu with
his Lettrespersanes, Voltaire with his philosophic tales and histories, Rousseau
with his glorification of nature and the common man—all found their admirers
and imitators. Nor, as we have seen, can the Germans, such as Gellert, Lessing,
and later, Kant, be left out of account.
   Characteristically for the times, however, belles-lettres comprised only a
small part of what was published. Aside from devotional literature, which
always accounted for the largest share, works on practical topics constituted the
greater part, of both what came out in print and what was usually to be found
