                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         37

a welcome issue to keep Scandinavia divided and therefore weak, ensuring
Russia s newly won dominance in the Baltic. In 1743 the empress Elizabeth
named Duke Peter Ulric of Holstein-Gottorp her heir on the Russian throne, and
as the condition of a lenient peace, involving the loss of only a small part of Fin¬
nish Karelia, she prevailed upon the Swedish Riksdag to elect the duke’s cousin,
Adolf Fredrik, as successor to the childless Fredrik I. Russia thereafter strove
repeatedly, through both bribery and threat, to oust the Hats from power and
replace them with the Caps, who favored good relations with St. Petersburg.
    Faced with a Holstein-Gottorp succession in both Russia and Sweden, Bern-
storff turned for support to France, but following the accession of Catherine II
in 1762, Denmark would again be drawn into the Russian orbit, in hopes of
negotiating a solution to the Holstein-Gottorp problem in the duchies and of
securing Norway against Sweden. By the 1760s both Scandinavian monarchies
were thus highly susceptible to Russian manipulation.67

    Although the two Scandinavian monarchies were ruled by very different
political regimes and had long been rivals in the international arena, they had
never ceased to form a closely related cultural community. Their elites of
power, wealth, and learning shared the cosmopolitan culture of their peers
throughout the Western world. At a more fundamental level, the more distinc¬
tive traditions of their cultures were the products of an ancient, common Nordic
heritage.
    Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes spoke mutually comprehensible languages
which had evolved from a common Old Nordic tongue. Beneath the level of the
official languages, the peasantry spoke local dialects which shaded, almost
imperceptibly, from one linguistic region into another.
    Danish and Swedish were the official languages, except in the German
provinces. Danish was spoken throughout Denmark, as well as in northern and
central Schleswig. It was also the language of the upper classes in Norway, and
to a degree in Iceland and the Faeroes. The Norwegian peasantry continued to
speak distinctive Norwegian dialects, whereas distance and isolation had pre¬
served Icelandic and Faeroese as archaic variants of Old Norse.
    Swedish was spoken throughout Sweden. It was also the language of close
to one-fifth of Finland’s population, including both the upper classes throughout
the country and the peasantry in extensive coastal districts. The majority of the
Finns meanwhile spoke Finnish, a tongue entirely unrelated to the Indo-Euro¬
pean languages, which was also still spoken by the descendants of Finnish set¬
tlers in scattered forest regions in both Sweden and Norway.68
    In southern Schleswig and throughout Holstein, Oldenburg-Delmenhorst,
Wismar and Swedish Pomerania, the population spoke German, generally the
Low German (Plattdeutsch) dialect, except along the North Sea coast of the
duchies, where the inhabitants were largely Frisian in speech.69 Colonies of
