42       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

in private libraries. In addition to practical handbooks of all kinds, there were
numerous works dealing with economic, social, and political questions.78
    Such works appeared in considerable numbers in Sweden-Finland after 1718,
although until mid-century government censorship generally restricted the polit¬
ical opinions published to those acceptable to the party in power, and opposing
views often circulated in handwritten manuscripts. After 1746 censorship was
relaxed.79 Under Danish-Norwegian absolutism, censorship was stricter still,
although those who praised and justified the regime, such as Holberg and the
political theorists of the “Sore Enlightenment,” Jens Schjelderup Sneedorff and
Andreas Schytte, were free enough to publish their views.80 Danish censorship
became more liberal under Frederik V, and in 1755 the king, prompted by his
favorite, Count A. G. Moltke, went so far as to solicit writings on projects use¬
ful for ”the flourishing of the land,” to be printed in Danmarks og Norges
Oeconomiske Magazin. The results contained, in addition to purely economic
ideas, much with social and even political implications.
    Public debate, especially after mid-century, is pervaded with the thought of
the Enlightenment and makes frequent and specific reference to the works of the
philosophes. Locke, Bolingbroke, Montesquieu, Voltaire, Helvetius, Rousseau,
Pufendorf, Justi and the German cameralists, Quesnay, the elder Mirabeau, Le
Mercier de la Riviere and the physiocrats, Diderot and the encyclopedists, Adam
Smith, Arthur Young and the English agricultural reformers—all these and a
host of others are constantly called to mind in the writings of Danes like Snee¬
dorff, Schytte, Tyge Rothe, Peter Frederik Suhm, Norwegians like Holberg and
Gerhard Schoning, Swedes like Olof Dalin, Anders Nordencrantz, and Carl
Fredrik Scheffer, Finns like Anders Chydenius and Gustaf Filip Creutz, even
Icelanders like Magnus Stephensen and Hans Finsen. Natural right and social
contract, the balance of public powers and social classes, the security of person
and property, legal despotism, the public good, the general will, the war against
ignorance and superstition, resistance to tyranny—all are to be found among
their writings. As elsewhere, the “party of Enlightenment” was best represented
among the most influential and best educated elements of society, among which
it often lost something of its critical edge. But intense pamphleteering during
periods of relative press freedom and of social and political ferment in both
monarchies showed that its fundamental ideas-generally passed on at second or
third hand-had not failed to penetrate deeply among the literate middle classes,
and even among some of the artisans and better-informed peasants, as will be
seen.
   In contrast to the Enlightenment in France and to Catholic Europe generally,
that in Scandinavia gave rise to little anticlericalism. Rather, it largely carried
the bastions of the church itself with the breakthrough of rationalism in theology,
especially at the University of Copenhagen, where the entire Danish-Norwegian
clergy was trained. This involved the explication of the faith in terms compre-
