                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                         43

hensible to human reason. Henrik Steffens later called it “an unbearable, raw
mixture of rigid orthodoxy and insipid rationalism.”81 Yet at a more practical
level, rationalism emphasized the role of the pastor as the public enlightener.
Bishops and clergymen were in the vanguard of practical efforts to improve
farming methods, popular literacy, public health, and the maintenance of the
poor and helpless. They became characteristically more concerned with small¬
pox vaccination or proper ditching and draining than with the mysteries of the
incarnation. In Norway such pastors were called “potato-priests” (Potetprce-
ster), thanks to their enthusiasm for this useful plant.82 In Sweden the Clerical
Estate of the Riksdag was much concerned with economic questions. Through¬
out the North clergymen were the principal contributors to that wealth of
detailed topographical descriptions of individual parishes and districts so charac¬
teristic of their time, with its emphasis upon the rational exploitation of re¬
sources.83
    By the 1760s the European Enlightenment seemed to reign triumphant among
Scandinavia's educated classes. Yet at that very time there were signs of a grow¬
ing reaction against its rationalism and cosmopolitanism. This assumed various
guises. Pietism, originally of German inspiration, had remained an undercurrent
within the church, and as the century wore on it gathered renewed vigor in urban
circles in reaction to religious rationalism and through the edifying example of
the Moravian Brethren.84
     At the same time, the Rousseauian exaltation of the simple life reinforced the
 old Nordic ideal of najsomhed (or fdmdjsomhet), that untranslatable term which
 means contentedness in frugal but adequate circumstances. Throughout the
 Nordic world by the 1760s there was a growing reaction, especially within the
 middle classes, against vain ostentation and foreign luxury, together with a senti¬
 mental idealization of the sturdy peasant freeholder.85 This cult of virtuous sim¬
 plicity thus opposed the pleasure-pain principle and the materialistic concept of
human felicity of the rationalistic and progressive High Enlightenment. It could
 be sternly puritanical, not to say downright philistine, in tone, as when the
 Swedish diarist, Rutger Fredrik Hochschild dourly blamed the court for encour¬
aging “arts and sciences which a poor land could better do without.”86
    National feeling was likewise on the rise by the 1760s. It expressed itself in
part through the flourishing of societies devoted to national development and in
a rich topographical literature. Much of the regional feeling in Finland, Norway,
and Iceland found its outlet in such activities. Thus, for instance, while many
upper-class Finns were concerned about Sweden’s ability to defend their part of
the kingdom against Russia, the scholars in Abo who devoted themselves to Fin¬
nish language and folklore remained unaffected in their loyalty to the Swedish
state. In Norway the middle classes felt increasing frustration over their coun¬
try’s provincial status within the kingdom, while the peasantry tended more than
ever to regard the same classes as an alien element in their midst, yet neither
