 38      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

Swabians were established in the early 1760s to cultivate the heathlands of
Schleswig and Jutland. There was a sizable German-speaking element in many
towns both in northern Schleswig and in Denmark itself, not least in Copen¬
hagen.
    The Lapps of northern Norway, Sweden, and Finland spoke their own
tongue, remotely related to Finnish. In the colonies, a variety of languages were
used. In the Danish West Indies, only a minority of the white population was
Danish or Norwegian, and the most common tongue was English.
    Language usage was closely connected with social class. French was widely
used by the aristocracy everywhere. It dominated at the Swedish court, whereas
in Denmark High German was during most of the century the language of the
court, the army, and much of the administration, owing largely to the promi¬
nence of German bureaucrats, officers, and courtiers. In Norway, Finland, and
the Danish-speaking parts of Schleswig, social mobility implied language mobil¬
ity: those who rose out of the peasant masses abandoned Norwegian or South
Jutish dialects, or the Finnish tongue, in favor of Danish, High German, and
Swedish, respectively. Such vestiges of the old local speech as still survived
among the upper classes at the beginning of the century gradually disappeared.
There were, however, certain exceptions. The clergy in the Finnish-speaking
parts of Finland naturally had to keep their command of the language of their
parishioners. Icelandic literature had been the glory of medieval Scandinavia,
and Icelandic, although spoken by only a tiny folk group, remained a literary
as well as an ecclesiastical language.
    Since the sixteenth century the Protestant faith placed a strong emphasis upon
literacy, which early became widespread by European standards. As early as
 1631, Anders Bure wrote of the inhabitants of Swedish Norrland that they were
 so fond of letters that although schools were few, “the literate instruct the others
 with such enthusiasm that the greatest part of the common people and even the
peasants are literate.” In 1741 a Norwegian bishop claimed to find no peasant
in remote Nordland Amt “who has not learned to read in a book,” and that
“indeed, most of the peasants are well-read.” An English visitor was deeply
impressed in 1811 by the literacy and “mental culture” of the Icelanders, even
though “the transmission of knowledge can take place only through the private
and domestic habits of the people.”70
    As these quotations suggest, widespread literacy was only to a limited extent
the result of schooling. Yet sporadic efforts were made in this direction. In 1721
Frederik IV established 240 rural schools (“rytterskoler’0 on his domain lands
in Denmark. A Swedish ordinance of 1723 held parents or guardians responsible
for teaching their children to “read in a book” and their articles of faith, but
made no provision for schools. In 1739 the Danish government required the
establishment of a school in each parish, but because implementation was left
to landowners in Denmark and to peasant parish councils in Norway, little was
