40      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

school of mining technology was established at Kongsberg in Norway in 1757.
The old Rytterakademi at Soro, near Copenhagen, supported after 1747 by a
legacy from Ludvig Holberg, was an aristocratic finishing school for young
gentlemen and provided sinecures for several historians and political thinkers of
stature. Many young Scandinavians meanwhile studied for a time abroad.
    As elsewhere in Europe at this time, the most significant thought and schol¬
arship took place largely outside the schools and universities. The royal courts
played a central role in patronizing the sciences as well as the arts, in Copen¬
hagen up to the 1770s, in Stockholm until the 1790s. Numerous academies,
learned societies, and reading circles were established, characteristically much
concerned with the utility of learning. In Sweden, the Royal Academy of Sci¬
ences was founded in 1739 and the Royal Academy of Letters (Vitterhetsaka-
demien) in 1753. Both have played a prominent cultural role since that time, as
has the Danish Royal Agricultural Society (Det kongelige Landhusholdningssel-
skab), organized in 1769. The Trondheim Scientific Society, established in 1760
and renamed the Royal Norwegian Scientific Society seven years later, served
as the real center for intellectual life in Norway until the University of Christi¬
ania finally came into being in 1811. The Aurora Society was founded in 1771
by academics at Abo University and followed in 1797 by the Finnish Economic
Society (Finska hushallningssallskapet). Even remote Iceland had its literary
and scientific societies.73 Most members of these and similar organizations were
gentlemen in private circumstances, among whom many rural landowners and
clergymen distinguished themselves by carrying enlightenment and new ideas to
their neighborhoods.
    Architecture, sculpture, painting, the decorative crafts, and the performing
arts had formerly been the preserve mainly of foreign artists and artisans, work¬
ing in international European styles. The eighteenth century represents a new
and important stage in Nordic cultural development. Mercantilism fostered
native talent, and the arts now came to be practiced mainly by Scandinavians,
although they still continued to follow cosmopolitan fashions—baroque, rococo,
neoclassical—and often received some of their training abroad. Certain of them
indeed achieved international renown, such as the Swedish rococo painters
Alexander Roslin and Nils Lafrensen (Lavreince) the younger, who were as well
known in Paris as in Stockholm, and later the Danish-Icelandic sculptor Bertel
Thorvaldsen, who was recognized as one of the leading European neoclassicists.
By the later decades of the century, certain artists, like the Swedes Elias Martin
and Per Hillestrom the elder, and the Danes Jens Juel and Erik Pauelson, would
begin to reveal a growing interest in the characteristic landscapes and folklife
of their native lands, foreshadowing the distinctively national cultural forms of
the nineteenth century.74
   Literature likewise reflected the cosmopolitan impulses of the time. From
France emanated the influences of classicism and rationalism, from England,
