48       THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

of Hat propagandists, the war never aroused public enthusiasm at home. State
finances and the monetary system, already disordered since the earlier war,
were thrown into further disarray, especially as promised subsidies from France
were never paid in full.
    Denmark, under the guiding hand of Baron Bernstorff, remained neutral in
the continental struggle, as in the maritime war. Yet neutrality too exacted its
price. In addition to naval units, a field army of some 25,000 men was as¬
sembled and maintained in Holstein to cover the southern frontier. As the mobi¬
lization revealed shortcomings in the army, Bernstorff secured the services of
the Comte de Saint-Germain, probably the ablest French general of the war, who
had fallen out of favor at Versailles and in 1760 was commissioned a field
marshal by Frederik V. To strengthen the state finances, already badly weak¬
ened by court extravagance, Bernstorff the following year called in Heinrich
Carl Schimmelmann, a Hamburg financier regarded as a financial wizard.
   Thus reinforced, Bernstorff sought to exert diplomatic pressure on Russia to
bring about a solution of the Holstein-Gottorp problem. St. Petersburg made no
positive response. But in January 1762 the empress Elizabeth died and her
adopted heir, the duke of Holstein-Gottorp, became Tsar Peter III, confronting
Scandinavia with an entirely new situation.
   The new tsar was inspired by an intense admiration for Russia’s enemy,
Frederick II of Prussia, and by an inherited hatred for Denmark which Bern¬
storff s diplomatic maneuvers had done nothing to assuage. During the next few
months he made peace with Prussia and prepared to attack Denmark to seize
Schleswig and humble the old enemy of his house. To gain Sweden’s support
he held out enticing prospects of strengthening monarchical power there and
Sweden’s acquisition of Norway.
    For Denmark the situation appeared perilous in the extreme. Although its
navy was superior, its army was hardly a match for the Russians. Saint-Germain
nevertheless resolved to fight an aggressive campaign and advanced into
Mecklenburg. His advance posts had just made contact with the Russians when
news arrived from St. Petersburg that the tsar had been deposed through a palace
revolution on 9 July. He was murdered soon thereafter.1
    The empress Catherine now assumed power and quickly liquidated the quar¬
rel with Denmark. She was soon prepared to negotiate over the future of Hol¬
stein-Gottorp. In the meantime she showed a particular interest in the little
duchy, practicing there, through her principal ducal minister, Casper von
Saldern, the kind of enlightened despotism that circumstances so greatly im¬
peded in Russia itself. For the next decade the Holstein-Gottorp model state
inspired reforms in both the royal and jointly administered parts of Holstein, as
well as elsewhere in the German world.2


   The crisis of 1762 badly shook the Danish council, impressing it with the
need for basic financial and military reforms. As finance minister, H. C. Schim-
