                                 THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                    49

melmann tried to stabilize the inflated currency and to reduce the heavy national
debt through the sale of state property, foreign loans, and in September 1762
the imposition of a special levy, the poll tax (ekstraskatt) of one rigsdaler
annually per person, regardless of means, throughout the monarchy, except for
the peasants in Finnmark, Iceland, and the Faeroes.
     The new tax reveals the government’s remarkable ignorance of local condi¬
tions. It had no more grasp of what the total burden of taxes, tithes, tolls, fees,
and local contributions amounted to in different parts of the monarchy than it
 is possible for us to have today; it knew only of its needs and what actually came
into the treasury. In Denmark and the duchies the poll tax imposed a heavy addi¬
tional load and led in places to disturbances; on Bornholm with its free peas¬
antry, these were so serious that in 1763 its assessment was reduced by half and
 in 1770 its special privileges were clarified and confirmed.3
     In Norway the situation was far more serious. Here previous special levies
had never affected the peasants. Money was in much shorter supply, and many
farm laborers scarcely earned as much as one rigsdaler in cash in a year.
Whereas in Denmark the proprietor was held responsible for the taxes of those
on his manor who were too poor to pay them, in Norway this obligation rested
on the peasant farmers, most of whom worked poor holdings and saw little cash.
Times were bad. Fishing was poor and crops were scanty in 1762 and 1763,
forcing the peasants to buy more Danish grain than usual. During the first two
years the tax was collected with little difficulty, as it was understood to be “the
king’s will.” By the third year economic hardships reduced the intake, collec¬
tion was resisted in some localities, and the government exempted certain cate¬
gories of persons from the tax. Unfortunately these relief measures were piece¬
meal, complicated, and inadequately publicized. They moreover tended to favor
the dependents of freeholders as opposed to tenant farmers, which caused partic¬
ular bitterness in the poorer districts of western Norway, where freeholders
were still relatively few.
     Under Frederik V the bureaucracy in Norway was less controlled than pre¬
viously from Copenhagen, and complaints mounted against various local offi¬
cials. Their forcible confiscation of livestock, tools, and household goods for
nonpayment of the poll tax aroused particular resentments. The peasants tended
to believe the officials were interpreting the tax stipulations to enrich themselves
and without the king’s knowledge. In time-honored fashion groups of Norwe¬
gian peasants went to Copenhagen to present their grievances to the king, but
such deputations seemed more coldly received by haughty bureaucrats than in
the past.
   In the meantime, the poll tax led to open rebellion in the poor but populous
Nordhordland district around Bergen. In February 1765 about a hundred
“Striler,” as the peasants of the area were called, visited the stiftamtmand, or
provincial governor, in Bergen, U. F. Cicignon, and demanded to see the king’s
orders regarding the tax. Cicignon could only try to explain them, but he prom-
