                                 THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                     51

Colonel Karl Gortz, Lieutenant-General P. E. Gahler, and Count Schack Carl
Rantzau-Ascheberg. Loosely associated with them in certain respects were
Count Frederik Danneskiold-Samsoe and Crown Prince Christian’s influential
tutor, the Swiss E. S. F. Reverdil.6
   The new, national army, however, could only be the cutting edge of a whole
substructure of administrative reorganization. Like many others in Europe at the
time, Saint-Germain and his friends looked for their ideal to Frederick the Great
and his efficient Kabinettsregiment in Prussia. From their correspondence the
broad outlines of a reform program emerge, involving above all the personal
exercise of power by the monarch, the replacement of the high aristocratic,
semi-autonomous, and slow-moving council by a small group of “honest” and
enlightened friends of reform close to the king’s person, the opening of higher
offices to talented men regardless of birth, the improvement of state finances,
the clarification and consistent application of the laws. The bases of the new sys¬
tem were to be simplicity and effectiveness.7
   But administrative reform would in turn ultimately have to depend upon a
restructuring of society itself to break the resurgent power of the aristocracy.
As Saint-Germain put it (according to Reverdil):
   Aristocratic rule has been eradicated only in appearance. The nobility still
   dominate and out of fear that the king might make himself all-powerful
   within the realm if he were to win consideration outside of it, they oppose
   his acquiring an army. The present army is only a sham. The nobles’
   dominance within the state is based upon the power they have retained on
   their manors. The noblemen are petty despots and are more to be con¬
   sidered taxable vassals than subjects. How has this power come about?
   Through the stipulations concerning the militia. But this militia, which is
   useless for defending the realm, is at once a means to oppress the common
   man and a hindrance to a good composition for the army. This is the real
   reason why the infantry is recruited at great cost abroad, among the dregs
   of Germany.8

    Here the field marshal and his friends joined hands with growing numbers
of critics of the stavnsband and the oppressive condition of the Danish peas¬
antry. Behind both of these circles there was an awakening public opinion within
broad middle-class strata in Denmark and Norway, which was increasingly
alienated by the rule of the high aristocratic “Excellencies” and by the German
dominance in government and at court.
    Bernstorff, Moltke, and their fellow councillors were humane and well-
meaning men, amenable to cautious and well-considered reforms. But in the
“party of Sant-Germain” they saw a serious threat, not only to the existing
order, over which they presided, but to their very political philosophy, which
stressed peace, prosperity, stability, and noblesse oblige.
