                                 THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                   53

upon which this increasingly heterogeneous party foundered. The Hat council
involved Sweden in the conflict, and politically appointed Hat commanders
bungled the campaigning in the field. Inflation increased rapidly through the
issue of unbacked paper currency, which declined to about one-third of its
prewar value, benefiting large exporters and manufacturers holding loans from
the state bank while hurting creditors and importers.
    When the Riksdag convened in 1760, the Hats retained a clear majority only
in the Burgher Estate, and only the support of the small Court party prevented
their losing control of the Nobility. During the twenty-month session that fol¬
lowed, various splinter groups formed briefly on specific issues. In this unstable
situation the Cap party coalesced as a powerful opposition, drawing to itself dis¬
contented elements from the rival camp.
    A sign of things to come was mounting friction between the Estates. The
 prestige of the Nobility suffered when over 200 noble officers left the front in
 Pomerania to take their places in the House of the Nobility. The nonnoble
 Estates voiced demands that would weaken the position of the nobility in state
 service, while the Burghers even suggested appointing commoners to the state
 council itself. “The croft is as rich in genius as the noble household,’’ one
 speaker proclaimed rhetorically.11
    The nobility—consisting, as seen, largely of men of relatively recent title—
closed ranks. In 1761-62 the council sharpened restrictions against the acquisi¬
tion of manors by persons not already nobles; in 1763 it ended the sale of crown
lands to the peasantry and sought to limit the latter’s hunting and fishing rights.
 Most significant, the Noble Estate resolved in 1762 to introduce no new nobles
into its number until this fell below 800. Since there were then some 1,250 intro¬
duced noble families, with normal attrition it would take a good half-century
before any new ones might join the charmed circle. This aroused great bitterness
among the Burghers and Clergy. Yet it also produced a more forward-looking
reaction among many leading commoners, who now felt a new pride at remain¬
ing within and identifying with their own Estates.12
    The Caps drew support from various sources. During the 1750s what re¬
mained of the party was still generally aristocratic and conservative, deriving
largely from the old nobility which had lost control of the Noble Estate by 1738.
Most of the clergy and much of the bourgeoisie were meanwhile repelled by the
opulence and luxury in leading Hat circles. By the early 1760s the Cap party
shifted character, reflecting an accumulation of new grievances and demands.
The “Younger Caps” built their following upon opposition to the war and to
the militaristic, expansionist stance behind it; to the government’s extravagance
and inflationary policy; to its favoritism toward exports and manufactures to the
neglect of agriculture, extractive industries, imports, and internal trade, and
toward the capital as opposed to the provinces; to the monopolistic rights of
staple towns and indeed of towns as such in relation to the countryside in local
