 52      THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

   During 1763 Saint-Germain and his friends prepared an ambitious program
of military reforms, and in October of that year the old Krigskancelli, or war
office, was transformed into a Generalkrigsdirektorium on the Prussian model,
giving its president, Saint-Germain, direct access to the king. But through Count
Moltke’s influence with Frederik V, the council remained unassailable. In the
end the plan of 1763 was quietly shelved, although the separate militia regiments
were liquidated in 1764 and peasant conscripts began to train with regular army
units from 1767. Meanwhile, Bernstorffs improvement of relations with Russia
further strengthened the civilian council against the military clique.
   The “Excellencies” were thus as firmly in power as ever when Frederik V,
worn out by his debaucheries, died at the age of forty-two, on 14 January 1766.
The hopes of the reformers focused immediately upon his sixteen-year-old son,
who now ascended the throne as Christian VII.

    Russia’s sudden withdrawal from the war with Prussia in January 1762 gave
 Sweden a welcome opportunity to follow suit. Queen Lovisa Ulrika used her
good offices with her brother, Frederick II, resulting in the Peace of Hamburg
on 22 May 1762, based on the status quo ante bellum.
    The war, which the Cap bishop Jacob Serenius later proclaimed to have been
begun “with Saul’s foolishness and the boastfulness of the Moabites,” badly
undermined the Hat party.9 In power uninterruptedly since 1738, the Hats had
been at the peak of their power during the 1750s. Their principal strength lay
in the bureaucracy and officer corps, and among the larger export merchants and
manufacturers. They upheld officialdom both against king and council, and
against public opinion, and inclined toward the doctrine, expressed by B.
Frondin in 1747, that the Riksdag was responsible only to itself, not to its elec¬
tors. Their economic policy was rigidly mercantilistic, considering necessary
both a small, favored entrepreneurial elite, concentrated mainly in the capital,
and a large and growing population, strictly regulated in its economic pursuits
and held close to the poverty line to provide cheap labor. Their system of sub¬
sidies, protective tariffs, and monetary inflation favored the larger exporters and
manufacturers. As war and expansion held out tempting opportunities for offi¬
cers, bureaucrats, and entrepreneurs alike, the Hats favored alliance with
France, the only European power that would encourage Sweden to follow an
aggressive foreign policy. To stifle criticism, they held strongly to secrecy in
Riksdag transactions and to press censorship.
    The Hats had owed their virtually unassailable position in the 1750s partly
to their strength in the Noble and Burgher Estates, partly to the lack of a viable
rival party. The faction turned out of power in 1738, which came to be called
the Caps, was in disarray, and certain of its leaders were discredited through
unseemly intrigues with the Russians to overthrow their rivals.
   Sweden’s inglorious participation in the Seven Years’ War proved the rock
