46      THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

often manor houses, with all of which they had numerous contacts. Timber
haulage, periodic fairs and markets, seasonal labor migration, fishing, seafar¬
ing, military service—all brought peasants from remoter areas, where parishes
could be the size of English counties, into touch with the wider world beyond.
Peasant culture thus reflected much in upper-class life: impulses that were usu¬
ally modified through naivete and older traditions, and preserved long after
upper-class fashions had changed. Such influences are still evident in the con¬
struction and decorating of houses and furnishings, in folk dress, music, and
dance. Emulation of the upper classes indeed was a matter of concern to the
governments, which repeatedly resorted to sumptuary ordinances to keep peas¬
ant christenings, betrothals, weddings, and funerals from becoming displays of
opulence unbefitting the peasants’ station in life. But such restrictions met with
only indifferent success, for these occasions were traditionally the high points
of peasant social life.
   There were indeed wealthy peasants, particularly in Norway and Sweden,
who lived in some style. There were those in Norway who read their law book,
Snorre Sturlason's sagas in Peder Clausson Friis’s sixteenth-century Norwegian
translation, and even Holberg. In Simen Fougner in Gudbrandsdalen, Norway
had a peasant poet of modest pretentions.94 The leading peasant politicians in the
Swedish Riksdag developed considerable worldly sophistication, both politically
and otherwise. An occasional peasant was even said to drink coffee and wear
a wig.
    Yet the peasantry on the whole lived its own way of life, passed on through
countless generations. Theirs was not a literary culture in a bookish sense, yet
oral tradition preserved an immense body of ancient lore, such as the Finnish
folk epics and the Danish medieval folk ballads. Peasant wisdom was embodied
in innumerable proverbs, rhymes, and songs. The peasants had their own styles
in building and decoration, in music, dance, and games, which clearly trace back
to the Viking age, and beyond. Theirs was a culture rich in weaving and embroi¬
dery, in woodcarving, ironwork, and decorative floral painting, in the ingenious
use of straw, birchbark, and pine shavings. In the peasant world the Christian
God and Devil coexisted with their predecessors, a host of supernatural be¬
ings—trolls, elves, watersprites, fairies, ghosts—and ultimate concern for salva¬
tion through the church was balanced by immediate needs to propitiate the spirits
of farm, forest, and stream. “Wise” old men and women were charged with
the cure of man and beast, and undertook a variety of other transactions with
the unseen world.
