44       THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760

 showed hostility to Denmark as such. National feeling was aroused in reaction
 to the prevailing cosmopolitanism and through friction with other national
 groups and cultures. In Sweden-Finland this took the form of a growing reaction
 against the French cultural affectations of the court and the higher aristocracy.
 Meanwhile, at the same time that the Germans—including those in the Scandina¬
vian monarchies—were awakened to a new pride by the exploits of, ironically,
the gallophile Frederick the Great and of Prussia in the Seven Years’ War, the
 Danish and Norwegian middle classes became aroused over the preeminence of
the Germans in government, the economy, high society, and culture, especially
 in Copenhagen itself. Although many native Danish nobles also reacted against
the German ascendancy and feeling often ran high between Danish and German
artisans, national and class conflict tended to become associated, as “German”
came to be identified in the popular mind with “aristocrat” and “Danish” with
 “bourgeois.”87 When Danish-Russian diplomacy held out the prospect of the
final unification of all of Holstein under the Danish crown by the later 1760s,
the Ritterschaft in the duchies was revivified by concern for the maintenance of
their surviving Germanic rights and liberties.88
    National feeling stimulated, and was stimulated by, the rediscovery of Nordic
antiquity by the 1760s. It had, to be sure, never ceased to be cultivated by Scan¬
dinavian scholars, but widespread enthusiasm for the subject was inspired,
characteristically in this cosmopolitan age, by outside impulses. Montesquieu
invoked both Jordanes and the earlier Swedish scholar Olof Rudbeck in 1748,
proclaiming the Scandinavian North to be the home of European liberties, the
“factory of those instruments which break the shackles forged in the South.”89
The Swiss Paul Henri Mallet, who lived for several years in Copenhagen, cap¬
tured the imagination of Europe in the 1750s with his works on Denmark’s early
history and on Old Norse literature. The “bardic” verse of Edward Gray and
the Ossian poems of James Macpherson meanwhile excited preromantic sensi¬
bilities in Scandinavia. The German Schleswiger Gerstenberg inspired both the
German Klopstock and the Dane Johannes Ewald to turn to ancient Scandinavian
motifs. Around 1760, too, the Norwegian Gerhard Schoning, and the Dane P.
F. Suhm, founders of the Trondheim Scientific Society in that year, devoted
themselves to the early history of their respective lands, while in Sweden Sven
Lagerbring continued his work on the origins of the Swedish kingdom. In Fin¬
land a small group of scholars around Henrik Gabriel Porthan in Abo began the
first systematic and critical study of the Finnish language and folk culture.90
    Interest in Nordic antiquity led to an increasing sense of a shared heritage and
community of interests among the Scandinavian lands, especially in the face of
mounting outside pressures: the German challenge to Danish culture and the
Russian threat to the security of both Scandinavian states.
  Literature and learning were naturally the preserve of a small cultivated elite.
Something of its extent and interests in Scandinavia is revealed by studies of the
