50       THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

 ised that confiscations would be suspended and forwarded the peasants’ com¬
 plaints to the capital. When it became known, however, that confiscations would
be resumed, over a thousand peasants marched on Bergen in April, joined by
the poorer classes of the town. In the resulting tumult the crowd mishandled the
stiftamtmand!, who in the heat of the moment promised that the poll taxes thus
 far collected would be refunded. Next day some 9,000 rigsdaler were paid out
and the peasants went home. News of the tumult quickly spread, particularly in
western Norway, resulting in confrontations with frightened local officials and
a virtual tax strike.
    By that time, the government in Copenhagen had already backed down. On
9 April it exempted the children and hired hands of both freehold and tenant
farmers. But it was too late. From then on, until the final abolition of the poll
tax for Norway in 1772—in Denmark it remained in effect until 1812—the sums
collected varied from 80 percent of the amounts levied in parts of Ostlandet to
 no more than 10 percent in Sunnfjord and Nordfjord in the west. A government
commission in Bergen, backed by 350 Danish mercenary troops, meted out
death sentences to four peasants; one had already died, and the others had their
sentences commuted to prison terms. The real instigators were never found.
Cicignon and several other officials were dismissed or transferred, and confisca¬
tions virtually ended.4
w. The so-called Stril War was a sobering experience for the government, the
first actual peasant insurrection against royal authority. The loyalty of the Nor¬
wegian peasantry to their king had been taken as axiomatic. It now became clear
that this by no means meant unquestioning obedience to the policies of his minis¬
ters. Uniting for the first time in a movement extending beyond their parishes
and districts, the peasants became aware of their strength and the government's
weakness. Too much should not be made of this initial clash, as some historians,
like Halvdan Koht, have been inclined to do. It was far from national in scope,
and nationalism as such played no part in it. Yet it formed the background for
more serious confrontations later on. From the later 1760s forward, the govern¬
ment’s policy toward Norway seems, in retrospect, increasingly defensive.5
    The Comte de Saint-Germain meanwhile addressed himself to military re¬
form. He was convinced of the ineffectiveness of both the foreign mercenary
troops and of the Danish territorial militia in its existing form, and proposed that
an increasing proportion of native conscripts be integrated into the regular regi¬
ments for periods long enough for proper training and discipline, before transfer
to the reserve. He thus hoped to build up a wartime strength of fully 100,000
men, in ways reminiscent both of the contemporary Prussian cantonment system
and the later French amalgame of 1792. Under Turgot’s ministry in France he
would likewise seek to implement reforms a la prusse, and he is since regarded
as one of the pioneers of modern military theory. Around him Saint-Germain
gathered a circle of military men including General W. F. von Schmettau,
