                    THE SETTING: SCANDINAVIA AROUND 1760                        45

 book trade and the contents of private libraries during the eighteenth century.
 Most preserved estate inventories contain some books. They were usually few
 and, where specified by title, mainly devotional works and practical handbooks.
 Yet noblemen, bureaucrats, merchants, and clergymen often had well-stocked
 libraries, some indeed of a magnitude rarely surpassed since the founding of
 public libraries, including the most significant works of contemporary European
 literature and scholarship, both in translation and in the original languages.
 Their proud owners were usually liberal in allowing access to others and fre¬
 quently bequeathed them to form the nuclei of important public libraries. P. F.
 Suhm s estimated 100,000 volumes, for instance, played an inestimable cultural
 role during his lifetime, first in Trondheim and later in Copenhagen, and were
 donated upon his death to the Danish Royal Library. In the later eighteenth cen¬
 tury private library societies and lending libraries were founded. The ideas of
 the time were meanwhile disseminated largely through a growing variety of peri¬
 odicals and pamphlets, the latter often anonymous, clandestinely printed, or
 even copied out by hand. Although their circulation figures were limited, each
 copy was usually read by several persons and its contents passed on to wider
 circles in conversation and argument.91
     The lower classes of the towns tended, within their means, to emulate, if not
 to parody, the manners and customs of their social betters.92 The great mass of
 the peasantry, meanwhile, lived a life apart. Its relative isolation from the rest
 of society was partly geographical, as in much of northern Scandinavia, includ¬
 ing the Atlantic islands. The entire central Finnish province of Savolaks (Savo),
 for instance, did not contain a single town before the 1770s; the nearest was
600-700 kilometers away.93 More significant, however, were the social barriers
of a still largely corporate society and the policies of governments determined
to prevent the decimation of the “producing” by the “consuming” classes.
Practical and, in varying degree, legal restrictions hindered occupational mobil¬
ity out of peasant status. Although literacy in the printed word was widespread,
few peasants read any but devotional books and few possessed the means to edu¬
cate their sons for nonpeasant occupations. Relatively few, moreover, showed
any desire to see them leave their own social class, except perhaps for a clerical
career, for the peasants, too, particularly the more prosperous farmers, had their
class pride and traditional suspicion toward other social groups. The Peasant
Estate of the Swedish Riksdag, for example, jealously excluded from member¬
ship farmers of nonpeasant origin and those who lived like gentlemen. Language
also limited the peasants’ horizons, for they generally spoke vernaculars differ¬
ent from those of the educated classes, or even a different language altogether,
as in much of Finland. Local dialects even made communication difficult be¬
tween peasants from various parts of the same country, especially in Norway.
    Yet the peasants’ isolation was never by any means total. In the more densely
settled areas they lived close to towns, officers’ residences, parsonages, and
