                                THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                   63

existing militia and of the stavnsbdnd, retroactively for all male peasants bom
since October 1760 and by degree for others, as well as land enclosures, heredi¬
tary tenure, and limitation or commutation of labor services. In Reverdil’s view,
this brash proposal spoiled everything. Both he and Saint-Germain had long
been regarded with ill will in high and distinguished circles, and within a few
days both were dismissed from the commission and banished from the kingdom.
In February 1768 new appointments were made, including Moltke and Schim-
melmann, whose attitudes toward reform were anything but radical, and in
March the commission was further domesticated by converting it into a regular
government department.35
   All was not lost, however. Henrik Stampe, who had written the commission’s
original instruction, took the initiative in his cautious and undramatic manner,
and by 1769 prepared several well-intended ordinances: for encouraging en¬
closures, fixing labor obligations, sharpening penalties against engrossment of
peasant tenancies into manorial demesne, and, most notably, encouraging free¬
hold purchases and protecting peasant freeholders against encroachment from
neighboring manors. Although they accomplished relatively little at the time, the
Stampe reforms point the way toward the specific character of the great Danish
agrarian reforms a generation later.36

     In the Swedish monarchy, the Younger Cap regime did not long survive its
 impressive victory. Already before the end of the long Riksdag of 1765-66 a
 growing reaction was evident against much of its program. Its deflationary pol¬
 icy proved too sudden and drastic, particularly because the economy was still
 depressed by the international postwar slump. Sweden’s monetary system was
 badly deranged, and numerous bankruptcies followed, not least among manufac¬
 turers dependent upon government support, which the Caps now reduced or
 eliminated. Their import restrictions and sumptuary regulations were unpopular
and widely evaded. The government suffered a serious loss of revenue, com¬
pounded when France ceased to pay subsidies, which Russia, Britain, and Den¬
mark failed to make good.
    The Caps’ partisan intolerance toward dissent likewise alienated many.
Various riksdagsman suffered persecution for opposition to the majority; even
Anders Chydenius was expelled from his seat in the Clerical Estate for criticiz¬
ing the party’s monetary plan. In addition to merchants in foreign trade, manu¬
facturers, and debtors, many others had reason to feel apprehensive about the
Younger Caps’ challenge to the old order: noblemen were concerned about their
sons’ futures; bureaucrats and magistrates about their jurisdictions, promotions,
and compensation; officers about neglect of the military establishment; small¬
town merchants about increased peasant trading; craft masters about the tradi¬
tional monopolies of their guilds; and many in different walks of life about un¬
abashed partisanship and an uncensored press. As in Denmark, there was also
