 54       THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

 commerce; to the relative neglect of Finland’s particular interests; to restrictions
 in peasant land acquisition and freehold rights; to the favored position of the
 bureaucracy in both municipal and national government; to secrecy in official
 matters and to press censorship; to aristocratic preference in state appointments
 and promotions; and, not least, to the concept that neither officials nor even riks-
 dagsman were accountable to the governed. Faced with this rapid shift, the Hats
 reacted by holding even more inflexibly than ever to their established posi¬
 tions.13
    It is clear that the grievances of the Younger Caps derived from existing cir¬
cumstances in Sweden and Finland. Yet mercantilism and the aristocratic ideal
reflected conditions throughout the European world of the time, as well as the
thought of the earlier Enlightenment, which was above all a movement of secu¬
larization and did not yet call into question absolutism, mercantilism, privilege,
or individual libertinism. By mid-century, meanwhile, a new intellectual climate
was emerging with Rousseau, Helvetius, the encyclopedists, and the physio¬
crats, stressing the legitimate needs of the individual and holding the state to be
the means to the “general good,” rather than an end in itself. Such a view im¬
plied a new social ethos, a concern for the common man and for agriculture
which provided his principal sustenance, opposition to militarism and war, to
special privileges and monopolies, and to vain ostentation. The later Enlighten¬
ment combined rationalism with the new moral fervor of the preromantic
awakening.14
    In Sweden, such ideas fell on fertile ground from the 1750s on, attracting
many of the better minds, which by the following decade generally aligned
themselves with the Younger Caps, helped to articulate their program, and pro¬
vided them with their ideology. That the Caps should come to represent the new
intellectual climate was at first by no means ensured. A number of Hat thinkers
were likewise beginning to question mercantilist dogmas. But the economic
problems created by the Hat party and its generally hardening conservatism in
the face of criticism by the early 1760s cemented the union between the leading
intellectuals and the Younger Caps.15 Of particular importance was the influence
of Anders Bachmansson Nordencrantz.
    Anders Bachmansson, born in 1697, the son of a Sundsvall merchant and
burgomaster, lived for a time in England and served as consul in Lisbon before
being ennobled under the name Nordencrantz in 1743 and serving on the
Kammerkollegium. His first writings, in the 1730s, were on economic subjects
and traditionally mercantilistic in tone; in the Riksdag he was originally aligned
with the Hats. As the owner of ironworks in Sweden and Finland, however, he
fell afoul of the Hats’ economic policy and was forced to sell out in 1756. Be¬
cause of inflation, Nordencrantz took a serious loss on the sale, directing his vast
indignation against the Hats’ monetary and banking policy. From the mid-1750s
