 58       THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

 Hesse, who shortly thereafter married one of Christian’s sisters. But Christian
 soon gave ear to the council’s opponents. He dismissed his father’s favorite,
 Count Moltke, from the council, replacing him with Count Frederik Danne-
 skjold-Samsoe, a Dane and the implacable foe of the German “Excellencies.”
 Around him gathered other opponents of the existing regime, including Colonel
 Gortz, Count Rantzau-Ascheberg, and the Prussian minister, Baron H. H.
 Borck. By August 1766 Danneskjold-Samsoe had Christian on the point of dis¬
 missing Count Bernstorff himself, which was apparently only forestalled by
 Reverdil’s energetic intervention. By March 1767 the king had tired of Carl of
 Hesse and recalled Saint-Germain.
     The old “Excellencies” still had one strong suit. Following the crisis of 1762,
 Bernstorff had worked with notable success to improve relations with St.
 Petersburg. A Danish-Russian Treaty of Friendship, signed in March 1765, con¬
 tained a secret article providing for negotiations to settle the Holstein-Gottorp
 question. Bernstorff thus appeared indispensable for the success of this vital
 enterprise and by March 1767 the Russians pointedly warned the king to stay
away from intrigues against the existing council.
    The tide turned. In October Danneskjold-Samsoe was dismissed from the
council, followed by Saint-Germain in November. Both were banished from the
capital, as was Rantzau-Ascheberg, and even Reverdil, who had striven to
remain neutral. By February 1768 Moltke was back on the council. Two years
after the beginning of the new reign the old council had apparently weathered
the storm. As Rantzau-Ascheberg now rightly predicted, it would take some
unforeseen turn of events to break its grip.23
    Although it represented more rational concepts of administrative efficiency,
the antiministerial faction suffered serious handicaps. It was united mainly by
opposition to the “Excellencies”; among its adherents personal ambitions
caused much rivalry and suspicion. More important surely was the widespread
fear in government circles, expressed by the influential generalprokuror (chief
legal expert) for the Danish Chancellery, Henrik Stampe,' that a “military gov¬
ernment” would be inimical to Denmark’s basic constitution.24 Only a strong-
willed monarch could thus have seized the opportunity provided by the French
field marshal and his friends and turned it to account.
    Unfortunately, Christian VII was altogether unequal to such a challenge. The
young king was not unintelligent, and Reverdil had done his best to instill in him
some sense of responsibility with the aid of Fenelon’s Telemaque and Montes¬
quieu’s L ’Esprit des lois. Yet he showed little inclination for effort or concentra¬
tion. Had he been prepared to leave governing to the council, as his father had
done, this too would have decided the contest for power. But Christian took a child¬
ish, malicious delight in unexpectedly dismissing and appointing officials, and in
playing one faction off against the other. At the same time, he was easily swayed.
Hence much ot the administrative confusion and insecurity of his early reign.
