  60       THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

  service. The results were widely publicized and aroused great interest within the
  kingdom.28
     Count Moltke had called attention to the unsatisfactory state of Danish agri¬
 culture at the beginning of Frederik V’s reign in 1746 and had himself experi¬
 mented with enclosures and an eleven-field rotation on his Bregentved Manor.
 In 1757 an Agricultural Commission was set up under Moltke, which concerned
 itself mainly with separating out the lands of different villages and estates. In
 1764, meanwhile, the stavnsband reached its furthest development when it was
 extended from the male peasant’s fourth to fortieth year.
      The Holsteiner Count Christian Gunther Stolberg experimented along the
  lines suggested by Rantzau-Ascheberg on his own estate at Branstedt and, from
  1751 on, as overhofinester for the dowager queen Sophia Magdalene on her
 manor at Hirschholm (Horsholm) on north Sjaelland. Count J. H. E. Bernstorffs
 nephew, Andreas Peter Bernstorff, was an intimate of the Stolberg household,
 where he mixed with such articulate proponents of agrarian reform as J. S.
 Sneedorff, Tyge Rothe, Reverdil, and the German G. C. Oeder. When the elder
 Bernstorff acquired lands for a new manor just north of Copenhagen his
 nephew, with a capable estate manager, Torkel Baden, carried out ambitious
 reforms, beginning in 1764.
    While Stolberg had divided the Hirschholm lands into compact farms and
 moved their tenants onto them, the Bernstorffs also granted hereditary lease¬
 holds and commuted labor obligations. The peasants at first resisted being up¬
 rooted from the comforting security of their old villages and vainly petitioned
 the king to prevent it. An enterprising peasant, Hans Jensen Bjerregaard, who
 was idealized by the enthusiastic Sneedorff in his influential journal. Den danske
 Tilskuer, took the lead, however, and by 1767 both the Bernstorffs and their
tenantry were highly satisfied with the changes. Torkel Baden described them
in a widely read account and the Bernstorff manor, being on the outskirts of the
capital, was much in the public eye.29 Similar reforms were carried out at Bis-
trup, a manor belonging to the Copenhagen magistratiire.
   Separately, a grass-roots movement toward peasant freeholding was getting
under way in west Jutland, where from the later 1750s peasants on occasion pur¬
chased their tenancies. When Grubbesholm Manor went up for sale in 1761 it
was bought in its entirety by its tenants, who divided it up into individual farms.
After the Seven Years’ War, the government, to help restore state finances sold
off much crown property between 1764 and 1769. In Denmark crown estates
were usually sold intact, creating dozens of new manors, although in some
areas, mainly in Jutland, peasants were able to buy their own farms; in the
duchies policy favored the extensive parceling out of crown land to peasant
purchasers, who thereupon became free if they had formerly been serfs.30
   All aspects of agrarian reform were discussed and debated in great detail. In
Norway there was the inspiring example of the free odelbonde, made much of
