 56      THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

Stockholm distributed money with unaccustomed largesse, with France backing
the Hats, Russia and Britain the Caps.18 The result was a resounding defeat for
the Hats; the Caps gained majorities in all four Estates, by a narrow margin in
the Nobility, by substantial ones in the other three.
   Far more significant than foreign influence, which was largely self-canceling,
were important changes in the social bases of the nonnoble Estates. Among the
Clergy, which had never been more than lukewarm toward the Hats, leadership
shifted increasingly from the bishops to the parish pastors. In 1766 the Estate
even formally excluded from future riksdagar any of its members who had
accepted ennoblement for themselves or their children, which removed the arch¬
bishop and several bishops.
    More important still was the striking Cap victory in the Burgher Estate, based
on a new coalition of middling and smaller merchants, mainly engaged in import
and internal trade, and well-to-do artisans, now increasingly activated politically
in a manner recalling Britain in the same years. The larger merchants, manufac¬
turers, and municipal magistrates who had traditionally dominated the Estate
meanwhile remained Hats. This shift was most notable in Stockholm, where
social cleavages within the bourgeoisie were greatest and where the Hats now
lost all but one of the city’s ten seats in the Burgher Estate. In the provincial
towns the lines were generally less sharply drawn and the elections were often
determined by personalities and local economic issues. During the Riksdag that
followed, the social reorientation of the Estate was further consolidated through
the removal of regulations from the 1750s affording government officials a voice
in the election of town magistrates and restricting the burghers’ freedom of
assembly. In 1766 anyone who had previously had the “character” of a govern¬
ment official was moreover barred from membership in the Estate.
   The peasantry were repelled by the Hat council’s recent limitations on peas¬
ant land acquisition and property rights, while being attracted by the Caps’
concern for agriculture and liberalism with regard to rural trading. It is not coin¬
cidental that several of the new Cap leaders in the Peasant Estate were rural
entrepreneurs as well as farmers.19
   After the Riksdag convened in January 1765 it dismissed most members of
the state council and replaced them with Caps. A number of new leaders ap¬
peared, many of them younger men making their political debut. Of them, the
most outstanding was Anders Chydenius, representative in the Clerical Estate
of the chaplains of Osterbotten in Finland.
   While he freely acknowledged his debt to Anders Nordencrantz, Chydenius
was at once more consistently radical and the master of a far more lucid and
compelling literary style. With unbounded energy he crusaded in the Riksdag
and in numerous writings for the freedom of the individual from all forms of
wardship and constraint. He thus led the fight for freedom of the press and
against restraints to free trade, in particular Stockholm’s staple rights over the
