                                  THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                   59

    Christian quickly revealed a restless passion for distraction. To his court
surgeon he declared his intention to “rage for two years.’’25 Bernstorff, hoping
to settle him down, hastened the king’s marriage to sixteen-year-old Caroline
Mathilde, sister of George III of England, in the fall of 1766. Christian soon
tired of the restraints of married life and with his boon companions made noc¬
turnal rounds of Copenhagen's taverns and brothels, often brawling with the
abashed guardians of the peace.
    In 1768 the king announced his intention to travel abroad for two years, caus¬
ing Bernstorff and his associates the gravest apprehensions for Denmark’s inter¬
national prestige. With the reluctant Bernstorff as cicerone, the royal party set
off in July on a tour that fortunately lasted only eight months. Christian visited
London and Paris, where he behaved himself with unexpected probity. But for
those closest to the royal person there could now be little doubt of what Reverdil
had suspected in his pupil: that Christian VII was touched with insanity.26
    This appalling circumstance would long remain a well-kept secret; that the
public tended to take a broad view of the king’s pleasure was clear from the dis¬
solute but amiable Frederik V’s unfailing popularity. Thus the first years of
Christian’s reign were a time of sanguine hopes and numerous projects for use¬
ful reform. Of these, none aroused as much interest and debate as those concern¬
ing the agrarian question.
    The steady rise of agricultural prices since the low of the 1730s had encour¬
aged increasing numbers of middle-class entrepreneurs to invest in manorial
lands and ensure their profitability through the strictest interpretation of their
proprietary rights. There thus occurred here, as elsewhere in Europe, “a sei-
gneurial reaction connected with the development of the capitalist spirit,” as
Kare D. Tonnesson has observed.27 By the 1750s, however, Denmark’s agrarian
structure was reaching the evident limits of productivity under its archaic forms
of cultivation and its wasteful and unjust social organization. To many it was
increasingly clear that dispersal of village landholdings into scattered strips kept
cultivating practices primitive and productivity low, and that insecurity of tenure
and tenant rights, mounting labor obligations, lack of personal freedom, and the
degrading treatment that frequently resulted, left the Danish peasants apathetic
and ineffectual, both as cultivators of their own land and as laborers on the land¬
lord’s, while they still remained a charge on the latter’s resources, particularly
with respect to responsibility for the tenants’ land tax.
   Inspiration for specific agrarian reforms was both practical and humanitarian.
Early in the century new fodder crops and crop rotations, inspired by north
German, Dutch, and English practice, increased productivity on manorial
demesnes in the duchies. Beginning in 1739, Count Hans Rantzau-Ascheberg
experimented with enclosures and the commutation of labor obligations on his
Holstein manor. By 1761 he had created some twenty compact peasant lease¬
holds out of his demesne, from which the rents compensated for the loss of labor
