                                    THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                  61

by the friends of reform; perhaps at a more immediately practical level there was
that of the numerous small freeholders and hereditary leaseholders in the
duchies. From England, France, Germany, even Sweden, came examples of
specific, useful reforms, while English economic thought, French physiocracy,
and German cameralism alike stressed the primacy of agriculture, the blessings
°f individual ownership, and the freedom and dignity of the cultivator. Whereas
English and French thinkers tended to emphasize the free play of market forces
and thus to favor large-scale, economically profitable exploitation, the German
cameralists, notably J. H. von Justi, who himself spent some time in Denmark,
placed greater weight upon the responsibility of the state to protect the economi¬
cally weak against the strong, and hence upon the creation and preservation of
small, independent farms.31
    Much of the voluminous agricultural literature in Denmark during the 1750s
and 1760s dealt with technical, thus relatively noncontroversial matters, but
 reform-minded men were not slow to attack the roots of the agrarian problem:
the peasants lack of freedom and their burden of labor obligations. Niels
 Schelde, himself born a peasant, called for the end of the stavnsband and was
joined by Sneedorff and others. They argued not only that existing conditions
offended against both justice and humanity, but that freedom alone could give
peasants the self-respect and initiative necessary to make them responsible and
truly productive members of society. Their arguments recalled those that had
justified Frederik IV’s abolition of vomedskab in 1701. Their opponents main¬
tained that peasants were by nature so shiftless and improvident that to abolish
the stavnsbaand would unfailingly bring ruin both to the state and to the peasants
themselves.
    Supporters of emancipation were meanwhile divided over the question of the
landlord’s property rights. Enlightened proprietors, such as Tyge Rothe, who
saw the need to free the peasantry, also generally favored an end to paternalism
and the full right of the proprietor to dispose of his property as he saw fit. The
Fyn landowner Baron Poul Abraham Lehn maintained in this regard:
   A peasant is a man, neither more nor less. Give him all the rights the state
   may bestow upon every citizen, but give him nothing that belongs to any¬
  one else. . . . When he thus becomes his own master, he becomes a
  farmer, as in England. The landlord is bound to uphold his side of the con¬
   tract and he [the tenant] his.

Discussion of agrarian questions received a further, important stimulus with the
founding in 1769 of the Royal Agricultural Society (Det kongelige Landhus-
holdningsselskab), based on British models.32
   Both Reverdil and Saint-Germain were opponents of the stavnsband.
Whereas the former’s motives were philosophical and humanitarian, the latter’s
were essentially military and political. Reverdil had long impressed the young
