                                  THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                   55

 he resumed his writing, now attacking the Hats. By the early 1760s he was
 acclaimed as the political and economic oracle of the Younger Caps.
     Nordencrantz was a passionate polemicist rather than a speculative philos¬
 opher. His numerous writings are long-winded, disorganized, and at times
 ambiguous and contradictory. As a theorist, perhaps especially in the economic
 sphere, he was easily outclassed by several of his contemporaries. Yet none
 were more widely read or profoundly influential among both intellectuals and
 riksdagsman. Taken as a whole, they embody the new criticism of the existing
 state and society.
     He was a true son of the Enlightenment in his basic rationalism and enormous
 reading in the works of the philosophes, to whom he made constant reference.
 There is an underlying pessimism regarding human weakness behind his per¬
 vasive fear of the abuse of unrestrained power, either political or economic. He
 was nonetheless confident of the power of human reason and enlightened legisla¬
 tion to rectify human errors.
      In Nordencrantz s view, all power derived from the people, not from its
  government. There must therefore be checks and balances. Public officials must
  be accountable to the public, elected for limited terms by those they served, who
  could thus watch over their performance. Those officials with judicial functions
  must share these with elected juries. Neither such “judges” nor the representa¬
  tives of special economic interests should be eligible to serve in the national
  legislative body, which Nordencrantz envisioned as a single chamber, elected
  by and composed of men of adequate, independent means, without reference to
  Estate, incorruptible by threat or bribery, and fearing only “God and the law.”
  The exercise of the people’s will required public enlightenment and the free
 exchange of ideas, hence popular education and freedom of the press. In his bit¬
 terness against suspected, highly placed financial speculators, whom he rather
 wildly imagined to have the state and its bureaucracy in their power, Norden¬
 crantz even asserted in the early 1760s the right of rebellion against tyranny. It
 follows that he opposed special privilege of all kinds, yet he did not reject Mon¬
 tesquieu’s concept of an aristocracy to serve as guardians of public freedom. In
 economic matters Nordencrantz continued through the 1760s to attack the estab¬
lished mercantilist system, in which bureaucratic decisions rather than the indi¬
vidual’s free choice determined who should be rich and who poor.16
     These basic ideas are echoed by other Cap publicists during the 1760s. Their
rivals in the Hat camp most generally based their defense of the existing and,
in their view, natural balance of powers within state and society upon Mon¬
tesquieu.17
   In the fall of 1764 elections were held for a riksdag to meet the following
winter. Campaigning was livelier than ever before, revealing that both parties—
especially the Caps—had been marshaling their forces. Foreign diplomats in
