 62         THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

 king with the need for peasant emancipation, to be accomplished gradually
 through example and persuasion, and without violating property rights. Chris¬
 tian showed keen but sporadic interest. In 1767, for instance, he granted heredi¬
 tary leases to his crown tenants in Kronborg and Frederiksberg Amter in north
 Sjaelland.33
     At the prompting of Saint-Germain, meanwhile, the king decreed in October
  1767 the establishment of a commission to consider the improvement of agricul¬
 ture and particularly of conditions among the peasantry. Apparently sensing a
 political coup by the “party of Saint-Germain” and fearing the reaction this
 would surely create, Reverdil prevailed upon Christian to appoint to it men com¬
 manding general respect, including both supporters and opponents of emancipa¬
 tion. The case for the former was stated by the Copenhagen magistrate Oluf
 Bruun:

      No subject of a realm, however great, powerful, and respected he may be,
      should or can be said to own another subject, of however humble estate
      and condition, and least of all in this kingdom, which is ruled by a king,
      of sovereign and unlimited power, whose law is equally just for all
      subjects.

The opposing view may best be represented by Baron Holger Rosenkrantz,
known to be a humane landlord, who stated:

   The peasantry is and remains the foundation of all other estates, and its
   welfare is certainly in the true interests of its masters. Whatever may be
   devised to improve the peasant’s lot is to the advantage of the proprietor,
   who stands in the same relationship to His Royal Majesty as the peasant
   does to the proprietor. . . . That the peasants would be helped if they
   were given freedom to move in their younger years from one manor to
   another ... I cannot but [doubt and] fear that they would misuse such
   freedom and leave the manors. . . . The landlord and peasant are in con¬
   stant need of each other and should comprise a common economy for their
   mutual benefit.

He later quoted an unidentified French authority on the peasantry: “One must
support, direct, and occupy them without crushing them.” Another landlord put
it more bluntly: “All peasant labor is so onerous that a certain compulsion is
necessary lest it cease altogether.” Fears were expressed that peasants would
abandon the poorer regions for more prosperous ones and crowd into the towns
to become lackeys and idlers, rather than staying on the land where they be¬
longed.
   Reverdil condemned servitude as “barbarous,” yet like Bruun he proposed
that it be abolished in stages, to avoid disruption. Saint-Germain's new General-
krigsdirektorium was more imperious: it demanded immediate abolition of the
