                                 THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                    57

Bothnian ports in Sweden and Finland. He would later campaign against the
monopolistic rights of craft guilds, restrictions on the grain trade, the oppressive
authority of masters over their servants, and religious intolerance. Over a
decade before Adam Smith, he argued that “each individual voluntarily seeks
out the position and the economic pursuit in which he best increases the national
profit.    Beyond the destruction of special privileges and monopolies, Chy-
denius envisioned a kind of rough economic democracy, without poverty and
dependence on the one hand, and idleness and luxury on the other. As a clergy¬
man, he took his duties seriously, holding to Lutheran orthodoxy and enforcing
his parishioners religious obligations. Like Rousseau—and later Robespierre—
he was impressed with the concept that the exercise of freedom required the
virtue that only a shared faith could impart.21
     The Caps program during the Riksdag largely bears the impress of Norden-
 crantz and Chydenius, although often attenuated by political give-and-take. A
 landmark was the abolition of press censorship for all nontheological writings
 in 1766, providing a freedom of expression unmatched outside Great Britain and
 the Dutch Netherlands and stimulating a torrent of political pamphleteering. An
 inquest was held into the previous Hat financial administration, and stiff penal¬
 ties were meted out. Stockholm’s monopoly on Bothnian exports was abolished.
 Rural trade became freer, and peasants were permitted to ship their wares di¬
rectly to their destinations. Many now took them to Stockholm, bypassing their
local market towns. Peasants were again permitted to buy crown land.
     The Caps meanwhile sought to practice thrift in government. Special sub¬
sidies to manufacturing were cut back. To reduce the national debt and improve
the trade balance, they prohibited the import of a number of foreign luxuries and
semi-luxuries, and imposed sumptuary ordinances. Some steps were also taken
to exercise a stricter control over public officials. They sought to develop peace¬
ful and friendly relations with Russia, Denmark, and Britain, while economizing
on defense, thus suspending the construction of fortifications in Finland.
    The Hats eventually regained control in the House of the Nobility through an
alliance with the small Court party, adding a growing element of class strife to
the political conflict. Alarmed at the new radicalism within their party, some
Caps, especially among the nobility, crossed over to the Hat camp. The poet and
nobleman G. F. Gyllenborg later recalled his repugnance toward the “violent
regime” of the “democrats,” similar in character to “the beginning of the
French Revolution.”22

    Across the Sound in Copenhagen, the accession of the sixteen-year-old Chris¬
tian VII in January 1766 was followed by a complex and confused struggle for
dominance between the rival factions of recent years. The council persuaded the
young king to dismiss Field Marshal Saint-Germain within a few days of his
accession; Saint-Germain was replaced by twenty-two-year-old Prince Carl of
