                    THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                        73

Above all, the nation could not accept the manner in which Struensee had risen
to royal favor and his domination of the king and queen.
   Struensee’s proclamation of press freedom in September 1770 released a
flood of pamphleteering, as had the Swedish law four years earlier. Although
much of it was scurrilous and irresponsible, taken as a whole it gave vent to
accumulated hopes and frustrations throughout the monarchy and dealt with
almost all contemporary conditions.11 In Denmark this meant much discussion
of agrarian questions.
   Similarly, press freedom aroused high hopes for important reforms in
Norway. Local sentiment was on the rise, spurred by the growing feeling that
Denmark consumed what Norway produced. The appearance in 1771 of the first
volume of Gerhard Schoning’s history of ancient Norway produced a surge of
local patriotism, while in Denmark such influential opinion makers as P. F.
Suhm, Tyge Rothe, and G. C. Oeder vocally supported Norway’s claims to
more equitable treatment.12
     In particular, the Norwegian writings called for a separate bank, university,
 and board of trade, and for the repeal of the Danish grain monopoly in southern
 Norway, all old demands now restated more forcefully than ever. In June 1771
 Struensee summoned to Copenhagen the bishop of Trondheim, Johan Ernst
 Gunnerus, co-founder with Schoning and Suhm of the Trondheim Scientific
 Society in 1760, to discuss the reform of the University of Copenhagen. Here
the bishop presented his own plan for a Norwegian university, to be supported
by the endowment his compatriot Holberg had given to Sora Academy in 1747.
 Nothing came of it, however. Copenhagen feared that abandonment of the
monarchy’s traditional centralism would ultimately threaten its unity. Although
Struensee’s administrative reorganization had provided for greater attention to
local interests than heretofore, he could ill afford by the fall of 1771 to sacrifice
what support he might still hope for in Denmark through concessions to Nor¬
way. Thus, like the proponents of agrarian reform in Denmark, the leaders of
opinion in Norway found their hopes first encouraged, then discouraged.
    In establishing press freedom in 1770, Struensee had hoped not only to open
channels between the governor and the governed, but to gain popular support
for his attack on privilege and administrative inefficiency. At first such support
seemed forthcoming. But as Struensee’s dictatorial manner and refusal to con¬
sider the views of others made ever more enemies, the press turned against him.
Personal attacks in the press became so bitter that he felt compelled to limit its
freedom, one of his most cherished reforms, in October 1771. Meanwhile, dis¬
affection reached the point where implied criticism was directed against the
absolutistic form of government itself: it was suggested that an assembly of
Estates be established to watch over and control the government, that the mon¬
arch should be the representative of the nation, responsible to it and replaceable
by it.13 Count A. P. Bernstorff was sufficiently alarmed by the prevailing tone
