                    THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                       71

 As seen, he opened careers to talent in the service of the state; he even admitted
 notables of common birth to court. Personal morality he held to be a private
 matter, provided it did not harm others, and he abolished numerous police regu¬
 lations for its surveillance and control. By establishing press freedom in Septem¬
 ber 1770, Struensee invited public opinion to play its part in public affairs. Being
 a freethinker himself, he favored religious tolerance and encouraged the Mora¬
 vian Brethren to settle in Schleswig.
    His liberalism is also evident in his economic policies. He removed the tariff
 barrier between the duchies and the kingdom, deprived Copenhagen of its
 favored status in foreign trade, and ended government subsidies to manufactures
 and the arts. He reduced the monopolistic privileges of the artisan guilds and
 encouraged free masterships. In December 1771 he ended the Danish grain
 monopoly in southern Norway.
     Struensee likewise set out to deal with Denmark’s greatest social problem,
  that of the peasantry, and already in November 1770 established a new agrarian
 commission composed of known proponents of reform. Its main accomplish¬
 ment was the limitation in February 1771 of manorial labor obligations, based
 on the size of the tenant's holding rather than the manor’s need for labor; for
 a tenancy of average size (six tonder hartkom), these were now restricted to 144
 days a year. In contrast, some tenant farms on Sjaelland had, by 1770, become
 liable for as many as 265 days annually. In August the commission submitted
 its proposal for the gradual abolition of the stavnsband. It also favored a free
 contractual relationship between landlord and tenant.8 A loan fund was estab¬
 lished to encourage peasant freehold purchases. The commission’s measures
 were not yet implemented when Struensee fell from power the following winter.
 In January 1771, meanwhile, odel protection of freehold farms in Norway was
 reduced from twenty to fifteen years to allow a greater mobility of wealth there.
     Finally, Struensee’s reforms reveal his humanitarianism, in the spirit of the
 later Enlightenment. He abolished various Draconian punishments and im¬
 proved conditions in prisons and workhouses. As a physician, he was much
concerned with public hygiene, opened Copenhagen’s hospitals to the poor,
established a foundling home to discourage infanticide by unwed mothers, and
provided medical control over brothels.9 He likewise unified and improved the
system of poor relief in the capital.
     Struensee reached the height of his power in July 1771, when he was made
a count, together with his friend Enevold Brandt, the master of the king’s plea¬
sures. The king appointed Struensee to the newly created post of Gehejmekabi-
nettsminister, with the unprecedented authority to sign cabinet orders without
the royal countersignature.
    But at this point his most active and creative period was over. He spent most
of the summer and fall with the royal family at Hirschholm, increasingly ab¬
sorbed with the amusements of the court and his relationship with the queen,
