 64      THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70

 growing apprehension over increasing subservience toward the Russian
 colossus.
    Under such circumstances, the small Court party, which aspired to increase
 royal authority, held the balance in the Noble Estate. Although Queen Lovisa
 Ulrika despised the rule of the Estates and had intrigued repeatedly to overcome
it, her husband, Adolf Fredrik, showed little stomach for political infighting.
The hopes of the monarchists—and of France, now disillusioned with the
Hats—thus focused increasingly upon Crown Prince Gustav.
    The leading figure among the Court faction was Count Carl Fredrik Scheffer,
a former Hat councillor and Swedish minister to Paris, where he was well
known in philosophic circles and by the 1750s was much impressed by the
Physiocratic school. In 1756 he was appointed Prince Gustav’s governor. It was
Scheffer who in 1767 called Gustav’s attention to P. F. J. H. Le Mercier de la
Riviere’s L’Ordre naturel et essentiel des societes politiqu.es, published that year
in London, with its ideal of a “legal despotism,” based upon the natural order,
as opposed to the “arbitrary” despotisms of the past or those necessarily resulting
from “aristocratic” or “democratic” rule. Gustav was profoundly impressed, and
Le Mercier’s concept of enlightened despotism would hereafter remain one of
the poles of his political thinking.37
    The Hat leaders, most notably Count Frederik Axel von Fersen, were pre¬
 pared to support some increase in royal authority as the price of an alliance with
 the Court faction. They now placed their hopes in an extraordinary Riksdag, to
 profit from dissatisfaction with the new regime. The opportunity was provided
by the Cap council in December 1768, when it initiated an inquest on the Kam-
merskollegium, causing alarm among the higher bureaucracy. At the instigation
of Prince Gustav, Adolf Fredrik declared his intention to abdicate unless the
Estates were convened; in the meantime he refused to sign state papers, backed
by a kind of general strike by most of the bureaucracy, foreshadowing that
which in the summer of 1788 would compel Louis XVI to call the French
Estates-General. When state business practically ground to a halt, the council
gave way and elections were proclaimed. Prince Gustav prepared two successive
drafts for a more monarchical constitution.
    The Court party and its Hat allies had chosen their moment well. After vigor¬
ous electioneering in the spring of 1769, showing the rapid development of party
organization and propaganda in recent years, the Hats won an electoral victory
hardly less striking than the Caps’ four years earlier, gaining control of all four
Estates. Ten members of the council were promptly replaced with Hats, and the
Riksdag, meeting in Norrkoping, confronted its two main tasks: the monetary
problem and constitutional revision to increase royal power.
   No real solutions were reached during the next nine months. The monetary
issue bogged down in partisan strife, and the defection of a group of Hats to the
Caps in the Noble Estate, led by Carl Fredrik Pechlin, broke the common front
