 72      THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

which by now was common knowledge and was accepted with apathetic equa¬
nimity by the king. Christian VII’s condition deteriorated rapidly. In September
Reverdil was recalled from Switzerland to distract him and was appalled.10
Under such conditions discontent bred rapidly throughout the monarchy, espe¬
cially in the capital.
    Struensee’s change of regime had naturally made enemies of those he had
driven out of power, the old ministerial party, who looked to Count Bernstorff,
now in exile in Mecklenburg, as their leader. Behind them was the nobility as
a whole, alarmed at the large-scale dismissal of their peers from civil and mili¬
tary employments and sinecures, the loss of their traditional preference in the
higher offices of state, the limitation of their tenants’ labor obligations, the loss
of the protected grain market in southern Norway, and the impending abolition
of the stavnsband. They were outraged by Struensee’s common birth, and more
so when he was made a count.
    Struensee attacked all forms of privilege and vested interest simultaneously.
 The lackeys of the high and mighty were deprived of what they regarded as their
 right to reward through government sinecures. Bureaucrats felt insecure over
 tenure and compensation, and frustrated by the loss of accustomed discretionary
 powers. Military and naval personnel, including rank and file, were apprehen¬
 sive about their future prospects. The Copenhageners were offended by the sup¬
 pression of their municipal liberties, which had been reconfirmed as recently as
 1760. Bourgeois social climbers were indignant at no longer being able to in¬
dulge their “title sickness’ by being made etatsrader or korrunersrader.
    Artisans were fearful for their guild privileges. Merchants in the capital were
concerned about Copenhagen’s foreign and colonial trade and those in the prov¬
inces about diminished grain exports to Norway. Manufacturers faced ruin
through the ending of subsidies and competition from the duchies. Unemploy¬
ment rose rapidly, and during 1771 more than 4,000 persons left the capital.
Poor harvests between 1770 and 1772 meanwhile caused widespread distress.
Struensee’s efforts to provision the capital were insufficient, and the repeal of
the grain monopoly came too late to save his popularity in Norway.
    Struensee at the same time offended the nation’s pride and moral sensibilities.
He was clearly not opposed to nobility as such, provided it were an elite open
to merit as it had been under the earlier Danish absolutism. But his own eleva¬
tion to the highest rank of the nobility seemed cynical and hypocritical in view
of his manifestly democratic tendencies heretofore, just as the emolument of
60,000 rigsdaler which accompanied it seemed indefensible when his strict
economies in government had deprived many officials of their posts and pen¬
sions. His habitual use of German in the administration and continued ignorance
of the Danish language offended a Danish national sentiment which was already
on the rise. Clergy and laity alike were scandalized by his apparent godlessness
and immorality, as evidenced by his relaxation of controls over private behavior.
