68       THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

 later while visiting Rantzau’s father, the pioneer agrarian reformer, at Asche-
berg, he met Struensee, who well impressed both the king and Reverdil. That
autumn both the younger Count Rantzau and Reverdil fell out of favor, together
with Saint-Germain. When Christian VII set off on his foreign tour in July 1768,
 Struensee nonetheless secured appointment as his traveling physician. He
proved effective in soothing the king’s overwrought emotions. By the time he
returned to Copenhagen in January 1769, Christian found Struensee indispens¬
able and he was permanently attached to the royal household.1
    The young queen, Caroline Mathilde, had suffered repeated humiliation, both
from her capricious husband and from a succession of his favorites, which not
even the birth of an heir. Crown Prince Frederik, in 1767, had prevented.
Struensee’s favor with the king thus made him suspect in her eyes, all the more
as she heard of his reputation as a libertine. During the summer of 1769, how¬
ever, she was seriously stricken with a malady, which in retrospect seems to
have been a long-overdue nervous breakdown. Christian at last persuaded the
queen to let his physician attend her. With his sympathetic and tactful manner
he soon gained her grateful confidence and she quickly recovered. In January
 1770 Struensee was lodged in Christiansborg palace. Soon the doctor could do
no wrong in the eyes of his royal patrons. He was made the king’s reader and
the queen’s cabinet secretary, with the title of konferensrad. By late spring, if
not before, the thirty-three-year-old physician and the eighteen-year-old queen
had become lovers.2
    Passionately in love for the first time, Caroline Mathilde behaved with a
remarkable lack of discretion and Struensee was hard put to preserve appear¬
ances. Despite rumors, the exact nature of their relationship remained a se¬
cret—of sorts—for some months to come. That the doctor enjoyed the royal
couple’s unbounded confidence and that the queen was gaining a growing domi¬
nance over her husband was, however, obvious by the summer of 1770.
   In Altona, Count Rantzau saw the rise of Struensee’s fortunes as the prelude
to his own. Although the old reform party led by a field marshal, Saint-Germain,
had failed, Rantzau now envisioned its revival under an even more powerful
“colonel in a long skirt.” “The queen’s party,” he hoped, would at last break the
influence of the despised Bernstorff on the young monarch.3
   As for Struensee, it is unclear when he began seriously to conceive of playing
a political role. During his Altona years he had been both ambitious and critical
of existing conditions. Yet he could hardly have anticipated the opportunities
that opened before him by mid-1770, and which his dangerous relationship with
the queen compelled him to seize. His rise to power reveals the interplay of cir¬
cumstance and personality.
   During the summer of 1770, Struensee was able to restore his friends Rantzau
and Brandt to royal favor. They were soon understood to form a “triumvirate,”
and Bernstorff saw the handwriting on the wall. On 4 September the king issued
