 70       THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

zation. By the end of 1770 the council was suspended, as seen, and the large,
semi-autonomous kollegier were broken down into smaller departments with
more limited functions, directly subordinate to the king—that is, to Struensee.
This was accompanied by the wholesale dismissal of the heads of the former
kollegier, who were nobles, permitting their subordinates of common origin to
rise to the top of the new departments on the basis of merit. Struensee now com¬
bined certain functions, most significantly those of the old Rentekammer (Ex¬
chequer), Kommerskollegium (Board of Trade), and Tollkammer (Customs
Office) into a new Finanskollegium, the heart of his administrative system,
under his elder brother, Karl August Struensee.
   Both the new Finanskollegium and the Danish and German Chancelleries,
responsible for internal affairs, were subdivided into regional departments for
Denmark, Norway and the Atlantic islands, and the duchies. Foreign affairs
were removed from the German Chancellery and entrusted to a new department
under Count von der Osten.
   Struensee undertook to reorganize the judicial system, establishing a new
superior court in Copenhagen, and worked for the consistent application of the
laws by eliminating various immunities and special tribunals.
   Count U. A. Holstein, one of the few nobles Struensee appointed to office,
was made overpresident for Copenhagen. The old town government, while it
preserved some vestige of burgher representation, was lax and corrupt. The
magistrature and the burgher assembly, "the Thirty-Two Men," were replaced
by a town council appointed by the crown.
    In matters of procedure, Struensee stressed speed, simplicity, and strict sub¬
 ordination. He insisted that reports be brief and concise, as were his own direc¬
tives. He strove to introduce the strictest economies in government—although
 not always at court. This led to the reduction of excessive salaries and emolu¬
ments, and to the dismissal of unnecessary functionaries, many of whom were
nobles, often without pension. Struensee likewise undertook to cut back the
overgrown military establishment by as much as one half, beginning with the
dissolution of the elite Mounted Guards’ Regiment in May 1771.
    There were understandable reasons for Struensee’s concentration upon
administrative reform. He knew that as a foreign parvenu of common origin his
position was a precarious one, which only an efficient administrative machine
staffed by trustworthy men could secure. This was the necessary precondition
to fundamental social and economic reforms which were certain to arouse wide¬
spread opposition. Temperamentally he was inclined to put great faith in logic,
consistency, and oganization.
   Still, Struensee did not wait to begin reforming society. Thus there emerges
a second characteristic of his efforts: his essential liberalism. With the physio¬
crats, he clearly believed that the state should use its absolute authority to create
the greatest possible sphere of personal freedom and opportunity for its subjects.
