                                  THE WINDS OF CHANGE, 1760-70                    65

necessary for constitutional change, thereby missing, as Michael Roberts
argues, what would be the last chance to convert the existing regime into a bal¬
anced and viable constitutional monarchy.38
   Class antagonisms resurfaced at the Riksdag. Both parties roundly accused
each other of “aristocracy,” meaning thereby domination by a small, exclusive
clique.39 The Hat council again limited the purchase of crown lands by the peas¬
antry. In January 1770 class conflict assumed a new prominence when the
burgomaster ot Borga (Porvoo) in Finland, Alexander Kepplerus, presented to
the Burgher Estate an appeal for guaranteed equality in rights and honor for
noble and commoner alike, for the unenfranchised masses as well as those
groups represented by the traditional Estates. Although it could at this point
hardly affect the course of the current Riksdag, which expired at the end of the
month, it pointed unmistakably to privilege as the central issue the next time it
convened.40
    Soon thereafter, in May 1770, the appointment of a new vice-president for
the appellate court (hovratt) in Abo, Finland, brought this issue to a head. The
Hat council proposed three candidates, all noblemen, deliberately bypassing two
admittedly better-qualified aspirants, one a commoner, the other a man ennobled
by the king but excluded from the House of the Nobility by its resolution of
 1762. As vice-presidencies of government kollegier had not previously been
reckoned among the high offices reserved for men of noble status by the Statute
of Privileges of 1723, the council’s action seemed to presage a further advance
of noble pretentions, against which not even the king’s patent of nobility might
now prevail. In retrospect, Baron Adolf Ludvig Hamilton later recognized in the
reaction this created “the first spark of a Jacobinism not yet named.”41 The battle
lines were drawn.
   While the Riksdag of 1769-70 ultimately failed to fulfill the hopes of those
who sought to strengthen the Swedish crown, it caused alarm in Russia and Den¬
mark. The Danish-Russian Treaty of 1765, which had initiated negotiations over
Holstein-Gottorp, also affirmed the interest of both powers in preserving Swe¬
den’s constitution. In 1769 Russia negotiated closer alliances with both Denmark
and Prussia; the convention with Denmark now specified that both powers con¬
sider as a casus belli against Sweden the slightest modification of its existing
form of government. At that very time Russia was negotiating with Prussia and
Austria over the first partition of Poland; it is evident that a similar partition of
Sweden’s territories was under consideration in St. Petersburg, Copenhagen,
and Berlin, in the event of a war to rescue Swedish liberties.42

   The Seven Years’ War aroused a growing public opinion in the Scandinavian
lands to a new concern for public issues and to a heightened awareness of the
outside world, while the military and financial burdens it imposed clearly
demonstrated the need for practical reforms. The ideas of the later Enlighten-
