                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                     69

three edicts: ordering an inquiry into an unsuccessful naval expedition against
the Algerine pirates, limiting the grant of honorary titles to persons of demon¬
strated merit, and permitting freedom of the press. All three implied criticism
of Bernstortfs foreign and internal policies; significantly, too, they were pro¬
mulgated as cabinet orders, thus bypassing both kollegier and council. The same
day Rantzau and General P. E. Gahler were made state councillors. On 14
September, Bernstorff, having resisted all pressure to resign, was dismissed. “If
the king holds to what he has begun,” Gahler wrote enthusiastically to Saint-
Germain in France, “you will once again see a philosophical, beloved prince,
who seeks only what is good and what is right.”4
     For the time being it remained unclear who would be the real power behind
 the throne. Clearly Rantzau pictured himself in the leading role. He saw foreign
 policy and military affairs as his special competency and was prepared to leave
 internal matters to Struensee, who kept himself in the background. Europe was
 meanwhile thunderstruck by the fall of the venerable Bernstorff after two dec¬
 ades in office. In Denmark they change officials as the queen changes her
 chemise-if for that matter she still uses such a garment,” wrote Catherine II.5
 To make matters worse, Rantzau had earlier made himself persona non grata
 in St. Petersburg. Catherine suspended the provisional treaty for settlement of
 the Holstein-Gottorp problem which Bernstorff had negotiated in 1767. Rela¬
 tions with Russia deteriorated to the point that Struensee was compelled to
 reduce Rantzau to a secondary role. On 18 December 1770 Struensee was made
 maitre de requites, through whom all state business would henceforth be con¬
 veyed to the king. On 27 December the council itself was suspended. Count A.
 S. von der Osten, a former envoy to Russia acceptable to the empress, was made
 foreign minister. Now clearly the most powerful man in the realm. Dr. Struen¬
 see could embark upon its internal transformation.
    The instrument of his rule was the cabinet order. Beginning already in 1768,
Christian VII had made occasional use of this procedure, at first in relatively
minor matters. Of some 2,200 cabinet orders issued from that time through
January 1772, however, fully 1,880 date from the period beginning in Septem¬
ber 1770. Emanating ostensibly from the king himself, they were now written
and almost invariably composed by Struensee. They were in German, brief, and
to the point, seldom providing any rationale or justification.6
    With tireless energy Struensee dealt simultaneously with a bewildering vari¬
ety of subjects. He never prepared a clear statement of his overall program and
objectives, which doubtless evolved with circumstances. Still, certain basic
features emerge. Struensee’s world view was that of the later French Enlighten¬
ment, and from the “party of Saint-Germain” of the preceding decade he
received many of his ideas for specific reforms.7 The inspiration of Prussia is
likewise evident.
   Struensee’s greatest efforts were concentrated upon administrative reorgani-
