                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                     75

 out the monarchy with rejoicing, which in Copenhagen degenerated into the pil¬
 laging of brothels—which Struensee was accused of having encouraged—and the
 property of local Germans. Juliane Marie, Hereditary Prince Frederik, and their
 associates were heaped with fulsome praise.
    Caroline Mathilde was confined to Kronborg Castle in Helsingor (Elsinore).
Struensee and Brandt were held in chains in Copenhagen’s citadel, and a special
tribunal was appointed for their trial. When a search of the prisoners’ papers
failed to reveal evidence of a plot against the king, the tribunal concentrated on
Struensee s relationship with the queen and usurpation of the monarch’s author¬
ity, and Brandt’s violence against the king’s person. After long questioning—
and very likely the threat of torture, which he himself had abolished—Struensee
admitted to adulterous relations with the queen. Confronted with this confession,
Caroline Mathilde admitted her guilt. Struensee and Brandt were condemned for
having violated the king’s honor and authority under the Lex Regia of 1665.18
    This fundamental law made no provision for the monarch’s insanity, and its
stipulations regarding lese-majeste were vague. The legality of the verdict thus
remains disputable.19 The persons now in power, however, needed to justify
their own seizure of the state, and they feared that once the initial enthusiasm
wore off, a popular reaction in favor of Struensee and the unfortunate queen
would take place.
    On 25 February Struensee and Brandt were declared forfeit of life, honor,
 and goods, and condemned to death. Both long remained confident—as did many
 others—of their eventual pardon or reprieve. Catherine II, despite her earlier
 antipathy, sought to intercede. But the new regime dared not show clemency.
 On 28 February, before an immense crowd, they were beheaded, after their
 right hands were struck off. Their bodies, drawn and quartered, remained on
 public display on the edge of Copenhagen for the next four years. Europe was
 aghast at this savage display of medieval barbarism toward persons of such
 standing and prominence.
    A separate tribunal divorced Caroline Mathilde from Christian VII. Thanks
to British intervention, George Ill’s sister was spared from life imprisonment
and granted asylum in Hanover.
    Thus ended the most dramatic and tragic episode in the history of European
enlightened despotism. More strikingly even than Emperor Joseph II, the
German physician demonstrates its ethos, goals—and limitations. The Danish-
Norwegian monarchy offered in many ways an ideal laboratory for the experi¬
ment he undertook. Royal power was in principle unlimited. With the partial
exception of the duchies, the state formed an administrative and economic unity,
and possessed by European standards a loyal and relatively efficient bureau¬
cracy. It was not burdened with militarist and expansionist ambitions.20 It is
indeed notable how far the experiment was able to proceed before an effective
opposition mobilized against it.
