                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                       77

had just been dismissed. The French ministry now proved to be cool toward any
precipitous action.
    In the meantime, Gustav, who had grown up on the writings of the French
philosophes, frequented the intellectual salons of Paris. Here he was received
with great adulation, reflecting a long-standing interest in Sweden, which Vol¬
taire had called “the freest kingdom on earth” in 1756, and not least its constitu¬
tion of 1720, which Mably considered the “masterpiece of modern legislation”
in its provisions for “the rights of humanity and equality.” To his mother,
Gustav admitted to the frightful blasphemy” that the philosophes were “more
amiable to read than to see.”23
   Before he departed Paris, the French ministry granted a subsidy to Sweden
but cautioned Gustav against attempting a coup; he received a similar warning
from his uncle, Frederick II, in Potsdam on his way home. On 30 May he en¬
tered Stockholm, where the Estates were already summoned to meet the follow¬
ing month.
    The Hat and the Cap parties organized their election campaigns to a hitherto
 unparalleled degree, and both Hat local officials and foreign envoys sought
 vigorously to affect the outcome. In their campaigning for the nonnoble Estates,
 the Caps above all exploited the burning issue of privilege, both on principle and
 for the tactical advantage it now offered. The atmosphere within these three
 Estates when they convened in June has been compared by P. J. Edler to that
 within the French Third Estate in May 1789 and the instructions prepared by
 the electoral assemblies to the cahiers de doleances.24
    The leaders of the Noble Estate had serious cause for alarm. The Hats feared
 a vindictive purge of the council, which they had controlled since 1769; the
 noble Caps that the triumph of their party in the nonnoble Estates would lead
to a general attack on noble privileges. On the eve of the Riksdag, three noble¬
 men from each party thus worked out a compromise agreement, or “composi¬
tion,” under Gustav Ill’s mediation, allocating places on the council and on
Riksdag committees, and stipulating that the coronation oath remain the same
as at Adolf Fredrik’s accession in 1751.
    When the Riksdag convened, the Caps commanded strong majorities in the
Burgher and Peasant Estates, and initially a majority of one in the Clergy. Only
the Nobility was dominated by the Hats, with support from the Court party.
    On 25 June Gustav III opened the Riksdag with an eloquent appeal for con¬
cord and patriotism, and declared it his greatest glory to be “the first citizen of
a free people.”25 Despite his earlier speculations and developments later in his
reign, there seems to be good reason to take him at his word at this point. Not
only had he been warned, in Paris and Potsdam, against attempting a coup, but
he evidently returned from Paris not unaffected by the libertarian and anglophile
influences he had encountered there. He seems to have hoped that in mediating
between factions and classes he could strengthen his own position by building
