 80      THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

ate concerns. Since 1760 politicization had proceeded too rapidly. There were
still relatively few who were prepared to agree wholeheartedly with Jacob
Wallenberg when he proclaimed in 1770 that
                      Once Rome had ceased to wrangle,
                      She saw her power declining;
                      And England rules the world,
                      ’Mid parliamentary strife.
                      From party, freedom draws its life.

To most, the concept of party was still disturbing and the idea of a loyal opposi¬
tion a contradiction in terms, as amply confirmed by the rising factiousness and
declining efficiency of the current Riksdag.37 Finally, too, many feared the
further exploitation of a divided Sweden by foreign powers, especially the old
enemy, Russia. Increasingly both the nobility and much of the rest of the nation
looked to the young king for inspiration and leadership.
    The later course of the Riksdag, after the king’s oath and his coronation in
May, was not calculated to restore social peace or public tranquillity. The coun¬
cil was now purged of its Hat members, and various Hat local officials were
brought to trial for interfering in the elections of the preceding year. The Riks¬
dag condemned the previous council’s filling of the vice-presidency of the Abo
superior court in 1770 as “a measure insulting to nonnoble men and contrary to
law.”38 The three Estates resolved in early August that nonnobles should be
eligible on an equal basis with nobles to the highest offices of the realm, meaning
above all to the council, while the Peasants, supported by the Clergy and
Burghers, demanded representation on the powerful Secret Committee of the
Riksdag. The same month the Riksdag considered an alliance with Russia, at the
very time when that power was arranging with Prussia and Austria to partition
Poland.
    By this time Gustav III had determined to take matters into his own hands,
prodded by France, which secretly threatened to suspend subsidies unless he
took firm action. Since he had learned early in life to keep his intentions well
disguised, it is not certain exactly when he decided upon a coup d’etat.39 His
letter of 11 February 1772 to his mother—already quoted above—may, how¬
ever, give some indication:

  They did not want a well-regulated liberty in 1769; they shall have it in
  1772—my dear mother may guess. . . . There have been certain mem¬
  bers of the other [i.e. nonnoble] orders who have responded that if they
  cannot enjoy those rights and liberties which every man ought justly to
  claim in a free country, they would prefer to have one master, rather than
  a hundred tyrants.40
