                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                       79

concurrence: nobles were not prepared to “take law” from commoners.30
    In vain Gustav III harangued the speakers of the four Estates on 28 Novem¬
ber, urging a compromise, which served largely to arouse the suspicion of the
nonnoble Estates. The same day, the burgher Aron Westen wrote in his diary,
“This meeting became immediately known, and it was said everywhere that the
king has^ now removed his mask, and that ... he is entirely devoted to the
nobility.    It appeared the Riksdag might break down into two hostile confeder¬
ations, each with its own coronation oath, which would compel Gustav to choose
sides. Gustav III, it seemed, would be faced with the same choice between the
ancient regime and the new era as Louis XVI a couple of decades later,” Fredrik
Lagerroth has asserted.32 To his mother, Gustav wrote on 11 February 1772:
“We have reached the point where shortly real anarchy, a civil war, or perfect
order will be born out of all these disorders. . . . There are no longer Caps
or Hats, there is the Nobility on the one side and the other three orders on the
other.33
    The Estates, however, stopped short of the brink. On 4 March Gustav III
 signed a revised coronation oath binding him to appoint and promote in state
 service without consideration of “favor, official character, estate, or standing,”
 on the basis “only”—rather than “preeminently,” as in the past—of skill and
 merit. In return, the nonnoble Estates offered a rather meaningless joint state¬
ment that the privileges of no Estate should be prejudiced by the new oath.34
    Why had the nonnoble Estates not pressed their advantage to the full? Tradi¬
tional respect for the law had doubtless restrained many riksdagsman from ex¬
treme measures. The debates over a charter of nonnoble privileges meanwhile
reveal a significant cleavage between the liberal individualism of a few advanced
thinkers, such as Chydenius, and the traditional corporatist mentality of the
majority. For most, the way to social equality was naturally to increase and
guarantee the rights of the three nonnoble Estates, rather than to destroy special
privileges as such. They envisioned a kind of balance between separate but equal
states within the state. Cooperation between Burghers and Peasants tended in
practice to break down over specific economic privileges involving the protec¬
tionism of the towns versus free trade in the countryside. Thus in the end no
charter emerged from the Riksdag.35 The time and circumstances were still far
from ripe for a Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen.
    At the same time there were signs that the bitter clash of class and faction
had gone beyond the political nation as a whole, leading to a growing weariness
with politics.36 Disheartened, many Hat nobles now left the Riksdag, as much
of the Danish nobility had withdrawn from Struensee’s Copenhagen the year
before, weakening the remaining defense against the Cap onslaught. But many
others throughout the kingdom were likewise disillusioned. During the poor
crop years 1771-72, Riksdag politics seemed increasingly remote from immedi-
