 82        THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

   Two days later Gustav III summoned the Riksdag to the royal palace, where
troops and loaded cannon were much in evidence. Addressing the assembled
Estates, the king justified his revolution by asserting that “a small number of
persons” had brought the kingdom to the verge of ruin. Liberty had “degener¬
ated into an aristocratic yoke, odious to all Swedish citizens.”46
   Gustav’s rhetorical condemnation of “aristocracy” deserves some comment.
Count Fersen, whose relationship with the king would undergo various vicissi¬
tudes, later wrote of it in his memoirs:

         That word, aristocracy, although without any meaning with regard to
      the existing constitution of that time, which was democratic in principle
      and which had degenerated into the rule of the rabble and anarchy, was
      of great help; harsh and jarring in sound, the people acquired a strange
      conception of its meaning and cried out against “aristocrats” as against
      werewolves.47

 The king of course applied the word as it had long been used in Swedish poltical
 polemics: in the sense of the engrossing of power by a small oligarchy, without
 reference to estate. During the 1760s Hats and Caps exchanged the epithet—
although this did not prevent the Hats from sometimes accusing their opponents
of democracy —just as during the 1720s and 1730s the so-called younger
nobility had castigated the “older” nobility for “aristocracy.” Yet Count Fer¬
sen s comments suggest that the term by now contained a certain ambiguity
which the king exploited demagogically to ensure the support of the nonnoble
orders.48 The nobility as a whole meanwhile realized full well that Gustav’s
revolution was anything but “democratic” and that it had indeed rescued them
in the eleventh hour. “Far from violating liberty [the king now continued], I
wish only to abolish license and to replace that arbitrariness which heretofore
has governed the realm with a wise and regulated form of government, such as
the ancient laws of Sweden prescribe and was established under my glorious
ancestors.”49
    His project for a new constitution was read to the Riksdag. It was immediately
accepted by acclaim and signed by the four speakers for their respective Estates.
Henceforth the king forbade further use of the old party names: the past should
be forgotten and concord now prevail. On 9 September the Riksdag was dis¬
solved with the assurance that the next one would be called six years hence.
Thus, after fifty-three years, Sweden’s “Era of Freedom” expired without a
struggle.
   The new constitution represented a compromise between new concepts of
enlightened absolutism and old Swedish parliamentary traditions. Count
Scheffer and Vergennes had strongly urged a royal absolutism whereas Sprengt-
porten had pointedly reminded the king of “the rights of the nation.” Gustav
was anxious for his constitution to be unanimously accepted by the Estates, thus
