                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                      83

gaining the widest popular backing. Moreover, Russia and its allies should not
be too flagrantly provoked by the new regime.50
    Gustav s constitution provided a certain balance of powers, revealing some¬
thing of Montesquieu s influence. Executive power was vested in the king.
Whereas the council was made responsible to him alone, he was obliged to con¬
sult it on administration of justice, proposed legislation, war, peace, and foreign
alliances, and his own travels abroad. On certain points his will could be over¬
ruled by its unanimous vote. Legislative power was shared between the king and
the Estates, and each was empowered to propose or reject legislation. The
Estates meanwhile retained control over taxation, and the king was accountable
to them for state expenditures. He was expressly forbidden to wage an offensive
war without their consent. The Riksdag would, however, meet and dissolve at
the king s pleasure. On the sensitive issue of appointment and promotion in state
service, all “commissions of the crown” in both the “civil” and “military
states,” except for court positions, were to be awarded on the basis of “ability
and experience . . . without regard to favor or birth when not accompanied by
merit.”51 To his mother, Gustav wrote on 22 August:
   I had absolute power in my hands through the voluntary submission,
   separately, of each of the Estates, but I considered it nobler, grander,
   more conformable to all I had said previously, and certainly surer for my
   future government, myself to limit the royal authority, leaving to the
   nation the essential rights of liberty and keeping for myself only what is
   necessary to prevent license.52

   The constitution was meanwhile complex and, on important points, vague.
Gustav declared repeatedly that he intended to restore the “constitution of
Gustav Adolf.” To the French foreign minister he had written already in 1768
that “since Sweden has never had a fixed constitution, nothing is more indefinite
than the promise of restoring the old laws.” What he envisioned then and in
August 1772 was the benevolent reign of a royal patriarch, whose broad powers
were not too closely confined by petty limitations, over a trusting and harmoni¬
ous hierarchical society. Although this ideal of kingship now had to be expressed
in a written constitution, such as the nation had become accustomed to since
 1720, it was, as Folke Almen has pointed out, essentially “heroic” and ’’pre¬
romantic,” in contrast to “the striving of the Enlightenment to regulate society
through definite legal requirements.”53 The ambiguities of the constitution were
such that it could later be interpreted in the direction either of a more indepen¬
dent Riksdag or of a more powerful monarch. Not surprisingly, they gave rise
to varying views even at the time the constitution was written. In a speech in
October 1772, Count Scheffer argued that the new constitution provided for
    ... a king, armed with power to govern, shelter, and defend, without
   power to disturb, oppress, attack, or offend . . . subjects bound to obey
