 78       THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

 up his own following. Already in July he was hailed by a pamphleteer as a
 “patriot king,’’ with clear reference to George III and the “king’s friends’’ in
 Great Britain.26
    Just as Gustav was impressed with the importance of willing subjects, so too
 was he convinced, as his earlier papers reveal, of Montesquieu’s axiom that a
 true monarchy must rest upon a social hierarchy headed by a healthy aristocracy.
 He was no less proud to be the first gentleman than the first citizen of the realm.
 Thus both principle and temperament committed him inwardly to the defense of
 the nobility.27
   The Caps in the nonnoble Estates disregarded the composition arranged by
the party leaders in the House of the Nobility by packing their places on the
Riksdag committees with their own adherents. The Nobility could only respond
by filling their places with Hats. By now class conflict overshadowed party. To
consolidate their position, the nonnoble Estates resolved that an act passed by
three Estates should immediately become law, even if the fourth delayed in pass¬
ing it.
    The main issue was now the coronation oath. If it remained as in 1751, the
monarch would be committed to preserve all existing rights and privileges. The
nonnoble Estates therefore strove to change it. Whereas the Peasants were par¬
ticularly concerned with property rights and the equality of their Estate within
the Riksdag, the Burghers concentrated on equal access to the higher offices of
state. Both Estates busied themselves with preparing statements of their corpo¬
rate privileges and with the Clerical Estate considered drafts, based principally
upon Alexander Kepplerus’s memorial of January 1770, for a common charter
of privileges for the nonnoble orders, to become a constitutional statute corre¬
sponding to the Nobility’s charter of 1723.28 The nobles came under increasing
attack in a spate of pamphleteering. “The inferior orders,’’ the French ambassa¬
dor, the Comte de Vergennes, reported in August, “breathe nothing but
democracy.”29
    The Noble Estate clung determinedly to the coronation oath of 1751. In
actuality, the rights it defended were modest enough by European criteria,
although they could still provide that margin of security which might permit
noble families to maintain themselves as befitted their station—however fru¬
gally—in the employment of the state or on protected manorial lands. The Estate
was sorely offended by the attacks against it and responded with much golden
oratory on the valor and sacrifices of its ancestors in the service of the father-
land. Its apologists invoked Montesquieu in arguing that the nobility provided
the necessary bulwark for the liberties of all, and pointed to the example of Den¬
mark, where the degradation of the nobility formed the basis for absolutism.
Most fundamental to the nobility was, however, the principle that three Estates
could not interpret or change the privileges of the fourth without its own
