 76      THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

    Yet these advantages were largely neutralized by Struensee’s personal short¬
 comings: his self-righteous dogmatism, his lack of political common sense, his
 insensitivity to historic traditions and prejudices, his imperious manner, his
 frequent superficiality and inconsistency. In his cold devotion to principle, he
 seems a more humane and self-indulgent Robespierre.
    Struensee always remained an outsider, without attachment to the native
traditions or ruling class of his adopted country. He was thus prepared to ride
 roughshod over both. No regime in Europe attempted so many and such radical
changes in so brief a period. Henry Steele Commager has claimed that while
elsewhere in Europe there emerged a “blueprint” for a new social order, in
Denmark “we have—briefly at least—the new order itself.”21
    Struensee’s position as an outsider was, however, also his basic weakness.
He had little understanding for the state he sought to transform. “He seemed
to believe,” wrote Reverdil, who was not unsympathetic, “that a minister who
stood behind a curtain and set a royal puppet in motion had as much power as
an absolute and enlightened king.”22 Perhaps this is unfair. But in his position,
Struensee could only gain mastery over the state through exceptional circum¬
stances and irregular means, which in turn could only weaken the royal authority
upon which he ultimately depended. Well-prepared reforms that Denmark-
Norway could and did accept later, when enacted by its legitimate crown prince
over a period of years, it could not tolerate as an all-out attack on the existing
order by a foreigner of common birth within a few months in 1770-71. It seems
inconceivable that Struensee could have remained in power much longer than
he did, when even Joseph II was ultimately compelled to retreat from his more
careful—but no more radical—program a generation later.
   Yet Struensee’s efforts were not lost. The period of reaction that followed his
regime made manifest the need for the fundamental and lasting reforms that fol¬
lowed after 1784 and that made unacknowledged but unmistakable use of Struen¬
see’s blueprint.


    The unforeseen occurred in Sweden when King Adolf Fredrik died on 12
 February 1771 and was succeeded by his twenty-five-year-old son, Gustav III.
The beginning of a new reign required the prompt convening of the Estates to
receive the new monarch’s coronation oath and to swear allegiance to him. The
oath was to guarantee the constitution and the privileges of the Estates. Because
feeling remained high on both scores since the recent Riksdag of 1769-70 and
because it was already evident that the new king was both ambitious and astute,
it was clear that a stormy session lay ahead.
   News of his father’s death reached Crown Prince Gustav in Paris. As seen,
he had concerned himself with projects for a coup to strengthen royal power
since at least 1768. He now visited the French capital to arrange for French sup¬
port with the Due de Choiseul. En route, however, Gustav learned that Choiseul
