 74      THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

 that he wrote to his uncle on 23 September: “If there should be a popular upris¬
 ing, it could well lead to the overthrow of the monarchical system. I see nothing
 more clearly than that thoughts in that direction are becoming quite common.
I can perceive them in all the writings that are coming out . . . ,”14
    In September a crowd of Norwegian seamen from the naval dockyard in
 Copenhagen marched out to Hirschholm to demand their back pay. Struensee’s
 weak handling of the situation encouraged further insubordination. The follow¬
 ing month placards appeared in the capital calling for the assassination of the
 “tyrant.” In December Struensee’s order to disband the last remaining guards’
battalion, composed mostly of Norwegians, led to a full-scale mutiny, which
was only ended by damaging concessions. Rumors were now circulating that
Struensee intended to do away with the king and even the crown prince, marry
the queen, and make himself master of the realm, as a new “Cromwell” or even
as usurper of the crown itself.15
    Struensee was, however, brought down not by popular insurrection but by
a palace revolution. By the end of 1771 his reforms and manner had alienated
even most of his former supporters. Enevold Brandt, the one man he still really
trusted, was plotting his overthrow when it became known that he himself had
physically chastised the king, allegedly with Struensee’s approval, which
thereby cut off his own retreat.
   Count Rantzau now despised Struensee as a lowborn upstart. With Magnus
Beringskjold, a bitter opponent of peasant emancipation, he conspired to bring
about the favorite’s downfall. They came in contact with the dowager queen,
Juliane Marie, and her son, Hereditary Prince (Arveprins) Frederik, who had
been repeatedly slighted by Struensee and Caroline Mathilde. As the king’s
nearest relatives, his stepmother and half-brother gave the conspiracy a certain
legitimacy, while their astute confidant, Ove Guldberg, the hereditary prince’s
former preceptor, may have been the real mastermind behind the plot.16 The
conspirators ensured the support of the military by recruiting Generals H. H.
Eickstedt and G. L. Roller.
    Following a masquerade ball at Christiansborg Palace on the night of 17 Janu¬
ary 1772, a party led by Guldberg gained access to the king’s bedchamber,
where the bewildered monarch was inveigled into signing orders for the arrest
of the queen, Struensee, Brandt, and certain others. Rantzau then seized the
queen while Roller secured Struensee. Brandt, Gahler, Rarl August Struensee,
and several others were likewise arrested. The following day Christian VII was
driven through the streets of the capital to show he had been freed from the
tyrant. The author, Charlotta Dorothea Biehl, who remained ever sympathetic
toward Struensee and the unfortunate queen, remembered the king as “pale as
a corpse and with the greatest anguish in his face, drawn by eight white horses
in the magnificent coach . . . surrounded by the shrieking, howling populace,
which knew not what it was cheering for.”17 The coup was welcomed through-
