                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                       81

To his Parisian friend, the Comtesse de Boufflers, he wrote in June of the
  onslaught of Democracy against the expiring Aristocracy, the latter preferring
to submit to Democracy rather than be protected by the Monarchy, which opens
its arms to it.”41 This was, however, no longer true. Already in May 1766 J.
H. E. Bernstorff in Copenhagen had predicted that when the Swedish nobility
became sufficiently hard pressed by the other Estates, it would prefer ‘‘sover¬
eign power” to “democracy.” Confronted with a rout in the Riksdag, the nobil¬
ity turned increasingly to the king as their last resort. The Hat chieftain, Count
Fredrik Axel von Fersen, sounded out the king over the possibility of a “revolu¬
tion to draw Sweden out of her degradation.”42
   Gustav indeed felt much sympathy for the Hats, while despising the Caps,
but he was not anxious to be beholden to the leaders of either party. He preferred
to use new men, dependent upon himself. Such a one was the Finnish colonel
Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten, a Hat nobleman who organized a royalist club in
Stockholm during the Riksdag; his “main purpose,” he later candidly declared,
was to defend the privileges of the nobility . . . and if possible give greater
authority to the king.” Sprengtporten prepared a plan for a military insurrection
in Finland.43 A similar uprising was planned for Skane, to be led by Johan
Christopher Toll, likewise a noble.
     The time was right, but there was none to lose. Russia, the most implacable
 opponent to constitutional change in Sweden, was embroiled in war with Turkey
 and the first partition of Poland, a fate which Gustav alleged lay in store for
 Sweden itself.44 Prussia, Britain, and Denmark seemed indisposed to act against
 Sweden without Russian support.
    At the last moment plans for the royalist coup leaked out to the British minis¬
 ter in Stockholm, who reported them to his Russian colleague. But already on
 12 August Toll raised the standard of revolt among the garrison at Kristianstad
 in Skane, and two days later Sprengtporten raised the troops in Borga (Porvoo),
 who were quickly joined by those in Helsingfors (Helsinki) and at Sveaborg
 fortress.
    Sprengtporten’s force was now to sail for Stockholm but was delayed by
contrary winds. News of the Kristianstad uprising meanwhile reached Stock¬
holm on 17 August. Realizing that the council would commandeer loyal troops
to the capital, Gustav III saw that he could not wait for Sprengtporten and his
Finns. Assured of funds by the French ambassador, Vergennes, he appealed to
the officers of the Life Guards’ Regiment for their support on 19 August. After
some hesitation, they agreed. They seized and briefly detained the council while
they took control of Stockholm. No blood was shed. Riding through the streets
to reassure the inhabitants, Gustav III was received with jubilation. As word
spread to the provinces, no effort was made to defend the old order.45
