 84        THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72

      in matters of general concern but free and secure in all that pertains to
      them personally . , . the leader and the led bound together through an
      inseparable interest in preserving the law and powerless unilaterally to
      decide its abrogation.54

    Yet others were not convinced. In her chagrin, Catherine II predicted that
Gustav would become “as despotic as the sultan, my neighbor.” In London,
Jean Louis de Lolme, discounting fears of a similar royalist coup in Britain,
described the former Swedish government as “an aristocratical yoke” under the
nobility, but considered Gustav III now “as absolute as any monarch in
Europe.” In Paris, Mably and Abbe Raynal were especially critical. Even his
friend, the comtesse de Boufflers, forthrightly wrote to Gustav that she could
not regard him as other than an “absolute king” and warned him that autocracy
was “incontestably” a “mortal malady.”ss
   Later historians, too, have remained divided over the nature and original
intent of Gustav Ill’s constitution of 1772.56 But to contemporaries, only time
and circumstances would reveal the directions in which it would ultimately
evolve.
    Gustav’s coup raises fundamental questions about the regime it replaced: in
 particular, how far Sweden had advanced during its “Era of Freedom” toward
 a modern form of parliamentary rule and party politics, and how viable this
 government proved to be in coping with the problems of the realm. Critics,
 beginning with Gustav III himself, have traditionally stressed the regime’s
 inadequacies in this latter respect, and it seems apparent, as Michael Roberts
 recently reiterated, that, never very efficient to begin with, the rule of the all-
 powerful Riksdag became unwieldly to the point of impotence amid the very
class and partisan conflict that in its final tumultuous years carried it furthest in
the direction of parliamentarism and a party system. At the same time, as others
have maintained, from Fredrik Lagerroth in 1915 to Michael F. Metcalf in
recent years, this development was by 1772 probably morfe advanced in structure
and procedure than were similar developments anywhere else in the Western
world, even including Great Britain, to which it offers the closest parallels.57
    The immediate result of the Swedish “revolution” of August 1772 was a
threatening international crisis. For Catherine II, Gustav’s coup represented the
greatest diplomatic setback she had thus far encountered, but Russia was still at
war with Turkey, involved in Poland, and the following year shaken by
Pugachev’s uprising. Copenhagen, fearful over Norway, was if anything even
more alarmed, and Count von der Osten urged an immediate attack on Sweden,
even without Russian support. Despite their rivalry, however, both France and
Britain were opposed to any disturbance to tranquillity in the North, and their
separate diplomatic representations and naval preparations to maintain it
evidently helped cool the crisis by the spring of 1773.58
