 92       THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

  corruptions of the former. Republics, though admirable in theory, made impos¬
   sible demands upon the virtue of their citizens. Thus monarchy provided the
  surest practical guarantees for the basic rights and felicity of its subjects. While
  the monarch must in principle possess absolute power for the public good, he
  was distinguished from the “despot” by voluntarily accepting the civil laws of
  the land. “The most unlimited monarch,” he wrote, “represents a double per¬
  sonage within the state, that of a prince and that of a citizen. As a prince he com¬
  mands, as a citizen he obeys.” Schytte’s presentation culminates in praise of the
  Danish-Norwegian monarchy since the council had been restored and the kol-
  legier had regained their rightful place. “To abolish kollegier in a monarchical
  state is the same as to make the regent blind and to turn the regime into a despot¬
 ism.” Here was a political philosophy in the tradition of Holberg and Sneedorff,
 admirably suited to the circumstances, which would long provide a theoretical
 foundation for the specifically Danish-Norwegian form of absolutism.11
      The new regime reacted not only against Struensee’s reforms but against the
 whole free-thinking and innovative spirit that underlay them. This reaction is
 apparent in its policies toward religion and education, both areas of special con¬
 cern to Guldberg. Lutheran orthodoxy was strongly upheld, buttressed by the
 return to censorship and the regulation of private morality. Education was con¬
 ceived in narrowly utilitarian terms. Such an attitude allowed little place for the
 instruction of the broader masses. As Guldberg later expressed it:
   Peasant children ought perhaps to learn their Christian principles and their
   duties, learn to read, and to acquaint themselves with the Bible, learn to
   write, and also, if need be, to reckon a little . . . More knowledge here
   makes the peasant’s lot unbearable to him and produces only boredom and
   disgust with the hard and monotonous work in which his days must be
   spent and the state must and shall use his days. . . . For nothing in the
   world [should we adopt] any German projects, any ingenious Copenhagen
   improvements, but simply what produces the result that can be obtained,
   in accordance with the small resources the state and land possess.

The last sentence well summarizes Guldberg’s mercantilistic philosophy in
general. Regarding popular education, he put the matter more succinctly on
another occasion: The peasant must not be enlightened, otherwise he will
rebel.”12
   The government did, however, initiate a new cultural policy in one important
area: in its strong assertion of danskhed—Danish nationality and language. Al¬
though originally a Brunswick princess, Juliane Marie identified strongly with
her adopted land and its culture. Breaking precedent, she had given her son.
Hereditary Prince Frederik, a Danish, rather than a German, upbringing. Their
confidant, Guldberg, a Dane of modest background, thoroughly shared the
growing animosity of his compatriots toward the German cultural domination of
