                   THE FIRST ASSAULT ON PRIVILEGE, 1770-72                      85

   Throughout the period 1760-72, there is a notable correspondence between
developments in the two Nordic states. In the early 1760s practical pressures for
reform coincided with the breakthrough of the radical and humanitarian later
Enlightenment. In 1765-66 the victory of the Younger Caps in Sweden and the
accession of Christian VII in Denmark held forth prospects for far-reaching
changes, which were temporarily checked by 1769, when the old council ^con¬
solidated its position in Denmark and the Hats returned to power in Sweden.
Finally, the years 1770-72 witnessed a serious challenge to the old order from
Struensee and the Caps at the Riksdag of 1771-72.
   These developments fall into a larger Western context. The efforts of
Struensee and others in Denmark took place against the background of numerous
experiments in enlightened absolutism following the Seven Years’ War, includ¬
ing the reconstruction of Prussia under Frederick II, who provided a model
throughout Europe, and of Austria, where Joseph II joined his mother, Maria
Theresia, as co-regent in 1765, the same year in which his brother Leopold com¬
menced his reforming reign as grand duke of Tuscany. In 1767, when Christian
VII appointed his new Agrarian Commission, Catherine II summoned her
Legislative Commission—which in the end proved no more effective. Duke
Charles Emanuel of Savoy was the first European ruler to abolish serfdom, in
1771, the year in which Louis XV at last suspended the aristocratic parlements
in France.
   Other developments during the same period recall the striving of the Younger
Caps in Sweden for a more egalitarian society and representative government.
John Wilkes began his stormy career as a political gadfly in 1763, leading by
the end of the decade to the beginnings of the British parliamentary reform
movement. In 1765, when the Younger Caps came to power—and the
Norwegian Striler rebelled against Schimmelmann’s new poll tax—the Ameri¬
can colonists protested the Stamp Act on the principle of no taxation without
representation. In 1768 the lower bourgeoisie staged a brief revolution against
the ruling oligarchy in the republic of Geneva.
   Against this background one cannot but be impressed by the force and
radicalism of the first assault upon the old order in Scandinavia during this
decade. Indeed, one would search in vain elsewhere in the Western world for
persons active in affairs of state with social, economic, or political ideals more
advanced in the context of their time than Nordencrantz, Chydenius, Kepplerus,
Reverdil, Saint-Germain, or Gahler, or for programs of reform more ambitious
and far-reaching than those evolved by the Younger Caps or by Struensee, as
Scandinavian historians have on occasion pointed out, or at least implied, albeit
rather cautiously.59
   In both Nordic states there nonetheless proved by 1772 to be practical limits
to radical reform. In Denmark these derived above all from the monarch’s
disability and the fundamental weakness of Struensee’s personal position in the
