                  THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                        91

Struensee’s former overpresident for Copenhagen, Count Ernst Schimmelmann,
the finance minister s young and impressionable son, and an English adventurer,
Nathanael Wraxall. Caroline Mathilde, in exile in Celle, allowed herself to be
drawn into their speculations. Juliane Marie and the new men in Copenhagen
meanwhile feared that when the crown prince came of age he might recall his
mother. Such fears ended only when Caroline Mathilde died in May 1775, at
the age of twenty-four.8
   In time some sympathy was expressed for Struensee as well. A Jutland peas¬
ant described him to a visiting Copenhagener as “a brave man, who gave us the
former ordinance establishing labor obligations, and, I can well believe, that is
why they cut off his head in Copenhagen.” As late as 1777, a man was banished
from the capital for being “confused in his mind, full of political fancies, and
enthusiastic for the Struensee party.”9
    A more serious challenge to the regime came, however, from ideas that called
into question the principles of royal absolutism itself. Even before 17 January
 1772, P. F. Suhm prepared a draft constitution, limiting royal power through
a parliament of forty-eight members from the entire monarchy, whose approval
would be required for all taxation and for major economic or internal adminis1
trative policies, and protecting officials against arbitrary dismissal. On the very
day of the coup he gave his draft to Guldberg, but the latter, accustomed, Suhm
complained, “to slavery,” rejected it. Suhm thereupon published a celebrated
open letter to the king (Brev til Kongen), proclaiming, “An awesome power is
autocracy! The greater the power, the greater the responsibility.” The same
theme was reflected in other writings in the months that followed. In October
 1772, a young visionary, Kristian Thura, was imprisoned for rejecting passive
obedience; he had suggested that sovereign authority could in certain cases be¬
come “harmful” and had proposed that the Lex Regia be amended to provide for
the possibility that the king might be “deprived of his reason.”10
   Criticism of specific government policies reached such a pitch in Norway by
the fall of 1772 that the stiftamtmand in Christiania began to introduce a de facto
censorship on his own authority. A year later, on 20 October 1773, the govern¬
ment in Copenhagen decreed limitations on press freedom throughout the
monarchy. Hereafter it intervened constantly in press matters. Even though the
new regulations were not extreme and indeed allowed for some criticism of cor¬
rupt or negligent officials, the threat of intervention effectively muzzled the
press for the next decade.
   The government was all the more gratified by publications upholding the
absolutist principle. Of these, the most influential by far was Andreas Schytte’s
Statemes indvortes Regering (On the Internal Government of States), printed in
1773. Schytte drew heavily—albeit selectively—upon his revered master,
Montesquieu. He classified governments as “republics,             “monarchies,
“aristocracies,” and “despotisms.” The latter two he considered oppressive
