                   THE RALLYING OF THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                         89

hind the court’s apparent capriciousness lay Juliane Marie’s and Guldberg’s
determination that the crown remain the source of all favor and advancement to
build a solid foundation of obligation and support. In March 1773 Guldberg
became cabinet secretary to the king as well as to the hereditary prince, now
allowing him to compose all cabinet orders. By the summer of that year Osten
complained that Guldberg was “the way to all grace and favor, and disposes
over rain and sunshine.’’3
      The position of the court was meanwhile enhanced by discord among the men
 who had overthrown Struensee and by a lack of any concerted resistance by the
 new council. Beringskiold and General Roller soon disappeared from public
 life. Saint-Germain, who had returned expectantly to Denmark, departed after
 a few months. Rantzau resigned from the council already in July 1772 and re¬
 tired with a pension to France, where he is later recalled to have been a humane
 and enlightened manorial landlord. Early in 1773, H. C. Schimmelmann and
 Count Andreas Peter Bernstorff, the old count’s nephew, were recalled to
 Copenhagen to take in hand the tangled state finances. In April that year the
 younger Bernstorff was appointed foreign minister to succeed Osten. Thus there
 now appeared in the council chamber the man who more than any other would
 dominate the course of Danish public life during the next quarter-century.
      Shortly after 17 January 1772, J. H. E. Bernstorff had written to a friend that
 while many changes would surely be made, he hoped the new regime would not
 “throw the baby out with the bathwater” and reject all the recent innovations
 simply because they had been made by “hateful men.” Those now in power felt
 little inclination, however, to see any good in Struensee’s reforms. A commis¬
 sion was appointed to consider all his cabinet orders, most of which were now
 revoked.4
     Whereas Struensee had concentrated upon reorganizing the administrative
structure to weaken the internal autonomy of the kollegier and make them instru¬
ments of cabinet rule, the new regime restored the earlier organization almost
 entirely, seeing in collegial decision-making and accountability a proven bul¬
 wark against the rise of another overmighty minister. Copenhagen’s traditional
town government was restored. Numerous officials who had served under
 Struensee were dismissed or relegated to minor provincial posts. Several of
Struensee’s judicial reforms were retained, although some use of pretrial torture
was again permitted and the police were once more charged with the surveil¬
lance of private morals. A number of humanitarian reforms dealing with the care
of the sick and indigent were kept on.5
     In the economic sphere the new regime returned wholeheartedly to the mer¬
cantilist system Struensee had sought to dismantle. The tariff barrier was re¬
stored between the kingdom and the duchies. In March 1774 the Danish grain
monopoly was reestablished in southern Norway. Copenhagen again enjoyed
favored status, and foreign entrepreneurs were offered special inducements as
