 90      THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

 before. Government subsidies for manufactures and foreign trade soon reached
 even higher levels than in the elder Bernstorff’s time. The economic life of the
 towns and particularly of the capital soon recovered from the disarray wrought
 by Struensee’s headlong drive to liberalize it, and the return of good harvests
 by 1773 further eased the situation.
     While the new regime focused much of its attention upon commerce and
  manufactures, its attitudes toward agriculture were similarly mercantilistic: it
  was above all concerned with increasing production to improve the foreign trade
  balance, provide for domestic needs, and strengthen the tax base. It thus favored
  the interests of the manorial proprietors who produced for the market, and large
  landlords, such as Schack-Rathlou, played a leading part in determining its
 agrarian policy. The sale of crown lands, undertaken on a large scale in the later
  1760s, resumed in 1774 under provisions even more favorable to the formation
 of new manors and the expansion of existing ones, both of which now proceeded
 apace. Peasant freehold purchases dwindled, and in some areas peasants had to
 relinquish properties they were buying.
     The proprietor’s control over his peasant tenants was meanwhile strength¬
 ened. Whereas Struensee in Lebruary 1771 had limited labor obligations
 throughout Denmark on the basis of 144 days per year for a tenancy of average
 size, a new ordinance of 12 August 1773 decreed that the obligations were to
be determined by “the custom and usage of each province or region,” i.e., as
much labor as each manor might require.6 In September 1774 a new militia
ordinance increased the quota of recruits to be provided under the stavnsband;
at the same time manorial proprietors were allowed to extend a soldier’s service
by six years, following his twelve-year term, if he would not accept a lease on
his home manor. The Danish peasantry had reached the nadir of its subjection
and exploitation. In the government’s view, each estate had its function; that of
the peasantry was to perform the menial labor upon which the very existence
of society depended. “The peasant’s yoke could not be cast off,” Guldberg
wrote to Suhm in 1776, “without shaking the state to its foundation.”7
    At the same time, the government continued to promote that aspect of agra¬
rian reform which promised to increase productivity without upsetting proprie¬
torial prerogatives: the consolidation and enclosure of scattered landholdings, as
will be seen in the following chapter.
   The freedom of the press proclaimed by Struensee in September 1770 al¬
lowed for an outpouring of pamphleteering celebrating his fall in terms of the
coarsest abuse while praising those who had brought it about and protesting
loyalty to the royal house. But before long the government felt less inclined to
indulge the press, as a softening of its tone toward the unhappy Queen Caroline
Mathilde became discernible. Although the latter had no plans to avenge her
degradation, there were others who sympathized with her and hoped for their
own reasons to restore her to power; these included Count U. A. Holstein,
