                  THE RALLYING OF THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                         93

the past, a reaction exacerbated throughout Denmark and Norway by Struen-
see s high-handed disregard for Danish sensibilities. In striking contrast to ear¬
lier practice, the restored council consisted entirely of Danes, except at first for
Rantzau, a Holsteiner, and after 1773 Bernstorff, a German from outside the
monarchy. It too contained its strong advocates of danskhed, most notably Count
Schack-Rathlou.
    In its appointments and promotions, the court and government showed a dis¬
tinct preference tor Danes and Norwegians. On 13 February it was decreed that
henceforth all state business, except that pertaining to the German provinces, be
transacted in Danish. Soon after, Danish was made the language of command
in the army it had never ceased to be in the navy—as an aspect of the progres¬
sive nationalization of the military forces. Recruits were now drawn increasingly
from the native peasantry, and with the new militia ordinance of 1774, the en¬
rollment of foreign mercenaries was ended in principle, although in practice it
continued on a diminishing scale until after the turn of the century.13
    The Danish national reaction had clearly antiaristocratic overtones. The court
strove to build its base of support with the Danish middle classes. Inspired by
Guldberg, it tended—particularly at first—to favor commoners in its appoint¬
ments to government posts. It was lavish with the honorific titles and distinctions
Struensee had abolished in 1770, without regard to estate, and prominent com¬
moners were received at court.14
    The government's policy of danskhed and the court’s evident disregard for
the distinctions of birth caused complications for the solution of the monarchy’s
greatest international problem, that of the southern frontier. Following the war
scare of 1762, J. H. E. Bernstorff had worked tirelessly to induce Catherine II
of Russia to exchange her minor son Paul’s hereditary duchy of Holstein-Got-
torp for the nonadjoining counties of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst in northwest¬
ern Germany. Formal negotiations were begun in 1766 and continued fitfully
until the dismissal of the elder Bernstorff in 1770. They remained in obeyance
throughout the Struensee period. Gustav Ill’s coup of August 1772 in Sweden,
however, impressed both St. Petersburg and Copenhagen with the need for a
closer alliance, and the matter was taken up again in April 1773, following
Count Andreas Peter Bernstorff’s appointment as foreign minister.
   Negotiations were quickly concluded, and the exchange treaty was signed
already on 1 June 1773. A secret clause held that since the casus foederis under
the secret stipulations of the Danish-Russian alliance of 1769 had already oc¬
curred through Gustav Ill’s coup d’etat, the allies were to strengthen themselves
by land and sea, and, following Russia’s ongoing war with Turkey, to seek a
favorable opportunity for reimposing Sweden’s former constitution.
   Even though the exchange at last removed ducal Holstein as a bridgehead for
possible attack by hostile monarchs of the house of Gottorp in Russia or even
Sweden, it created new problems. The leading inhabitants of Holstein-Gottorp
