 88      THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

persons whose judgment she respected. Regarding international affairs, her own
particular interest, she corresponded with her revered brother-in-law, Erederick
II of Prussia. In internal matters she had implicit faith in her son’s former pre¬
ceptor, now his cabinet secretary, Ove Guldberg.1
    Guldberg, the son of a small merchant in Horsens, had followed a scholarly
career as a historian and as professor eloquentice at Soro Academy before
becoming a part of the dowager queen’s household. He was a man of modest,
even humble demeanor, unfailingly deferential to his royal patrons and respect¬
ful toward his social superiors. Yet his unprepossessing exterior concealed a
powerful ambition to implement a firmly held social, economic, and political
philosophy. He was above all dedicated to the royal house and to unrestricted
royal absolutism; his son would later call him a “product of the spirit of 1660.”
Throughout the years that followed, down to 1784, there is no sign of any funda¬
mental disagreement between Guldberg and his patrons. To initiates, it soon
became evident that Denmark was governed by a triumvirate. Of the three, the
hereditary prince, nominally the leading figure, was the least significant,
whereas the ideas he represented emanated from his mother and, increasingly,
from Guldberg.2
   Those who had overthrown Struensee were determined that there should
henceforth be no single, all-powerful minister, capable of dominating through
cabinet rule. A royal decree of 13 February 1772 thus reestablished the council
under the new title of Gehej me stats rad. It was charged with preparing all royal
ordinances for the king s signature, and all government kollegier were made
subordinate to it. Ostensibly the council was granted wider powers than it had
exercised before Struensee’s time. Yet the question of what to do about Count
J. H. E. Bernstorff, waiting expectantly on his estate in Mecklenburg, soon
revealed that the new masters intended no total restoration of the old regime.
Conveniently, Bernstorff died on 18 February. The new council included
Hereditary Prince Fredrik and the former conspirators Count Rantzau and
General Eickstedt, as well as Count A. S. von der Osten, who remained on as
foreign minister. Its most outstanding member was at first Count Joachim Otto
Schack-Rathlou.
   The hapless Christian VII attended the council and signed whatever it placed
before him. At first, Juliane Marie also sat in to keep an eye on him while her
son represented the views of the court. The dowager queen became de facto
guardian of the insane king and of his two children.
   The decree of 13 February did not, meanwhile, renounce the use of cabinet
orders, which continued to be issued, especially on matters of appointment,
promotion, and honors. This type of patronage was particularly attractive to
Juliane Marie, her son, and Guldberg, and the court exercised it with a lavish
hand. This frequently caused consternation in the council and kollegier, which
sought with indifferent success to keep control over personnel matters. Yet be-
