  100      THE RALLYING OF THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

  recalls the stabilization of Swedish society a half century earlier, following the
  Great Northern War. In his new constitution the king reaffirmed his right to
 ennoble those who distinguished themselves through loyalty, virtue, valor, or
  learning, although he was prepared to limit himself to 150, who could not be
 denied introduction into the Noble Estate. In September 1772 he created forty
 new nobles, largely for loyalty in his revolution; in December he granted patents
 of nobility to all whom Adolf Fredrik had resolved to ennoble, but to whom the
 Noble Estate had refused introduction since 1762. Thereafter ennoblements
 dropped off to an average of three per year until the end of his reign. In all,
 Gustav III created about a hundred new nobles.27 Other prominent commoners
 were awarded a variety of distinctions, including Gustav’s Order of Vasa, estab¬
 lished after his coup to recognize accomplishment in agriculture, mining,
 manufactures, commerce, and the arts.
    Gustav’s sympathies meanwhile lay with the old high nobilty. He created an
elaborate court ceremonial, inspired by the Versailles of Louis XIV, which re¬
served for them a prominent role, although this ill accorded with Sweden’s
slender resources or its political traditions. The wording of the new constitution
enabled him to favor nobles over commoners in appointments and promotions
in state service. During the 1770s the number of nonnoble students in the univer¬
sities preparing for civil appointments declined whereas those studying for
clerical careers increased.28
    Gustav III s revolution of 1772 was greeted with relief and jubilation by most
 of his subjects. Yet his efforts to arouse the hopes of all classes while actually
 favoring the nobility could not but be risky. This first became evident among
the hard-pressed peasant tenantry of the former Danish provinces in southern
 Sweden. Here, as elsewhere in Scandinavia and throughout much of Europe, the
lean years from 1770 to 1772 made manorial obligations particularly burden¬
some. Their hopes aroused, it was believed, by Gustav’s polemical attacks on
  aristocracy, tenants in southern Halland petitioned the king in the spring of
 1773 to limit the unregulated labor services they owed their landlords, and de¬
fied the latters unreasonable demands. Similar movements developed in neigh¬
boring Skane and in southeastern Finland, close to the Russian border. Except
for a clash between rebellious peasants and government troops near Viirala in
Finland, there was little lawlessness or violence. The dispute dragged on in the
courts until 1779.
    In the tense international situation following his coup, Gustav III feared that
peasant discontent in border regions might invite Danish or Russian collusion
and suspected that disgruntled former Cap leaders were secretly behind it.
Worse still, it threatened the social harmony he was striving to restore A
lengthy statement to the council in February 1774 reveals his uncomfortable
dilemma. No one, he held, possessed the right to establish a serfdom resembling
slavery in conflict with Sweden’s fundamental laws. He recognized the justice
