                  THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                         99

marked the rallying of the old order. His writings show the young king to have
been much concerned with the concept of a traditional balance in state and soci¬
ety, clearly under the influence of Montesquieu. This idea had come to the fore
already during the abdication crisis of late 1768, when Crown Prince Gustav had
prepared two draft constitutions. In one he wrote:

   Despotism is each and every government in which the executive and legis¬
   lative powers are united, either in one person, or in certain families, or
   in an assembly of all the citizens. Sweden has fallen into such a state of
   disorder. Its government, from having been monarchical, has become
   aristocratic, and from aristocratic, democratic. The confusions of fifty
   years have proven this.23

In his public statements following the coup of 1772, Gustav constantly reiterated
that the just polity of the Vasa kings, especially Gustav I Vasa and Gustav II
Adolf, had been destroyed, and with it Sweden’s power and prosperity, first by
the “sovereignty” or royal despotism established by Karl XI in 1680, then by
an egotistical and ineffectual “aristocracy” following Karl XII’s death in 1718.
Stressing his own rather remote descent from the house of Vasa, Gustav pre¬
sented himself as the champion of its traditional balance between king, council,
and estates, and the restorer of the nation’s greatness.24
   In Gustav’s mind the balance of political forces must rest firmly upon a hier¬
archical social order. He thus regarded the close alliance between the king and
his nobility as essential to Sweden’s social and political stability. This ideal was
perhaps best expressed in a letter to Madame de Boufflers written at the time
of the 1778 Riksdag:
   It is so difficult to judge properly each country’s internal arrangements:
   climate, fundamental principles differ so greatly from one nation to the
   next that what suits the one is harmful to the other. There are certain
   parties which seek to gain too great an ascendancy over the others and
   which must be repressed; it is the true science of sovereigns to balance
   them, and to hold this balance in just equilibrium. If this equilibrium is
   ever lost, harmful consequences follow: with us it is democracy which
   seeks to gain the upper hand and all my efforts are aimed at reestablishing
   the old high nobility. With you [in Trance] perhaps the people are too
   oppressed and count for too little, the nobility too favored.25

   Gustav’s astute manipulation of the ambiguous term “aristocracy” during the
change of regime in 1772 proved effective propaganda, obscuring for the time
being his strong attachment, both in principle and in sentiment, to the nobility.
As Tom Soderberg has put it, his revolution saved the social order at the expense
of the political.26
   While defending the aristocratic principle, Gustav largely disarmed opposi¬
tion by co-opting many of its potential leaders into the nobility, in a manner that
