  96      THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

     At this point, however, the Militia Ordinance of September 1774 created
  fresh complications. In the duchies it increased the number of recruits a land-
  owner had to provide per unit of land (Plovtal or Pflugzaht) by one-sixth. Thus,
  whereas their population was over half as large as the kingdom’s, they would
  supply one quarter of the troops; for Denmark the number of recruits per Plovtal
 was increased by fully two-thirds. Yet to Cai Rantzau and his friends, what was
  involved was a matter of principle: an attempt by the Copenhagen government
 to subvert the established privileges of the Schleswig-Holstein nobility. Their
 bitter attacks on the new ordinance aroused indignant opposition on the council
 to the new proposal for a standing committee of the Ritterschaft. Bernstorff had
 to warn the Ritterschaft to quiet down its opposition before its new Fortwah-
 rende Deputation could at last receive royal approval in March 1775. Its
 functions were, in effect, limited to preparing matters for discussion by the
 Ritterschaft itself and to conveying to it the government’s decrees. Yet its mere
 existence had symbolic significance in keeping alive ideals inimical to Danish
 absolutism, and the time would come when the Ritterschaft would seek to
 expand its role.16
    In Norway, Struensee’s fall was celebrated as jubilantly as in Denmark and
 the duchies, although this had its paradoxical aspects. Struensee had indeed
 shown no small interest in Norway. Yet tangible results had been disappointing
 when compared with the hopes aroused, and Norway was particularly hard-
 pressed economically in 1770-72. As noted, Norwegian sailors and guardsmen
 were conspicuous in the disturbances in Copenhagen preceding Struensee’s
 overthrow.
    The new regime meanwhile showed no sympathy for Norwegian particularist
aspirations. Although compelled by circumstances to accept a special status for
the duchies following their reunification in 1773, it was strongly centralist in its
views. Struensee’s special administrative sections for different regions were
quickly abolished, and Copenhagen was restored to its dominating position in
all aspects of the life of the kingdom, reducing provincial Denmark together with
Norway to their previous subordinate status.
    Norwegians had shared in the mounting reaction against German predomi¬
 nance. In Copenhagen it was the Norwegian literary society, Det norske Sels-
kab, established in late 1771, that took the lead in attacking German influences
in Danish literature. Yet the new government’s policy of danskhed implied a
concept of cultural unity throughout the kingdom that allowed no place for the
growing sense of a separate Norwegian identity, now greatly enhanced since the
abolition of press censorship in 1770. During the Struensee period, while Nor¬
wegian pamphleteers like “Philonorvagus” had argued vigorously for the estab¬
lishment of specifically Norwegian institutions-above all a university and a
bank Guldberg, under the pseudonym “Philodanus,” had polemicized against
their particularist demands. His oft-quoted admonition to Suhm in 1776 sum-
