 94       THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

  had long regarded the Danish monarchy as their archenemy. During her regency
  over the duchy, Catherine II—herself of Gottorp blood—had taken much pride
  and interest in its affairs. Yet St. Petersburg, unlike Copenhagen, was comfort¬
  ably far away, and the duchy had been governed by its own administration under
  its own laws. Practical reforms in recent years had, moreover, scrupulously
 respected the established rights and privileges of the burghers of Kiel and other
 chartered towns, and above all of the powerful landed nobility.
      The politically influential classes in Holstein-Gottorp were meanwhile all too
 aware of the anti-German and, to a degree, antiaristocratic stance of the new
 Copenhagen government. Since Struensee’s fall, the affairs of the duchies once
 again came under the German Chancellery. The four members of this kollegium
 were all commoners. While all shared equal status, the leading figure was
 Christian Ludwig Stemann, who notwithstanding his Holstein background was
 intimately associated with Danish circles in the capital; as a close friend of Guld-
 berg’s, he was clearly the court’s chosen instrument and thus the focus of suspi¬
 cion and ill will in Holstein-Gottorp.
    Formerly Copenhagen had intervened little in the internal affairs of Schles¬
wig and the royal portion of Holstein. During his long years as oversekretcer of
the German Chancellery, the elder Bernstorff had carefully avoided offending
local sensibilities in the hope of reconciling the inhabitants of the ducal portion
to eventual annexation. With the duchies now reunited under the Danish crown,
such restraints would appear to have been removed. During 1773 there emerged
a so-called Swedish party, with reference to the traditional anti-Danish alliance
of the seventeenth century, and the malcontents were quick to assert the interests
of the duchies as a whole.
     The situation appeared so ominous that the Holsteiner Casper von Saldern,
  Catherine II’s right-hand man in Kiel and principal negotiator for the exchange
 treaty, intervened with the Danish council. He insisted that the German Chancel¬
 lery be headed, as before 1770, by an oversekretcer with full authority in his
 field, and that he be a high German noble personally associated with the duchies
 The obvious candidate was Count A. P. Bernstorff, whose uncle’s memory was
 revered in the duchies and who was the proprietor of Borstel manor in Holstein.
 Such demands ran counter to the principles of administrative uniformity, col¬
 legial responsibility, disregard for birth and privilege, and Danish cultural pre¬
 dominance cherished by the court. But the exchange treaty was too important
to hazard and Saldern did not hesitate to threaten its suspension.
    The Danish council thus felt compelled to back down. In November 1773
Bernstorff was appointed head of the German Chancellery while remaining
foreign minister, once again combining the functions his uncle had held. The
appointment was made palatable to the court by providing that he should not be
titled oversekretar but simply direktor, which ostensibly assured some role in
decision-making to the other members of the German Chancellery. It was mean-
