                   THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                          95

while arranged that Bernstorff be received into the Schleswig-Holstein Ritter-
schaft, to reinforce his personal ties with the nobility of the duchies.
    No better man could have been found to fill this difficult position. Bernstorff
satisfied himself with the substance, if not all the outward attributes, of power
within the German Chancellery. He was respected by the German inhabitants
of the duchies and strove with patience and tact to bridge the chasm of suspicion
and ill will that separated Copenhagen from the former Holstein-Gottorp nobility.
    Bernstorff understood both viewpoints and sought constantly to balance the
conflicting claims of Danish absolutism and the traditional German liberties of
the duchies. Whereas he fully accepted the Lex Regia of 1665 where the king¬
dom was concerned, he respected the historic rights of the duchies, as long as
they did not affect the vital interests of the monarchy as a whole. While main¬
taining the distinctions between the kingdom and the duchies, he also worked
to amalgamate Schleswig and the reunified Holstein into a single entity within
the state.
    Bernstorff was soon put to the test. Although the Danish crown, upon acquir¬
 ing Holstein-Gottorp, had formally guaranteed the existing rights of the Ritter-
schaft, the latter was not slow to assert itself and to seek to extend its privileges.
 In 1774 its convocation in Kiel considered petitioning the king to revive the old
 Schleswig-Holstein Landtag, or diet. The majority, however, considered this
too overt a challenge to Copenhagen and preferred a less direct approach. A
deputation was sent to the capital to demonstrate the loyalty of the Ritterschaft
to the sovereign and, at the same time, to present a memorandum on its
particular desires. Alluding pointedly to the old Landtag, “never abolished but
only postponed during the time that has elapsed,” it proposed the establishment
of a “perpetual select committee” of the Ritterschaft that would present to the
crown “valid [unvorgreifliche] ideas and proposals for the true benefit of the
religious foundations and noble manors,” and which the government should
consult about any ordinances that might affect their domains.15 If these demands
appear both modest and imprecise, they were an entering wedge, behind which
loomed the ideal of a corporate representative body sharing power with the
monarch throughout the duchies.
    The deputation submitted its memorandum to Bernstorff, who was quick to
recognize that any allusion to provincial estates, however indirect, would unfail¬
ingly arouse both the court and his Danish colleagues on the council. He let the
memorandum go no farther and impressed upon the Ritterschaft the recklessness
of its action. Half a year later, its leading moderates prepared a new project for
a standing committee with more modest pretentions, which at the same time
would weaken the influence of the more intransigent Holstein-Gottorp cabal, led
by Count Cai Rantzau. It made no mention of the old Landtag or of any role
in legislation affecting the duchies and was thus innocuous enough for Bernstorff
to present to the council.
