 98      THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

 threat to Norway. Eoreign Minister von der Osten was so aroused that he urged
 a prompt attack on Sweden, even without Russian support.21
     Gustav III was meanwhile investigating the possibilities. He conferred pri¬
 vately with Carsten Anker, a prominent Christiania merchant in Stockholm on
 business, until the Danish government became alarmed and called him home.
 Swedish agents circulated in Norway to gauge opinion. In November Gustav
 visited Sweden’s southwestern border region, where he received a group of
 Norwegian peasants. Rumors were afoot in Stockholm of some impending de¬
 sign against Norway.22
    The Danish government strengthened its defenses, wisely relying upon
Norway’s own military forces and thereby expressing a greater confidence than
all of its leading figures privately shared. In September 1772 the Norwegian
viceregency was reestablished, and Prince Carl of Hesse, the king’s brother-in-
law, was appointed statholdev, although not without some misgivings on the
council. Osten feared he might seek to make himself king in Norway—as an¬
other prince of the royal house, Christian Lrederik, would do nearly half a
century later, in 1814. Prince Carl arrived in Christiania in November and was
received with jubilant manifestations of loyalty.
    The crisis soon passed. Wiser counsels than Osten’s prevailed in Copen¬
hagen, while Gustav Ill’s sanguine hopes were cooled by unmistakable signs of
Norwegian loyalty to the Oldenburg house. The Danish court and council made
a few small gestures of solicitude for Norwegian concerns: Hereditary Prince
Lrederik, for instance, donated 500 rigsdaler to the Royal Norwegian Scientific
Society. In November 1772 the government rescinded for all of Norway the
hated poll tax of 1762, which meanwhile remained in effect in Denmark. In actu¬
ality, the tax had been largely uncollected in Norway since it had set off the Stril
War of 1765. But to the Norwegian peasantry it could appear as confirmation
of their traditional exemption from special levies, hence of their favored status
within the monarchy. Although times remained hard through the winter, har¬
vests and fishing improved in 1773, allaying the unrest in the countryside of the
past three years.
   The government had handled the situation adroitly. Its display of confidence
in Norwegian loyalty had paid off handsomely, and with the peasant masses
placated, there was no need for substantial concessions to middle-class demands.
As seen, de facto censorship began to silence its critics in Christiania already
by the fall of 1772. A year later the curtain fell on the free debate of public
affairs throughout the monarchy. Prince Carl returned to Denmark in the fall
of 1773. Even the reimposition of the Danish grain monopoly in southern Nor¬
way in March 1774 failed to arouse any public reaction. But the ideas that had
been ventilated during the preceding years did not disappear. Nor did the
government’s apprehensions about Norway.


  In Sweden-Linland Gustav Ill’s coup d’etat of 19 August 1772 likewise
