                  THE RALLYING OF THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                        97

marizes his consistent attitude: “There are no Norwegians. We are all citizens
of the Danish state. Don’t write for the contemptible Christiania raisonneursV U7
    Norwegian “raisonneurs” continued to belabor the inequities of the existing
system. Their writings reflect the curious ambivalance of a still only half-awak¬
ened sense of nationality. Their accusations of Norway’s exploitation by Den¬
mark and the willful denial of its legitimate interests could be bitter in the ex¬
treme, yet were characteristically combined with fervent protestations of loyalty
to the crown and the brotherhood of the Norwegian and Danish peoples. In
actuality, they expressed the particular grievances of a small but articulate upper
bourgeoisie, especially in Christiania and its hinterland, against the overpower¬
ing administrative, commercial, and cultural dominance of Copenhagen. Their
silence regarding the distinctly favored status within the kingdom of the great
majority of their countrymen —the peasantry —as compared with their opposite
numbers in Denmark, is indicative.18
    The government might have paid little heed to these complaints, were it not
for Gustav III. Since the last century the Swedes had repeatedly shown an inter¬
est in acquiring Norway from Denmark. That the idea was fairly widespread is
suggested by verses in a popular travel account by Jacob Wallenberg, which
appeared in 1770:
                    Slavish in their ways of thought,
                    Raised in shackles from their birth,
                    Norway’s folk toil ’neath the lash,
                    Enjoying nought but the rights of oxen.

                    Brother Northmen, join us now
                    In the Swedish kingdom.
                    Your kings shall in your place
                    Receive our Pomeranians.19

   Gustav III had long been interested in Norway and in August 1772, shortly
before his coup d’etat, he wrote lengthy “reflections” on its possible acquisi¬
tion. Whereas in Sweden, he maintained, an excess of freedom had degenerated
to a “license” that threatened with the fate of Poland, in Denmark “despotism
in the hands of a child” had fallen prey to “magnates” and “favorites,” and
after Struensee’s fall it was “the aristocrats who rulejd]This had aroused the
Norwegians, who “have had to feed greedy masters without sharing their
booty.” Gustav thus hoped for an insurrection in Norway, which he could then
hasten to support, winning him esteem both at home and abroad.20 Implicit in
his speculations was the old aim—analogous to Denmark s long-standing designs
on Holstein-Gottorp—of breaking the Danish-Russian encirclement by securing
Sweden’s long western frontier.
  Copenhagen immediately perceived Gustav Ill’s coup of 19 August as a
