                 THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                           101

of the peasant tenants’ complaints. Yet to make any public pronouncement
against the proprietors would be politically dangerous, since it would offend the
nobility and encourage the peasants to become “more obstinate.” “If they them¬
selves do not fear,” he stated “they will seek to make themselves feared.” A
direct pronouncement against them could, however, shake their traditional
loyalty to the crown. Gustav thus limited himself to urging proprietors privately
to treat their tenants fairly and left the settlement of disputes to the courts, which
consistently rejected the peasants’ appeals, imposed fines, imprisonment, and the
lash, and upheld forcible evictions. It was in line with Gustav’s social policy that
he suspended further sales of crown lands to the peasantry in 1773. As in
Norway and Denmark, however, peasant unrest gradually subsided with the
return of good harvests after 1773.29
    No sooner had the king dismissed the Riksdag in August 1772 than he em¬
 barked upon an impressive program of reforms, in keeping with his sanguine
 and ambitious spirit.30 Not unlike Charles I of England after 1629, he set out
 to validate his new regime through justice, administrative efficiency, and pros¬
 perity, thereby healing the political and social conflicts that rent the country. He
 was meanwhile eager to win goodwill and esteem abroad, not least among the
 opinion makers of the “philosophic party.”
    The peasant unrest beginning in 1773 revealed much administrative ineffi¬
ciency and corruption. While Gustav avoided offending the proprietorial class,
he instigated in 1773 a wide-ranging inquest on the provincial bureaucracy, lead¬
ing to numerous transferals, censures, and dismissals. The king himself severely
reprimanded the Gota Court of Appeals in Jonkoping; five of its members were
dismissed, others were suspended or fined. The following year the bureaucratic
structure was reviewed; a number of positions and pensions were found super¬
fluous and eliminated. Special commissions were appointed to study specific
problems and recommend administrative action. Plans were meanwhile pre¬
pared to improve conditions of employment in state service, and these plans
would be put into effect in 1778.
    The new constitution enabled Gustav to abolish judicial torture already in
1772, and he thereafter made the penalties for many offenses more humane; he
not only wished to conserve usable labor but was ahead of his time in his concern
for the social rehabilitation of the wrongdoer.31
    The king’s visit to Finland in 1775 led to several useful administrative im¬
provements. Four new towns were laid out, beginning with Tammerfors
(Tampere) that year. The administrative provinces (Ian) were increased from
four to six in 1776, when northern Finland also received its own court of appeal
in Vasa (Vaasa).
    While Gustav himself lacked any deep understanding of economic matters,
he was impressed by the French physiocrats—largely because of their views on
strong royal authority—describing himself to the elder Mirabeau as their “dis-
