                 THE RALLYING OF THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76                         103

allowed for ‘‘free masters,” unattached to guilds. For the benefit of the
treasury, distillation of spirits was made a crown monopoly in 1775, partly
farmed out to concessionaires at substantial fees.
   These reforms were not uniformly popular. Town merchants were alarmed
over peasant navigation, free trade in grain, and the grant of new staple rights,
which bypassed old, established monopolies. Craft masters protested that not all
apprentices “should necessarily become masters” but that it should be the lot
of some to live and die as journeymen.”35 Not only merchants but peasant
farmers resented the ban on private distilling, and the clergy was concerned that
the government-licensed distilleries encouraged drunkenness.
    The greatest economic problem was that of Sweden’s currency, badly inflated
through the constant issue of unbacked paper money during Sweden’s wars after
 1738, and correspondingly devalued on the international money market. All of
Gustav s early economic reforms were aimed largely at improving productivity
and the kingdom s foreign trade balance, as well as increasing state revenues.
In addition, a number of superfluous religious holidays were abolished, a state
lottery was set up, as well as discount banks for private borrowers and an office
for the management of the national debt. Most important, Johan Liljencrantz
devised a plan for stabilizing the national currency. International economic
conditions compelled Gustav III and Liljencrantz to bide their time until 1776,
and the conversion was carried out the following year, as will be seen.
   Just as Gustav Ill’s conservative social ideal found support in Montesquieu,
so too do his practical and humanitarian reforms bear the unmistakable imprint
of the Enlightenment. No contemporary European monarch was better read in
the works of the philosophes than he; nor was any initially more enthusiastic.
His record as an enlightened reformer bears favorable comparison with any of
his time.
    Unlike the autocrats of central and eastern Europe, however, Gustav III had
to labor under certain limitations. Although his coup of 1772 greatly strength¬
ened his hand, his power was not absolute, either in theory or in practice. He
 remained dependent upon the Estates for the grant of any extraordinary reve¬
nues, yet to consolidate his new regime he was anxious to put off the convening
of another Riksdag. Given Sweden’s old constitutional traditions, he could not
proceed without regard for public opinion. Deeply as he might be influenced by
the thought of the Enlightenment, Gustav also saw his reforms as essential to
the very survival and revival of the state, riven internally by recent, bitter con¬
tentions and encircled by watchful, hostile powers.36 He naturally tempered
philosophic idealism with practical raison d’etat.
    Nowhere is Gustav Ill’s mixture of motives more evident than with regard
to freedom of the press. This was a central tenet of the philosophes, not least
of the physiocrats, who found therein the essential bulwark against abuse of that
strong public authority necessary for effective reform. The Swedish law of 1766
