 102      THE RALLYING OF THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

  ciple” in 1772.32 His two principal economic advisers, his former governor,
  Count Carl Fredrik Scheffer, and his de facto finance minister from 1773, Johan
  Liljencrantz, were highly receptive to physiocratic ideas. The new regime in
  Sweden thus pursued a policy of relative economic liberalism, largely set forth
  in a comprehensive plan presented by Liljencrantz in January 1774, which
 stands in marked contrast to the revived mercantilism of the Danish regime after
 January 1772. During the first year following the coup, the Swedish government
 meanwhile strove to relieve the shortages caused by recent crop failures.
     Gustav and his advisers were keenly interested in agriculture, which, the king
 stated in 1772, “this enlightened age’’ must recognize as the “primary and
 essential basis for all prosperity.”33 They promoted the ongoing process of
 partial land consolidation (storskifte), which had been initiated in 1757 but still
 affected less than a third of the kingdom. This was particularly true in Finland.
 An ordinance in 1775 divided extensive forest lands, which the Finnish peasant¬
 ry had heretofore regarded as unrestricted commons, between the villages-on
 the basis of set allotments per farmstead (hemman)-and the crown. This
 aroused some discontent in areas where the inhabitants were accustomed to
making extensive but wasteful use of large tracts of forest. But although peasant
 forest holdings were later increased in places, the new arrangement promoted
more intensive, efficient, and economical forms of farming and forest use, while
the crown opened up its enlarged domain to new settlement and development.
Gustav Ill’s agrarian reforms in Finland are thus rightly considered a landmark
in its economic development.34 At the same time, the suspension of the sale of
crown land to the Swedish and Finnish peasantry in 1773 may be seen as a means
to encourage more productive forms of agriculture on manors and the royal
domain. Later, in 1779, tenants on well-tended crown tenancies were granted
twenty-five- to fifty-year leases.
    Productivity was likewise encouraged by the peasants’ right, since 1766, to
transport their own products by sea within the kingdom, .which Gustav III con¬
firmed. In 1775 he freed the grain trade from old restrictions in the more fertile
provinces, inspired largely by Turgot in France, a reform extended to the rest
of the kingdom in 1780. In numerous locations the government established
depots for storing grain reserves against future crop failures, a measure corre¬
sponding to its efforts to improve public health through provincial physicians,
trained midwives, and better infirmaries.
    Marstrand, on Sweden’s west coast, was made a free port in 1775, and the
following year staple rights were granted to a number of towns around the Gulf
of Bothnia which had not received them in 1766. Although tariffs still protected
native manufacturers, a new schedule in 1776 removed various import restric¬
tions and lowered several import duties. In 1773 artisan guilds were prohibited
from imposing unreasonable demands to prevent journeymen from establishing
themselves as masters, and thereafter a number of new municipal charters
