                    THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                         113

these considerations ‘’quite justified,” upon which both proposals fell through.
A comprehensive system of popular education in Sweden would have to wait for
another half century, until 1842.16
    Outside the Riksdag, Anders Chydenius resumed his fight for personal free¬
dom in his Tankar om husbonders och tjdnstehjons naturliga ratt (Thoughts on
the Natural Rights ot Masters and Servants), which appeared in Stockholm in
late 1778. It attacked existing requirements that landless farm laborers take ser¬
vice for a year at a time at controlled wages as a flagrant violation of their rights
under both natural and Swedish law.17
    The Riksdag, meanwhile, did not pass without political remonstrance, as
Gustav had hoped. The constitution of 1772 left unanswered significant ques¬
tions of parliamentary procedure, and the king’s determined efforts to solve
them in ways strengthening his control over the Estates led to mounting opposi¬
tion, particularly in the House of the Nobility, with its ancient traditions as the
guardian of Swedish liberty. In summoning the Riksdag, the king decreed the
reestablishment of the old division of the Noble Estate into three classes, each
with one vote in internal deliberations, which had been abolished in 1720. The
division, he wrote, would “bring to an end that democracy which prevailed
within the House of the Nobility, and which caused the first Estate of the realm
to resemble an undisciplined mob, ignorant of its rights and its interests.”18 This
was hardly calculated to be popular with the majority of the nobility, lumped
into the third class; it moreover gave the king the means of packing the first class
by creating counts and barons, and the second class through the awarding of cer¬
tain royal orders. The king’s appointment of the speakers of the Estates and his
efforts initially to limit their deliberations to royal proposals only and to have
important matters handled by joint committees, often in secrecy, rather than by
the Riksdag as a whole, likewise seemed manifest encroachments on the political
role of the Estates, and gave rise to mounting dissention, only partly dispelled
by the birth of Crown Prince Gustav Adolf, in November.
   It was thus with much relief that Gustav III dissolved the Riksdag in January
1779. A bit of anonymous doggerel cynically summarized its results:
                The Nobles received classification,
                The Clerics indifference in religion,
                Burghers, in their trade, systematic confusion,
                The Peasants all the proposed contribution,
                And Harlequin dress, the entire nation.

The joyous honeymoon between the young king and his subjects was over.
Count Ulrik Scheffer, himself a staunch royalist, commented privately that
  the Estates of the realm had found the form of government different in its
  application than they had believed it to be in its letter. The old spirit of
