                     THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                         109

 the monarch alone. In October 1777 Landmte von Hedemann and von Schilden
 appealed to the king:

    Your Majesty will know how to vindicate your sovereign rights over your
    subjects. . . . When such a corporation [as the Ritterschaft] arrogate to
    themselves great preferential advantages within the State, when they play
    the part of a co-regent, when they comprise a state within the State, when
    they command others, when in actions concerning reception they exercise
    the rights of majesty, levy contributions, and seek unlawfully to compel
    others, unconsulted and unheard, to contribute to and to submit themselves
    to their power, not only does common sense rebel but no prince can or
    will suffer such impertinence.7

Above all, not the king of Denmark, “the most sovereign monarch of Europe,”
they added pointedly.
     It again fell to Bernstorff to dampen the conflict. He remained all too aware
 of the danger of turning the Ritterschaft into a center of opposition to the govern¬
 ment. At the same time his own aristocratic sensibilities were offended by the
 clamorous attack of the non recepti upon the very principle of hereditary nobil¬
 ity. To strengthen the aristocratic element, he would have preferred if possible
 to fuse both recepti and non recepti into a single body.8 The royal commission’s
 recommendation, approved by the king in 1778, nonetheless approved the Rit¬
 terschaft's own compromise proposal: non recepti proprietors of manors were
 to be represented in matters concerning the disputed levies, but were denied
 equal status with the recepti. The Ritterschaft's solution also provided that non¬
 noble manorial proprietors be included in this representation, doubtless to
 undercut the noble non recepti; such nonnoble proprietors, who were especially
 numerous in Schleswig, had thus far remained outside the fray. At Bernstorff s
 prompting, the Ritterschaft displayed its gratitude and loyalty to the crown by
 donating 10,000 Taler to establish a teachers’ seminary in Kiel.
     Pasch von Cossel sought to hold together the remnants of the non recepti
 movement, hoped to arouse European sympathies, and spoke of appealing to the
 court of appeals (Reichskammergericht) of the Holy Roman Empire in Wetzlar.
 They drew a sharp royal reprimand in January 1780, and their efforts came to
 naught. But tensions would remain within the divided aristocracy in the duchies
until the disasters of the Napoleonic wars would draw them together.9
    There seems to be no direct evidence of American influences at work among
the non recepti, though Bernstorff may not have been unmindful of the duchies
when he complained in October 1776 of the “mania for independence” that
aroused sympathy for the American rebels. Nor is the possibility of inspiration
from across the Atlantic to be excluded as the conflict wore on. More signifi¬
cant, however, was surely the widespread correspondence of political and social
ideas throughout the Western world by the mid-1770s.
