                    THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                        111

leagues. Especially after the Indfodsretslov in January 1776, he found himself
increasingly isolated as the only non-Dane on the council. His basically pro-
Bntish sympathies during the American War contrasted with Juliane Marie’s
and Guldberg’s anglophobia, stemming back to Caroline Mathilde’s days.
    Bernstorff s home was the favored gathering place for a crowd of young aris¬
tocrats from the duchies and the empire—most of them relatives by blood or
marriage—with strongly German sentiments, which often found an outlet in tact¬
less contempt for both Danish culture and Danish absolutism. While Bernstorff
himself maintained the strictest propriety, his young kinsmen from Holstein,
Counts Christian and Friedrich Leopold Stolberg, inspired by the German
national romanticism of the Gottingen Hainbund and the Americans’ fight
against royal despotism, caused him no small embarrassment. From the perspec¬
tive of Christiansborg palace, Bernstorff s manor outside Copenhagen could
appear increasingly to be a rival court. Yet for the time being, Bernstorff re¬
mained indispensable in his dual role as foreign minister and director of the
German Chancellery.13
    To return to the Indfodsretslov, it has been variously interpreted, as a clever
 piece of propaganda and a political maneuver to strengthen Guldberg and the
 court, and as a statesmanlike break with the monarchy’s dependence upon for¬
eign personnel, essential to the future development of its own potentialities. Both
viewpoints contain their element of truth. The law was widely acclaimed
throughout the realm, which events would prove was now indeed capable of pro¬
viding its own leadership. Guldberg and the court meanwhile sought to exploit
its propaganda value from a specifically Danish-national perspective. Nonethe¬
less, while the frontier for recruitment might now be closed at the Elbe, as long
as it remained open at the Eider the German element in the bureaucracy and mili¬
tary would remain prominent. The “foreign” Germans had been cosmopolitan
in outlook and thus dedicated servants of the crown, as Christian Degn has ob¬
served, whereas the aristocrats from the duchies who largely replaced them after
 1776 were often divided in their loyalties to Danish absolutism and to Schleswig-
Holstein particularism. Although the Indfodsretslov was intended to strengthen
the monarchy, in important respects it increased its internal tensions.14

   In Sweden-Finland, Gustav Ill’s reform program meanwhile continued. By
 1776 economic conditions were sufficiently improved to implement Johan Lil-
jencrantz’s plan for currency reform, which went into effect on 1 January 1777.
A new silver-based riksdaler was established, and the crown redeemed the exist¬
ing paper currency in silver at half its nominal value. New convertible bank¬
notes were also issued. The plan restored confidence in Sweden’s currency at
home and abroad, enabling the government to raise loans to cover the conver¬
sion. In 1778 the king established a “national dress” for the nobility and
