 110       THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

     As Bernstorff was striving to reconcile competing factions in the duchies, he
 found both his position and his principles seriously challenged in the capital. On
  15 January 1776, the government promulgated a Law on Indigenous Rights-the
 Indfadsretslov — henceforward barring any but subjects of the realm from enter¬
 ing the service of the state. This measure represented the culmination of the
 nationalist reaction following Struensee’s fall and met with widespread acclaim.
 Like the English Act of Settlement of 1701, it ensured that the nation would
 develop on the basis of its own human resources. Edvard Holm has described
 it as mercantilism applied to state employment.10
    At the same time, the new law was an adroit political maneuver by the court.
 It had been prepared in secrecy by Guldberg with the help of Count Schack-
 Rathlou and was promulgated as a cabinet order, without being considered by
 the council; this notwithstanding, it was proclaimed as an irrepealable “funda¬
mental law —in violation of the Lex Regia. The Indfadsretslov thus set an
 important precedent, in a highly popular cause, for a return to cabinet rule, by¬
passing the council, which in turn was weakened by driving a wedge between
the strongly Danish Schack-Rathlou and Bernstorff, its two leading figures.
    Predictably Bernstorff reacted strongly. In his view, Denmark remained a
backward nation in need of all the talent it could muster, of which little was
available within its own frontiers. It was painful, he wrote, to see Denmark
adopt an unjust and narrow-minded policy, “which may cause it to fall back into
that barbarism out of which it has been raised up by thirty years of careful gov¬
ernment and fatherly concern”—an obvious reference to both his uncle’s and his
own efforts.11
    Bernstoiff held steadfastly to the central role of the council and hence of the
noble order in government. He was a staunch upholder of Danish royal absolut¬
ism and expressed little sympathy for “aristocratic” government, of which he
considered Sweden during the Era of Liberty a notorious example. Yet since
neither Frederik V nor Christian VII ruled personally, he, like his uncle, consid¬
ered it essential that the state council govern in their place, and that the council
in turn be composed of noblemen. While all should enjoy the equal protection
of the laws, it was the specific purpose of the noble order to serve the crown;
thus, in Bernstorff s view, it was proper that noblemen should enjoy preference
in state service, that they alone should have access to the king’s council, and that
the highest titles and distinctions be reserved for them. While he opposed the
preferential treatment of undeserving nobles, he was also indignant during this
period when the court bestowed upon commoners honors he considered appro¬
priate only for noblemen.12
   Thus Bernstorff, the cosmopolitan German grand seigneur, stood in direct
conflict with the Danish bourgeois vizier, Guldberg. Bernstorff fought at every
turn to uphold the council’s authority but lacked the firm backing of his col-
