 108       THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

    The public here is extremely enthusiastic for the rebels, not through
    knowledge of the circumstances but because the mania for independence
    has actually infected the popular imagination, and because this poison
    gradually spreads from the works of the philosophers down even to the vil¬
    lage schools.3

     The Swedish newspapers were by no means in agreement about the revolu¬
 tion. Some, such as Johan Pfeiffer’s Dagligt Allehanda, were clearly hostile,
 drawing their material largely from English journals or the anti-American publi¬
 cist August Ludwig Schlozer of Gottingen. Others, like the various journals pub¬
 lished by Carl Christoffer Gjorwell, while not partial toward Britain, regarded
 the revolution as the usurpation of legitimate authority. Stockholms-Posten, the
 organ of Johan Henrik Kellgren, expressed in the philosophical language of the
 day approval of the American revolution as a warning to “tyrants,” but in gen¬
eral terms and without application, expressed or implied, to conditions in
 Sweden. Finally, as will be noted, certain small journals, published toward the
end of the war, enthusiastically backed the American cause, borrowing from the
Abbe Raynal as liberally as Dagligt Allehanda made use of Schlozer.4
    It is evident that much of the apparent enthusiasm in Scandinavia had little
to do with the Americans. Of greater importance was surely the old resentment
against British high-handedness in matters of trade and maritime rights, recently
revived during the Seven Years’ War, combined with prospects for lucrative
trade with the belligerents, especially with Britain’s enemies, who were largely
dependent upon neutral shipping. An observer in Altona commented wryly that
if Washington’s and Franklin’s actions had impaired commerce, there would
have been nothing but scorn for American independence.5

    As the Americans took their stand on the principle of “no taxation without
 representation, a curiously analogous conflict developed in the newly reunified
duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, between the virtually’closed corporation of
the Ritterschaft and the more numerous nobles of more recent origin in the
duchies—the so-called non recepti or Nichtrezipierte—who remained excluded
from it. The dispute arose over the assessment of local levies upon all manors
by the Ritterschaft, which certain non recepti now refused to pay on the grounds
that they were not represented in that body. Already in 1774 the Ritterschaft felt
compelled to appeal to Copenhagen, and a royal commission was set up to study
the matter.
   In defending the status quo, the Ritterschaft appealed to tradition and historic
rights. Its adversaries, like the America Patriots, invoked the principle of natural
right, while stressing the claims of personal merit over those of birth.6
   The implications led, in this instance, not to political democracy but to en¬
lightened despotism. All privileges, the non recepti emphasized, emanated from
