 112       THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

 burgher class, to encourage native manufactures and reduce luxury imports. In
  1778 a reformed salary schedule was adopted for the state service, and officials
 were permitted to retire on pension at the age of seventy.
    The defense of the realm received a high priority. Mobilization against the
 threat of war in 1772-73 had revealed serious deficiencies. A third of the billets
 in the army remained unfilled, munitions and supplies were inadequate, naval
 vessels were run-down and obsolete, the officer corps was inexperienced, de¬
 moralized, and strongly politicized. In 1774 a commission was established to
 review the entire defense establishment, which from 1776 on carried out numer¬
 ous improvements.
    In September 1778 Gustav summoned a riksdag to convene within twelve
days in Stockholm. In so doing, he fulfilled his promise to the Estates in 1772;
moreover he needed their approval for certain details of his monetary conversion
and bank policy, as well as for the renewal of existing revenues. The time was
propitious. The economy was thriving. In 1777 Gustav had paid a conciliatory
visit to Catherine II in St. Petersburg, and in the fall of 1778 he concluded a
new subsidy convention with France. By allowing the shortest possible time for
elections, Gustav sought to keep political agitation and foreign interference to
a minimum.
   The king placed high hopes in the popularity of his reform program. He
opened the Riksdag with a glowing report on his accomplishments. On the whole
it proceeded satisfactorily. The royal proposals on monetary matters were
approved, and the tax subvention was renewed until the next Riksdag. The crim¬
inal code was made more humane in important respects.
    In the Clerical Estate, Anders Chydenius proposed, with the king’s support,
 freedom of religion for residents of foreign origin. His clerical brethren vehe¬
 mently rejected his proposal, but a similar motion in the House of the Nobility
 was adopted by the three secular Estates. This formed the basis for Gustav Ill’s
 ordinance of 24 January 1781, which allowed foreign- denominations, even
 including Roman Catholics, to carry on their own organized religious life, as
 well as his ordinance of 1782, which permitted Jews to settle in Stockholm,
 Gothenburg, and Norrkoping, subject to certain restrictions; these foreign reli¬
gions were nonetheless forbidden to proselytize, and members of the state
church remained subject to severe penalties if they sought to leave it.15
    The Clergy proposed the establishment of fixed schools in each parish, to be
linked to the extension of confirmation throughout the kingdom. Gustav III
turned these matters over to State Councillor A. J. von Hopken, who reported
in June 1779—after the end of the Riksdag—that he could see in the proposal
nothing but a hierarchical” scheme for clerical domination over the peasantry,
that it would require great sacrifices without spreading ‘‘true enlightenment,”
that it was ill prepared and ‘‘harmful to the political regime.” Gustav found
