 104      THE RALLYING OL THE OLD ORDER, 1772-76

on press freedom was therefore widely admired in European philosophic circles.
Gustav III himself loved the free exchange of ideas on the theoretical level in
select company. Yet it was apparent to him that free public debate on national
issues could keep alive in Sweden the conflicts of a bygone era and compromise
the success of his reform program. As his new constitution abrogated all funda¬
mental laws back to 1680, he was in a position to redefine freedom of the press
to suit the circumstances.
   The matter was widely discussed in the press itself following the trial of an
editor for libel in late 1773. The historian, Anders Schonberg, for instance,
urged revocation of the law of 1766, pointing to the abuse of press freedom both
in Sweden since that time and in Britain by John Wilkes and his following, Per
Johan Hoppener retorted by accusing the old “aristocratic-bureaucratic league”
 of seeking to suppress press freedom to hide its own abuse of power. The council
 of state strongly favored the abolition of press freedom.37
    The result was Gustav Ill’s ordinance of April 1774, a masterpiece of studied
ambiguity. In a lengthy preamble the king stated that the press law of 1766 had
appeared during a “period of anarchy,” when men’s rights had been trampled
underfoot by “violence and self-interest,” whereas the present constitution was
based on “liberty, security, and property”-a formula deriving from Le Mercier
de la Riviere. “Under such a government, all should have the right to think,
speak, and write on anything that is not contrary to the tranquillity of the realm.”
To avoid the ills of the past, it was essential that “freedom of the press,
maintained and protected, be used to enlighten the public as to its own best inter¬
ests and to reveal to the sovereign the opinion of the nation.” Persuaded of these
“verities,” the king deemed it necessary to revise the law of 1766 in only a few
particulars to conform to the constitution of 1772 and “the new type of adminis¬
tration.”38
    In truth, these revisions were not inconsequential, since they declared trea¬
sonable any statement that “touches upon or offends” th? majesty of the king,
realm, or constitution, and held authors and printers jointly accountable, as also
in cases of libel and fraud. Publication of the proceedings of the council and the
Riksdag was now prohibited, as was discussion in the press of relations with
foreign powers. A basic physiocratic function was still served by permitting
criticism of public officials and the publication of bureaucratic and judicial
records as a check on their performance.39
   In the context of its time, the ordinance was not illiberal. The concerned
public, aware of the council s intransigent position and fearing a reversion to
the old press controls from before 1766, expressed both relief and satisfaction.
Yet the danger zone of treasonable statements was broadly enough defined to
permit an increasingly rigorous application, as would indeed be the case, and
holding printers jointly responsible subjected authors to their effective and
generally cautious censorship. Most important, press freedom was now gov-
