                      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                       119

    In foreign policy, as in virtually everything else, Ove Guldberg now became
 the monarchy s all-powerful vizier. Slowly but surely he had increased his
 power behind the scenes. In 1776 he was appointed state and secret cabinet
 secretary (stats- og gehejme-kabinettssekretcer). In 1777 he was ennobled under
 the name Hoegh-Guldberg. At the end of 1780, after Bernstorff s dismissal, he
 was made a titular state councillor (gehejmrad), assured of an eventual seat on
 the council. Nothing now stood in his way.34
     The regime meanwhile continued along its earlier lines of development: cab¬
  inet rule, based upon close agreement between Guldberg, the dowager queen
 Juliane Marie, and her son. Hereditary Prince Frederik; centralized direction of
 all areas of national life; a conservative stance in social, religious, educational,
 and cultural matters, combined with a policy of danskhed. Although Guldberg’s
 ennoblement in 1777 was in keeping with Danish absolutism and its nobility of
 rank, the regime tended to lose some of the “bourgeois” quality that had charac¬
 terized its early years, since 1772.35 As before, Guldberg kept himself out of
 the limelight.
      In no sphere was the etatisme of the Guldberg era more evident than in its
  ambitious mercantilism. In response to the opportunities of the American war,
  the government, led by Guldberg and H. C. Schimmelmann, embarked on far-
  reaching commercial ventures. Already in 1777 it took over the Danish East
  India Company s establishments in India and those of the Guinea Company in
 West Africa. In 1778 it chartered a West Indian Company, with the intention
 of making St. Thomas a competitor to Dutch St. Eustatius as an entrepot for
 European trade with America. A Baltic and Guinea Company was decreed in
  1781. Most grandiose in conception was the Trading and Canal Company of
  1782, for worldwide commercial operations, as well as fishing and whaling in
 the North Sea and the Arctic. Its title likewise refers to the Schleswig-Holstein
 Canal between the Bay of Kiel and the Elbe estuary, begun in 1777 and opened
 in 1784, which reduced the water route between the Baltic and North Seas by
 300 sea miles and which up to 1830 was the most heavily trafficked canal in
 Europe. While the main focus of the government’s interest during the war years
was upon trade and seafaring, it also encouraged and supported numerous other
enterprises, not least of all shipbuilding.36
     It is worth considering the Indfodsretslov of 1776 once again in the light of
the monarchy’s economy. Although it barred the future employment of foreign¬
ers in the state service, in the interests of the Danish noblesse de la robe, it did
not interfere with the immigration of foreign entrepreneurs and artisans with
capital and skills still essential to national economic development. Later research
shows that there was little change in the numbers of foreigners receiving burgher
rights in Danish towns before and after 1776. Albert Olsen has characterized the
outlook of Guldberg and his associates as fundamentally more mercantilistic
