116      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

mitting them to fly the Danish flag. A large part of the sugar and rum exported
from St. Thomas and St. Croix came from the French islands, to enjoy the pro¬
tection of neutral shipping. To Guldberg, trade with the French colonies was
“one of our richest goldmines.”27
    The heaviest investments went into the East Indian trade, which produced the
most spectacular profits. Since the early 1770s, Danish merchants at Tranquebar
on the Coromandel Coast and Fredriksnagore in Bengal had carried on a lucra¬
tive trade financed by British sources in India. Employees of the British East
India Company accumulated fortunes, largely through abuses prohibited by the
company. To avoid problems in transferring their gains back to their homeland,
they made extensive loans at low interest to foreign, including Danish, traders,
who used them to purchase Indian goods for export to Europe, and eventually
repaid the creditors’ accounts in London. This trade increased considerably dur¬
ing the American war as first the French, then the Dutch, were eliminated from
the India trade. Danish vessels now began to carry cargoes from Isle de France
and Batavia, where they had not previously traded. On occasion ships belonging
to nationals of the belligerent powers sailed under the Danish flag. The Canton
trade with China likewise thrived.28
    The war years brought unprecedented prosperity to Copenhagen, especially
to its great merchant houses. Outside the capital and, to an extent, the colonies,
the benefits of the war were far more modest. Altona and Flensburg in the
duchies did well, as did Bergen, and some of the smaller seaports in southern
Norway (Sorlandet), especially Christiansand. In this part of Norway opportuni¬
ties offered by shipping and shipbuilding led to a rapid spread of the market and
money economy, at the expense of the old rural self-sufficiency, leading to
heightened social tensions during the years that followed. Many peasants from
the countryside became involved in activities traditionally monopolized by the
towns; some built and operated their own vessels. Eastern Norway (0stlandet)
fared less well, for its economy was based mainly upon timber export, which
languished.29
   One remote outpost of the Danish monarchy deserves more than passing
notice: the port of Torshavn in the Fasro Islands. Here Niels Ryberg, an enter¬
prising Copenhagen merchant of peasant origin, had established a trading depot
in 1767, which soon supplanted the Isle of Man as a center of the smuggling
trade into Great Britain. During the American war large quantities of colonial
wares from both the East and the West Indies were brought to Ryberg’s depot,
in part in American vessels, where they were picked up by smugglers, mainly
from Scotland and Ireland. All this activity provided new employments and
developed new skills among the local population, bringing them for the first time
into close contact with the outside world. It provided an essential impetus to the
process of change in an isolated and almost timeless society.30
