 114      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

    party has been aroused rather than slaked. The nation has learned to cabal
    against the crown, since the crown began to cabal against the nation.19

    Criticism of his regime and of penal reform and religious tolerance at the
 Riksdag of 1778-79 was deeply disillusioning for Gustav III. No less distressing
 was the bitter conflict with his mother, which, long submerged, came to the sur¬
 face in 1778, when Lovisa Ulrika accepted and even spread the rumor that the
 newborn crown prince was not Gustav’s son and which lasted until her death
 in 1782.
   Gustav lost much of his earlier enthusiasm for internal reform, which con¬
tinued rather fitfully in the years that followed. A marked cooling of his attitude
toward thephilosophes and their ideas became discernible, and he was for a time
drawn to the mysticisms of Swedenborgianism and Freemasonry.20 Increasingly
he sought distraction in the amusements of the court, particularly its theater, in
which he was active as impressario, actor, and even playwright—to the dismay
of many both inside and outside the court. It was at this time, too, that he re¬
vealed a growing fascination for la grande politique in the international arena.

   The American revolt turned into a European conflict when France went to
war with Great Britain in June 1778, followed by Spain in 1779 and the United
Netherlands in 1780; during 1778-79 the inconclusive War of Bavarian Succes¬
sion threatened moreover to merge continental with colonial conflict. While
Bernstorff in Copenhagen strove above all to preserve Danish neutrality and
uphold neutral shipping rights, Gustav III in Stockholm speculated about exploit¬
ing a general European conflagration to seize Norway from Denmark and the
overseas struggle to acquire a colony in the New World, preferably a West
Indian island.21
    The American war provided a welcome opportunity for Swedish officers to
acquire combat experience as volunteers abroad. Over 100 Swedes and Finns
served in the French forces, 116 with the Dutch, and at least 30 in the Conti¬
nental navy or on America privateers. After France entered the war, Swedish
officers turned up in Paris in such numbers that the Swedish ambassador hardly
knew what to do with them. Most, seeking army commissions, were turned
away, although a few seem to have later found places in the Continental forces.
Naval officers were in greater demand. Gustav III encouraged his officers to
serve in the allied forces to enhance his good relations with France. Numerous
Danish subjects seem also to have taken part, although less is known about them.
Guldberg noted in September 1781 that in their most recent naval action the
Dutch crews had included 155 Danes (most of whom were probably Norwe¬
gians), a reduction, he claimed, from the usual one-third of Holland’s seamen.22
   Guldberg once expressed the view that one could safely count on there being
six to eight European wars in each century.23 It was precisely at such times that
neutral Scandinavian merchants and shippers saw their most brilliant prospects
