                     THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                       115

for profit, through which they could make up for the lean years of European
peace. According to official statistics, Swedish exports to the “West Indies,”
i.e., the whole of the New World, increased in value from 6,107 to 153,005
nksdaler between 1777 and 1783, while during the same period the Swedish
East India Company, profiting from the war in the eastern seas, recorded annual
gams of up to 300 percent. The free port of Marstrand on Sweden’s west coast
was open to vessels of all nations and served as a center for the sale of prize
ships and the transshipment of goods to other European and American destina¬
tions. From 1780 on, “West Indian” trade was encouraged through favorable
tariff and bonding privileges. The overall value of Swedish-Finnish exports
increased from 3.9 million riksdaler in 1774 to 5.8 million by 1782, producing
a favorable balance of trade and a considerable accumulation of silver.24
    Even betore the war was over, the Swedish ambassador in Paris, Count
Gustat Philip Creutz, negotiated with Benjamin Franklin for a treaty of amity
and commerce, signed in April 1783. Creutz hoped it might be remembered that
Sweden was the first power to offer unsolicited its friendship to the new re¬
public.25
   The wartime trade of the Danish monarchy was even greater than Sweden-
Finland’s, owing to its larger merchant marine, its overseas colonies, and
Copenhagen’s preeminence as the emporium of the North. For Denmark alone,
European imports—not counting goods reexported—increased in value from
1,461.000 rigsdaler in 1775 to 3,441,000 in 1782, while exports grew from
1,211,000 to 3,476,000 rigsdaler. Comparable figures are lacking for the other
parts of the monarchy. Between 1777 and 1783, merchant shipping increased
correspondingly, quadrupling in tonnage in Altona, tripling in Copenhagen, and
doubling in Norway.26
     This commerce consisted overwhelmingly in the transit of foreign goods,
 rather than in the sale of products from the monarchy itself. Much of the ship¬
 ment of noncontraband cargoes within Europe, particularly to the anti-British
 allies, fell into Scandinavian, mainly Danish and Norwegian, hands. As during
the Seven Years’ War, the Mediterranean trade became once again a largely
 Danish enterprise, and the Danes largely replaced the Dutch in the Baltic.
     The Danish West Indies provided a thriving entrepot for goods of varying
nationality, especially after the British attack on Dutch St. Eustatius in February
 1781, when many American, European—and even some British—merchants and
skippers shifted operations to St. Thomas. The Danish government officially
forbade its subjects to ship arms to the Americans, but such traffic was too prof¬
itable for Copenhagen to seek actively to restrain it. American wares, carried
to the Danish islands by American or sometimes by Danish ships, were reex¬
ported to Copenhagen and thence to other European destinations. American
skippers were occasionally “naturalized” as Copenhagen merchants or their
vessels sailed under the nominal command or ownership of Danish subjects, per-
