118      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

powers and privateering declined. Scandinavian maritime trade reached its high
point between 1780 and 1782.33
    The league was, however, compromised from the start by conflicts of inter¬
est, which led to a political crisis in Copenhagen. Sweden-Finland was Europe’s
principal source of naval stores—ship’s timber, masts and spars, sailcloth, pitch,
tar, hemp, and cordage—which provided its greatest source of profit, especially
in western Finland, but which the British held to be contraband. The Swedish
government therefore pressed for the narrowest interpretation of contraband
within the league and for solidarity among its members in upholding it. Den-
mark-Norway’s wartime prosperity was much more dependent upon its far-flung
transit trade in foreign commodities than upon its own products. The Danish
colonies lay exposed to the British fleet. Count Bernstorff, though concerned
with neutral rights and balance of power, was basically an anglophile and disap¬
proved of Russia’s and Sweden’s anti-British bias. Thus, while negotiating Den¬
mark’s entry into the league, he secretly bargained with London, resulting in the
Explanatory Article of 4 July 1780, by which Denmark undertook not to ship
contraband, specifically including naval stores, although not Norwegian pine
lumber. Five days later, on 9 July, the armed neutrality pact concluded with
Russia accepting all prior commitments of the contracting parties to both Britain
and France.
    The Russian government was outraged when it learned of Denmark’s private
deal with Britain; the reaction in Stockholm may well be imagined. Guldberg
and the Danish court, strongly anglophobe, were no less mortified and seized
the opportunity to compel Bernstorff s resignation on 10 November 1780, the
culmination of a long and intense rivalry, based on political principles but with
social, cultural, ethnic, and personal overtones.
    Although Bernstorffs resignation took place under honorable forms, it
caused a sensation both at home and abroad. There was panic on the Copenhagen
stock exchange and widespread dismay in the duchies. Even Catherine II was
taken aback and protested Bernstorffs removal. Withdrawing to his estate in
Mecklenburg, the ex-minister remained the focus of the hopes of those within
the monarchy dissatisfied with the existing regime, in a way recalling the Due
de Choiseul at Chanteloup after 1770.

   General histories often call the entire period from 1772 to 1784 in the Danish
monarchy the “Guldberg era.” However, this began, properly speaking, only
after Bernstorff s dismissal in November 1780 removed the last real obstacle to
a cabinet rule that would reduce the state council to an empty formality. The
German Chancellery was now managed collegially by its members, and the new
foreign minister, the Norwegian-born Marcus Gerhard Rosencrone, was a non¬
entity without a seat on the council.
