122      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

of the Swedish officers remained in America or ever returned there. In general,
they distinguished themselves in later life through loyal service to their king. As
for Swedes below officer rank, their part in the war may on the whole be attrib¬
uted to the vagaries of life at sea.44
    Few of the Swedish volunteers served ashore in the American colonies, and
of those who did, only two, Curt von Stedingk and Axel von Fersen, left any
very revealing impressions of the American Revolution. Claims have been made
that both served out of enthusiasm for the American cause, but their preserved
letters make it clear that such considerations were far from their minds. Both
desired active military service, while Fersen, whose name was already linked
romantically to that of Queen Marie Antoinette of France, considered it prudent
to leave Paris. Stedingk wrote to a friend in Sweden, “the desire to go to Amer¬
ica has become so great and fashionable since Lafayette received such a favor¬
able reception from the whole [French] nation, that it can be compared with
nothing less than what the Crusaders of old experienced when they made their
way to the Holy Land.” However, “As far as I am concerned, who sadly
enough cannot be reckoned among their number, it is reason and calculation
which have determined the matter.“4S
    While enthusiastic at the prospect of French success, Stedingk and Fersen
regarded their British adversaries with professional admiration and had little but
contempt for the ragged American forces. They noted the existence of large and
 influential loyalist elements. Although at first well impressed with America,
 Fersen became disillusioned with the mercenary nature of the Americans, who
 sold as willingly to the enemy as to their French allies. Both he and Stedingk
 considered it likely for a time that Britain would partition America, keeping the
 more desirable southern provinces. Fersen, later noting that the Virginians pos¬
 sessed “all the aristocratic principles,” expressed surprise that they should have
 been able to “enter into the general confederation and to accept a government
 based upon a perfect equality of condition.” Indeed, he expected that “the same
 spirit which has brought them to free themselves from the English yoke” would
 lead the Virginians to detach themselves from the other states and that the Amer¬
 ican government might in time degenerate into “a perfect aristocracy,” presum¬
 ably on the same disjointed and licentious model as Poland or Sweden before
 Gustav Ill’s coup of 1772.46
     Harald Elovson has maintained that Stedingk’s and Fersen’s attitude toward
 the conflict may be taken as representative of the Swedish officers who took
 part. More recent studies have nonetheless shown that certain of the volunteers,
 enthusiastic over the ideals of the Enlightenment, were genuinely inspired by the
 revolution in America and were later involved in opposition to Gustav III.
 Among these were the three brothers of Hans Jarta, one of the principal authors
 of the Swedish constitution of 1809; Adolf Ludvig Ribbing, who in 1792 took
 part in the assassination of Gustav III; and Goran Magnus Sprengtporten, leader
