120      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

than nationalistic.37 Looked at in another way, the indigenous potentialities of
the monarchy had developed further in the administrative than in the economic
sphere.
   If, as seen, the period after 1772 saw the reversal of earlier efforts—since
1766_to secure greater personal freedom and property for the peasantry, it also
saw the culmination of the trend toward land reallocation and consolidation in
the interests of more rational and productive cultivation, through ordinances in
May 1776 and April 1781. The latter in particular was of epochal importance
for Danish agriculture, since it permitted the individual landowner to have his
holdings consolidated, upon demand, into one, two, or at most three parcels.
The similarities to contemporary British and Swedish practice are unmistakable.
Henceforth enclosures and the movement of peasant farmers out of the old com¬
pact villages onto new consolidated farms proceeded at an ever increasing pace,
transforming the very appearance of the countryside, and leading before long
to increased production and greater peasant initiative.

    Across the Atlantic, the Americans continued their struggle for indepen¬
dence. In 1779, the American Francis Dana wrote from St. Petersburg, “Britain
has not a single friend among all the powers of Europe."38 As seen, the Scandi¬
navian lands—directly and indirectly-gave support to the Americans: Scandina¬
vian volunteers fought in the allied forces against Britain, while neutral
Scandinavia permitted an ongoing exchange of products between Europe and the
rebellious colonies. Behind this situation lay calculations of power and profit,
but certainly no sympathy for the American cause on the part of those who deter¬
mined policy in the Northern courts.
    Bernstorff set forth his views in a letter dated 27 December 1777. If North
American independence had no other consequence than to prevent Britain from
henceforth “usurping a tyrannical domination of the seas,” he would consider
it beneficial. But he feared not only that this would strengthen France—Swe¬
den’s ally—in the European balance, but also that an independent America
would become a serious competitor in the markets for the Danish Monarchy’s
principal exports—timber, fish, and grain—and could in time usurp the Green¬
land fisheries and the Danish West Indian islands. “The rebellion,” he wrote
in June 1779, was “hardly excusable and the most pernicious example that could
exist.”39 Under the circumstances, however, he strove to maintain Denmark’s
neutrality in the war, while drawing the greatest commercial benefits from it,
in ways not directly inimical to British interests.
    In April 1779, the French ambassador in Stockholm wrote to Paris, “In gen¬
eral, the cause of the Americans is not that of sovereigns; Gustav III has not,
as of the present moment, shown himself favorable to them.”40 When in 1780
the king further tightened control of the press under his ordinance of 1774, one
of the first victims was the Abbe Raynal’s popular Histoire des Deux Indes. As
