                     THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                       123

 of the movement for Finnish autonomy in the later 1780s, who held a temporary
 commission in the French army for a few months in 1780-81. These are names
 we shall encounter again.47
     The American Revolution and War of Independence lasted for more than
 eig t years, during which Swedish political opinion underwent a considerable
 transformation. In 1772 most Swedes of all classes had welcomed Gustav Ill’s
 coup d’etat. At first the American Revolution aroused little political response
 among a people still basically satisfied with their regime and strongly attached
 to their king. The Riksdag of 1778-79, however, revealed signs of discontent,
 which in some circles found an outlet in an increasing idealization of the Ameri¬
 cans and their struggle for liberty. Already in 1777 the poet Bengt Lidner wrote
 his dissertation at the University of Greifswald defending the legitimacy of the
 American Revolution. Around 1780 there appeared certain small journals ex¬
 pressing opposition to royal policy, such as Josias Carl Cederhjelm’s Sunning
 och Ndje and the publications of Major Pehr af Lund, which enthusiastically
 espoused the American cause as a means to belabor the government in Sweden.
 Lund, for instance, wrote in his Tryck-Friheten den Walsignade for 28 April
 1783, that the knowledge that “there is one place on earth where man can be
free from his chains” should “frighten the despots and hold them in rein.”48
    As opposition increased during the years following the war, important seg¬
ments of Swedish opinion tended to idealize the American Revolution in retro¬
spect. This is apparent in literature, especially in poetry. In his Aret 1783 (writ¬
ten in 1784), Bengt Lidner sang the praises of a “Brutian Washington” who
“snatches a bloody scepter from the tyrant’s hand,” and several years later.
Bishop Johan Olof Wallin lauded “the first American” in his George Washing¬
ton. During the mid-1780s the young noble malcontents in Finland regarded
their leader, Goran Magnus Sprengtporten, as “a second Washington, the savior
of his oppressed fatherland, and the founder of its freedom and felicity.”49 In
1790 the editor of the radical journal, Medborgaren—“The Citizen”—Carl
Fredrik Nordenskiold, proclaimed, in looking back, that
  the independence of America for all time shall cause wise rulers to govern
  their subjects under the banner of freedom, for America has taught
  Nations to know their rights and the equal protection which a benevolent
  nature affords to all. All men are born free and equal; this was the first
  meaning of the actions of the American states. These words were made
  the fundament of their form of government. The virtuous Americans will
  soon teach all nationalities the meaning of the Majesty of Nations: the
  Majesty of Man! . . . Philosophers, Friends of Mankind, Citizens, what
  a magnificent prospect for you!

Gustav III was, in effect, saying the same thing, although in a very different
spirit, when he denounced, early in 1791, the “epidemic of popular distur-
