                      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                          121

 the events of the war called for some commitment on his part, Gustav III turned
 steadily against the Americans. His letter of 19 August 1778 to Creutz in Paris
 foreshadows that fear of revolution which he was to show so strongly for the
 rest ot his life: I cannot admit that it is right to support rebels against their king.
 The example will find only too many imitators in an age when it is the fashion
 to overthrow every bulwark of authority.” In December 1782 he wrote: ‘‘This
 is the cause of kings. I have always considered it so; either this is a prejudice
 belonging to my position, or it derives from the relationship in which at the
 beginning of my reign I stood with regard to my own subjects, the impression
 of which is hard to efface.”41
    The clear analogy Gustav perceived between the American Revolution and
 earlier developments in Sweden is again reflected in 1784, when he forbade two
 Swedish officers, Baron Curt von Stedingk and Count Axel von Fersen, the
younger, to accept the new American Order of the Cincinnati. ‘‘I do not despise
the nomination, the king wrote to Stedingk, “but too recently having ourselves
escaped from our troubles that there should not exist, no doubt, some germs of
our former divisions, it is my duty to avert anything which could reawaken such
ideas.” George Washington came close to the truth when he wrote to General
Rochambeau in August that year, ‘‘Considering how recently the King of
Sweden has changed the form of the constitution of that Country, it is not much
to be wondered at that his fears should get the better of his liberality at anything
which might have the semblance of republicanism.42
     Swedish-American historians in particular, anxious to stress their country¬
 men’s contributions to American liberty, have gone to some pains to demon¬
 strate a natural affinity and wide popular support for the American cause among
 their ancestors. Above all, they have emphasized the participation in the war of
 a striking number of Swedish and Finnish volunteers.43 Here too, however, a
 more sober examination reveals little overt enthusiasm for American ideals as
 such. Only after France entered the war in 1778 is there clear evidence that any
 Swedish subjects took part in it. There was no Swedish Kosciusko or Lafayette,
 or indeed any Swedish counterpart to the Danish-born brigadier-general in the
 Continental Army, Hans Christian Fibiger, who had arrived from St. Croix and
 was familiarly known as ‘‘Old Denmark.” The great majority of the Swedish
officers were noblemen and officers in Swedish or French service when the war
began. Most were dependent upon military employment, and, like other foreign
officers who sought to serve, they were in straitened circumstances following
a long period of peace in Europe. Stedingk wrote indignantly that the importu¬
nate demands of many of his countrymen for French commissions were ‘‘nothing
more than disguised begging.” The largest number of Swedish officers served
in the Dutch navy, which offered the greatest opportunities for foreigners.
Meanwhile some fifty Swedes held commissions in the British navy, into which
over 370 Swedish seamen were either enlisted or impressed. Apparently none
