                       THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                         117


  wind Is they c„SuidaLWsa,mme Pr°fltS' 'he N°rdiC COUr,s steered as close >° •"<=
  ■he proper forms—or tires           "eU,ral' Ye‘ deSp“e lheir a«™P« '« observe
  belligerent powers, particularlv'P(J“ranRCeS , co"f1lc,s of interesl arose with the
        , .           p          y Great Britain. Individual merchants and skin

                            eS‘abliShet mleS 0f neu,rali<y. even if usually unde!
  eganstic pretexts. More important, however, were varying interpretations of

 poweJs0TnrwMcTThraband’                  VeSSdS m‘ght n0t Carry t0 bell*g^ent
 Lat “d whlch the*r enemies could rightfully confiscate on the high seas
 Great Britain, as the dominant naval power, long held and sought to enforce a
 broad concept of contraband; after 1778 it faced a life-and-death struggle against
   growmg combmatmn of European and American naval forces, whfch thf Brit-
  tained       y S°USht t0          °f needftl1 supplies- The anti-British allies main¬
   tained a narrow interpretation of contraband, limited essentially to arms and mu-
   mt ons, as did the neutral maritime nations, for which large profits were at stake
      Individually the Northern kingdoms were too weak to assert their interests
  but by combining forces they might hope to compel respect. Such a solution had
  been tried with some success during earlier European wars, in 1666 in 1691
  and, as noted, in 1756. On 25 August 1778, Count Bernstorff sent to St. Peters-
    urg a proposal for a common defense of maritime rights, based upon an influ¬
 ential treatise, De la saisie des bdtimens neutres (1759), by the Danish jurist
 Martin Hubner; quite by coincidence, the Russian court dispatched a similar
 proposal to Copenhagen the same day. In their mutual mistrust of Sweden, Den¬
 mark and Russia at first considered only a bilateral arrangement. The following
 month, however, France strongly urged Scandinavian cooperation in defense of
 neutral rights m Stockholm and Copenhagen. In October and November, Gustav
 III invited Russia and Denmark to undertake joint measures.
     Agreement was delayed for over a year, owing mainly to the vagaries of Rus¬
 sian policy, but also to mutual suspicion between the Scandinavian governments;
 indeed during 1779 Gustav III again began to speculate about the possibility of
 seizing Norway.31 Meanwhile, numerous Scandinavian vessels were seized by
the belligerent powers, condemned in admiralty courts, and sold with their car¬
goes as lawful prizes. During 1779 Sweden organized a naval escort for its mer¬
chantmen as far as the Mediterranean; soon after, Denmark began convoying its
East Indiamen. By March 1780 Catherine II’s policy took an anti-British turn,
and she proposed a League of Armed Neutrality, obviously based on Bernstorffs
draft of August 1778. Denmark joined in July and Sweden in September, to be
followed in due course by Prussia, Austria, Portugal, and the Kingdom of the
Two Sicilies.
   Lord North is supposed to have asked in 1779, “Who then is to escort the
Swedish war vessels?”32 In practice, however, the Scandinavian convoys and
the League of Armed Neutrality compelled greater respect from the belligerent
