                                    CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                  131

 mercantilism, and authoritarian cultural and moral tutelage, which he strove
 against mounting odds to uphold.14
    According to the ordinance of 14 April 1784, the crown prince was hence-
  orth to countersign all royal decrees. In a formal sense, this provision limited
 the king’s authority and was thus a violation of the Lex Regia comparable to
 Struensee s in 1771. Yet because Frederik was the legal heir to the throne, such
 a consideration scarcely came to mind. In actuality, his power was now essen¬
tially unlimited, a situation he would in due time exploit.
    For the present the young prince was prepared to rely upon an impressive
group of advisers. Among them. Count Bernstorff, now restored to the council,
foreign ministry, and German Chancellery, was clearly the dominant figure. At
forty-nine, he was at the height of his powers. His years of enforced idleness
on his Mecklenburg estate had allowed him to reconsider his basic views on state
and society. Up to 1780 his outlook had been strongly aristocratic. By February
 1783 he wrote of the need for a “total reform’’; what he might have meant at
this point is not clear, but later developments would show that this was no idle
remark and that his views had broadened considerably.15
   His principal collaborators would be his younger colleagues Count Ernst
Schimmelmann, now in charge of the treasury, and Count Christian Ditlev
Reventlow, who among his various posts presided over the Rentekammer, or
Exchequer, which served in part as a kind of ministry of agriculture. Both held
views even more liberal than Bernstorff s. For the time being, neither was a
member of the council, where Count Schack-Rathlou remained a force to be
reckoned with.
    This group stands in striking contrast to Guldberg and his friends. Its leading
 figures were high noblemen of ancient lineage. Although all were subjects of the
 Danish crown and landed magnates within the kingdom, all except Schack-
 Rathlou were German in background and culture. Bernstorff, Reventlow, and
 Schimmelmann were related by blood or marriage. Outwardly they recalled the
old “Excellencies” of Frederik V’s day. Yet they would carry out a sweeping
 program of reform, largely transforming Danish society and laying the founda¬
tions for its future revolution. Bernstorff and his younger associates were men
of cosmopolitan outlook and generous principles, grounded in part in the human-
itarianism of the Enlightenment, but even more in that of German preromantic
idealism. Their high sense of noblesse oblige and their warm Lutheran piety —in
Bernstorff s case including an element of mysticism—found their outlet in prac¬
tical projects to improve the lot of their fellow men.16 They represent that cre¬
ative synthesis of sense and sensibility so characteristic of the 1780s.
    The new regime lost little time in embarking upon needed reforms. In 1784
a commission was established under Ernst Schimmelmann to prepare a compre¬
hensive plan for reviving national prosperity and restructuring the state finances.
