                                    CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                 129

 socml and economic views could disapprove of its method of governing. In
    arch 1784 Tonne Luttichau, a Jutland proprietor and outspoken opponent of
 peasant emancipation, protested to the king the use of cabinet orders: “If these
 should have such force as to nullify, amend, and in all respects recast and strike
 down the privileged laws, you do not reign over a free people, but rather over
 a couple of million slaves, whose inheritances, lives, and goods are all confined
 to your Majesty’s high cabinet.’’10
    By this time the hopes and fears of the Danish monarchy were focusing in¬
 creasingly upon Crown Prince Frederik, whose confirmation at the age of six¬
 teen would mark his coming of age in the spring of 1784. The young prince
 remained something of an unknown quantity. His early upbringing had been
 largely neglected, for Struensee had held to the relaxed educational ideals of
 Rousseau’s Emile, while the cold and imperious treatment he thereafter received
 from Juliane Marie and Hereditary Prince Frederik had made him withdrawn
 and taciturn. Those closest to him were two personal retainers, his kammer-
junker, the scholarly Johan von Biilow, and particularly his Norwegian-born
kammerpage, Theodor Georg Schlanbusch.
   Already in August 1781, at the age of thirteen, the crown prince confided his
dissatisfaction with the confining tutelage under which he was placed to Schlan¬
busch, with whom he began considering schemes to establish himself as de facto
regent in place of his stepgrandmother and uncle. Schlanbusch saw in Count A.
P. Bernstorff an indispensable ally, and tried to win him over. Bernstorff was
clearly eager to return to power, but insisted that no action be taken until after
the crown prince’s confirmation in 1784.11 Others were meanwhile initiated into
the conspiracy; these included Count Ernst Schimmelmann, who in 1782 suc¬
ceeded his deceased father as director of finances, Counts Christian Ditlev and
Johan Ludwig Reventlow, and eventually Biilow and State Councillor Count
Schack-Rathlou.
    Guldberg and his royal patrons paid little heed to disturbing rumors but none¬
theless took measures to strengthen their position in preparation for the crown
prince’s coming of age. On 4 April 1784, the day of his confirmation, Frederik
received a letter from Juliane Marie, informing him that he might now “help”
her and his uncle in the exercise of sovereign power and attend the council.
Guldberg gave him a letter he had formulated in Christian VII’s name, admon¬
ishing him: “Hold in all things to my mother and brother. Until now we three
have been as one, and now we four shall be as one.” “Guldberg,” the letter
added, “will see to it that you learn daily what I decide.”12 The confirmation
was marked by the bestowal of numerous honors to faithful supporters of the
regime.
   Two days later, the pro-government element on the council was reinforced
when Guldberg at last took his place on it, together with two of his close associ¬
ates. The real locus of power was still to remain the cabinet, thereby bypassing
