                                     CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                   133

  mg a m0V®ment °l fundamental significance. And in Swedish Pomerania Kam-
 absornf            Reicbenbach was the first’ beginning in 1784, to condemn the
 absorption ot peasant farms into manorial demesnes (Bauernlegen)- which the
 Swedish governor-general, the Prince von Hessenstein, was striving with indif¬
 ferent success to limit-and above all serfdom, which he characterized as “a
  arbarous institution which no custom can exonerate, which arouses horror in
 every well-meaning citizen, which offends against the dignity of man, robbing
 him ot all physical and moral strength, for the primeval right of all men is free¬
 dom and equality.”20
     In Stockholm Gustav III had been much occupied since 1779 with plans to
 seize Norway from Denmark. The Danish economic crisis at the end of the
 American war and renewed signs of discontent in Norway, resulting from crop
 failures and the Danish grain monopoly, seemed to augur well for such a ven¬
 ture. Plans were laid for a direct attack on Copenhagen, and the army and navy
 were prepared for action.21
     Despite Gustav’s amiable visit in St. Petersburg in 1777, the position of Rus¬
  sia in the event of an attack on Denmark remained disquieting. In the summer
  of 1783 Gustav accepted Catherine II’s invitation to visit her in Fredrikshamn,
  in Russian Finland, where amid mutual amenities both sought to sound out the
  other’s intentions. Gustav came to recognize that the Russian-Danish alliance re¬
  mained undisturbed and put off his “Grand Design” until the following year.
     He meanwhile hoped to allay suspicion by departing in September 1783 on
 a grand tour of Italy and France, which lasted until the following August. This
 brought him personal contacts with Emperor Joseph II, Grand Duke Feopold of
 Tuscany, their sister, Marie Antoinette, and Fouis XVI of France, and it was
 to be of great cultural significance for the breakthrough in Sweden of the neo¬
 classical late Gustavian style in architecture and the arts. At the same time it re¬
 vealed Gustav’s growing disenchantment with the French philosophes.22
     From the political viewpoint, the grand tour gave little satisfaction. Gustav
 discerned no encouragement for his daring plans in any quarter. His hopes were
 aroused when Catherine II’s annexation of the Crimea offered the prospect of
 Russia’s becoming embroiled in a war with the Turks, leaving him a free hand
 in the North. Through his ambassador in Constantinople he did his best to rouse
the Porte to action. When news of a Turkish-Russian settlement reached him in
Naples in March 1784, however, it became clear that his “Grand Design” would
have to be abandoned. British intelligence had meanwhile revealed his plans to
St. Petersburg, which warned that Russia would stand by its Danish ally. In
April the coup d’etat took place in Copenhagen, and Denmark-Norway’s
defenses were set in readiness.
    Continuing to Paris and Versailles, Gustav had to content himself with a new
defensive and subsidy treaty with France, concluded in July 1784, which also
ceded to Sweden the small West Indian island of St. Barthelemy.23
