130      CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

the crown prince. All state papers destined for the council were meanwhile to
be sent first to Hereditary Prince Frederik, so that he could bring his influence
to bear on his young nephew.
    On 14 April Crown Prince Frederik attended his first meeting of the council.
The agenda was to open with the swearing in of the three new state councillors,
but the crown prince interrupted and obtained Christian VII s permission to read
a document he had with him. This called for an end to cabinet rule and a return
to the principles of collegial government formally reestablished by the ordinance
of 18 February 1772, following Struensee’s fall, as well as the appointment to
the council of Count Bernstorff and three of his supporters. He requested the
king’s immediate acceptance of the document. Despite the hereditary prince s
desperate protests, the demented king signed it, then fled the room. The crown
prince thereupon dismissed the dumfounded, unsworn councillors. The coup
was thus carried off with astonishing ease, although the conspirators had been
prepared to use force.
   Unlike in 1772, in 1784 there were no reprisals. Juliane Marie and her son
were allowed to sink back into decent obscurity. Guldberg was appointed stift-
amtmand in Aarhus, a position he thereafter filled both loyally and with greater
competence than he had shown in guiding the destinies of the state.
    Looking back, we can see that the fallen regime had been compromised both
by its origins and by its manifest inner contradictions. The coup that brought it
to power recalls the bloody palace revolutions of eighteenth-century St. Peters¬
burg, and its shadow lingered on. Ostensibly it freed Christian VII from domina¬
tion; in actuality Juliane Marie and Guldberg replaced Caroline Mathilde and
Struensee as custodians of the royal will. Government by council was formally
reinstated in 1772, with the regular bureaucratic procedures of the past; in fact
cabinet rule suffered little interruption, and its constant intervention created
bureaucratic confusion and insecurity.
    The men of 1772 had sought to prevent the rise of another all-powerful minis¬
ter. In effect, they succeeded both too well and not well enough. Lacking a
monarch capable of ruling in person, government remained hamstrung and inef¬
ficient. Guldberg ultimately came closest to dominating the regime, yet his
progress was slow and necessarily roundabout, and his official position re¬
mained ambiguous. He was loyal, honest, and industrious: altogether he drafted
four to five thousand cabinet orders, often even writing them out himself in clear
copy.13 His views set their stamp upon the era. But he lacked the vision and ini¬
tiative of real leadership.
    Guldberg liked to think of himself as a hardheaded realist. Yet although he
could be pragmatic enough in political maneuver, he was woefully lacking in
practical experience in matters of state, and his viewpoint remained firmly
grounded in the baroque world of early Danish absolutism, with its hierarchy,
