                     THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83                         125

 order in which we lived might be destroyed, was a fear unknown to us.” Yet
 he described his father, a regimental surgeon who “admired Rousseau,” in
 terms that would be familiar elsewhere in Europe:

    Talented, spirited, dissatisfied with his situation, he felt himself, often not
    without reason, called upon to decry the oppression of the powerful, and
    did so not infrequently with the vehemence that belonged to his nature. His
    complaints thereupon often took a more general turn: it was then that I first
    heard of the caprice of the higher authorities and the pride of the nobility,
    of the arrogance of the rich and the reward of the undeserving, of the op¬
    pressed condition of the burgher and the burden of the great standing
    armies, all those expressions of discontent which later, often justifiably
    enough, would move the world and myself with it, and dark intimations
    of these [evils] mingled with fiery resolves for future action.

     I too, Steffens reminisced, ‘was well enough informed of the significance
of the North American war to sympathize heart and soul with a nation which
so courageously fought for its freedom ... The attitude of my father spurred
the enthusiasm of his sons, indeed first aroused it.” Steffens’s boyhood heroes
were Washington and Franklin, especially the latter who rose to eminence
  from a simple burgher background.’ He adds, “Surely there were few young
men of spirit in that peaceful land who did not support the cause of the North
Americans.”
    At length news of the Peace of Paris in April 1783 reached Helsingor on the
Sound, where the family lived. It was a brilliant day; ships of all nations lay at
anchor in the roadstead, decked out with flags and pennants; the crews cheered;
the war vessels—“even every merchantman that carried a couple of cannon”—
fired salutes. The elder Steffens assembled his friends around a punchbowl, and
“the victory of the Americans, the cause of the freedom of nations, was enthusi¬
astically discussed.” Eager to nurture in his sons a “sense of civic liberty,” he
summoned them and “sought to make clear to us the meaning of this festive
occasion, and as a toast was drunk to the fortunes of the new republic, a Danish
and an American flag flew in our garden.”
     Looking back in the 1830s, Steffens saw in this unforgettable occasion “an
 intimation of the great events that would arise out of this victory.” Behind the
striking growth of public concern for the general good and mounting social fric¬
tion in the Nordic lands during the years immediately following, it is difficult
not to recognize the powerful influence of the revolution across the sea. To Stef¬
fens in his later years, it was “the amicable dawn of the bloody day of his¬
tory.”55
