124      THE CLASH OF ARMS AND IDEAS, 1776-83

bances” which had “spread from the soil of America to France” and which
threatened all thrones.50 Even when in later years, members of the old opposi¬
tion against Gustav III became disillusioned with the excesses of the French
Revolution, they tended to retain their admiration for America.51
   Aside from Bernstorff s intriguing remark from October 1776 about popular
enthusiasm for the “rebels,” based upon the “mania for independence,” con¬
temporary testimony is notably sparse regarding the impact of the American
Revolution upon opinion in the Danish monarchy. Censorship was more effec¬
tive—or the press simply more cautious—than in Sweden-Finland, and pre¬
served letters and diaries seldom discuss American affairs. Surely for this reason
the topic remains neglected by scholarship.52
    Later references, however, help to confirm that the revolution in America left
a considerable impression in Denmark, Norway, and the duchies, as it did else¬
where in Europe. Lecturing on “the most important revolutions of the past three
centuries” at Copenhagen University in the mid 1790s, the young historian
Frederik Sneedorff said of the “North American Revolution”:
   It was not only against vigorous armies that they [the British] had to fight,
   but there was a whole nation, inspired by that spirit of freedom and hatred
   for tyranny that made a soldier of every man; they were their own com¬
   patriots, who had with them from England laws, customs, and concepts
   of liberty. And finally France entered the fray and the spark which was
   struck in North America burst out into the flame that has swept over the
   whole world.53

    “Franklin was ever my ideal,” wrote a contributor to the Copenhagen
journal Minerva in 1798; “Franklin . . . who made something of himself
through honesty, ambition, and work. His example is worth more than all of
Plutarch’s heroes.” After describing the “spirit of submissiveness, of the
prevailing deference to mere rank and title” in the Altona of his youth, the Hol¬
stein schoolmaster Georg Friedrich Schumacher recalled how Washington and
Franklin,
   the idols of the day, expressed principles we had not been used to hearing,
   and even if no one in our land actually considered offending against the
   king’s authority, we nonetheless became familiar in theory with the idea
   that in certain circumstances it could be just and honorable to defy the arbi¬
   trary will of a ruler.54

   It was, finally, a Dane, Henrik Steffens, who has left one of the most reveal¬
ing pictures that has been preserved of the impact of the American Revolution
in Europe. The peaceful island of Sjaelland seemed in his childhood remote from
the great events of the time, such as “the earthquake in Calabria” or the war
in America: “That the flat land which we inhabited might quake, that the civil
