132      CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

A royal decree the following year called for reform of the monetary system. C.
D. Reventlow was placed at the head of the so-called Smaller Agrarian Commis¬
sion (den Lille landbokommission) in 1785 to improve conditions on the crown
estates in north Sjaelland—thus resuming the efforts of the 1760s—for the benefit
of both the tenantry and the treasury.
   The government meanwhile began investigating the status of the peasantry
throughout Denmark. Count Reventlow proposed the establishment of a com¬
mission to deal with all aspects of the problem, which was officially decreed on
25 August 1786. Learning of the crown prince’s approval, Reventlow wrote to
his sister on 14 July:
   Joyously and with thanks to God, I hasten to write these lines to you. God’s
   blessing, tidings of freedom, have come. . . . Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah!
   Cry out with me, that our voices may join together where great men in
   blue cordons sit and cross themselves over these strange happenings.
   ... I shall not rest, either in body or soul, until the whole task is
   completed, until the temple of thralldom is destroyed and that of freedom
   is built.17

     Although the coup of 14 April 1784—unlike that of January 1772—caused
little immediate stir, the new spirit quickly became evident to the informed
public. No formal change was made to the ordinance of 1773 on control of the
press, yet a new freedom was understood to prevail, as reflected in the rapid
appearance of new periodicals throughout the monarchy in the mid-1780s and
the zest with which they addressed themselves to matters concerning the public
weal. The heady new spirit was exemplified by the journal Minerva in Copen¬
hagen, which in 1785 lightheartedly asked whether “general enlightenment is
not a dangerous thing,” replying tongue-in-cheek that almost any kind of learn¬
ing must surely imperil society—especially in Denmark.18
    The clubs entered their golden era, reflecting the n^w atmosphere of opti¬
mism and civic virtue. At the ten-year anniversary of Drejer’s Club in 1785,
Thomas Thaarup extolled its purposes as “noble” and “philosophically
grounded,” and its members as honored within its walls not according to those
distinctions the service of the state required but to the extent each “served the
general good,” and “according to his qualities of mind and heart.” Typical of
many new societies was the Schleswig-Holsteinische Patriotische Gesellschaft,
founded in Kiel in 1786 “for the advancement of agriculture and civic welfare.”19
A new epoch was at hand.

   In the Swedish monarchy new ideas of agrarian reform were likewise making
themselves felt in deed and word. In 1785 Baron Rutger Maclean, having in¬
herited Svaneholm manor in Skane, commenced the consolidation of his lands
into compact model leasehold farms on the new Danish model, eventually inspir-
