128      CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

    In May 1780 a cabinet order, drafted by Guldberg, was issued, for the regula¬
tion of the “so-called clubs.” Although not harmful in themselves, these soci¬
eties, the order explained, could lead young men astray into “idleness, neglect
of their high duties, and the waste of their time, which is nonetheless valuable
for the state,” and in the long run to “even more dangerous excesses.” The
Copenhagen police were instructed to keep the clubs under surveillance. Their
leaders were to be public officials, or at least “men of respected age and settled
ways, known for good behavior.” In brief: “Anything that virtue, law, and
decency condemn, will not be tolerated.” Meetings were to end promptly at
11:00 p.m.6
    The cabinet order meanwhile required each club to prepare regulations, thus
to reflect carefully upon its philosophy and raison d’etre. Their outlook was per¬
haps best expressed by Drejer’s Club, the most notable of them, established in
1775, which by 1780 counted 130 members of Copenhagen’s leading citizens.
The club’s purpose, its new constitution proclaimed that year, was “to promote
all possible utility.”7
    By the early 1780s the peasant question was becoming urgent. Since 1772,
Danish agricultural policy had again favored the manor as the primary unit of
production for the market, at the expense of the peasantry. The poor crop years
after 1781 seemed, however, to call into question the adequacy of this approach,
even on practical, economic grounds. The landlord remained responsible to the
government for the payment of his tenants’ taxes. The peasant, bound to the
manor, remained all too often a listless and inefficient worker, increasingly a
burden rather than an asset to his landlord, who had to advance tax payments
and other necessities to keep his tenancy filled. Both the cause and the effect of
the peasant’s lassitude were the heavy labor obligations to the manor, which
often led to the relative neglect of their own holdings. In sum, efforts to obtain
a somewhat better yield on a small part of the land impeded the effective cultiva¬
tion of the rest.8
    The solution of Guldberg and the conservative proprietors was constantly to
strengthen the landlord’s control over the peasant, which to a growing number
of critics only compounded the problem. In their view, personal freedom could
alone restore the peasant’s self-respect and initiative, hence the productivity of
agriculture as a whole. All the basic arguments of twenty years or more were
once again aired, while increasingly the debate revealed fundamentally opposed
concepts of human nature itself. Still, the would-be reformers now had behind
them the added force of European advances in agrarian theory and practices in
recent years, as well as the growing trend of enlightened thought in the Western
world to regard the state as the instrument of individual human felicity, rather
than as an end in itself.9
   Discontent thus mounted, on both practical and ideal grounds, against the
existing regime. Meanwhile, even persons in agreement with its conservative
