                                    CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                  127

 war to put its financial house in order. Taxes rose, but state and court expendi-
tUrfj increased more rapidly. The national debt grew by over one-half between
  77- and 1784. The government sought to cover its deficits by issuing unbacked
paper currency, which increased three times over during the same period. Infla¬
tion set in by 1781. as confidence in the currency suffered at home and abroad.
Paper money fell off one-fifth in value during 1783-84. To shore up the mon¬
archy s sagging trade balance, the government imposed a sumptuary ordinance
in January 1783; this severely restricted the use of numerous luxuries or semi¬
luxuries of foreign origin, and aroused widespread resentment, even among the
peasantry—especially in Norway—for whom the lavish celebration of christen¬
ings, weddings, and funerals provided life’s traditional high points.2
   Aside from the Danish overseas colonies, the rest of the Scandinavian world,
being more dependent upon the export of native products, was rather less af¬
fected by changing trade conditions. Northern Europe as a whole, however, suf¬
fered a series ot bad crop years between 1781 and 1785. These caused particular
distress in southern Norway—Akershus and Christiansand Stifter—where the
Danish grain monopoly had been reimposed in 1774.3

   In the Danish monarchy, economic hardship pointed up Ove Hoegh-Guld-
berg's shortcomings as a statesman, especially after 1782, when Baron H. C.
Schimmelmann s death left him saddled with sole responsibility for their eco¬
nomic policy. It likewise gave an impetus to intellectual currents, which the
regime had sought to hold in check.
     A sign of the times were the numerous clubs and societies, which from the
 early 1770s began to appear in Copenhagen, setting their stamp upon bourgeois
 life in the capital. Although devoted to conviviality, they represent a consider¬
 able advance in refinement over the boisterous tavern life of Holberg’s day. The
 new clubs had rules and selected their members with care. The steaming punch¬
 bowl provided the centerpiece for their gatherings, inspiring elaborate toasts and
 verses, and ushering in the golden age of the drinking song in Denmark. “The
 wine we enjoyed,” Henrik Steffens later reminisced, “was more sung about
 than drunk.”4 Characteristically, too, the clubs aspired to some higher purpose.
 Several were devoted to the cultivation of literature; the Norwegian Society (Det
norske Selskab), one of the first such groups, indeed played a significant role
 in the evolution of a specifically Norwegian literature. Others interested them¬
selves in the theater, natural science, or, not least, in philanthropic projects.
    All of this sounds innocent enough. Yet for the government there were dis¬
quieting undertones. The English word club, which came into use in the 1770s,
reflected an “Anglomania” characteristic of the time, which could be taken to
imply an affinity for English ideas and even sympathy for the unfortunate
Caroline Mathilde.5 From the discussion of literature it was only a short step
to the consideration of public affairs.
