           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            143

cil, where he was joined in 1788 by Ernst Schimmelmann; outside the council
C. D. Reventlow took in hand a variety of reform projects concerned mainly
with agrarian questions. They could count on—and did not hesitate to culti¬
vate the enthusiastic support of progressive opinion throughout the monarchy,
especially that of the pace-setting clubs and journals in the capital.
    In 1785 Crown Prince Frederik established the so-called Smaller Agrarian
Commission (den Lille landbokommission), headed by Reventlow, to resume the
reform of the crown estates on north Sjaelland begun during the first years of
Christian VII's reign. The commission pursued a vigorous policy of land reallo¬
cation combined with hereditary leaseholds for the new consolidated farms.
Labor services were virtually abolished, and crown tenants were relieved of the
royal portion of the tithe, in return for reasonable yearly money payments. Hus-
mcend, or cotters, who performed necessary seasonal labor, were provided small
plots of land. Inspired largely by Count Ludvig Reventlow, who also served on
the commission, attention was likewise given to improving the elementary
schooling of the children of royal tenants.1
     By mid-1788 these reforms were largely prepared. On 15 August C. D.
 Reventlow presented the first fifteen hereditary leasehold contracts to crown
 tenants from Frederiksborg and Kronborg Amter. In a speech for the occasion,
 printed in the influential progressive journal Minerva, in Copenhagen, he
 stressed the king’s concern for his peasant subjects and painted a glowing picture
 of the future: enlightened cultivators would transform wastelands into lovingly
 tended gardens and orchards, rich fields, and useful woodlots; and both peasant
 and cotter would be satisfied with their lot, amid growing prosperity.2
     In many ways the reforms of the Smaller Agrarian Commission in north
 Sjaelland served as a kind of pilot project. In his speech Reventlow held that the
good of the peasants, rather than revenues to the treasury, were the king’s prin¬
cipal concern. Yet the financial interests of the crown could scarcely be over¬
looked. In April 1784 Tyge Rothe had written to Biilow, “What is essential [for
the state] is not to save, but to earn.’’ The government advanced considerable
sums to reform the crown estates, but in the long run these investments would
pay off in rents and taxes.3
    Greater problems meanwhile awaited solution. In September 1783 a crown
bailiff in Viborg had raised the question whether the government, rather than
the manorial proprietor, should not appoint executors for the estates of deceased
tenants, thus ending old abuses preventing peasant families from bettering their
lot from generation to generation. His inquiry received little attention under the
Guldberg regime, but it raised in concrete form the whole question of the peas¬
ant’s dependent and exploited condition.4
    In July 1786 C. D. Reventlow brought up this question with Crown Prince
Frederik, who replied warmly that no time ought to be lost in dealing with so
vital a matter. Reventlow prepared a memorandum from the Rentekammer to the
