 134      CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

    With characteristic flexibility, Gustav III continued to explore possibilities in
Denmark-Norway, including a farfetched scheme to stir up civil conflict through
the cooperation of Juliane Marie—which she refused to consider—and intima¬
tions to the Danish court concerning a future Scandinavian dynastic union.24 At
this time, in July 1785, he wrote to his confidant, J. C. Toll:
   With Norway there does not seem much that can be done. It will be in
   Copenhagen that its crown will be taken. ... To arouse a republican
   spirit there could easily take place; but who knows whether it might de¬
   velop as we might wish, and I would then fear its contagion in Sweden,
   which so recently has been cured of it.25

   While Gustav III speculated about intrigue and agitation in Denmark-
Norway, Catherine II secretly instructed her ambassador to Stockholm in
December 1784 to revive the old pro-Russian faction in preparation for a
Russian attack, when circumstances permitted, to restore the constitution Gustav
had overthrown in 1772.26 The Danish minister to Stockholm received similar
instructions soon thereafter.
   In preparation for the Riksdag in 1778, the Russian and Danish envoys had
sought to encourage opposition to the king.27 But times had then been good, and
Gustav Ill’s regime still retained its early popularity. By the mid-1780s, how¬
ever, discontent was rapidly mounting. Crop failures caused widespread misery.
Military expenditures weighed down the depressed economy. By 1783 alarming
rumors circulated that the king intended to attack Denmark.28 Gustav’s grand
tour on the Continent in 1783-84 was condemned as frivolous and extravagant,
especially at a time of want at home.
    Hard times aggravated existing grievances. Many burghers, especially in
Stockholm, fretted against the king’s economic liberalism in such matters as free
trade in grain and “free” masterships outside the guilds; they also feared a
planned royal monopoly on tobacco, a particularly lucrative commodity. The
peasantry in particular strongly opposed the ban on private distillation of spirits,
on both practical and legal grounds. The clergy were increasingly indignant, not
only over the decline of public morality and the unedifying example of the court
itself, but also over the growing “sale” of pastorates, often mediated by the
king’s current favorites in return for substantial douceurs. In such manner, for
instance, the bishop of Gothenburg, Johan Wingard, managed to engross the
incomes from eleven pastorates and to have himself appointed dean of his own
cathedral.29
   Such grievances often concerned the aristocracy as well. But opposition
within the noble order was based above all on constitutional considerations.
Gustav Ill’s high-handed management of the Riksdag in 1778-79 had not been
forgotten. Press freedom was further limited by royal decree in 1780 and again
in 1785. Increasingly the king bypassed his council and the regular bureau-
