                                   CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                   135

cracy, and governed with the aid of a miscellaneous group of confidants, which
by the early 1780s no longer included such respected figures from his earlier
reign as Count Ulrik Scheffer or Johan Liljencrantz. Among the new men
around the king were various young favorites—most notably the Finnish Baron
Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt—who were despised as corrupt and unprincipled oppor¬
tunists, and about whom scandalous stories circulated. Appointments and pro¬
motions became increasingly arbitrary. The king, it seemed apparent, was
reducing his own constitution of 1772 to an empty form. To Armfelt, Gustav
confided in November 1781 the principle that “a king ought never to allow him¬
self to be controlled by anyone in his projects.”31
   Noble discontent was particularly acute in Finland. There the government’s
limitation of private forest holdings affected not only the freehold peasantry but
also a nobility highly dependent upon income from its estates, which tended to
be smaller and less profitable than in Sweden proper. The crown’s confiscation
of so-called excess forest lands at a time of ruinous harvests—perhaps the worst
period economically for Sweden-Finland between 1720 and 1800—bore heavily
upon the Finnish nobility, which tended to see Gustav Ill’s land policy for their
part of the kingdom as yet another alarming indication of his mounting des¬
potism.
    There meanwhile remained the longer-term problem of Finland’s security
against Russia. Occupation by the Russians in 1713-21 and 1741-43 had made
the Finns painfully aware of Sweden's weaknesses and their own exposed posi¬
tion. Following the Peace of Nystad of 1721, Sweden made only sporadic efforts
to strengthen its eastern frontier. Gustav Ill’s more vigorous defense policy after
1772, however, had encouraged the Finnish nobility, many of whom held mili¬
tary commissions.
     Within the Finnish officer corps. Colonel Goran Magnus Sprengtporten dis¬
tinguished himself by organizing a flexible system of defense along the frontier.
 He also undertook to instruct young Finnish noblemen in military science, an
 initiative leading by 1781 to the establishment of a military academy at Haapan-
iemi. Visiting Stockholm in 1777-78, however, he became disillusioned with
Gustav III, in part for what he considered ingratitude. Resentful and hard-
pressed economically, he left in 1780 for the Continent, where he sought a billet
in the French army during the American war. At the same time, his elder half-
brother, Jacob Magnus—the king’s devoted collaborator in the coup of
 1772—addressed to Gustav a long and forthright statement of his profound
disenchantment with the existing regime.32
    Returning from France in 1782, G. M. Sprengtporten turned to new specula¬
tions. ‘‘North America’s independence,” a contemporary later recalled, aroused
in him the thought that ‘‘Finland might also be separated from Sweden and be¬
come independent. He preached on this theme for all whom he believed to be
his friends and devoted to him.”33 The latter included many of the younger
