136       CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

Finnish officers, who tended to see in him a “true patriot, worthy of treading
in the footsteps of a Washington.”34 In 1784 Sprengtporten sounded out Duke
Carl of Sodermanland —whose relations with his brother, Gustav III, were often
known to be strained —over the prospect of his ruling an independent Finland,
but the duke shied away.
    The following year, Sprengtporten entered the service of the United Nether¬
lands, at a time when that strife-ridden republic was, in Bruno Lesch’s words,
“the best school for revolutionaries Europe then had to offer,” and quickly
became involved with the “Patriot” party.35 He prepared a draft constitution for
a “Republic of the United Provinces of Finland,” on a strongly federative
model. Provincial diets, composed of the traditional four estates, were to meet
annually, and a national Finnish Riksdag was to be convened every third year.
The ongoing business of government would be conducted by a small standing
“congress,” consisting of representatives of both noble and nonnoble land-
owners—for which peasant freeholders might vote without themselves being
eligible—as well as for each diocese and staple town, elected for three years but
subject to recall by their electors. The congress would be presided over by a
member elected for a three-month term, who officially represented the state.
Executive functions would be handled by a state council composed of elected
civil servants with life tenure. Within the Noble Estate, Gustav Ill’s division into
three classes was to be abolished, as were the titles of count and baron, making
all noblemen equal in status. Voting in the congress was evidently to be by head
rather than by estate, and any citizen might propose legislation to the Riksdag
or congress. Social origin was to play no role in public appointments. Complete
press freedom and considerable religious liberty were to be guaranteed.36 The
project thus contained a mixture of both aristocratic and democratic elements.
It bears manifest similarities to the Swedish constitution of 1720, which Gustav
III had overthrown, as well as those of the United Netherlands, the United States
under the Articles of Confederation, and even of Poland, which Sprengtporten
had visited in 1779.
    To what extent such an arrangement might have corresponded to actual con¬
ditions in Finland, with its relatively primitive social structure and strong tradi¬
tions of Swedish centralism, remains an open question. Clearly Sprengtporten
was seeking a formula that might gain support from various constituencies in
Finland, as well as from abroad. For under what conditions might Finland con¬
ceivably achieve its independence from Sweden? Only with support from Rus¬
sia, which in turn would imply some kind of a protectorate such as the Russians
seemed to favor in their borderlands-in Poland, Courland, and the Crimea -
during the 1770s. The idea of an autonomous Finland under Russian protection
had indeed first been openly proposed by Empress Elizabeth in a manifesto to
the Finns in March 1742 during the war with Sweden. Thereafter such ideas did
not entirely disappear, either in Finland or in St. Petersburg, which remained
