                                     CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                    137

 perilously close to the Swedish frontier.37 In 1785 Sprengtporten presented his
 scheme to the Russian minister in The Hague; returning to Stockholm the fol¬
 lowing year, he took it up with the Russian ambassador there. Later in 1786 he
 accepted a commission as a Russian major-general and departed for St. Peters¬
 burg.
    Years later, in 1809, Sprengtporten justified his actions on the basis of
 Sweden’s basic inability to defend Finland: “Let us agree that security against
a foreign enemy is the first condition of life within society, and that the contract
upon which it is based is broken as soon as this condition is no longer ful¬
filled.    In the 1780s, however, only a few of Sprengtporten’s more devoted
followers were prepared to go so far as to break entirely with Sweden and accept
the protection of the hereditary foe. Few could contemplate Finland’s future
 “independence” except in terms of self-government under the Swedish crown,
analogous to that of Ireland within the United Kingdom after 1782, which—it
might be hoped would allay Russian fears of Swedish aggression.
    The Finnish autonomist movement of the 1780s thus included a small inner,
and a wider outer circle, with differing concepts of self-rule; knowing the tradi¬
tional Russophobia of most of their countrymen, the Sprengtportians kept their
ultimate intentions to themselves.
     The movement as a whole received moral reinforcement from the Valhalla
 Order, founded by Major Jan Anders Jagerhorn in 1780-81 among the younger
 officers at Sveaborg fortress, commanding the seaward approach to Helsingfors
  (Helsinki). Secret lodges on the Continental model, with graduated hierarchies
 and elaborate mystical rites, were as characteristic of Sweden-Finland during
 this period as were the convivial clubs of the English type in Danish society.
 Both, however, were inspired with an intense concern for the public good. The
 Valhalla Order combined patriotism to the “fatherland”-which ever more came
 to mean Finland rather than the monarchy as a whole—with a cult of antique
 virtue, largely inspired by “our forefathers’ pure and simple customs.” Both
 republican Rome and ancient Scandinavia provided its heroes. Increasingly its
 initiates came to see in the cynical and frivolous court of Gustav III the very anti¬
 thesis of its lofty ideals and moral fervor.39
     Finnish nationalist historians earlier in this century—in particular J. R.
 Danielson-Kalmari—tended to perceive the autonomists of the 1780s as precur¬
sors of Finnish ethnic nationalism and its struggle against Swedish language and
cultural domination in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. More recent
scholarship has dismissed such an interpretation as anachronistic.40 The autono¬
mists were almost exclusively noblemen, particularly from the exposed south¬
eastern border districts. All were Swedish in language and culture, and although
a few were affected by academic interest at Abo University in native Finnish
traditions and speech, many knew little of the indigenous language. Among the
nonnoble classes, not least among the overwhelmingly Finnish-speaking
