                                   CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                  139

   The king looked forward to continued cooperation. He had given no explana¬
tion tor his calling the Estates. In 1778-79 they had extended the regular grant
of revenue until the king might see fit to reconvene them. It seemed dear that
the king now sought to increase his revenues, even though the mounting burden
of national debt remained a carefully kept secret. Among the opposition, it was
rumored that he planned to seize greater power for himself.
    The crown’s principal proposal, inspired by Colonel Toll, called for commu¬
tation throughout the kingdom of the landowners’ standing obligation to provi¬
sion and transport the territorial troops maintained by their localities during
annual regimental musters into a money payment, the passevolans. Such
arrangements had been made by local agreement in Finland and parts of Sweden,
resulting in improved military efficiency.
     The opposition within the Noble Estate resolutely rejected the proposition on
 both practical and constitutional grounds. It saw in the commutation of specific
 local requirements in natura and in labor to money payments a disguised form
 of permanent taxation that would increase the king’s freedom of action in the
 military sphere—in which he was known to have dangerously adventurous ideas.
 In vain Gustav sought to intimidate Count Fersen, threatening, according to the
 latter, that he had the means to uphold his “rightful authority” by force.41 Fin¬
 nish members of the Noble Estate, realizing its implications for the defense of
 their part of the realm, fought a losing battle for the passevolans. Although the
 royal proposition was passed by the Clergy and the Burghers, it was roundly
 defeated by the Nobles, followed by the Peasants. With the Estates thus evenly
divided, it failed by default, in accordance with the voting procedure the king
had just accepted.
     Except for a project for local grain magazines, which passed in scaled-down
form, the crown’s remaining propositions were likewise defeated. The question
of distillation provided further grist for the opposition. A royal proposition for
licensing parish distilleries was defeated by all four Estates. When the king then
offered to permit free household distillation in return for a standing tax, the
“Patriots” among the Nobility declared household distillation a basic property
right, in return for which the king could not legally demand a new permanent
revenue. The Clergy, Burghers, and Peasants were prepared to compromise, but
Gustav III refused to alter his proposition and it failed to pass. The Estates lim¬
ited their regular grant of revenue to the next four years, virtually compelling
the king to summon another Riksdag upon its expiration. As a further lesson to
him it was reduced by a symbolic 1 percent.
    The Estates, separately and in combination, also petitioned against numerous
grievances in recent years, including royal monopolies and limitations on free¬
dom of the press. To justify their actions before public opinion, the Noble,
Burgher, and Peasant Estates published their proceedings.
    After seven weeks, Gustav III dissolved the Riksdag. He deplored the “ill-
