 140      CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

 founded suspicions” that had disturbed its deliberations, and appealed to poster¬
 ity to vindicate his devotion to his subjects’ welfare.42 He had convened the
 Estates, it would appear, partly as a means to sound opinion, which by 1786 was
 largely silenced in the press. But he was hardly prepared for the force of opposi¬
 tion he encountered in all four Estates. This proved a bitter blow for a monarch
 who had gloried in the adulation of his people.
     Gustav III was, however, too astute a politician not to learn from the experi¬
 ence and to adapt himself accordingly. It was evident during the Riksdag that
 opposition among the nonnoble Estates was based upon specific, material griev¬
 ances, which left essentially unshaken the traditional loyalty of the commonality
 to the crown, whereas among the nobility it bore the intransigeance of principle
 and challenged the very nature of the regime itself on constitutional grounds.
 The lesson was clear: locked in a struggle for power, the king must split the
 opposition and isolate the nobility.
     To do so meant a return to an age-old principle of statecraft, even if this did
 not come easily to Gustav III with his aristocratic predilections. These had by
 no means changed by 1786. The year before he had still deplored “that spirit
of democracy which brought about the fall of our former government, and which
would have succeeded in its goal of annihilating the nobility if the revolution [of
 1772] had not come in time to raise a barrier against it.”43 It was also in 1785
that Gustav had considered eliminating commoners altogether in his officer
corps. Nor, as events would prove, did he abandon the ideal of a special relation¬
ship between the king and his nobility—provided the latter could be reduced to
political submission. Eino Jutikkala has aptly described Gustav Ill’s motto as
 “everything for the good of the nobility, but nothing through the efforts of the
House of the Nobles.”44 For the time being, its realization required other allies.
    Already by the end of the Riksdag in June 1786, Gustav made a play for peas¬
ant sympathies in particular by voluntarily renouncing the fourth year—one-
quarter—of the tax revenue just granted him. Soon thereafter he abandoned the
projected tobacco monopoly, to the relief of the burghers. A new ecclesiastical
commission reformed the corrupt traffic in clerical appointments. Most impor¬
tant, in 1787 free household distillation was again permitted, for a fee based on
the size of the farm involved. Although this arrangement was rejected on
principle by some landowners, mainly noblemen, it was enthusiastically re¬
ceived by the great majority of the peasants. “The marriage between the peas¬
antry and the high and mighty is now broken,” Gustav III wrote to Toll, “and
that alone is useful.”45


    Throughout Scandinavia, the period beginning in 1772 and lasting to the
middle 1780s is characterized by a conservative reaction against the radical im¬
pulses of the years immediately preceding. There was a trend toward the concen¬
tration of political power, in Sweden this was the work of the king himself.
