                                   CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86                   141

Gustav III, in Denmark of the monarch’s self-appointed representatives, Guid¬
es and the court. In both kingdoms new regimes had come to power during
a time of economic crisis, in 1772, which threatened the stability of the old
society; in both renewed economic distress prepared the way for changes of
direction in the mid-1780s.
    Social and economic policy throughout Scandinavia during this period
strengthened the position of the manorial proprietors—still predominantly noble
in both kingdoms—while holding peasant interests in check, despite Guldberg’s
bourgeois tone and Gustav Ill’s protestations of concern for the peasantry. One
cannot but be struck by the similarity of Bernstorff’s and Gustav Ill’s aristocratic
values during these years, as well as by the fact that both would take the lead
in transforming society by the later 1780s. Both regimes sought to uphold the
cultural values of earlier epochs, in the face of new impulses both at home and
abroad. Whereas Gustav III romanticized the great age of the Vasa kings of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Guldberg looked back to the regimented and
docile society of early Danish absolutism in the later seventeenth and early eigh¬
teenth centuries.
    This era in the Scandinavian kingdoms reflects developments throughout the
Western world. In France the decade and a half following Louis XVI’s accession
in 1774 was marked by an aristocratic reaction which blocked repeated efforts
at reform. British conservatism hardened in the face of the Americans, the Irish,
and the would-be parliamentary reformers. Catherine II’s Charter of the Nobil¬
ity at last conferred corporate status upon the Russian aristocracy in 1785.
Frederick II was at the time of his death in 1786 preparing the Prussian law
code, adopted in 1794, which could be considered the culmination of the corpor¬
ative ideal in Europe. A patrician counterrevolution took place in Geneva in
 1782, while in the Habsburg lands there was determined resistance to reform,
in the name of ancient privileges.46
    Yet there were other forces at work that could not be denied. The later
Enlightenment upheld the rights of the individual against the demands of the
state, a principle vindicated in impressive fashion by the revolution in America.
In Scandinavia itself a “middle class” was steadily evolving—the term itself
first appears in the Swedish Academy’s dictionary in 1792—borne up by the
profits of trade, extractive industries, manufacture, and shipping, at a time when
agriculture, the mainstay of the aristocracy, remained largely depressed, despite
government efforts to encourage it.47 Meanwhile in both kingdoms influential
members of the nobility itself were prepared to envision a more open society,
offering greater incentives to talent and ambition. In Copenhagen, government
moved after 1784 in the direction of enlightened aristocracy; in Stockholm after
1786 toward Caesarian democracy. In both capitals it now began to respond to
an evolving society.
