 138      CHANGING BEARINGS, 1783-86

peasantry, there was little sympathy either for the nobility or for its ideals.
    After its first flush of enthusiasm, the autonomist movement wavered with
the course of events. In 1783 Russia’s outright annexation of its Crimean pro¬
tectorate proved disillusioning to those who fixed their hopes upon St. Peters¬
burg, as did the administrative Russification of the Baltic provinces and Russian
Finland, overriding privileges guaranteed under the Peace Treaties of Nystad
and Abo, which began the same year. The freeze in Gustav Ill’s relations with
Catherine II in the spring of 1784, however, again aroused fears for Finland’s
security, as did word of a new defense plan in 1785, calling for an initial strate¬
gic retreat far to the west and north, until a counterattack could be mounted. A
rumor circulated at this time, evidently inspired by St. Petersburg, that Gustav
III was considering trading Finland for Norway. The Riksdag of 1786 in Stock¬
holm further aroused noble resentments against the king, as will be seen. Yet
Sprengtporten’s departure for Russia that year left his followers leaderless,
while a visit by the king to Finland in 1787 and further attention to its defenses
apparently allayed—for the time being—some of the anxieties underlying the
autonomist movement.
    On 2 April 1786 Gustav III unexpectedly summoned a Riksdag, to convene
a month later in Stockholm. Such short notice gave rise to suspicion and ill will
from the beginning, since many provincial riksdagsman, especially from Fin¬
land, could hardly reach the capital by the appointed date. There was little time
for preparation, yet the political composition of the Riksdag reflected the rising
tide of dissatisfaction with the king and his policies since its last meeting in
1778-79.
    The Noble Estate was clearly dominated by the anti-royalist “Patriots,”
around the former Hat chieftain, Count Axel von Fersen, the elder, who called
for a return to strict observance of the constitution of 1772. A more radical
faction aspired to limit the king’s constitutional powers; some of its adherents
were prepared to revert to the practice of the “Era of Freedom” and seek covert
support from the Russian and Danish envoys, but the latter, taken unawares,
were unable to play a very effective role. A small but determined royalist minor¬
ity was led by the king’s confidant, Colonel J. C. Toll. Elections among the non¬
noble Estates produced less clear-cut results: whereas the peasants strongly
inclined toward opposition, the Clergy and Burghers were initially more closely
divided.
   Upon convening, the Noble Estate raised a basic procedural question still not
clearly settled at the previous Riksdag: the reckoning of votes by house for the
passage of legislation. It proposed that the votes of three estates be sufficient,
except for revenue matters, in which each Estate would vote on its own share
of proposed taxation, and questions of privilege, which would require the assent
of all four estates. Gustav III accepted this solution, which was thereupon
adopted by the other three estates.
