                                CHAPTER 7




Enlightened Despotism and Revolt
             1786-89




During the period from 1772 to the mid-1780s, there was a growing tension in
Scandinavia between social evolution and policies of state. In the years immedi¬
ately following, this tension was dramatically released as epochal reforms and
rebellion occurred in both Nordic kingdoms. The aspirations of the Scandina¬
vian radicals of the 1760s and early 1770s came in large part to be realized in
the climactic years 1786-89—on the eve of the great revolution in France.

    In Copenhagen young Crown Prince Frederik showed from the beginning his
conscientious concern for the affairs of state. Above all, he was fascinated by
the military, in which he was encouraged by his uncle. Prince Carl of Hesse,
who also managed to arouse in him a fleeting interest in mystical religion and
Freemasonry. A contrary source of interest soon appeared with the arrival from
Schleswig of the three sons of the Duke of Augustenburg, two of whom—
Friedrich Christian and Christian August—would play important roles in his
later reign. The Augustenburgs, a junior branch of the Oldenburg house, repre¬
sented a strongly rationalistic outlook, thus appealing to Frederik’s basically
prosaic nature. Being gregarious and high-spirited young men, they overcame
the crown prince’s rather shy indifference to the amenities of social life. Kam-
merjunker Johan von Biilow, now also the crown prince’s personal secretary,
strove to hold his young master to the straight and narrow path.
    Most of what was accomplished in the Danish monarchy during the first years
following the coup ot 14 April 1784 was the work of the council and government
departments. The crown prince remained in the background, following with
particular attention developments in those areas that interested him the most,
such as military or agrarian matters. A. P. Bernstorff took the lead in the coun-

                                      142
