          ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                           145

it shall therefore be incumbent upon the commission, upon determining whether
these have not been modified or set aside by later decrees, to make recommenda¬
tions as to how they may be put into effect.”7 The intention was evident enough.
Frederik IV had abolished vornedskab, the earlier form of partial serfdom in
eastern Denmark, in 1702. The “later decrees” could only refer to the stavns-
band, established in 1733. The question was not whether it should be repealed,
but how.
   In this matter Reventlow took the lead and quickly stirred up controversy,
both within the commission and beyond. The commission’s published proceed¬
ings indeed reflect all the long-familiar controversies both for and against peas¬
ant emancipation. The essential question remained that of basic human nature:
how would the common man use or abuse freedom?
    For Bolle Luxdorph, an old friend of reform, “Freedom, like mental and
physical faculties, is not a reward for previous accomplishment, but rather the
means to make oneself deserving, after which one may expect one’s reward.”
On the other side, his colleague on the commission, F. C. Rosenkrantz, was
convinced that there was greater poverty in England, “whose subjects have
wrested such freedom from their government,” than in Denmark. Similarly, the
diplomat Peter Schumacher wrote from abroad, “Experience clearly shows that
there is far less poverty among peasants where they are unfree,” and on the basis
of his own observations compared Italy, with its crowds of free beggars, with
Russia, where “sensible” landlords saw their peasants’ welfare as essential to
their own. The reformers, who “sit in their studies hatching projects,” he dis¬
missed as motivated solely by “lust for change, self-importance, and conceit.”
In Aarhus, Guldberg foresaw the ruin of both the peasantry and the state itself.
He scoffed at “all the general principles of freedom argued by the theoretici in
their government offices, sung about by the poets, shown on the stage, defended
in the clubs,” and warned darkly that “those same persons who now wish to
release the peasantry from all constraints also . . . [portray] the discipline
which princes impose upon their subjects as the bonds of slavery, which should
be broken.” To conservatives, the very fabric of society seemed imperiled.8
   The whole issue of reform—particularly agrarian—created a rift within the
government itself, discernible already by the end of 1784. On the council
Bernstorff was its leading proponent. The opposing faction was headed by the
formidable Schack-Rathlou, who had played a prominent part in agrarian
affairs during the Guldberg years, and even more vehemently by F. C. Rosen¬
krantz; the presence of both on the council following the coup of April 1784
had indeed been intended to reassure conservative and Danish national senti¬
ments. Behind the scenes, Guldberg sought to exercise an occult influence upon
the crown prince through Bulow, whose earlier progressive views had quickly
evaporated.
   Conservatives were proud to identify themselves as the “Danish ’ and to
