           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                           147

state of veritable crisis and had written Billow that the only remaining hope
lay in blocking implementation of the impending reforms; surely this was as
close as this dedicated absolutist ever came to outright defiance. Yet a year later
he expressed to Billow “the greatest horror” at the thought of being a “fron-
deur.     As a functionary,” he continued, “it is now my duty to put into effect
the commands of the government and to seek only to know what they are, rather
than what I might wish them to be." He was gratified in October 1789 that the
proprietors in his stift felt as he did, that

   when the king has once decreed a law, fundamental law is established, and
   thereafter no more prattle, no more outcry, no more intrigues. The stavns-
   band is now abolished: the most numerous estate has now regained from
   the Legislator its lost freedom, and woe to him who might seek secretly
   or openly to violate a right which Nature conferred and the Legislator has
   restored.12

    A few additional reforms also belong to the first period of the Great Agrarian
Commission’s activity. Already in August 1786 a credit bank (Kreditkasse) was
set up to encourage peasant freehold purchases throughout the monarchy. The
export trade in cattle, which went mainly to Germany, previously the monopoly
of the manorial proprietors, was opened up to all in June 1788, providing a
potentially profitable market to peasant cultivators. In July the Danish grain
monopoly in southern Norway was finally abolished for good. Court records
meanwhile reveal a marked tendency toward judgments favorable to peasant
interests during this period.13
    The Great Agrarian Commission was inactive between May 1788 and Feb¬
ruary 1790. This was in part because the government was then faced with other
concerns, especially in foreign affairs. But it also considered it prudent to see
what results the changes already wrought would produce before proceeding
further.
    What had thus far been accomplished? Present-day historians, more keenly
aware of the importance of economic factors, might find it difficult to accept V.
Falbe-Hansen’s view in 1889, that the later transformation of Danish agrarian
life would have followed by itself from the abolition of the stavnsband,14 Serious
problems still remained after 20 June 1788, some of which affected rural life
even more deeply than the stavnsband itself. The ownership of land remained
virtually the monopoly of the manors, thus the overwhelming majority of peas¬
ant farmers could still only be manorial tenants, subject to heavy and variable
labor services, and to the discipline of the landlord’s bailiff. The tithe remained
an onerous burden. Much of the peasantry consisted of cotters and landless
laborers, largely dependent upon seasonable employment. In the duchies serf¬
dom continued to exist. These were questions that would engage the agrarian
reformers for years to come.
