            ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                             149

archy and six localities on the island were designated staple towns, of which
Reykjavik, with a population of some 300, was the largest. The Icelanders were,
however, still torbidden to trade directly with foreign merchants.16
    The trade monopoly for Finnmark in northern Norway, established in 1687,
was abolished in September 1787, and staple towns were founded at Tromso,
Hammerfest, and Vardo, where both Swedes and Russians were also permitted
to trade. Finnmark developed rapidly during the years that followed. Restric¬
tions on trade with the West Indian, African, and East Indian colonies were like¬
wise relaxed, and a special commission would eventually recommend the freeing
ot trade with the Faero Islands by 1796. The Greenland Commission, set up in
 1788, nonetheless opposed opening up trade with that remote colony, which thus
remained in royal hands to protect the native population.17
   Basically pragmatic in its approach to reform, the government did not
immediately withdraw subsidization to manufactures or remove tariff barriers
against imports from the duchies or from abroad. It did, however, promote the
wider dispersal of industry throughout the provinces. In Schleswig it encouraged
the settlement of industrious Moravian Brethren from Germany by granting
special privileges to their colony at Christiansfeld, near Haderslev, in 1788.18

     While the new regime of Crown Prince Frederik was launching its ambitious
 reform program in Denmark, an explosive situation was developing across the
 Skagerrak in southern Norway, arising out of the fundamental conflict between
 an essentially self-contained peasant society, with age-old traditions of self-rule,
 and the encroachments upon its way of life by a steadily growing state bureau¬
 cracy and urban merchant class. Economically it reflected the clash between a
 peasantry, which by tradition and the limitations of its environment supported
 itself largely through nonagricultural pursuits, and a town middle class, which,
 backed by the mercantilist policies of recent regimes in the capital, progressively
 limited peasant economic activity.
    This conflict was not new in Norway. It had already produced a frightening
outburst in the Stril insurrection of 1765 in Vestlandet. Circumstances in the
 1780s now once again brought it to a head. The American war produced a boom
in seafaring and commerce, but lean conditions in farming and logging. To
deepen the rift, there were poor harvests in 1781 and 1782. Even though the
Guldberg government temporarily allowed some limited import of foreign grain
into southern Norway, scarcity drove up prices to the profit of town merchants
and the detriment of much of the peasantry. The latter normally bought at least
a part of their grain supply even in good years, particularly in Sorlandet, where
the contrast was greatest between urban prosperity and rural poverty during the
war years. Here capable and ambitious peasants ventured into modest shipbuild¬
ing, trading, mining, and timber enterprises of their own. This violated the com¬
mercial privileges of the towns, but it did not immediately lead to confrontation.
