 150      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

    The situation changed, however, with the end of the American war and the
 European economic crisis that followed. Faced with harder times, the town mer¬
chants became more jealous of their privileges and were backed by the Guldberg
regime. The authorities strove to suppress trade and seafaring among the peas¬
antry. The privileges of Christiansand and Arendal on the south coast were
strengthened at the peasants’ expense: the latter were forbidden to buy grain
directly from importing vessels or to sell their timber except to licensed saw¬
mills. The monopolies of privileged merchants led to growing indebtedness in
the countryside and to perpetual complaints about poor merchandise at exorbi¬
tant prices. Having now become so largely integrated into a money and market
economy through the pressures and opportunities of the recent war, much of the
peasantry in Sorlandet—including some of its most able and venturesome
members—neither could nor would return to their old subordinate economic
role. To make matters worse, in 1784 and 1785 harvests were particularly bad.
In 1785-86 mortality in Norway exceeded nativity.19
    Economic hardship heightened old antagonisms between peasants and
bureaucrats. The state official was of old regarded as an unwelcome intruder in
the countryside, ever at odds with the traditional leadership within the peasant
community itself. While bureaucrats complained of the lawlessness and intracta¬
bility of the stiff-necked Norwegian peasants, they themselves were all too often
self-willed, arbitrary, and arrogant. Still mainly dependent for their livelihoods
on perquisites for their services, many officials were unscrupulous in their
exactions. Hard times following the American war meanwhile put them in the
position of driving in debts and taxes, which only added to their unpopularity.
Thus, paradoxically, while in Denmark the state official was emerging as the
champion of the peasantry, in Norway he still appeared as the self-serving
henchman of an oppressive town patriciate.20
    By tradition the Norwegian peasantry was staunchly loyal to its king and
cherished its ancient right to present its grievances directly to him. The'mon-
archs had encouraged this practice during the earlier years of absolutism as a
means of breaking aristocratic influence, but by 1744 deputations of Norwegian
peasants arrived in Copenhagen with such frequency that it was henceforth for¬
bidden. This prohibition was, however, never strictly enforced, since it helped
the central government keep an eye on its officials in Norway, and after 1784
word got out that the young crown prince was sympathetic to the plight of the
common man. Norwegian peasants could likewise count on the admiration and
goodwill of reformist opinion in Copenhagen, where a sympathetic newspaper
would write of them in 1790: “The king is their God here on earth. Nothing
that is oppressive to the people can come from a king; it is the work of those
hateful beings who stand between them.’’22 The more absolute the monarch’s
power, the more absolute the Norwegian peasants’ confidence that he could and
would end their grievances. As Sverre Steen has put it, they “seized the doctrine
