 148      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

   The government meanwhile embarked upon a variety of economic reforms.
The Guldberg regime had left a heavy national debt and a badly inflated cur¬
rency. An investigative commission appointed in 1784 presented its far-reaching
proposals for financial reorganization and monetary reform, partially inspired
by the recent Swedish example, set forth in a royal proclamation on 8 July 1785.
Like the proceedings of the Great Agrarian Commission soon after, this was
widely publicized by the government, recalling similar uses of publicity to win
the support of enlightened opinion for intended reforms elsewhere in Europe
during this decade.
    In May 1787 a finance commission, headed by Ernst Schimmelmann, was
appointed to carry out financial and monetary reform. Schimmelmann proposed
to make a start within the duchies by making the Altona bank (Altonaer Giro-
und Leihbank), established in 1776, the central bank of issue for a new, re¬
formed currency for Schleswig and Holstein, which traded extensively with
Hamburg. This was opposed by the “Danish” faction on the council and its
friends, ever suspicious of any suggestion of special status. Guldberg, who com¬
plained that the Danes were perpetually the “king’s stepchildren,” feared that the
duchies would become an economic “state within the state.” But backed by
Bernstorff and Reventlow, the crown prince approved the measure. The Altona
bank was reconstituted in February 1788 with its own independent board of
directors and adequate funding.15 There now began a long period of economic
stability and prosperity in the duchies, lasting until the later Napoleonic wars,
which unfortunately came to contrast all too glaringly with conditions in the
kingdom, where circumstances prevented the completion of the Finance Com¬
mission’s ambitious plans and where the currency was never really stabilized
before the later 1830s.
    The government abandoned the strict mercantilism of Guldberg’s day and
adopted a more liberal stance reminiscent of Struensee’s brief experiment. The
term “liberal” is used here—for lack of a satisfactory alternative—simply in a
relative sense, to denote greater freedom in economic enterprise, rather than the
full-blown, classic laissez-faire Liberalism which came to prevail in the early
nineteenth century, in Denmark following the state bankruptcy of 1813. Hans
Chr. Johansen indeed argues that during this period economic policy in Den¬
mark, as in Europe generally, is best described as “late mercantilism,” with
government continuing to play an active role, albeit now with greater emphasis
upon population growth and public welfare.
   No attempt was made to resuscitate Guldberg’s great Copenhagen trading
companies, or indeed to preserve the specially favored economic status of the
capital. A royal ordinance on 18 August 1786 ended, as of the beginning of
 1788, the Icelandic trade monopoly, held since 1602 by privileged companies
of Copenhagen merchants or by the crown itself. Henceforth both trade with Ice¬
land and fishing in Icelandic waters were opened up to all subjects of the mon-
