           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                                  153

officials were punished, transferred, or dismissed for abuse of power or for
inept handling of the recent crisis. Various bureaucratic abuses were reformed
locally, and in June 1788 a new ordinance regularized the entire system of offi¬
cial perquisites. Most important, the same month the Danish grain monopoly in
southern Norway was abolished once and for all. Over the next few years the
new regime s economic policy was reflected in relaxed restrictions upon rural
trade, especially in timber.28
   As for Lofthuus himself, he languished in the dungeon of Akershus fortress
in Christiania, chained to a rock. While the government had no intention of
releasing him, it was in no hurry to bring him to trial, lest this stir up fresh dis¬
orders. He was finally condemned to life imprisonment in 1792; the sentence
was contirmed by the supreme court of appeal in Copenhagen in 1799—two
years after his death. In 1800 twelve others imprisoned at the same time were
finally released. The reflections of the wealthy Christiania merchant Bernt
Anker in March 1787 give some idea of the fears and hatred Lofthuus aroused
among his middle-class adversaries:
   If the rebellious mob is not punished, it can murder us in our homes and
   go scot-free. This is a base soul, a rascal in public affairs and a stupid rebel
   in political life. They come running to see this miserable fellow, who dares
   to appear important in his chains. Some call this rude butcher a second
   Washington, but if I should wish to see him it would be to spit in his face.29

     In retrospect, the Lofthuus insurrection cannot be regarded as a national up¬
 rising. While protesting their traditional loyalty to their sovereign, the peasants
 reacted against men no less Norwegian—in sentiment, if not always by descent
 —than themselves, of the type who had been vocal in condemning Danish
 exploitation in the early 1770s and who would take the lead in the movement
 for Norwegian independence a generation later, in 1814. Nor had the time yet
 come in Norway when a peasant movement could encompass the entire country.
At its height it remained limited to the South and Southeast. It is noteworthy that
the Stril district in Vestlandet, the center of revolt in 1765, played no part in it.
     The peasants’ grievances in southern Norway were preeminently economic-
—at least on the face of it—as were the reforms that placated them after the up¬
rising. Yet the movement’s significance in Norway’s modern history is far
broader. For all his shortcomings, Christian Jensen Lofthuus was the first Nor¬
wegian peasant leader in recent centuries with real ability to gather and lead a
large following from a wide area. Had the government not tempered firmness
with real concessions, the episode might have become far more serious than it
did. Even more than the Stril War, it made the Norwegian peasantry aware of
common interests beyond the confines of their local parishes and districts, and
confident of their own capacity for leadership and effective action. Lofthuus was
thus the first in an impressive line of peasant leaders who throughout the nine-
