152       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

reached them of Lofthuus’s impending arrest. His companions continued on to
Copenhagen to arrange his safe passage. The government meanwhile had second
thoughts. Unwilling to leave disgruntled Norwegian peasants in Sweden, where
they might provide unwelcome opportunities to Gustav III, it cancelled the arrest
order. But it was now too late, for Lofthuus had returned home. Fearing some
collusion on his part with the Swedes, the authorities in Sorlandet were deter¬
mined to hunt him down, while the peasants rallied to Lofthuus’s cause in large
numbers.
   By the end of November he had an armed following of some 800 men. The
burghers of Arendal and Christiansand, thrown into a near-panic, organized
town militias to defend themselves. The moment of decision was at hand, but
Lofthuus failed to provide resolute leadership: neither he nor his following could
bring themselves to use force against constituted authority. Most of his men soon
returned home, and the initiative passed to the other side.
   In December the government appointed a commission to investigate peasant
grievances. Beginning early in January 1787, it heard testimony from 350
peasants—including Lofthuus himself, under a temporary safe-conduct—and
called to account a number of officials. Already by 13 February its report was
ready. It found many of the peasants’ complaints justified and made numerous
recommendations to the council in Copenhagen. It meanwhile determined that
as “the people’s hero,” Lofthuus himself must be gotten out of the way. “Guile
is what must be resorted to in this case,” it recommended. “We must seek to
arrest Lofthuus quietly.”26
   Lofthuus’s safe-conduct expired in February, and the authorities seized and
imprisoned him the following month. A storm of indignation swept through the
peasantry of Nedenes and Ovre Telemark, who once again mobilized; those who
would not join were forced to contribute to their support. This peasant host
seized Bailiff Dahl in 0yestad, as a hostage for Lofthuus’s release, and here
800-900 armed peasants assembled. They nonetheless backed down and re¬
leased the bailiff when confronted by 300 troops supported by cannon.
   The threat of bloodshed thus passed during the spring of 1787, although this
was not immediately evident. The peasants remained aroused throughout Sor-
landet and much of 0stlandet; ominous gatherings were reported as far afield
as 0sterdalen and Gudbrandsdalen. In Christiansand, the stiftamtmand called in
a regiment of Danish troops. He was now no longer as much concerned about
the farmers as about “the workers at the ironworks and mines, the seamen, the
timber-cutters on the coast, folk who owned nothing and were accustomed to all
kinds of excesses. 27 In May a three-man delegation went to Copenhagen to
seek Lofthuus s release from prison, but was severely reprimanded by the
council for its attempt.
   By summer, the situation began to cool as a good harvest ripened in the fields
and the government undertook to alleviate the causes of unrest. A number of
