           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                          151

ot the king s unlimited power and used it as a weapon against the state itself.”23
The danger was that this naive, unquestioning confidence in the monarch’s
power and goodwill might suffer disillusionment, and thereby be undermined
for the future.
   By the mid-1780s peasant discontent found its natural leader. Christian Jen¬
sen Lofthuus was no ordinary peasant. He was born in Sorlandet, the illegitimate
child ot a socially prominent father and a local peasant woman. An enterprising
farmer near Lillesand, he branched out during the American war into shipbuild¬
ing, navigation, and trade in grain, timber, and other wares. These activities
took him as far as England and involved him in frequent unsuccessful litigation.
In 1782 he was tried and fined for violating the commercial privileges of the
town of Arendal; to meet his debts he was compelled to sell his farm. At every
turn he found his path blocked by that commercial and official class to which
he himself half belonged. His grievances made him the outspoken champion of
the peasantry.24 He was a classic case of the ambitious and frustrated outsider
as insurrectionary leader. Lofthuus quickly gained a hearing among the peas¬
antry in Sorlandet.
    In June 1786 Lofthuus appeared in Copenhagen, where he personally pre¬
 sented to Crown Prince Frederik a complaint against the royal bailiff of Nedenes
Amt, Andreas Dahl, his predecessor in office, and the burghers of Arendal,
 made “on behalf of the Fatherland" but signed only by himself. He thereupon
 returned to Sorlandet, implying that he was charged by the crown prince himself
to gather further evidence. The following month he was back in the capital, but
again more evidence was required. By early August he had ready two petitions
signed by 532 persons in thirteen parishes, including both landowning farmers
and rural poor, requesting a royal commission to investigate their grievances.25
When Bailiff Dahl threatened to take action against them, the peasants became
defiant. Lofthuus now traveled about armed and with a bodyguard. To accom¬
pany him to Copenhagen, he assembled representatives of each parish in
Nedenes Amt, plus several from neighboring Bratsberg Amt. In so doing, he
violated an ordinance from the time of the “Stril War” in 1765, forbidding
public meetings without official approval. At the end of September Bailiff Dahl
sent a detachment of soldiers to arrest Lofthuus, who managed to escape.
    This touched off a general insurrection. On 2 October several hundred armed
peasants marched into Lillesand, where they forced the bailiff to urge the stift-
amtmand in Christiansand to guarantee Lofthuus immunity from arrest. Faced
with this threatening situation, the latter granted Lofthuus and his deputation a
pass to travel to Copenhagen. On 17 October they departed, thirty-eight strong.
Informed of these developments, the state council resolved to arrest Lofthuus.
Since national units appeared untrustworthy, the stiftamtmand in Christiansand
was authorized to request regular troops from Denmark.
    Lofthuus and his deputation made their way through Sweden, where word
