 146       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

  label the reformers as the “German” party. They did not hesitate to attack the
 “foreign,” and even the high-aristocratic, character of their rivals. Yet national¬
  ity and aristocratic ranking were only tactical expedients obscuring the real
  struggle for power. Prince Friedrich Christian of Augustenburg and his personal
 rival, Prince Carl of Hesse, great lords thoroughly German in culture, asso¬
 ciated themselves with the “Danish” faction, whereas Henrik Stampe, Colbjorn-
 sen, and enlightened opinion generally, both inside and outside the government,
 identified with the Germans.’ The headstrong C. D. Reventlow became the
 particular bane of the conservatives, while F. C. Rosenkrantz was singled out
 by the friends of reform as their most implacable enemy. In December 1787 the
 funeral of the Copenhagen shipbuilder Henrik Gerner, an outspoken proponent
of reform, was turned into a great demonstration against Rosenkrantz. Feelings
 ran high, and most of the capital’s prominent intellectuals, including Christian
Colbjornsen, followed Gerner to his grave.9
     The ultimate decisions lay with the young crown prince, who was already
 committed firmly to reform. The conservatives were thus reduced to a futile
 rear-guard action. By the end of April 1788 the Great Agrarian Commission
completed its proposal for abolishing the stavnsband. By royal ordinance on 20
June 1788, the Danish peasantry was emancipated by stages. Male peasants
under fourteen and over thirty-six years of age, as well as those who completed
military service, were immediately free to leave their manors of origin; the old
restrictions remained in force for the rest until 1 January 1800. Conscription,
reduced from twelve to eight years, was to be handled by regimental recruiting
districts (Icegde), from which male peasants of military age might not move be¬
fore completion of service except by permission of the local recruiting officer.
Conscription was henceforth based on population, rather than productive farm¬
land.10
   Emancipation was thus to be carried out gradually, to avoid any sudden dis¬
ruption of the military establishment or of agriculture. Yet its import could not
be mistaken. Danish peasants were freed from their legal dependence upon the
lord of the manor. The proprietor lost his most effective means of coercion,
particularly for forcing tenancies on unfavorable terms upon reluctant tenants.
Henceforth competition and free contract would govern relations between them.
Revocation of the stavnsband of 1733 thus completed the task tenuously begun
with Frederik IV s abolition of vomedskab in 1702, and may illustrate the
degree to which the growth of bureaucratic government during the eighteenth
century had strengthened the crown.11
    The legal emancipation of the peasantry was widely recognized at the time,
at home and abroad, as the decisive breach in the old order. It effectively broke
the will of the opposition, allowing further reforms to follow in due course.
Already on 1 June Schack-Rathlou resigned from the council, soon followed by
Rosenkrantz. In February 1788 Guldberg had considered Denmark to be in a
