 144       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

council, proposing a royal commission to consider the whole question of the
Danish peasant’s legal status. The crown prince approved of this idea on 14 July,
to Reventlow’s boundless delight, as seen in the last chapter.
   The Great Agrarian Commission (den Store landbokommission) was decreed
on 25 August 1786. The government was solicitous to assemble a group of six¬
teen men that might command respect, not least among the proprietorial class,
who were directed to consider “everything which can aid the improvement of
peasant conditions, so far as is possible without interfering with any of the land¬
lord’s legal property rights and without hindering the landlord in the legal utili¬
zation of his manor.’’5
     While the commission included proprietors of conservative views, its major¬
 ity were government officials, who might be counted on to place national ahead
of private considerations. Its published proceedings do not reveal the role played
by its individual members. There is evidence of sharp conflicts and heated
exchanges. It soon became apparent, however, that its dominating personalities
were its chairman, C. D. Reventlow, and the generalprokuror, or juridical
counselor of the Danish Chancellery, Christian Colbjornsen, who served as its
secretary. The latter, a Norwegian, represented his homeland’s tradition of the
proud yeoman farmer, and he brought to bear his fiery indignation against the
degradation of the Danish peasant. They made a strange pair in many ways,
the high-spirited and sanguine Danish-German grand seigneur and the often
morose and pessimistic, but fiercely antiaristocratic Norwegian jurist; yet both
were equally dedicated supporters of a benevolent despotism to improve the lot
of the broader masses.
    Largely through Colbjornsen’s efforts and legal expertise the initial question
 was solved by royal ordinance on 8 June 1787, which protected the estates of
deceased manorial tenants through government appointed executors. It also pro¬
vided for impartial outside inspectors to determine the condition of a tenant farm
at the beginning of a lifetime lease and to confirm that it was sufficiently stocked
with draft animals, implements, and seed grain to permit the tenant both to work
his own tenancy and to fulfill his stipulated labor services on the demesne. Land¬
lords were thereby prevented from making unsubstantiated claims against a
deceased tenant’s estate. The right of the proprietor or his agent to inflict cor¬
poral punishment upon peasants performing labor service was severely cur¬
tailed. A second ordinance, issued the same day, prohibited the landlord from
reducing the size of a tenancy without the express consent of the tenant, except
under certain limited circumstances.6 By this time, the commission had mean¬
while begun to confront the central question of the peasant’s legal status: the
stavnsband.
   The royal instructions to the commission stated that landlord-tenant relations
were to be “based upon the rights and duties which after the abolition of
vornedskab ought to prevail between the proprietor and the peasant estate, and
