           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                           163

federation raised emotions to a fever pitch.58 In October Duchess Charlotta
wrote apprehensively in her diary: “The king's action in allowing the people
openly to express their views may unfortunately become fatal to him, for it is
always dangerous when the mass of the people is permitted to mix in the affairs
of state. . . . The masses are much too fickle and can as easily be persuaded
to oppose the king as to back him.”59
    Gustav III arrived in Stockholm from Finland on 1 September. He transferred
the city s regular garrison to Skane and confided its defense to its burgher mili¬
tia, which, the diarist Hochschild sniffed, “went to all the extremes to which
military enthusiasm can give rise when combined with the burgher spirit.”60
    The king thereupon departed for Dalarna, where with his sure sense of histor¬
ical drama he appealed to the local peasantry for their support on 14 September
at the same place in Mora where his ancestor, Gustav Vasa, had called upon
their ancestors to rise up against the hated Danes in 1520. The response was
overwhelming. The Dalecarlians raised a volunteer corps. Their example was
quickly followed in neighboring Halsingland and Varmland, as well as in
Gothenburg and Vasterbotten.61
    Alarm and consternation seized the nobility, among whom wild rumors cir¬
culated. It was widely feared that Gustav intended to place himself at the head
of a peasant host, which would hail him as an absolute monarch, and march on
 Stockholm. Many nobles hid their valuables and discretely left the capital.
 Duchess Charlotta believed “the least shift in the wind” might set off an upris¬
 ing of the Stockholm populace and “horrible atrocities.” Nils Rosen von Rosen-
stein feared all the excesses of the Gordon Riot of 1780 in London. There was
talk of bringing over insurgent units of the army from Finland to defend the
capital. Throughout the provinces the cry was raised to “break the gentry.”62
From Varmland, Baron Armfelt, in charge of peasant levies, wrote to the king
at the end of October, “The time has come when we are more embarrassed by
the zeal of your subjects than by the treason of the factious.” To his wife, Arm-
felt confided: “The bitterness among the lower orders against the nobility is so
great that one hardly dares to admit to being a baron or a count. They are talking
of nothing less than killing and uprooting the whole pack of them. God help us
out of this confusion!”63 Civil war seemed imminent.
    In view of Gustav Ill’s recent apprehensions about fomenting peasant upris¬
ings in Norway and the Baltic provinces, he clearly recognized his own appeal
to the broader masses in the fall of 1788 as a desperate and risky step. The night
before leaving Stockholm for Dalarna in September, he confided to Duchess
Charlotta that he had never felt so undecided about what he was going to do.64
Certainly he had no wish for bloodshed among his own subjects, for the ruin
of the nobility, or even for its further alienation from the crown. The peasant
and municipal levies unleashed even more frightening class antagonisms than
Gustav and his confidants might well have been prepared for. After receiving
