 162       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

 brought to the surface old class antagonisms. Gustav wrote from Abo on 27
 August, “I found, all along my way, clergy and burghers who made the greatest
 protestations of their inviolable attachment to me and to Sweden, and their hor¬
 ror over what is taking place.” By early October Stedingk reported that the
 insurgents’ efforts to gain popular support in Finland were getting nowhere; the
 common people accused them of cowardice and treason, and emissaries from
 villages came to Stedingk to assure him of their determination to defend their
 king.55
   The Finnish peasantry were particularly outspoken in their loyalty, and nu¬
merous parish meetings were held to condemn the treachery of the officers.
Behind their reaction there lay not only traditional antipathies toward Russians
and aristocrats but also the fear that the Finnish nobility would gladly accept
Russian overlordship to gain the same power over the peasantry as the nobles
of the Baltic provinces, to whom many were closely related. Thus the village
elders of Hollola parish stated:

   We, as simple peasants, cannot comprehend, nor do we wish to speak of
   that noble-minded attitude, which is alleged to have been behind this other¬
   wise unheard-of action, but consider it the most infamous step, for it was
   taken, so we have heard, for the purpose of forging chains for us and our
   children, that under the pretext of calling ourselves independent we there¬
   by become eternal slaves.56

  The antiaristocratic reaction in Finland was well summarized by Professor
Porthan of Abo University by the end of 1788:
   But if there has been any suspicion that the Finns have felt the least inclina¬
   tion for such a stupid and criminal project, my countrymen have suffered
   great injustice. Perhaps four to six noble crackpots, who hoped thereby to
   oppress their countrymen and reduce them to serfdom on the Livonian
   model, were actually attracted to such an idea, which certain emissaries
   have dared to present to their confidants; but so crude a trap has been re¬
   garded by all thinking persons with as much horror as contempt, and the
   common people never heard it discussed. Our common people hate the
   Russians and their protection. . . . Their confidence in the king and
   mistrust of the gentry is also so great that only the greatest force could
   create the least inclination for such an insane idea.57

   In Stockholm there was rioting against resigned officers who had returned
from Finland already on 1 August, before the beginning of the Anjala mutiny;
it was rumored that Police Master Henrik Liljensparre himself was its secret
instigator. Anonymous pamphlets appeared, accusing the officers—and by
implication the nobility as a whole—of cowardice and treason, which its victims
were likewise convinced were inspired from on high. News of the Anjala Con-
