 158      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

     On 9 August, a group of officers from the Finnish army corps met at Liikala,
 near the front, where they drafted a note to Empress Catherine II. In it, they
 declared the attack on Russia to be “in conflict with the rights of the nation,
 which we consider it no less incumbent upon us as citizens to protect than to
 fulfill our military duties,” and proclaimed it the sincere wish of “the whole
 nation, and especially of the Finnish [nation],” that “eternal peace and neigh¬
 borly relations” with Russia be established. As its “surest guarantee,” they
 made bold to suggest that Russia return those parts of Finland that had been lost
 in 1721 and 1743. They thereupon requested the empress’s “gracious views on
 how negotiations may properly be carried out with the representatives of the
 nation.” The nature of her reply would determine whether they could “lay down
 their arms and return to that tranquillity upon which the well-being of the realm
 depends,” or continue to bear them in a manner worthy of “honorable Swedish
 men when they know with certainty that it is for their fatherland that they defy
 perils and death.” The note was signed by seven officers, including General
 Carl Gustaf Armfelt, the elderly commander of the Finnish army corps.43
    While taking a desperate measure in the face of what appeared a dire threat,
the authors of the Liikala note sought to use this very threat to turn the tables
on their own king. Just as he was suspected of seeking to use the war to justify
an increase of his autocratic powers, they hoped, with the backing of the Russian
empress, to force Gustav back within the bounds of his own constitution or,
better yet, to restrict even further the authority it allowed him.
    Such an appeal was not without ample precedent in past decades, even in time
of hostilities. Repeatedly during the Era of Freedom, Swedish factions—
generally the Caps—had called upon Russia to bring pressures to bear against
their domestic rivals. During the unfortunate war of 1741-43 the army in the
field had on its own initiative sent an officer to Moscow to negotiate for peace,
who may have suggested to Empress Elizabeth the idea of appealing to the Finns
in 1742 to establish their autonomy under Russian protection. The concept of
the social contract and its violation by the monarch is implicit in the words and
actions of the insurgents, who included a number of G. M. Sprengtporten’s
disciples in the “independence” movement of recent years.44 It was one of the
leading separatists. Major Jan Anders Jagerhorn, who departed the same day to
deliver the Liikala note to Empress Catherine in St. Petersburg.
    When disquieting rumors reached Gustav III at Kymmenegard, he demanded
that his officers swear an oath of allegiance. In response, the insurgents, now
encamped at Anjala manor, prepared a declaration on 12-13 August, signed by
 112 officers. “Concerned as citizens for the sanctity of the form of government
to which we have sworn allegiance, the nation reserves to itself the right to judge
the necessity of offensive war,” it stated. “The conviction of the necessity of
war, which, among a people intended by Nature for freedom, creates fighting
men who cannot be defeated, has vanished.” The military situation was hope*
