           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                           159

less, the whole land is exposed and we have nothing but the generosity and
humanity of the victors to rely upon." The insurgents protested their basic
loyalty to the king in seeking themselves to mediate peace between him and the
Russian empress, which function they could more advantageously fulfdl than
any foreign power. It the empress should refuse to make peace, they would “not
leave their weapons while alive until the peace and security of the fatherland
were assured.’’45
    An unsigned copy of the declaration was sent to Gustav while it was widely
circulated to other Finnish and Swedish military units and among the nobility
at large. Thus was born the so-called Anjala Confederation, the cutting edge of
the aristocratic resurgence throughout the monarchy.46
    Arriving in the Russian capital. Major Jagerhorn delivered the Liikala note
and conferred with the empress, with Russian officials, and with Sprengtporten.
All quickly seized upon the opportunity the Finnish officers’ mutiny and its
appeal to St. Petersburg seemed to offer for separating Finland from Sweden and
making it a Russian protectorate, encouraged by Jagerhorn on his own initia¬
tive.47 Catherine II at length gave Jagerhorn a reply to take back to his confeder¬
ates. Vaguely formulated and prudently unsigned, it urged the Finns to convene
a “representative body’’ of their own, which could give “lawful sanction’’ to
their decisions and which the Russian commanding general would aid and sup¬
port. Only then might the empress be able to give expression to the “noble and
benevolent sentiments she holds for the Finnish nation.’’ These sentiments are
set forth more clearly in her instructions to General Musin-Pushkin in Viborg,
in which she spoke of an autonomous Finland under her own protection.48 Like
Empress Elizabeth’s manifesto of 1742, Catherine II’s reply to the Liikala note
seems intended as a trial balloon to determine exactly how far the Finns them¬
selves were prepared to go in breaking with Sweden.
    With his army paralyzed by mutiny and his fleet now blockaded by the Rus¬
sians at Sveaborg, Gustav III was in desperate straits. He appealed secretly to
France, but also to Britain, Prussia, and even Denmark to mediate peace with
Catherine II. He even contemplated abdication. In the midst of this situation, he
received what should have been the crowning blow, the news that Denmark
intended to intervene militarily in support of its Russian ally. It produced just
the opposite effect, and Gustav is supposed to have exclaimed, “I am saved!”49
The Danish declaration gave him the opportunity to leave Finland and appeal
to the broader masses of his subjects to rally against the nation’s enemies,
external and internal. By late August he was back in Stockholm.

    Nothing could have been less welcome to Copenhagen than a war between
Sweden and Russia. Count Bernstorff had hoped that Gustav III might be re¬
strained by his constitution, but once he attacked Russia there was no question
that Denmark would have to come to its aid. Only the Russian alliance could
