 160      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

prevent the eventual loss of Norway to the Swedes. Yet Russia’s very success
against Sweden could force Copenhagen into still greater dependence upon St.
Petersburg. The greatest danger was indeed that the Russians might succeed in
taking Finland, finally removing their main source of contention with Sweden
and hence their basic motive for an alliance with Denmark.
   Involvement in the war threatened moreover to play havoc with internal
reform. Available funds would have to be diverted to military needs, which
meanwhile would make impossible the economies necessary for Ernst Schim-
melmann's reform of the currency and state finances. In Norway the internal sit¬
uation was still disquieting.
    All these factors affected the nature and extent of Danish support for Russia.
The crown prince, then visiting Norway, was all for throwing the monarchy’s
full military strength—40,000 men and forty-six warships—into the fray and
seeking from Russia both subsidies and the guarantee of any conquests from
Sweden. Bernstorff was determined to restrict participation to the bare minimum
required under the Russian alliance: 12,000 men and fifteen warships. Since
these were stipulated as an auxiliary force, Denmark need not formally declare
war on Sweden. He justified this approach on the grounds that both Britain and
Prussia seemed likely to intervene if the odds against Sweden should become too
great.
   It was Bernstorff’s sober view that prevailed, in accord with the mood of the
country. At a time when public opinion was coming to play a growing role in
public affairs, there was practically no reflection of anti-Swedish sentiment in
Denmark or Norway. Minerva could well write, “Every honest man in all of
Scandinavia wishes for peace between Denmark and Sweden.’’ The Danish gov¬
ernment did its best to assure the Swedes that it acted out of necessity and hoped
for the speedy return of good relations.50
    Given its limited scale, the Danish diversionary action would have to be
mounted from Norway, making use of the Norwegian part of the army, which
in lecent years had been badly neglected. Arriving to take command in early
September 1788, Prince Carl of Hesse found “everything in complete chaos.’’
The year before, during the peasant uprising, the government had hesitated to
strengthen the Norwegian army out of concern over its dependability and had
sent Prince Carl on only a short visit, lest as a prince of the blood he be wel¬
comed as a rival focus of loyalty.51 Nonetheless, by 24 September, after hectic
preparations, Prince Carl crossed the Swedish border at the head of 10,000
Norwegian troops and advanced cautiously on Gothenburg. The Swedes were
even less prepared, with only some 4,000 poorly equipped troops in that sector.
On 29 September, the Norwegians encircled and took prisoner a force of 806
Swedes and ten cannon at Kvistrum.
  The Danish-Norwegian intervention had scarcely gotten underway when it
was brought to an abrupt halt. Following his return from Finland, Gustav III
