 154      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

teenth and into the twentieth century have advanced the status of their class
within Norwegian society— one of the dominating themes of their nation’s recent
history —as well as its martyr.
    There nonetheless remains an underlying ambivalence about the Lofthuus
movement. On the one hand, it was profoundly conservative, the attempt to
protect an ancient way of life against outside encroachments. On the other, it
sought to break out of the legal constraints that restricted the peasantry to that
very way of life by denying them access to more dynamic and profitable fields
of activity. This dichotomy, too, would remain characteristic of the Norwegian
peasant movement of coming generations, as it surely is of peasant movements
in general.

    From Stockholm, Gustav III followed these developments with keen interest.
A Swedish informant in Norway wrote to him early in 1787 that 3,000 Norwe¬
gian peasants were ready to put themselves at the disposal of the Swedish king.
Similar rumors in official circles in Norway and in Copenhagen itself did noth¬
ing to still the fears of the Danish government. In May 1787 Gustav III estab¬
lished a Swedish consul general in Christiania; it was well understood that his
real purpose was espionage and contact with malcontents in Norway.30
    Gustav had, however, determined two years before that Norway would have
to be taken “in Copenhagen,” that is, through the military defeat of Denmark,
which would prevent the “republican spirit” behind an anti-Danish uprising in
Norway from contaminating Sweden itself.31 But Denmark could only be beaten
if detached from its ally, Russia.
    By the spring of 1787 it was this which above all concerned Gustav III. Fol¬
lowing his coup of 1772, he had concentrated upon winning his cousin Catherine
II’s goodwill, largely to wean her away from her Danish commitment. By 1784
this attempt had clearly failed. The alternative would be to weaken Russia
through military defeat, removing the threat of Russian intervention in Sweden’s
internal affairs, and clearing the way for a showdown with Denmark and the
annexation of Norway, thereby breaking Sweden’s encirclement.
    During the Crimean crisis of 1783-84, Gustav had vainly hoped for a new
Russian war with Turkey. By 1787, such a conflict was clearly imminent.
Gustav thus envisioned an opportunity to strike at Russia while the bulk of its
forces were engaged against the Turks far to the south.
   Gustav was no less mindful of internal considerations. The Riksdag of 1786
had revealed the extent of opposition among the Swedish and Finnish aristoc¬
racy. An audacious and successful campaign against the hereditary foe might
once again rally the nobility around their king, while giving him the chance to
increase his powers. To J. A. Ehrenstrom, Gustav complained in the fall of 1787
that he had been young and inexperienced when he had adopted the constitution
of 1772, which now caused “embarrassments.” His sister-in-law, Duchess
