 156      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

 in rebellion, as much against their own masters as against Russian overlordship,
 in expectation of their freedom. Nonetheless, during the war that followed,
 Gustav never attempted to strike at Russia by this means, damaging as it might
 have been. Other strategic considerations aside, he was apparently no more pre¬
 pared to stir up the peasantry of the Baltic provinces—close to his own domains
 —than he was in Norway, for fear of repercussions in Sweden and Finland.35
    At the end of 1787 Gustav also sent Lars von Engestrom to Warsaw to seek
to mobilize Polish support against the Russians and to encourage rebellion in the
former Polish lands lost to Russia in 1772.36 He thus pursued the time-honored
ideal of a Swedish-Polish-Turkish common front against the Muscovite.
    Thanks largely to reforms since 1772, Gustav was meanwhile able to raise
forces totaling some 40,000 men, the largest thus far assembled by the Swedish
monarchy. Colonel Toll worked out a plan of attack. Following the spring thaw,
the Russian Baltic fleet was expected to depart for operations against the Turks
in the Mediterranean. The Swedes would then land their main force near St.
Petersburg, which it would seize before that city’s defenses could be orga¬
nized.37 The king justified his warlike preparations by claiming a threat from
Russia, but the Russians avoided provocation and few, at home or abroad, were
misled by Gustav’s allegations. Disquieting reports meanwhile came in regard¬
ing the inadequacies of the Swedish military dispositions, particularly in muni¬
tions and supplies.
     Gustav III embarked for Finland with his fleet in mid-June 1788, “as though
 leaving for a festivity,” as the younger Fersen described it. “In a word,” the
 king wrote to Baron Armfelt, “it is like 1772,” sanguine in the belief that his
 great enterprise was restoring social harmony and devotion to the crown. It was
 meanwhile essential to Gustav that Russia appear the aggressor, since his consti¬
 tution of 1772 prohibited a war of aggression without the consent of the Estates,
 and since this might also provide Denmark with a pretext for remaining
 neutral.38 On 28 June a border incident at Puumala provided the necessary pro¬
 vocation; later it was claimed that it had been staged by Finnish soldiers dis¬
guised as Russians. Gustav thereupon sent off an impossible ultimatum to St.
 Petersburg, demanding the return “for ever” of those parts of Finnish Karelia
ceded to Russia in 1721 and 1743, the dismantling of the Russian Baltic fleet,
and Swedish mediation in the Turkish war. It was also rumored that Gustav
hoped to regain the Baltic provinces, even including St. Petersburg itself, and
round out Finland to the White Sea.39 The ultimatum was delivered on 12 July;
already on 19 June the Swedes attacked Nyslott (Savonlinna) in Russian Finland.
    The success of the Swedish war plan depended upon surprise and speed.
Gustav opened the campaign with some 25,000 troops in Finland, as opposed
to an enemy force of only about 15,000 in Ingria and Russian Finland.40 The
attack caused great alarm in St. Petersburg. Most of the Russian Baltic fleet,
however, was still at Kronstadt, barring a landing near the Russian capital. On
