           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                               155

Hedvig Elisabeth Charlotta, reported him to say, about the same time: “The
Swedes seem to have tired of a mild and peaceful regime and to long for stricter
treatment. It we had a war, they might become more tractable. And who knows
whether they may not someday have their way?’’32
    That fall the anticipated war broke out between Russia and Turkey. Gustav
now sought support from France, Great Britain, Prussia, and the Ottoman Porte.
Fiance was strongly opposed to any Swedish aggression. Britain and Prussia,
while not anxious to see Russia overwhelm Turkey, remained noncommittal.
Only the Porte promised subsidies, which in the end were never paid.
    Denmark-Norway was technically bound to its defensive alliance with Rus¬
sia. Yet it seemed evident that Copenhagen, deeply involved in internal reform
and still anxious about the volatile situation in Norway, would gladly avoid
involvement. Bernstorff had, moreover, little desire to see Denmark’s over-
mighty ally strengthened still further. In October 1787, Gustav III paid a sur¬
prise visit to Copenhagen, where he sought a guarantee of Danish neutrality in
the event of a Swedish-Russian conflict. It was to no avail: Bernstorff was pre¬
pared to do anything possible to improve relations with Sweden-anything that
did not violate Denmark’s treaty obligations to Russia.33
   In another sense, Gustav's visit to Copenhagen was of greater import, for it
revealed the extent to which old enmities had given way to a new sense of a com¬
mon Scandinavian identity, especially within intellectual circles in the Danish
capital. Minerrn wrote:

   Surely it is a joyful and captivating sight for every Scandinavian to see the
   peoples of the three kingdoms, represented by their monarchs, wander
   together in friendship, hand in hand. What more beautiful, what symbol
   more striking to the senses of the concord, friendship, and good under¬
   standing so longed-for between these nations, which proximity, common
   origins, common interests, language, customs, which everything unites!34

    Thus although Gustav did not obtain the assurance he sought, he felt little
threat from Denmark-Norway. He was determined to seize the opportunity to
attack Russia and meanwhile turned to other expedients. In 1783 Russian admin¬
istrative and judicial reforms in the Baltic provinces had aroused much resent¬
ment among the Baltic German nobility, a situation Gustav instructed his
minister in St. Petersburg to watch closely already in the fall of 1786. Now in
the fall of 1787 he sent J. A. Ehrenstrom on an ostensibly private visit to Livonia
and Estonia, not only to sound opinion but to seek to stir up a noble revolt. Both
Ehrenstrom and the Swedish minister in St. Petersburg reported much discontent
among the Baltic nobility but put no faith in their support, since they were too
dependent upon Russian state service and paralyzed by the fear of their own
serfs, whom Ehrenstrom believed to be “devoted heart and soul to Sweden.’’
At the appearance of the first Swedish troops, he reported, the latter would rise
