           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                              157

17 July, the two fleets met near the island of Hogland (Suursaari) in the Finnish
Gulf. The Swedes, under Duke Carl of Sodermanland, might have won a deci¬
sive victory had they not run short of ammunition. As it was, the battle ended
in a draw, and the landing on the Ingrian coast had to be abandoned.
   The only alternative was now to advance overland against the Russian capital.
The Karelian Isthmus was as yet only lightly defended, but the terrain was
rugged and Swedish logistical deficiencies began to make themselves felt. At the
beginning of August, Gustav attacked the Russian border fortress of Fredriks-
hamn (Hamina), but the operations were ineptly handled and soon broken off.41
The campaign thus seemed to have reached a stalemate when events took a new
and alarming turn: Gustav was confronted by the mutiny of a large part of his
Finnish officer corps.
   For months prospects of war had caused growing concern in Sweden and Fin¬
land. Although the council had gone along with the king’s demand for defensive
measures, it was strongly opposed to any thought of an offensive war. Yet
through the boastful indiscretion of Gustav’s favorites, his true intentions soon
became an open secret.
     It was widely feared that the time was now long past when Sweden could hope
 to stand up against the Russian colossus, even together with the Turks. More¬
 over, to those in the know it was evident that military preparedness was inade¬
 quate, despite recent reforms. There was meanwhile widespread mistrust in
 aristocratic circles of the king’s despotic intentions. In his memoirs, the elder
 Count Fersen would later write: “The preparations for this monstrous war plan
 were not undertaken against Russia alone, but equally against the Estates of the
 realm, against the constitution, and council; in short, for the furtherance of abso¬
 lutism.’’ It was rumored that Gustav planned, upon arrival with his army in Fin¬
 land, to hold a surprise Riksdag in Abo to change the constitution. Duchess
 Charlotta was shocked in June to hear it suggested in society that the king’s death
 would be the nation’s only salvation. Like others, she feared “the greatest mis¬
fortunes.’’42 Gustav’s pretense of Russian aggression seemed a clumsy and cyn¬
 ical charade; there could be no mistaking the king’s deliberate violation of his
own constitution of 1772.
    Opposition and alarm were greatest among the Finnish nobility, particularly
those from the manorial region in the southeast, adjoining the Russian border,
who were strongly represented in the officer corps. As noblemen, officers, and
Finns, they had long held mounting grievances against the king for economic,
constitutional, and military reasons, as has been seen. Although the rather vague
and ambiguous autonomist movement seems to have declined somewhat follow¬
ing G. M. Sprengtporten’s departure for Russia in 1786, it quickly revived with
the outbreak of Gustav Ill’s unconstitutional and poorly prepared war, and the
peril to which it exposed Finland. Numerous officers resigned their commis¬
sions and went home even before the fiasco at Fredrikshamn.
