           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            161

whipped up Swedish resentment against Danish perfidy and mobilized fresh
forces, with which he hastened to the relief of Gothenburg. More important,
Denmark’s action produced the very reaction that both Bernstorff and Gustav
III had anticipated: the intervention of Britain and Prussia. Thus Gustav’s opti¬
mistic calculations proved largely justified. The initiative came from the British
minister in Copenhagen, Hugh Elliott. Acting without the prior knowledge of
his government and backed by his Prussian colleague, he demanded that Den¬
mark cease hostilities or face British and Prussian military intervention. Already
by 8 October the two ministers mediated an armistice and the withdrawal of the
Norwegian force from Swedish territory. The Russians were understandably
indignant but impressed with the threat from London and Berlin. By April 1789
Catherine II notified Copenhagen that she would not demand further military
support, and in July Denmark declared its neutrality for the rest of the war.52
    From the strategic viewpoint, Denmark-Norway’s brief participation was
only a minor episode in the war. Indeed, its greatest effect was to arouse a war¬
like spirit in Sweden that had heretofore been lacking. Its consequences for the
Danish monarchy were meanwhile far from negligible. Although it helped
revive Norwegian loyalty following the recent troubles, Gustav III and the
Swedes became more hostile to Denmark than ever before and more convinced
of the ultimate necessity of seizing Norway, where Gustav continued to seek
every opportunity to fish in troubled waters. Worst of all, despite a Russian sub¬
sidy of a half-million rigsdaler, the financial burden of the war wrecked Schim-
melmann’s carefully constructed program of financial reform. The opportunity
was lost which would thereafter never be regained before Denmark’s state
finances finally collapsed in 1813. The consequences would be far-reaching. In
the short run the financial strain set back the impetus of social and economic
reform. Faced with an extraordinary war levy, the Ritterschaft in Schleswig-
Holstein again demanded recognition of its special corporate status within the
state.53

    Far more than the Danish-Norwegian attack, however, the behavior of the
officers in Finland aroused a storm of indignation among the broader masses of
Gustav Ill’s realm. On 29 August Colonel Curt von Stedingk wrote to the king
that “the old project of M. de Sprengtporten, to make Finland a republic,’’ was
gaining ground among his Finnish colleagues. “I see only one way. Sire, to stop
the progress of this evil,’’ he urged, “that is to place yourself at the head of the
Finnish people. . . . Your Majesty will have all of the people for you. The
gentry will have to give in.”54
    The idea can hardly have been a novel one to Gustav III; since the war had
failed to unify the nation, he would have to revert to his strategy following the
Riksdag of 1786, of playing the lower orders off against the aristocracy. Even
before he left Finland there was ample evidence that the officers’ mutiny had
