            ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            173

theory, although it had long lacked a vigorous and reform-minded autocrat.
Crown Prince Frederik, assisted by exceptionally able advisers and an effective
bureaucracy, was thus in a position to undertake the reshaping of society within
the kingdom by royal decree. Gustav III was—and even after February 1789
remained in principle a constitutional monarch. Yet the war and the aristocratic
revolt in 1788 allowed him in the spring of 1789 to exercise a Caesarian democ¬
racy by imposing reform from above. Under Scandinavian conditions at that
time, so basic a restructuring of society could scarcely have proceeded either as
far or as rapidly as it did had it not been mandated by an enlightened des¬
potism.90
    For all the alarms and excursions of these years, the forces were so unevenly
balanced that this revolution could be carried out virtually without bloodshed.
Its principal victims at the time were the Norwegian peasant Lofthuus, chained
to his rock in Akershus fortress in Christiania, and the Finnish nobleman Has-
tesko, beheaded in Stockholm in 1790, who in themselves represent the anti¬
theses in the great social conflict.
     Georges Lefebvre has argued—building upon Alexis de Tocqueville—that the
 ideals of liberty and “equality” belonged before 1789 to different and largely
 antithetical political traditions, and that these only became linked in the French
 Revolution because Louis XVI elected to back the aristocracy in the defense of
 corporate privilege. The Third Estate thus had to win freedom from royal des¬
 potism to gain its basic goal of social equality.91 In Scandinavia the crown placed
 itself at the head of the nonnoble orders and carried out social reforms that satis¬
 fied—in the main—their long-standing aspirations. The Nordic lands thus under¬
 went a “revolution of equality,” but not yet of political “liberty,” whose aristo¬
 cratic defenders were struck down by the alliance of crown and commonality.
    Even so, the great reforms of 1786-89 did not yet abolish privilege as such.
 For this, the old traditions of the corporate society remained too deeply rooted,
as they had been in 1770-72. What they allowed was the leveling upward of the
privileges of the nonnoble orders. Eino Jutikkala has pointed to the paradox that
the Swedish and Finnish peasantry emerged in 1789 as a “fully formed Estate,”
socially as well as politically, at the very time the old Estates system was break¬
ing down at its upper levels, even though the privileges thus gained would ulti¬
mately clear the way for the peasant’s full integration into national life. The
Swedish Act of Union and declaration of peasant rights, like the abolition of the
Danish stavnsband, in this respect differed fundamentally from the French
Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, proclaimed a half a year later,
with which it has naturally been compared.92
    Still, nowhere in the Western world was the Old Regime as radically trans¬
formed, before the coming of the French Revolution, as in the Nordic lands. In
Denmark-Norway, the strong hand of government created conditions necessary
for the social and economic advancement of the mass of the people, particularly
