           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            171

of 1789 did not make Gustav a complete autocrat. Nor was it to remain in force
for more than a generation in Sweden. Yet for the sake of this incomplete and
ultimately transitory concentration of power, Gustav had resorted to drastic and
unlawful means when—in contrast to Louis XVI in the months that followed—he
deliberately leveled those corporate privileges that underlay the whole aristo¬
cratic way of life he himselt loved so dearly, to win the support of his common
subjects. In the end it was this expedient, rather than the end he sought to gain
by it, that proved his most enduring accomplishment in the broader perspectives
of Swedish and Finnish history. Gustav III had gone full circle: by his coup in
1772, he had prevented the Younger Caps from leveling privileges; by his coup
in 1789, he in effect finally fulfilled their program.86
   In the process he deepened the chasm that now separated him from those
formerly closest to him. "The true situation can no longer be concealed,” his
own sister-in-law. Duchess Charlotta, wrote in her diary in February 1789, with
a sense of historical drama worthy of Gustav himself:

   We live in a time of general dissolution and lawlessness. Force and injus¬
   tice possess the power while innocence vainly cries out for vengeance, a
   revenge which unfortunately will probably come too late, when the king¬
   dom has been brought to ruin and thousands are reduced to misery. .
   The history of no time can show the counterpart to the horrors I shall now
   reveal. Ye kings and princes, who shall one day read this, tremble and
   refuse to take as your example him, who for all time must remain an object
   of dread and abomination, not only for his own land but for the whole
   world.87

Although the duchess would soon be deploring even greater "horrors” in
France, the struggle between the king and the aristocracy in Sweden was by no
means over.


     The years 1786-89 were a climactic period in the Nordic lands, marked by
reform, revolt, and war. Between them, obvious similarities and contrasts sug¬
gest themselves. There were insurrections in both Norway and Finland, sub¬
sidiary domains with particular grievances. Yet in Norway there took place a
peasant uprising deriving from an appeal to the autocrat himself, against local
conditions and servants of the crown, with social—although not political—impli¬
cations that pointed toward the future. In Finland it was aristocratic holders of
the king’s own commission who rebelled in the name of constitutional rights
against the attempted autocracy of their monarch, in a way that in essence looked
backward socially—but forward politically. Yet this outward contrast can be
misleading, for the officers’ mutiny in Finland was significant in the context of
its time not only in itself, but because of the much greater popular reaction that
