           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            165

they sought individually to make their peace with the king. The Sprengtportians
and the Russians had overplayed their hand, and they now turned to rash expedi¬
ents. In December a few local gentry held a “diet” at Paaso manor on the
border, at which they declared Finland’s independence, elected Sprengtporten
their leader, and appealed to Catherine II for armed support.69
   The same month, Gustav III issued a proclamation to the Finns, pointing to
the sad fates of Poland, Courland, and the Crimea, “which the promise of an
illusory independence have misled into helplessness, deprivation, and mis¬
ery.   70 One may indeed wonder what might have become of Finland had it
fallen under Catherine II's suzerainty in 1788, rather than under Alexander I’s
twenty years later.
   By the turn of the year, Gustav III was able to arrest most of the Anjala con¬
federates. Only a few dedicated Sprengtportians, including Jagerhorn, made
good their escape to Russia, thereby branding their movement all the more
clearly as a foreign intrigue.71 After two years of hearings, the supreme military
tribunal sentenced to death eighty-seven officers, who appealed to the king’s
mercy. All were pardoned but one, who was to serve as an example. But the
execution of Colonel J. H. Hastesko in 1790 left a continuing legacy of bit¬
terness.
   On 8 December 1788 Gustav III at last announced the convening of the
Estates at the end of January. To fight the Russian war he had incurred large
debts, and a new campaigning season was approaching. There was no way out
of a riksdag to obtain the necessary funds. But circumstances had radically
changed since the previous summer. The enemy was in winter quarters; the Fin¬
nish insurgents were disconcerted and their leaders arrested; the aristocratic
opposition was in ill repute. Rather than forcing a humiliating peace and consti¬
tutional restraints, a riksdag could now strengthen the nation’s defenses and the
king himself. If need be, it could provide the opportunity to crush the opposition.
   The announcement, according to Duchess Charlotta, came like a “bolt out
of the blue.” It was feared in aristocratic circles that Gustav intended to seize
absolute power, backed by the lower classes.72 The rumor circulated that he had
deliberately provoked the Anjala conspiracy to flush his opponents into the open
and brand them with treason. In January 1789 R. F. Hochschild recognized once
again the social tensions of the Riksdag of 1771-72:

   In connection with the approaching Riksdag there arose those questions of
  the rights of the other estates in relation to those of the nobility, which
  have ever been so unfortunate for Sweden. They are talking about the right
  of commoners to hold all official positions, the leveling of those advan¬
  tages which manors and noble properties enjoy as opposed to other types
  of land, and similar matters, based upon and sanctioned by the privileges
  that have always existed, and this can only serve to sow the seeds of dis¬
  cord, with consequences ever perilous for this country.
