 172      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

 it aroused. It is this staunchly royalist and socially egalitarian movement in Swe¬
den and Finland, firmly rooted in the radical traditions of the later 1760s and
early 1770s, that bears analogy with the peasant insurrection in Norway.
     The Northern war that broke out in 1788 has rightly been regarded as a
crucial event in the history of the Swedish-Finnish monarchy. Aside from its
 international consequences, it led, through noble revolt and popular reaction, to
the Act of Union and Security in February 1789. In Sweden-Finland war thus
opened the way to epoch-making reforms. In Denmark-Norway, it had the con¬
trary effect of slowing the impetus of a vigorous reform movement already
underway and weakening its economic foundations for the future.
     Events in Scandinavia during these years reflect developments elsewhere in
the Western world. The Lofthuus movement in Norway recalls various other
peasant uprisings in Europe at that time. Yet, occurring in one of the few socie¬
ties in Europe that was no longer aristocratic in the traditional sense, it was
directed not against noble landowners but against middle-class merchants and
public officials. Halvdan Koht has compared it with Shay’s Rebellion, which at
that very time was taking place in rural Massachusetts.88 In some ways, too, it
would seem to anticipate the antiurban and antibureaucratic rebellion in the
Vendee in republican France a few years later.
    The Anjala Confederation meanwhile provides a classic example of the later
eighteenth-century revolte nobiliaire, recalling reactions in defense of traditional
liberties in, among other places, the Habsburg lands and in France during the
last years of the Old Regime, especially after the convening of the Assembly of
Notables in February 1787. The Anjala Confederation calls to mind the “con¬
federations” of the contemporary Polish Republic, with their appeals to Russia
to uphold Poland’s ancient constitutional rights, such as the Confederation of
Bar of 1768 and the later Confederation of Targowica of 1792.89
    By the time the revolution—properly speaking—began in France during the
late spring of 1789, Scandinavia had in effect already undergone its revolution.
Here a number of later developments in France were already anticipated: royal
reform in the name of efficiency, aristocratic reaction in the name of liberty,
popular counterreaction in the name of equality. There was foreign war, the
appeal by the defenders of the old order for help from abroad and by their adver¬
saries to “la patrie en danger,” a kind of “national guard,” even the beginnings
of a “levee en masse” the issuance of “assignats” of a type, the radicalization
of expectancies, the clamor for the punishment of “aristocrats” and “traitors,”
and-as suggested-something like a “Vendeean” uprising.
    Not all of these developments occurred throughout Scandinavia; they are
most notable in Sweden-Finland. Nor did they even there follow what would
later come to be regarded as the classic pattern and sequence of the French Revo¬
lution. Above all, the epochal reforms of 1786-89 in the Nordic lands were the
work of the monarchs themselves. Denmark-Norway was an autocracy in
