 164      ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89


 a heartening demonstration of patriotism and loyalty from them, Gustav made
 as little use of the volunteer corps as possible. Most never left their home par¬
 ishes. The aristocracy, meanwhile, could not but be impressed with its isolated
 and precarious position.
   At the same time the king’s situation in Finland improved. Even before
 returning to Sweden, Gustav III had recognized that the Anjala Confederation
 imposed a de facto armistice on the Finnish front, since St. Petersburg, hard-
pressed by the Turkish war, would naturally seek to maintain the goodwill and
cooperation of the insurgents.65 He could thus leave the command in Finland to
his brother, Duke Carl, who concluded a formal armistice. When the campaign¬
ing season was over by October, he sent most of his units home on winter leave,
thereby dispersing them.
   Through the late summer and into the fall of 1788, the Anjala confederates
vigorously propagated their views within the Finnish and Swedish officer corps
and the nobility at large. Their handwritten pamphlets strongly stress concepts
of natural law and the social contract. “One must distinguish between legal and
natural rights,” reasoned “a Patriot.” A “Finnish Officer” stated that since the
Estates could only meet at the king's pleasure, the army

   considered the rights of humanity and regarded with contempt those
   prejudices which deify the persons of kings and thus revere their whims,
   even their vices, and weigh them against the nation’s will, rights, and con¬
   sideration for the well-being of posterity. It found the king to be the first
   servant of the nation, and that his interest may thus never be other than
   society s, still less in conflict with it. . . . When the foundations of
   government are shaken, he does best who takes the strongest action to
   restore them. To condemn such action as illegal is to condemn the law it¬
   self, which has not provided any means to uphold the nation’s rights.66

Numerous constitutional projects were discussed, aimed at limiting arbitrary
power, securing the position of the bureaucracy and of regular procedures,
largely inspired by the old constitution of 1720.67
   By September the Anjala insurrection was at its height and probably had the
support of most of the army and naval officers in Finland.68 The duke himself
was persuaded to back the demand for a riksdag. Yet at that very time, the con¬
federation began to break down under its own internal contradictions. The
majority of its adherents sought only what the Liikala note called for: peace, a
riksdag, and the strengthening of the constitution; at most they also desired some
kind of special status for Finland under the existing monarchy. Catherine II’s
reply to the Liikala note and the intrigues of Sprengtporten and his confidants
which followed, however, revealed that they had been manipulated into working
toward Finland’s complete separation from Sweden. For most, including old
General Armfelt, this realization was both disillusioning and humiliating, and
