170       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89


National Debt Office was empowered to raise foreign loans and issue bills of
credit (kreditsedlar) in the form of interest-bearing bonds, limited “to begin
with” to 5-600,000 riksdaler and to be redeemed within one or two years. The
king bound himself to incur no further debts without the consent of the Estates.
   Following hard upon the triumph of the Act of Union, this finance plan re¬
quired substantial concessions from Gustav III. The precedent was set that bud¬
getary matters could no longer be dealt with in privileged secrecy but were the
legitimate concern of the entire Riksdag, hence of the nation as a whole. The
Estates emerged with greater financial power than ever before.
   Only with great difficulty could the Noble Estate be persuaded to join the
others in accepting the finance plan. It now prepared to fight a last-ditch battle
over the duration of the annual subsidy to the crown. The Nobles demanded that
this be granted for two years only, to compel the king to hold a riksdag upon
its expiration, and on this matter it began to gain some hearing in the other
Estates. Gustav countered by invoking his constitutional right to convene the
Estates at his own pleasure and insisted that the success of the finance plan
required a grant of unrestricted duration. The Clergy and Burghers accepted,
after some debate, a subsidy to continue “until the next riksdag” When the
Peasants hesitated over the size of their share of the proposed taxation, the king
summoned them to the royal palace and harangued them into acceptance.
   On 27 April Gustav appeared at the House of the Nobility and claimed his
seat under the shield of the Vasa family. He appealed for passage of the grant
for an unlimited period as essential to the nation’s security. On the square out¬
side a large crowd gathered in an ugly mood, once again inspired, it was aver¬
red, by Police Master Liljensparre. Hochschild, and surely others as well,
feared a “massacre” if the Noble Estate defied the king’s demand—although he
scoffed afterward, “that miserable rabble could easily have been dispersed by
a few courageous souls.”84 In this ominous atmosphere Gustav called for an
immediate vote by acclaim, which was answered by -mingled “yeas” and
“nays,” upon which the king declared the motion passed. When he departed,
the crowd outside cheered and broke up.
  The day after, on 28 April, the Riksdag of 1789 was formally dissolved and
the last of the detained noblemen were released, only a week before the French
Estates-General were to convene at Versailles. Gustav III had gained an impres¬
sive victory over his adversaries. “Without money, without support, with an
inactive fleet and a half mutinous army,    Count Adolf Ludvig Hamilton, one
of his bitterest opponents, later wrote, “he had the whole North against him—
Russia, Denmark, and Sweden. In a few months the Danish attack was frus¬
trated, Russia still on the defensive, and Sweden ... in chains at Gustav’s
feet.”85
  Despite the claims of his enemies, however, the Act of Union and Security
