           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            169

property as noble proprietors exercised over their manorial tenancies. They
were thus finally freed from surviving restrictions affecting their forest, hunting,
and fishing rights, the free sale of their property, and their employment of farm
laborers. The Act of Union opened up for purchase by commoners most noble
land, in the form of outlying manorial tenancies (frdlse strogods). In a separate
ordinance on 21 February, the king confirmed hereditary tenure for peasant
tenants of the crown and restored to them the right and first option of acquiring
their tenancies through freehold purchase, first granted in 1723, which he him¬
self had suspended in 1773. These provisions would lead to an impressive rise
in peasant freeholding and hence in the status and prosperity of the peasantry
in Sweden and Finland by the early years of the nineteenth century.81
   The deceptively moderate language of the Act of Union, its qualifying clauses
regarding both land and office, as well as the confirmation of all privileges not
affected therein, reflect Gustav s persistent hope that while stripping them of
their remaining power, he might still in time reconcile the nobles. The act none¬
theless satisfied long-standing demands of the Clerical and Burgher Estates for
a career open to talents in the service of the state. The remaining restrictions
concerning the highest offices in effect meant little, for the king could—and sub¬
sequently did—ennoble bureaucrats of common birth to qualify them for such
positions.
   Additional concessions to the Clerical and Burgher Estates further rewarded
them for their support, even at the cost of compromising to a degree the king’s
administrative freedom under the Act of Union itself and his earlier economic
liberalism. Gustav made assurances of the security of tenure for clergymen and
lower functionaries, and permitted the reestablishment of certain town and guild
monopolies in trade and manufacture; nevertheless the government thereafter
did little to fulfill these promises.82
   The House of the Nobility stood firm in its rejection of the Act of Union, on
valid legal grounds. Its passage had flagrantly violated the constitution of 1772
in three ways: it had not been submitted to the council in advance; it had been
passed in plenary session immediately following its proposal; and it affected the
privileges of one Estate without its own concurrance.83 In the end the king's
handpicked lantmarskalk was induced to sign the act on behalf of the Nobility,
which did not, however, accept it formally until the Riksdag of 1800.
   Gustav III now turned to the financial problem. He revealed to the Secret
Committee that by the end of 1788 the national debt had risen to some
10,300,000 riksdaler, over four-fifths of which in foreign loans. The expenses
of the campaign of 1789 in Finland moreover threatened to double the debt. The
Secret Committee prepared a proposal which it submitted to the entire Riksdag.
Both the old and the anticipated debt, up to the amount of 21,000,000 riksdaler,
were to be guaranteed by the Estates and administered by a new National Debt
Office (Riksgaldskontor), controlled by deputies of their own choosing. The
