           ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89                            167

    Valuable time was lost, confirming Gustav’s belief that the aristocratic oppo¬
sition must be broken by forceful means. An alleged insult to his handpicked
lantmarskalk, or speaker of the House of the Nobility, allowed him to bring
matters to a head. At a plenary session of the Estates on 17 February, he roundly
castigated the nobility for their lack of cooperation, in contrast to the loyalty of
the rest of the nation. Their behavior, he warned, showed the “old anarchical
spirit, which has long been nurtured in darkness,” and which threatened to “re¬
vive that aristocratic power which I believed I had crushed already at the begin¬
ning of my reign.” “Who cannot still recognize here,” he continued, “those who,
so long as they held power, governed the state with an iron sceptor?” In response
to those who accused him of being “Europe’s most absolute sovereign ... I
declare to you for the second time . . . that I renounce sovereignty for all
time, and that even if disorders should cause it to fall into my power, I will never
retain it; I regard it my glory to be the true defender of liberty.”76 His words
still have the ring of 1772.
   The king commanded the Noble Estate to leave the hall to prepare a formal
apology to its lantmarskalk, and preemptorily rejected its leaders’ requests to
speak in its defense. When they had withdrawn, Gustav called upon the other
Estates to designate delegates to consult with him concerning the privileges of
the nonnoble orders and to enter into a “union, which will guarantee our own
and the kingdom’s common weal.'-77 This formula was the king’s answer—on
his own terms—to the Anjala “Confederation” of the previous August. The
burgher militia, some 3,000 strong, commanded the streets of Stockholm, and
1,200 Dalarna peasants, remobilized by G. M. Armfelt, bivouacked at nearby
Drottningholm. Everything now pointed to that royal coup which the opposition
had feared for the past year.
    Meeting with representatives of the three nonnoble Estates, beginning the
 same evening, Gustav presented them with the draft of an “Act of Union and
 Security,” which provided for a leveling of corporate privileges in return for
greater power to the crown. On 20 February, after the Clerical, Burgher, and
 Peasant Estates called upon the king to guide the Riksdag's continued proceed¬
ings, Gustav arrested and placed in detention nineteen leaders of the noble oppo¬
sition, including old Count Fersen, to cow his adversaries into submission. This
scarcely produced the desired effect; new leaders came to the fore, and many
who had formerly sympathized with the king were sorely disillusioned by the
coup de main, even within the royal family itself.78
    The day after the arrests, on 21 February, Gustav read to a plenary session
of the Estates his Act of Union and Security, and called for its immediate accep¬
tance. This was answered by a great shout, affirmative among the three Estates,
overwhelmingly negative among the Nobility. The king declared the Act of
Union passed by the votes of three Estates, to which the Nobility could later
accede.
