166       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

When a high official sought to remonstrate over the favor he showed toward the
other orders, Gustav replied, “What should I do when the nobility want to drive
me out of the kingdom?”73
    The elections, held as quickly as possible, produced the anticipated results:
large royalist majorities in three of the Estates. Many of the local electoral
assemblies petitioned for the punishment of traitors to the realm; Helsingfors
(Helsinki) further instructed its representative to the Burgher Estate to demand
an end to all remaining distinctions of birth in civil and military appointments.74
The nobility, meanwhile, showed that its spirit was by no means broken. Around
900 of its members attended the Riksdag, the overwhelming majority belonging
to the opposition. They were determined to defend the nation’s constitutional
liberties and thereby revindicate themselves in the eyes of their countrymen.
    Gustav III opened the Riksdag in Stockholm on 2 February 1789 with a
masterful speech stressing the perils that faced the realm. He pointedly praised
the loyalty of his Finnish subjects, “except for a small number of flagrant
traitors and criminals,” and of the peasantry, who had been the first to rally to
their king, as in Gustav Vasa’s day. Pursuing this historical analogy, he invoked
the memory of
   that frightful century of the Kalmar Union, when we were oppressed by
   foreign tutelage under the pretext of the defense of our rights, but which
   had no real effect other than to increase the power of the high and mighty,
   to serve the ambition of certain individuals, all at the expense of the public
   good. Remember how much blood these false friends cost you, how much
   discord and desolation they caused among you; recognize their language
   and their misleading promises. Compare them with the proposals that the
   enemy is making to you today.75

    Gustav’s appeal failed to produce the unity of purpose he strove for. His
actions showed that he was determined to solve the financial problem as expedi¬
tiously as possible by circumventing the noble opposition.’Already the following
day, the king called for a secret committee to decide with him all matters affect¬
ing the independence and security of the realm. Its broadly formulated charge
would allow the king to remove from the purview of the Riksdag as a whole
virtually any question that might be politically explosive, to be dealt with in
privileged secrecy by a select group presided over by himself. The Secret Com¬
mittee, moreover, was now for the first time to include six representatives from
the Peasant Estate; thus even if the Nobility elected members of the opposition
to its twelve seats on it —as it did-they would still be outnumbered by the eigh¬
teen committeemen elected by the other three Estates, since voting on the com¬
mittee was by head. The noble opposition fought to limit the powers of the
Secret Committee. They meanwhile pressed for their vindication by the other
Estates against all the unjust accusations against them.
