168       ENLIGHTENED DESPOTISM AND REVOLT, 1786-89

     The Act of Union amended the constitution of 1772, which otherwise re¬
 mained in effect. It gave the king “full power to govern and defend the realm,”
 including specifically the right to declare war, conclude treaties and alliances,
 grant pardons, “dispose of all royal employments,” which must, however, be
 held by Swedish subjects, as well as to “administer justice and provide for the
 execution of the laws.” Other affairs of state were to be “conducted in the man¬
 ner he judges most useful.” “The Swedish people” retained “the incontestable
 right to discuss and reach agreements with the king on all things concerning sub¬
 sidies to the state”; the Estates might, however consider only proposals pre¬
 sented by the king.79
     Important implications emerge from these broad formulations. The king’s
 full disposition of official appointments swept away any constitutional guar¬
 antees for the preservation of administrative institutions or security of tenure for
 individual officials. To a largely office-holding nobility, this meant a deathblow
to traditional Swedish liberties. The old royal council (rad), the bastion of aristo¬
cratic influence in government, now ceased to exist after five hundred years. A
new standing government commission, the Rikets arenders allmdnna beredning,
henceforth prepared routine administrative matters for decision by the king, who
was free to seek advice when and where he might choose. A separate Ecclesias¬
tical Commission handled church affairs of the same type. The judicial functions
of the old council were assumed by a new supreme court (Hogsta domstol), half
of whose members were commoners.
     As for the king’s relations with the Estates, he was henceforth free to embark
upon an offensive war without the restraint that had embarrassed him a year
earlier. He now had the full power of legislative initiative. His unrestricted
control over the bureaucracy, moreover, would give him the means to bring
greater pressures to bear upon the Estates, particularly the Nobility, whose ranks
were largely filled with officials. Yet the Estates were by no means reduced to
insignificance. They retained the power of approving taxation, an effective guar¬
antee that they would have to be called on critical occasions, and they could still
present to the king petitions which he might find himself well advised to heed.80
    Of greatest consequence in the long run were the social provisions of the Act
of Union. It proclaimed that “all subjects enjoy the same rights, under protec¬
tion of the laws.” All had the right “to possess and acquire land,” although the
nobility was confirmed in its exclusive possession of immediate manorial
demesne (ypperligt fralse). Further, all offices of state were henceforth to be
accessible to “all subjects, of whatever birth or condition,” excepting only cer¬
tain “high dignities and principal offices of the kingdom” and court appoint¬
ments, which were still reserved for noblemen.
  The import of these clauses was amplified by specific royal ordinances. On
3 April Gustav issued the “Charter of the Rights of the Swedish and Finnish
Peasantry,’ which granted them the same full disposition over their freehold
