 176      A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 Fersen for attempting to rescue the French royal family from Paris and jubilant
 over their capture at Varennes, all the while “making insinuations aimed at our
 king." A few noble enthusiasts did indeed recognize the social dimension of the
 revolution but were prepared to accept it; for example, the diplomat Pehr Olof
 von Asp, an admirer of England, welcomed the voluntary renunciation of its
 corporate privileges by the French noblesse as the necessary price of political
 freedom.1 The following chapters will have more to say about the impact of the
 French Revolution upon its devotees among the Swedish-Finnish nobility.
    Less numerous but considerably more articulate was a small group of Stock¬
holm literati of generally middle-class origins, dedicated with romantic ardor to
the libertarian ideals of the later Enlightenment. Although several had enjoyed
favor and patronage from the court, they had become disillusioned in varying
degree with Gustav Ill’s autocracy, particularly with his high-handedness at the
Riksdag of 1789. Their leading figure was Johan Fredrik Kellgren, a stalwart
defender of the Enlightenment and former collaborator with Gustav III in his
dramatic authorship, whose letters largely summarize the first wave of enthusi¬
asm for the French Revolution in Sweden-Finland.
    Few Frenchmen could rejoice more than he, Kellgren wrote to Nils Rosen
von Rosenstein, Crown Prince Gustav’s preceptor, on 7 August 1789, over the
triumph of “the good cause” and the breaking of “long-lived and consecrated
oppression” in France. If this demanded the sacrifice of “a few hundred lives,”
so be it, in contrast to Sweden, which had just drawn “its last breath of freedom”
without the courage or will to resist. He feared only that the uprising in France
might result only in “needless bloodshed and even greater oppression,” in which
case “who could then dare to mention the word Enlightenment in connection
with a monarchical regime? And would not philosophers, arsonists, and
geniuses henceforward be considered as synonymous?” “Now heavens be
praised,” he wrote more confidently a week later,

   There is still a people on earth who feel themselves to be human beings!
   What matters it to us if they be hundreds of miles away? What lies farther
   than the sun, yet is it not the sun for us all? And for the friend of truth,
   is not the world his fatherland? And have I not wept like a child—like a
   man—at the recounting of this great triumph? Tell me, brother, you who
   are a historian, do Rome or Greece have anything so glorious to reveal?
   . . . This is not the uprising of a mob, which only rages and destroys;
   it is the rising of a people, which overthrows in order to build.2

    “Who does not recognize the dawning of a philosophic light,” proclaimed
Carl Fredrik Nordenskiold in his short-lived journal Medborgaren (The Citizen)
in January 1790, “spreading its joyous rays to all thinking beings? Ignorance
flees like the shades of night. . . . Providence has for all eternity manifestly
ordained that Freedom closely follows Enlightenment.” An even more exalted
