                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                          177

visionary was Thomas Thorild. After denouncing the ills of court and society
in the tones of a Roman tribune of the people in his soon-suppressed Den nye
granskaren in the mid-1780s and thereby gaining a following among the king’s
aristocratic opponents, Thorild had left in disillusionment for England, seeking
“to explain all Nature and reform the whole world.” In 1790 he returned to
Stockholm filled with projects for transforming society, which he was convinced
Gustav III, faced with the implied menace of the revolution in France, could not
fail to implement through a “Tribunal for Reform and Enlightenment,” pre¬
sided over by Thorild himself as “court philosopher.”3
    Despite bitterness against Gustav III, other politically conscious Swedes took
a more sober view of the tumult in France, which placed them in a painful dilem¬
ma. In her diary for January 1790, the king’s sister-in-law, Duchess Charlotta,
expressed a growing alarm over the rising tide of revolution in the Austrian and
Dutch Netherlands, Geneva, Bern, Hungary, and elsewhere in Europe. As for
France:

   To be sure, the despotism which existed there cried out for reforms, but
   in its place there has now arisen a crowd of petty tyrants and complete
   anarchy seems to reign. . . . While the people is thus the absolute master
   in France, holding its king in what amounts to imprisonment in his own
   capital, we have a king who under the mask of freedom is the most
   complete despot. . . . To allow one man alone to determine the destinies
   of a people cannot be right; there must be a law which imposes a limit to
   his ambition and injustice. Yet I can no more favor a republican form of
   government under which despotism can appear in an even cruder form.
   The best thing is undeniably a well-balanced division of powers, such as
   we had under the constitution of 1772.4

   In his memoirs, the historian Erik Gustaf Geijer later wrote of the impres¬
sions created in his home in rural Ransater parish in Varmland:
      War and revolution at a suitable distance may be enjoyed like dessert
   after a meal. It is remarkable what one can then endure. The most horrible
   events evoke only a breath of heroism. Frightened we were not. The fair
   speeches in the French National Assembly —as much of them as echoed
   far off in the forest—were a source of endless joy to us. We gave little
   credence to accounts of bloody scenes, since they did not accord with these
   words.5

Geijer was the son of a nonnoble ironmaster and thus belonged to the category
of ofralse standspersoner, persons of wealth and quality who did not fit into any
of the four traditional Estates and thus lacked any political voice-a group in
Sweden-Finland particularly susceptible to new ideas. Meanwhile among the
broader strata of the burghers, clergy, and peasantry, the French Revolution at
