                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                        181

university town of Kiel, and in Norway. From Christiania, Stiftamtmand Fred-
erik Moltke wrote in the spring of 1790:

   The only question is how close we are to a revolution. That Norway’s bold
   sons are aware ot the progress of freedom in Europe and watch for the
   moment when they can obtain new advantages, and that they are more
   drawn to them than ever, seems to me evident.12

    In Norway the Swedish threat continued to lurk in the background, and a
 small circle of merchants and entrepreneurs in 0stlandet indeed intrigued with
 Gustav Ill’s agents.13 Otherwise, however, the middle classes of the Danish
 monarchy tended to look benignly upon the revolutionary transformation of
 France in the light of peaceful reforms already well underway under the aegis
 of a benevolent royal absolutism at home. The journalist Rahbek liked half-
jokingly to call himself “a Jacobin in France but a royalist in Denmark”—a
 description which in general would aptly have fit his peers. Their exultation over
 the revolution in France thus fortified the popularity and stability of the Danish
 monarchy, as Bernstorff recognized. The press throughout the realm was filled
 with fervent protestations of loyalty to the royal house, especially to the crown
 prince.14 Yet these very protestations were based upon certain fundamental
 premises.
    Christian Pram, then editor of Minerx’a, wrote in September 1789 that the
French people, “weary of the most unbearable oppression, casts off all bonds,
that it may in full freedom choose the form of government that best suits the real
purpose of all government, the true felicity of the people.” The implication
behind this and similar statements is clearly that the Danish monarchy, in con¬
trast to the French, was justified because—and as long as—it fulfilled this goal.
The idea had indeed been stated clearly by the Norwegian Edvard Storm in a
speech celebrating the king’s birthday at Drejer’s Club in January 1788, printed
in Minerva. Man, he held, was by nature free; the state was based upon a volun¬
tary contract, “implicit if not explicit”; any act by which the state might limit
individual freedom more than the general good required was “tyranny,” against
which the surest bulwark was “the Patriot’s” right to “speak out against mani¬
fest abuses, even when these involve the high and mighty.”15 Newspapers and
pamphlets, especially in Copenhagen, fill in the essential contours of what the
friends of reform expected of the crown. It must be endowed with absolute
power to override vested interests for the common weal, yet be ever responsive
to the views of an enlightened public as expressed through a free press—what
Jens Arup Seip has described as the ideal of “opinion-guided absolutism.”
These views were, moreover, distinctly antiaristocratic. “While one considered
a republic the ideal form of government in principle,” the jurist A. S. Orsted
later recalled, “absolute monarchy was considered the next best, for the autocrat
could use his power to establish freedom and equality.” “True monarchy,”
