                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                          179

all governments to become “military” as the only means to maintain order and
public tranquillity. In July 1789 he foresaw dissolution and civil war in France,
in July 1791 “a frightful despotism, the antithesis of the liberty to which they
aspire. It is besides,' he added, “contrary to human nature to pretend that the
people will obey when it believes itself to be the source of the law.” Yet he
showed at first little concern over the contagion of French ideas, secure in the
belief that they could threaten only regimes that oppressed their subjects. Less
jubilant than his wife, Charlotte, Ernst Schimmelmann wondered if the French
would come to deserve what they sought, although in 1791 he still could not
resist privately composing a statement of principles for an improved constitution
for France in what a confidant acclaimed as “the true spirit of Rousseau,
Mirabeau, and Kant.' Ludvig Reventlow contrasted the “glorious” actions of the
French with the ignominy of the Swedes, but unlike his intrepid Sybille was
disturbed by the excesses of the crowd that stormed the Bastille.7
    Among the Danish nobles within the kingdom proper, enthusiasm for the
French Revolution seems to have been notably absent. Their political power as
an estate had been broken in the 1660s, and their interests had by now become
essentially those of manorial proprietors, which they shared with a growing
number of nonnoble landlords. For this proprietorial class of mixed social
origins, the French Revolution represented above all the dissolution of the legal
and traditional bonds of discipline and respect in the countryside—bonds which,
in their view, had already been dangerously undermined in Denmark by the
agrarian reforms of recent years.
    Evidence is scanty on their views, but again Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, himself
a recent annobli, would seem representative. Everywhere, he wrote on 6 August
 1789, might now seemed to make right.
   In Sweden a king can without fear trample the rights of his people, and
   do so at a meeting of the Estates through the basest expedients and the
   manifest use of force. In France, where a king is good enough to revive
   from the dead the French Estates-General, this first diet is bold enough to
   strike down the royal authority itself.

After noting fearfully the simultaneous ferment in the Austrian and Dutch
Netherlands and in Poland, Guldberg continued:
  A certain spirit of freedom has entirely won the upper hand in Europe and
  is protected, indeed encouraged, by the princes themselves. ... It has
  captivated all, from the heads of states to their lowest and remotest mem¬
  bers.8

   The events in France, Guldberg wrote on 1 September 1789, were “alto¬
gether worthy of the 18th century, the philosophic age and its Aujkldrung"—
pointedly using the German word to describe the Enlightenment: despised root
