                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                       183

   My friend will see [he continued] that I have carefully read through this
   latest piece and have found that the spirit which manifestly prevails in it
   is the same as that which is now ruining lovely France. And it is just that
   spirit which reigns ... in most of the writings in our time from Copen¬
   hagen. . . . One shudders to see, in almost every piece, freedom—law¬
   less freedom praised; all royal revenue called the people’s money, which
   the king has no right to dispose of—a truth which the ruler himself may
   say to us, but which the people certainly may not say to him; the nobil¬
   ity—our innocent nobility—thoroughly abused; the rights of the peasantry
   asserted to the extreme, to the point of usurping all other legal rights, so
   that the great majority in our land . . . may be prepared to break forth,
   once the battery is prepared, and thus sink Denmark, which hardly pos¬
   sesses a twentieth of France’s resources, into an abyss of misery and make
   us an easy prey for our ever unscrupulous neighbor [Sweden], At the
   slightest outbreak Norway will be lost, and will surely become a republic
   of its own in accordance with the Norwegian-English spirit.

 Guldberg’s letters thereafter repeatedly dwell upon his alarm and indignation
over the clubs and periodicals in Copenhagen—and to a degree in Christiania—
 as the source of the “light troops” of revolution.20
    Concern in official quarters over the growing audacity of the press was rein¬
 forced by widespread peasant reluctance in Denmark to fulfill manorial labor
obligations in anticipation of further, rumored government reforms and by the
outbreak of popular disturbances in north Schleswig during 1790. Although
these were quite evidently caused by food shortages following poor harvests the
year before, the authorities feared wider implications. “Such was then the pop¬
ular spirit spread by the French Revolution,” the amtmand in Abenra wrote in
his report.21
    The government was vexed by the anonymity behind which the radical pam¬
phleteers took cover. When the printer of Riegels’s pamphlet refused to disclose
its author’s identity, he was fined under the press ordinance of 1773. A new
ordinance was at length decreed on 3 December 1790. While it removed the
arbitrary powers of Copenhagen’s chief of police in press matters and placed
them under the law courts, it also warned against the abuse of the press “in vio¬
lation of the civil laws.” The new ordinance was generally welcomed by in¬
formed opinion for providing a stable legal foundation for freedom of expression
and for rejecting the clamor among conservatives for a return to censorship. Yet
it also showed the government’s concern about dangerous ideas and outside in¬
fluences.22
   The course of internal reform meanwhile continued in the Danish monarchy.
State finances and currency naturally received a high priority. The unwelcome
expenditures connected with the Swedish-Russian war were at least partially met
