 182       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 Minerva proclaimed, “is democratic.” Increasingly the crown prince was re¬
 ferred to as the “first citizen of the realm.”16
     The underlying premises of this popular royalism nonetheless held implica¬
 tions which could not but eventually appear threatening to the existing state and
 society. P. A. Heiberg, who in 1787 had fiercely satirized aristocratic preten¬
 tions and ignorance in his Rigsdalerens Hcmdelser (The Tale of a Rigsdaler),
 returned to the same theme in a song (Selskabssang) for a private gathering in
 September 1790, which inadvertently came out in print:


                   Orders and decorations are hung on idiots.
                   Stars and ribbons go to noblemen alone.

                  We teach no despotic principles.
                  It is for equality among men that we strive;
                  Nor do we, like the Jutland proprietors
                  Wish for slaves and peasants for us to flay.

The same year Heiberg hailed Crown Prince Frederik’s marriage with a “Pro¬
cessional Song” (Indtogsvise), which in effect publicly lectured the young re¬
gent on the views of the more advanced Copenhagen radicals:
             We seek not to censure princes’ actions.
             But to warn them against dangerous intrigues.
             Alas! Kings are not gods!—Seldom do they see more
             Than other mortals; indeed, oft times, far less.17

   Heiberg’s reference to Jutland proprietors alluded to the attempt in 1790 of
a group of them to remonstrate against the recent agrarian reforms, of which
more below. This played directly into the hands of the antiaristocratic camp.
Perhaps the most widely noted polemic pamphlet during 1790 was Niels Ditlev
Riegels’s anonymous Jule-Mcerker fra Land og By (Christmas Omens from
Country and Town), which satirized the Jutland proprietors’ desire to reduce the
common people to “beasts of burden and slaves.” It also went so far as to call
for the convening of the defunct Estates of the realm to review the state fi¬
nances.18
    Here Riegels tread on dangerous ground, for the very suggestion of a diet
called into question royal absolutism under the Lex Regia and could be regarded
as lese-majeste. His pamphlet caused a sensation, not least in aristocratic circles.
Even Countess Charlotte Schimmelmann, considered by her friends “une fur-
leuse democrate,” was indignant over the wretched scribblers of the capital.19
From Aarhus, Guldberg wrote to Biilow in October 1790 that the diet Riegels
demanded would unfailingly follow the course of the French Estates-General,
stripping the monarch of his power and establishing “French democracy.”
