 178       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

first created relatively little stir. Their social and economic grievances had been
on the whole satisfied by Gustav III at the Riksdag of 1789. They could remain
fiercely royalist while observing with benign approval how the French National
Assembly sought to realize an apparently similar program of reform.

    Among the aristocracy of the Danish monarchy, it was the high German
nobility of the capital and the duchies, with their past traditions of imperial liber¬
ties, who reacted most enthusiastically to the news from France. ‘'The kingdom
of the Ford is at hand!” exulted Countess Fuise Stolberg in July 1789, and a
few days later:

   The respective ministers of Europe will surely say that the king of France
   has gotten what he deserved for having helped the rebels in Amer¬
   ica. . . . In a “well-Bastilled” monarchy the word Freedom must never
   be uttered under any circumstances: it is a kind of bell-weather which lures
   slaves to desertion.

Her brother-in-law, the poet Friedrich Feopold Stolberg, declared himself pre¬
pared, in this “dawn of a new era,” to “sacrifice the ancient arms of the impe¬
rial counts of Stolberg to the cause of freedom.” Adam Moltke, inspired by the
speeches of Mirabeau, eliminated the “von” from his name and accepted disin¬
heritance as a result. Friedrich Christian of Augustenburg, heir to the only ducal
title in the realm, “wept like a child” over the fall of the Bastille. To Bernstorff
he wrote how events in Versailles and Paris filled him with “horror, agitation,
and joy,” while to Schimmelmann he expressed his satisfaction that “the might¬
iest and most arrogant court upon which Despotism has raised its throne is the
first of all to bend its neck.” When the French complete their great task, wrote
Countess Sybille Reventlow to Fuise Stolberg in January 1790,
   they will find imitators. That is as it should be. It is in the nature of things.
   Europe will then come to consist entirely of republics, having gained in
   wisdom from the experience of so many centuries, through culture and
   Christianity. We shall perhaps surpass the Greeks, whom we so admire.

Steadfast in her idealism. Countess Charlotte Schimmelmann was heartened in
July 1791 that “the Revolution in France shakes the base of the aristocratic hier¬
archy and its influence spreads throughout the entire region where blindness and
the debasement of man prevail.”6
    Others were less sanguine. Count Bernstorff had not been uncritical of the
old regime in France, but he had no use for popular movements. Already in 1774
he had perceived a tendency, under the influence of “an unhealthy philosophy
which ruins the spirit and corrupts the heart,” to “crush civil while appearing
to defend personal liberty.” The breakdown of respect for the law, the “shield”
of the weak and “legitimate restraint” on the strong, would eventually compel
