 180       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 of the ills of his time. The lessons of past ages proved that “no constitution but
 the monarchical is suited to European states, and none can stand without it.”
 Surely he touched upon the heart of the matter in his own mind when he added:
   The common people are little concerned with what form of constitution
   they live under. Rather, what they crave is to be free from taxes, from
   requisitions, from the maintenance of troops, from burdens. That is what
   they call freedom and that is what the French peasantry has now seized
   for itself. What it will now be interesting to see will be how well the dema¬
   gogues will succeed in depriving the peasantry of these marvelous gains
   and in subjecting them once again to law, order, and taxes.9

    If the Danish proprietors showed little enthusiasm for the French Revolution,
the Danish urban middle classes, especially in the intellectual and reform-
minded circles of the capital, were all the more likely to welcome the tidings
from France. Henrik Steffens later recalled how his father, upon learning of the
fall of the Bastille, solemnly gathered his sons around him and proclaimed:
   My children, you are to be envied. What a glorious, happy time lies before
   you! If you do not succeed in acquiring for yourselves a free and inde¬
   pendent position, the fault will be your own. All estates, all the constrain¬
   ing bonds of poverty will disappear, the lowest will enter into equal battle
   with him who heretofore has been mightiest, a battle with equal weapons,
   on equal ground.10

The same news reached the poet Jens Baggesen in Germany, where he foresaw
the leveling of “all Bastilles”; soon in Paris he danced on the ruins of that temple
of despotism. Societies like Drejer’s Club and newspapers like Minerva or
Kjabenhavns Lcerde Efterretninger, which had already been much concerned
with questions of agrarian reform, civic freedom and equality, and attacks on
aristocracy, were alive with excitement. Already by the end of 1789, the gregar¬
ious Knud Rahbek, co-editor of Minerva and very much at the center of Copen¬
hagen’s club life, complained wearily:
                    In Brabant there rages civil war.
                    In France a war of words;
                    That seems, I think, so near at hand
                    When we are gathered here.
                    But let the struggle never reach
                    To Medoc, Pontac, and Bordeaux,
                    To Epernay, Chalons, and the Rhine
                    From whence there comes our wine!11

  Outside Copenhagen, bourgeois enthusiasm for the French Revolution was
most manifest in the duchies, particularly in the old Holstein-Gottorp capital and
