 192       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

    The ceaseless inquietude and remarkable zeal with which King Gustav III
    followed the disturbances in France could not but amaze and almost irri¬
    tate. At table almost nothing else was ever discussed. All other reading
    gave way to the Moniteur, the Journal de Paris, and the newspapers. The
    womenfolk tried to reason with him over this and in the council this sub¬
    ject interrupted the deliberations.42

    Like his own aristocratic opponents, Gustav III saw the revolution in France
 as above all a struggle over royal authority, with ramifications throughout the
 European world. Behind the unrest of the time this former enthusiast for the
 French Enlightenment now perceived the “system of innovation our modern
 philosophers have introduced,” as he wrote to Mme. de Boufflers already in
 August 1787.

    It would be most strange [he continued] if their speculations, which they
   consider intended for mankind’s greatest good, should simply lead to the
   opposite result and end, in the last analysis, by turning sovereigns—into
   tyrants, and peoples—into rebels.43

    “The end of this century is the time of revolutions,” Gustav observed in
December 1789; an “epidemic,” he wrote two years later, which had “spread
from the soil of America to France” and which threatened all thrones. In partic¬
ular he saw the French Revolution in the light of his own recent crisis. Repeat¬
edly he compared his own determined action against the Anjala mutineers and
their aristocratic sympathizers with Fouis XVI’s inept and spineless handling of
the contemporary French revoke nobiliaire. “See,” he wrote to Stedingk in
August 1789, what they are doing to la delicieuse France', there is the result
of weakness and indecision.”44
   Following the end of the Russian war in August 1790, Gustav Ill’s hostility
to the French Revolution became increasingly manifest. Suspecting the revolu¬
tionary sympathies of his ambassador to France, Baron de Stael—and especially
of his ambitious wife, Jacques Necker’s daughter—Gustav made the younger
Axel Fersen his secret agent in Paris already in January 1790, opening a direct
channel to the French royal family and a steady flow of secret reports bitterly
hostile to the revolution. In 1790 and again the following year, Gustav further
limited freedom of the press by prohibiting authors or newspapers from referr¬
ing to the unrest in France or the proceedings of the National Assembly.
   Ambitious plans were meanwhile forming in Gustav’s mind. To speed the
peace negotiations at Varala in the summer of 1790, the Russians had hinted at
an alliance, while in Paris Fersen hoped that peace in the North might help bring
“some change” in France. Fersen's reports, Gustav wrote in September to their
mutual confidant, Baron Evert Taube, seemed to show the chaos in France at
its peak and that a league “like that of the Greeks against Troy” should be
