                        A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                          189

   In Sweden, as seen, the French Revolution added to the tensions created by
the Riksdag of 1789 and the Act of Union and Security. Gustav III found himself
largely ostracized by the nobility, many of whom resigned their court positions,
and even by members of his own family. To G. G. Adlerbeth, he said in Decem¬
ber 1789:

   I know what you think of my behavior at the last Riksdag, but I can assure
   you that I have saved rather than harmed the nobility, for had I not placed
   myself at the head of the faction which the nobility had then raised against
   itself, the other Estates would have gone much further. The nobility has
   meanwhile lost nothing essential.

Turning to events in France, he added: “It was fortunate for the Swedish nobil¬
ity that those scenes had not yet taken place before the last Riksdag. Your fate,
gentlemen, would have been worse, and the public’s passions toward you harder
to manage.’’36
   Gustav Ill’s repeated expressions of concern for his nobility in this period
reveal his still unshaken conviction that despite its recent behavior it had its vital
role—once it could be brought to recognize it. To the French emigre Marquis
de Bouille, he wrote in February 1792:
   We are trying to make them understand that in the eighteenth century it
   is necessary that this first order of the state be sustained by the stability
   of the throne and by its protection, and not in seeking to fight against it.37

    Gustav evidently considered the Act of Union of March 1789 as at best a tem¬
porary expedient. He told P. O. von Asp the same month that Sweden’s present
situation allowed no solution other than “full power to the king’’; yet he ad¬
mitted that if the country should not have a “king’’—one equal to his task—he
could conceive of its eventually becoming a “republic.’’ He was already think¬
ing of reorganizing the Noble Estate or even the entire Riksdag, and during the
next three years he continued to speculate about constitutional changes. By the
end of 1791 he had immersed himself in the study of British institutions, partic¬
ularly through Jean Louis De Lolme’s Constitution de I’Angleterre in the Geneva
edition of 1790.
    By the time he convened his next Riksdag, in January 1792, Gustav was con¬
sidering another coup to establish a new constitution, based on the English. This,
it appears, would have created a bicameral legislature, with an upper house of
twenty-four “jarls,” elected by the nobility, and a lower house of 240, elected
by the “people,” with substantial property qualifications for both. The king
would “communicate” with this legislature through ministers heading special¬
ized government departments. The plan was farsighted and ambitious, anticipat¬
ing the basic administrative and representational reforms of the nineteenth cen¬
tury in Sweden.
