                          A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                       191

let,      losing nearly a third of their high seas fleet and a score of galleys.
   They withdrew westward to Svensksund, pursued by the combined Russian
fleet. Morale was at a low ebb. J. A. Ehrenstrom, who himself had been asso¬
ciated with the Finnish independence movement in the mid-1780s, wrote how
many officers hoped for a Swedish defeat at Svensksund:

       They imagined that day could not pass without the king’s being killed or
       taken prisoner, that this would lead to peace and that however harmful this
       might be for the kingdom, they would thereby win their desired goal of
       vindicating the Anjala Confederation, destroying the royal authority in
       accordance with the principles of the constitution of 1720, and wreaking
       vengeance upon the non-noble orders for the devotion they had shown the
       king.39

       Such hopes were crushed in the ensuing battle on 9 July. The Swedes under
Gustav III trapped and largely destroyed the Russian galley fleet, which lost
fifty-three vessels and at last 9,000 men, while Swedish losses were negligible.
Svensksund was the Swedish navy’s greatest victory, the last, belated triumph
of what had long been one of Europe’s proud military nations.
       In the immediate perspective, Svensksund restored the naval balance lost in
1788 and destroyed Catherine’s hopes for a quick and decisive end to the Swe¬
dish war. Meanwhile Great Britain, Prussia, and Poland were threatening to join
Sweden and Turkey in a grand coalition against Russian expansion. The empress
therefore offered Sweden a separate peace on the basis of the status quo ante
bellum, which Gustav III was glad to accept.
       On 14 August 1790 the peace was concluded at Varala in Finland. Ostensibly
it restored the prewar situation, but its deeper significance was not spelled out
in its text. By excluding any confirmation of the peace treaties of Nystad and
Abo, it deprived Russia of any legalistic excuse for intervening in Swedish-Fin-
nish internal affairs. The link between the Swedish noble opposition and St.
Petersburg was broken. The Danish-Russian alliance had failed the crucial test,
and Great Britain and Prussia had shown their determination to maintain the
balance of power in the Baltic. But since Finland still remained part of the
Swedish realm, the ancient conflict between Sweden and Russia remained un¬
resolved.40
   Throughout the Russian war Gustav had been, as always, much preoccupied
with the situation in France. The convening of the Assembly of Notables in 1787
disturbed him; he knew from experience the ways of “such assemblies,’’ where
“they use big words but generally are moved only by personal feelings.’’41 He
had reacted strongly and promptly to rebellion in America; he now seems to
have been the first European monarch to become seriously concerned over the
prospect of rebelliousness in France.
   One of the king’s confidants, Elis Schroderheim, later recalled:
