 190       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

    Gustav had early been drawn to the physiocrat Le Mercier de la Riviere’s
 “legal despotism” and derived from him his lasting formula for the “true inter¬
 ests” of peoples—“liberty, security, property.” This formula was repeated in
 Gustav’s edict on freedom of the press in 1774 and expressed as “the true free¬
 dom of peoples, which is security of persons and property,” in his letter to his
 ambassador, Eric Magnus Stael von Holstein, in Paris in December 1791. He
 had, however, also been attracted to Montesquieu’s concept of an ordered hier¬
 archical monarchy, which likewise underlay De Lolme’s idealized description of
 the British constitution. By 1791 Gustav saw this as a surer means to effective
 royal authority than theoretical absolutism. “The nobility do not understand me
 nor do they understand their own interest,” he stated early in 1792. “I am the
 nobles’ friend and I cannot be king without a nobility. The king of England has
 more power than I do under the Act of Security.”38
    Meanwhile there was the continued war with Russia, which still threatened
to destroy all he had thus far accomplished. The best he could hope for was to
end the war without loss, but Prussian attempts at mediation during the winter
of 1789 were contemptuously rejected by Catherine II. Fortunately, the Russians
still had to deploy the bulk of their forces against the Turks. But the Swedes,
too, were seriously handicapped. Their economic resources were badly strained.
A devastating typhoid epidemic killed 10-12,000 people, most of them naval
personnel, during 1789-90. An embittered and insubordinate spirit pervaded
much of the officer corps, on occasion evidently hampering operations in the
field.
   In June 1789 Gustav III returned to Finland to take command of his forces.
The following campaign was carried on in desultory fashion on land and sea by
both sides, without decisive results. At the end of the year, Catherine II declared
her conditions for peace to be confirmation of the Treaties of Nystad (1721) and
Abo (1743), amnesty for the Anjala conspirators, and reinstatement of the con¬
stitutional prohibition against offensive war without the consent of the Estates.
Gustav III published these humiliating demands to steel his subjects for yet an¬
other campaign.
   In 1790 the Swedes concentrated upon the war at sea to gain control over the
Finnish Gulf, the seaward flank of all land operations in southern Finland.
Impressive efforts through the winter produced the largest naval force in Swe¬
den’s history.
   The campaign opened in April with Swedish attacks on Baltischport, Reval.
Fredrikshamn, and Kronstadt. The combined Swedish high seas and galley fleets
under Gustav III himself next entered Viborg Bay to destroy the Russian galley
squadron stationed there, but were trapped there by contrary winds while the
scattered detachments of the Russian fleet assembled outside. Virtually the entire
Swedish navy, with the king himself and 30,000 men embarked, was cornered.
On 3 July, however, the wind changed and the Swedes ran the “Viborg Gaunt-
