                        A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                         185

legal protection of tenant farms maintained a sizable rural population, with the
duchies, where the absence of such protection resulted in an alarming depopula¬
tion of the countryside. Fabricius, too, looked to the English example—which
impressed him with the pauperism created by the landlord’s unlimited freedom
of contract.24
   On the Great Agrarian Commission, the most outspoken proponent of peasant
protection was Christian Colbjornsen, who since August 1788 was also general-
prokurer, or juridical counselor to the Danish Chancellery. His basic attitude
was summarized already in 1783:

   The rights of the tenant should be specified in law, and this law should,
   if it is to protect a weaker class against a more powerful one, be given such
   strength and consistency that the latter shall not be able, through its
   strength and the other’s weakness, to disturb or hinder its effective
   enforcement.25

    With the backing of C. D. Reventlow, this viewpoint won the support of the
majority on the commission and led to important reforms. On 19 March 1790,
a royal ordinance required that all tenancies be granted for the lifetimes of the
tenant farmer and his wife. To Ludvig Reventlow, the commission “is too des¬
potic in its attitude, seeks to prescribe everything in hair-splitting, fussy detail,
so that everything must depend upon petty functionaries . . . and there is too
much animosity and grudge against proprietors in all your undertakings,’’ as he
wrote indignantly to his brother, who replied that it was his “confession of
faith” that short-term leases would be “the country’s ruin.”26
    A year later, on 25 March 1791, Danish landowners were given some com¬
pensation when they were permitted, if they could not find a tenant for a farm
in good condition, to reallocate its land to other farms, to existing crofts (huse)
for agricultural laborers with less than three tender hartkom of land, or to set
up two new crofts with six tender hartkom each. This allowed the proprietor
somewhat greater flexibility in the exercise of his property rights, while also
providing for the subsistence of the cotter (husmand) class, from which it was
envisioned that seasonal agricultural labor for both peasant farm and manorial
demesne would increasingly be drawn.27
    With this solution to the problem of rural labor in view, another ordinance
of the same date called upon proprietors to negotiate agreements with their ten¬
ants fixing the amount and nature of their labor obligations (hoveri) on each
manor and providing for government mediation if agreement could not be
reached. During the years that followed, numerous settlements were concluded.
Many tenants commuted labor obligations into money payments, while a grow¬
ing number purchased their leaseholds and were thereby released from hoveri
altogether. The same ordinance forbade physical chastisement of the tenant
