                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                        193

formed “to restore order and avenge the honor of crowned heads.” “I should
like, he added, “to be the Agamemnon of that host.”45
    Throughout late 1790 and early 1791, Gustav III sought to interest Catherine
II in a joint action against revolutionary France. Still at war with the Turks, she
showed only vague signs of approval until Great Britain and Prussia once again
threatened to intervene and angled for Swedish support. This evoked from
Catherine a livelier interest in Gustav’s speculations. Thus encouraged, on 17
May 1791 he confidently offered to Louis XVI’s secret diplomatic agent, the
emigre Baron de Breteuil, a Swedish-Russian force to support the king of
France, in return for suitable compensation. Breteuil declined for the present
because of the danger this might pose for the French royal family in Paris.
    By now Gustav knew of the secret preparations by Breteuil, the Baron de
Bouille in Metz, and Fersen in Paris for the escape of the French royal family
to France's eastern frontier, where they would appeal both to their own loyal
subjects and to the European powers for support. Confident of Russian backing,
Gustav departed for Aachen on 24 May to take personal control of his enterprise
and to keep Louis XVI and his family, following their escape, from falling under
the influence of other monarchs less implacable toward the revolution.
    Gustav Ill's high hopes were foiled by the capture of the French royal family
at Varennes on 20 June 1791, after Axel Fersen had successfully spirited them
out of Paris.46 Catherine II’s apparent zeal for Russian participation in an inter¬
vention in France meanwhile cooled with the passing of the immediate crisis in
the East.
    Gustav now turned to the idea of a great monarchical crusade, under his own
leadership, to attack France before the end of the summer. He sent emissaries
to Russia, Britain, Spain, several German principalities, and the French emigres
in Coblenz. Essential to his plan was meanwhile the support of the new emperor,
Leopold II, in Vienna, not least to forestall similar initiatives of his own which
Gustav feared would acknowledge much of the work of the National Assembly.
    The Swedish king sent Axel Fersen, recently escaped from France, to
Vienna, thereby introducing a new complication. While officially representing
the king of Sweden, Fersen felt personally committed to the interests of the
French royal family. Like Marie Antoinette, with whom he remained in secret
correspondence, he was convinced that these would best be served by convening
a congress of powers, backed by military force, to cow the French into freeing
their king and thereafter allowing him to determine the future of the new consti¬
tution, rather than by the direct armed intervention that Gustav III strove to or¬
ganize. The Austrian government inclined toward the idea of such a congress,
whereas neither the emigre French princes nor the other European monarchs
showed any enthusiasm for accepting the leadership of the quixotic king of
Sweden.
