 186       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 farmer or his wife, as “offensive against the respect due them as themselves the
 masters and mistresses of households,” although not of the tenant’s hired help,
 who in fact performed most of his labor for the manor.28
    “Except for the agrarian question, there is no topic which has set more
 hands, pens, and printing presses to work than the improvement of the schools,”
 wrote Kjobenhavns Loerde Efterretninger in 1790.29 Education was, of course,
 a central preoccupation of the European Enlightenment. In the minds of the
 Danish agrarian reformers the cultivator must be literate and informed to profit
 from emancipation.
    As seen, the school ordinance of 1739 had produced only limited results, but
vai ious enlightened landlords had interested themselves in the education of their
peasants, inspired in part by such continental reformers as Basedow and Pesta-
lozzi. Count Ludvig Reventlow played an innovative role in this respect, estab¬
lishing model elementary schools on his lands, experimenting with an adult
evening school and with teacher training. In his school regulation of 1788 for
Brahe-Trolleborg manor, he stated:
   To become a tenant farmer it will henceforth be required, beginning in
    1788, that one not only be able to read whatever is set before one, both
   in print and in script, but that one also be able to write in a good, legible
   hand and to reckon by the four basic arithmetical modes and [to practice]
   simple bookkeeping, as well as to understand all that is necessary for ra¬
   tional farming.30

    His brother, C. D. Reventlow, sought to educate the children on Chris-
tianssaede manor “to become good human beings.” On 15 August 1788, when
he presented the first hereditary leases to crown tenants in north Sjaelland, he
stressed the importance of education to the success of the other reforms, while
holding forth the humanistic ideal that “in all schools the cultivation of the mind
and heart is more important than rote learning.”31
    In 1789 the crown appointed a seven-member School Commission, headed
by Ernst Schimmelmann, who had likewise established schools on his estates,
and including C. D. Reventlow; Ludvig Reventlow—who may at first have
seemed too visionary-was added in 1791. In March 1791 the commission estab¬
lished a teachers’ training seminary at Blagard, near Copenhagen, following the
lead of J. A. Cramer, who had founded such a school in Kiel already in 1781.
Admission to Blagard was limited to men of peasant origin, who were trained
to teach reading, writing, arithmetic, and singing. The school opened with four¬
teen students.
   From the start, the commission became the battleground of profoundly differ¬
ing philosophies with far-reaching social implications, which largely deadlocked
