  188      A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 similar message to Prince Carl, who was known for his conservative views, was
 presented by Beenfelt and Kammerherre Tonne Liittichau on 18 August. It read
 in part:

    We indeed have cause to fear the general violation of our property, attacks
    upon our rights, which are sanctioned in law, and the suppression of our
    liberties, which will in time leave us without bread, lead to general dis¬
    solution, bring about the ruin of the land, and wreak misfortune upon pos¬
    terity. . . . We experience one deprivation of our legal liberties after the
    other, through which our property rights are violated in what for us is the
    most humiliating manner.

 The proprietors invoked the frightening picture of anarchy in France. They at¬
 tacked the authors of the reforms, Colbjornsen in particular, for not acting as
 “honest Danish men,” and enumerated the harmful effects from which they
 claimed they already suffered.34
    The government was prepared to brook no opposition. Crown Prince Fre-
derik promptly stated, “What has been proclaimed by royal decree cannot be
changed.” He forwarded the letter to the Great Agrarian Commission. Col-
bjomsen published it, together with a sharp critique intended for “the tribunal
of all just and thoughtful men,” branding the proprietors with disloyalty for sug¬
gesting that the crown had acted tyrannically. Moreover, he accused the Jutland
proprietors of having falsified signatures on their letter to the crown prince. The
latter appointed a commission of inquiry, which called Beenfelt and Liittichau
to account and verified the allegation.
    Colbjornsen’s attack was a bitter and not altogether scrupulous one, backed
by royal approval and well calculated to stir up middle-class support. Indeed,
as noted, it stimulated a wave of antiaristocratic pamphleteering, in which Hei¬
berg and Riegels in particular made their mark. The doughty Liittichau, how¬
ever, who in 1784 had dared to accuse the government of growing despotism,
was not so easily put down. He entered into a heated exchange of pamphlets with
Colbjornsen, who sued him for libel. His defense lawyer complained that society
was breaking down into two camps: “He who shows any doubt concerning the
rightness of Colbjomsen’s views is given the name of Aristocrat, while he who
is of another opinion . . . is called a Democrat.”
    In the end Liittichau was heavily fined, and the crown prince deprived him
of his title of kammerherre for disrespect toward the inquest commission. He left
Denmark in disillusionment, with the widespread sympathy of the opponents of
reform, including Schack-Rathlou and Guldberg. In Germany he was received
as a martyr to the cause of historic rights, was made an imperial count by Em¬
peror Francis II and a privy councillor by the duke of Brunswick. But with his
departure, overt opposition to reform among the Danish proprietorial class was
effectively broken.35
