 184       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 by a special levy in 1789 upon all classes except the peasantry. The much-her¬
 alded finance plan of 1785 had to be abandoned, however, and was replaced in
 1791 by a new one, which included the establishment that year of a central bank
of issue for the kingdom, corresponding to the recently founded Altona bank in
the duchies. While the government strove to economize, it concentrated primar¬
 ily upon stimulating the national economy.23
     In Denmark this meant above all continued reforms in the agrarian sector.
After a recess of nearly two years, the Great Agrarian Commission reconvened
 in February 1790 to consider a range of problems connected with the abolition
of the stavnsbdnd. The most basic question was the future relationship between
the manorial proprietor and his now emancipated peasant tenant. If the tenant
farmer was no longer legally bound to the manor, should the landlord henceforth
be bound by any obligations toward the tenant?
    In the past the responsibilities of local administration had necessarily de¬
volved largely upon the proprietor, who was compensated by the tax exemption
of his demesne (hovedgard)—if of requisite size—so long as he maintained the
existing number of taxable tenant farms on his manor. His property rights were
thus restricted. Moreover, as he was ultimately responsible for the payment of
the land tax for his tenant farms, numerous customary arrangements had evolved
through which proprietors assisted their tenants in time of need, to keep their
tenancies occupied and productive.
   Since mid-century at least, an increasing number of landowners had come to
recognize that the legal and customary burdens of manorial proprietorship could
outweigh the advantages of an assured labor supply under the stavnsbdnd. Free
wage labor, hired as needed, could prove more profitable than the cumbersome
and inflexible system of tenant labor obligations. Such landlords looked to Eng¬
land for their inspiration; there the landowner enjoyed the free disposition of his
property and could contract freely with tenants and laborers, in accordance with
the laws of supply and demand. Freedom, in their view, should work both ways.
Such ideas were espoused by champions of peasant emancipation like Tyge
Rothe—who somewhat paradoxically defended the restrictive odelret in Nor¬
way—Fudvig Reventlow, and certain members of the Great Agrarian Commis¬
sion itself.
    Opposed to this viewpoint was the ideal of peasant protection, tracing back
to the beginnings of Danish absolutism, inspired first by fiscal and later fortified
by humanitarian considerations. It had been exemplified by Henrik Stampe’s
modest reforms in 1769, which had aimed not only at creating a landowning
peasantry but also at protecting it against the rich and powerful. Its leading theo¬
rist was the Kiel professor Johann Christian Fabricius, who in his Von der Volks-
Vermehrung insbesonderheit in Danemark (1791) attacked the existing manorial
system throughout the realm but nonetheless compared Denmark, where the
