                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                       187

its deliberations tor years at a time. The new Kulturhumanismus of the Revent-
lows and Schimmelmann clashed with the orthodox traditionalism of Nicolaj
Balle, bishop of Sjaelland, with its emphasis upon the catechism, and the cautious
utilitarianism ot Prince Friedrich Christian of Augustenburg, which sought to
limit the education of the broader masses to the minimum suitable to their menial
vocations. As will be seen, it was not until 1814 that a comprehensive new
school ordinance was finally adopted.
    The education of the middle classes likewise attracted attention. Because the
traditional learned schools and the University of Copenhagen remained pri¬
marily oriented to the training of clergymen and the wealthy employed tutors
and sent their sons abroad, there was a growing demand for schools suited to
the practical needs of middling men in commerce and the professions. Here
again, private initiative took the lead, notably through the establishment in 1786
of the Efterslcegtsselskabets Skole in Copenhagen, a Realschule on the new Ger¬
man model, by the Society for Civic Virtue (Selskabet for Borgerdyd). Govern¬
ment commissions were established in 1785 and again in 1790 to study
secondary and higher education. The second commission was dominated by the
bookish prince of Augustenburg, who took a real interest in this sphere of
learning. Although little would be accomplished in these areas for some years
to come, it was symptomatic of a new spirit that the Soro Rytterakademi, which
in 1782 had been opened to commoners, was closed in 1796.32
    Since 1784, numerous periodicals and pamphlets in the capital hailed the
reforms of Crown Prince Frederik and his advisers with the latters’ blessings,
whereas complaints against them were limited almost entirely to private conver¬
sation and correspondence. Yet in manor houses throughout Denmark there was
clearly much bitterness. Many of the smaller landowners in particular had been
economically hard-pressed in recent years. While the abolition of the stavnsband
aroused their consternation, regulation of tenancy contracts caused outright
alarm. The peasants seemed increasingly surly and insubordinate, the old rural
society on the verge of dissolution. Yet few dared to complain publicly. When
some Fyn proprietors held that the ordinances of 8 June 1787 on the rights of
manorial tenants threatened to ruin the landowners, the government brought
legal action against them, compelling them to beg for pardon.33
    Proprietorial opposition came to a head in the summer of 1790, at the time
of Crown Prince Frederik’s marriage to Princess Marie Sophie Frederikke, the
daughter of Prince Carl of Hesse. Aroused by the activity of the reconvened
Great Agrarian Commission since February of that year, a large gathering of
Jutland proprietors in Viborg prepared a message of congratulation to the crown
prince; at the same time, Kammerherre F. L. K. Beenfelt drafted an accompany¬
ing statement of grievances signed by 103 proprietors. This document, with a
