                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                         197

He had nonetheless mobilized Gavle’s burgher militia and quartered military
detachments in the neighborhood.
   The king could count on sure majorities in three of the Estates but only upon
a small minority of the Nobility. According to the diarist Hochschild, who al¬
ways had his ear to the ground:

   As many of the Nobility as could turned out for the Riksdag, even those
   who in 1789 had been imprisoned at Fredrikshof, partly to show the nation
   that they were not causing difficulties, partly at least to be present in case
   their rights should be called into question and taken from them. The rumor
   was widely spread that an end to the exclusive right to manorial demesne
   land might be proposed, together with the equal taxation of land.58

As will be seen, the questions of manorial demesne and a uniform land tax would
arise seventeen years later, to bedevil the Riksdag of 1809-10.
    The Gavle Riksdag of 1792 went surprisingly smoothly. As in 1789, most of
the work was done by the Secret Committee, with a nonnoble majority including
Peasant representatives. It estimated the war debts as low as possible at 8.5 mil¬
lion riksdaler and the total national debt at 29.5 million—three times as large
as at the beginning of the reign—which the Estates were to guarantee and place
under the management of the National Debt Office established in 1789. The tax¬
ation granted in 1789 was to continue “until the next Riksdag.” This plan was
accepted with little debate outside the Noble Estate. The Riksdag could be dis¬
solved already on 24 February 1792.
   The king’s aristocratic opponents had prudently avoided a confrontation.
Anxious to reconcile them, Gustav III had brought up neither his plan for a new
constitution nor the question of the Act of Union and Security of 1789, which
the Noble Estate had still not accepted. While the noble opposition continued to
ostracize him. the other Estates addressed to him a joint petition of thanks, sup¬
plemented by an additional one from the Finnish peasant riksdagsman. Alto¬
gether Gustav could feel well pleased. Time seemed to be on his side. But this
was only the calm before the storm.59

   In surveying the three years between the spring of 1789 and the spring of
1792, one cannot but be struck by a greater divergence in the focus of national
energies within the Nordic world than at any time since the Seven Years’ War.
Sweden-Finland under Gustav III was above all concerned with war and diplo¬
macy; Denmark-Norway with peaceful internal reform.
   As ruling sovereigns, neither Crown Prince Frederik nor Gustav III wel¬
comed the Revolution in France, not least because both had established their
positions of power through coups d’etat, or what were often referred to before
1789 as “revolutions.” For the time being, Frederik had little to say on the sub-
