     196      A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

 Throughout 1790 and 1791 Gustav’s agents remained active in Norway, sending
 the king detailed reports and seeking contact with malcontents. But Adlerbeth’s
 suggestion remains questionable.53
      Gustav was meanwhile involved in far-reaching speculations about Poland.
  By the summer of 1790, the Polish Diet, then in the midst of drafting a new con¬
  stitution, considered an eventual successor to King Stanislaus Poniatowski. In
 October, following the peace of Varala, Gustav made known his own candida¬
 ture. Rumors in Poland that he enjoyed Russian backing, however, put the kiss
 of death on any Swedish-Polish dynastic union, and in May 1791 the Poles of¬
 fered the succession to the elector of Saxony. Gustav confided to his minister
 in Warsaw, Lars von Engestrom, that he only contemplated this “sacrifice” for
 the sake of the strategic and especially the financial benefits it might bring Swe¬
 den. The whole scheme may moreover have been only a ploy to allow Sweden
 to claim compensation in a future partition of Poland; in such an event, he wrote
 to Stedingk in March 1792, Sweden must be prepared to seize such advantages
 as the situation might allow. Armfelt later noted that these would have been in
 “the only area for expansion that would be suitable for him.” Again, Norway
 comes to mind.54
    Gustav Ill’s motives regarding both France and Poland during 1790-92 were
 as complex as the man himself. No episodes better illustrate his characteristic
 mixture of romantic idealism and flexible opportunism.
    His foreign policy following the end of the Russian war had been spurred
largely by the ruinous condition of Sweden’s state finances since the Riksdag of
 1789. The Estates had then only guaranteed the estimated costs of the campaign
for that year. To fill the inevitable deficit and to pay for the war in 1790, the
government had resorted to the unrestrained issue of bills of credit, debt notes,
and other paper. By the end of the war no one knew the full extent of the national
debt. In 1791 redemption of the credit notes, set in 1789 for one to two years,
was postponed indefinitely and interest payments on them were suspended.55
Johan Liljencrantz’s great monetary reform of 1776 was drowned in a flood of
paper.
    Anxious to avoid another Riksdag, Gustav III sought for alliances that could
provide foreign subsidies. But by the end of 1791 a diet could no longer be post¬
poned. Many dreaded its consequences. Duchess Charlotta feared in December
 1791 that “the desperate state of our finances could here, as in France, easily
lead to a revolution.”56
   The Estates were summoned to convene on 23 January 1792 in Gavle, to
avoid possible disturbances in the capital. In his opening address Gustav III
pointed out that, confident of his subjects’ loyalty, he had not hesitated to call
a Riksdag at a time of “fanatical confusion . . . when other kings would have
hesitated to expose themselves to the ferment aroused by great assemblies ”57
