                              REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                      201

 surrounded by a group of masked figures, one of whom discharged a pistol into
 his back. Although the assassins escaped, they were soon apprehended. All were
 noblemen. The aristocratic opposition, which the king and commonality had
 driven underground in 1788-89, had taken its revenge.
    Gustav had been warned of a plot against his life that very day, but disre¬
 garded it since the past three years had been rife with such rumors. Already in
 1790, there had been talk in Finland of a coup to change the constitution in the
 event the king were killed or taken prisoner in the Russian war, or even to elim¬
 inate him by force. By the time of the Gavle Riksdag and thereafter, stories of
 similar conspiracies were widespread even abroad.1
   Following the Peace of Varala, Gustav Ill’s opponents were deeply con¬
cerned about the state of Sweden’s finances and signs of the king’s adventurous
speculations in European grande politique. Virtually no one in Sweden favored
an armed intervention against France. While many feared financial chaos or
dangerous dependence upon Russia, the prospect of taking up arms against the
very temple of liberty outraged the more idealistic opponents of the king, who
saw him as a Swedish 'Nero or "Caligula,” at once treacherous, cruel, and
decadent. They hoped, J. A. Ehrenstrom recalled,

   by revealing his warlike intentions toward France to increase their fol¬
   lowing, not only among friends of the fatherland but among that daily
   increasing party which, delighted by the eloquent phrases in the speeches
   from the tribune of the French National Assembly, were filled with
   enthusiasm for a revolution, of which they expected the rebirth of the
   world and the golden age of freedom. . . . [They] indeed succeeded in
   arousing deep fears . . . and in spreading disaffection toward a king who
   was depicted as a despot, prepared to suppress abroad the regained rights
   of an oppressed nation, so as to be all the more able to suppress them in
   his own.2

    In Stockholm malcontents congregated around General Carl Fredrik Pechlin,
 a steadfast opponent of strong monarchy during the later Era of Freedom and
 a master of intrigue. Associated with this circle was Jacob von Engestrom, who
drafted the outlines of a constitution featuring a strong council, dependent upon
the Estates, and securely tenured bureaucracy. Such stipulations recall the old
constitution of 1720. Yet Engestrom appears also to have envisioned a uni¬
cameral legislature, elected by classes based upon property ownership, and the
opening of all state employments and categories of land to all citizens. These
points call to mind both the Legislative Assembly under the new French consti¬
tution of 1791 and Gustav Ill’s own physiocratic emphasis upon property as the
basis of representation in his last constitutional plans. Principles aside, the aris¬
tocratic conspirators realized they must win over the other Estates from the king.
Since the nobility had already lost most of its substantive privileges, Engestrom
