                       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92                        195

himself nothing more than a revolutionary, although he was favored by suc¬
cess.” Gustav himself admitted as much to Bouille in February 1792: “I have
been in the position too often of conducting revolutions or of combating them
not to know that this [enterprise against France] cannot succeed unless led by
a single person.”50
   Others were less impressed by the revolutionary menace. Duchess Charlotta,
for instance, wrote in September 1791:

   The justification the king gives for his activity, namely the fear that the
   principles of the National Assembly might spread to other lands and even
   to us, seems groundless to me, for a king who lets himself be guided by
   love of justice and freedom should have nothing to fear from anarchy; but
   the despotism for which the king strives is meanwhile fully as great an evil
   as this anarchy, which is indeed the antithesis of freedom and the same as
   the despotism of the many.51

    Various hardheaded, practical motives may likewise be discerned behind
Gustav’s counterrevolutionary plans. Sweden was left diplomatically isolated
and close to bankruptcy following the Peace of Varala in 1790. Its traditional
ally and source of subsidies, France, was crippled by internal disorder —in
Gustav’s mind much as France’s ally, Sweden, had been under the constitution
of 1720. If successful, a Swedish-led intervention could ultimately restore
France as the bulwark of Sweden’s security.
    Such a project meanwhile provided a basis for other possible alliances, partic¬
ularly with the old enemy, Russia. The Treaty of Drottningholm was the begin¬
ning of what might become a real diplomatic revolution in the North. Copen¬
hagen was duly concerned, especially since Bernstorff rejected a Russian feeler
in September 1791 concerning possible Danish participation in a common action
against France, on the grounds that ‘‘each nation may give itself its own consti¬
tution and govern itself without other powers having the right to intervene”; this
was a principle, he added, which none had more stoutly defended than the king
of Sweden. Gustav did not fail to raise with the Russians the possibility of Swe¬
den’s acquiring Norway in return for compensation to Denmark in Oldenburg
and Delmenhorst—at Russia’s expense.52
    By early 1792, Gustav III appeared to some initiates to have lost part of his
zeal for French affairs. Certainly his efforts had met with repeated disappoint¬
ment. But there is another explanation. In his memoirs, G. G. Adlerbeth wrote:
   In Sweden several of the king’s confidants held that His Majesty was not
   really serious about his armament against France. Some maintained that
   Denmark was the real enemy against which it was intended; that France
   served only as a cover, and that a campaign would be mounted against
   Norway as soon as the season permitted.
