 198      A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

ject. Gustav was older and more experienced in such matters—as well as consid¬
 erably more articulate. Both the American revolt and the Anjala revolt had well
 prepared him for his immediate and implacable opposition to the French Revolu¬
 tion.
    Although there were some signs of discontent with the recent agrarian re¬
 forms in Denmark, the petition of the Jutland proprietors in 1790 and Tonne
 Fiittichau’s feud with Colbjornsen can hardly compare with the determined—
even though seemingly restrained—opposition to Gustav III among a proud
 nobility with strong constitutional traditions in Sweden and Finland. The relative
 intensity of reactions to the French Revolution in the two kingdoms must be seen
 in this light. Fargely for internal political reasons Gustav III spun ambitious
schemes for intervention against the revolutionary menace; in Denmark Berns-
torff saw little to be gained and much to be lost by intervening.
    Against the background of its political struggle against Gustav III, the Swed-
ish-Finnish nobility and its intellectual allies welcomed the revolution in France,
often with passionate enthusiasm. The Danish proprietorial class seems gener¬
ally to have reacted negatively to it, from the viewpoint of already beleaguered
manorial lords. The German nobles in the Danish kingdom and the duchies,
however, reveal a notable similarity to their Swedish and Finnish counterparts,
based on their own constitutional traditions. In both monarchies, members of the
high court aristocracy, closest to the intellectual currents of the time, were most
articulate in their enthusiasm over developments in France. Many of these high¬
born “enrages” were women. “The fair sex,” wrote Baron A. F. Hamilton,
“which does not love despotism in others . . . exercised a vast influence upon
the attitudes of the younger men, inspiring in them a firmness one would never
have expected of folk whose fortunes depended partly on court favor.” Perhaps
one may here perceive the greater influence of Rousseauian romanticism upon
the novel-reading female members of the great families. “Bernstorff said
yesterday at court that Rousseau was a scoundrel,” wrote Charlotte Schim-
melmann to Fuise Stolberg in September 1789; “that scoundrel is almost my
saint.”60
    The paradoxical aspects of these reactions to the French Revolution in palace
and manor house would become evident enough with time. Both Crown Prince
Frederik by choice and Gustav III by circumstance were radical social refor¬
mers—if not indeed “crowned revolutionaries”—by the later 1780s. By the eve
ot the French Revolution they had largely accomplished by peaceful means what
in France would only be gained by turmoil and bloodshed. Yet neither regarded
the French Revolution from this perspective, seeing it instead as a challenge to
royal sovereignty. Their opponents among both the Swedish-Finnish and the
German aristocracies saw the revolution from the same viewpoint, largely fail¬
ing at first to recognize that it threatened the very survival of hereditary corpo¬
rate status. Only the Danish landlord class, represented by Fiittichau and the Jut-
