                              REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                      203

    likewise voided. ... It says in a clause of the constitution . . . that
    whosoever seeks to change or overthrow that fundamental law shall be
    considered an enemy of the realm. In consequence thereof, the king has
    declared himself an enemy of the realm and the people . . . and as a
    society must defend itself against him who would injure his neighbor’s
    person or property ... one is justified in opposing force with force.8

    The court condemned five of those indicted to death, but in August the duke-
regent changed four of these sentences to exile. Five others received lesser pen¬
alties. Ultimately only Anckarstrom suffered the supreme penalty. After being
publicly whipped on the pillory for three consecutive days, his right hand was
struck off and he was beheaded, drawn, and quartered, on 27 April 3792. Swe¬
den s last political execution recalls Struensee’s cruel fate in Copenhagen just
two decades earlier.
   Abroad, news of the assassination caused a sensation. The court of Copen¬
hagen had reason to feel relieved, although in Aarhus Guldberg feared the result¬
ing outcry “against aristocrats.” Indeed, signs were not lacking in Sweden that
the assassination had again stirred up the class antagonism of recent years. In
France there was jubilation among the Jacobins, among whom something of an
Anckarstrom cult flourished.9
     ‘If heaven had vouchsafed Gustav III a few more years’ peace,” Armfelt later
 wrote, “we would have seen at Haga the philosopher of Sans Souci.”10 In many
 ways Gustav indeed recalls his uncle, Frederick the Great. As it was, his life
 was cut short at the age of forty-six. Yet his reign was of great and lasting signif¬
 icance for his nation’s future evolution. The Gustavian era remains a golden age
 of Swedish culture, thanks not least to the king’s own passionate interest in liter¬
ature and the arts. Gustav restored Sweden’s strength and self-esteem, and main¬
tained its full, effective independence from the Russian colossus. In the longer
perspective, Gustav III, the nobles’ friend, left his lasting mark by leveling in
drastic fashion the corporate privileges of his subjects. The would-be leader of
a monarchical crusade to crush the Hydra of Revolution, Gustav was not alto¬
gether blind to this paradox. Once, in 1790, he said-with a prescience he could
hardly have appreciated — “I am myself a democrat.”11
    He remains a strange and enigmatic figure, who in adversity showed himself
as strong as he had been weak and frivolous in more fortunate times, as J. A.
Ehrenstrom later wrote. He could be hardheaded and opportunistic in politics
and diplomacy, and he was among the last European monarchs to command his
forces in the field. He was at the same time a man of romantic imagination and
grandiose dreams. Historians have never ceased to debate his motives and signif¬
icance. Yet surely he revealed much of himself when he wrote to his envoy in
Warsaw in November 1790: “We are created to work, to strain our powers, suf¬
fer, fight against success, which spoils us, and against adversity, which op¬
presses us: that is man’s lot, as long as he lives, and that is the duty of kings.”12
