202       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

and his friends were evidently prepared to contemplate further sacrifices to
restore constitutional freedom.3
    Separately, another conspiracy formed among men prepared to take the final,
desperate step. Gustav’s actual assassin, Jacob Johan Anckarstrom, a former
captain of the Guards, was the king’s bitter enemy both in principle and over
personal grievances. By the winter of 1792, he had confided his views to the
young counts Claes Horn and Adolf Ludvig Ribbing; according to the latter,
society by then “swarmed with men who wished to play the role of Brutus.’’4
At the Gavle Riksdag in January 1792, Anckarstrom and his friends vainly
sought an opportunity to strike. Meanwhile, through Ribbing they came into
contact with the wider circle of conspirators around General Pechlin, who by
March had evidently gathered the various threads of conspiracy into his hands.
    It appears that the conspirators planned, after assassinating Gustav III, to
seize power with the support of trustworthy military units, to set up a regency
for the thirteen-year-old Crown Prince Gustav Adolf, nominally under his
mother, to eliminate Gustav’s hated henchmen from government and court, and
to establish a new constitution. Their plans were, however, frustrated by their
failure to kill the king immediately on 16 March and their own rapid arrest. Gus¬
tav lingered on until 29 March.5
    Most of the Swedish and Finnish nobility were aghast at the assassination,
and many hastened to make their peace with the dying king. His bitterest ene¬
mies were meanwhile jubilant over the fall of what one of them called a despot
“surely unrivaled in either ancient or modern history.’’ Naturally French
Jacobins were suspected of complicity, a suspicion Gustav himself shared in his
final days, doubtful as it now appears.6
    During the weeks following, the police inquest made alarming progress, im¬
plicating an ever-widening circle among the aristocracy. According to a well-
informed source, had it continued, every other prominent family would have had
cause to “wear mourning.’’7 By August the new regent, Gustav’s brother, Duke
Carl of Sodermanland, closed the investigation, claiming that the king had on
his deathbed urged leniency toward his assassins. Thus the full scope of the con¬
spiracy remains shrouded in mystery.
   Of some forty persons arrested, fourteen were brought to trial. Here Anckar¬
strom defended his act as tyrannicide under the social contract:
  A king is, in himself, only a sinful mortal like any other, but he has re¬
  ceived the nation’s mandate to maintain law, peace, and security, and thus
  to see that all goes well when the nation itself is not convened. . . . Can
  he be king of the realm who is capable of breaking the oath he has made
  to the people, to uphold, respect, and govern according to the constitution
  of 1772, which the king himself had prepared and which was accepted
  without change by the nation, [he] who can deprive the people of all secur¬
  ity? . . . When the king has violated his oath, . . . that of his people is
