 194       A NEW DAWN FOR HUMANITY, 1789-92

     By the later summer of 1791, Gustav III was back in Stockholm and soon
  occupied with fresh plans, first for a Swedish-Russian landing in Normandy,
 then for a Swedish-Russian-Spanish coalition against France. Preoccupied with
 the Turkish war and the threat of a revivified Poland, Catherine II vaguely en¬
 couraged Gustav’s concern with France to distract him from the Baltic. On 19
 October 1791, after protracted negotiations, Russia concluded a definitive peace
 and a defensive alliance with Sweden at Drottningholm. While only vaguely
 referring to France, it provided for an annual subsidy of 300,000 rubles. The
 threads of Gustav Ill's complex counterrevolutionary diplomacy continued to
 pass largely through the hands of Axel Fersen, now in Brussels, who stubbornly
 sought to win his king over to the idea of an armed congress. This is where mat¬
 ters stood by the time of Gustav Ilfs death in March 1792.47
    What lay behind his plans against revolutionary France? Certainly the idea
of leading a great monarchical crusade against the revolutionary Hydra appealed
strongly to Gustav’s romantic sensibilities. He had hoped his Russian war would
rekindle the loyal enthusiasm of his nobility, which had cooled in the years pre¬
ceding, instead it had widened the rift between them. Their alienation deeply
grieved him. Yet earlier than most of the Swedish-Finnish nobility, Gustav
recognized the social side of the revolution in France, reconfirming his convic¬
tion that monarch and nobility must stand or fall together. To Armfelt he wrote
of his hope that by participating in a campaign in France, the Swedish nobles
would be cured of their opposition by the sufferings and loyalty of the French
noblesse,48
    At the same time, Gustav III regarded the revolution as a malady threatening
to other lands, not least his own, the latest outbreak of an endemic evil afflicting
the European world since even before his own ascent to the throne, which must
be cured by drastic means. The king of France must reestablish “royalty in its
full powers’’ and accept no “mixed government.’’ While he took a personal
interest in the royal family, he wrote to Stedingk, now ambassador in St. Peters¬
burg, in the summer of 1791,

   that which I take in the public cause, in the private interest of Sweden, and
   in the cause of all kings is greater yet . . . it may be all the same whether
   it be Louis XVI or Charles X who occupies the throne, as long as
   the principles destructive to all authority are uprooted. . . . The only
   remedy for all this is steel and cannon. It may be that at this moment the
   [French] king and queen are in danger, but this danger is not as great as
   that to all the crowned heads that are menaced by the Revolution.49

   George Washington had observed already in 1784 that since Gustav III had
himself so recently changed Sweden’s constitution, he was naturally sensitive
toward ‘anything that might have the semblance of republicanism.’’ In April
1788, “one of his less enthusiastic admirers’’ reportedly said that “the king is
