                             REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                     213

by the European war. In May 1793 Copenhagen lost its exclusive bonding privi¬
leges in the transit trade, which were now extended to virtually all ports in Den¬
mark and Norway. The Finnmark and Iceland, as well as much of the West
Indian trade, was opened to all merchants.
   The government continued to aid selected manufacturers, but in February
1797 it issued a new tariff ordinance—the most liberal of its time—eliminating
most import restrictions and drastically lowering import duties on a wide assort¬
ment of foreign wares, thus largely liquidating the old protectionist system and
greatly stimulating foreign trade.
   A commission to investigate a carpenters’ strike in Copenhagen in 1794 took
up the whole question of the craft guilds—of which there were then forty-one
in the capital—leading ultimately to curtailment of their monopolies in March
1800. Norwegian forest owners were granted full freedom to cut timber in 1795,
and in 1799 all types of trade in Christiania were opened to all with burgher
rights.34
    On 21 June 1797, Count Andreas Peter Bernstorff died in Copenhagen at the
age of sixty-two. Combining in his hands the direction of foreign policy, the
German and—in 1788-89 —the Danish Chancelleries, he was the dominant fig¬
ure on the royal council and had long been recognized, both at home and abroad,
as the real head of government in the Danish monarchy, occupying a position
of authority and prestige unmatched in its modern history. No less significant
were his unwavering dedication to his adopted fatherland, his involvement to
some degree in virtually all aspects of its national life, his patient diplomacy and
tact. Not only did Bernstorff manage to preserve the monarchy’s neutrality and
promote its prosperity in a Europe racked by revolution and war; he also concil¬
iated and turned to constructive ends the centrifugal forces of a diverse and frag¬
ile dynastic state. He was sincerely mourned in Denmark, Norway, and the
duchies alike. His passing marked the end of the era, since 1784, rightly associ¬
ated with his name, the most creative and dynamic phase of the Danish era of
reform.
    While various tasks remained to be completed in 1797, few new reforms
would thereafter be initiated. How then is the historic significance of the era to
be evaluated? The literature on the subject is immense and constantly growing,
not least in recent years, but it varies greatly in quality and depth, leaving room
for much controversy over basic questions. How bad were the “bad old days’’
before 1784? How great a role did legislation play in the amelioration of condi¬
tions? To what extent did conditions actually improve, and for whom? What
were the guiding motives of the reformers and their adversaries? As such ques¬
tions are by their very nature largely unanswerable, the interpretations offered
largely reflect the changing concerns and ideologies of later times, as well as
shifting concepts of the potentialities and proper tasks of historical research.
   Older accounts, dating back to the period itself, tended to dramatize the re-
