208        REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

  Still, through these alternatives hoveri was removed altogether from about two-
 thirds of Denmark’s peasant farms by the time an ordinance in December 1799
  finally made the fixing of tenant labor an absolute requirement, confirming what
 was then a virtual fait accompli. Where still subject to hoveri, the tenant could
 now at least make permanent arrangements to cover it.21
     The tithe remained a burden to peasant cultivators. Levied for the support of
 the church, its papal share had been divided at the time of the Reformation be¬
 tween the crown and the local landlord. In part a tax, in part a manorial due,
 it involved various vested interests. As it was payable in kind—normally in
 grain—it denied the cultivator profit in time of scarcity. Tithed grain was col¬
 lected from the field, “in the sheaf,’’ before the rest of the crop could be taken
 in, causing inconvenient delays and spoilage in wet weather. An ordinance of
 March 1796 urged titheholders to conclude private agreements with tithable
 peasants, but such piecemeal, voluntary reforms proceeded slowly.22
     Except for its relaxation of old restrictions against peasant enterprises outside
 the towns, following the Lofthuus uprising of 1787, and periodic relief during
 poor crop years, the government felt little need at this time to concern itself with
 the Norwegian peasantry. The emancipation of the Danish peasants meanwhile
 brought to the fore the question of Leiheigenschaft, or serfdom, in the duchies.
     In Denmark the stavnsband had been a recent innovation, decreed in 1733
 by an absolute monarch free to terminate it at will. In the duchies the king—or
rather duke—did not possess unlimited power, and the manorial right of serf¬
holding was included among ancient privileges repeatedly guaranteed, most
recently when ducal Holstein was acquired in 1773. Holstein’s ambiguous status
as a fief of the Holy Roman Empire and the Schleswig-Holstein Ritterschaft’s
jealous vigilance over local rights further restricted Copenhagen’s effective free¬
dom of action.
    In this matter—as in others—the government proceeded cautiously, seeking
voluntary reform rather than direct confrontation. Since 1765 the crown had
sold off much of its domain in the duchies as hereditary leaseholds, whose peas¬
ant purchasers were released from serfdom. In 1787 it urged private proprietors
to follow suit. Some did so, especially in Schleswig, and many others were at¬
tracted to the idea.
   The duchies were among the more progressive areas of the German cultural
world, a crossroads for cosmopolitan influences. Both Danish and foreign visi¬
tors were struck during the 1790s by the prosperity and industriousness they
encountered there, in contrast to Denmark itself.23 The humanitarianism of the
French Enlightenment and the new Lutheran pietism, as well as the practical
examples of German cameralism and English agronomy all favored the emanci¬
pation of the remaining serfs. Early experiments in the duchies had stimulated
agrarian reforms in Denmark. Now the Danish program provided a model for
the duchies.
