                             REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                      211

archy’s inhabitants, the government turned to the problems of other, smaller dis¬
advantaged groups. It relaxed old restrictions against non-Lutheran Christians.
A dispute in the 1780s between orthodox and reforming members of the Copen¬
hagen synagogue led to a government commission, which in 1796 recommended
that the Jews—heretofore a miniature state within the state—be made entirely
subject to the civil laws, except in questions pertaining to the Christian faith. The
matter dragged, largely because of disagreements among the Jews themselves,
until March 1814, by which time barriers against them had already fallen: they
could acquire landed property and were admitted to schools, professions, civil
posts, trade guilds, and clubs. Copenhagen’s Jews, most of those within the
monarchy, estimated in 1800 at about 2,000, by then included many prosperous
merchants. “More than anywhere else,” Pram made bold to state in Minerva
in 1797, “we have treated these, our brothers, with a humanity denied them by
Europe’s other Christians.”29
    The problem of poverty likewise attracted attention. Already in 1787 the gov¬
ernment appointed a commission to consider relief to the poor in Copenhagen.
An ordinance in March 1792, while leaving a number of details to be resolved,
stated the principle that public relief should be available to all in real need.30
    With the establishment of a new police court (Politiret) in Copenhagen in
 1793, the policemaster lost his authority to inflict arbitrary punishment, without
appeal, for a wide range of offenses, thereby bringing the poorer classes of the
capital under the full protection of the law. Numerous reforms in the 1790s
meanwhile simplified and speeded legal procedure, prescribed more humane
punishments, and improved conditions in the prisons, whose inmates were like¬
wise put to useful work. The establishment of arbitration boards in 1795 greatly
reduced the number of civil law suits. A more tolerant attitude allowed an in¬
creasing number of divorces after 1790. The appearance of a Society for Saving
Lost Citizens on Fyn in 1797 shows a growing public interest in rehabilitating
public offenders.31
   The most wretched inhabitants of the state were the black slaves in the Danish
West Indian islands, whose plight aroused a growing sympathy. Debate on the
slave trade in the British Parliament stimulated the appointment of a Danish
commission, headed by Ernst Schimmelmann, in the fall of 1791. Although the
Danes prided themselves on treating their slaves more decently than other na¬
tions, the Danish Baltic and Guinea Company had lost some 15 percent of its
blacks and a third of its seamen on the Middle Passage, showing little, if any,
profit up to its liquidation in 1787. Schimmelmann, who himself had been a di¬
rector of the company, was conscience-stricken over the trade and sought, on
his inherited sugar plantation on St. Croix, to ensure humane treatment of his
slaves and their replacement through natural increase alone. The commission
concluded that while slavery could not yet be abolished, the condition of the
slaves should be improved toward that eventual end through voluntary coopera-
