204       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

    In a codicil to his will, prepared on the day of his death, Gustav III appointed
a regency council of five, including Barons Armfelt and Taube, to share author¬
ity with the regent, Duke Carl, until Crown Prince Gustav Adolf should come
of age four and a half years hence. This arrangement expressed Gustav’s misgiv¬
ings about his brother, who, resentful over the limited role he had heretofore
been allowed, had become a natural focal point for the aristocratic opposition.
No sooner was Gustav dead than Duke Carl declared the codicil null and void
on technical grounds.
    While the duke at first retained the appointed council, he summoned to its
meetings prominent “Patriots” opposed to Gustavian autocracy. Clearly he had
no intention of being guided by his late brother’s confidants. In discouragement,
Armfelt departed by summer for the Continent. Taube withdrew to private life.
Other leading “Gustavians” were sent to minor posts in the provinces.
    Although Duke Carl exulted in his newly gained authority, he lacked his
brother’s qualities of leadership. He was indecisive, indolent, and easily
swayed. He tended to be secretive and suspicious. From the start he relied
strongly upon unofficial advisers and agents outside the regular structure of
government.13
    In July 1792, Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm, scion of a Finnish noble family of
 strongly Cap traditions and prominent “Patriot” at the Riksdagar of 1786 and
 1789, returned to Sweden from semi-exile on the Continent. Like the duke and
others in his entourage, he was a passionate devotee of Freemasonry and the
occult arts. Inspired by a mystical belief in his own genius and mission, he pos¬
sessed an energy and strength of will which the duke lacked. Although he ac¬
cepted only a minor position in the financial administration, Reuterholm soon
emerged as the duke-regent’s “grand vizier.”14 His position recalls that of
Guldberg in Denmark twenty years earlier. The francophile Baron de Stael,
recalled from Paris by Gustav III in late 1791, replaced Taube as principal ad¬
viser for foreign affairs, without assuming the position of rikskansler.
    The regency was not a period of constructive government action. For all his
ambition, Reuterholm lacked any real program other than to maintain himself
in power against his Gustavian rivals. The regime reacted fitfully to alleged Gus¬
tavian conspiracies and popular disturbances, as well as to the shifting fortunes
of the European war. Thus the really significant developments in Sweden-Fin-
land during these years were the results of private activities, especially in the
agrarian sphere.
   Gustav Ill’s reforms of 1789 were bearing fruit. There was a steady rise in
peasant freeholding through purchase of both crown and manorial tenancies.
Peasant holdings likewise increased through internal colonization, particularly
in Finland, and the division of existing farms. Freedom, after 1789, from old
restrictions on peasant property rights and on the employment of labor promoted
increased productivity and land reclamation.15
