 212      REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

tion of the plantation owners. On 16 March 1792, Denmark was the first West¬
ern nation to prohibit the import of slaves into its colonies, as of the beginning
of 1803. Through the determined efforts of the planters, implementation was
nonetheless delayed until 1807, after Britain had banned the trade. Slavery itself
would not be abolished in the Danish colonies until 1848.32
   Throughout the 1790s, the government sought to stir the old municipal gov¬
ernments to greater activity in Denmark and Norway; in the duchies they had
long played a more independent role. In August 1795 it issued new instructions
to the Copenhagen magistrature, setting forth its responsibilities in economic
matters, welfare, and schools. Whereas in most Danish and Norwegian towns
the trend in the later eighteenth century had been from collegial magistrature to
mayor (byfoged), the councils of “elected men” (eligerede mcend) were now
given increased powers of surveillance and control.
   The government meanwhile strove to make the councils more representative.
Beginning in Viborg in 1793, the common pattern came to be the election of
councilmen by majority vote of the citizenry (borgerskab). In 1797 this became
mandatory for all Danish provincial towns and in 1799 for Norwegian towns.
In 1800, members of the artisan class were made eligible for Copenhagen’s city
council, the “Thirty-Two Men.’’
   At the same time, the government encouraged open citizens’ meetings to
advise and watch over the “elected men.’’ In 1791 provincial town councils
were required to consult with the entire citizenry before preparing proposals. An
instruction of 1798 mandated open meetings to consider “everything having to
do with economic life and governance.”
    The government meanwhile kept a close watch over municipal affairs, partic¬
 ularly in the capital. Town ordinances required the approval of the local amt-
mand or stiftamtmand, and the authorities constantly intervened directly in town
affairs. The quickening pace of citizen participation during the 1790s may reflect
a public spirit stimulated by the French Revolution, as has been suggested. But
it was still far from democratic, and the government was generally more pro¬
gressive than the burghers themselves. There was, for instance, much opposition
among the old oligarchies to broadening representation on the councils in Chris¬
tiania, Bergen, and Trondheim, which the civic leaders of the last-named town
feared would produce “tumultuous scenes and Polish diets,” in accordance with
the “spirit of the times.”33
    In June 1795 much of central Copenhagen was destroyed by a disastrous fire.
The city made extensive arrangements for temporary relief and housing, aided
by donations from throughout the monarchy. The well-planned rebuilding of the
devastated areas was soon begun, producing some of the city’s most character¬
istic quarters.
   In commerce and manufacturing, the government continued its trend toward
greater economic freedom, stimulated by opportunities for neutral trade created
