                            REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                     207

ing the latter added incentive to purchase. Despite an initial lack of enthusiasm,
about half ot Denmark s peasant farmholders would relocate outside the old vil¬
lages by 1807; fortunately, the framework of the old half-timbered buildings
could fairly easily be disassembled and moved. This movement brought much
former common land within reach for cultivation.19
    Despite the apprehensions of many proprietors, there proved to be no lack
of tenants following the abolition of the stavnsband in 1788. While that dispensa¬
tion, reflecting the fears ot the 1730s of a paucity of manpower, had bound male
peasants to the manors by law, the steady growth of population together with
a scarcity of alternative employments made young peasants eager enough to bind
themselves to lifetime leases by the 1790s. For the great majority economic
security was surely more important than freedom of movement.20
    The central problem was now the hoveri, or manorial labor, required of most
tenants, and here the government tread warily. Although it had firmly rebuked
the Jutland proprietors who had sought to remonstrate against agrarian reforms
in 1790, it was impressed with the widespread discontent among the landlord
class this episode revealed and was tacitly prepared to compromise. The situa¬
tion recalls its combination of public repression and quiet concession in respond¬
ing to the Lofthuus rebellion in Norway. Its ordinance of June 1791 encouraged
landlords and tenants to conclude private settlements based on the existing
hoveri on each manor—provided only that this did not impede the adequate culti¬
vation of the tenant farms—while strongly stressing the tenant’s duty and obe¬
dience to the landlord. Proprietors, particularly of smaller manors, hesitated to
freeze hoveri, even at relatively high levels, so long as it remained in effect the
only real source of profit from their tenancies which could be adjusted to keep
pace with rising prices and an expanding market. The ordinance of 15 June
1792, permitting freely negotiable rents for consolidated tenant farms, however,
not only gave a strong impetus to further land reallocation but provided a wel¬
come, alternative form of profitability to landlords. From their side the deadlock
was now broken. An instruction in June 1795 urged the commutation of labor
obligations to payments, preferably in money, a solution already then increas¬
ingly common. Hoping for a general reduction of hoveri, many peasants pro¬
crastinated until the government made it known it would mediate, where volun¬
tary settlements were not reached, on the basis of the manor’s hoveri in 1790.
Thus by mid-1795, agreements had been concluded for some 600 of the 759
manors on which tenant labor was performed; in only thirty-seven cases did
government mediators thereafter intervene.
   Thanks to the expansive agricultural market of recent decades, the govern¬
ment’s cautious solution provided substantial benefits to proprietors, for by the
early 1790s tenant labor in much of Denmark had reached the highest levels
ever. These were now generally frozen by agreement, while the costs to the
peasant of either freehold purchase or commutation were correspondingly high.
