 210      REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

     In Norway the number of crofters grew rapidly, already amounting to some
 40,000 by 1792, in which year the government required farmers to conclude
 written contracts with them. A large class of landless laborers remained subject
 to the ordinance of 1754, requiring them to accept any available work within
 their parishes, which they could not leave without permission from the royal
 bailiff. If complaints were not heard from Norway against such “local slav¬
 ery”—as the Danish radical Riegels called it—this only shows how well it suited
 the needs of the farmers. Only by 1799 would this requirement be relaxed by
 a new militia ordinance. Some relief from population growth was meanwhile
 provided by internal colonization, particularly in northern Norway.26
    In Denmark there had been a limited need for wage laborers or cotters while
 the stavnsband was in force. But with its abolition, the rise in freeholding, and
 regulation and commutation of tenant labor, a new source of agricultural labor
 was essential. The government thus encouraged the formation of a sizable hus-
 mand class, to be provided ideally with small plots of land—too small to be self-
 sufficient—in return for labor. In 1791, as noted, it had permitted proprietors
under certain conditions to divide up tenant farms into crofts; a further instruc¬
tion in May 1796 allowed them to create crofts up to the number of their tenant
farms. Through these provisions and special dispensations, numerous farms
were broken up into new crofts—on Sjaelland alone some 30,000 crofts before
 1800. Although in principle intended partly to compensate husmcend for the loss
of customary village rights, land attached to crofts was not usually protected
against reallocation by the landlord for other use; nor was it required that most
cotters be granted any security of tenure. In time an increasing number of crofts
came to have no land at all, or had no more than small garden plots. In this
indirect way, much former peasant land was eventually added to manorial
demesnes, despite the general prohibition against such engrossments. The cot¬
ters meanwhile became increasingly more dependent upon manorial and peasant
landowners. In 1791 unmarried laborers were required to seek local employ¬
ment.27
   The significant dividing line within Danish rural society moved downward to
split the peasantry itself into haves and a growing number of have-nots. In the
duchies a similar situation was evolving. A new servitude was emerging to
replace the old.
    Abolition of the stavnsband and an increasingly dispersed settlement pattern
in the countryside left an administrative vacuum, which was fdled partly by the
parish pastor, partly by new local officials, most notably the parish bailiff
(sognefoged) established in 1791, appointed from among the more substantial
farmers. Over the years they were charged with a growing number of tasks in¬
volving conscription, schools, and relief to the poor, thereby acquiring practical
experience in public affairs of increasing significance for following decades.28
   As agrarian reforms transformed the condition of the majority of the mon-
