 206       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

 leases, in return for labor. There were also increasing numbers of bakstugusit-
 tare, essentially squatters on others’ land, without contractual rights and depen¬
 dent upon casual labor, and of rootless rural paupers. The division of family
 farms likewise reduced many smallholders to at least part-time wage earners.17

   In Denmark, the mid-1790s remained a time of vigorous reform under gov¬
ernment leadership. While the main emphasis remained the improvement of
agrarian conditions, a wide range of problems received attention.
   Although there had been a promising beginning in the 1760s, few peasant
freehold purchases occurred between 1770 and 1790. Thereafter they increased
rapidly and would continue at a high level until Denmark was drawn into the
Napoleonic wars in 1807. Following recent reforms, many landlords were now
anxious to be rid of their tenant farms, which remained a fiscal liability. By sell¬
ing them off, they could raise capital to rationalize cultivation of their demesnes,
which they were often prepared to reduce to more manageable size. The govern¬
ment encouraged them to do so by granting dispensations allowing them to retain
their tax exemptions.
   The Credit Bank (Kreditkasse), founded in 1786, made credit available to
peasant purchasers. An even more important source was the Almindelige Enke-
kasse, a subscription fund for widows’ pensions, after C. D. Reventlow became
one of its directors in 1797. Most of the necessary credit was, however, ex¬
tended by private persons, in particular by the landlords themselves. Mortgages
were almost uniformly set at the 4 percent maximum interest permitted by law.
Such residual manorial rights as had earlier encumbered freeholds as well as
hereditary leaseholds now virtually disappeared in contracts of sale. Within
twenty years over half of Denmark’s peasant farms passed into freehold owner¬
ship.
    Peasant tenants were at first often less anxious to buy their farms than their
 landlords were to sell them. In places the government had reneged on freehold
 purchases in the 1760s. Many peasants were fearful of payments, interest, and
taxes frequently amounting to more than they were accustomed to pay for their
leaseholds, or were reluctant to cut themselves off from the landlord’s support
in time of need. Sale of tenancies might be combined with land reallocation, add¬
ing both further expense and the emotional strains of moving away from the old
village. Landlords thus often brought pressure to bear through the threat of exact
enforcement of tenant obligations, denial of assistance, or prompt collection of
outstanding debts. An ordinance in June 1792 permitted proprietors to increase
rents for new leases. The main incentive to purchase nevertheless proved to be
the obvious success of growing numbers of freeholders.18
   During the same years land reallocation proceeded rapidly, by now frequently
welcomed by the peasantry. An ordinance in June 1792 permitted landlords to
charge tenants 4 percent interest on the capital they invested in the process, giv-
