                            REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                    209

    Further stimulus came from alarming incidents of social unrest in the
duchies. The disturbances in 1790 around Tender and Abenra have already been
noted. There were outbreaks in several places in 1794, especially among the
cotters near Kaltenkirchen, and the following year a tumult in Flensburg, which
had to be put down by the military. Although precipitated mainly by rising
prices, this ferment—and the utterances of some of the participants — seemed
particularly ominous against the background of the French Revolution. Similar
fears were rife in neighboring Mecklenburg and in Swedish Pomerania.24
   In January 1795, the non recepti landowners of the duchies called upon the
Ritterschaft for common deliberations concerning the abolition of serfdom on all
manors within a set period. There ensued a wide-ranging discussion, in which
A. P. Bernstorff and Ernst Schimmelmann, who belonged to the Ritterschaft,
expressed the government’s viewpoint, and the brothers Cai and Fritz Revent-
low—of the Holstein branch of that widespread family—championed conserva¬
tive interests. Although there was substantial agreement over the desirability of
ending serfdom, the deliberations bogged down over the role to be played by
the Ritterschaft, in view of its old rivalries with both the non recepti and the
government in Copenhagen.
    At the end of the year, Bernstorff s close collaborator, Professor C. U. D.
Eggers of Kiel, came out with his anonymous Schreiben eines Holsteinischen
Edelmanns an seinen Bruder iiber die Aufhebung der Leibeigenschaft in Hol¬
stein, inferring that if the proprietors did not solve the problem, the ruler
(.Landsherr) could do it for them, and stressing the overhanging threat of social
upheaval. Like Bernstorff, Eggers proposed that the Ritterschaft elect a deputa¬
tion to prepare for reform.
   When the Ritterschaft convened in January 1796, it was acquainted with
Eggers’s admonition and well understood the official inspiration behind it. It
established a commission, including representatives of the non recepti, to con¬
sider emancipation. Its investigations showed that by early 1797 serfdom no
longer existed on many manors, although it still remained on at least thirty-eight
in Schleswig and eighty-four in Holstein. In October of that year, after much
controversy, the commission submitted its petition to the crown, stating that the
proprietors of the duchies, with only one exception, were resolved that serfdom
be abolished by a set date, which most agreed should be eight years hence, in
 1805. No one had striven with greater tact and determination for this result than
A. P. Bernstorff. When he died in June 1797, he had the satisfaction of knowing
the commission’s decision.25
   Throughout the monarchy the government’s reforms had concentrated upon
bettering the conditions—and hence the productivity—of a particular class of
peasants: the gardmcend, or farmholders, whether freeholders or leaseholders.
The reverse side of the coin was the rapid increase in the lower strata of peasant
society.
