                            REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                     205

   The Storskifte, or partial land reallocation, commenced in 1757 and advanced
by Gustav III, had resulted by the 1790s in some reduction in the numbers of
scattered holdings in about half of Sweden's village lands, although with great
regional variations. Nowhere, however, had any village been completely re¬
structured. Land consolidation had proceeded much further in Denmark and the
duchies, whose early agrarian reformers had been in part inspired by the Swe¬
dish Storskifte.
     Not surprisingly, a new movement for consolidation now arose in Sweden’s
southernmost province of Skane, an old Danish territory acquired in 1658,
 where terrain and agrarian conditions closely resembled those across the Sound.
The initiative came from Baron Rutger Maclean, a liberal-minded opponent of
Gustav III who had welcomed the revolution in France largely for its abolition
of old restrictions on property rights. Beginning in 1785, Maclean, inspired by
 Danish and English examples, had by 1793 reorganized the tenancies on his
Svaneholm manor into seventy-five single, compact holdings, in the process
breaking up four old villages. These farms were leased out on strict renewable
contracts, requiring improved methods of cultivation and commuting all dues
and labor obligations to a money rent. Maclean divided his demesne into six
farms, worked by hired labor under his own supervision, to provide models for
effective agriculture. Eager to raise the cultural level of his tenantry, he estab¬
lished schools for their chilren, and even sent a young scholar to study the new
pedagogy with Heinrich Pestalozzi in Switzerland.
     At first the baron had a hard time finding tenants for his farms. Peasants ac¬
customed to traditional village life were hesitant about moving out to isolated
farmsteads or trying new, unfamiliar farming practices. But by the mid-1790s
the benefits of the new system were amply demonstrated, not only to the local
peasantry but to other landlords in the area. It aroused widespread interest, as
evidenced by numerous writings on the subject, and inspired the similar reor¬
ganization—or enskifte—of a number of other manors in the Skane.16
    Compact farms and money rents increased the profitability of peasant tenan¬
cies to both occupant and landlord, while wage labor permitted better cultivation
of demesne lands. Dividing the lands of entire villages into compact holdings
moreover brought under the plow former common lands that had been too re¬
mote to cultivate. Land consolidation proved, however, more problematical
elsewhere in Sweden and in Finland, where manorial tenancies were widely
scattered and their tenants well protected in their traditional rights.
    In Sweden—as in Denmark—increased agricultural productivity provided the
basis for a growing population, while demanding a large pool of wage labor for
peasant farms as well as manorial demesnes. While the number of freehold
farmers increased, that of the rural population as a whole increased more rapidly
still. A growing proportion were now cotters or torpare, who, like Norwegian
and many Danish husmcend, cultivated parts of farms or manors on revocable
