 220       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

closer at hand than ever,” wrote Prince Friedrich Christian of Augustenburg—
 soon to become a state councillor and the monarchy’s only duke—who after suf¬
fering much disillusionment with the Revolution in 1791, felt his hopes revived
by the “wise and bold” actions of the new French Convention. By December
 1792 he could contemplate with philosophic “equanimity” the prospect of los¬
ing rank, title, and wealth. Although by the end of 1793 he came to fear “the
heaven would be too dearly bought that could immediately arise out of the pres¬
ent Hell” in France, and soon contemplated emigrating to America, his wife,
Princess Luise Augusta—sister of the crown prince—stood fast in the faith a year
later, when in August 1794 she rejoiced at the triumph of French arms and
longed for the day when she might sacrifice her title to the “public good” and
‘ ‘be admitted to the class of Danish citizens, possessing no advantages other than
those I am able to acquire myself.”53
     In Holstein, Amtmann August Hennings at Plon published in 1792 his polem¬
 ical Ueber Adelsgeist und Aristokratismus, for which he was attacked as a
 “Jacobin” or “Sansculotte,” although he protested that he was rather a “Giron-
din in sympathy. Count W. F. von Schmettau, a retired Danish general, at¬
tacked the militarism of the monarchy in his Patriotischen Gedanken eines
Danen in 1792, setting off a public controversy intensely irritating to Crown
Prince Frederik, who for his own part followed the operations of the French
armies with keen interest. Nikolaus von Luckner at Blumendorff, son of a gen¬
eral in French service guillotined in 1794, remained an enthusiastic defender of
the revolution, although it was noted that his servants still addressed him as “His
Grace.”54
     In May 1793 the Prince of Augustenburg wrote to Baggesen that he believed
 he could get along well with the “Kiel democrats,” provided they espoused a
 “democracy of true cosmopolitans”; he was indeed too much of a Kultur-
 humanist to feel much affinity for the unwashed masses. He was by then in con¬
 tact with Adam Weishaupt, former leader of the suppressed Order of Illuminati
 in Bavaria, whom he had long hoped to bring to Denmark to head a secret orga¬
 nization for the spread of true enlightenment.55 Yet even those among the aris¬
tocracy of the duchies who felt little enthusiasm for the revolution as such did
not remain unaffected. In 1788 the Ritterschaft had declared itself prepared to
pay a special levy for the Swedish campaign but had seized the opportunity to
reassert its corporate status (ius subcollectandi). When in 1792 the government
imposed a tax upon the inheritance of estates by collateral heirs, the Ritterschaft
held this to be a violation of established rights and called for the convening of
the long-defunct Schleswig-Holstein Landtag, in a manner recalling the French
nobility’s demand for the Estates-General in 1787-88. As in 1774, however,
Bernstorff s determination and tact smoothed the troubled waters.56 Many land¬
lords were meanwhile impressed by peasant unrest in the duchies with the need
for some measure of reform.
