216       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

   of ennoblement, decorations, that place in society which are demanded as
   hereditary rights. Blush to have anyone but yourself to thank for any right,
   any social advantage whatsoever.

Nonetheless, from 1792 there was a growing rift between aristocratic libertar¬
ianism and antiaristocratic social radicalism.41
   Those, meanwhile, who turned against the French Revolution and all its
works tended in like measure to repudiate the rationalism of the philosophes in
favor of religious pietism or secular mysticisms. Among the intellectuals, only
a few stout souls, like Nils Rosen von Rosenstein in 1793, still dared uphold the
ideals of the Enlightenment by seeking to disassociate them from the excesses
of the revolution. By the turn of the century the poet Franzen would elegiacally
express their deepening discouragement:

           In vain ye burned the midnight oil, ye wise ones,
           Locke, Rousseau, Voltaire, and Montesquieu,
           Your efforts are now scattered by the winds.
           While yet the sound of your names we praise,
           In sorrow to your graves takes flight
           The friend of light, who sees the failure of all his hopes
           When Marat shares adoration in this world
           With Cagliostro and with Swedenborg.42

   G. A. Reuterholm had been among the Swedish “Patriots” of the 1780s
inspired by the revolution and had visited Paris in 1789-90. Upon becoming
Duke Carl’s “vizier” in July 1792, he prepared a grandiloquent edict restoring
freedom of the press, which Gustav III had progressively curtailed since 1774.43
The result was a plethora of new journals and pamphlets glorifying the French
Revolution and the rights of man, and in particular attacking the institution of
hereditary aristocracy. Most prominent among the radical journalists of 1792
was Lorenz Munter Philipson, who in December declared in his newly founded
Patriot en:

   No one should hold, much less be born to, any honor but that which he
   earns through his native and acquired abilities; should own anything but
   what he himself needs and is not denied to others; permit himself any idle¬
   ness but that which his nature requires to restore his strength.

While some nobles took up the pen in defense of their order, there were still
some who took the popular side. Admiral F. W. Leijonancker even accused the
French Revolution of being too moderate and called for a liberty based on eco¬
nomic equality.44
  Reuterholm, proud aristocrat that he was, had indeed been attracted to the lib-
