 214      REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

forms of 1784-97 as a unique, sudden, and essentially complete transformation
of society. More recent scholarship has made clear that they were in fact none
of these things. There had been much speculation about and numerous practical
experiments in reform long before A. P. Bernstorff—or indeed Struensee—came
to power. More significant, the conditions of the Danish peasantry had steadily
improved in important respects since the beginning of the long peace in 1720,
particularly in matters of tenure, as Fridlev Skrubbeltrang has shown.35
   According to Hans Jensen, the reforms demonstrated that by 1784 an increas¬
ingly effective bureaucracy had essentially freed the crown from its earlier
administrative dependency upon the landlord class. Ole Feldbaek, however,
rightly reminds us that as the administrative machine became more complex,
Danish society as a whole did likewise. Bernstorff and his associates thus strove
pragmatically to balance the competing demands of social justice, the rights of
property, and the needs of the state, while seeking to avoid confrontations dam¬
aging to the prestige and popularity of the regime. Important reforms could
therefore be delayed and compromised in their implementation. If peasant farm-
holders benefited greatly, the manorial proprietors ultimately benefited as much
or more. That improving conditions in the monarchy by the later eighteenth
century were due at least as much to rising prices and favorable markets as to
government edicts has frequently been observed. The reformers’ solutions to old
problems meanwhile gave rise to new ones, notably a growing rural proletariat
exposed to new forms of exploitation.36
    The earlier literature presented the reforms of the Bernstorff era in a heroic
light, as the work of great men with lofty ideals. Edvard Holm in the 1880s
 stressed the influence of the European Enlightenment, while V. A. Falbe-
Hansen in the same decade saw in them the liberal ideal of personal freedom.
Hans Jensen, writing in the troubled 1930s, recognized in the reforms the tri¬
umph of a benevolent welfare state over private interests, whereas Albert Olsen,
followed by Jens Holmgaard in the 1950s, considered paramount the needs of
the national economy and treasury. In the early 1970s, an American, Carol
Gold, described the reforms in her doctoral dissertation as “adjustive and diver¬
sionary mechanisms,” through which a dominant landlord class defused poten¬
tial social disorder while retaining control of the means of production and the
state.37
    The great reforms represent a classic case of mixed motives. Even the most
reactionary could not altogether escape the spirit of the times, as Johan Hvidt-
feldt has emphasized, while the men who guided the destinies of the monarchy
after 1784 strove with high hopes and enthusiasm to create a more uniform, effi¬
cient, and humane society. They naturally gave highest priority to the agrarian
problem and were convinced that personal freedom would make the peasant
farmer an enterprising, productive, and patriotic citizen. It was likewise evident
to them that the reform of peasant agriculture was essential, as Jens Holmgaard
