                           REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                    219

the Italian courts, whose correspondence with Sweden he secretly intercepted.
This correspondence contained remarks offensive to himself and the regime. In
December 1793 Reuterholm had-or was confident he could find - sufficient
evidence to prosecute Armfelt and his closest associates. The latter, including
Ehrenstrom and Armfelt’s mistress, Magdalena Rudenschold, were arrested and
brought to trial, although they were first able to burn some of their papers. A
warship was dispatched to Naples to arrest Armfelt, who escaped to Russia.
    The trial proved an embarrassment to the government for lack of evidence
until in April 1794 Reuterholm’s agent, the engraver Francesco Piranesi, pur¬
loined Armfelt’s papers from the safekeeping of the British minister to Florence.
These contained a sketchy “plan of revolution,’’ prepared for the eventuality of
a riksdag in the summer of 1792, whereby the “royalists” (Gustavians), should
pretend to come to terms with the “Feuillants” or “Monarchical” (the old
“Patriot” party of 1789), to destroy the “Jacobins” (Reuterholm, Stael, and
their friends). At this point, the Russian empress should issue a manifesto guar¬
anteeing Gustav Ill’s political testament and the original regency council. The
“royalists” would then break with the “Feuillants” and establish themselves in
power.
    The anticipated riksdag was never held and Armfelt and his confidants appar¬
ently did nothing to implement their “revolution,” but its discovery gave
Reuterholm his revenge. After a parody of a trial, the conspirators were given
death sentences, commuted by Duke Carl to imprisonment. The unfortunate
Magdalena Rudenschold was pilloried and committed to a workhouse, arousing
much sympathy.51
    To supporters of the regime, this so-called Armfelt Conspiracy was an odious
“Jacobin” attempt to overthrow the legitimate government.52 Ironies abound.
Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt, the “Alcibiades of the North,” who had stood by
Gustav III in the dark days of the Anjala revolt, looked to the Russian empress
for deliverance, while in seeking to crush “Jacobinism” in Sweden, he and his
friends were tarred with the same brush.

   In the Danish monarchy, an idealistic admiration for the French Revolution
long survived among the higher German aristocracy. In the fall of 1792, “all”
Copenhagen, which was “very democratic,” rejoiced at the French victory at
Valmy, according to Jens Baggesen, protege of the Augustenburgs and Schim-
melmanns, who hoped this would strengthen the liberal forces in the Danish
government. Countess Sophie, the wife of Christian Ditlev Reventlow, sang
“£a ira” in jubilation and noted the satisfaction of all her friends. Countess
Luise Stolberg saw in Valmy the “hand of God,” through which the “benign
influence” of France would spread to all lands.
   “May the French defeat their anarchy within as well as their enemies with¬
out, then the last days of crowns and coronets and patents of nobility should be
