                            REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                        217

ertarian aspect of the revolution, but by no means to its egalitarian side. The
behavior of the unbridled press made him and his friends increasingly uncom¬
fortable. Late in 1792 Thomas Thorild provided an excuse to reimpose controls
on the press.
    Thorild thirsted, as seen, for the role of court philosopher and prepared ambi¬
tious plans for the regeneration of society which he pressed upon Reuterholm,
who considered Thorild his protege. In December 1792, however, Thorild pub¬
lished a pamphlet that appealed for an end to all remaining limitations to freedom
of expression, “before it is seized through violence and bloodshed,” and of¬
fended the dignity of the four Estates by calling them the “kingdom’s four states
of confusion.      Vanquish,’ he urged, “these four barbaric nations! Make of
us one people! The pamphlet was confiscated and Thorild was arrested, tried,
and exiled for four years, amid much public outcry and some rioting in his
support—actions which aroused no little attention abroad.45
    The severity of Thorild’s final sentence meanwhile reflected the govern¬
ment s indignation over the execution of Louis XVI in France and its exagger¬
ated fear of “Jacobinism” behind a relatively minor tumult in Stockholm—the
so-called Ebel Riot-precipitated by a scuffle between an officer and two local
citizens, both of which occurred in January 1793.46 Already the previous month,
the press restrictions of 1774 were restored, and both author and printer were
made responsible for violations.
    Thus ended, within a scant half-year, Reuterholm’s experiment in freedom
of expression. Power agreed with him, and he abandoned his old libertarian
 ideas. Increasingly he was himself regarded as a despot. In 1795, suspicious of
 “Jacobin” influences, he closed the Swedish Academy, which was only re¬
opened after the end of the regency.
    By early 1793, Uppsala University emerged as the new center of Swedish
radicalism, with some reverberations at the universities in Lund and Abo. On
New Year’s Eve 1792, the Uppsala students held a mock funeral for press free¬
dom. Out of this there developed the so-called Convention—a concept with ob¬
vious French republican connotations—which convened frequently at local tav¬
erns over the next few months and evidently involved a sizable proportion of
the university’s roughly 550 students, to the alarm and indignation of conserva¬
tive circles. Ringing orations were held, republican cocardes worn, and trees of
liberty planted. One of the Convention’s few preserved speeches asked rhetor¬
ically,
  ... is it first in our time that we may courageously declare that those
  fields of knowledge which are concerned with mankind’s, or a people’s,
  true rights and happiness, and with the means to attain them, are the fore¬
  most, the most useful and necessary of all? Is it reserved for our time alone
