                           REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                     221

    Most of the nobility in the duchies, as elsewhere in Europe, regarded the
French Revolution with growing repugnance, particularly after 1792. Emken-
dorf manor in Holstein emerged as the center of a romantic conservatism rooted
in an idealization of both Greek antiquity and the High Middle Ages, in classical
stoicism and a revived Lutheran piety, implacably opposed to the godless Revo¬
lution and the atheistical Enlightenment, with far-reaching influence in the
Germanic world. Count Fritz Reventlow of Emkendorf had left the Danish dip¬
lomatic service already in 1786 and with his brother, Count Cai Reventlow,
assumed leadership of the conservative phalanx of the Ritterschaft against the
menace of leveling by either Danish absolutism from above or French Sans-
culottisme from below. He was married to Ernst Schimmelmann’s sister, Julia,
 die schone Seele’ of the Emkendorf cult, whose Weltanschauung was expressed
in a letter to her brother in November 1793:
   The word Aujklarung has gradually become quite hateful to me. Never has
   it been spoken as often as during this shallow century in which no great¬
   ness thrives. Every youth, it seems, has it ever on his tongue, while
   despising the old, true wisdom of life. Oh, that man might once again learn
   to reform himself and not seek to light the way for others before he has
   endured this struggle! Oh, that he might once again learn to gather within
   his soul the blessed inspiration from above and to recognize his own
   powerlessness when he relies upon himself alone! Then would Peace and
   Joy embrace once more. One is almost ashamed in our time to be a human
   being. For in the jungles of Africa there flourish, among lions and tigers,
   more or less the same kinds of laws, the same liberty and equality!57

    Although Charlotte Schimmelmann had been much disillusioned by the exe¬
cution of Louis XVI, she was still amused to describe in May 1794 how Guld-
berg “jeremiadized” against France “like a good Jutlander.” His letters are
indeed filled with outbursts against France’s “metaphysical constitution” and
 “metaphysical politici,,, as well as dire warnings that Copenhagen was a nest
of “Jacobins.” His views, it would appear, were characteristic enough, not only
of a “good Jutlander,” but generally of the Danish proprietorial class. In Den¬
mark, Jakob Baden, a professor of philology at the University of Copenhagen
and stout defender of absolutism, and in Norway, Johan Nordal Brun, composer
in 1771 of “Norway, Land of Heroes” and now bishop of Bergen, were
determined antirevolutionary polemicists.58
    In the kingdom, as in the duchies, opposition to the revolution was closely
linked to antirationalist religious revivalism, not least in response to criticism
of orthodox Christian dogma by certain of the Copenhagen radicals. In the capi¬
tal Bishop Balle began conducting well-attended biweekly Bible reading sessions
in 1793 and brought out a devotional journal with some 30,000 subscribers. A
visit to Copenhagen in 1793 by the Swiss evangelist and mystic Johann Casper
