 222       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

 Lavater, at A. P. Bernstorff s invitation, created a sensation in high aristocratic
 circles.59
    Among Copenhagen’s substantial bourgeoisie, there remained widespread, if
 somewhat diffuse, sympathy for the French Revolution, as became evident in
  1793, when the French Convention sent the regicide Philippe Grouvelle to Den¬
 mark, ostensibly to buy grain. He was lionized by members of the Copenhagen
 Wholesale Merchants’ Society (Grosserer-Societetet). They—and particularly
 their women—were thoroughly charmed by Grouvelle and his companions,
 whom they affected to see in the guise of heroes of republican Rome. French
 cocardes were sported and the “Marseillaise” enthusiastically sung.60
    Thereafter, during the Terror, Minerva, which generally mirrored enlight¬
ened middle-class opinion, turned sharply critical of the revolution, although it
again adopted a more favorable tone following the Thermidorian reaction of
mid-1794. Britain’s oppressive maritime policies after joining the European war
in the spring of 1793 meanwhile stirred old resentments, thereby strengthening
sympathy for France, together with the triumphs of French arms against heavy
odds. Throughout this period, there are nonetheless signs of a gradual slacken¬
ing of political engagement among the Danish middle classes as a whole, as
reflected, for example, in the waning of club activity in Copenhagen. Already
in the winter of 1792, the young historian Frederik Sneedorff, upon visiting
France, was disillusioned since the revolution had “made an idol of the rabble,
whose altars disgrace and offend the Majesty of the People.”61
    French sympathies meanwhile remained very much the fashion among uni¬
versity students. Henrik Steffens recalled a group popularly known as the
  Copenhagen Jacobin Club, to which he belonged and in which hair-raising
harangues were heard calling for revolution and the blood of tyrants. Of his
student days at the University of Kiel, the Holstein schoolmaster Georg Fried¬
rich Schumacher reminisced:

  War on the palaces, peace to the cottages! This motto we inscribed in our
  albums, thus we shouted on our nightly excursions through the quiet,
  deserted alleys. Long live Freedom! Down with Tyrants! So we often bel¬
  lowed through the night. But when we had properly cursed the palaces,
  we let them stand in peace. . . . When we had consigned the tyrants to
  the underworld, we left it to them to find their own way there, having done
  our part. We sang the Marseillaise in exalted voices, Allons enfants de la
  patrie, but went no further than to bed.62

   Outside Copenhagen, the burghers of the larger towns in the duchies and
Norway showed the greatest interest in French developments. By the mid-1790s,
growing censorship elsewhere left Schleswig-Holstein with the freest press in
the German-speaking world. Certain journals, such as the Niedersdchsischer
Merkur from Hamburg, sought asylum there, while Georg Conrad Meyer’s Der
