                           REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                     223

neue Mensch in Flensburg was particularly outspoken in its republicanism. In
Altona and Kiel there were thriving “Jacobin” societies. In 1795 Mary Woll-
stonecraft found the citizens of Moss in Norway “so determined ... to
excuse every thing, disgracing the struggle for freedom, by admitting the ty¬
rant s plea necessity, that I could hardly persuade them that Robespierre was a
monster.     A Norwegian study has meanwhile shown how deeply the basic
ideals of the revolution had penetrated by the middle of the decade, even into
areas of thought where they might hardly be expected; printed sermons and pas¬
toral letters, for instance, show that some of the most articulate spokesmen for
egalitarian principles were rationalist clergymen-all, of course, graduates of
the University of Copenhagen —even when they condemned revolution as
such.63
    Enthusiasm for the French Revolution remained linked to demonstrative
loyalty to the Danish monarchy. “Most of the merchants,” Thomas Malthus
observed in Fredrikshald (Halden), Norway, in 1799, “seem to be a little in¬
clined to republicanism,” but added: “They extoll much the liberty they enjoy
under their own government; & say that in England we are comparative slaves.”
To August Hennings, the absolute monarchy was democracy enthroned. Chris¬
tian Colbjornsen best expressed this ideal in a speech to the Agricultural Society
(.Landhusholdningsselskab) in February 1794:

   They are not rulers who through misdeeds have assumed that lofty title.
   . . . No! Ye fathers of your country! It is that power entrusted to you by
   the people that we hail, it is that which we call government, . . . it is
   your glorious deeds that we acclaim when we see you, armed with the
   clear light of Reason, exorcise the specter of Prejudice and, with a mighty
   hand, break the hateful chains of Feudal Tyranny. . . . The rights of the
   throne are inseparable from those of the people. . . . Government is the
   gathering point for the General Will.

  “If our famous Colbjornsen were not deeply involved in public affairs here,”
Charlotte Schimmelmann wrote to Luise Stolberg, “he would be a dangerous
democrat or demagogue; here he is all zeal for the monarchy, while speaking
freely of France.”64
   While in Sweden the press was unbridled for only half a year, in 1792, it re¬
mained remarkably free in the Danish monarchy throughout the decade, provid¬
ing a far fuller picture of the evolution of opinion in informed, essentially
middle-class circles. Voices praising the revolution in France while condemning
“aristocracy” and “tyranny” were well represented. This was no less true of,
for instance, Den snaksomme Bergenser or Bergenseren in Bergen, Trond-
hjemske Tidender or, later, Quarterbladet in Trondheim, Hermoder in Christi¬
ania, or Schleswigsche Journal in Altona (later Flensburg), than of Minerva or
Kjobenhavns Lcerde Efterretninger in the capital.65
