                             REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                       215

has made clear, if the badly depleted treasury were to profit from the later eigh¬
teenth-century economic upswing. To have allowed landowners unrestricted dis¬
position of their property at the very time the government was largely dismant¬
ling the old protectionist system in manufactures and commerce would have
created unemployment and poverty on an unmanageable scale in both town and
countryside, Albert Olsen has observed.38 The reduction of tariffs meanwhile
permitted the national economy to benefit fully from the opportunities offered
by the European war, while the government sought to relieve such local distress
as this readjustment created.
   No conspiracy theory is necessary to understand that enlightened and public-
spirited men deriving from the old elite should consider themselves the natural
leaders of a society whose great majority were only beginning to acquire some
rudiments of prosperity, literacy, and awareness of a wider world. They mean¬
while strove, as circumstances allowed, to improve the lot of the least favored
inhabitants of the state—the Jew, the farm laborer, the pauper, the convict, even¬
tually the West Indian slave—as well as of the peasant cultivator. In sum, ideal
motives combined with practical needs to lay the bases of a new way of life.


   Internal developments in the North took place against the background of the
ongoing revolution in France. The assassination of Gustav III in March 1792
was a profound shock to his Swedish and Finnish subjects, including most of
his erstwhile opponents, while the growing violence and radicalism of the
French Revolution disillusioned by stages most who had initially welcomed it.
As late as January 1793, Gustav Ill’s bitter critic Baron Adolf Ludvig Hamilton
could send to the Convention a “Project for the Legislation of the French
Republic.’’39 But then came the crucial year of the Terror.
   Of those still able to keep the faith, many lost it when the revolution thereafter
seemed to compromise its earlier ideals. In 1796 the young poet Frans Michael
Franzen from Finland arrived in Paris, exhilarated to find himself in “the arena
of so many great events and deeds, the mere echo of which in our distant hills
was enough to enrapture us,” but soon “fell, as if from the heavens, when I
did not once encounter in Paris the republican, the public spirit I had expected,”
which apparently had expired with Robespierre. Departing from Le Havre, he
threw his tricolor cocarde into the sea, with a “certain ceremony and with
solemn, rather melancholy feelings.” “I am sure,” he added wistfully, “the
best republicans both within and outside of France would as easily discard their
convictions, if circumstances required.”40
   The young regicides involved in Gustav Ill’s assassination had been romantic
enthusiasts for both freedom and equality as they saw these ideals embodied in
the French Revolution. Around 1794, Count Adolf Ludvig Ribbing would write:

  Hasten, Swedish noblemen, to sacrifice freely all that can be called privi¬
  lege, keep pace with your century, throw to the ground those titles, patents
