218       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

   to ask: What is most useful, most necessary? What is true in our under¬
   standing? What is noble and touches our hearts? What are the rights of
   mankind? What are the laws of God and Nature?47

   By the end of April 1793, Duke Carl, the university’s chancellor, ordered the
Convention dissolved. It offered no resistance, but radical political and social
ideals—characteristically combined with the new Kantian concept of an individ¬
ual “categorical imperative’’—continued to be cultivated the rest of the decade
by a small group of Uppsala intellectuals which came to be called the “Junta.”
Many of its members were of noble origin, and several would play important
cultural and political roles in the future. While they tended to be regarded as
flaming “Jacobins,” their political liberalism and federalist sympathies were
indeed rather more “Girondin.”48
    Radicalism among middle-class circles, especially in the capital, was by all
evidence distinctly more social in orientation. “The former royalists,” R. F.
Hochschild complained in May 1793, “miss the king [Gustav III] and are be¬
coming attached to Jacobinism, going from one extreme to another.” The Aus¬
trian charge d’affaires may have been closer to the mark when he reported in
 1797 that “French” principles had made great headway among the Swedish
  Third Estate’ in connection with “that sort of Jacobinism already fomented
by the late king against the nobility.” Leniency toward the regicides in 1792 had
increased resentments against both the aristocracy and the regency itself, while
the fears of the latter were greatly aroused by the Ebel Riot in Stockholm in early
1793.49
    Fears and accusations of “Jacobinism” likewise loomed large in the bitter
rivalry between the Reuterholm faction and the ousted Gustavians. During 1792
the latter were deeply offended by the new regime’s lenient treatment of the regi¬
cides, its efforts at rapprochement with France, and the rumor that summer that
a riksdag would be called which, like the French Estates-General, they feared
might precipitate revolution. In J. A. Ehrenstrom’s word's:
  The ground is already prepared, in my view, for so-called Jacobinism, in
  our land as elsewhere. Inflated ideas of freedom, equality, and the rights
  of the people, which indeed form the Jacobin articles of faith and which
  in practice are so ruinous to all civic order, seem to be carried by the winds
  like a contagion throughout Europe. We have seen a clear enough begin¬
  ning of Jacobinism in the writings which came out as soon as freedom of
  the press was allowed.50

To the Gustavians, Reuterholm, Stael, even the duke-regent himself were
“Jacobins” in sheep’s clothing.
   Reuterholm was ever fearful of Gustavian plots. While Baron Taube did in¬
deed quietly cultivate the confidence of the young king, Gustav IV Adolf,
Reuterholm’s suspicions focused above all on Baron Armfelt, now minister to
