 228       REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

 characterized by its affinity for radical social and political ideals and its cosmo¬
 politan view of membership in a larger Nordic community as a step toward the
 higher goal of world citizenship. It culminated with the establishment in Copen¬
 hagen of Det Skandinaviske Litteraturselskab (The Scandinavian Literary So¬
 ciety) in 1796.

                   Like dew before the sun, all imagined hate
                      now disappears;
                   See Cimbrian joyfully embracing Goth,
                      like a cherished friend.

Thus wrote the Norwegian Jens Zeitlitz in 1794. The contrast to Ewald’s warlike
anthem of 1779 is striking.79


   For the later 1780s a notable similarity was observed in the internal develop¬
ment of the two Nordic kingdoms: in both, vigorous and fundamental reforms
were then carried out by the crown itself. By the turn of the decade, however,
Sweden-Finland, under Gustav III, was occupied primarily by war and diplo¬
macy, whereas Denmark-Norway, under Crown Prince Frederik, continued on
the path of reform.
     During the years 1792 to 1797, from the death of Gustav III to that of A. P.
  Bernstorff, there was a further parting of the ways. The reform program of the
  Danish monarchy was sustained and advanced, while the regency in Sweden was
  marked by reaction and paranoiac fears. The situation of the two monarchies
  was now reversed: Gustav Ill’s early reign, after 1772, had been a time of
 numerous useful reforms in Sweden-Finland, while Denmark-Norway had been
 governed by the reactionary de facto regency of Juliane Marie.
    It was frequently maintained by the thinkers of the Enlightenment that a
 government should be judged by results rather than form. Scandinavia during
 these years is a case in point. Subjects of the absolutistic Danish monarchy en¬
joyed far greater civic liberty—above all, freedom of expression—than those of
 the Swedish constitutional monarchy, which had evolved into a kind of ad hoc
dictatorship. In 1795 Mary Wollstonecraft believed “the inhabitants of Den¬
mark and Norway are the least oppressed people of Europe.” The same year,
the Swedish regicide Count Ribbing, in exile near Copenhagen, rejoiced to find
himself at last in a land where he could “in all justice praise the government,”
which had “crushed the aristocratic Hydra.” Well might Swedish radicals look
with envy across the Sound.80 Meanwhile, as Swedish radicalism took an in¬
creasingly social direction, the avant-garde of Danish radicalism now for the
first time turned to basic political questions, looking beyond popular autocracy
to popular sovereignty.
   Despite contrasts between the two regimes, basic similarities can be seen in
