                            REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                      225

cows, as did Count Schmettau in his criticism of the military establishment in
the same year. Bruun and Riegels in particular aroused resentment through their
attacks on Christian dogma and the religious establishment. In March 1797, 300
burghers of Copenhagen petitioned the crown to protect religion against abuse.68
    To many, the situation appeared increasingly serious in the light of social dis¬
turbances in various parts of the monarchy. Troubles in the duchies in 1794-95
have already been noted. In Norway, there were outbreaks of urban unrest,
especially among the miners in Kongsberg in 1794, and conflicts in 0stlandet
between timber merchants and teamsters. More frightening yet was the so-called
Post Office Riot of February 1793 in Copenhagen, set off by an altercation be¬
tween a student and a Guards’ officer. In April 1794 some 2,000 journeyman
carpenters in the capital went on strike, encouraged by the radical press, most
notably Bruun’s Vcekkeren. Of the strikers, 122—many of them Germans—were
exiled for life.69
    In individual cases the government took action for abuse of press freedom.
In 1794 Professor C. F. Cramer was dismissed from the University of Kiel for
statements unbefitting a subject of Holstein, which as part of the Holy Roman
Empire was technically at war with France. The same year, Heiberg was fined
for a satirical song, “Klubvise,” insulting to the king of England, and a journey¬
man printer was prosecuted for a pamphlet ridiculing the doctrines of the state
church. Bruun was fined for implying in Vcekkeren, in connection with the car¬
penters’ strike, that an individual was not bound in obedience to a law or author¬
ity he considered unjust. In 1795 he was indicted for attacking the government
in his Aristocratemes Catechismus and fled temporarily to Sweden.70
    In the face of a mounting reaction against freedom of expression, its sup¬
porters rallied in its defense. The Danish monarch’s power, M. G. Birkner
argued in a widely disseminated pamphlet in 1797, was in principle as great as
the Turkish sultan’s or Tipoo Sahib’s; without liberty to write about government
or administration, there could be no “free citizens,” at best only “children
under guardianship or leniently, mildly, and humanely treated slaves.” While
A. P. Bernstorff lived, freedom of expression survived, despite his own anti¬
pathy to many of the ideas expressed. But with his passing in the summer of
1797, its days were numbered.71
   The Danish ultraradicals of the 1790s have naturally received no little atten¬
tion from the historians. Yet how little impact they had upon the mass of the
monarchy’s subjects was illuminated, literally and figuratively, by a fire that
accidentally broke out in February 1794, destroying Christiansborg palace in
Copenhagen. The result was a great wave of public sympathy for the crown
prince and his family, as evidenced by private donations, large and small, from
throughout the monarchy. The royal family’s move to the simpler Moltke and
Schack palaces, connected by C. F. Harsdorffs neoclassical colonade, on
