                            REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                     227

   Despite old resentments—especially in Sweden—common commercial inter¬
ests drew the two Scandinavian kingdoms together. Negotiations commenced in
the summer of 1793, leading to the Armed Neutrality Convention signed in
Copenhagen on 27 March 1794.76
   In June 1794 a Swedish squadron of eight ships of the line joined a Danish
squadron of the same size to cruise in the North Sea. British visitations in Scan¬
dinavian waters ceased, seized vessels were released, and the Danish grain trade
with France resumed. Until 1797, combined Scandinavian naval operations con¬
tinued to produce good effects. Efforts were likewise made in 1794-95 to in¬
volve other neutrals, especially the United States, but without result. In 1797
Danish operations against the dey of Tripoli protected a burgeoning commerce
in the Mediterranean.77
     Scandinavian trade flourished. But cooperation in the North did not proceed
without friction. As during the American war, Denmark tended to incline to¬
ward Britain and Russia, Sweden toward France, largely on the basis of their
trade commodities. Sweden’s defensive alliance with France in September 1795
moreover called into question its neutral status and led by the spring of 1796 to
the threat of war with Russia. France, by now successful on all fronts, showed
little concern. Reuterholm, fearful for his native Finland, sought a reconciliation
with St. Petersburg. His efforts had met with only limited success when Gustav
IV Adolf came of age and assumed personal control in November 1796. The
same month, Catherine II died, to the relief of her Nordic neighbors.78
    The Armed Neutrality of 1780 had revealed the old mistrust between the
hereditary enemies of the North, reflected in Johannes Ewald’s patriotic anthem,
written the year before:
                    King Christian stood by the lofty mast,
                       'mid swirling smoke.
                    His sword it struck with mighty blows,
                       cleaving Gothic helm and skull.

   In contrast, the Armed Neutrality of 1794 showed the growing Nordic senti¬
ment of the later eighteenth century, evident in literature, especially in Den¬
mark, where it was part of the reaction against still powerful German cultural
influences. The expressions Skandinavien and Norden (in an exclusively Scan¬
dinavian sense) became increasingly current. In the spring of 1792, the young
Danish historian Frederik Sneedorff spoke to a group in London calling itself
the Scandinavian Society on “The Importance of the Union of the Three Nordic
Kingdoms’’; in this speech he appealed that “we united Swedes, Norwegians,
and Danes consider ourselves as belonging to only one fatherland—Scandi¬
navia.’’
   While interest was weaker in Sweden, progressive opinion there tended to
admire Danish enlightened absolutism. The Scandinavianism of the 1790s was
