                             REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97                        229

 the economic, social, and cultural evolution of the Nordic lands, especially with
 regard to the peasant masses. Everywhere freehold ownership was on the rise
 among a free peasantry, while in the richer agricultural regions land realloca¬
 tions and the relocation of farmsteads were breaking up the familiar patterns of
 village and manorial life. Just as the land reforms originating in the duchies and
 Denmark began to spread to southern Sweden, peasant emancipation inspired by
 the Swedish-Finnish, as well as the Norwegian and now the Danish model, was
 gradually extended to the remaining serfs of Schleswig and Holstein. Through¬
 out the Nordic world the rise in numbers and well-being of peasant farmers was
 meanwhile paralleled by the rapid growth of a rural proletariat of cotters and
 landless laborers.
    The Danish reforms of 1784-97 were neither the first nor even in principle
 the most radical of their kind in Europe. Extensive and ambitious efforts were
 made in the preceding decades in Prussia, Austria, and various smaller German
and Italian principalities, while enclosures were proceeding in Britain. The
Danish reform program, however, continued for a good decade after the out¬
break of the French Revolution. Whereas earlier Continental reforms were
stopped in midstream or turned back by the rising tide of reaction, the Danish
monarchy underwent a greater transformation of existing society than anywhere
outside of revolutionary France or French-occupied Europe. Although Crown
Prince Frederik was no friend of the French Revolution, it seems not inappro¬
priate that on a visit to Frankfurt-am-Main in 1796 General Jourdan’s French
troops hailed him as “Citoyen Altesse.,,ai
   Responses to the French Revolution entered into a new phase by 1792. Early
 “Whiggish” enthusiasm in high aristocratic circles, originally inspired by the
French revolte nobiliaire, was by now largely disillusioned, especially in
Sweden-Finland. Increasingly, Scandinavian “Jacobinism” assumed a bourgeois,
socially radical character, directed against all forms of “aristocracy.”
   To assume thereby that the Scandinavian radicals of the 1790s were “demo¬
cratic" according to later criteria would naturally be anachronistic. Although
they attacked distinctions and privileges based on inheritance, they accepted as
a matter of course a “natural” hierarchy of virtue and of accomplishment out¬
side the traditional noble profession of arms. “No one denies the difference be¬
tween a great merchant and a peddler,” declared Berndt Borretzen in 1795, in
Den snaksomme Bergenser:

  Both, be it understood, may be excellent men and good citizens; both are
  human beings, conceived in iniquity and born in sin. They should, from
  that standpoint, be regarded as brothers. But there is still a difference, and
  we hope it may continue to exist among us to the end of time, for it is or¬
  dained by Nature herself and unhappy the land where it disappears! Thus
  reasonable policy demands that each be treated in daily intercourse accord-
