232       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

circles, and ultimately his life. The new king was determined to exercise to the
fullest the extensive powers afforded him by the constitution of 1772 as amended
by the Act of Union and Security of 1789, backed by the growing public reaction
against the French Revolution. Yet, although he was no political theorist, he on
one occasion around 1799 expressed a rationale for his rule not out of keeping
with his times, “having been bom free in a kingdom where the king governs
according to the laws and where each individual enjoys his rights but knows how
to obey,” thereby avoiding “licentious liberty,” which ultimately makes men
“slaves under several or under a single despot.”2 Among his faithful servants,
especially among old Gustavians like J. C. Toll and Axel von Fersen, there were
meanwhile those who more frankly espoused royal absolutism.3
    The young king abhorred the French Revolution—convinced as he was that
French Jacobins had been behind his father’s assassination in 1792—as well as
the rationalist philosophy of the Enlightenment, which he considered the root of
the present disorders. In religion he held to a strict Lutheran orthodoxy with
pietist overtones. Press censorship remained firm.
    The markedly conservative features of the reign from its beginning can, how¬
ever, all too easily obscure the fact that useful and practical reforms were
resumed in Sweden-Finland following the end of the regency. Until the final
disasters of his reign a decade later, Gustav IV Adolf was able to work far more
harmoniously with his bureaucrats than had Gustav III. Despite his fear of
“Jacobinism,” the king revealed no romantic attachment to the nobility as such,
and his top appointments went by preference to men of recent ennoblement and
to commoners. Gustav Adolf s interest in aspects of his officials’ work could be
considerable, if sporadic; ultimately it was he who gave their projects the force
of law.
    Through various administrative reorganizations, culminating with the re¬
structuring of the old Kanslikollegium and the emergence of a separate foreign
ministry in 1801, the business of government was steerecj back into established
and now largely rationalized channels. Already in 1796 a new finance committee
(statsberedning) was set up to regularize the annual budget and adjust expendi¬
tures to standing revenues. Gustav Ill’s inflated court establishment and pension
list were drastically cut back, while provisions for widows and orphans of public
servants were improved. During the first few years careful financial administra¬
tion combined with favorable economic conditions to return a healthy surplus
to the treasury. The restrictive trade policies of the regency were relaxed. A
committee, the Kanslersgille, was appointed in 1801 to propose reforms for the
secondary schools, while private initiative continued to increase the numbers of
local parish schools. By 1800 the government was prepared to face the formid¬
able task of monetary reform. The new regime meanwhile showed a strong in¬
terest in agriculture, which by 1803 would give rise to important initiatives.
