 224      REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

    Most of the press accepted the premise implied in Colbjornsen’s speech in
 1794: that Danish absolutism accomplished by peaceful means what the revolu¬
tion in France could only achieve by force, in accordance with the popular will.
Such a concept could, however, be a double-edged sword, for it raised critical
questions. What was the will of the people and how could it be adequately com¬
municated to the ruler? And was the ruler indeed fulfilling its rightful demands?
    Faced with such questions, a small avant-garde of journalists and publicists
went over to a republican viewpoint by the mid-1790s and attacked royal abso¬
lutism not only in its abuses but in principle. “What is the history of all mon¬
archical governments but a frightful depiction of human misery?” wrote Politisk
og Physisk Magazin in Copenhagen, following the Terror which it had never
ceased to justify, “All hereditary regimes are by their very nature tyrannical.”
In the same journal, “A Danish Man” stated in 1797 that as an unlimited mon¬
archy, Denmark suffered from all the faults inherent in such a form of govern¬
ment.66
    Whereas the supporters of enlightened absolutism considered it the sword of
democracy, these republican critics condemned it as the shield of privilege. N.
D. Riegels complained that in a monarchy, “the monarch’s lap dog, or his hair¬
dresser and flunkies, are more important than the nation.” This sentiment was
widely disseminated by the youthful Malte Conrad Bruun—son of one of the
aristocratic Jutland proprietors of 1790—in the first “hymn” of his popular sa¬
tire Aristocratemes Catechismus (The Aristocrats’ Catechism) in 1795:
                  Oh, Monarchy, our praise to thee!
                  Thou shelterst all our guile and treachery.
                  What indeed is Aristocracy,
                  If thou
                  doest not uphold it?

In his Jerusalems Skomagers Rejse til Maarten (The Jerusalem Shoemaker’s
Journey to the Moon) the same year, as well as in his newspaper, Vcekkeren,
Bruun held forth the ideal of a republic as the only regime under which morality
and virtue could blossom, a vision held by such other radical writers as P. A.
Heiberg, N. D. Riegels, M. G. Birkner in Korsor, and G. C. Meyer in Flens-
burg.67
   Abroad, liberal opinion hailed Denmark’s press freedom as unsurpassed in
Europe, while the counterrevolutionary camp saw the Danish monarchy as a
dangerous center of Jacobinism. In Denmark conservatives like Guldberg and
Schack-Rathlou considered the free press a dire threat to the existing order.
Crown Prince Frederik, otherwise no reader, took to avidly following the news¬
papers, to his mounting indignation. They raised demands, such as for a separate
Norwegian university and bank, beginning again in 1793, and criticized sacred
