         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                            233

   Impressive as A. P. Bernstorff s position had been in the Danish-Norwegian
 monarchy, his death in June 1797 did not bring any striking and immediate
transformation of the regime. Bernstorff himself designated his successors: his
son. Count Christian Gunther Bernstorff, as foreign minister, and son-in-law,
Count Cai Reventlow, as president of the German Chancellery. The latter, who
belonged to the Holstein branch, together with Christian Ditlev Reventlow of the
Danish branch ot that widespread family, was now also appointed to the state
council. The Bernstorff-Reventlow-Schimmelmann circle was more firmly en¬
sconced in the seats of power than ever after the passing of its dominant per¬
sonality.
    There were nonetheless portents of change. The new men represented a nar¬
rower and more conservative viewpoint, which soon led to friction with the
  Men of 1784 : C. D. Reventlow, Ernst Schimmelmann, and their friends.
Meanwhile, Crown Prince Frederik now felt at the age of twenty-nine that the
time had come to take the lead himself. Increasingly, he dealt directly with the
government departments and individual state councillors. Although lacking the
intellectual brilliance of his leading ministers, the crown prince possessed both
willpower and an unflagging sense of duty. By the turn of the century it was
clearly he who ruled—and to an almost excessive degree administered—the
monarchy.
   Much remained to be done if the great task of reform, so well begun during
the preceding thirteen years, were to be consolidated and advanced in a time of
hardening reaction throughout Europe. While the broader outlines had been
established in A. P. Bernstorffs time, difficult questions of implementation
remained.
    The administrative structure was simplified for the kingdom in 1799 when the
Danish Chancellery was divided into four sections—for church and education,
justice, social matters, and public institutions—while officials at lower levels
were permitted to deal with a wider variety of matters without referring to
higher authority.
    Administrative rationalization meanwhile largely obliterated the last remain¬
ing symbols of Iceland’s national past. The Althing, which in 1777 had been con¬
verted into an eight-member district court for Iceland, met for the last time at
Thingvallfr in 1798. It was thereafter transferred to Reykjavik and in 1800 dis¬
solved, thereby ending, at least temporarily, its 870-year existence. The ancient
Holar bishopric was discontinued, and the Holar and Skalholt Latin schools
were combined into a single school in Reykjavik, which now emerged as the
island’s administrative, commercial, and cultural center.
    The establishment in 1799 of a special section of the Danish Chancellery for
social matters is indicative of the government’s growing concern with problems
of poverty. Building upon a largely ineffectual ordinance of 1708 for the sup-
