  226      REFORM AND RADICALISM, 1792-97

  Amalienborg Square—where it still resides today—was symbolic of the changed
  nature of Danish absolutism since Christian VI had built the massive, baroque
  Christiansborg in the 1730s.72


     Scarcely a fortnight after Gustav III died, the war he had so avidly sought
 broke out when France declared war on Austria and Prussia in April 1792. As
 principalities of the Holy Roman Empire, both Holstein and Swedish Pomerania
 were nominally involved until 1795, to the extent of modest financial contribu¬
 tions, but this in no way determined policy in Copenhagen or Stockholm. Re¬
 lieved of the Swedish menace, Denmark held firmly to its neutrality. Gustav
 Hi’s passing meanwhile led to a diplomatic reversal in Sweden. Duke Carl and
 his entourage felt a certain sympathy for the French constitutional monarchy.
 Already in May 1792, France sent a diplomatic agent to Stockholm and secret
 discussions were begun concerning a possible Franco-Swedish alliance.
    Sweden s foreign policy dilemma at this juncture was perceptively described
 by Duchess Charlotta:

    If the duke-regent should now enter into an alliance with France to seek
    to obtain a counterweight against Russian power, perhaps the mania for
    freedom which reigns there might also gain the upper hand in our land,
    which would indeed be a greater misfortune than any other. If, on the
    other hand, the duke continues to show himself as submissive to Russia
    as the late king, one might well fear that Sweden might become a new
    Poland.73

   Negotiations with France continued fitfully for over three years, at last result¬
ing in a defensive alliance in September 1795, providing a French subsidy for
Sweden to defend its neutral maritime rights.74
    As always, the outbreak of a major European war created welcome prospects
 or neutral trade and shipping. Both opportunities and risks increased greatly
when Great Britain, the United Netherlands, and Spain entered the conflict in
the spring of 1793. France now became heavily dependent upon neutral carriers
for provisionment and supply, while British privateers preyed upon Scandina¬
vian ships en route to France. By mid-August the British had seized 189 Danish
and Norwegian vessels alone. In so doing, they arbitrarily renounced their treaty
of July 1780 conceding Denmark’s right to export foodstuffs to Britain’s ene¬
mies claiming that the French had now placed themselves outside the bounds
of all international law.
    In July 1793 Britain offered to buy Danish grain shipments bound for France
  ut together with Russia demanded an end to all trade with France. Bernstorff
stood fast, declaring, “International law is unalterable; its principles do not
depend upon circumstances.’’ As expected, Russia was too involved in Poland
to back up its demand.75
