         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                             239

right to own immediate manorial demesne lands; one such petition was endorsed
by 332 of its members.20
    There were signs of unrest outside the noble order, notably within the Peasant
Estate. Fersen noted that here there were many who wished to abolish both
the Clerical Estate and the remaining privileges of the nobility. The radicals in
the Noble Estate made, according to Hamilton, “insinuations to the Estate of
the Peasantry that religion, priests, kings were unnecessary, of the sweetness of
the words equality and liberty.” The diarist Hochschild feared that “lust for
revenge” for the assassination of Gustav III would break forth and that “if the
nobles commit the least indiscretion, that will do it!”21
    In May the Secret Committee presented to the Estates its project for monetary
reform. Of an estimated 15 million riksdaler in national debt notes then in circu¬
lation, two-thirds were to be redeemed in bank currency at a discount of one-
sixth of face value, by means of a special levy amounting to 2 percent of the
total national wealth; the remaining third would be replaced by a new type of
credit notes, courantsedlar, to be redeemed over fifteen years through regular
taxation.
    The Clerical, Burgher, and Peasant Estates had no difficulties with the pro¬
 posal. Among the Nobility, it was also generally accepted. The radical opposi¬
tion, however, saw its chance to gain political leverage by separating the ques¬
tion of the monetary conversion from that of the regular grant of taxation, upon
 which it was dependent: by limiting the duration of the grant, it sought to compel
the king to convene the Estates at regular intervals.
    On 29 May this matter gave rise to such an uproar in the Noble Estate that
five of the leading radicals, among them Hans Hierta, dramatically renounced
their noble status and left the hall, followed by seven others, including Georg
Adlersparre, who refused to participate any longer in the current Riksdag. Their
gesture created a sensation, as intended, but the “Mountain” thereby virtually
abdicated the field to the royalists, who, with the other Estates, accepted both
the conversion and a grant of unrestricted duration.
   Conservatives were shocked by such goings-on. In Duchess Charlotta’s view,
the nobility behaved like a “rabble” at Norrkoping, and “one must have really
low-minded Jacobinical views to wish to renounce one’s nobility and change
one’s name.”22 Following the Riksdag, the king ordered the trial of six of the
more prominent radicals for offending against the dignity of the lantmarskalk,
or speaker of the Noble Estate. Several of them thereupon published statements,
presenting themselves as martyrs of liberty. Hierta—who now respelled his
name Jarta—in particular turned the trial into a farce, and in 1802 one defendant
was acquitted while four received no more than token sentences. The following
year renunciation of noble status was officially prohibited.
   The remainder of the Riksdag passed relatively smoothly, and much useful
