 240      COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

business was completed before it was dissolved on 15 June. The king, Duchess
Charlotta wrote, had every reason to be satisfied and had “won even greater
power than his father had had.”23 Yet the Riksdag of 1800 served merely to con¬
firm Gustav IV Adolf in his aversion to elected assemblies. His only Riksdag,
in 1800, was thus a landmark in the growth of late Gustavian autocracy in
Sweden—but also in that of the new liberalism that was to triumph in 1809. It
remains of particular interest, too, as a rare example of parliamentary activity
in Europe outside of Great Britain, France, and France’s satellite republics,
around the turn of the century, revealing both indigenous issues and traditions,
and powerful influences from a wider world locked in ideological and military
conflict.
    The conversion plan ultimately failed to solve the monetary problem. Collec¬
tion of the special levy, which had to be increased by 20 percent, dragged on
until 1802, when the government changed the plan without conferring with the
Estates, mainly by mortgaging the Swedish enclave of Wismar to the Duke of
Mecklenburg-Schwerin—in effect selling it for 1.25 million riksdaler— in 1803.
In the end, the national bank did redeem the designated amount in national debt
notes, before Sweden’s war in 1808 once again undermined the currency.
    In retrospect, one cannot but wonder at the apparently rapid decline of the
flourishing Swedish radicalism of the 1790s. To be sure, an increasingly strict
censorship after 1800 would conceal much that would emerge from the shadows
nine years later. Yet beneath the surface, other forces were at work by the turn
of the century. As seen, early enthusiasm for French liberty among much of the
nobility had been chilled by revolutionary “excesses.” Even the regicide of
1792, C. F. Ehrensvard, in exile in Copenhagen, was by now an outspoken pro¬
ponent of enlightened Danish absolutism, in preference to the French republic.24
Gustav IV Adolfs strongly bureaucratic regime also helped assuage discontents
among the nobility.
    The French Revolution was moreover opposed throughout Europe by a grow¬
 ing body of conservative social and political thought; while Edmund Burke was
its leading luminary, men like Mallet du Pan, Senac de Meilhan, and Abbe
Maury held to moderate, constitutional views particularly congenial to former
 “Patriots” of Gustav Ill’s day. The Uppsala “Junta” itself seems less influ¬
enced by outright French revolutionary propaganda than by foreign sympa¬
thizers of the revolution, such as Arthur Young or Thomas Paine, and by certain
German publications like the Gottinger Gelehrte Anzeigen, more “Girondin”—
that is, libertarian, antibureaucratic, anticentralist—than “Jacobin” in sympa¬
thies.25
    Even this tempered radicalism in Uppsala was scarcely reflected at the uni¬
versities of Lund, Abo, and Greifswald. The Oxford don E. D. Clarke, who at
this time considered the Uppsala students debauched by “licentiousness and
