 234      COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

 pression of beggary and care for the deserving poor, piecemeal reforms in this
 area had been projected since 1787, as noted in the preceding chapter. Although
 paupers were officially reckoned at only 3.1 percent of the population of Den¬
 mark proper in the census of 1801 (the first since 1787)-as compared with 13
 percent in Great Britain in the same year —poverty aroused not only humanitar¬
 ian concerns but social fears.4 Late in 1798 Minerva wrote:
   The laboring class, which alternately is utilized both by . . . [princes
   and by other classes], informed by one or the other’s faults, has at last
   learned to know, hence to mistrust, fear, and hate them all. Awaiting only
   a favorable chance to avenge itself for real and imagined injustices, it
   stands ready, with the sword of destruction in one hand and the torch of
   enlightenment in the other.5

    In 1798 relief to the poor in Copenhagen was transferred from the magistra-
 ture to a special commission. A comprehensive ordinance for poor relief in the
 capital was decreed in 1799, implementing the policy stated already in 1792 that
 public support be available to all in real need. Work was to be provided, in
 workhouses if need be, for those capable of performing it, as was modest sup¬
 port for the old and helpless, medical attention for the sick, and elementary
 schooling, to teach the young useful skills, industry, and good morals. The de¬
pendent poor could establish eligibility for direct help after three years’ resi¬
dence, while begging was strictly forbidden. A new emphasis was meanwhile
placed upon rehabilitation, in addition to relief, through giving such aid to vic¬
tims of temporary misfortune as might enable them once again to become useful
and productive members of society. Specific revenues, including one-quarter of
Copenhagen’s port dues, were designated to support the system, which proved
adequate at least until the war years after 1807. Similar provisions were ex¬
tended to the entire kingdom by 1803. During the same years, the training of
parish midwives was improved and smallpox vaccination was put to widespread
use, as was also the case in the Swedish monarchy. A Board of Health (Sund-
hedskollegium) was established in Copenhagen in 1803, charged with overseeing
public hygiene and sanitation, and recalling Struensee’s earlier efforts in that
direction. An ordinance in 1806 called for the establishment of a modest infir¬
mary in each district {amt). In 1799 the School Commission, appointed in 1792,
presented an ambitious project for a complete system of rural schools, the uni¬
versal implementation of which in more modest form was nonetheless delayed
by circumstances until 1814.6
    In 1799 the government opened up all types of trade in Christiania to every
person possessing citizen rights in the town. An ordinance in March 1800 cur¬
tailed the power of the craft guilds by abolishing their exclusive monopolies and
permitting any artisan to qualify as journeyman, and any journeyman to become
a free master and receive citizen rights in his town after four years. Although
