        COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                              243

ln (?eC!JTlber 1799' Bruun received the same sentence a year later, in December
1800. Both thereafter made their way to Paris. After 1799 criticism of estab¬
lished authority virtually vanished in the Danish press.
    Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, never a friend of the unbridled press, claimed that the
 Russian tsar had been midwife to the ordinance of September 1799. Russian
 pressures over the past year had indeed been considerable. Yet in the Danish
 monarchy, as in the Swedish, opinion had been changing, and signs were not
 lacking that much of the reading public itself was ready to welcome restraints
 on the radical press. The Terror, the decline of political liberty in France,
 French privateering—all contributed to disenchantment with republican France.
 Even the impetuous Jens Baggesen, who in 1792 had ecstatically hailed the es¬
tablishment of the French Republic as Humanity’s greatest triumph, after visit¬
 ing Paris in May 1795—in time to experience the uprising of 1 Prairial—wearily
admitted the following year that he now regretted the effort he had expended in
seeking to comprehend and explain the “chaos” in France.34 The ongoing re¬
form program at home meanwhile continued to enjoy general support. Among
the Copenhagen intelligentsia itself, more moderate men like Rahbek, Pram,
Baggesen, Rasmus Nyerup, and Jens Kragh Host were warily disassociating
themselves from the hotheads.
     The notable decline of club life in Copenhagen by the later 1790s reveals a
  growing apathy toward political questions among a bourgeoisie now occupied
  above all by the pursuit of profit on the wartime European market. It is likewise
  indicative of changing social mores. Women, who had taken no part in the clubs,
  were assuming an ever more active role in both social and cultural life, rein¬
  forced by the idealization of womanhood and domesticity in literature and art.35
  By the turn of the century, the homes of prominent burghers, like Constantin
  Brun’s Sophienholm, where his wife Friederike presided over a circle of refined
 souls, and of literati like Knud Rahbek, at whose Bakkehuset the charming
 Kamma held sway after 1798, were becoming the centers of literary and artistic
 coteries. Heiberg’s former wife, Thomasine, remarried in 1802 to the Finnish
 regicide, C. F. Ehrensvard. had her devoted following. One thinks, too, of such
 muses as Constantine de Steensen-Leth, mistress of Egelykke manor on Lange-
 land, for whom the young N. F. S. Grundtvig pined in secret love, of Countess
 Julie Reventlow at Emkendorf, who inspired her circle of German poets with
 the dream of an idealized medieval age of faith and hierarchical social harmony,
 and of the French emigree Marquise de Tesse at Wittmoldt in Holstein, whose
 coterie included her nephew, General de Lafayette.
    In Sweden, Anna Maria Lenngren, a frequent contributor to Stockholms
Posten who ridiculed the pretentions of the aristocracy, decried prevailing pre¬
judices against her sex, and warmly praised the newer Danish literature, enjoyed
growing respect, and Malla Montgomery-Silfverstolpe’s celebrated salon was
soon to become the temple of Uppsala romanticism. To be sure, Thomas Mai-
