 236      COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

most influential adviser, particularly on foreign policy, while J. C. Toll, an old
Gustavian stalwart who proudly called himself “despotism’s first-born son,”
had much to say on internal matters. From 1799 the Russian ambassador, Baron
Andrei Budberg, added another strongly reactionary influence, while in Tsar
Paul I, whom Gustav Adolf visited in St. Petersburg in late 1800, the Swedish
king found in many respects a kindred soul.8
   The new Swedish regime was soon faced with a serious economic crisis, with
alarming social and political repercussions. Harvests were poor in 1798 and
 1799, and in the latter year commerce throughout northern Europe was largely
paralyzed by the collapse of the Hamburg market owing to an overimportation
of British products. During late 1799 and early 1800, there was a wave of rioting
in Stockholm, Gothenburg, Norrkoping, Linkoping, Malmo, and other Swedish
towns, although no similar disturbances seem to have occurred in Finland.
While observers both then and since tended to consider these outbreaks the result
of grain shortages, influential conservatives perceived in them the dark forces
of revolution.9
     During the fall of 1799, General Bonaparte’s return to Paris from Egypt was
 warmly welcomed in many circles. A mixed company of Frenchmen and Swe¬
 dish “Jacobins” celebrated the event in Stockholm with noisy abandon and
 “republican cheers,” to the mortification of the Swedish government and not
 least of the Russian ambassador in his reports to St. Petersburg. Gustav Adolf
 was secretly warned of widespread “Jacobin” sympathies throughout the coun¬
 try, especially in middle-class, commercial circles and at Uppsala University,
 and that revolution seemed imminent. Disturbing rumors circulated.
     Gustav IV Adolf was not one to disregard such alarms, nor was Tsar Paul
 prepared to let him do so. The military received strict orders to suppress any
unrest. For some time, the king had meanwhile been concerned about radicalism
 at the university in Uppsala. In the face of hardening reaction, persons asso¬
ciated with the so-called Junta, in particular Hans Hierta and Georg Adlersparre,
strove between 1798 and 1800 to defend their “zeal for enlightenment in the
study of society” against hostile allegations of “Jacobinism.”10 In 1799, just
when Count Fersen, returning from the Continent, sought to persuade Gustav
IV Adolf to place himself at the head of a secret, international anti-Jacobin
league, Hierta wrote a bitter satire on the obscurantism of the new Swedish
regime, arousing great indignation in both Stockholm and St. Petersburg.11
    When students at Uppsala openly celebrated French victories and Bonaparte’s
return from Egypt in December 1799, Gustav Adolf installed Count Fersen as
chancellor. The symbolism implicit in this choice was unmistakable; in G. G.
Adlerbeth’s words, “a declared French royalist” was made “the Swedish
Jacobins’ schoolmaster.”12
   Fersen strove with a strong hand to stamp out any manifestations of radical¬
ism among faculty and students. The gifted young Kantian philosopher Benjamin
