         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                                 235

 the old guilds would remain strong, especially in Copenhagen, for some decades
 to come, a breach had been made in their privileged position.
    By 1797, labor obligations were fixed by contract on all but a very few of
the manors in Denmark where they were required of tenants. In December 1799
this was made an absolute requirement by royal ordinance. The economic crisis
of 1799 of which more below meanwhile compelled many proprietors to sell
off tenancies to raise ready cash.7
    The problem of serfdom in the duchies remained complex and difficult. A
commission of the Ritterschaft had resolved in October 1797 that serfdom should
be entirely abolished by around 1805. A number of proprietors in the duchies
voluntarily freed their serfs, but otherwise matters languished, while the stoutly
conservative Cai Reventlow headed the German Chancellery until 1802—to the
mounting impatience of Crown Prince Frederik. After the commission failed to
reach any agreement at its last meeting in 1798, the government regulated the
military aspects of the problem by unilateral decree in 1800, making little con¬
cession to the landowners. It was only a matter of time before it would impose
its own solution to the question of serfdom in 1804.
     In one respect, however, the Danish reform program was notably unsuccess¬
 ful. Its early efforts after 1784 to stabilize state finances, as well as the monetary
system within the kingdom, had been upset by the brief hostilities with Sweden
in 1788. Thereafter, despite the general prosperity of the following years, it
failed to balance the state budget or to accumulate any surplus against more dif¬
ficult times. The government sought above all to increase the nation’s wealth and
productive capacity to the utmost and therefore declined to tax too heavily. Al¬
though revenues increased, expenditures rose more rapidly. For the time being,
the financial and monetary situation in the duchies remained more stable than
in the kingdom.

    Following the unpopular regency, the beginning of Gustav IV Adolfs per¬
 sonal reign aroused high hopes in Sweden-Finland, even among the Uppsala
radicals. The latter were soon disillusioned, however, by the young king’s patent
anti-intellectualism and continued censorship. It soon became evident, too, that
he had no immediate intention of convening a riksdag.
    Despite his wish to avoid favoritism, Gustav Adolf soon came to rely strongly
upon the advice of his father’s former confidants. Indeed, throughout the
regency, Baron Evert Taube, who remained at court, had exercised an occult
influence upon him on behalf of the basic tenets of Gustav Ill’s last years: stand¬
fast opposition to revolutionary France, close relations with Russia, and hostility
toward Denmark, with the ultimate objective of acquiring Norway. In this, he
was strongly seconded by Count Fersen, who via Taube sent Gustav Adolf fear¬
some reports of the spread of the Jacobin menace on the Continent.
   Following the end of the regency, Taube was soon recognized as the king’s
