         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                              237

Hoijer, considered the radicals’ standard-bearer, was denied a permanent chair
and departed for the Continent in the spring of 1800 following an obstreperous
celebration in his honor. In April an attempt to trick the academic orchestra into
performing a composition containing an excerpt from the Marseillaise led to the
trial and punishment ot four known radicals on the faculty, one of whom was
dismissed. This rather ludicrous “Music Trial” proved the deathblow to what
remained of the lively Uppsala radicalism of the preceding decade. The univer¬
sity , which since Gustav III s death had evolved into the real center of Swedish
literary life, now entered what has been called its “Iron Age.” The same sobri¬
quet would in retrospect be widely applied to Swedish culture as a whole to the
end of Gustav IV Adolfs reign.13
    Hard times by the turn of the century brought to a head perplexing currency
problems. Although the monetary system had been stabilized in 1777, the mass
issue of unbacked government credit notes (riksgaldssedlar) from 1789, to pay
for the Russian war, had undone this much-needed reform. Thereafter, credit
transactions, foreign trade, and government finance were severely handicapped,
and regular bank notes and metallic coin were driven out of circulation. Gustav
IV Adolf sought to contend with the problems of the treasury through strict
economies, but poor harvests and declining trade undermined his efforts. It
became evident that the currency must be reformed at whatever sacrifice if the
state were to be saved from bankruptcy.
     Constitutionally, such a measure required the assent of the Estates, which
 Gustav Adolf had thus far avoided convening. He profoundly mistrusted elected
 assemblies, at home or abroad, and he lacked both parliamentary experience and
 his father’s striking qualities of leadership. Already in March 1799, R. F.
 Hochschild wrote in his diary that both “the old Gustavian league and the old,
 so-called Patriot [party] call for a riksdag, each believing that they can lead the
 Estates.’’ In November he recounted how Baron Fabian Wrede, a conspicuous
aristocratic “Jacobin” in the early 1790s, urged the king to convene the Estates,
 “lest one run the risk that the people, unbidden, assemble.”14 “Who, given
the spirit that now prevails, can guarantee that there will not be a general up¬
heaval,” wrote Axel von Fersen, for whom the analogy with France on the eve
of the Estates-General in 1789 seemed painfully evident.15
    The king’s advisers saw no other way out, and in January 1800 a riksdag was
announced. As at other critical junctures, it was to be held in a provincial town,
Norrkoping, to avoid possible turbulence in the capital as well as pressures from
foreign diplomats, who were pointedly not invited to attend. Tsar Paul, who pic¬
tured Scandinavia as a hotbed of Jacobinism, offered to occupy Finland in case
of need. Gustav Adolf, who would have preferred financial aid, tactfully de¬
clined but clearly hoped that his close relationship with the tsar might help to
overawe any opposition at the forthcoming riksdag.
    Elections returned solidly royalist majorities for the Clergy and Peasantry,
