 242       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

  bureaucracy a lesson in discipline. The following month, a government commis¬
  sion was appointed to consider new press regulations. Although this caused con¬
 sternation among the radicals, the commission’s recommendations, submitted in
 January 1798, were modest enough and rejected actual censorship.31
     Most of the radicals—including doubtless the most original thinkers among
 them, M. G. Birkner and N. D. Riegels—henceforth tread warily. After 1797,
 the limelight fell above all on the two most conspicuous radical publicists, P.
 A. Heiberg and M. C. Bruun. Heiberg, whose bitterness against the regime
 became irreconcilable after it blocked his appointment to a municipal post in
 Copenhagen in 1798, belabored it with massive scorn and irony, whereas the
 younger Bruun attacked it with boyish impudence and lighthearted satire. Dur¬
 ing 1798 Heiberg criticized the government’s finances and the un-Danish nature
 of the administration. Shortly after the establishment of the commission on the
 press, he counterattacked with En Draabe i det store Hav af Skrifter om Skrive-
friheden (A Drop in the Great Sea of Writings on Press Freedom), intimating
the legitimacy of revolt and maintaining that revolutions were precipitated not
by peoples but by their rulers.
    In February 1799 the government brought Heiberg to trial, demanding that
his earlier writings also be examined for subversive ideas. Heiberg struck back
in the journal Lcesning for Publikum with thinly veiled attacks on Colbjornsen,
whom he now despised as a renegade.
   By 17 August 1799, Crown Prince Frederik had had enough.
   It is offensive to me [he stated] that the [Danish] Chancellery should have
   so much to do with the scribblers. . . . These people have to be cowed.
   Why should such nonsense have to appear in a state where everyone mav
   receive justice and where the way to the throne is open to all? I demand
   that the Chancellery take these gentlemen in hand. Show no leniency and
   the matter will be taken care of.32

    The result was the press ordinance of 27 September 1799. While this stated
that free discussion should continue to spread enlightenment and useful knowl¬
edge, and to suggest practical improvements in state and society, anonymity was
prohibited, all publications of fewer than twenty-four pages were to be approved
by Copenhagen’s policemaster or, in cases of doubt, by the Danish Chancellery,
and those condemned in press cases were to be placed under permanent
censorship. A similar ordinance in November extended the same restrictions
to the duchies.
    These provisions were not altogether illiberal for Europe at that time. Cer¬
tainly the press remained freer in principle in the Danish than in the Swedish
monarchy. The government nonetheless added point to its new policy by in¬
creasing the charges against Heiberg and by bringing Bruun to trial. Applying
the new ordinance retroactively, the court sentenced Heiberg to permanent exile
