 238      COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

 as expected. Although the royalists also dominated the Burgher Estate, its elec¬
 tion, especially in the capital, revealed some antigovernment sentiment, even
 social radicalism. Fersen noted a Stockholm tailor who campaigned for the limi¬
 tation of all unearned incomes to 1,000 riksdaler and the distribution of sur¬
 pluses to the people.16
     The Nobility did not attend in force, with less than half the usual number of
 families represented. Many old “Patriots” were demoralized by Gustav Ill’s
 later autocracy and the spread of revolution in Europe, and thus left the field
 to a majority of committed royalists and a minority of enthusiastic but inexperi¬
 enced young radicals. The former, according to Count Adolf Ludvig Hamilton,
 “no longer consisted only of courtiers and adventurers,” but included many for¬
 mer Patriots, now convinced that “Jacobinism could not be prevented except
by means of the most extensive despotism.”17 The radicals, soon nicknamed the
 “Mountain,” were led by former members of the Uppsala “Junta.” While they
did not succinctly set forth their ideals, these included, broadly speaking, a bal¬
ance of power between the crown and an active, regularly convened diet, greater
local freedom from bureaucratic constraints, a wider liberty of expression, and
some loosening of the traditional corporate structure of society.
    The Riksdag was officially opened on 15 March 1800 in a generally hopeful
spirit. A fortnight later Gustav IV Adolf and Queen Fredrika were at last
crowned in Norrkoping cathedral, the frugal ceremony reflecting the depleted
treasury. The Nobility showed up for the event in fair numbers and now made
no difficulties about swearing allegiance to the crown and to the Act of Union
and Security of 1789, which as an Estate of the realm they had still not officially
accepted.
     A secret committee of the Estates, under the chairmanship of the king him¬
 self, undertook to prepare a plan for currency reform. Developments at the Riks¬
dag meanwhile soon revealed a degree of political radicalism and social ferment
that strict press censorship, lifted only briefly in 1792, had largely concealed.
 In the Noble Estate, the opposition demanded without success that the delibera¬
tions of the Secret and Bank Committees be made public. It likewise proposed
improvements in the conditions of employment of agricultural laborers, giving
rise to heated controversy. Count Hamilton was indignant that “principles of
equality, already outmoded at their place of birth and which only served to se¬
duce the worst classes of society” should here be presented with such “zeal and
eloquence.”18 The young radicals, according to Count Fersen, sought to outdo
each other in outrageous schemes, and “ . . .to spew out and spread Jacobin
ideas and attitudes among the public. . . . These attitudes, which are destruc¬
tive of all authority and which have plunged France into ruin, will in the same
way lead all other kingdoms to their destruction.”19 Petitions were likewise pre¬
sented within the Noble Estate for its voluntary renunciation of its exclusive
