        COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                                 241

Jacobinism,” was especially impressed by the sound attitudes he encountered in
Abo.26
   The Consulate in France was, after 1799, unquestionably disillusioning to
Swedish, as to other foreign, friends of liberty, while to many conservatives it
seemed to presage a restoration of order. “All our Jacobins, who cheered so
wildly for Bonaparte, have become very long in the face,” Count Fersen noted
with satisfaction in January 1800.27 The first years of the new century were a
bleak time for the old radicals of the 1790s, and sensitive souls of a younger
generation increasingly took flight into the world of romantic fantasy. Returning
to Uppsala from the Continent in 1802, the dismissed philosopher Benjamin
Hoijer complained that he could no longer find any “tolerable company”-and
had “to starve besides”!28

     In Denmark enmity hardened between the government and the small group
of radical intellectuals and publicists who with growing audacity attacked the
very principle of royal absolutism. A. P. Bemstorffs death in mid-1797 re¬
 moved the most influential supporter of press freedom, while Crown Prince
 Frederik’s patience with public criticism was rapidly running out.
     As in Sweden, tensions were increased by poor crop years in the late 1790s
and by the economic crisis of 1799, which caused some thirty commercial bank¬
 ruptcies in Copenhagen alone and ruined the efforts of the Specie Bank, estab¬
 lished in 1791, to maintain order in the monetary system. In 1800 there was
another flare-up of peasant unrest near Tender in Schleswig.29 Meanwhile,
 Danish—like Swedish—radicalism seemed to threaten all of northern Europe in
the eyes of Tsar Paul, who in 1799 sent Baron B. A. C. von Kriidener to Copen¬
hagen to urge in the strongest terms the curtailment of press freedom. From
there, Kriidener sent home alarmist reports on the dangers of Danish and Scan¬
dinavian “Jacobinism,” including an alleged secret society, Deforenede Skan-
dinaver (The United Scandinavians), said to be headed by Conrad Malte Bruun
and to aspire to a federative Scandinavian republic.30 Such reports, reinforced
by the French emigre General Dumouriez’s Tableau speculatif de I’Europe,
published in 1798, which depicted Denmark and the duchies as a seedbed of
revolution, brought increasing pressures from St. Petersburg.
    Beginning already in 1794, the government had, as noted, taken action in in¬
dividual cases for violation of the press ordinance of 1790. In September 1797
a judicial official, Peter Collet, was dismissed for maintaining in print that a
public servant had the same right as any other citizen to express his views on
public affairs, even to urge resistance to authority, short of revolt. It is revealing
that Collet was dismissed through administrative rather than judicial action,
pressed by none other than Christian Colbjornsen, who was increasingly out¬
raged by attacks upon the reforming monarchy and determined to teach the
