 252       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

  ish fleet remained weatherbound at Karlskrona, occupied with its own feverish
  preparations, while the Russians were immobilized in Reval and Kronstadt.
     Britain now presented its ultimatum demanding that Denmark withdraw from
  the armed neutrality. When this was refused, Admiral Parker detached the
  greater part of his force, some thirty vessels including twelve ships of the line,
  under his second-in-command, Sir Horatio Nelson, the recent hero of Aboukir
  Bay, to smash Denmark s naval capacity. Negotiating the tricky eastern ap¬
  proach to Copenhagen Roads, Nelson was able to attack the line of Danish
 blockships at its weakest point on the morning of 2 April, but the ensuing battle
 proved far harder than the attackers had anticipated. Although both unmaneuver-
 able and outgunned, the Danish blockships resisted valiantly, their guns manned
 by successive relays of fresh volunteers from the shore who replaced the fallen.
 The British were forced to operate in hazardously close quarters, some of their
 ships grounded in shoal waters, and they were dangerously exposed when they
 came within range of the Danish shore batteries, covering their line of retreat
 to leeward. Prevented by wind and tide from joining in, the anxious Parker sig¬
 naled vainly for Nelson to break off the engagement.
    By mid-afternoon, impressed by the growing seriousness of his situation,
Nelson sent word to Crown Prince Frederik that in the event of further resistance
he would be compelled to set fire to the ships now in British hands, “without
having the power of saving the brave Danes who have defended them.’’50 The
threat produced the desired effect. Denmark had done more than honor required
in defending the armed neutrality against superior force. A number of the Dan¬
ish ships had not yet come under attack and could be saved. Without consulting
his military commander, who favored further resistance, the crown prince ac¬
cepted a truce. No sooner was it signed than four of Nelson’s ships ran aground
within easy range of Tre Kroner’s batteries.
      I have been in a hundred and five engagements,’’ Nelson wrote, “but that
 of to-day is the most terrible of them all.”51 Casualties had been heavy on both
 sides: the Danes lost 375 dead, 670 wounded, and 1,984 prisoners and missing-
 the British, 350 dead and 850 wounded. Much of the Danish fleet was destroyed
 or damaged, and the League of Armed Neutrality collapsed, as it turned out,
almost immediately thereafter. Yet the bloody Second of April, 1800, aroused
throughout the Danish monarchy a wave of patriotic fervor unparalleled since
the heroic defense of Copenhagen against the Swedes in 1658-60. Adam Oeh-
lenschlager and his literary friends, who had served as volunteers, glorified in
verse and prose the martial valor of a nation that had enjoyed virtually unbroken
peace for over eight decades. Countess Sophie Reventlow saw in the battle a new
   Thermopylae. And in Holstein, the Kiel medical professor Georg Heinrich
Weber could write—in German—“Our national honor stands in all its glory
This every good Dane feels with noble pride . . . for we too are good Danes!52
  The sequel to the Battle of Copenhagen Roads is quickly told. While the truce
