         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                              251

and especially the United States. In 1801 Denmark accredited its first minister
to Washington.49
   As in the American war twenty years before, the new armed neutrality posed
a grave threat to Great Britain. Austria could not alone keep up the struggle by
land against France and concluded peace at Luneville in February 1801. At sea
Britain’s naval resources were strained to the limit by the combined fleets of
France, Spain, and the Batavian Republic. The armed neutrality now threatened
not only to break the blockade of France and throttle Britain’s vital trade with
the Baltic, but given Tsar Paul s emotional anglophobia—to destroy Europe’s
precarious balance of naval power altogether, bringing into existence a vast
Continental fleet capable of covering the invasion of the home islands them¬
selves.
   The British responded with alacrity. On 14 January 1801 they seized all
vessels belonging to the armed neutrals in British ports; those from Denmark-
Norway alone amounted to 149 ships. As rapidly as communications would
permit, they occupied the Danish Virgin Islands and Swedish St. Barthelemy,
followed by Danish Tranquebar and Frederiksnagore in India. On 12 March a
British naval force of 53 sail, including twenty ships of the line, put to sea under
Sir Hyde Parker to break up the League of Armed Neutrality by intimidation
or force.
    The Scandinavians found themselves dangerously exposed. France had given
them no assurance of support. Although the Russian fleet appeared formidable
on paper, it was of poor quality and still frozen into its ports. Both Nordic states
made hectic efforts to fortify their far-flung coastlines, but owing to financial
weakness their navies, upon which their defenses above all depended, were not
up to strength. Denmark hastily organized a landevcem, or militia. Meanwhile
many warships lay decommissioned and unrigged in Copenhagen’s naval dock¬
yard while their crews were furloughed and away serving on merchant vessels.
    To protect their capital by sea, the Danes deployed a line of nineteen unrigged
warships, anchored bow and stern, to serve as floating gun platforms, supported
by smaller craft and covered in part by land fortifications, especially on Tre
Kroner Island in the roadstead, the key point of the defense. With trained naval
personnel in short supply, the blockships were largely manned by comman¬
deered land troops, reinforced by city militia and an enthusiastic crowd of volun¬
teers, including students from the university.
   There was meanwhile little collaboration between the two Scandinavian king¬
doms. As the British fleet passed the Sound on 30 March, it kept out of cannon
range of Kronborg Castle at Helsingor on the Danish side by hugging the Swed¬
ish shore. The Swedes did not fire on it since Crown Prince Frederik deliber¬
ately declined to request such support, fearing it might later encourage the
Swedes to demand exemption from the Danish Sound dues in return. The Swed-
