         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                               247

himself, for Hauge combined in remarkable fashion the qualities of the charis¬
matic visionary and of the practical man of affairs. He recognized the need for
a strong economic base for his evangelistic movement. “The worldly wise, false
and evil,’ he wrote in 1804, had possessed themselves of the goods of this
world; the godly should therefore “put a stop to the prideful luxury of the
rich.     Worldly success among the faithful he considered a sign of God’s
grace. For a time in 1800-1801 he considered the idea of a community of prop¬
erty among the Friends ; although he soon gave it up, they frequently pooled
their resources with telling effect in common business ventures. In 1801 Hauge
was able to establish himself as a merchant and citizen of Bergen through funds
raised by his followers. The Friends acquired or founded a number of enter¬
prises, including Christiansand’s only newspaper and two paper mills—impor¬
tant for the printing of Hauge’s writings.
   The Establishment became increasingly concerned as Hauge and his peasant
following seemed to threaten both clerical and secular authority and the eco¬
nomic privileges of the urban merchant oligarchy.43

   The later 1790s were a particularly prosperous period for Scandinavian—
especially Danish-Norwegian—maritime commerce. After Austria made peace
with France at Campo Formio in October 1797, the European war turned into
a bitter and closely matched maritime struggle between Great Britain on the one
side and France, Spain, and the Batavian Republic on the other. According to
a Danish government report in 1798:
   France’s commerce has come to a complete halt, Britain’s trade in the
   Mediterranean has stopped, the formerly so extensive Dutch carrying
   trade has been ruined, Venice’s political existence has been destroyed, and
   the other Italian states are concerned above all with their self-defense.44

   The Scandinavian kingdoms—with the United States—remained the principal
neutral carriers and profited accordingly. The Danish monarchy maintained
close to 3,000 seagoing vessels, of which more than half were Norwegian,
around the turn of the century, whereas Sweden-Finland had somewhat less than
half that number.45 In addition to carrying their own products and those of the
Baltic region, they assumed much of the carrying trade both in Europe and be¬
yond. Most of the Mediterranean trade now fell into Scandinavian hands, as did
a growing volume of business with North America.
   A lively commerce passed through Denmark’s colonies in the West Indies
and in India—and on a more modest scale through Swedish St. Barthelemy—
consisting largely of goods belonging to citizens of the belligerent powers seek¬
ing the protection of neutral flags. The Danish Asiatic Company entered into its
era of greatest prosperity. Danish ships called frequently at isolated French lie
de France. In February 1797 the Dutch-born Copenhagen merchant Frederic de
