 244      COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

thus was struck in 1799 by a lack of “literary female characters” in Norway,
while Mary Wollstonecraft, who was much interested, four years earlier found
Danish women —as well as their Scandinavian sisters in general —to be “simply
notable housewives; without accomplishments, or any of the charms that adorn
more advanced social life.”36 Yet from an internal perspective, the change is
unmistakable, as is its growing influence upon the cultural life of the North.
    The return of Henrik Steffens from Jena to Copenhagen in 1802, filled with
the romantic theories of Fichte and Schelling, and his encounter with the young
Adam Oehlenschlager, which left the latter a wholehearted convert to the new
Weltanschauung, were milestones in the blossoming of full-blown romanticism
in Denmark, with Oehlenschlager as its standard-bearer. The civic-minded ethos
of past decades was here, as elsewhere, dissolving before shining visions of a
distant past.
   Responsibility for suppression of the press cannot, meanwhile, be attributed
solely to conservative currents at home and abroad. The struggle over the press
was waged above all, as Edvard Holm has pointed out, within the progressive
camp itself.37 All its adherents desired a regime of justice and material well¬
being, and all had been comrades-in-arms in the heady, early years of reform.
By the turn of the century they had divided irreconcilably into those who like
Crown Prince Frederik, C. D. Reventlow, and Christian Colbjornsen occupied
the citadel of power and held fast to the ideal of enlightened absolutism, and
those like P. A. Heiberg and C. M. Bruun who ultimately could be satisfied only
with a government by—as well as for—the people.
    If the friends of reform within the Danish monarchy idealized Crown Prince
Frederik as democracy enthroned, the Ritterschaft in the duchies feared him for
that very reason. Frederik could speak, as he did in a letter to Schimmelmann
in 1803, of the power he “received from the nation,” but he mistrusted and dis¬
liked the aristocratic defenders of local, corporate privileges in Schleswig-Hol¬
stein for essentially the same reason as he did the ultraradicals in Copenhagen,
for both contested the ideal of rationalist, reforming absolutism.38 While con¬
sidering themselves implacable foes of the French Revolution, both the crown
prince and the Ritterschaft represented forces inherent in the revolution itself,
and for that very reason mistrusted and feared each other.
    A. P. Bernstorff, the great conciliator, had managed to tread a narrow path
between Danish centralism and Schleswig-Holstein particularism, and had en¬
joyed the confidence of the Ritterschaft. While he was succeeded at the German
Chancellery by the strongly conservative Holsteiner Count Cai Reventlow,
Bernstorff s death also cleared the way for Crown Prince Frederik’s increasing¬
ly direct rule over the entire monarchy. Conflict between two opposed concepts
of state and society could not long be postponed.
   Under such circumstances, the question of serfdom in the duchies proved an
increasingly difficult bone of contention. Many noble proprietors in the duchies.
