        COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                             249

    Following General Bonaparte’s coup d’etat of 18 Brumaire in November
 1799, France, now facing the combined might of the Second Coalition, adopted
a more conciliatory stance toward the maritime neutrals, while Britain held to
its hard line and was increasingly aroused over enemy overseas trade under neu¬
tral flags. In March 1799 the British admiralty required strict enforcement of
boarding and inspection of neutral merchant ships. Already by July this resulted
in an encounter in the Channel between four British frigates and the Danish
escort vessel Freja, whose commander, Captain Peder Greis Krabbe, became
the hero of the hour throughout the Danish monarchy. In December 1799 the
Danish Havfruen sought to defend its convoy off Gibraltar.

      While Denmark concentrated upon safeguarding neutrality and commercial
 interests, Sweden’s foreign policy during the first years of Gustav IV Adolfs
 personal reign followed an erratic course determined by both principle and
 opportunism, as well as by the vagaries of European great-power politics.
      The conclusion of peace between France and Austria in 1797 provided for
 a congress at which France and the Germanic states were to work out a territo¬
  rial settlement for the Holy Roman Empire. As both ruler of Swedish Pomerania
 and as co-guarantor (with France) of the Peace of Westphalia of 1648, Gustav
 Adolf, encouraged by Austria, saw an opportunity for Sweden to defend the
 integrity of the empire and thus oppose the further spread of revolution, and
 appointed Axel von Fersen his ambassador to the congress, which convened at
 Rastadt in December 1797. When Vienna quickly abandoned its opposition to
 a French annexation of the Rhineland, Fersen found himself in an untenable
 position and was browbeaten in humiliating fashion by the ranking French
 envoy, General Bonaparte himself.
     The same month, in December 1797, Gustav IV Adolf appointed as his acting
 foreign minister Fredrik Wilhelm von Ehrenheim, who favored accepting the
 apparently inevitable territorial reshuffle in Germany and turning it to Sweden’s
 advantage. He now held out to the young king the beguiling prospect of acquir¬
 ing Norway in return for compensation to Denmark in Germany. While he
 surely realized how totally unacceptable such a scheme would be to Copen¬
hagen, it enticed Gustav Adolf out of an impossible, if not dangerous, position
at Rastadt, and Count Fersen was quietly removed from the congress.
     Already by the spring of 1798 it was evident even to Gustav Adolf that there
was no immediate prospect of obtaining Norway as part of a wider territorial
settlement on the Continent. Austria again shifted ground, the Congress of
Rastadt became deadlocked, and Europe drifted toward a new war. Alarmed by
reports from Count Fersen of the continued spread of French influence and ideas
on the Continent, the king reverted to his natural anti-French stance, encouraged
by Tsar Paul, who by the end of the year brought Russia into the Second Coali¬
tion and thus for the first time into the struggle against revolutionary France.
