 248       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

Coninck negotiated the so-called Batavian Contract with the Dutch East India
Committee to buy up the latter’s accumulated wares in the East Indies for 19
million gulden—secretly provided by the Dutch themselves—and ship them,
under the Danish flag, to Copenhagen, from whence they could be profitably
sold on the Continent. Foreign merchants invested heavily in Danish commer¬
cial ventures, and despite the efforts of the Danish government, an undetermin¬
able number of foreign ships were registered as Danish, or at least flew the
Danish flag, which Thomas Malthus considered “much prostituted during the
war.’’ French, Dutch, and Spanish privateers put into Norwegian ports, where
local middlemen carried on a thriving business selling captured ships and their
cargoes back to their owners.46
   Statistics on Scandinavian trade during these years are incomplete, especially
for Denmark-Norway after 1794. But the prosperity it brought was unmistak¬
able. Copenhagen emerged by the turn of the century as the great emporium of
neutral commerce in Europe, even though in total value this evidently did not
quite reach the level of 1782-83, during the American war. Other seaports, like
Altona, Flensburg, Bergen, Arendal, Christiansand, Christiania, Stockholm,
and Gothenburg, also thrived.
   Such commerce was, however, necessarily risky. Reinforced by Dutch and
Spanish naval power, France sought to press its advantage through the edict of
29 Nivose, Year VI (18 January 1798), according to which neutral vessels to¬
gether with their cargoes would be forfeit if they carried any British goods what¬
soever. Because British shipping was largely convoyed by the Royal Navy,
French and allied privateers preyed mainly upon the neutrals trading with
Britain.
    Privateering caused a growing demand among Scandinavian merchants for
regular convoying of their shipping. By the early summer of 1798 Sweden com¬
menced convoy operations, followed soon after by Denmark. Dismissing For¬
eign Minister Christian Bernstorff s apprehensions, Crown Prince Frederik and
his admiralty instructed escort commanders to resist seizure of ships under their
protection after guaranteeing that they did not carry contraband. Cooperation
under the armed neutrality agreement of 1794 revived, and ships of the two
Scandinavian powers sailed in each others’ convoys.
   Having responded to French privateering, the Scandinavians quickly ran
afoul of the British navy, not least of all as the Swedes refused to regard naval
stores as contraband. In June 1798 the first of the Swedish convoys, consisting
of eighteen merchant vessels, was seized by the British, followed in August by
another Swedish convoy of thirty-eight ships. Forty-three vessels and their car¬
goes were declared forfeit by a British admiralty court, after long delays, in June
1799. Since Sweden was then facing mounting economic difficulties, the loss
was heavy. Despite his natural gallophobia, Gustav IV Adolf was aroused to
profound indignation.
