        COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                               253

with Denmark was extended from day to day, Parker’s force proceeded to Karls-
krona to deal with the Swedes. As both sides girded for battle, the news arrived
that Tsar Paul had been assassinated in St. Petersburg. His successor, Alexander
I, was disposed to negotiate with Great Britain, and since the Scandinavian
powers could only follow suit, Parker’s naval force left the Baltic. A British-
Russian convention in June 1801 recognized Britain’s right to visit and search
neutral vessels, even if convoyed, and tacitly surrendered the principle that free
ships made free goods. In separate conventions Sweden and Denmark thereafter
acknowledged the same conditions, and the occupied Scandinavian overseas
colonies were returned. By the summer of 1801 Scandinavian maritime trade
was once again thriving. Gustav IV Adolf returned to speculating over ways to
acquire Norway, even sounding out Paris on this matter. In March 1802 the
Treaty of Amiens between Britain and France at last restored peace throughout
Europe after a decade of war.

    The years from 1797 to 1802 reveal once again a close parallelism of de¬
velopments within the two Nordic states for both internal and external reasons,
following the divergences noted in the preceding decade. There are striking
similarities between both the ruling princes and their regimes after 1796-97. In
his retiring nature, distaste for courtly pomp and state extravagance, impatience
with high aristocratic pretentions, pedantic concern for detail, above all military,
and rather dogmatic self-righteousness, Gustav IV Adolf closely resembled his
cousin. Crown Prince Frederik. Both stood at the head of dedicated and hard¬
working bureaucracies, to which they entrusted the administration of their
realms and which soberly and unostentatiously carried on the work of practical
reform initiated earlier by more brilliant and imaginative leaders. Both mean¬
while determinedly silenced any voices that presumed to question the authority
or legitimacy of their regimes.
    The Danish press ordinance of 1799 and the exile of Heiberg and Bruun had
their counterpart in Gustav IV Adolfs suppression of the Uppsala “Junta,”
while his confrontation with the aristocratic liberals of the “Mountain” at the
Norrkoping Riksdag in 1800 recalls the mounting conflict between Crown
Prince Frederik and the Schleswig-Holstein Ritterschaft which would culminate
in 1802. In both monarchies the rapid subsidence of native “Jacobinism” after
 1799-1800 shows how far the avant-garde had by then gone beyond educated
opinion as a whole. Religious unrest among the Norwegian peasantry and polit¬
ical discontent among the Schleswig-Holstein nobility meanwhile sprang from
deeper roots.
   Scandinavian internal developments in these years reflect those occurring
elsewhere in the Western world. Everywhere a conservative reaction against
revolutionary radicalism was evident. One recalls the suspension of the Habeas
Corpus in 1794 and the Seditious Meetings and Treasonable Practices Acts of
