 246       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

 with merchants and officials, doubtless exacerbated in places by poor harvests
 between 1800 and 1804, found during these very years a new outlet in a great
 pietistic revival movement led by a man from its own ranks, Hans Nielsen
 Hauge.
    By the middle 1790s signs were not lacking of a religious awakening in var¬
 ious parts of the monarchy, although this was at first generally limited to the
 upper levels of society: the aristocracy, the urban middle classes, some of the
 clergy. By the end of the decade, however, attempts by the Lutheran state
 church to introduce a more rationalistic liturgy and devotional books began to
 encounter peasant resistance, in Jutland as well as in the duchies, where it was
 encouraged by the aristocratic Emkendorf circle, and even in Iceland. For social
 as well as religious reasons, however, the strongest reaction took place in
 Norway.
     Rationalism had been gaining ground in the theological faculty of the Univer¬
 sity of Copenhagen, and in consequence throughout the Danish and Norwegian
 clergy, since mid-century. By the 1790s it had reached its apogee. Its propo¬
 nents, in parsonages throughout the far-flung kingdom, included many admi¬
 rable men distinguished as much—if not more—through zeal for peasant literacy
 or improved farming methods as for the cure of souls. In most rural parishes
the pastor was the most conspicuous and active bearer of enlightenment, culture,
and practical reform. But he was, by the same token, the foremost representative
of outside officialdom, hence of the power of the state and of the upper classes.
In Norway this circumstance alone was enough to cause frequent difficulties be¬
tween pastors and their flocks. Many peasants resented the constant, nagging
efforts of the clergy to change their accustomed ways, which threatened to in¬
volve risks and expense. At the same time, the dry rationalism of the later eigh¬
teenth century failed to satisfy yearnings for a richer, more emotional religious
experience.41
   At this point Hans Nielsen Hauge emerged from the ohscurity of rural 0st-
landet. In 1796 he experienced a religious awakening and took to the road to
preach his message of personal conversion, simple piety, and strict Christian
morality far and wide throughout Norway. Already in 1799 he was arrested for
the first time, for violating the ordinance of 1754 requiring farm laborers to take
local service. By then Hauge had already won over several thousand “Friends,”
as they called themselves, many of whom became missionaries for the new
awakening.
    Hauge’s writings show their author’s lack of book learning and systematic
theology. They are poorly written, often obscure, sometimes inconsistent. He
made no attempt to found a new and separate sect, in violation of the Conventicle
Law of 1741, seeking rather to establish a company of the righteous within the
state church-ever an uncomfortable situation both for the few and for the many
   The writings were meanwhile relatively insignificant compared with the man
