 250       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

    By April 1799 Gustav Adolf was negotiating secretly with the tsar concerning
 Sweden s entry into the new coalition. The same month his envoy to the Ger¬
 manic diet at Regensburg made a ringing appeal for resistance against French
 encroachments. The allied campaign was strikingly successful during the sum¬
 mer of 1799, and conservatives everywhere exulted at the prospect of the immi¬
 nent collapse of the revolution.
     On 29 October 1799 Sweden concluded the Gatchina Treaty with Russia.
 Ostensibly a defensive alliance like Gustav Ill’s Drottningholm Treaty of 1791,
 it contained secret clauses committing Sweden to put at the tsar’s disposal a
 Swedish auxiliary corps of 8,000 men for the war against France, in return for
 “suitable compensation,’’ by which Norway was doubtless intended. Gustav IV
 Adolf now stood prepared to take up his father’s crusade and, if possible, to
 unite the Scandinavian peninsula in the process.47
     In the summer of 1799 Tsar Paul, aroused by the specter of Danish “Jacobin¬
 ism,” pressured Copenhagen not only to muzzle its press but also to join the
 Second Coalition against France, even without direct participation in the war,
 adding emphasis through a temporary embargo on Danish vessels in Russian
ports. Given this threatening situation, the Danish government reluctantly ac¬
ceded in principle, in a memorandum to St. Petersburg dated 27 September.48
    The picture was soon radically transformed when the Russian tsar fell out
with his Austrian and British allies and withdrew from the Second Coalition by
the beginning of 1800. Both Sweden and Denmark were thus fortuitously re¬
leased from any obligation to join the struggle as the advantage now passed to
the French. While at home official repression of native “Jacobinism” reached
its climax by 1800, the main concern of the Northern monarchies in the interna¬
tional arena became once again Britain’s tyranny on the seas.
    Aroused in particular over the two convoys seized by the British in 1798, the
 Swedish government proposed to St. Petersburg a commercial treaty in June
 1800 including the revival of the program of the League of Armed Neutrality
of 1780. In August, after the Freja’s engagement with the British in the Channel,
Copenhagen sent a similar suggestion to the Russian government, followed by
a second feeler from Stockholm. Tsar Paul responded enthusiastically with a
proposal to the Scandinavian kingdoms and Prussia for resurrecting the League
of Armed Neutrality, behind which lay even more ambitious plans for an al¬
liance system—the “Northern League”—hostile to Great Britain. In November
he seized all British ships in Russian ports. Gustav IV Adolf visited him in St.
Petersburg in December, and by the end of the month Sweden, Denmark, and
Prussia joined Russia in a new league based on the principles of 1780 and speci¬
fically stipulating armed resistance to the visitation of convoyed merchant ves¬
sels, following assurance that they did not carry contraband. The participating
powers sought to broaden the league and negotiated to that end with Portugal
