         COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802                               245

including both Cai and his brother Fritz Reventlow, were genuinely concerned
with the welfare of their peasants and by no means opposed to serf emancipation
as such, but they stoutly denied the right of the central government in Copen¬
hagen to impose a solution in violation of their immemorial privileges. Cai
Reventlow regarded the relationship between lord and peasant as a “purely
domestic matter which ought not, so to speak, cross the threshold of my house,”
as he had written to Schimmelmann in 1795. “Just because the dukes of Holstein
have become kings of Denmark,” his brother Fritz, the master of Emkendorf,
wrote to Cai in 1798, “this gives them no right to tear the province away from
the Germanic empire and govern it according to Danish laws, customs, and
ideas.”39 As noted, the eight years set in 1797 for the completion of emancipa¬
tion passed amid a growing deadlock.
    Emkendorf manor became ever more the capital of an aristocratic state within
the state, in rivalry with Copenhagen, bitterly opposed to democracy in either
its French republican or its Danish autocratic guise, a citadel of German roman¬
ticism in both literature and politics. It led opposition in the duchies to religious
rationalism and despite its Lutheran orthodoxy opened its doors to sincere
Roman Catholics, including various French emigre nobles, as allies against in-
differentism and unbelief. In 1799 Count Friedrich Leopold Stolberg embraced
the Roman faith, bringing accusations of crypto-Catholicism against Emkendorf
from the opposing camp. Cai Reventlow counterattacked by arranging for
Fritz’s appointment in 1800 as curator of the University of Kiel, where like
Count Fersen at Uppsala he waged a determined battle against the new ideas.
    In Norway the ironmaster and merchant Jacob Aall would later look back
with nostalgia to the years around 1800:

    Nowhere were the effects of the French Revolution felt less than in Nor¬
    way, and nowhere did ideas of liberty cause less ferment. . . . There
    was no wish for any change and . . . the great mass of the inhabitants
    had long enjoyed in effect that freedom and equality in the conditions of
   civil life which other nations waged a bloody struggle to win. No nation
    in the North was less concerned over that revolution in the form of govern¬
   ment than Norway, which just at the beginning of this [the nineteenth] cen¬
   tury was in the midst of the most advantageous period of activity its history
   can reveal. It felt the spur of no oppression; its taxation was light and by
   no means in proportion to what the nation was able to bear, and any sort
   of change in its official or political status seemed to forbode a loss rather
   than a gain.40

   These were indeed prosperous times for Norwegian merchants and mariners.
The small radical journals in Christiania, Bergen, and Trondheim—loyal as they
had always remained to the monarchy—were gone by 1800. Yet Aall’s bright
description had little to say about the Norwegian peasantry, whose old conflicts
