  256      AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 master and man by eliminating fixed maximum wages. Most significant, how¬
 ever, was a new movement to consolidate landholdings.
      The problems connected with scattered and intermixed holdings had long
  been evident. The Swedish government had attempted through the Storskifte
  ordinances of 1757 and 1762 to reduce somewhat the fragmentation of village
  lands. These measures had provided some inspiration for the more thorough¬
  going Danish land consolidations, especially from 1781 on, which in turn had
  set an example for Baron Rutger Maclean and his friends on their estates in
  Sweden’s southernmost province of Skane across the Sound, beginning in 1785.
     While Baron Maclean was persona non grata with Gustav IV Adolf for his
 supposedly “Jacobin” political views, his rational reorganization of Svaneholm
 manor into consolidated tenancies of practicable size, as well as the Danish land
 reforms, greatly impressed influential members of the government in Stock¬
 holm, leading by March 1803 to the Enskifte ordinance for Skane.
     This provided for the creation of farms consolidated into single blocs of land.
 Any landowner could upon demand withdraw from his village community (bya-
 lag) and have his holdings thus concentrated. While other village landholders
 were not obliged to follow suit, the surveyors and outside referees called in to
effect the necessary land exchanges would prepare a plan for the reorganization
of allthe village lands and encourage its adoption. In practice, despite apprehen¬
sions, pressures from social superiors and officials induced numerous villages
to undergo complete reorganization; by 1807, 194 villages in Skane had at least
commenced the process. A second ordinance in 1804 extended enskifte to Vas-
tergotland. A third in 1807 applied to the rest of the kingdom, except for Dalar-
na, the northernmost provinces (Norrland), and Finland. A new forest ordinance
in 1805 provided for the division of village woodlands upon the demand of any
village landowner. In 1827 a new Laga Skifte ordinance would provide some¬
what greater flexibility by allowing consolidation of farms into more than one
bloc to accommodate the rugged topography of much of .Sweden,
    As in Denmark—and Great Britain—the process of land consolidation and
enclosure would continue long into the nineteenth century, gaining momentum
with the development of commercial agriculture and in the process transforming
both rural life and the very appearance of the countryside. For many it brought
material and psychological hardship, reducing as it did many marginal members
of the old village communities, who had previously benefited from common
lands and common rights, to the meaner status of landless wage laborers, and
largely breaking up the old close-knit rural society. For holders of both freehold
and leasehold farms, the agrarian reorganization brought possibilities for new
wealth, comfort, and social standing. Much new land was now cleared and culti¬
vated, while the fallow was gradually reduced with the spread of more intensive
systems of crop rotation. The enlargement of landholdings with portions of for¬
mer common lands encouraged their division into smaller, more easily workable
