                                    AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                  257

units or the sale of part of the land to pay the costs of surveying and enclosing,
thereby increasing the total numbers of farms and crofts. All of this resulted in
a great increase in food production, which by the 1820s would allow Sweden
to export surplus grain for the first time since the 1680s. The rural population
grew rapidly, but the increase was greatest among the poorer, landless strata of
the peasantry. Parallels with both Denmark and Great Britain are evident.1

    Crown Prince Frederik’s increasingly personal autocracy is no less apparent
than Gustav IV Adolfs. His growing impatience with contrary opinions and
inclination to deal directly with individual subordinates raised apprehensions in
various quarters. This is most evident among the German nobility in the duchies,
and indeed during these very years issues arose that sorely tried their attachment
to the crown. Yet on the Danish council itself frictions are apparent. C. D.
Reventlow came to regard himself as the principal defender of its traditional,
quasi-constitutional power and dignity, while he became increasingly solicitous
of individual rights, leading to admonitions that the crown prince found
tiresome.2
    Increasingly, Frederik filled the higher administrative posts with professional
bureaucrats, such as Frederik Moltke, president of the Danish Chancellery,
1799-1804, Frederik Julius Kaas, his successor, and Johan Sigismund von
Mosting, president of the German Chancellery after 1802. Characteristically
these men were Danes, commoners, or both, rather than independently wealthy
and prominent noble German landowners like those of the Bernstorff-Revent-
low-Schimmelmann circle, which had dominated after 1784. They had made
their way in royal service, often as provincial governors (amtmcend), and were
dependable instruments of the regent’s will.
    After the resumption of the Anglo-French conflict led to a French occupation
of neighboring Hanover in 1803, Crown Prince Frederik mobilized an army of
observation in Holstein, with which he spent much of his time during the follow¬
ing years, while the council in Copenhagen faded into the background. It was
widely believed, at the time and since, that Frederik fell at this time under the
influence of a camarilla of military adjutants at his headquarters in Kiel, popu¬
larly known as “The Red Feathers” for their plumed headgear, but later histor¬
ical opinion has tended to discount their probable significance.3
    What occurred was the reemergence of cabinet, as opposed to conciliar,
government, such as had evolved during the Struensee and Guldberg eras in the
1770s and 1780s, with the important difference that power was exercised direct¬
ly by the rightful heir to the throne.
   For the time being, however, Frederik’s personal autocracy proved an asset
in carrying on the program of reform. In accordance with the decree of 1792,
the slave trade was ended in the Danish colonies in 1807. Commerce was consis¬
tently encouraged and the tariff systems of the kingdom and the duchies were
