 254       COMMERCE AND COUNTERREVOLUTION, 1797-1802

  1796 in Britain, the so-called Jacobin Trials of 1795 in Vienna, the Alien and
 Sedition Acts of 1798 in the United States. Count Fersen became convinced by
  1798 that the French Directory, no less than other European regimes, was itself
 threatened by the destructive force of Jacobinism, and the coup d’etat of 18
 Brumaire, which brought General Bonaparte to power in November 1799, was
indeed intended to forestall a resurgent neo-Jacobinism.53 The banishment of
Heiberg and Bruun from Denmark recalls not only that of Thorild from Sweden
in 1793, but also such contemporary political refugees as Joseph Priestley,
Wolfe Tone, Vittorio Alfieri, Tadeusz Kosciuszko. The Haugian revival in Nor¬
way, like English Wesleyanism and a variety of German pietisms, reflected in
part the growing self-awareness of simple people whose traditional patterns of
life and belief were under the pressures of change. Among the educated classes,
the conservative trend of backward-yearning romanticism calls to mind such
European figures as Goethe, Tieck, Novalis, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Chateau¬
briand.
    In international affairs there were greater contrasts between the Nordic king¬
 doms, with precedents extending back to the early seventeenth century: Sweden
 under Gustav IV Adolf followed an adventurous and at times opportunistic
 course, in which the hope of acquiring Norway and thereby creating a strong
and secure Scandinavian power provided the leitmotif, whereas Denmark held
to its traditional policy of preserving its existing territory and exploiting the
blessings of neutral trade in wartime. The economic crisis of the later 1790s was
international in scope, and the Swedish monetary conversion of 1800 recalls that
of the French Directory in 1798. Scandinavian maritime trade faced the same
problems as that of the greatest of the maritime neutrals, the United States, dur¬
ing the years of its “quasi-war” with France and of growing friction with Bri¬
tain.
    Buffeted by the epic struggle of the great powers, the Scandinavian kingdoms
were narrowly spared from involvement in the war against.France by 1800, but
were in turn precipitated into a conflict with Britain which led to the baptism
of fire at Copenhagen Roads by the spring of 1801. A precarious peace was rees¬
tablished in Europe a year later, but it was not destined to last long. In the next
round of hostilities the Scandinavian lands would be drawn into the maelstrom
itself.
