                                    AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                 263

The crisis also opened a fateful breach between the crown prince and the duke
of Augustenburg.
   In Norway the government continued to face the perplexing religious
awakening among the peasantry led by the evangelist Hans Nielsen Hauge,
which expressed other discontents with the existing authoritarianism. The
Norwegian “Brethren” were increasing in numbers and, especially after their
leader established himself as a merchant in Bergen in 1801, were rapidly
building up a coordinated and mutually supportive network of economic
enterprises in town and countryside.
   Since the Haugians did not secede from the state church, it is impossible to
judge their numbers with anything approaching accuracy. At the height of the
movement, Hauge’s writings were, however, being printed in editions of 50,000
to 60,000 copies.15 No doubt there were considerable numbers of passive sym¬
pathizers.
     The movement gave rise to mounting consternation and alarm in the upper
levels of Norwegian society, for in various ways it appeared to threaten the
vested interests of the entire Establishment. Hauge’s strong emphasis upon, in
effect, Luther s doctrine of the priesthood of all true believers—upon individual
repentance and conversion, lay preaching, private devotions, and the ministry
of useful work in this world—called into question the authority of the ordained
and appointed parish pastor, the hierarchy, the entire institutional church. The
weakening of ecclesiastical discipline, a pillar of the absolutist state, in turn
undermined the authority of the civil bureaucracy as well as respect toward per¬
sons of quality and their established prerogatives. Insolence, it seemed, was for¬
tified by blind and willful fanaticism, even though Hauge himself dismissed the
fears of those who believed “all will go here as in France if we are success¬
ful."16 The burgher class felt threatened by a movement that strove to break
down traditional barriers between privileged towns and their rural hinterlands,
between commerce and agriculture, between individual enterprise and an or¬
ganized, collective competition.
    Complaints accumulated. Hauge and various of his followers were repeatedly
arrested on diverse charges. In 1804 Bishop Peder Hansen of Christiansand, an
enlightened rationalist who had done much to improve popular education in his
diocese, sent an alarming report on Hauge’s religious fanaticism to the Danish
Chancellery in Copenhagen. This was supplemented by the testimony of twenty-
four leading citizens of Christiansand that the “Friends” threatened to disrupt
economic life and even to precipitate civil or religious war. The Chancellery
solicited reports from other officials, clerical and secular, in Norway.
    In October 1804 Hauge was arrested and his property was confiscated upon
government orders. While he was held in confinement, a commission of inquiry
was appointed and heard some three hundred witnesses over the next three years
