                                      AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                 261

 his dearest wish: the final, complete consolidation of the monarchy. Time was
 of the essence. From Kiel, he wrote on 29 August to Duke Friedrich Christian
 of Augustenburg as the senior state councillor, directing the council to prepare
 a proclamation by which “Holstein is incorporated and integrated entirely and
 without any reservation whatsoever into Denmark.”9
    These instructions set off a complex conflict of wills, matching principles
against expediency. The crown prince stood for a well-established objective of
Danish statecraft, and he was staunchly backed by the presidents of the Danish
and German Chancelleries, Kaas and Mosting, as well as by much Danish-
national sentiment within the kingdom. Unfortunately, however, Frederik had
only two living children, both daughters, and he was not expected to produce
further heirs. The duke of Augustenburg consequently had the dynastic interests
of his own, younger branch of the Oldenburg house to uphold, since the old Salic
law had heretofore prohibited succession through the female line in Holstein. He
was particularly affronted that Frederik should pass on through him the order
that the council prepare an ordinance barring him and his heirs from their right¬
ful claims.
      After presenting the directive, the duke withdrew from the council’s delibera¬
 tions and sent a memorandum to the crown prince, bluntly expressing incredu¬
 lity that the “reputation of a government renowned for its wisdom and integ¬
 rity” could be called into question through the “theft” of the rightful succession
 in Holstein. Instead, he proposed that Holstein be declared a sovereign duchy,
 closely federated with Denmark, but preserving the existing order of succession
 and the traditional rights and privileges guaranteed by the exchange treaties with
 Russia of 1767 and 1773. This was of course the last thing Crown Prince Fred¬
 erik wanted. To his sister he declared himself to be the “sworn enemy of the
 Germanic constitution” and to feel “great satisfaction” over the demise of the
 empire. He was incensed by the duke’s memorandum, complaining that while
 every “patriot, cosmopolitan, and true subject” recognized the need for the
 incorporation, “my brother-in-law has secretly set aside his patriotic pose and
his old Holstein hatred of the Danish royal house, imbibed with his mother’s
milk, reveals itself all too clearly.”10
     In this, the crown prince judged too harshly, for the duke was caught in a
painful dilemma. But others on the council, in particular Christian Bernstorff
and Ernst Schimmelmann, also had reservations. The treaties with Russia in
1767 and 1773 had stipulated the reversion of ducal Holstein to the Russian
imperial house if the male line of the older, royal branch of the Oldenburg
dynasty should fail, and Sweden, too, claimed reversionary rights for its
Holstein-Gottorp kings. The outright annexation of the duchy was bound to
alienate even further the aroused Ritterschaft. Christian Bernstorff and Schim¬
melmann had, moreover, a certain sentimental fondness for Holstein’s old Ger¬
manic liberties.
