  258      AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 largely equalized in 1803. A forest ordinance in 1805, prepared by C. D.
 Reventlow, allowed the government extensive control over private woodlands
 to ensure their rational management. The higher schools were placed under a
 new Directorate tor the University and Learned Schools in 1805, freeing them
 from the control of the state church. An important landmark was reached in the
 evolution of the national army when it was decreed in 1804 that henceforth all
 recruitment would consist of the enlistment or conscription of subjects of the
 crown. Most important of all was the emancipation of the serfs in the duchies
 by 1805, of which more below.
     There has been a tendency in the older historiography to contrast an earlier,
 creative period of reform led by A. P. Bernstorff up to his death in 1797 with
 an arid period that followed under the crown prince’s personal autocracy. The
 studies of Axel Linvald in particular have meanwhile shown that such a contrast
 is in the main untenable. Although Frederik lacked the brilliance and imagina¬
 tion of an A. P. Bernstorff or a C. D. Reventlow, he was firmly committed to
 the ideals they represented and indeed would seem even to have surpassed them
 in the warmth of his sympathy for his humbler subjects. “Every citizen without
 exception stands under the protection of the laws,” he declared. And on another
 occasion:

   Were it not so much against the prevailing spirit, I would never exempt
   either the nobility or those of equivalent privileges from conscription, for
   when these sons of the people are destined neither for naval nor military
   careers nor for studies, I consider them, when they do not learn even the
   simplest handicrafts, useless members of the state.4

    After 1797 it was above all the crown prince himself who provided the impe¬
tus not only to new reforms but to the consistent implementation of those already
undertaken, and who broke the deadlocks impeding their progress, overriding
the protests of vested interests and the cautious apprehensions of his advisers.
The burden of responsibility his self-willed autocracy imposed upon him was,
however, at times more than Frederik could manage—not least in view of his
personal limitations, his long absences from Copenhagen, and sometimes the
indifference or tacit opposition of his officials. This could on occasion thwart
his good intentions, as in the case of his attempt to forbid the physical chastise¬
ment of crofters in 1807.5
    Christian Colbjornsen might still inveigh, as he did in 1803, against “that
proud nobility of birth which from the days of the Waldemars has oppressed the
nation by weakening the royal authority” and warn that the “spirit of aristoc¬
racy . . . lurks within the ruins of the fearsome temple of wicked feudalism.”
His polemics echo the storms of the previous decade, which his own support for
the press ordinance of 1799 had helped to still. But by now the aristocratic bogey
no longer excited much concern within the kingdom.6
