  260       AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 formula was modified somewhat to allow proprietors to attach parts of their
 tenancies to their demesne, provided this were controlled and the number of
 tenant farms were not thereby reduced. The final emancipation ordinance was
 endorsed by the council and signed on 19 December 1804; it abolished all re¬
 maining Leibeigenschaft in the duchies as of 1 January 1805.
      1 he ordinance had been somewhat hastily put together at the last moment and
  it contained certain ambiguities, not least because of the government’s desire not
 to offend needlessly the nobility in the duchies. On the whole it provided the
 peasantry with somewhat less protection than in the kingdom. C. D. Reventlow
 in particular was dissatisfied with it. Yet the government by no means let matters
 go at that. If any former serf were deprived of his farm or croft as a result of
 emancipation, it required that the proprietor provide him and his widow with an
 income for life equal to that produced by the tenancy. Manorial labor require¬
 ments were regulated by an ordinance in July 1805, based on the Danish ordi¬
 nance of 1791 and largely prepared by C. D. Reventlow, which calmed a certain
 ferment among the disoriented former serfs following emancipation.
      Whatever its shortcomings, the emancipation must be considered one of the
   monarchy’s greatest agrarian reforms. Some 100,000 serfs-about one sixth of
  the population of the duchies—at last gained their personal freedom under pro¬
  tection against both outright expropriation of their tenancies and arbitrary labor
  obligations.7 While term leases, rather than hereditary leaseholds (as in Den¬
  mark), remained the norm in the duchies, in practice the same families generally
  continued to occupy the same holdings. And while proprietors could somewhat
  enlarge their demesne, peasant land henceforth remained on the whole in peasant
 hands. One need only compare the flourishing class of large and middling peas¬
 ant farmers of the following decades in the duchies-where many, be it recalled,
 had long been freeholders—with the desolation in the same period of the old
 peasant society in much of northern Germany and the Baltic region, where
 proprietors were left free to incorporate tenant farms into.the demesne, thereby
 reducing the peasantry to an impoverished rural proletariat. A notorious exam¬
 ple of this process of Bauemlegen is provided by neighboring Mecklenburg,
 from which many peasants came to seek a better life in Holstein and Schleswig.®
     The government’s proceedings regarding emancipation and peasant protec¬
tion could not but rankle the more intransigent elements of the Ritterschaft for
which they represented the inexorable advance of Danish absolutism But worse
was yet to come. On 6 August 1806, following the Peace of Pressburg, Emperor
Francis II laid down the imperial crown, thus dissolving the ancient Holy Roman
Empire under which Denmark held Holstein in fief. Prussia, now anticipating
war with France, sought to organize a north German league including Holstein
The French foreign minister, Talleyrand, countered by assuring the Danish min-
ister m Pans that France would favor direct Danish sovereignty over Holstein
    This situation suddenly offered Crown Prince Frederik the chance to realize
