                                     AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                   259

   Aristocracy as such remained far more vigorous in the duchies, in the face
of mounting frictions with the crown during these very years. Following the
British naval attack on Copenhagen Roads in 1801, the government in its press¬
ing need for new revenues decreed in 1802 a new supplementary tax (kontribu-
tion) levied upon real property throughout the monarchy, except Finnmark and
the Atlantic Islands. In the duchies this increased the taxation set “once and for
all as long ago as 1652, and was extended to both persons and forms of prop¬
erty, urban and manorial, that had previously been exempt. To the Ritterschaft,
the new surtax represented a flagrant violation of its historic rights and a perilous
precedent. Cai Reventlow resigned in December 1802 as president of the Ger¬
man Chancellery in ill-concealed protest.
    Unity within the Ritterschaft over the taxation issue, however, began to break
down when it was unable to agree on an appeal to the crown prince in January
 1803. Most of its Schleswig members, with some Holsteiners—as well as the
majority of the non recepti in both duchies—feared a direct confrontation and
backed down. Most of the Holstein Ritterschaft at first favored a direct appeal
to the Reichskammergericht or Imperial Cameral Tribunal, but confidence in the
institutions of the Holy Roman Empire waned following the Peace of Luneville
in February 1801 and in the end nothing came of it.
    Count Fritz Reventlow, the lord of Emkendorf and leader of the intransigents
in the taxation controversy, was meanwhile chancellor of Kiel University since
 1800, providing another source of contention with Copenhagen, especially when
he appointed the ultrareactionary Prussian H. D. Hermes to head the Kiel
Teachers’ Seminary in 1804. This caused such a furor in the rationalist camp that
the government intervened and dismissed Hermes after a year. The Emkendorf
circle had suffered yet another defeat in a matter of principle and prestige. By
 1808 Fritz Reventlow resigned his chancellorship.
    Since the issue of emancipation of the serfs in Holstein and Schleswig had
first been raised in 1795, many manorial lords had voluntarily freed their serfs.
In Schleswig serfdom had virtually disappeared. Yet the Ritterschaft, jealous of
its ancient rights, remained apprehensive of any solution imposed from above.
    After lengthy delays, the matter was revived within the German Chancellery
by C. D. Reventlow in May 1803, leading to protracted negotiations with the
superior courts of Gliickstadt and Gottorp and with the Ritterschaft, which now
focused primarily upon the question of the manorial proprietor’s free disposition
of his property following emancipation. Like many Danish landowners in the
later 1780s, the manorial lords in the duchies sought to gain unrestricted proper¬
ty rights, whereas the government favored some degree of protection for the
peasantry, as in Denmark.
    Crown Prince Frederik at length determined in November 1804 that the num¬
ber of peasant holdings on each manor not be reduced and that all future mano¬
rial labor obligations (Frondienst) be fixed in amount. At Mosting’s urging, this
