 262       AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

    The royal declaration of 9 September 1806 somewhat softened Crown Prince
 Frederik’s hard line with studied ambiguity. It acknowledged the existence of
 a “duchy of Holstein,” which comprised “in every respect a fully unseparated
 [ungetrennter] part” of the Danish state, which in consequence was “hencefor¬
 ward subject only to Our own unlimited authority.”11
    Reactions were accordingly mixed. Russia and Sweden evoked their rever¬
sionary rights, but only pro forma. Joachim Bernstorff wrote dejectedly to his
brother, Christian, on 2 September that the idea “that the Holsteiners should re¬
joice over this reunion, based upon the destruction of their German fatherland
by lawless outside force, I consider an unheard-of expectation.” Christian
replied a few days later that the declaration “in no way united Holstein with the
Danish kingdom as such through a complete incorporation,” but this could only
be wishful thinking. Crown Prince Frederik had precisely the opposite view, and
in directing the German Chancellery —henceforward called the Schleswig-Hol¬
stein Chancellery —to prepare a new law code for Holstein, he spoke of the
duchy’s “inseparable [ unzertrennliche] union with Denmark.”12 He was warmly
sympathetic to the urgings of various of his confidants that Holstein be
completely Danicized, in language as well as law. The Copenhagen journal
Nyeste Skilderie af Kjobenhavn, wrote enthusiastically on 13 September:

   Our fellow citizens in Holstein will become accustomed through the new
   ordinance to consider themselves not simply the subjects of one king, but
   also as one people under the king, who should forget their German origin
   and their former relationship to Germany. They will learn to see that they
   never honor themselves more than when they honor the Danish people, its
   language, and customs. May Denmark, Norway, and Holstein ever remain
   a single state, unified by the closest bonds of blood, brotherhood, and just
   laws! May this be the warmest wish of every friend of the Fatherland.13

    In Holstein itself, while it aroused no great manifestations of enthusiasm, the
 incorporation was apparently accepted easily enough in bourgeois circles of
rationalist bent, to which it seemed a logical solution and a welcome deliverance
from Prussian designs. But more evident are the fears it aroused in more roman¬
tically minded, aristocratic society, above all at Emkendorf. Denmark’s involve¬
ment in the European conflict after 1807 would for the time being hold its griev¬
ances in abeyance; yet it would also prevent the peaceful structural reforms
which alone might have consolidated Holstein’s new status. Otto Brandt’s thesis
that the origins of the nineteenth-century Schleswig-Holstein separatist move¬
ment must be sought in this period thus seem amply borne out.14
   The incorporation issue of 1806 largely alienated Crown Prince Frederik
from the aristocratic German members of his council, thus in effect from the
council as a whole, an important step toward its eventual suspension in 1808.
