                                    AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                  273

the practical realities of Britain’s strategic situation and command of the seas.
In dealing with France, they tended to be more pragmatic, in view of the imme¬
diate proximity of Napoleon’s Grand Army in Germany. All of this could not
but cause mounting exasperation in London. Upon becoming Britain’s foreign
minister in March 1807, George Canning ominously decided that Denmark was
not to be relied upon.


    Throughout the years from 1802 to 1807, the internal development of the two
Scandinavian monarchies continued along remarkably similar lines. Both saw
the progressive emergence of an autocracy at once personal and bureaucratic,
despite formal constitutional differences. The lines of authority tended increas¬
ingly to run from the crown to the individual officials and government bureaus,
whose established procedures it generally respected, in the process bypassing
such intermediate bodies as formally continued to exist. The Swedish council
had been suspended by Gustav III in 1789, and Gustav IV Adolf avoided calling
another riksdag after 1800. Following A. P. Bernstorffs death in 1797, Crown
Prince Frederik relied less and less upon the Danish state council until it too was
suspended in 1808. Both Holstein and Swedish Pomerania were at last deprived
of their special status and integrated into their respective kingdoms. The sup¬
pression of the Haugian movement in Norway meanwhile upheld the sanctity of
both clerical and bureaucratic authority. In both states the voice of dissent was
stifled by tight press controls. The lengthy absences of both rulers from their
capitals further reinforced the trend toward a personal and bureaucratic
autocracy.
    Yet this autocracy remained a benevolent one, for all its cultural obscuran¬
tism, and it carried out important internal improvements. In both Sweden and
Denmark the tendency has long been to emphasize earlier reforms under the
aegis of Gustav III and A. P. Bernstorff, at the expense of those later carried
out by the less glamorous Gustav IV Adolf and Crown Prince Frederik, both
of whom were moreover later burdened with the stigma of their unfortunate for¬
eign policies. Yet the liberation of the serfs in Holstein and Swedish Pomerania
and the program of land consolidation in Sweden easily bear comparison with
earlier accomplishments. Both Crown Prince Frederik and Gustav IV Adolf re¬
vealed a strong dislike for aristocratic privilege and a warm sympathy for the
common man.37 It is worth noting that peasant emancipation and agrarian re¬
forms in Denmark’s and Sweden’s German provinces provided useful precedents
for Prussia in the era of Stein and Hardenberg following the defeat at Jena and
Auerstadt in 1806.
    In foreign policy, however, the two Nordic states continued to follow sepa¬
rate paths. Gustav IV Adolf, unreconciled to Sweden’s role as a minor power,
followed an adventurous course which by 1805 involved his reluctant nation in
