 272       AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 gested.36 As during the Seven Years’ War, the price of military preparedness
 on the southern border meanwhile came high.
    There was once again the matter of neutral commerce. Denmark had adhered
 to the Anglo-Russian convention of June 1801 in October of that year. When
 the Anglo-French war resumed in the spring of 1803, the Danish government
 issued strict regulations to prevent misuse of the Danish flag and ships’ papers
 by foreigners.
     Danish commerce was at first little disturbed. During the first two years of
 hostilities, Napoleon, concentrating on his intended cross-Channel invasion of
 England, was little concerned with commercial warfare, while the British,
 initially assured of their command of the seas, showed greater leniency toward
 neutral shipping. At first the British blockaded only France itself, then Spain
 from 1804.
    Danish commerce once again flourished, reaching a peak by 1806. Visitors
 to Copenhagen were struck by the prosperity of the city arising in more impos¬
 es grandeur than ever following the great fire of 1795. The old dream of earlier
 decades was revived of making Copenhagen the great entrepot of trade between
 northern and southern Europe.
    Following the British naval victory at Trafalgar and the French triumphs by
 land at Austerlitz and Jena-Auerstadt in 1805-6, however, both sides turned to
 economic warfare to force a decision. In November 1806, after bringing most
 of the European coastline from the Adriatic to the Baltic under French domi¬
 nance, Napoleon issued his Berlin Decree, establishing his Continental System:
 Great Britain was declared to be under blockade, and all ports under his control
 were closed to vessels proceeding from Britain or its colonies. The British naval
blockade had meanwhile been progressively extended along the coastlines of
French-controlled Europe, and in January 1807 a British Order in Council pro¬
hibited neutral trade between enemy ports or with ports from which the British
were denied entry. During the following year both sides tightened their restric¬
tions to the point where any neutral vessel trading with one belligerent was liable
to seizure and confiscation by the other.
    A swarm of British privateers took to the seas to enforce Britain’s effective
blockade of the enemy to their own profit, while French privateering had by now
become relatively ineffectual. Danes and Norwegians continued to carry on a
sizable trade with Britain, which above all needed imports of grain and timber.
But the British blockade of the Continent hurt other Danish interests, partic¬
ularly in the Mediterranean, where the thriving neutral carrying trade was
largely ruined. In negotiations with Britain—such as those concerning the clos¬
ing of the Elbe, which cut off the trade of Altona and Gluckstadt in Holstein—
Crown Prince Frederik and Christian Bernstorff held to a rigidly legalistic inter¬
pretation of Denmark’s neutral rights, rather than seeking to accommodate to
