  266      AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

      The British declaration of war against France on 16 May 1803 eased
  Sweden s situation to some degree. It evidently helped smooth over the recent
  Swedish-Russian crisis. Stockholm gained a stronger bargaining position vis-a-
  vis London, leading at last to a commercial convention in July 1803, exempting
  both metals and timber (except oak) from contraband and granting Sweden gen¬
  erous compensation for the convoys of 1798. For the next two years, Sweden
  did a good business with both sides, especially with Britain, producing a favor¬
  able balance of trade up to 1807, despite growing competition to its principal
  export industry from Britain’s increasing production of coke-smelted iron.22
     In July 1803 Gustav IV Adolf and Queen Fredrika departed for a visit to Ger¬
 many. The queen had long desired to revisit her childhood home at the court
 of Karlsruhe in Baden, but the king had his political interests as well, which
 would cause mounting anxiety at home during the eighteen long months before
 he returned. Already in October 1803 Duchess Charlotta noted rumors in Stock¬
 holm that Gustav Adolf sought in Germany to “form a league against France
 and that the allies would choose him their leader.’’23 The situation was, how¬
 ever, at first more complex. While he associated with French emigres and coun¬
 terrevolutionaries who eagerly sought his support, Gustav Adolf also carried on
 secret negotiations with French agents in Germany concerning a possible al¬
liance with a view to obtaining Norway, at least through the end of 1803.
     This interval of watchful opportunism ended abruptly when French troops
violated the territory of neutral Baden to abduct the due d’Enghien, a close rela¬
tive of the French royal family, who was summarily tried and executed in Paris
in March 1804. The incident caused an uproar throughout monarchical Europe.
To the distress of his advisers in Stockholm, Gustav Adolf in Karlsruhe recalled
his minister from Paris. Tsar Alexander did the same. By the end of March both
Sweden and Russia sounded each other out regarding an anti-French alliance,
and in April both refused to recognize Napoleon Bonaparte’s self-proclaimed
imperial title. Their recent mutual suspicions were quickly forgotten.
    In August 1804 the Moniteur in Paris ridiculed Gustav IV Adolf as a vain and
childish fool, the misfortune of the “brave and loyal’’ Swedish nation.24 This
article circulated in translation in Sweden, together with other, surreptitious
attacks on the king. Already in February Gustav Adolf had forbidden the import
of Danish newspapers into Sweden. In August new French books and journals
were banned, as was any mention in the Swedish press of events in France. Dip¬
lomatic relations with Paris were now broken off altogether.
   Gustav Adolf had meanwhile entered into negotiations with the British, even
before finally returning to Stockholm in February 1805. Britain and Russia con¬
cluded an alliance against France in April, soon to be joined by Austria, thus
forming the Third Coalition. A new continental war was bound to break out
shortly. Yet Sweden’s negotiations with Russia and Britain proceeded slowly,
