                                     AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                 271

    The Swedish king was in an exalted frame of mind by the summer of 1807.
Always seriously religious with strong pietistic and mystical leanings, he began
by now, if not before, to recognize in Napoleon the biblical Beast of the Apoca¬
lypse as interpreted by the German mystic Johann Heinrich Jung-Stilling; he
feared that by negotiating with Napoleon he would condemn himself to both
temporal and eternal woe.34 There was now speculation, both at home and
abroad, about his sanity, a question which has since perplexed historians.
    Counting British and Prussian reinforcements and Pomeranian Landwehr,
Gustav Adolf had hopes of fielding 36,000 men, and on 3 July 1807 he an¬
nounced that he would terminate the armistice after the stipulated two weeks.
Unfortunately the situation was already then beginning to change radically. The
Russians were defeated by the French at Friedland on 14 June. By 7-9 July,
Alexander I concluded both peace and an alliance with Napoleon at Tilsit.
Prussia made peace and recalled its troops from Swedish Pomerania, and the
British detachment also withdrew. The French attacked in overwhelming force
on 13 July. Stralsund quickly capitulated. The last Swedish troops evacuated the
island of Rugen in late September. In all, some 10,000 returned, leaving behind
at least 6,000 dead or prisoners of war.35
    Thus ended Sweden's ill-starred campaign in Germany. Despite it all, it had
not been insignificant. Without Sweden’s participation, Alexander I hesitated to
commit Russia to the struggle and Napoleon later admitted that the Pomeranian
redoubt on his flank had tied down sizable French forces.
   The Swedish king had nonetheless been plagued by misfortune: Austerlitz
ended his first attempt to go on the offensive, Friedland his second. More alarm¬
ingly, he manifestly lacked those qualities his difficult situation demanded, while
possessing others that under the circumstances were dangerous. His dogmatic
intransigence prevented compromise with either the Prussians or the French,
to the detriment of both Swedish and allied interests. The price Sweden itself
paid for its failure and that of its allies by the end of 1807 was not excessive
in material terms; even Swedish Pomerania was eventually recovered through
the fortunes of war. Sweden’s greatest sacrifice was the loss of confidence in the
sovereign by both his allies and his own subjects. And in the months ahead he
would be overwhelmed by far greater problems.

   Denmark, in the meantime, maintained its neutrality as the tides of war once
again engulfed Europe. When the French, following the outbreak of hostilities,
occupied Hanover, Denmark mobilized an army of observation of 16,000 men
in Holstein. Dike Sweden, it had cause to watch Prussia closely, for should they
be drawn into the war on opposite sides, Prussia would surely seize the
duchies—as it was to do some sixty years later. Despite much sympathy in the
Danish government for the Third Coalition, mistrust of Prussia played perhaps
a decisive role in keeping Denmark on the sideline, Edvard Holm has sug-
