                                    AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                  267

 for Gustav IV Adolf proved an astute bargainer. Although Sweden could con¬
 tribute only limited military resources, its strategic position on the Sound and
 the Baltic offered the allies an important asset. In particular, Swedish Pomer¬
 ania, with the fortified port of Stralsund, could provide the necessary bridgehead
 for operations against the French in northern Germany. Gustav Adolf could hold
 out tor high subsidies, thus avoiding a riksdag. He also long insisted that the
 allies commit themselves to restoring the Bourbons in France, producing further
 delays which made the allies ever more disposed to make concessions regarding
 the respective sizes of the Swedish military contingent and the British subsidy.
     At length, through a series of agreements culminating with the Treaty of
 Backaskog on 3 October 1805, Sweden undertook to augment its garrison at
 Stralsund to 8,000 men, half of them to be subsidized by Britain at nearly twice
 the standard rate per man to be paid to Russia and Austria, and to provide a field
 army of 10,000 (formally 12,000) troops at the standard subsidy. Counting
 additional sums for armaments and transport, Sweden was to receive a monthly
 subsidy from Britain of some 20,000 pounds. The allies gained access to Swed¬
 ish Pomerania, while the Swedish king was to command the combined allied
 forces in northern Germany. Peace was to be concluded only by common agree¬
 ment. There was no mention of the Bourbons.25
     On 31 October Sweden declared war on France. A decade and a half after
Gustav III had sought to organize a great monarchical crusade, his son at last
brought Sweden into the great struggle against France. His purpose, Gustav
Adolf wrote on 7 October, was to “resist and obstruct the brutal system of en¬
croachment and oppression of French despotism.’’26 The die was cast. The neu¬
trality of the Scandinavian world, so long preserved, was breached.
     In view of the ignominious outcome of Sweden’s role in the War of the Third
Coalition and of its aftermath, Gustav IV Adolfs entry into the European con¬
flict has traditionally been condemned as folly, if not outright madness. The
decision was his own and was favored by none of his principal advisers. Yet in
the fall of 1805 both ideal and practical arguments could be made in its favor.
Napoleonic France did indeed threaten all of Europe. As Duchess Charlotta—
who was by no means uncritical of her nephew—saw it in December, Sweden
had only three options: to side with France, to remain neutral, or to join Britain
and Russia. The first alternative was impossible, for experience showed that the
combined enmity of the British on the seas and the Russians on the Finnish bor¬
der would be ruinous, while with their backing, Sweden was shielded from
direct attack. Neutrality would naturally be preferable, but could it ultimately
be maintained? To be sure, both Prussia and Denmark still remained neutral,
but, the duchess added prophetically, “we have not yet seen the end of this
war.” Sweden was meanwhile compensated by considerable foreign subsidies
and was able to fight on its own terms on foreign ground.27 When the allies won
