 270       AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 tion and guaranteed the debts of the Pomeranian treasury. Ambitious plans were
 meanwhile being considered for creating new farms on the royal domain and for
 land reallocation and consolidation such as was then being carried out in
 Sweden. The king’s aim in Pomerania in 1806, Sten Carlsson has written, was
 “clearly a free and independent peasantry on the Swedish model.’’31
    Gustav IV Adolf’s actions in Swedish Pomerania in 1806, as well as the aris¬
 tocratic opposition they aroused, bear obvious similarities with the Danish gov¬
 ernment’s reforms in the duchies during the same period. Yet while Swedish
 Pomerania was considerably smaller in area, population, and relative impor¬
tance to the state as a whole, its defense of its corporate privileges was more
determined and the program of reforms that destroyed them was at once more
sudden and more radical than in Schleswig and Holstein. Lars Dalgren, the lead¬
ing authority on the subject, did not hesitate to call it the “coup d’etat of 1806,’’
thereby bringing to mind Gustav Ill’s coup at the Riksdag of 1789 which pro¬
duced the Act of Union and Security.32 Like his father in Sweden, Gustav IV
Adolf in Pomerania combined social with constitutional objectives, although in
the latter’s case a more clearly antiaristocratic stance is apparent. Similarly,
Gustav Adolf’s high-handed proceedings did not fail to create much bitterness
among the Pomeranian Junkers.
    In September 1806 Gustav IV Adolf returned to Stockholm, well pleased with
his recent triumphs over Frederick William III and the Pomeranian Landstande.
Soon thereafter, Prussia declared war on France on 9 October. Five days later,
its main armies were smashed by the French at Jena and Auerstadt. Frederick
William retreated with the remnants of his forces to East Prussia and the protec¬
tion of his Russian ally. The small Swedish detachment in Lauenburg was
trapped and capitulated.
    Swedish Pomerania now lay isolated far behind the front. Napoleon sent
peace feelers to Gustav Adolf, who peremptorily rejected them. The king made
strenuous efforts to assemble 30,000 men, frustrated by constitutional limits to
his authority to raise revenues without convening a riksdag. Early in 1807 he
confiscated 375,000 pounds in British subsidies then crossing Sweden on the
way to Russia, claiming that the Russians owed him that amount. It has been
suggested that Alexander I foreclosed on this debt in Finland the following
year.33
   In January 1807 the French attacked Swedish Pomerania in force, but en¬
countering stout resistance, they were prepared to conclude an armistice in April
when all their available forces were needed in the east.
    During the respite, Gustav Adolf managed to arrange for increased British
subsidies and for the reinforcement of Swedish Pomerania with British and Prus¬
sian troops. He likewise intrigued with a variety of French counterrevolution¬
aries urging daring projects and sought to recruit French emigres under his
banner.
