 268       AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 the victory they had every reason to expect, Sweden could demand its just
 rewards.
     Early in the present century, some efforts were made to revindicate Gustav
 IV Adolf’s war policy in 1805 by seeking to show that it was motivated by a
 practical concern for Sweden’s commercial interests, but this view is now gener¬
 ally discounted. “It is impossible to speak with the king about commercial inter¬
 ests,” Gustaf af Wetterstedt would complain in 1807, “he can never believe they
 are of any benefit to the state.”28
   Gustav IV Adolf arrived in Pomerania at the beginning of November 1805
to assume overall command of the allied forces there, including some 12,000
Swedes and 17,000 Russians. The latter advanced into Hanover, and a small
British force landed at the mouth of the Elbe. Gustav Adolf was meanwhile held
back by his mistrust of still-neutral Prussia, which mobilized a 30,000-man army
of observation on the Pomeranian border and also sent troops into Hanover as
the French withdrew.
   Ill will between Sweden and Prussia was of long standing, tracing back to the
seventeenth century and exacerbated in the Seven Years’ War. Berlin was ever
watchful for its chance to acquire Swedish Pomerania. Since the accessions of
Gustav IV Adolf and Frederick William III, friction had increased over ques¬
tions of neutral trade and German affairs.
   Fearful for its growing domination in neutral northern Germany, Berlin had
sought to sabotage the recent Swedish-Russian rapprochement. Gustav Adolf
was offended by Prussia’s recognition of Napoleon’s imperial title, leading to
the breaking of diplomatic relations between Berlin and Stockholm at the very
time the Third Coalition was forming.
    Upon arrival in Pomerania, Gustav Adolf demanded a clarification of his
intentions from the Prussian king. His personal envoy arrived in Berlin just as
Tsar Alexander was negotiating a provisional alliance with Prussia, signed on
3 November; in the excitement the Swedish note remained unanswered. Gustav
Adolf was outraged by this new sign of Prussian duplicity, as well as by his
allies’ apparently greater solicitude toward Frederick William than toward
himself.
   Under these circumstances, the Swedish army did not receive orders to march
into Hanover until 3 December. Already the day before, the main Austrian and
Russian armies were crushed by Napoleon at Austerlitz in Bohemia. There
ensued a kind of drole de guerre, as the allies in the north awaited the outcome
of confused developments in the south. Prussia made a sudden about-face; on
15 December, the very day it had undertaken to join the coalition, it concluded
an agreement with France allowing for a Prussian occupation of Hanover.
   The British and Russians withdrew from northern Germany, but Gustav
Adolf continued to occupy the small Hanoverian territory of Lauenburg, on the
