                                      AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                   265

legends. “From a purely religious-historical point of view,” Halvdan Koht has
written, ii may be said that the Haugian movement carried through what ration¬
alism had undertaken: to put an end to all old superstition. . . . many shadows
fell over the earthy vitality and aesthetic creativity that until recently had distin¬
guished peasant culture. 20 The price could not but be high for liberation from
old, previously accepted restraints and, in consequence, from the traditions of
a largely self-contained society.


   The brief respite in the European wars ushered in by the Peace of Amiens
in March 1802 proved a somewhat mixed blessing for the Scandinavian lands.
While the perils of neutrality now ceased, so too did the advantages that wartime
commerce offered to neutral carriers.
    Sweden remained on bad terms with Great Britain. The Anglo-Russian con¬
 vention of June 1801, to which the Nordic states were invited to adhere, had
 accepted the neutrals’ demand that a blockade, to be honored, must be effective
 rather than simply proclaimed, but rejected the principle that free ships made
 free goods while accepting Britain’s right to visit and search neutral merchant¬
 men. Gustav IV Adolf refused to accept the terms of the convention, even after
 the British returned St. Barthelemy in May 1802, hoping to gain compensation
 for the two convoys and numerous other vessels seized by the British since 1798,
 as well as a more favorable definition of contraband.
    The danger of Sweden’s diplomatic isolation meanwhile became painfully
 apparent in April 1803, when a petty border dispute at Abborfors in Finland
 promptly led to a Russian ultimatum. After bidding proud defiance, Gustav IV
 Adolf accepted a face-saving solution, after which the whole affair soon blew
over. Russian motives remain unclear, but they seem to be connected with the
possibility that a resumption of Anglo-French hostilities would soon involve
Russia as an ally of Britain, again exposing St. Petersburg to attack from a
potentially hostile Sweden, as in 1788. Perhaps the Abborfors crisis was only
intended as a precautionary warning to Stockholm. It was nonetheless a re¬
minder that the Russian government still by no means considered the problem
of Finland resolved.
    Gustav IV Adolf meanwhile revealed an increasingly paranoiac fear of the
Jacobin peril, perceiving it even in most unlikely places. In September 1802
Alexander I carried out far-reaching administrative reforms in Russia, increas¬
ing the powers of the Senate and allowing both it and the provincial nobility cer¬
tain rights of remonstrance. According to G. G. Adlerbeth, Gustav IV Adolf,
who had the ‘‘most exalted concept of the royal prerogative,” perceived therein
‘‘Jacobinical principles and a threat to all governments.” It was a curious rever¬
sal of roles since Tsar Paul’s day, only a few years previously. In 1803 Gustav
Adolf was alarmed to discover in the royal palace itself a small circle of occultist
adepts around Duke Carl, which he imagined to be dangerous ‘‘Illuminati.”21
