 264       AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7

 before preparing charges that Hauge had violated the Conventicle Ordinance of
 1741, had sought to found a sect with its own separate social order while seeking
 his own private gain, had spoken and written in a manner offensive to both civil
 and ecclesiastical authority, and had presented doctrines “which mislead the less
 enlightened masses into unsuitable brooding over the truth of the Christian
 religion.”17
   The government took its time, hoping that deprived of its leader the move¬
ment would fade away. The trial did not begin until 1809, a year after the com¬
mission’s report, and it took another three years. Hauge was treated leniently
in prison and was even released for a time in 1809 to help organize wartime salt¬
peter production. At last the court passed judgment in December 1813: nine
years after his arrest in 1804, Hauge was sentenced to two years in a workhouse
and to pay the costs of his trial. An appeal to the Superior Criminal Court (Over-
kriminalret) in Christiania, by that time Norway’s highest tribunal, in December
1814 reduced the sentence to a fine of 1,000 rigsdaler plus court costs. Looking
ahead, the Norwegian Storting or parliament would grant Hauge a small com¬
pensation of 2,600 rigsdaler in 1820, four years before his death. By the end
of his life he showed little of his old fire.
    The object of these proceedings against Hauge had been, as Frederik VI
 wrote in 1808, “to prevent the further spread of this fanaticism.”18 Yet persecu¬
tion only strengthened the religious movement by making a martyr of its leader.
Haugianism would remain a strong spiritual tradition among much of the Nor¬
wegian peasantry throughout the nineteenth century, and its influence lives on
today. It meanwhile gave a higher moral sanction to a mounting social reaction
against bureaucratic controls and urban monopolies, such as had underlain the
Lofthuus rebellion in 1786. It represents a vital stage in the evolution of a self-
conscious peasant movement that would find political expression already in the
Norwegian constitutional convention of 1814. Unlike earlier manifestations of
peasant unrest, which had always been more or less local in character, Haugian¬
ism quickly spread throughout Norway. In proclaiming the Word and in manag¬
ing a variety of worldly enterprises, the “Friends” acquired a new self-con¬
fidence and a new mobility, established widespread contacts, and gained
considerable practical organizational experience. Their puritan work ethic
surely underlay, in no small measure, the economic advancement of numerous
peasant families from this time forward.19
   In its social and economic aspects, the Haugian movement seems more clear¬
ly progressive than had the Lofthuus uprising more than a decade before, which
had shown a certain ambivalence toward transforming the old peasant society.
The Haugians strove not only to break down occupational barriers but also, in
their pietistic zeal, to eradicate much in the ancient folk culture that they dis¬
missed as worldly or sinful: fiddle playing and the singing of old ballads, dances
and games, ornate festive dress, ostentation in food and drink, old stories and
