                                    AT THE CROSSROADS, 1802-7                269

right bank of the Elbe. The Swedish presence there provided him with a legalis¬
tic justification to seek British and Russian backing in his defiance of Prussia,
as well as to extort from Britain some still unpaid subsidies. London and St.
Petersburg urged him to abandon an untenable situation. When Prussia an¬
nounced its formal annexation of Hanover in March 1806, Gustav Adolf warned
that an attack on Lauenburg would be tantamount to an attack on Sweden itself,
although he prudently reduced his force there to a token 300 men.
   The line was drawn. Under growing pressure from France, the Prussians
could hardly fail to cross it. In April they marched into Lauenburg, from which
the small Swedish force retreated after offering a symbolic resistance. Gustav
Adolf responded by clamping a naval blockade on Prussia’s Baltic ports.
   The escalating Swedish-Prussian dispute was a constant irritant to the British
and Russians. Gustav Adolf had riled the Prussians at the very time their active
participation in the coalition hung in the balance. His blockade of the Prussian
ports in the spring and summer of 1806 seriously disrupted British and Russian
commerce in the Baltic. Repeated British and Russian efforts at mediation, in
hopes that Prussia might yet be won back into the allied camp, stranded mainly
on Gustav Adolfs intransigence.
     During the summer of 1806, however, friction between France and Prussia
 reached its breaking point. A Prussian-Russian alliance was concluded in
 August, and Frederick William withdrew his troops from Lauenburg, which
 Gustav Adolf promptly reoccupied, permitting him to celebrate what G. M.
 Armfelt wryly called the “triumph of obstinacy.”29 The whole dispute with
 Prussia vanished almost miraculously in the face of the far greater menace from
 the west.
     While Gustav IV Adolf was engaged in his quasi-war with Prussia, a crisis
 arose in his own German dependency of Pomerania when he undertook to aug¬
 ment his forces by creating a Pomeranian Landwehr through conscription on the
 French model in the early summer of 1806.30 The Pomerania Estates (Land-
stande) protested that this violated the established privileges of the duchy and—
more audacious than the Schleswig-Holstein Ritterschaft in 1802—they appealed
to the imperial Reichskammergericht in Wetzlar. The king thereupon declared
Pomerania’s ancient constitution and privileges null and void on 26 June 1806.
Following the formal dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire a few weeks later,
in August, he proceeded to reorganize and reform the province to his own taste.
The old Germanic institutions were replaced by the Swedish constitution and
laws. These did not allow for the existence of personal servitude, and Gustav
Adolf abolished serfdom (Leibeigenschaft) in the province. Swedish ecclesias¬
tical and educational institutions were introduced.
    In August the king convened a special Pomeranian Landtag in Greifswald,
organized on the Swedish four-Estates model, which accepted the new dispensa-
