 280       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 offensive. No lasting bridgehead could be established in the south. In his rage
 Gustav Adolf stripped the three elite guards’ regiments of their special status and
 distinctions.
    Had the Swedes shown greater skill and determination, the Finnish peasantry
 might have risen up against the occupier, as was taking place in Spain at that
 very time. But by the late fall of 1808 the chance was lost. The British navy
 withdrew from the Baltic for the winter. The Russian army, increased to some
 55,000 men, pressed steadily northward against the dispirited and dwindling
 Finnish force. On 19 November its command concluded a convention for the
 evacuation of northern Finland, and on 13 December the last of some 10,000
 Finnish troops crossed the Kemi River into Sweden proper.
    Sweden meanwhile faced its enemy to the west, and it was here that Gustav
 IV Adolf at first concentrated his attention. Denmark was the weaker foe, and
 the old Gustavian dream of acquiring Norway was never far beneath the surface.
 In the fall of 1807, Canning had raised the idea of a Swedish occupation of
 Sjaelland until the end of the war. Although nothing came of this somewhat nebu¬
 lous scheme, London thereafter held out to Gustav IV Adolf the prospect of Brit¬
 ish support against Denmark to help Sweden acquire Norway. In view of this
enticement, Sven G. Trulsson has recently argued that Gustav Adolf, aware that
a continued British alliance must surely bring war with Russia and Denmark,
was prepared to “maximize risks” to “maximize his gains,” with Finland as
his “stake” in the gamble. Alarmed by Sweden’s manifest designs against Nor¬
way, Crown Prince Frederik, following the outbreak of the war, in turn aspired
to regain the old “East Denmark”: the Scanian provinces lost to Sweden in the
seventeenth century.7
   Denmark was under strong French pressure to attack Sweden. Napoleon
made Marshal Bernadotte’s army corps available for an offensive across the
Sound, provided Bernadotte be placed in command. In early March the marshal
entered Denmark with a force including several Spanish regiments, hostages for
the good behavior of an uncertain ally. His troops took up quarters in the
duchies, Jutland, and Fyn, where they could be provisioned at Denmark’s
expense. The appearance of Spanish troops in Rendsburg literally frightened
Christian VII to death on 13 March, and the crown prince at last became King
Frederik VI.
   The projected invasion came to naught. Only two Spanish regiments crossed
the Great Belt to Sjaelland, from whence the attack on Sweden was to proceed,
before the spring thaw allowed the British fleet to return to Danish waters. Soon
thereafter, the British got word of the national uprising in Spain, beginning in
May, to most of the Spanish units in Denmark before the French could secure
their oath of allegiance to Joseph Bonaparte. In early August the Spaniards muti¬
nied. The British fleet succeeded in evacuating most of them, some 9,000 men.
