 278       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 would declare war on Denmark.5 On 31 October Denmark concluded a formal
 alliance with France, which Crown Prince Frederik was thereafter determined
 to uphold at any cost.


     Gustav IV Adolf meanwhile held staunchly to his British alliance, which fol¬
  lowing Tilsit and Denmark’s entry into the war on the other side placed Sweden
 and Finland in a particularly hazardous position, once again encircled by a re¬
 constituted, hostile Russian-Danish entente. Alexander I made what seemed
 simply pro forma soundings to urge his brother-in-law, Gustav IV Adolf, to
 abandon Britain and join the Continental System. Only by late January was
 Stockholm apprised of alarming Russian military preparations. On 21 February
 the Swedish ambassador in St. Petersburg was handed an ultimatum demanding
 that Sweden make common cause with Russia and Denmark. On the same day
 Russian troops crossed the Finnish border. Three weeks later, on 14 March,
 Stockholm received Denmark’s declaration of war.
    By attacking during the winter the Russians enjoyed the advantage that Fin¬
 land could not be reinforced from Sweden until after the spring thaw. However,
 owing to problems of provisionment and communications in Finland’s rugged
and thinly settled terrain, they at first committed only 24,000 troops to the cam¬
paign under General F. W. von Buxthovden, a veteran of the Russo-Swedish
war of 1788-90; the aging G. M. Sprengtporten, leader of the Finnish autono¬
mist movement of the 1780s, accompanied him as his adviser. The Finnish army
was not much smaller, amounting to some 22,000 men. The Russian troops
were, however, seasoned veterans, capably commanded, and backed by large
reserves, whereas few of the Finns had yet seen combat and their officers were
all too often inexperienced, superannuated, and defeatist in attitude. A third of
the Finnish army was immobilized in Sveaborg fortress in the Helsingfors archi¬
pelago.
    For centuries Sweden’s defense of its trans-Baltic possessions had been based
on the concept of a strategic retreat to coastal redoubts, from which counterat¬
tacks could be mounted after reinforcement by sea. The construction of Svea¬
borg in the mid-eighteenth century had been based on this strategy, which was
reiterated in instructions to the Finnish command at the beginning of 1808.
    In issuing these instructions, Gustav IV Adolf stressed the importance of a
fighting retreat. Following the Russian attack, however, the Finnish field army
of some 12,000 men, under the elderly General W. M. Klingspor, withdrew
rapidly to northern Osterbotten on the Bothnian coast, offering practically no
resistance. The main Russian force advanced along the south coast. By 2 March
it entered Helsingfors, thereby isolating Sveaborg. By 22 March the Russians
had taken Abo. On 12 April they landed on the Aland Islands.
   As long as Sveaborg, the “Gibraltar of the North,’’ held out, the Russian
hold on southern Finland remained precarious. Considered one of Europe’s
