 282       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 Norway, while the chance was lost for an effective seaborne counterattack in
 Finland.
    As 1808 drew to a close, Sweden’s enemies laid plans for their knockout
 blow. While a small Russian force advanced around the Gulf of Bothnia to the
 north, larger units would land in the Umea area and just north of Stockholm.
 The Danes would land in Skane while a new attack would be mounted from
 Norway. In actuality, the coordination of so vast a strategy proved impossible.
 In late January and briefly in March the Sound froze over, offering the Danes
 their chance, but since their preparations were not complete they lost it. Lack
 of supplies hindered any attack from Norway. The Russians were unable to
 begin their offensive before the middle of March.
     Gustav IV Adolf remained as determined as ever to carry on the fight. Troops
 were not lacking, but without adequate supplies, especially following poor har¬
 vests in 1808, the newly raised Lantvarn and the remnants of the Finnish army
 in the north in particular suffered serious deprivation and were decimated by dis¬
 ease. Existing tax revenues and an annual British subsidy of 300,000 pounds left
 a rapidly mounting deficit. On 7 January 1809, the king on his own authority
decreed a new wartime levy, amounting to five times the existing taxation
granted by the Riksdag in 1800. This was done over the unanimous opposition
of his advisers, arousing widespread consternation, especially among the prop¬
ertied classes. While Sweden—now minus Finland and Pomerania—was doubt¬
less capable of greater sacrifices, the scale of the increase was alarming. More¬
over, under the constitution the Estates were empowered to levy taxes or grant
credit. By adamantly refusing to call a riksdag in the nation’s hour of peril,
Gustav Adolf revealed the depth of his mistrust of his own subjects.
    The king s pressing demands for increased British subsidies brought no satis¬
faction, and in February 1809 London tactfully suggested that it would not
object to Sweden’s making a separate peace. Clearly Britain no longer consid¬
ered Sweden’s services worth the price. Gustav Adolf became so incensed that
his advisers could barely restrain him from breaking immediately with his only
ally and offering peace and an alliance to Denmark to bar the British from the
Baltic.
    A curious and revealing episode seems to have played its part in dissuading
 Gustav Adolf from so desperate a course. Word reached him of a printed procla¬
 mation being scattered in Skane by means of Danish hot air balloons. This so-
called Balloon Proclamation had been composed by the exiled Finnish regicide
of 1792, C. F. Ehrensvard, long resident in Copenhagen and an enthusiastic
Pan-Scandinavianist. After painting a dark picture of Sweden’s perilous situa¬
tion, it urged that it reject its present “foreign” dynasty and accept “Frederik of
the North" as its king. The proclamation gave assurances that under such a
Scandinavian union Swedish law, or at least the “good part” of it, as well as a
riksdag controlling taxation, would be combined with the enlightened features
