 276       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 joined the Continental System, the maritime trade upon which Denmark—and
 particularly Norway—depended so heavily would be swept from the seas, Nor¬
 way would be cut off from Denmark by the British navy and a hostile Sweden,
 the Atlantic islands and overseas colonies would be isolated and defenseless,
 while even communications in Danish home waters would be precarious. In the
 balance. Crown Prince Frederik and his advisers inclined toward the British
 Scylla rather than the French Charybdis, as they clearly signaled to London al¬
 ready by the beginning of 1807.2
     The outcome was decided otherwise thanks to George Canning, the new Brit¬
 ish foreign minister since March 1807. Danish protests over neutral rights had
 quickly convinced him that Denmark was not to be relied on, and the Tilsit al¬
 liance immediately aroused his apprehensions over the Danish fleet, which had
 proved its mettle at Copenhagen Roads six years before. If joined with other
 continental naval forces, it might threaten the decisive but now ever more thinly
 spread British command of the seas following Trafalgar.
    Already around 10 July 1807, just as the first rumors reached London that
 a Franco-Russian rapprochement was impending. Canning received a report
 from a traveling British diplomat that the Danish fleet was being mobilized,
 while the British resident in Altona feared the Danes might close the Holstein
ports and that the duchy might be occupied by the French. Both reports were
mistaken, but Canning decided that Britain must strike hard and fast.3 On 18 July
he secured orders for a large naval expedition against Denmark. Sir Francis
Jackson was appointed special envoy to deal with the Danes. When the main
British foice sailed from Yarmouth on 26 July, no one embarked knew its desti¬
nation except Jackson and its commander, Admiral James Gambier. But to many
it appeared to be the greatest expedition to set forth from Britain’s shores in the
struggle against Napoleon. The fleet, which entered the Sound during the first
days of August, included twenty-four ships of the line, twenty-two smaller naval
vessels, and a host of troop transports.
    What followed was a tragic comedy of errors. Only after the expedition had
sailed did Canning receive reports from the British minister in Copenhagen
strongly denying the veracity of the reports he had received. Jackson was under
strict instructions to demand that the Danish fleet be placed at Britain’s disposal
until the end of the war, possibly through an Anglo-Danish alliance. He pre¬
sented his proposals to Christian Bernstorff and to Crown Prince Frederik on
7-8 August in Kiel. Outraged, the crown prince departed for Copenhagen to see
to its defenses. Jackson followed after, arriving in the capital after Frederik had
returned to Kiel, and thus vainly negotiated with Joachim Bernstorff, who had
no authority to grant the assurances he demanded. In exasperation, Jackson
broke off negotiations on 13 August and rejoined the British fleet in the Sound.
   The British now landed 30,000 troops on Sjaflland-including the force just
