                                  INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                    277

withdrawn from Swedish Pomerania—beginning on 16 August. In command
was General William Cathcart, and among his subordinates was Arthur Welles¬
ley, the future duke of Wellington. Opposing them were only some 5,500 Dan¬
ish regulars since the Danish main force was in Holstein—backed by peasant
and burgher militias, a total of some 13,000 men. Copenhagen’s land defenses
had been neglected for the past century. Morale in the city nevertheless re¬
mained remarkably high at tirst, not least among the high-spirited corps of
student volunteers, some 800 strong.
   After encircling the city on its landward side, the British demanded its surren¬
der upon pain of bombardment on 20 August. A pitiful force of Sjadland militia
was handily routed near Koge on 29 August. Jackson pressed for bombardment
of Copenhagen. Reluctantly Cathcart agreed.
    The ordeal began on 2 September, causing great destruction. The new Con¬
 greve incendiary rockets proved particularly effective, and large areas of the city
 were devastated by fire. Under growing pressure from the magistrature, the
 wounded commandant agreed to an armistice on 5 September, and a council of
 war in the capital undertook to negotiate the surrender of the fleet to the British.
 Crown Prince Frederik, who on 16 August had declared war on Britain, was
 outraged by Copenhagen’s early capitulation.
    The armistice was concluded on 7 September, to last until 19 October. The
 British sought to be tactful in their occupation, and Copenhageners were be¬
 mused at the sight of kilted Highlanders encamped in their city’s parks. British
 naval personnel meanwhile worked furiously to rig the Danish fleet before the
armistice expired. On 20 October the entire British force on Sjaflland embarked
and departed. Their armada now included eighty warships and 243 transport
vessels, several of which were lost on the stormy return voyage. It included vir¬
tually the entire Danish fleet: seventeen ships of the line, seventeen frigates,
eight brigs, eight smaller vessels, and twenty-six cannon boats. Before depart¬
ing, the British destroyed a ship of the line and three other vessels in dry dock.4
    Behind them they left a city badly devastated. Recovery during the hard times
after 1807 would be slow, and empty lots could still be seen twenty or thirty
years later. The British attack upon a major European capital meanwhile caused
a furor throughout the Continent and aroused no little indignation in Britain it¬
self. Canning was accused of having acted irresponsibly, and Jackson was ostra¬
cized by George III and polite society.
    For the Danish monarchy, the British attack meant more than humiliation and
the loss of the fleet. It was thereby precipitated into the European conflict on
the side of Britain’s enemies, with fateful consequences for its future existence.
At this critical juncture, the course of events might have been very different. On
2 August Napoleon had written to Marshal Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte, his com¬
mander in Hamburg, that if Denmark would not go to war with Britain, he
