                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   281

and took them home to Spain to fight against their erstwhile allies. In the mean¬
time, they had been surprisingly popular with the local population.
    The mutiny, as well as problems of coordination, supply, and naval support,
ended for the time being any prospect for an attack across the Sound. Already
concerned mainly with the Iberian peninsula, it seems most probable that
Napoleon—unlike Bernadotte—intended the troop movements in Denmark
simply to encourage the Danes and Russians while distracting the British and
Swedes, without really intending to follow through.8 Bernadotte’s corps re¬
turned to Germany, to the relief of the Danes, who were surely mindful of what
Spain’s French allies had undertaken there while en route to Portugal. Den¬
mark’s war against Sweden could now be carried on only from Norway, which,
isolated by the British fleet, involved serious difficulties and risks.
    To cover its western front, Sweden at first assembled 7,000 men in Skane
to oppose a landing from Denmark, and some over 15,000 men on the Norwe¬
gian frontier, of which 13,400 in the southernmost sector, the traditional inva¬
sion route. The Norwegian army amounted to 35,800 men, but since much of
it was dispersed along the long coastline or in fixed fortifications, Prince Chris¬
tian August of Augustenburg, the commander in southern Norway, had a field
army of only 9-10,000 men.
     Both Swedes and Norwegians were plagued by logistical problems. More¬
 over, following generations of peace-broken only by the brief conflict in
 1788 —neither army showed much enthusiasm for what now seemed a fratricidal
 war. A cautious Swedish advance into southern Norway was repelled by a lim¬
 ited Norwegian counterattack in the spring, after which operations virtually
 ceased.
    Gustav IV Adolf had far more ambitious plans. Convinced that the Finnish
army would offer stouter initial resistance to the Russians and that Sveaborg
 would stand fast, he favored from the start a holding action in the east while he
directed his main effort to a rapid conquest of Norway. Developments in Finland
undermined this strategy, yet the king persevered. On 17 May a convoy carrying
 11,000 British troops under Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore arrived in
Gothenburg. It was intended primarily to protect that essential seaport and the
Swedish west coast against invasion from Denmark or Norway, but Moore’s
rather vague instructions permitted him to consider other objectives. The oppor¬
tunity thus provided was lost, however, when the king refused to allow the Brit¬
ish troops to debark until Moore recognized him as their commander-in-chief
and agreed to his own proposals for an Anglo-Swedish landing on Sjaelland or
in Norway. Negotiations broke down amid mutual recriminations, and after six
weeks Moore’s troops departed Gothenburg en route to Spain on 3 July. As in
the case of the Spanish units in Denmark, the Iberian Peninsula again played its
part in the war in the North. There could now be no immediate hope of winning
