                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                  279

most impregnable fortresses, it protected a sizable galley fleet and was gar¬
risoned by some 7,000 men. The Russians began serious siege operations in
mid-March with a force roughly equal to that of the defenders. Their first sum¬
mons to surrender were rejected, and their bombardment from nearby islands
caused little damage. But morale among the higher officers of the garrison soon
eroded. Unaccustomed to land operations of this type, Sveaborg’s commander,
Vice-Admiral C. O. Cronstedt, relied upon the advice of subordinates who con¬
sidered resistance futile. On 6 April he was persuaded to conclude an armistice
with the Russians, according to which he would capitulate on 3 May if the for¬
tress were not relieved before that date.
    The agreement entailed serious risks owing to the unpredictability of the
 spring thaw, which indeed came late that year. No relief expedition was yet be¬
 ing prepared in Sweden. Cronstedt was allowed to send couriers to Stockholm,
 but the Russians found ways to delay them. News of the armistice first reached
 the Swedish capital the very day Sveaborg surrendered.
    Word of the impending capitulation aroused great indignation among the gar¬
 rison, and some of the junior officers vainly sought to organize a mutiny. With
 the fortress the Russians took 110 vessels and over 2,000 cannon. The garrison
 was released on parole, although many of the men later rejoined the Finnish field
 army. Cronstedt remains in historical memory a Finnish Benedict Arnold.6
    The war, however, was not yet over, especially since Russia’s concerns in
 Central Europe and on the Black Sea immobilized the greater part of its military
 might. Klingspor’s army commenced its two-pronged counteroffensive from
 Osberbotten by July, advancing down the west coast and inland toward the Rus¬
 sian supply lines in Karelia. Until mid-September it penetrated far to the south,
 supported by peasant partisans behind the enemy’s lines.
    Finland could not, however, be regained unless the Finnish counteroffensive
 from the north were supported by an even larger-scale attack from Sweden in
 the south. Following the surrender of Sveaborg, this necessarily involved diffi¬
cult and risky landing operations, although prospects improved when a local
 uprising drove the Russians out of the Aland Islands in May and the combined
 British and Swedish fleets took control of the Baltic.
    Gustav IV Adolf meanwhile made great efforts to raise troops. To supple¬
ment an existing military establishment of 66,000 (including 20,000 Finns), he
created a new militia, the Lantvdrn, based on conscription of unmarried men
between the ages of nineteen and twenty-five. This levy, which recalls Gustav
IV Adolfs Pomeranian Landwehr in 1806, provided an additional 30,000 men.
Sweden-Finland thus fielded a total force of close to 100,000, although its train¬
ing, armament, and supply presented serious problems.
    Swedish attempts at landing operations in southwestern Finland were delayed
until August and September, when they were disrupted by stormy weather on
the Baltic. By then the Russians had already turned back Klingspor’s counter-
