                                  INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                    283

of the Danish regime. King Frederik, it added, “recognized the true principle
that all citizens ot the state should on the same basis bear the burdens of the state
and enjoy rights in relation to their usefulness to the common good.” Such a
union would ensure the future peace and prosperity of the North.9
    Few copies of the “Balloon Proclamation” seem to have reached Skane, and
it apparently had no effect on public opinion in Sweden.10 It is meanwhile diffi¬
cult to judge the extent to which Frederik VI and his advisers considered it some¬
thing more than opportunistic wartime propaganda. To be sure, as long ago as
1790 Frederik had played with the idea of a unifed “Kingdom of Scandinavia”
under himself, at a time when Gustav III had already engaged in somewhat simi¬
lar speculations from a Swedish perspective.11 Thereafter, he seems to have
given little thought to such ideas, despite the lively Scandinavianism in Copen¬
hagen literary circles. Certain of his advisers were, however, apparently inter¬
ested in the prospect of a Nordic dynastic union.12
    By the beginning of 1809, Gustav IV Adolf, at best never a popular monarch,
 faced a rising tide of disaffection among influential classes of his subjects. His
 foreign policy had drawn Sweden into a ruinous war, pitting him against
 Napoleon—the apparent arbiter of the new Europe—and had largely disen¬
 chanted his only ally, Great Britain. His military command had resulted in
repeated fiascoes. Pomerania and Finland were lost. What remained of the Fin¬
nish army and the new Lantvdrn were decimated by deprivation and disease.
    The ordeal of the war years had aliented the upper bureaucrats, who sought
to curb him in the fall of 1808 by urging a riksdag and a settlement with Swe¬
 den's enemies. A committee to investigate war finances purposefully overesti¬
 mated the costs of the following year’s campaign to make him see reason;
 instead he imposed what seemed a crushing special war levy and demanded in¬
creased subsidies from Britain. In desperation, leading officials considered a
kind of bureaucratic general strike, such as those that had compelled the conven¬
ing of a riksdag in 1769 and the French Estates-General in 1789.
    The possibility of a coup d’etat had been bruited about in military circles
since the inglorious siege of Stralsund in the summer of 1807. Concern over
Gustav Adolfs military ineptitude had greatly increased during 1808, and his
arbitrary degradation of the 120 officers of the elite guards regiments in Sep¬
tember had spread resentment throughout widespread aristocratic circles.
    As it was, Gustav Adolf inspired little love among the nobility. According
to Count H. G. Trolle-Wachtmeister, one of his bitterest critics, Gustav Adolf
spoke in November 1808 of consulting directly with “the Swedish people,”
thereby bypassing the Estates, over means to continue the war. The king, he
claimed, hoped for an outbreak among the “higher classes” to provide “an
opportunity to appeal to the people against their masters, throw all the blame
on them, and seal his power in blood.” Opposition to the special war levy could
be represented to the “rabble” as collusion between the “distinguished” classes
