 286      INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

constitution for Duke Carl to promulgate as legitimate heir to the throne, thereby
stressing the legal continuity of the regime and forestalling more radical initia¬
tives. Led by the Nobility, the Estates rejected this draft and elected its own
committee—six Nobles and three from each of the other Estates—which notably
did not include Adlersparre, to prepare another.
    The new committee presented its draft to the Estates on 1 June, a little over
a fortnight after it convened. Although it did not keep minutes, it is evident that
its proposals were to a considerable degree the work of its secretary, Hans Jarta,
who likewise presented a memorandum explaining and justifying the commit¬
tee’s draft.
    The new constitution was clearly intended to prevent abuses of monarchical
power such as had occurred under Gustav Ill’s constitution of 1772 and Act of
Union and Security of 1789. Yet the lessons of the preceding Era of Freedom,
during which the authority of the crown had been fatally weakened, were not
forgotten. “Warned by a double experience,” in Jarta’s words, the committee
sought “to protect the nation against oppression from either of the two powers
within society which during a single lifetime have prevailed, each in its own
direction and each to hateful extremes, equally unrestrained and equally devas¬
tating.”16
    Like Gustav III in 1772, the constitution-makers assumed the previous exis¬
tence of a just polity, which from the later seventeenth century had repeatedly
been upset by cycles of royal despotism and licentious liberty, and thus sought
to emphasize the native Swedish background to their proposals. Yet in 1809—as
in 1772 the propaganda value of such a nationalist stance must be taken into
account. Foreign ideas and examples could not but play an important role. In
particular the British constitution, as interpreted by Locke, Montesquieu, J.-L.
De Lolme, Blackstone, and J. J. Mounier, evidently provided much inspiration.
Similarly the American federal and state constitutions afforded positive
examples, and various of the French revolutionary constitutions negative ones.17
   The resulting constitutional proposal was thus cautious and moderate in its
approach, which Hans Jarta explained in classic fashion in his accompanying
memorandum:

  The committee does not propose great and brilliant changes to the ancient
  foundations of our constitution. It has felt that such principles should not
  be lightly transformed, least of all during the first days of a regained free¬
  dom, when opinion must unavoidably be divided. It has believed what the
  example of Europe’s freest state likewise demonstrates, that there is no
  surer protection for the general rights of the nation and for the citizen’s
  personal liberty than these foundations, surrounded by the sanctity of cen¬
  turies and fortified by a common national force, which works through
  them.18
