 284        INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 and the Russians, “under whose dominion the lord is powerful, but the peasant
 a slave."13
    Early in 1809 a group of subordinate officers and bureaucrats conspired to
 seize Gustav Adolf in Stockholm. The attempt was called off by Hans Jarta, a
 former leader of the radical opposition at the Norrkoping Riksdag of 1800 with
 close connections in the upper bureaucracy, who saw that it was too poorly
 planned to succeed.
     The initiates in this plot meanwhile included Lieutenant-Colonel Georg
 Adlersparre in Varmland, recently relieved of a command on the Norwegian
 front. Upon learning that the coup in Stockholm had fallen through, he deter¬
 mined to act himself, with the support of like-minded fellow officers. After
 claiming he had arranged a tacit armistice with the Norwegians, he issued a man¬
 ifesto in Karlstad dated 7 March, calling in high-flown rhetoric for peace, a riks¬
 dag. the rescinding of the special war levy, and a “change of system,” in a man¬
 ner consciously recalling William Ill’s proclamation to the English in 1688.14
 He thereupon marched on Stockholm at the head of an insurgent force of 3,000
 men.
     In the capital Gustav Adolf at first dismissed rumors of Adlersparre’s revolt.
 Not until 12 March did he realize the seriousness of the situation. After mid¬
 night, he determined to confiscate the remaining reserves of the national bank
 and withdraw with his family, court, and the Stockholm garrison to join up with
 the army commanded by the staunch old royalist J. C. Toll in Skane.
    To a number of higher army officers in Stockholm who had thus far remained
 uncommitted, it became clear that the moment had come for quick and decisive
 action if civil war, in the midst of foreign war, were to be averted. Urgency was
 heightened by renewed Russian attacks on Sweden. These men likewise mis¬
trusted Adlersparre, who at the turn of the century had edited the “Jacobin”
journal Lasning i blandade amnen, had been a conspicuous member of the
   Mountain’ at the Riksdag of 1800, and was feared to hold dangerous demo¬
cratic ideas.
   At the head of six other high officers, General Carl Johan Adlercreutz, a hero
ot the Finnish campaign, demanded an audience with Gustav IV Adolf at the
palace early on the morning of 13 March. After the king angrily refused their
demand for a riksdag, the officers placed him under arrest. The same day, his
uncle, Duke Carl of Sodermanland, assumed the regency, as he had in 1792
Gustav Adolf and his family were confined in Gripsholm Castle.15
   A provisional government was formed, including most of the king’s former
advisers, together with Generals Adlercreutz and Klingspor, and Count Axel
von Fersen. This miscellaneous group, popularly called “Noah’s Ark,” was
clearly constituted largely for its symbolic value, to reassure all classes that what
had occurred was a coup necessitated by special circumstances, rather than a
