                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                  293

to Norway show his rising exasperation. Still, political considerations aside the
Norwegian army, cut off by sea from Denmark, was so poorly equipped and
provisioned that any effective offensive was out of the question. Following the
Swedish-Russian peace in September, Copenhagen could only follow suit. On
10 December 1809 Denmark and Sweden made peace at Jonkdping on the basis
of the status quo antebellum. Soon thereafter Sweden concluded the Peace of
Paris with France on 6 January 1810, by which Sweden formally entered the
Continental System and regained Swedish Pomerania.


    Denmark meanwhile remained at war with Britain, although this now in¬
 volved few actual hostilities. The British took the island of Heligoland in the
 North Sea in September 1807, and on Christmas Day of that year occupied the
 Danish West Indies, whose largely English-speaking planter class thereafter
 profited from the high price of sugar on the London market. In March 1808 Den¬
mark’s last ship of the line, the Prins Christian Frederik, which had been in Nor¬
way, was trapped by a British squadron off Sjaelland and forced to strike its flag
after a stiff fight. More than a year later, in May 1809, the British seized the
island of Anholt in the Kattegat to control its vital lighthouse.
    Denmark made great efforts to rebuild its fleet, supported by generous pri¬
vate donations, although by the end of the war in 1814 only four frigates had
been completed. More important at the time was the construction of nearly two
hundred oared cannon boats. Manned by twenty or more men and mounting one
or two relatively large-bore guns, such craft could wreak considerable destruc¬
tion upon becalmed enemy merchantmen and on occasion fought pitched battles
with convoying British warships or their longboats. In Norway five brigs man¬
aged in June 1810 to seize a British convoy of forty-seven ships. During the
course of the war, the Danes and Norwegians captured or sank several smaller
British naval vessels. From 1808 Denmark also provided crews for two French
warships in the Scheldt estuary.
    The government meanwhile issued letters of mark and reprisal to enterprising
shipowners, and close to 600 privateers were fitted out during the war years.
Many were provided by joint stock companies, whose shares sold at inflated
prices, although the great mercantile houses, anxious to preserve international
goodwill for the future, remained aloof. Enormous gains were to be made
through privateering against British (and Swedish) commerce, and with the war¬
time slump in foreign trade it bid fair by around 1810 to become the monarchy’s
most profitable activity.
    Copenhagen would long remember the colorful ostentation of newly rich
privateers of humble origins, although few of their quickly won fortunes would
survive the war. Privateering would prove a mixed blessing at best. While it
inflicted damage upon enemy commerce and tied down enemy naval forces, the
men, weapons, and money expended upon it might well have been more effec-
