                                  INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                      287

    In its actual stipulations this draft constitution did not differ greatly from that
previously prepared by the provisional government’s committee, which the
Estates had rejected. Their own constitutional initiative was thus based upon the
principle that the new constitution must emanate from the elected representatives
of the nation and that Duke Carl must accept it as the condition of his accession.
  By such a loosening of all constitutional bonds,” Baron Lars Mannerheim
wrote the duke, the nation, through its representatives, has regained its original
right alone to give itself a king and another constitution.” This position was soon
summarized by the slogan “Constitution first, then king.”19 It was a stand rem¬
iniscent of past accession charters, not least between 1719 and 1772, as well as
of England s Glorious Revolution of 1688, as its proponents were quick to point
out. “The revolution whereby James II was expelled from the English throne,”
exulted Count Trolle-Wachtmeister in May, “shall now no longer be admired
as the only one of its kind.”20 They were rather less eager to recall Louis XVI’s
forced acceptance of the French constitution of 1791.
    The constitution-makers strove for a balance between the traditional elements
of Swedish state power: Crown, Council, and Estates. Hans Jarta explained his
colleagues’ intentions:
   The committee has sought to establish an executive power, acting within
   set forms, united in its decisions and with full means to carry them out;
   a legislative power, acting with all due deliberation but firm and steadfast
   in resistance; a judicial power, independent under the law, but without
   arbitrary authority over it. It has moreover sought to organize these
   powers in such fashion that they maintain a surveillance over each other,
   that they hold each other in check, without mixing them together, without
   allowing the restraining power any of the authority appertaining to the
   power it restrains.21

    Under this formulation, the crown was to remain strong, with “undivided
authority to administer” the realm. In some respects, its power became even
greater than under the constitution of 1772. Because of the difficulty of distin¬
guishing between defense and offense, the assent of the Estates was no longer
required to declare war. Most earlier restrictions concerning the bureaucracy
were removed, and new categories of higher officials were made freely remov¬
able at royal pleasure. The tenure of judges was meanwhile strengthened by
making them replaceable only through specified judicial action.
    The crown was, however, counterbalanced by reestablishing the statsrad, or
state council, discontinued by Gustav III after 1789, and requiring that all state
business be submitted to its consideration. The nine councillors were to be freely
appointed by the monarch but accountable to the Estates, either for the advice
they gave or for remaining silent when they should give warning. This was
