 290      INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 ities for amendment, it would endure for more than a century and a half, until
  1975.
     The way was now cleared for crowning the new king, Karl XIII, on 29 June,
 and for the selection of his successor. Adlersparre and his friends were quick
 to propose a candidate from an unlikely quarter: Prince Christian August of
 Augustenburg, the Danish commander in southern Norway. Adlersparre had
 secretly negotiated with the prince concerning an armistice before his march on
 Stockholm, at which time the possibility had been raised of Christian August’s
 candidature for the Swedish succession. The Adlersparre circle knew him to be
 a capable and inspiring leader of men—in striking contrast to the deposed Gustav
 IV Adolf.
     Yet considerably more was involved than Christian August’s personal quali¬
 ties. Nothing might better establish a new dynasty in Sweden than the acquisition
 of Norway, following the loss of Finland. Christian August was immensely pop¬
 ular in Norway, where wartime hardships had revived old grievances against
 Copenhagen. The Adlersparre faction thus had high hopes that if Christian
 August accepted the Swedish succession, he might bring Norway with him.
    The prince, however, had an even more grandiose vision, unbeknown to his
Swedish backers. Already on 10 March—three days after Adlersparre had raised
the standard of revolt in Karlstad—Christian August wrote to his brother, Duke
Friedrich Christian in Copenhagen, that he hoped to “perform a brilliant service
for our king and fatherland,” the details of which he wrote on 6 April. The
“close union of the three Nordic realms under one scepter” would be the only
means to save the Danish-Norwegian monarchy from “dissolution.” Its basis
should be a common, moderate constitution, drafted by delegates from all three
kingdoms in consultation with the king. “This revolution” would have to come
about “from above,” through the sacrifice of unlimited sovereignty by the
monarch, who should nonetheless remain powerful enough to ensure “the felic¬
ity and security of the land.”24
    On 11 March, Christian August reported to Frederik VI on his indirect nego¬
tiations with Adlersparre’s envoy, predicting a “civil war, which will bring a
completely devastated Sweden to Your Majesty’s feet.”25 He thereafter con¬
tinued to urge upon Frederik a Scandinavian union under his rule.
    Despite the recent balloon proclamation calling for union under “Frederik of
the North,” the latter seems to have been taken by surprise by the Swedish
revolution of 13 March and to have found it not altogether to his liking. He was
reluctant to abandon the projected joint Danish-Russian offensive. When a
Swedish delegation arrived to inform him of Duke Carl’s regency and evidently
to sound him out concerning a union as well, Frederik expressed his repugnance
at dealing with “insurgents.”26
  During the ensuing weeks Frederik, influenced both by Christian August and
