                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   291

advisers in Copenhagen enthusiastic for a Nordic union, began to warm to the
idea, even though the constitutional problem bothered him. His inclination in
recent years had been toward the restoration of personal absolutism in his own
domains. He would be prepared, he wrote Christian August on 18 April, to al¬
low the Swedes no more than “the appearance of freedom,” while maintaining
absolute sovereignty in Denmark and Norway. On 24 May, Christian August,
in a last-minute effort to sway the Swedish Riksdag, urged a “modified and uni¬
form constitution for the whole of Scandinavia.’’27 This was more than Frederik
could contemplate.
     The Riksdag’s election of Karl XIII came as a shock. Frederik VI was out¬
 raged, believing the Swedes had intentionally duped both Christian August and
 himself. He had ever regarded them as an unruly and unreliable people. No
 friend of aristocracy at home, he felt a particular antipathy toward the Swedish
 nobility, for whose proud constitutional traditions he had neither sympathy nor
 understanding. Behind the overthrow of the autocratic Gustav IV Adolf he dis¬
 cerned the specter of aristocratic resurgence, the reimposition of a “system of
 oppression” upon the common people. With Karl XIII as king he saw “aristoc¬
 racy at its height,” a view generally shared by his ministers and Danish liberal
 opinion. Christian August too put his confidence in “the lower classes, that is,
 the greater part of the nation,” expected little enthusiasm for union among the
 “privileged,” and had repeatedly urged upon Frederik a constitution for Swe¬
 den conferring “equal rights without regard to estate.”28
     The Danish king now returned determinedly to the idea of the outright con¬
 quest of as much Swedish territory as possible with Russian support. He now
 envisioned not only the recovery of the lost Scanian provinces but a new frontier
 along the Klara River. “It is deplorable,” he wrote to Christian August on 28
June, “that what the Swedes could have done voluntarily to their own advan¬
tage, circumstances will compel them to do; and when Finland goes to Russia
and part of southern Sweden falls to Denmark, Karl XIII’s kingdom will become
very small and scarcely possible for him to sustain in the long run.”29 He there¬
after sent repeated orders to Christian August to attack.
    The latter found himself in a difficult quandary. He was already deeply in¬
volved in secret negotiations with the Swedes, and although disappointed by
their election of Karl XIII, he still hoped to work for Frederik Vi’s eventual suc¬
cession in Sweden. He was moreover hesitant to support a Russian offensive,
which might bring all of Scandinavia under “that barbaric yoke.” Its only salva¬
tion, he remained convinced, lay in a strong Nordic union, “which can, in its
time, shake the throne of Russia.”30
    On 18 July, The Swedish Riksdag, under the vigorous prodding of the Adler-
sparre faction and lacking any other viable candidate, elected Christian August
as Swedish crown prince. The latter agreed provisionally to come to Sweden
