 288       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 intended to forestall the biased information and unofficial advisers so evident
 under the Gustavian regime. State secretaries, in charge of government depart¬
 ments, as well as the generals-adjutant for the army and navy, sat with the coun¬
 cil in matters affecting their fields of competency, but without vote. However,
 except on questions of war and peace, all the councillors were not required to
 meet as a body, and in the interests of secrecy, the monarch could consult with
 only the secretary for foreign affairs or the generals-adjutant on diplomatic or
 military matters.
    The monarch was to relinquish governing authority to the council when out¬
 side the country. If he remained abroad for more than a year, the Estates were
 empowered to decide on the nation’s future government.
    The Estates were to meet regularly every five years and remain in session for
at least four months after the government presented its proposals; the monarch
might also summon extraordinary meetings. The Estates and most of their com¬
mittees were forbidden to deliberate or vote in the monarch’s presence, to fore¬
stall royal pressure of the type exercised by both Gustav III and Gustav IV
Adolf. Both crown and Estates were empowered to initiate and veto legislation.
   Control over all taxation, loans, the state bank, and national debt office was
vested in the Estates, while various tolls and excises which formerly provided
a standing revenue to the crown now became part of the regular taxation. The
Estates furthermore obtained widespread controls over the specific expenditures
of the government.
    They reviewed not only the government’s accounts but also the minutes of
 the state council. If they judged a councillor to have been derelict in his duties,
they could petition the monarch for his removal or impeach him before a special
tribunal, the riksratt, composed of certain high officials, sitting ex officio. The
constitution could be amended by two successive riksdagar, upon the initiative
of either the crown or the constitutional committee of the Estates. To insure the
individual citizen against bureaucratic or judicial abuse, the constitution pro¬
vided for an independent official, the judicial ombudsman, with direct access to
all levels of government. The citizen’s right to express himself freely on all mat¬
ters of public concern was specifically guaranteed.
    The new constitution was not without its flaws. In particular, the revived state
council was placed in an ambiguous position. Because its members were to be
appointed by the monarch but answerable to the Estates, they were neither riks-
dagsman nor the responsible heads of administrative departments, and they were
only exceptionally required to function as a group. Rolf Karlbom has indeed
described 1809 as the great break in Sweden’s constitutional development,
through which the ancient tripartite balance between Crown, Council, and
Estates finally and definitively gave way to that dualism between monarch and
legislature which would thereafter prevail into the twentieth century.22 Their
respective powers were moreover so evenly opposed to each other as to impede
