 292       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 once peace was concluded, if Frederik VI would permit this. To the dismay of
 Adlersparre and his friends, however, he refused to hear of any insurrectionary
 schemes concerning Norway.
     The Swedish-Russian war meanwhile dragged on in desultory fashion. Early
  in March 1809 the Russians mounted a two-pronged attack over the ice of the
  frozen Gulf of Bothnia. The Swedes were dislodged from the Aland Islands, and
 a small Russian detachment seized Grisslehamn in the northern Stockholm
 Archipelago. A larger Russian force crossed over to Umea. The decimated and
 demoralized Swedish-Finnish force at the head of the Gulf was thereby isolated,
 and in late March its commander capitulated under terms paroling his Swedish
 troops while permitting their Finnish comrades to return to their homeland.
 Although the Russians withdrew from Grisslehamn, a long stretch of Sweden’s
 northern Bothnian coastline was now in enemy hands.
     There followed something of a lull in the hostilities as all parties sought to
 interpret the significance and potentialities of the Swedish revolution of 13
 March. The provisional government in Stockholm appealed, as seen, to Napo¬
 leon for mediation, but the emperor simply referred it to Tsar Alexander’s noble
 generosity. Operations languished until August, when 7,500 Swedes landed to
 the north of Russian-occupied Umea, but within a few days they were outmaneu-
 vered and forced to debark.
   Stockholm could now only seek peace on the best terms it could get. Informal
feelers since March gave way to hard negotiating at Fredrikshamn (Hamina) in
Finland. The Russians were by now eager to end the northern war, which proved
a heavy burden and a strategic liability since their relations with Napoleon were
badly deteriorating. Had the Swedes been more fully aware of this, they might
have held out for better terms.
   On 17 September 1809 Sweden concluded peace with Russia. It ceded to the
tsar all of Finland plus part of the province of Vasterbotten lying east of the
Torne and Muonio Rivers; although the Swedish negotiators strove to save the
Aland Islands, considered essential for the defense of Stockholm, the Russians
refused to take the “trunk” without the “keys.” Sweden thus relinquished
roughly a third of its territory and a quarter of its population. The consequences
for both Finland and Sweden would be profound, for unlike many of the other
great renversements of the Napoleonic era the Peace of Fredrikshamn would not
thereafter be undone. An immediate result was that Sweden now pledged itself
to join the Continental System.
    As long as Russia had remained in the field, Frederik VI had wanted to con¬
tinue the war against Sweden. By late summer, however, the Russians made it
clear that they would support Denmark’s claim only to such Swedish territory
as it succeeded in occupying itself. Norway was now Frederik’s only feasible
base of operations against Sweden, but Prince Christian August was reluctant
to attack the land that chose him as its crown prince. Frederik’s repeated orders
