                                INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   285

revolution. Censorship was lifted, resulting during the following months in a
rapid revival of political journalism.
   On 22 March Adlersparre made a rather anticlimactic entry into the capital
at the head of his private army. Here he established his headquarters, from
which he exercised for some weeks a kind of quasi-independent authority, arous¬
ing the hopes of the increasingly vocal radical wing of the opposition to the late
regime.
    On one point virtually all shades of opinion were agreed: a riksdag must be
convened. Already on 14 March the provisional government issued its summons
for 1 May. The problems the Estates would have to face were many and serious.
Above all they included the succession to the throne, the constitution, and peace.
    These questions were closely interwoven. Adlercreutz, Klingspor, and their
friends had intended only to take power from a monarch they felt could no
longer manage it, naturally assuming that he would be succeeded by his son, the
nine-year-old Crown Prince Gustav. Recent Danish and British experience
offered precedents for such a situation. Duke Carl wished at first only to serve
as regent for his grandnephew, who was favored by most of the provisional gov¬
ernment, as well as by broad strata of public opinion. Gustav Adolf showed a
surprising readiness to cooperate, having indeed considered abdication. On 27
March he offered to vacate the throne for his son.
   By this time, however, Georg Adlersparre, with two strong supporters, had
been added to the provisional government, where they gained a growing influ¬
ence. Although a man of considerable talents, both idolized and feared as a radi¬
cal standard-bearer, Adlersparre was fearful and suspicious, obsessed with
protecting himself against future retribution by excluding from the throne both
Gustav IV Adolf and all his heirs. By arranging a mission to Napoleon to seek
mediation with Russia as well as to determine his views on the Swedish succes¬
sion, the Adlersparre faction gained precious time. Upon the return of the Swed¬
ish envoys in early May, Adlersparre’s supporters were able to construe
Napoleon’s noncommittal remarks as disapproval of Prince Gustav. They mean¬
while stressed the perils of a long and uncertain regency for the young prince.
Duke Carl was at length persuaded to accept the throne as King Karl XIII, but
since he was by then sixty years old and childless, the ultimate solution to the
succession problem would only thereby be postponed.
   The Riksdag convened on 1 May. Ten days later, the Estates, meeting in
plenary session, resolved by acclaim to exclude Gustav IV Adolf and his heirs
permanently from the Swedish throne. No voice was raised in defense of the
crown prince. The Gustavian legitimists feared both for themselves and for the
royal family. But they would not forget that passage of a resolution by acclaim
was not legally valid in riksdag proceedings.
   A committee appointed by the provisional government had prepared a draft
