                                  INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                    289

cooperation, and thus prompt and decisive action. Since the Estates remained
much divided between and within themselves, effective national leadership
would still necessarily depend in high degree upon the personal qualities of the
monarch.
    Important questions remained unanswered, which threatened the establish¬
ment of a stable regime, as quickly became apparent with the relaxation of cen¬
sorship. Anxious above all to provide a rudderless Sweden with a new, workable
constitution as quickly as possible in a perilous situation, the Riksdag committee
understandably steered clear of controversies that could hazard that objective.
It proposed, and the Riksdag concurred, that special committees of the Estates
be elected to prepare separate statutes on freedom of the press, representation
in the Riksdag, and the succession to the throne during the current session, fol¬
lowing acceptance of the constitution; these statutes were to have the force of
constitutional law.
    Behind these divisive issues loomed greater and more fateful questions of the
 survival of those corporate privileges that still remained even after Gustav Ill’s
parliamentary coup of 1789: above all the reservation of certain high dignities
and of immediate manorial domain (yppersta fralse) lands to the nobility.
Already in June the Noble Estate voluntarily relinquished these rights, thus at
last giving full access to all public employments and categories of land to all citi¬
zens. The Nobles held adamantly, however, to the special tax exemptions
attached to manorial lands no matter in whose possession, on the grounds that
they constituted a legitimate form of property.
    Whereas the other three Estates accepted the new constitution early in June,
the Peasantry held out for a revision requiring the equal taxation of all landed
property, led by prosperous members of the Estate particularly resentful of sur¬
viving distinctions. According to Count Trolle-Wachtmeister, passions reached
the point where the more radical peasant leaders spoke of “turning us into a
republic under a president, like in North America,” since without the desired
taxation reform Sweden could not afford the monarchy. This agitation, he added
ironically, “has brought some measure of moderation to the more stormy mem¬
bers of the nobility, who want no one but themselves to act as revolutionaries
and are more devoted to their manors than to democracy.” Many of the latter
were now prepared to accept “any constitution whatsoever” to put an end to
the wrangling in the Riksdag.23
    Only after much pressure and bribery from the other Estates and a royal dres¬
sing down by Duke Carl on 27 June did the Peasants give way and accept the
constitution in return for minor concessions on the tax obligations of manorial
lands and on the promise that taxation would continue to be discussed in the
future. The old system of taxation would survive until 1891.
    The new constitution was at last accepted by all four Estates. Despite its
weaknesses, but perhaps largely thanks to its studied ambiguities and possibil-
