 296       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 sparre’s emissaries about his possible candidature to the Swedish throne and
 right before the coup d’etat in Stockholm.37
    For Wedel and certain influential members of the patriciate in Ostlandet with
 whom he enjoyed close relations, these developments —in close apposition —
proved decisive. Wedel was now persuaded that Norway’s immediate and future
 salvation lay in its own self-government under a liberal constitution. The Swed¬
ish coup in March at first encouraged him to hope for a union of the three Scan¬
dinavian kingdoms, each under its own constitution, and he strongly urged
Prince Christian August in this direction. Already by late April, however,
Wedel recognized that Frederik VI could not be counted upon to realize such
an ideal. In consultation with Swedish envoys of the Adlersparre faction, he now
put his hopes in a voluntary Norwegian-Swedish dynastic union, to be brought
about through Christian August’s election as Swedish crown prince and a Nor¬
wegian insurrection to make him king of Norway. Central to Wedel’s plan was
a separate constitution for Norway, to be framed prior to union with Sweden and
to be its essential precondition.38
   Although Christian August accepted election as successor to the Swedish
crown in July, he refused to place himself at the head of a Norwegian uprising
against Denmark, as seen. Wedel did not lose hope, and an undated letter to a
Swedish correspondent reveals much about his thinking by the late summer of
1809. It would be well, he wrote, if Denmark might now “make common cause
with us in establishing the internal and external freedom and independence of
the North under Prince Christian’s leadership, which little by little forms closer
bonds between the nations.”

    Otherwise, Norway will in a few weeks be obliged to speak forcefully.
    This seems the most likely. . . . Once the Norwegian nation has clearly
   expressed its will, I am convinced Prince C. can make no more difficulties
   over assuming the rule over both nations. This must, however, come about
   in such fashion that Norway has its own representation on the basis of
   equality, its own laws, finances, etc. We have almost no nobles, and those
   we have must either content themselves with becoming like their fellow
   citizens or move to other places better suited to their exalted nature. Your
   constitution may be very good under present circumstances for Sweden,
   but it does not suit Norway, which will create entirely new institutions for
   itself.

If Frederik VI s stupidity and conceit” should lead shortly to a Norwegian
insurrection, Wedel nonetheless warned against any overt Swedish intervention,
particularly through armed force, which could be ruinous to the great goal.
Wedel here set forth the essential principles he would uphold through the fateful
years to follow. During the summer and fall of 1809, he and his friends strove
to foment a Norwegian uprising. A letter to Georg Adlersparre from one of his
