                                  INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   297

agents on the border meanwhile summarized in late September the hopes of their
faction in Sweden

   that a speedy peace with Denmark [will have] the double good effect that
   our crown prince will leave Norway, which is now threatened by famine
   after a total crop failure, [and that this,] together with the war with Eng¬
   land which still continues for them and in consequence the strictest block¬
   ade of their coasts will cause the Norwegians to cast themselves into the
   arms of their friends the Swedes.

But despite a well-advertised surplus of grain in Sweden, it was all ultimately
to no avail.39
   By this time, informed opinion in Norway was in considerable ferment.
Christian August held to the ideal of a constitutional Scandinavian state, whereas
Wedel and his friends on both sides of the Keel aspired to the more limited goal
of a Norwegian-Swedish federation. Others still hoped for greater autonomy and
separate institutions under the Danish crown. Common to them all, however,
was the growing conviction that what they increasingly referred to as their
“fatherland" was, in fact and by right, a separate national entity with its own
legitimate interests.
     By August, Frederik VI came to realize he would have to make concessions
 to save Norway. It was apparent that further military action against Sweden
 could be expected neither from the Russians nor from the Norwegians. He at
 last permitted licensed trade with Great Britian in Norway, although not in Den¬
 mark and the duchies. He temporarily forbade further privateering and entered
 into negotiations with Sweden leading to peace in December. In return, the Brit¬
 ish relaxed their blockade, allowing foreign trade and grain shipments from
 Denmark. In effect, Frederik VI adopted the separate policy for Norway pro¬
 posed by the Government Commission in February.
    Norway’s economic situation improved almost miraculously during the fall
of 1809. Within months sizable fortunes were accumulated through trade under
British and French licenses—many skippers carried both—in disregard of the
Continental System. Much clandestine trade with the British was now also car¬
ried on through Gothenburg in Sweden, which during the war years became a
thriving entrepot. Recent political discontents were generally soon forgotten—at
least for the time being.
    It is easy in retrospect to overestimate political disaffection in Norway during
the crisis of 1809, especially in view of developments there five years later. It
was essentially limited to a small elite of merchants and officials, mainly in the
southeast. Above all, there was little the patriciate could do without the support
of the peasant masses. Between them lay a social cleavage which recent decades
had only deepened, and despite their own tribulations the Norwegian peasantry
remained steadfastly loyal to the crown. To reinforce its position, the govern-
