 300       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 cipline and good order. Few members of the elite hesitated to swear the required
 oath during the summer of 1808, at the very time the Finnish army was counter¬
 attacking from the north. Few attempted to flee to Sweden.
    Behind this tame acquiescence lay generations of growing fatalism vis-a-vis
 the Russian threat. Combined with this were old traditions of political opportun¬
 ism inherited from the Era of Freedom, and the pragmatic utilitarianism of the
 later Enlightenment, with its conviction that government must be judged by the
 human needs it fulfilled rather than on the basis of history and tradition. There
 was moreover a growing confidence during the cosmopolitan eighteenth century
 that a civil population would remain undisturbed if it did not offer resistance,
 even under a sovereign of a different religious faith. Acceptance was eased—at
 the time and since    by emotional resentment against Sweden, and especially
 Gustav IV Adolf, for its meager support during the war. “We were separated
 from Sweden,     wrote Carl Johan Walleen of the Abo Court of Appeals, “be¬
 cause that land in the most craven fashion abandoned us to our fate,” although
 he admitted that the Finns,   guided by that worldly wisdom which distinguishes
our age,” had done little enough to ward off the flood that had overwhelmed
them.45
    The war of 1808-9, however, again revealed the same social cleavages as had
Gustav Ill’s war of 1788-90: whereas the Swedish-speaking elite showed a
widespread willingness to cooperate with the Russians, the peasantry, both
Finnish- and Swedish-speaking, displayed a firm determination to defend its
native soil against the hereditary foe, spurred by fears that they would fall under
the same oppression as their brethren in Old Finland, or worse yet, the Baltic
provinces. The men in the ranks fought stubbornly despite often poor and dispir¬
ited leadership, while peasant partisans caused both the Russians and upper-class
Finns who had sworn allegiance to them serious concern in several areas. A
young student wrote how “there was a general fear of the common people, when
the Russian army under Prince Bagration finally entered Abo and freed its
inhabitants from this justifiable fear.” To Finland’s elite, Russia offered the
inducements of both future peace and social stability. Its defenders justified
acquiescence as true devotion to the fatherland, the highest patriotism.46
   On 1 December 1808 Alexander I announced that he would govern Finland
directly as an autonomous principality under its existing constitution. In so do¬
ing, he opted essentially for the proposal made the preceding winter by G. M.
Sprengtporten, whom he now appointed as his governor-general in Finland. He
thereby rejected the view of many of his principal advisers, and even of certain
Finns, that Finland should be annexed outright to the empire, even if allowed
certain privileges, as in Old Finland and the Baltic provinces.47
   Both ideal and practical motives were surely involved in this solution. Alex¬
ander was at the height of his youthfiil “liberalism,” and under the influence
