                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   303

   In Sweden, economically crippled, defeated in war, mutilated through the
loss of Finland, and deadlocked in political and social strife, the ship of state
drifted without strong leadership or a clear sense of national priorities.
   The provisional government had immediately rescinded Gustav IV Adolfs
special war levy of January 1809. But war deficits, combined with the loss of
British subsidies after March 1809 and of tax revenues from Finland, compelled
the Riksdag to increase regular taxation to more than twice what it had been at
the beginning of 1808. Foreign trade meanwhile languished. Continental mar¬
kets were cut off, while iron exports faced British domestic competition. The
export of Swedish bar iron declined by 1809 to about half of its 1800 level.53
Sweden was flooded with more British imports than it could dispose of owing
to the Continental System, despite much clandestine trade. Merchant shipping
was harried by Danish and French privateers. The currency, laboriously stabi¬
lized in 1800-1803, again fell into disarray. Economic hardship gave a keener
edge to social and political antagonisms.
   The surrender of Finland meant more than the loss of manpower, resources,
and revenues. For over six hundred years it had been an integral part of the
realm. Innumerable bonds of blood and sentiment spanned the Bothnian Gulf.
The Russian colossus was moreover now within immediate striking distance of
the Swedish heartland, giving rise to much the same fears as the territorial losses
of 1721 and 1743 had earlier created in Finland, that the land now lay exposed
and essentially undefendable. Following ratification of the new constitution in
June 1809, the Estates turned to questions of immediate concern. Not only was
taxation increased, but a uniform, graduated income tax was enacted, ranging
from .25 to 10 percent of income, without reference to social status.54 The estab¬
lishment of a permanent standing debt on the British model was approved. Re¬
strictions of 1800 on household distillation were removed. The Estates endorsed
the construction of the Gota Canal, which via Lakes Vattern and Vanern would
bypass the strategically exposed Sound and long provide a major artery of trans¬
port. A system of national conscription, establishing a reserve of 50,000 men,
was passed by three Estates against the opposition of the Peasantry. A statute
on freedom of the press, based on the law of 1766, was enacted in March 1810.
   The Estates had convened amid high hopes in May 1809, and much more
might surely have been accomplished during the following year had the Riksdag
not soon broken down into increasingly hostile factions over issues that were as
much social as political.
   The revolution of 1809 had been first and foremost the work of members of
the nobility, as members of that Estate pointedly reminded the others at the
beginning of the Riksdag, and until its dissolution in May 1810 its leadership
in all camps—conservative, liberal, radical—was provided almost entirely by
noblemen.55 The nobility thus maintained, under new and trying conditions, its
traditional role as the political class above all others.
