                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   295

sufficient in grain. Denmark, especially Jutland, was Norway’s natural bread¬
basket, but shipment across the enemy-controlled Skagerrak was hazardous.
Few skippers were prepared to chance it, and of the grain sent from Denmark
to Norway at least a quarter ended up in British or Swedish ports.34 Internal
communications via Norway’s long coastline were badly disrupted, and the Far
North was virtually isolated.
    Most ruinously affected were the South and Southeast, Christiansand and
Akershus Stifter, which together accounted for over half of Norway’s popula¬
tion, 84 percent of its merchant shipping, 92 percent of its timber exports, and
all ot its iron and glass production.35 Not only were their trade, manufacture,
and shipping devastated, they also suffered the greatest grain shortages. Har¬
vests in the north and west were generally good and were supplemented by
Russian grain from Arkhangelsk, even as far south as Bergen. In Akershus Stift,
where there were widespread crop failures, the supply of grain declined to only
one-sixth of the normal level during 1808, accompanied by an alarming rise in
local mortality rates.36 Privateering provided some profits in Christiansand Stift.
The situation was grimmest in Akershus Stift, which moreover bore the brunt
of the war with neighboring Sweden.
      The repulse of the brief Swedish offensive in the spring of 1808 created an
  initial wave of patriotic fervor but also strengthened an impression among the
  Norwegians that they stood virtually alone against the British and Swedish foes.
 Faced with the imminent economic ruin of the classes and starvation of the
 masses, influential members of the patriciate in 0stlandet began to reflect seri¬
 ously on Norway’s position within the dual monarchy.
     In December 1808 the youthful Count Herman Wedel Jarlsberg was ap¬
 pointed to the Government Commission. One of the few Norwegians to bear a
 noble title, Wedel Jarlsberg had spent much of his youth in England and com¬
 bined a warm love for his native Norway, to which he had returned two years
 before, with a deep admiration for British parliamentary liberty. Since the out¬
break of the war he had distinguished himself through several hazardous trips
to Denmark to organize relief shipments of grain. By the time he first appeared
 in the Government Commission in January 1809, he had concluded that only a
change in the monarchy’s foreign policy with regard to Norway, exempting it
from the Continental System and restoring peace with Sweden, could save the
country from total disaster. The following month, on 17 February, the Govern¬
ment Commission, evidently under Count Wedel’s strong influence, appealed to
Frederik VI to delegate to it the authority to conclude a separate armistice with
Britain and Sweden.
     The king remained determined to hold strictly to the Continental System and
was by no means prepared to permit the provisional Government Commission
in Christiania to make policy on its own. His rejection of its proposal arrived
in early March, at the very time Christian August was first approached by Adler-
