 298       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 ment in Copenhagen declined to raise the Norwegian peasants’ tax burden—
 while increasing that of the Danish peasantry. The raising of revenue through
 tolls, loans, and inflation meanwhile affected the peasants but little. As for union
 with Sweden, the Norwegian peasants were soon made aware that their Swedish
 brethren were more heavily taxed than themselves.
    The immediate crisis had passed. Yet neither patrician nor peasant could
 thereafter conceive of their homeland in quite the same terms as before. “What
 has Norway been; what is it; what can it become?” wrote Jacob Aall in a pamph¬
 let entitled Fcedrelandske Ideer (Ideas on the Fatherland) in December 1809,
 echoing the Abbe Sieyes’s famous appeal to the French Third Estate in 1789.40
    There were intimations of an answer when Wedel and his friends capitalized
 on the wave of patriotic fervor surrounding Christian August’s departure for
 Sweden to establish, without royal permission, a Society for Norway’s Welfare
 (Selskabet for Norges Vet) on 29 December 1809. Its manifesto made no mention
 of Denmark or the monarchy as a whole, only of Norway, “our proud and
 ancient mountain home, [which] once again shall arise in renewed glory’’ as its
 “honor and well-being shall be the first thought and highest goal of Norway’s
 sons.   On its first day it had 200 members, a year later nearly 1,500, in a net¬
 work of local committees throughout the land. Ostensibly it was devoted to
 economic and cultural advancement, but Frederik VI was under no illusions as
to the threat it posed to the centralized monarchy, even though he sought to pre¬
 serve appearances by adding “Royal’’ to the Society’s name.41
    The Atlantic islands, cut adrift by the war, evolved their own modus vivendi
with the enemy. They suffered serious shortages and were defenseless against
landing parties from British vessels. The British made no attempt to occupy them
but felt under no compulsion to respect established Danish trade monopolies. In
Iceland British merchants and skippers soon gained control of overseas trade
despite the efforts of local officials.
   Early in 1809 Captain George Jackson of the Clarence, a ship belonging to
the London merchant Samuel Phelps, obtained an agreement permitting British
merchants to establish themselves in Reykjavik, upon pain of bombardment of the
town. Jackson’s interpreter was the renegade Danish adventurer Jurgen Jiirgen-
sen, who in June 1809 returned to Iceland, together with Phelps. With a band
of armed men they seized the Danish stiftamtmand in Reykjavik. On 26 June Jiir-
gensen issued a proclamation that all Danish authority in Iceland had ceased that
a national government would be established under British protection, with Ice¬
landic laws such as they had been at the time of the union with Norway—in
1262!—and that all further contacts with Denmark were forbidden.
   On 12 July Jiirgensen declared himself “protector’’ and commander of the
armed forces by land and sea. All officials were required to swear allegiance
and British subjects were granted the right to trade and reside in Iceland. Jurgen-
