                                INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   301

of Mikhail Speransky and Prince Adam Czartoryski was prepared to consider
moderate constitutional regimes in peripheral territories under Russian overlord¬
ship, as experiments for an eventual federative reorganization of the empire. In
Finland the Pole Czartoryski could hope for useful precedents for his own unfor¬
tunate homeland.
   The tsar was apparently also impressed by the spirited resistance of the Fin¬
nish army during the summer of 1808 and the hazards of inciting a “Spanish”
peasant insurrection. Moderation toward the Finns in their hour of defeat could
win their future loyalty while enhancing Russia’s credit in enlightened European
opinion—not least in Poland. As an autocrat at home, it would have been diffi¬
cult for Alexander to decree constitutional laws and civil rights for a conquered
people. Gustav Ill’s constitution of 1772, as amended in 1789, however, already
provided ample authority in Finland.
   In January 1809, Alexander called for a meeting of the Finnish Estates, which
convened in Borga (Porvoo) on 22 March. Three days later Alexander appeared
before them and proclaimed:

   We, Alexander I, . . . have desired, by the present act, to confirm and
   ratify the religion and fundamental laws of the land, as well as the privi¬
   leges and rights which each Estate in the said Grand Duchy in particular,
   and all the inhabitants in general, be their position high or low, have
   hitherto enjoyed according to the constitution. We promise to maintain all
   these benefits and laws firm, unchanged, and in full force.48

   On 29 March the Finnish Estates swore their fealty to their new grand duke.
It would be a salve to their consciences that the Swedish revolution earlier the
same month had absolved them of their allegiance to Gustav IV Adolf, and in¬
deed developments in Sweden would thereafter tend to solidify the new regime
in Finland by appearing dangerously “Jacobin.”
   The Borga diet adopted a plan for Finland’s higher administration prepared
by Matthias Calonius. The tsar was represented by a governor-general, who pre¬
sided over a council (renamed the Senate in 1816). A state secretary for Finland
stationed in St. Petersburg presented matters requiring his decision to the tsar-
grand duke. Beneath this new superstructure, the existing bureaucratic, judicial,
and ecclesiastical organs continued to function as before. Because convening the
Estates was the prerogative of the sovereign under the constitution of 1772, no
diet would thereafter be called until 1863, under Alexander II. Thus Finland was
in effect governed by its bureaucracy, which continued to use Swedish as the
official language.
   At the conclusion of the Borga diet in June, Alexander predicted that his Fin¬
nish subjects would be grateful to Providence for having placed Finland “in the
rank of nations, governed by its own laws.”49 Finnish nationalist historians, in
