                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                    299

sen promised to relinquish authority before 1 July 1810, after a constituent as¬
sembly established a new government. He thereupon set off at the head of his
armed retinue to confiscate the property of Danish merchants.
   The British government was not prepared to countenance a filibustering
expedition which could complicate an eventual peace settlement with Denmark.
On 14 August the British man-of-war Talbot arrived in Reykjavik. Its captain
negotiated an agreement with Phelps and the brothers Stephan and Magnus
Stephensen by 22 August, declaring Jiirgensen’s actions null and void. The regu¬
lar administration and officials were reinstated, and Danish property was re¬
stored, although British subjects retained the right to trade and settle in Iceland.
On 4 September the Talbot departed for Britain carrying Phelps and Jiirgensen,
leaving the Stephensen brothers in temporary charge of affairs.
   Thus ended Iceland’s brief revolution in 1809. Upon his return to England,
Jiirgensen was imprisoned. He later became a gambler in the more conventional
sense and was deported to Tasmania, where he ended his days.42


   By the Peace of Fredrikshamn Sweden ceded Finland to the Russian tsar in
September 1809. Yet the original intentions of the secretive and often vacillating
Alexander I remain a matter of some controversy.43 Ostensibly the Russian at¬
tack in February 1808 was intended to force Sweden into the Continental Sys¬
tem, and initially the Russians declared that Finland would be occupied only
temporarily. The extension of Russia’s frontier to the Gulf of Bothnia had
nonetheless had its proponents in St. Petersburg since Peter I had opened his
“window to the West.” At the end of 1807, G. M. Sprengtporten prepared a
memorandum for the Russian government urging the conquest of Finland and
its establishment as an autonomous buffer state under a member of the Russian
imperial house.44
   Already on 1 April 1808 Tsar Alexander declared Finland a part of the Rus¬
sian empire. On 17 June he proclaimed that its religion, laws, and corporate
privileges would be respected. At the same time, the Russians demanded that
the Finns swear fealty to the emperor, as they had during the Russian occupation
in 1741-43.
   Whatever Alexander’s original intentions, it became clear during 1808 that
once having taken Finland he did not intend to relinquish it. At his Erfurt meet¬
ing with Napoleon that fall—if not before—he had learned that Russia’s enforce¬
ment of the Continental System in the North would bring no concessions from
France in the Balkans, but that Russia had a free hand in Finland.
   The behavior of the upper classes in occupied Finland could not but encour¬
age Russian aspirations. Defeatism was rife within the Finnish officer corps.
The civil administration continued to function without interruption, and the
church admonished cooperation with the occupiers, who in turn maintained dis-
