 302       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 their struggle to assert their national identity, would later make much of the diet
 of 1809, seeing in it the actual beginning of their country’s separate existence.
 It cannot, however, be regarded as an initiative by the Finns themselves. Tsar
 Alexander had declared the main outlines of Finland’s autonomous status in
 December    if not already in June—1809. It was he who called together the
 Estates and determined what matters they might consider. The Peace of Fred-
 rikshamn, moreover, made no mention of Finland’s position under the tsar,
 which thus remained an essentially domestic matter. Yet the Borga diet had great
 symbolic value, both internally and externally: it proclaimed to Sweden and the
 world Finland’s acceptance of its new situation while fostering a sense of direct
 participation among Finland’s politically influential classes.50
    Faced with deteriorating relations with France, Alexander showed a partic¬
 ular solicitude for the Finns in the period that followed. It was his intent, he
 wrote to his governor-general in 1810, “to give this people a political existence
 in such a way that it does not regard itself as conquered by Russia but on the
contrary as attached to it by the bonds of its evident interests.” Finland’s internal
organization should therefore offer “incomparably greater advantages than they
would have had under Swedish domination.”51
   The creation of a new central administration brought new opportunities. Al¬
though the Finnish government played no part in the affairs of the empire as a
whole, Finns were welcomed into the imperial service and before long would
join it in considerable numbers. Meanwhile, except for the governor-general, no
Russian might hold office in Finland.
   Salaries for bureaucrats in Abo were raised to almost double those of their
Swedish and far above those of their Russian colleagues. In 1809 a provincial
governor had urged the importance of assuring “the future destiny of our unfor¬
tunate but above all honorable military establishment, perhaps I sould say the
future survival of our class.    In March 1810 Alexander guaranteed former
officers and noncommissioned officers of the disbanded Finnish army retention
of their previous incomes and assigned farms. Already in the summer of 1808
the University of Abo was instructed to plan for a sizable expansion, imple¬
mented by early 1811. Numerous titles and dignities were distributed. Between
1808 and 1816, twenty families were raised to noble status. In 1809 the retired
major Berndt Aminoff had confided to his diary, “There now remains for me
only the painful memory that I once was a happy Swede.” Soon after, he con¬
sidered Finland “the most fortunate land in Europe.”52
   While Alexander’s policy of pacification concentrated primarily upon the
small elite, he sought to reassure the broader masses by changing existing con¬
ditions as little as possible. After the reestablishment of normal relations with
Sweden in the fall of 1809, St. Petersburg meanwhile sought to make clear that
the cause of future discord was now eliminated and it refrained from any at¬
tempts to fish in the troubled waters of Swedish internal politics.
