 294       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 tively utilized by the meagerly supported Danish-Norwegian military forces. In
 seizing British merchantmen flying the neutral American flag, Danish privateers
 also captured some American ships, resulting in a controversy only finally
 resolved in 1830 when Denmark paid an indemnity to the United States.31
    The war ruined the flourishing overseas trade the monarchy had enjoyed dur¬
 ing the long years of neutrality. Its merchant marine was swept from the seas,
 much of it confiscated in British ports or permanently blockaded in Continental
ones, while thousands of Danish and Norwegian seamen were interned on Brit¬
 ish prison hulks. During the course of the war the British seized some 1,400
Danish-Norwegian vessels on the high seas. The shock to the great mercantile
houses in Copenhagen was buffered somewhat by the large supplies of Far East-
ern goods on hand in 1807, which could be disposed of through Baltic ports over
the next few years. British colonial wares were meanwhile smuggled into the
duchies via Heligoland, from whence they found their way into Germany.32
    Although harvests remained generally good, there were heavy demands for
grain, in Norway and, for a time, to provision Marshal Bernadotte’s French and
Spanish troops. Coastal and inter-island transportation was meanwhile badly dis¬
rupted, stimulating the development of internal waterways, especially on Sjael¬
land to provide Copenhagen with food, fodder, and fuel. Under the strains of
war the government was compelled to abandon its recent economic liberalism
and impose extensive controls.
   The war encouraged Frederik VI to complete his concentration of personal
power. On 19 March 1808, immediately following his succession, he informed
the departments of the central administration that they were henceforth to re¬
ceive their instructions directly from him. The state council was effectively sus¬
pended.
    Yet the wartime disruption of seaborne communications with outlying parts
 of the monarchy, such as Bornholm, the Fasroes, and Iceland, had by then al¬
 ready compelled the government to grant extensive powers to local authorities
 and to relax its efforts, begun in 1806, to integrate the duchies into the kingdom.
The greatest administrative problems were meanwhile posed by Norway, across
the Skagerrak, where an interim Government Commission (Regjeringskommi-
sjon) of four, presided over by Prince Christian August, was established already
on 24 August 1807, followed by a provisional superior civil court, admiralty
court, and exchequer for Norway. The necessities of war forced the government
to break, in effect, with its traditional policy of centralization.33
   The new Government Commission in Christiania faced grievous problems,
for the greatest burden of Denmark’s alliance with France necessarily fell upon
Norway. Norwegian trade, far more than Danish, dealt in local products and
depended primarily upon the British market, while a disproportionately large
part of the monarchy’s merchant marine was Norwegian.
  More serious still was the problem of provisioning a land never at best self-
