310       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

force, and the long series of reforms had firmly established Frederik in the affec¬
tions of his nation. Frederik would thus weather the storm and be remembered
for firmness, attachment to principle, steadfastness in the face of national mis¬
fortune, whereas Gustav Adolf has been branded with inflexibility, dogmatism,
quixotic refusal to face reality. The first remains associated with a “golden
age, ’ the latter with an “iron age” in the cultural life of their respective lands.
   In Sweden, following the adoption of the new constitution in 1809, there was
much speculation about abolishing all surviving corporate rights and establishing
a system of parliamentary representation without regard to social status. In Nor¬
way new liberal constitutions were likewise envisioned within broader Scandina¬
vian frameworks. Although they remained unrealized at the time, all these pro¬
jects looked essentially toward a social and political order based on class rather
than estate. In all, moreover, the innovative role played by great noblemen—
Prince Christian August of Augustenburg, Count Wedel Jarlsberg, Count De La
Gardie, Baron Maclean—is unmistakable; by contrast, there is a notable lack of
initiative among other classes—with the partial exception of the Swedish Peasant
Estate—to dismantle what remained of the corporate structure of society. One
is reminded of the role of the great reforming magnates of the Bernstorff-
Reventlow-Schimmelmann circle in Denmark a generation earlier. In Finland,
meanwhile, all the Estates clung firmly to the existing order at the Borga diet,
to forestall any restructuring under Russian auspices.
   It is ironic yet revealing that the pressures precipitating these developments
resulted largely from a war between the two Nordic monarchies which by that
time was considered so unnatural that a Danish-Schleswig noble could be elected
crown prince of Sweden and ambitious projects for a union of the Scandinavian
crowns could be considered while it was still going on. That such ideas were
more than a passing dream the future would show.
