                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   307

while came to accept Karl August’s new position as a guarantee of improved
Swedish-Danish relations.
   Only gradually did Karl August come to realize the depth of anti-Danish
sentiment in Sweden, revived by the recent war, and turn to other thoughts. He
hinted to the Gustavian leaders that he considered eventually abdicating in favor
of Prince Gustav. Only after his last-minute discovery of their plan for a coup
d etat in March 1810 did he begin to resign himself to the idea of marrying and
establishing his own dynasty.
   On 28 May 1810, only four months after his arrival in Sweden, Crown Prince
Karl August fell from his saddle while attending army maneuvers in Skane and
expired within half an hour. Although an autopsy revealed that he had died of
a stroke, word quickly circulated that he had been poisoned. Since January it
had been rumored in Stockholm that the Gustavians conspired to do away with
the crown prince, evidently spread by Carl August Grevesmohlen, a journalist
and political jobber of shady background, to discredit the opponents of the
dominant party. As news of Karl August’s death reached the capital, suspicion
focused on Count Axel von Fersen and his sister, largely through an anonymous
satirical poem, “Rafvame” (“The Foxes”), in the radical journal Nya Posten.
   There followed three weeks of feverish agitation, and on June 20 Karl
August's body reached Stockholm. As it was escorted to the royal palace by an
impressive cortege, an aroused crowd set upon Count Fersen, who took part as
grand marshal, hauled him from his coach, and trampled him to death, despite
the presence of military units. Rioting continued late into the night, by now
largely directed toward the homes of wealthy and powerful persons, until the
troops fired into the crowd, causing an unknown number of casualties.
   A prolonged inquiry into the events of 20 June ultimately revealed little about
its causes and probable instigators, which ever since have remained the objects
of much speculation. Karl XIII, various of his councillors, as well as the Adler-
sparre faction generally, were convinced—or found it politically expedient to
suspect—that the Fersen family was implicated in Karl August’s untimely death,
which would account for the curious passivity of the troops until after the rioting
had gotten out of hand, as well as for the apparent efforts of the “highest author¬
ity” to suppress certain evidence in the inquest.
   Antipathy was meanwhile widespread among the middle classes toward the
nobility as a whole, including the oligarchs of 1809, heightened by economic
dislocations, disillusionment with the results of the recent Riksdag, and crushed
hopes in the new crown prince. Obviously middle-class persons were much in
evidence in the violence against Fersen. Their involvement was apparently coor¬
dinated in advance by a small circle of radicals around C. A. Grevesmohlen.
An anonymous report to St. Petersburg perceived behind the tumult a “revolu¬
tionary party,” led by “certain bourgeois,” which sought to “overthrow en¬
tirely the whole order that had recently been reestablished in the country.” The
