                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               313

exasperated, seeing in the duke the main obstacle to his own election, and in
August sent a military detachment to Als to “protect” the duke from being
“abducted” to Sweden by the Adlersparre faction. Relations between the Dan¬
ish royal house and the Augustenburg family, already embittered by Holstein’s
incorporation into the realm in 1806, henceforth became irreconcilable, with
fateful consequences for the Schleswig-Holstein dispute of the mid-nineteenth
century.
    This strife between the royal brothers-in-law largely canceled out whatever
support either might have hoped for in Sweden, thereby clearing the way for the
improbable candidacy of the French Marshal Bernadotte. On 10 August—the
same day the Secret Committee endorsed the duke of Augustenburg—the
marshal’s personal emissary, J. A. Fournier, arrived in Orebro. Although he
carried no written message from Bernadotte, he gained credence by showing
miniature portraits of the latter’s wife Desiree and son Oscar. Assurances of the
marshal’s interest had meanwhile reached Sweden from Paris. Fournier strongly
hinted that his master enjoyed official French support; the effect was reinforced
by dispatches in the same vein from the Swedish minister in Paris, Baron Gustaf
Lagerbjelke. Fournier moreover gave assurances that Bernadotte was prepared
to offer Sweden substantial economic benefits, including a loan of eight million
francs.
    The government was thus persuaded to refer the matter back to the Secret
 Committee, which already on 14 August shifted its support to Bernadotte. A
 week later he was unanimously elected crown prince by the Estates. “All the
 Scandinavian voices did not prevail against a single Gallic one,” wrote the
 Swedish unionist C. V. Broocman to his Danish colleague Rasmus Nyerup.
 “We are now considered quite fortunate. God grant that this be so!”4
    “No one has fulfilled a destiny like mine,” said Bernadotte at the end of his
long life in 1844.5 He was born in Pau in Bearn, the son of a petty lawyer (pro-
cureur), in 1763 and began his military career as a private soldier in 1780. He
was commissioned a lieutenant in 1791 and rose to major-general already by
1794. After serving as French ambassador to Austria and as war minister, as well
as in the field, Bonaparte appointed him to his Conseil d’Etat in 1800, made
him a marshal in 1804, and Prince of Ponte Corvo in 1806. His first contact with
the Nordic world came in November 1806 when he took Liibeck by storm;
among the enemy units there taken prisoner was a small Swedish force, whose
officers the marshal treated with a courtesy that would not be forgotten in Swed¬
ish higher society. As French administrator over the Hanseatic Cities—Ham¬
burg, Bremen, and Liibeck—Bernadotte revealed both administrative skill and
consideration for their inhabitants. As noted, he commanded the French and
Spanish force that moved into Denmark in 1808 in anticipation of a Danish-
French attack on Sweden.
   The death of Crown Prince Karl August quickly aroused interest in certain
