 304       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

    The “Men of 1809,” including such divergent personalities as Georg Adler-
 sparre and Hans Jarta, were essentially liberals in the classic sense: upholders
 of personal rights and of constitutional government regulated by checks and
 balances. Since these moderate and, in the Swedish context, largely traditional
 objects were quickly attained following the revolution, the liberal bloc soon
 became anxious to prevent any further transformation of state or society. Its
 leaders, the old “Jacobins” of the 1790s, reveal clearly enough the overall trend
 since that time of Swedish—and Scandinavian—radicalism, away from social
 toward purely political objectives. Looking back on the student radicalism of his
 youth. Count Trolle-Wachtmeister would write in the 1840s that he and his
 friends would now be ridiculed as “doctrinaires” and “adherents of the juste-
 milieu," revealing “our present-day reformers’ contempt for the constitution of
 1809, which is the realization of Swedish Jacobinism.”56
    “One has a fatherland under a good regent, but not under a bad one,” one
 of their leading ideologues, Axel Gabriel Silfverstolpe, had written in Adler-
 sparre’s journal, Lasning i blandade amnen already in 1800, echoing the British
 Lockean tradition and foreshadowing the rationalizations of his Finnish peers in
 1808-9. No one, he continued, could love a land that it was not in one’s interest
 to love; hence there was no basis for the state but a contract freely accepted by
its inhabitants, which they might freely renounce. The fatherland was therefore
not necessarily the land where one was born, but that in which the individual
might expect that felicity to which all were entitled.57
   Flanking this liberal bloc in the Riksdag was a varied and growing opposition.
Following their initial confusion and discouragement, the Gustavian legitimists
began to take heart during the summer of 1809. Led by Counts Jacob De La
Gardie and Eric Ruuth, they sought to disconcert the “Men of 1809” at every
turn, often joining forces with those who believed the revolution had not gone
far enough, making it at times difficult to distinguish “right” from “left” in
the opposition.
   What the Gustavian faction had in common was above all its continuing sup¬
port for Prince Gustav of Vasa’s hereditary right to the throne and, generally,
for a strengthened royal power, rather than for a specific social orientation. Its
leading figures were titled and economically independent landed magnates,
largely from Skane, in contrast to the lower service nobility who predominated
among the “Men of 1809.” While some, such as Count Hans Axel von Fersen
and Baron G. M. Armfelt, were social conservatives. Counts De La Gardie and
Ruuth, Baron Rutger Maclean, and others showed an apparently greater recep¬
tivity to social change than the leading revolutionaries of 1809.
   During the fall of 1809 a group of Gustavians, including De La Gardie,
Ruuth, Adlercreutz, and Klingspor, planned secretly with Karl XIII for a coup
d etat to change the constitution and increase royal authority, in the process
