 308       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 Danish minister reported that ambitious burghers aspired to “introduce a com¬
 plete equality within society.’’61
    Behind them stood the poorer classes of the capital, who gave weight and
 impact to the rioting but whose resentments, under mounting economic hard¬
 ship. were directed more toward all who possessed wealth and authority than
 toward the nobility as such. Among the broader masses of both town and coun¬
 tryside, the revolution of 1809 had aroused little enthusiasm, and the deposed
 Gustav IV Adolf—who like Karl August had been widely regarded as the peo¬
 ple’s friend—met with many signs of popular sympathy as he and his family
 were escorted through Sweden and Swedish Pomerania into exile in December
1809. Among those who murdered Count Fersen, J. A. Ehrenstrom wrote in
August 1810,

    were surely many who with sheep-like stupidity imagined that in him they
   avenged, besides the poisoning of the crown prince, Gustav Ill’s assas¬
   sination, the deposition of his son, the exclusion of the latter’s family from
   his hereditary rights, and even the abandonment of Sveaborg and the loss
   of Finland. It was necessary to put such ideas into circulation to set the
   masses in motion.62

The Fersen murder was one of the great political assassinations of the revolu¬
tionary and Napoleonic era, and the rioting that attended it was the largest and
bloodiest popular uprising in Scandinavia during the entire period. It seemed to
symbolize the nadir of Sweden’s degradation, following over a year of revolu¬
tion, social and political conflict, military defeat, and inept leadership. Rumors
were rife of future dissentions. To many, both at home and abroad, the nation’s
future seemed dark. In neighboring Denmark, C. D. Reventlow saw in the
“fearsome’’ events across the Sound “a late imitation of the French Revolu¬
tion.   Napoleon lectured the Swedish minister to Paris on the dangers of the
“Jacobin” avalanche. “He must indeed be sanguine,” wrote the English trav¬
eler E. D. Clark, “who can hope to see Sweden regenerated and her glorv
restored.”63


   By the fall of 1807, all of Scandinavia was involved in the European conflict,
and although the Swedish and Danish monarchies took different sides, the im¬
mediate consequences were largely similar for both. Throughout the North, the
pressures of war moreover precipitated basic changes that had long been pre¬
paring.
   The economic impact of war was devastating. Up to 1807 the Scandinavians
had prospered in international trade. In the fall of that year, however, Hans Jarta
observed:

   Surely a worse and more worrisome situation for commerce than at pre¬
   sent has never existed. If peace does not intervene, by spring either our
