 306       INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10

 mers” previously excluded. In general, the Nobility showed the greatest con¬
 cern for the representation of essentially middle-class nonnoble persons of
 quality.
    In April 1810 the constitutional committee at last presented its proposal: for
 the replacement of the four Estates by a bicameral legislature, including an
 upper house, elected on the basis of taxable property, and a lower house, based
 on population, although elected by voters qualified by property ownership.
 While a notable departure from Swedish political tradition, the proposal was
 scarcely democratic in spirit, for it would reinforce the political power of the
 wealthiest magnates. What it envisioned was well expressed by A. G. Silfver-
 stolpe in February 1810, in language that revealed the hardening social conser¬
 vatism of the revolutionaries of 1809 and which could have been taken almost
 verbatim from Montesquieu:

    The monarch has a natural interest in being as powerful as he possibly can;
    his inclination should be recognized as despotism. . . . The representa¬
    tives of the people (Commune, lower house, or whatever one may call
   them) have a natural interest in limiting the monarch’s power. . . . Both
   of these forces tend toward the dissolution of the state. Something is
   needed to hold them together. That is the intermediate power, which may
   here be called the aristocratic [upper house].60

   The proposal was passed by the Riksdag, but as an amendment to the constitu¬
tion it required the endorsement of the following diet. Subsequently, it was
ignored by the Riksdagar of the summer of 1810, 1812, and early 1815, and was
quietly shelved in an atmosphere of growing conservatism.
   On 2 May 1810 the long Riksdag at last dissolved. Amid mounting disillu¬
sionment and political conflict, all parties had meanwhile come increasingly to
place their hopes in the new crown prince. Christian August made his senti¬
mental departure from Norway in January 1810. Arriving in Sweden, he
adopted the more Swedish name Karl August and quickly became as popular as
he had been across the Keel. Thanks to his simple habits and unaffected manner,
it was soon widely believed among a populace again aroused by old social antag¬
onisms that he was the enemy of the old aristocracy. He showed, however,
political acumen in winning over various influential elements in the Swedish
political establishment. He quickly gained the affection of Karl XIII and Queen
Charlotta. He was naturally on good terms with the Adlersparre faction, which
had secured his election, but he avoided its more obvious attempts to dominate
him. Before long he also managed to gain the respect of leading Gustavians.
   At first the new crown prince continued to hope for a constitutional Scan¬
dinavian union. Since he was still a bachelor, he envisioned his possible future
abdication of the Swedish crown in favor of the king of Denmark, in return for
a liberal constitution or constitutions for all of Scandinavia. Frederik VI mean-
