                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   305

restoring the legitimate succession. Significantly, they were able to gain support
among some of the more radical members of the Peasant Estate, who had suf¬
fered defeat over the land taxation issue in June 1809. For the “Men of 1809,”
alarmed by vague reports from informers, this revived the old specter of a union
between the crown and the populace, still vivid in memory from 1788-89 and
with antecedents stretching far back into Sweden’s past.
   There were meanwhile intimations of what such a coup could mean in socio¬
political terms. Already in June 1809 Baron Maclean had proposed the abolition
of the clause in the new constitution requiring the assent of all four Estates to
changes affecting corporate privileges. It was largely through De La Gardie’s
initiative that the uniform progressive income tax was established.
   On 13 January 1810 De La Gardie hurled a bombshell at his rivals by pro¬
posing in the Noble Estate that his peers renounce all their remaining privileges
providing the other Estates did likewise, that all land be reassessed and taxed
on an equal basis, and that a more modern and equitable system of representation
be adopted in the Riksdag. The “Men of 1809” counterattacked bitterly, both
in the Riksdag and through personal slander. De La Gardie was denounced for
his “aristocratic-demagogic” spirit and compared with the “deserter” Count
Mathieu de Montmorency, who in 1789 had so lightheartedly renounced for his
Estate the privileges of the French noblesse.58 The constitutional committee
refused to consider the proposal after A. G. Silfverstolpe demonstrated to its
satisfaction that virtually all surviving privileges were now property rights,
accessible to all citizens. The Clerical and Burgher Estates revealed a marked
reluctance to surrender their established privileges and the Peasant Estate was
fearful that a new assessment might increase its tax burden.
   The intended Gustavian-royalist coup d’etat was planned for 13 March 1809,
the anniversary of the revolution of the preceding year. But at the last moment
the sickly and indecisive Karl XIII lost his nerve.
   Representational reform had been under consideration since the spring of
1809 by the Constitutional Committee, which received numerous proposals: for
enlarging the existing Estates, for adding a fifth Estate, for devising an entirely
new system. The matter seemed pressing. Petitions to the committee pointed out
that in 1809 some 70,000 “nonnoble persons of quality” (ofralse standsper-
soner) lived in Sweden proper; although more numerous than any of the three
higher Estates and accounting for a sixth of the regular taxation, this group was
debarred from membership in any of the Estates. In addition, a half million
others, including soldiers, miners, and nonagricultural laborers, lay outside the
existing Estates system.59 Individual Estates undertook some reforms on their
own initiative. The Nobility abolished the three-class voting procedure estab¬
lished by Gustav III in 1778, restoring the “noble democracy” of the Era of
Freedom. The Peasantry now admitted certain categories of “gentlemen far-
