 312      THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 one of his own marshals, Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte, Prince of Ponte Corvo,
 revealed surprisingly that he had been urged to stand as a candidate for the
 Swedish succession.
    The election of a new crown prince called for a special riksdag, convened
 in July in Orebro. Frederik VI at first hesitated to advance his candidacy in
 Sweden. Thus no official Danish measures were taken in that regard before the
beginning of July, when Count Rosenkrantz returned from Paris to replace
Christian Bernstorff as foreign minister. Believing Napoleon’s goodwill to be
assured, Rosenkrantz initiated a vigorous campaign to secure his king’s election
as Swedish crown prince. Ernst Schimmelmann and Frederik Moltke, with a
number of pro-Scandinavianist literati in Denmark, wrote pamphlets—generally
under pseudonyms—to persuade their Swedish brethren that a Scandinavian
union was essential to their future security, prosperity, and happiness, using
arguments recalling the “Balloon Proclamation’’ of 1809 and anticipating al¬
most all the traditional Scandinavianist ideas of the nineteenth century.1 At last
on 18 July Frederik VI wrote to Karl XIII, formally proposing his candidacy.
Count Dernath sought support on the Swedish state council, making it known
that his monarch was prepared to accept the Swedish constitution of 1809 for
Sweden, although not for Denmark or Norway. Prominent Danish aristocrats
and men of letters toured Sweden to arouse enthusiasm among their respective
peers.
    Reactions in Sweden were, however, mainly negative or indifferent. The
 Swedes retained bitter memories of the medieval Kalmar Union, mistrusted
Danish absolutism, feared economic and cultural domination and the eclipse of
Stockholm by Copenhagen. The recent war had revived old prejudices against
the perfidious Jute. Danish and Norwegian privateers continued to prey on
Swedish vessels trying to run the Continental Blockade. While union with Nor¬
way would clearly strengthen Sweden, there were fears that Denmark, espe¬
cially Jutland and the duchies, would prove a strategic liability. Since the pre¬
ceding year, the person of Frederik VI had become distasteful to most politically
conscious Swedes; to many he seemed, in Lolo Krusius-Ahrenberg’s words, “a
Gustav IV Adolf in Danish guise.’’2 A way out of this dilemma appeared to some
to be the election of Frederik’s cousin and heir presumptive, the young Prince
Christian Frederik, but Frederik Vi’s own announced candidacy stood in the
way.
    On 10 August the Secret Committee of the Estates, charged with nominating
a successor, endorsed the Duke of Augustenburg, who despite strained relations
with Frederik VI had himself shown interest in a greater Scandinavia and made
references to a union along the lines conceived by his brother, Karl August, that
is, one endowed with a common, liberal constitution. He pointedly told Frederik
VI that he saw little chance of his election and that he himself would not refuse
the Swedish crown from a “higher hand.’’3 Frederik became increasingly
