                                 INTO THE MAELSTROM, 1807-10                   309

    own ports will be blockaded or all other ports will be closed to us, depend¬
    ing upon the political course we take.64

In the event, Sweden suffered from the latter consequences, Denmark from the
former. Faced with similar dilemmas, the remaining neutrals, Portugal and the
United States, would likewise soon be drawn into the fray.
    The war led to a de facto decentralization of power in both Nordic kingdoms,
following periods in which personal autocracy had reached its height. In Sweden
military defeat resulted in the loss of the eastern third of the realm, which now
for the tirst time became self-governing, as well as in a new constitution for
Sweden proper which imposed a system of checks and balances. The attempt to
incorporate Swedish Pomerania directly into the kingdom was frustrated by its
occupation by the French in 1807-10. In the Danish monarchy, Frederik VI at
last dispensed with his state council, but he was forced to grant a wide measure
of local initiative to officials in his outlying domains, particularly Norway, and
largely to suspend his efforts to integrate the duchies. In Finland, Norway, and
even Iceland, under the strains of war members of the local elites now found
themselves prepared to think the unthinkable: of a national destiny separate from
the old metropolises.
    Gustav IV Adolf and Frederik VI were enemies by 1808, each bent on the
conquest of territory from the other. Yet in personality and attitudes Gustav IV
Adolf surely resembled his older Danish cousin, Frederik VI, more than he did
his father, Gustav III. He was hardly the “charmer king” Gustav III had been,
and he did nothing to gain for posterity the gratitude and praise of courtiers,
artists, and literati. After the revolution of 1809 his reputation was systematic¬
ally blackened by Sweden’s new masters.65
    Still, there is more to a reign than the personality of the monarch, and there
remains a basic unity to the Gustavian period, particularly with respect to
Sweden’s social and economic development from 1789 on. Gustav IV Adolf was
in effect the executor of Gustav Ill’s Act of Union and Security and Charter of
the Rights and Liberties of the Swedish and Finnish Peasantry of 1789. Through
his practical, pragmatic internal reforms, his reign went in significant respects
beyond his father’s.66
    Gustav IV Adolfs sobriety, thrift, personal piety, sense of justice, mistrust
for the old aristocracy, and concern for his humbler subjects were surely more
to the taste of the broader masses than Gustav Ill’s often exotic ways, and indeed
their affection for him largely survived the essentially oligarchic revolution of
1809. Again, these are qualities that recall Frederik VI.
    If Gustav IV Adolf’s mismanagement of the war led to his deposition in
March 1809, in the long run Frederik Vi’s wartime leadership in Denmark
would result in even greater national calamities. But in Denmark the absolute
monarchy was far more solidly entrenched than Gustav IV Adolf’s makeshift
autocracy in Sweden, the aristocracy had long since ceased to be a political
