 318       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 tently did he hold to it? Clear answers can hardly be expected. Torvald Hojer
 and Sten Carlsson, for instance, tend to stress his opportunistic turns and shifts
 in response to changing circumstances, whereas Sam Clason, Jorgen Weibull,
 and Paivio Tommila emphasize the early beginnings and underlying consistency
 of Karl Johan’s foreign policy.17
     Much can be said for both views. As early as November 1806, Bernadotte
 allegedly told a Swedish officer taken prisoner at Liibeck that it was unnatural
 for Norway to belong to Denmark and that it ought rightfully to be annexed to
 the Swedish king’s domains. Lagerbjelke reported from Paris in August 1810
 that he was aware the marshal had spoken to Napoleon about Norway.18 Berna¬
dotte was at that very time passing on to Alexander I assurances of his goodwill
and apparent disinclination to regain Finland, through Colonel I. A. Chernychev
in Paris, and indeed the tsar, unlike many of his advisers, showed remarkable
equanimity over Bernadotte’s election. Considering, however, the strength of
revanchiste sentiment in Sweden and its importance in his election, the new
crown prince could scarcely reveal prematurely the idea of so startling a reversal
of policy. As long as France and Russia remained at peace, there was moreover
always the chance they might reconcile their differences, leaving Sweden ex¬
posed, and until they actually came to blows it would be impossible to judge the
relative likelihood of victory for either side. To be sure, the advantages of gain¬
ing Norway were manifest. But for a self-made prince there were even greater
concerns at stake. A striking triumph would consolidate his position in his
adopted land. More essential still, however the great power contest should end,
was that he should be on the winning side. His political survival and that of his
dynasty depended upon biding the right moment for action and keeping his
options open.
     Bernadotte had scarcely arrived in Stockholm before he was faced with a
 serious challenge from his former master. Sweden had undertaken in the peace
 treaties of Fredrikshamn and Paris, in September 1809 and January 1810, to
 adhere to the Continental System, but this commitment had been honored mainly
 in the breach. Despite initial fears, Britain had not retaliated. Admiral Sir James
 Saumarez, dispatched to Northern waters in March 1810 with instructions to act
 according to circumstances, avoided provocation and helped the Swedes to carry
 on business as usual. Although officially blockading Sweden, he established
 covert relations with local officials, of which Stockholm remained officially
 ignorant, and his ships quietly provisioned along the Swedish coast, to the profit
of its inhabitants. As long as Swedish ships flew a neutral flag-usually the
American —their origins were not questioned and licenses were required only if
they were trading with the Continent. Swedish vessels from the Baltic even
sailed in British convoys, while British exporters often transported goods for
Baltic destinations overland across Sweden to avoid Danish privateers. Swedish
imports from Britain thus amounted in 1810 to nearly 7,000,000 riksdaler in
