                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                319

value, to which may be added around 2,000,000 riksdaler in imports from the
United States, mostly destined for reexport to the Continent. The same year
Sweden sent some 3,750,000 riksdaler in exports to Pomerania and other
German destinations alone.19
    Napoleon was determined to apply the Continental Blockade with maximum
effect and thus to prevent violations in northern Europe. During the summer of
 1810 he annexed directly to France both Holland and the north German coast
as far as Liibeck. This established a land frontier with Denmark, largely ending
the profitable smuggling trade from Holstein. On 13 November a French ulti¬
matum reached Stockholm, demanding that Sweden declare war on Britain,
together with notification of Karl Johan’s forfeiture of his continental appanages
as Prince of Ponte Corvo. Napoleon clearly sought to force his brother-in-law’s
hand and commit him publicly to the French camp before he had any chance to
strike out on any independent line of his own. Under the circumstances, Sweden
could only accede. The new crown prince, however, declined to play any part
in the decision, while protesting to the French minister and assuring the council
that although bom French, he was now “Swedish in heart and soul.’’20
    London was naturally apprehensive at the election of a French marshal to the
Swedish succession, which in turn aroused fears in Sweden. Yet nothing was
to be gained on either side by active hostilities. By treating the state of war as
a mere formality, it still proved possible to carry on no small amount of contra¬
band trade in quiet agreement with Admiral Saumarez.21
    Already in February 1811—even before becoming regent—Karl Johan
entered into secret negotiations with Napoleon for an alliance in return for sub¬
sidies and increased territory, above all in Norway. The emperor categorically
opposed such an arrangement. The Swedes, he took for granted, must naturally
desire revenge against Russia, the Finns to rejoin Sweden, and the Russians to
prevent a Norwegian-Swedish union. Once the crisis in Franco-Russian relations
of the spring of 1811 had passed, he let the matter drop.
   The reasons for these negotiations remain obscure.22 Yet from Karl Johan’s
standpoint they could for the time being reassure revanchiste sentiment in
Sweden, while giving Napoleon notice of his primary objective—the acquisition
of Norway—and of his determination to pursue an independent policy. He prob¬
ably neither expected nor perhaps even hoped the emperor would accept his
proposal; it could later be evoked as evidence of his desire for good relations,
and its rejection could subsequently be blamed on France. Not least, Karl Johan
gained valuable time to follow developments on the European scene and quietly
prepare opinion for a change of course.
   He meanwhile kept his line open to St. Petersburg. By the fall of 1810 the
Russian government began seriously to consider the Norwegian question, seeing
a real need to compensate Sweden for Finland. Already in December Colonel
Chernychev turned up in Stockholm, where he apparently encouraged Karl
