  316      THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

     Upon first meeting the new crown prince, Gustav Ill’s dowager queen,
  Sophia Magdalena, is said to have exclaimed, “He is marvelously like the late
  king. 12 Indeed, Karl Johan’s similarity to Gustav III is in many ways as striking
 as it was unexpected. He had, to be sure, been an enthusiastic enough supporter
 of the revolution that had opened his way to advancement: in 1798 Axel von
 Fersen had called him “one of the raging Jacobins,’’ and to his dying day he
 reputedly bore on his chest the tattoo, “Mort a roi [sic].”13 Yet before his arrival
 in Sweden he had evolved into a firm upholder of the existing social order. Four
 days before his election in Orebro, Hans Jarta wrote, with clear allusion to
 young Carl Otto Morner, “What most appeals to me is the conviction that under
 him, more than any other, lieutenants will remain lieutenants.”14 Grevesmohlen
 and his fellow radicals who had labored covertly for his election received scant
 reward. Nor did Karl Johan seek or find support primarily among the Men of
 1809. Instead he relied from the start upon tried and true officials from the
 Gustavian era to implement what would in time prove to be essentially Gustavian
 policies.
    Like Gustav III, he was a consummate political opportunist who whenever
possible kept several irons in the fire. Though voluble, often in the extreme, his
utterances could on occasion be both misleading and bewilderingly inconsistent.
His innermost thoughts he kept to himself, and unlike Gustav III he was not
given to putting on paper general statements of political philosophy. His temper
was mercurial, although behind his celebrated “gasconnades” one could fre¬
quently perceive well-timed, calculated dramatic effects. He had a sure sense for
the telling gesture and the uses of propaganda, produced for him by hired
pens-including Grevesmohlen. For these reasons, interpretation of Karl Johan’s
motives and intentions must be based largely upon conjecture-essentially upon
deeds more than words - leaving ample room for controversy on almost every
significant point.                                                              J
     What is indisputable is that Karl Johan assumed a commanding position al¬
 most from the moment he arrived in Stockholm. With tact and deference, he
 quickly overcame the misgivings of King Karl and Queen Charlotta over' his
 common origins and checkered past, while his forcefiil personality overshad¬
owed both the aging monarch and his ministers. When Karl XIII was incapaci¬
tated by a stroke less than four months later, in March 1811, Karl Johan declared
himself regent, disregarding the constitution of 1809 which conferred such
powers on the council. This action would be symptomatic of his tendency in fol¬
lowing years to adjust the constitution to his own needs—again recalling Gustav
III. Although the regency ended officially in January 1812, Karl Johan remained
Sweden s real ruler; in this respect his accession to the throne as Karl XIV Johan
in 1818 simply confirmed the position he had long held.
   In no respect has there been greater controversy than over Karl Johan’s for¬
eign policy. His election had been fervently supported and enthusiastically wel-
