                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                315

   The Fersen Riot in Stockholm marked the beginning of a long era of political
reaction in early nineteenth-century Sweden, as would become evident soon
enough. On a smaller scale, it recalls the pivotal impact of the Gordon Riots in
London, twenty years earlier, upon British political opinion.
    The invitation to seek the Swedish succession reached Bernadotte in most
irregular fashion. A young officer, Lieutenant Count Carl Otto Morner, sent to
Paris with the message that his government intended to back Duke Friedrich
Christian, obtained a private meeting with Bernadotte on 25 June and proposed
that he should be Sweden's next crown prince. Ostensibly Morner was acting
on his own, yet he had influential connections at home. He was promptly joined
in his representations to the French marshal by General Fabian Wrede, also in
Paris at that juncture.
    The offer was clearly made in the firm belief that Bernadotte enjoyed the full
confidence of the emperor Napoleon, his brother-in-law. In actuality, relations
between them were never cordial and frequently strained. A vehement dispute
between them during the Austrian campaign in July 1809 had led to Bernadotte’s
return to Paris in disgrace. Still, the day after Lieutenant Morner’s visit, Berna¬
dotte informed Napoleon of the offer made him and asked permission to accept
it. The emperor did not refuse, but he made no direct effort to support Berna¬
dotte’s candidacy.
    There has been much speculation about Napoleon’s actual views on the
 Swedish succession in 1810.8 It seems, however, reasonable to accept Baron
 Lagerbjelke’s opinion that Napoleon could not openly back Bernadotte lest he
 prematurely alarm the Russians.9 While a more or less unified Scandinavia
under Frederik VI or Duke Friedrich Christian might prove an asset if allied
with France, neither was an effective military leader. A divided North might
more easily be dominated. Napoleon may have been under no illusions regarding
Bernadotte’s loyalty to his person, but he surely counted on his patriotism toward
France and on Sweden’s natural revanchisme toward Russia. To the Austrian
ambassador, Prince Metternich, he said, “If the Swedes take a [French] marshal
as their king, it will be to reconquer Finland; if they choose the Prince [sic] of
Augustenburg, they will devote themselves to peace.” To which he added, soon
after, that Bernadotte was a “good soldier,” but lacked “any talent for ruling.”10
He thus seems to have been confident that the ex-marshal would be a tractable
satrap and Sweden a dependable adjunct to the Grand Empire, even though he
considered extracting a promise from Bernadotte that he would never bear arms
against France, when the latter departed for Stockholm at the end of
September.11
    Arriving in Helsingor, Bernadotte was received into the Lutheran faith on 19
October 1810, before setting foot for the first time on the soil of his new patri¬
mony the following day. He entered Stockholm on 2 November and three days
later was proclaimed Karl XIII’s adopted son under the name Karl Johan.
