                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               317

comed by those in Sweden who saw in him Finland’s redeemer. It was increas¬
ingly evident that the Tilsit alliance would sooner or later break down, offering
Sweden its chance to recover its ancient eastern domain.
   This prospect aroused considerable concern, not only in Russia but among
those in Finland who found it beneficial to come to terms with the new order
in their land and who had compromised themselves by doing so. Their alarm
was increased by the knowledge that many Finns still regarded Sweden as the
true fatherland. Throughout 1810-11 there were rumors of pro-Swedish con¬
spiracies.
    Bernadotte’s election, however, presented another possibility. “If ever our
greatest political concern, Norway’s union with Sweden, can be realized,”
wrote Gustaf Lagerbjelke to Karl XIII already on 17 August, “it will be through
a French prince.”15 The Danish minister to St. Petersburg quickly sensed this
danger and warned his government of it. Prince Christian Frederik, the Danish
successor, saw his country faced with a “great fight for life or death” and pro¬
posed grandiose plans for invading Sweden to create a Nordic union by force.16
Frederik VI and his foreign minister, Rosenkrantz, were at first not much im¬
pressed. Frederik assumed Bemadotte to be, like himself, firmly in Napoleon’s
camp and received the marshal cordially in Copenhagen on his way to Sweden.
    During the two years following Bernadotte’s election there would emerge the
outlines of a new foreign policy for Sweden. What came to be called the “Policy
of 1812” meant accepting the loss of Finland with Norway as compensation, to
be obtained in alliance with Russia and Great Britain against France and Den¬
mark. The acquisition of Norway—although not the ultimate relinquishment of
Finland—was of course a long-standing Swedish aspiration, cherished by both
Gustav III and Gustav IV Adolf, and most recently championed by Georg Ad-
lersparre and his friends in 1809. At Fredrikshamn, the Russian peace negoti¬
ators had moreover hinted in September 1809 that Sweden might find compensa¬
tion for Finland in Norway.
    As a foreigner, Bemadotte had no sentimental attachment to Finland, while
as a hardheaded soldier-statesman of the French revolutionary school he could
not but be impressed by the plain facts of geography: Finland would be hard to
reconquer and harder to retain, whereas Norway, easier to acquire, would
ensure Sweden’s security within natural frontiers. Knowing Napoleon’s Grand
Empire from within, he was surely less certain than most Swedes or Danes of
its ultimate survival. To tie himself to France to reconquer Finland would keep
him Napoleon’s vassal; an alliance with Russia and Britain, and the acquisition
of Norway, would give both Sweden and himself greater strength and indepen¬
dence in the European arena.
    Significant questions nonetheless remain. At what point did Bemadotte first
conceive the “Policy of 1812”? When did he, at least in his own mind, commit
himself to it? How firm was this commitment at any given point? How consis-
