                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               321

immediate Swedish military aid to Russia in return for a temporary Swedish
occupation of Finland, as a gage for Sweden’s future acquisition of Norway, and
perhaps the cession of the Aland Islands. Alexander rejected this proposal, as
Karl Johan surely expected. They meanwhile discussed an idea urged upon the
tsar by the ubiquitous Mme. de Stael, which the crown prince must already have
contemplated: that Karl Johan might become France’s new ruler following
Napoleon’s defeat.23
   The secret Swedish-Russian agreement signed in Abo on 30 August 1812
amplified the St. Petersburg treaty of five months earlier, calling for a joint
expedition against Sjaelland, now to include 35,000 Russians, to obtain for
Sweden not only Norway but Sjaelland and Bornholm, the keys to the Baltic, for
which Denmark was to receive compensation in northern Germany; thereafter,
Sweden would join the war against France. It also included a family pact, requir¬
ing both parties to oppose any attempt by a third power to disturb the security
or tranquillity of each others’ domains.
   The Abo meeting failed, not surprisingly, to bring about a speedy attack on
Denmark. Russia was naturally unprepared to spare troops for such a venture
while fighting for survival, as Alexander officially informed Karl Johan after
the French occupied Moscow a fortnight later. Karl Johan’s gains at Abo were
less direct. He was able to maintain and through personal contact to strengthen
his alliance with Alexander I, while postponing direct Swedish involvement
before the outcome of the war in Russia became clear. A new factor involved
was a desire to delay or minimize open war with France to protect his
popularity there against the day when he might conceivably be called to its
throne. Meanwhile, the family pact at Abo gave Karl Johan’s succession in
Sweden the indispensable backing of a great European power. It would be upon
this rock that the survival of his dynasty and forty years of Swedish-Russian
amity would be based. Russia also remained committed in principle to Sweden’s
acquisition of Norway.
    For his part, Alexander was reassured of Finland’s security, permitting him
to send the Russian forces assembled there to the relief of Riga, while simply
by meeting with him at this juncture Karl Johan sufficiently compromised him¬
self to bar any future return to the Napoleonic camp.
    During the fall of 1812 Sweden made military preparations, arousing fears
in Denmark and some dissatisfaction at home, since they were costly but led
nowhere. Very likely they were intended largely to demonstrate to St. Peters¬
burg Sweden’s seriousness about the Norwegian project and to London its need
for subsidies.
   It may be asked whether Karl Johan did not lose his most favorable opportu¬
nity to seize Norway on his own terms that fall, even without Russian support,
for with the French retreat from Moscow and the Russian advance into northern
Germany by early 1813, Sweden quickly lost much of its strategic value to both
