 320       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 Johan in this hope. The lead thus provided was not immediately followed up
 while the crown prince pursued his negotiation with France, but thereafter rela¬
 tions became increasingly cordial beween Russia and Sweden in the fall of 1811.
 By the turn of the year the Russian charge d’affaires in Stockholm was instructed
 to explore the possibility of a Russo-Swedish alliance.
    At this point Napoleon played into Karl Johan’s hands. In January 1812,
 incensed over continued Swedish evasions of the Continental System, he occu¬
 pied Swedish Pomerania and sent its captured garrison as prisoners of war to
 France. This aroused a wave of indignation throughout Sweden, clearing the
 way for a reversal of policy. Karl Johan lost no time in negotiating with Russia
 and declaring Sweden’s neutrality in the Anglo-French conflict. His position was
 further strengthened when Denmark concluded a new alliance treaty with France
 on 3 March 1812, placing at Napoleon’s disposal a force of 10,000 men for use
 in Northern Germany.
    On 5 April a secret Swedish-Russian treaty was signed in St. Petersburg, by
 which Alexander I undertook to obtain Norway for Sweden through negotiation
 or force, providing in the latter case 15-20,000 men and naval forces for the
purpose, after which Karl Johan, at the head of this force augmented by
25-30,000 Swedes, would undertake a diversion against the French in northern
Germany. The treaty likewise contained a mutual guarantee of both powers’
existing territories. For Sweden this meant nothing less than a formal renuncia¬
tion of Finland. Napoleon sought in March to offer Karl Johan the return of Fin¬
land if Sweden joined him against Russia, which simply strengthened the crown
prince’s hand vis-a-vis St. Petersburg and London. In June 1812 Britain con¬
cluded peace with both Sweden and Russia in Orebro. But Karl Johan prudently
did not sever connections with Paris until the Grand Army invaded Russia the
same month.
   Sweden and Russia prepared to attack Sjaelland in the spring of 1812, causing
alarm in Denmark and relief in upper-class circles in Finland. A sizable Russian
army was assembled in Finland by the time the French crossed the Niemen, but
the Swedes were still not ready to act. Yet more than practical logistical prob¬
lems would seem to have delayed the project. For the Russians, a Scandinavian
diversion could be hazardous in the face of imminent French attack. Karl Johan
was surely not anxious to break with France before Alexander did and must have
wished to assure himself of the probable outcome of the Franco-Russian contest
before irrevocably committing himself. In the meantime he reactivated Adler-
sparres propaganda and intelligence network in Norway.
    As the Grand Army plunged deep into Russia, Sweden’s goodwill became
increasingly vital to Alexander I, who in August arranged a personal meeting
with Karl Johan in Finland. Their conversations, held in Abo, were mainly tete-
a-tete and unrecorded, but significant details emerge. Alexander offered Karl
Johan command of a Russian field army. The latter countered by proposing
