                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                323

among the vanquished,” whereas “Danes and Norwegians comprised a single
nation.”25 Negotiations broke down.
   A curious incident suddenly threatened to upset the calculations of all parties.
In May the French counterattacked toward Hamburg, which was then occupied
by a Danish force whose commander, uncertain of his government’s position,
prepared to defend the city and appealed to the Swedish commander in Pomer¬
ania for support. A small Swedish force set forth before being furiously recalled
by Karl Johan, who arrived in Pomerania on 17 May to take personal command.
On 10 June 1813 Denmark concluded a new alliance treaty with France, provid¬
ing an auxiliary corps of 12,500 men in northern Germany.
   Although the immediate threat to Karl Johan’s policy had passed, he found
himself compelled to give ground on important points. Transferring the main
Swedish army to northern Germany meant abandoning a landing on Sjaelland and
hence the possibility of acquiring that island and Bornholm, along with Norway,
as envisioned at the Abo meeting. Denmark would have to be attacked through
the duchies and Jutland. Soon after his arrival in Germany, however, the British
and Russians made it clear the Karl Johan would have to join the campaign
against the French without further delay, postponing the solution of the Nor¬
wegian question.
    On 4 June Russia and Prussia without warning concluded an armistice with
France, followed by negotiations for a compromise peace. At last fully com¬
mitted to enter the fray and thus compromised on all sides, Karl Johan found
himself dangerously exposed. He was now prepared to limit his demands to
Trondheim Stift, together with gages in northern Germany which he contem¬
plated retaining if he could not later acquire the rest of Norway.26 Frederik VI
naturally stood fast. Austria sought to mediate between France and the allies,
and Austria was known to be pro-Danish. After a year, Karl Johan’s ‘‘Policy
of 1812” lay in apparent ruin and was subject to growing criticism in Sweden.
Worse still, he was haunted by the recurrent specter of a new ‘‘Tilsit” at Swe¬
den’s expense. His very political existence seemed to hang in the balance.
    Karl Johan nevertheless still had his battlefield experience and inside knowl¬
edge of Napoleonic strategy. When the peace negotiations led nowhere and
Britain pushed for resumption of the war, the Russian and Prussian monarchs
invited him to Trachenburg in Silesia on 9-12 July to consider strategy. The plan
adopted was mainly Karl Johan’s and placed him at the head of the allied North¬
ern Army, consisting of 158,000 Russians, Prussians, and Swedes. The armi¬
stice ended on 10 August, and Austria joined the coalition two days later.
    The Northern Army played a decisive role in the ensuing campaign, leading
up to the defeat of the French at Leipzig on 16-19 October. Karl Johan’s sparing
use of his own Swedish troops meanwhile caused much bitterness among his
allied subordinates. During the entire German campaign of 1813, Sweden lost
