 322       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 Russia and Britain, depriving Karl Johan of much of the leverage upon which
 his “Policy of 1812“ was predicated. His position was moreover morally equiv¬
 ocal, for while other powers fought to regain what they had lost, he was pre¬
 pared only to fight to gain a land Sweden had never possessed. He now faced
 a hard dilemma: to join the allies in the war would brand him as a traitor to his
 native land, diminishing his chances for the French throne; to fail to do so would
 cost him the support of the allies, the chance to gain Norway, and probably the
 insecure Swedish crown itself. By the winter of 1813 a Swedish army of 30,000
 men began to assemble in Swedish Pomerania, evacuated by the retreating
 French.
     Karl Johan’s anxieties greatly increased when the allies around the turn of the
 year began making discreet overtures to Denmark, whose strategic importance
 waxed as Sweden s waned. Opinion in Denmark had become increasingly skep¬
 tical of the French alliance during 1812 as the Swedish threat to Norway became
 apparent. On 19 September 1812 the Norwegian-born foreign minister, Niels
 Rosenkrantz, alarmed by armaments across the Sound, had urged that only by
 breaking with Napoleon and joining the allies might Denmark be saved from
 being stricken from the number of independent states, for nothing less is at
stake.” Frederik VI had then remained firm. The French, he replied, would in
such a case surely occupy the duchies and Jutland, and Norway would be lost
should it become dependent upon other sources of provisionment outside the
monarchy. “Sjaelland would, perhaps, be all I would have left.’’ Moreover,
honor demanded that he stand by his ally.24 Napoleon’s crushing defeat in Russia
by the end of the year nonetheless caused him to waver, and he did not reject
the allies’ approaches in early 1813.
     The success of Karl Johan’s grand design depended above all upon keeping
  Denmark in the enemy camp. On 3 March 1813 he scored a crucial success with
  the conclusion in London of an Anglo-Swedish alliance treaty. In return for
  Sweden’s participation in the war against “common enemies” with at least
 30,000 men, Britain would provide diplomatic and naval support for the acquisi¬
 tion of Norway, a subsidy of 1,000,000 pounds, and the French West Indian
 island of Guadeloupe. At this point the allies crossed their signals, for on 22
 March Prince Sergei Dolgoruki, a confidant of the tsar, arrived in Copenhagen,
 where he intimated that Russia would not press for Sweden's accession of Nor¬
 way if Denmark joined the coalition. Frederik VI was persuaded to send envoys
 to London and St. Petersburg. As he got wind of these developments, Karl Johan
protested furiously and broke diplomatic relations with Denmark on 21 April.
Tsar Alexander recalled Dolgoruki and disavowed his actions. St. Petersburg
and London would now only offer Frederik VI compensation for Norway in
Germany or Holland. This, the Danish envoy explained to the tsar, would make
the Danish king “a Dutch or German prince. ... The victors would be lost
