 314       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 Swedish circles in a Napoleonic marshal as the new successor. In particular,
 some of the younger military officers of progressive views sought for a military
 leader of proven capabilities and on close terms with Napoleon to avenge the
 recent defeat by Russia and recapture Finland. Certain academics and radicals
 in Uppsala and Stockholm hoped that a crowned Jacobin would level the last
 vestiges of aristocratic privilege. Although much of the background to the Fer-
 sen Riot of June 1810 remains obscure, it is apparent that C. A. Grevesmohlen
 and his friends hoped through it to clear the way for the election of a French
marshal. An article in Nya Posten, probably by Grevesmohlen, in October
acclaimed Bernadotte s election as “in actuality a greater revolution than that
which took place on 13 March 1809,’ which would end “aristocratic oppres¬
sion, which of all forms is that which the Swedish people can least endure.”6
Of the French marshals, none was better known than Bernadotte, whose martial
skills and qualities of leadership stood in striking contrast to both the pedantic
Frederik VI and the schoolmasterish Duke Friedrich Christian.
    Once Bernadotte’s candidacy became known at the Orebro Riksdag, he
appeared to many in a new light as the strong-willed man of order who alone
could restore discipline to a society badly shaken by the recent Fersen Riot. A
few days after that event. Count Dernath wrote to Copenhagen:
   The crime committed has opened the eyes of those thoughtless men who
   give encouragement to a dangerous delusion but who are far from wishing
   the overthrow of the social order. They have drawn closer than ever to the
   government.

Gustav Lagerbjelke wrote to Karl XIII from Paris in July that Providence itself
seemed to have permitted this “deplorable event,” to provide “a government,
as firm as it is enlightened, the opportunity and justification for developing that
power, authority, and indeed that salutory severity the general good unfailingly
demands.” Count Trolle-Wachtmeister, who himself had been something of a
“Jacobin” in his day, later recalled how the tumult had given a horrifying
glimpse into the abyss of social dissolution:

  The weak government could not possibly have held in check the parties
  already then emerging, which, through their dissension opened the way
  for a democratic or anarchical league, to which a Gustavian faction had
  attached itself, which would have stirred up popular uprisings, after which
  we would perhaps in the end have seen the Russians come to put an end
  to anarchy and civil war. . . . All, despite their differing views, came
  [to Orebro in 1810] determined, in electing a successor, to unite around
  a person who could protect them against popular revolution and who was
  strong enough to prevent anarchy. All party interests made way for the
  personal concern not to be killed in the open street.7
