                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               333

tively suspending the state council, which ceased to meet. During the next five
years the king exercised a Kabinettsregiment reminiscent of the Struensee and
Guldberg eras. In the crisis caused by the Swedish attack and demand for the
cession of Norway in December 1813, however, Frederik called together a
  council of good men” (“de Gode mcends rad"), presaging the end of the long
trend toward personal autocracy. From April 1814, the state council again met
regularly and the king abandoned direct intervention in government affairs
through cabinet orders. Counts C. D. Reventlow and Ernst Schimmelmann
remained on from the old council; the former no longer participated much, but
Schimmelmann remained active until his death in 1831. Its dominating members
were meanwhile the new men of recent years, stout Danes, competent and
obedient bureaucrats, men not unlike the former Gustavian functionaries sur¬
rounding Karl Johan in Sweden. The day of the reforming cosmopolitan grands
seigneurs was now past.
     The Peace of Jonkoping with Sweden and the permitting of Norwegian li¬
 censed trading with Britain in the fall of 1809 had for the time being reestab¬
 lished more or less normal communications across the Skagerrak and ended,
 almost miraculously, Norway’s threatening crisis of that year. Through Prince
 Christian August’s successor in Christiania, Prince Frederik of Hesse, the
 Copenhagen government lost no time in dissolving the emergency Government
 Commission set up in 1808, and in reasserting its traditional policy of centrali¬
 zation. “Everything,” the king instructed him, “that does not contribute to the
 closest relationship and union of the entire monarchy must go.”45
     That such a situation could no longer satisfy Norway’s upper classes was
 soon demonstrated by a revival of the old demand for a separate Norwegian
university, which quickly turned into a demonstration of popular sentiment. The
matter had been raised by Count Wedel and his friends in connection with the
organization of the Society for Norway’s Welfare in December 1809. One of
its first acts was to sponsor an essay contest on the university question, won by
Nicolai Wergeland, who spoke of Denmark as though it were a foreign land.
In April 1810 Frederik VI announced that an academic institution would be
established at the existing school of mines in Kongsberg, allowing students to
complete their arts (artiurri) degree in Norway. This was both too little and too
late, particularly since Wedel and others who still aspired to a constitution and
union with Sweden were deliberately exploiting the issue to mobilize opinion in
Norway. In June 1810 supporters of a true university began collecting voluntary
contributions toward its establishment; within two years this campaign brought
in some 781,000 rigsdaler, plus quantities of grain.46
    Early in 1811 Frederik VI commanded Wedel to appear before him in Copen¬
hagen, evidently hoping to regain his support. What was said at their meeting
on 1 March is not known, but doubtless dealt largely with the university ques-
