 332       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 who could afford it were permitted to educate their children at home through
 private tutors or in private schools, subject to suitable controls.
    In sum, the ordinances of 1814 were the decisive step toward the progressive
 enlightenment of the broader masses. They established the first comprehensive
 system of public education in Scandinavia—Sweden would follow suit in 1842,
 Norway in 1860, and Finland in 1865—and one of the earliest in the Western
 world. The higher, or Latin, schools and the universities in Copenhagen and
 Kiel meanwhile remained unconnected with the new system, and from the mid¬
 eighteenth until well into the nineteenth century the number of university stu¬
 dents of peasant or artisan background declined in Denmark and Norway, in
 contrast to Sweden, where their proportion rose from the 1780s on.43
    It has been seen that Denmark’s small Jewish community had, since the
 1790s, gradually been freed from numerous old restrictions, both legal and
 customary. A government commission had recommended in 1796 that the Jews,
 who hitherto had largely managed their own affairs, be made fully subject to
 Danish law, except where it pertained to the Christian religion.
    Owing largely to divisions within the Jewish community itself, the govern¬
ment put off taking action. The legal emancipation of the Jews in France in 1791
and in French-dominated Holland, Italy, and western Germany in 1796 mean¬
while encouraged a formal resolution of the matter. Napoleon’s efforts in
 1806-7 to work out a Jewish Concordat” for the Grand Empire aroused fears
in Denmark, as elsewhere, that he sought the allegiance of Jews everywhere.
The Danish government was also apprehensive lest the French initiatives revive
the authority of the rabbis and of Mosaic law.
     Following the so-called Jewish Feud in 1813, when the rising prominence of
 Jews in Copenhagen’s economic life led to overt manifestations of anti-Semitism
 under the impact of widespread distress, the government at last took action. In
 its ordinance of 29 March 1814 it proclaimed the Jews in the kingdom—although
 not yet in the duchies—to possess equal rights with all other subjects, under the
civil law of the land, against which no appeal could be made to Mosaic law; it
also gave the state certain controls over the practice of Judaism, similar to those
it held over both the state church and other Christian religious bodies.44 The
ordinance of 1814 granted in effect official sanction to what was already a virtual
fait accompli, and following generations would witness a steady integration of
Jews into Danish national life. Their full civic equality would be confirmed by
the Danish constitution of 1849. In Norway they would attain comparable status
by 1851 (at which time they were also first permitted to settle in the country),
in Sweden by 1860, and in Finland following independence from tsarist Russia
in 1918.
  Upon acceding to the throne in March 1808, Frederik VI had announced he
would deal directly with the various government departments, thereby effec-
