 328      THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

to their homeland was the old Gustavian Johan Albrekt Ehrenstrdm, an erstwhile
participant in the “Armfelt Conspiracy” of 1793-94, under whose supervision
Finland’s new capital, Helsingfors, would be rebuilt by the 1820s in the neo¬
classical style as a miniature St. Petersburg.
    Finland was finding its place in the new order of things. “Many still believe
they should be Swedes and not Finns, which they confuse with Russians, which
we ought not be except in wishing them all success for our own sake,” com¬
mented Colonel A. F. Palmfelt in 1811. “The emperor wants to make good
Finns of us,” wrote Armfelt that summer, “and in God’s name let us fulfill our
destiny.” To the Swedish charge d’affaires in St. Petersburg in November, the
“dominant spirit” in Finland appeared so “Russian” that it would now be beyond
reason to shed a drop of Swedish blood to recover it. The social realities of the
situation are meanwhile glimpsed in a letter from the old Gustavian J. F.
Aminoff to Armfelt in July 1812:
   On all the better people I think we can surely count, [although] never in
   any land on the common people or mob, especially here, where the weight
   of centuries has attached them to the former overlordship. They are best
   kept in hand with sternness and justice. The Greencoats [Russians] hold
   them best to order and obedience.36

    Denmark’s war with Great Britain dragged on, essentially as a guerre de
course against British merchantmen and Swedish blockade-runners. Privateer¬
ing was temporarily suspended in the summer of 1809, to permit the the provi¬
sioning of Norway, but resumed the following spring. In March 1811 the Danes
vainly attempted to recover the island of Anholt in the Kattegat, which the Brit¬
ish had occupied in 1809, in the last real encounter between Danish and British
forces.
    Although uneventful, the war was ruinous for Denmark. Its fleet was gone,
much of its merchant marine confiscated in enemy ports,.its colonies occupied,
its foreign trade cut off, its sea lanes to Norway and the Atlantic islands largely
severed, its inter-island communications in constant jeopardy. By the spring of
 1811 the smuggling trade through Holstein was largely suppressed, and priva¬
teering became increasingly hazardous and unprofitable. While Norway could
not obtain enough grain, Jutland and the duchies could not dispose of their
surpluses.
   State revenues fell as expenditures increased, and the government—to an
even greater degree than in Sweden—sought to fill the gap by printing unbacked
paper money. Silver and copper currency disappeared from circulation. Already
by 1807 the paper rigsdaler had sunk to a third of its silver value, by 1812 to
a fourteenth.37 That summer a commission was appointed to consider the prob¬
lem. It soon convinced itself that only the most draconian measures would
suffice.
