                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 331

commission lapsed into inactivity. It was thereafter revived mainly by Bishop
Balle, whose influence, with that of Duke Friedrich Christian, now gained
ground.
   The duke expressed his views clearly in a memorandum of April 1802:
   The instruction of the youth in the village schools must aim at developing
   basic human understanding. Everything must be excluded that does not
   contribute to making them upright, sensible country folk, suited for and
   active in their occupations. Any education going beyond the sphere of
   their future activity would be harmful, for it implants the seeds of dissatis¬
   faction with one’s station in life, encourages a restless striving to raise
   one’s lot, creates distaste for physical labor, and becomes the source of
   foolish desires and decisions.40

C. D. Reventlow protested angrily that the duke sought to divide the population
into the “civilized” and the “uncivilized.”41 Yet the latter’s viewpoint reflected
widely held, traditional social apprehensions both at home and abroad. The
educational system adopted provisionally in the islands in 1806 and throughout
the kingdom in 1814 was thus a compromise: in its simplified curriculum it
leaned toward the conservative values of the bishop and the duke, while adapting
to economic austerity; yet in mandating a comprehensive system of compulsory
schooling it realized one of the cornerstones of the whole program of reforms
conceived by the Reventlows and their friends in the 1780s.
    The ordinances issued on 29 July 1814 stated that it was the purpose of popu¬
lar education to make children “good, law-abiding people, in accordance with
the teachings of the evangelical Christian religion, as well as to bring them the
skills and proficiencies which are necessary for them to be useful citizens of the
state.”42 They required the establishment of a fixed school in each parish, rural
and urban, and the erection of suitable buildings, although ambulatory teachers
could also be employed in large parishes. Costs were to be met through parish
taxation and a modest tuition, from which poor families were exempted. Chil¬
dren were required to attend from the age of six or seven until they received
confirmation at thirteen. Instruction was to include religion, reading, writing,
reckoning, singing, and where possible some Danish history and geography, and
gymnastics. In towns boys were to be taught wood and metal crafts, and girls
needlework; an optional additional class, intended primarily for middle-class
pupils, taught basic commercial subjects to boys and domestic skills to girls.
Teachers were to be trained in teachers’ seminaries or to take examinations in
basic subjects, although decades would pass before these stipulations could be
fully met; in the meantime the English “Lancaster” system, using older pupils
to help instruct younger ones, was widely employed, involving much rote drill¬
ing and marching about in groups. A separate ordinance of the same date set
essentially similar requirements for elementary schools in the capital. Parents
