 330       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 gations of the state toward those who give it their trust and the guaranteed rights
 and fundamental laws of the provinces!

   Our land, I speak here only of the duchies,” Count Christian Stolberg warned
 in June, would be ‘‘irretrievably lost” unless the ordinance were repealed;
 otherwise nothing could secure the ‘‘Fatherland” against an uprising in the near
 vicinity of 20,000 Swedish troops commanded by a true son of the revolution.39
 Another grievous blow had widened the chasm between Copenhagen and the
 proud Holstein nobility, which Schimmelmann’s dismissal for the sake of public
 opinion in December 1813 did nothing to bridge.
    While war and economic breakdown brought widespread distress in Den¬
mark, one important element of society fared remarkably well: the peasant
farmers. The rapidly inflating currency after 1807 progressively lightened the
burden of taxation and of mortgage payments for those purchasing freeholds,
while as creditors, many of their former landlords suffered accordingly. Neither
the monetary crash of 1813 nor the loss of the Norwegian market had a very
great impact upon farmers still largely geared to self-sufficiency. They were
thus strengthened for times to come. The lot of cotters and landless laborers on
both manors and peasant farms was less enviable, particularly where they were
dependent upon occasional work at money wages, which rose more slowly than
prices for produce.
    Neither war nor economic crisis ended the work of internal reform in Den¬
mark before the last of its long-considered projects were completed. Among
these was the matter of the tithe, which had long remained unresolved. It has
been seen that the government sought, in characteristic fashion, to encourage
private agreements between titheholders and farmers, beginning in 1796. At
last on 8 January 1810 a new ordinance established a uniform annual tithe in
grain, which the farmer could commute to a money payment based on a sliding
scale according to current grain prices. In 1853 all remaining tithes in kind
would be commuted to money payments, the last of which were made as late
as the 1970s.
    The School Commission, established in 1789, finally completed its labors in
 1814, after long delays due mainly to philosophical differences between the cul¬
tural idealism of Ludvig and Christian Ditlev Reventlow, the clerical traditional¬
ism of Bishop Nicolaj Balle, and the socially conservative utilitarianism of Duke
Friedrich Christian of Augustenburg. The commission's initial proposal, sub¬
mitted in 1799, contained an ambitious curriculum for elementary instruction,
inspired by the Reventlows, including natural history, civics, music, and gym¬
nastics in addition to reading, writing, reckoning, and religion. This formed the
basis for the program of the Copenhagen schools established under the ordinance
of July 1799 on poor relief in the capital, which proved largely unpracticable,
and it came under such strong criticism, not least from official quarters, that the
