                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                325

Since recruitment by lot was left to parish councils composed of exempted
farmers, ferment was greatest among the landless laborers, who had bitter
memories ot the unfortunate lantvarn of 1809. Unrest was most widespread
where social cleavages in the countryside were widest. Queen Charlotte feared
an outbreak of smoldering “Jacobinism.”30 In Skane a military force attacked
a crowd of some 800 peasants at Klagerup, near Lund, in July. Thereafter
hundreds of persons were brought to trial and two farm laborers were executed.
This brutal overreaction reflects the new crown prince’s sense of insecurity and
his suspicion often revealed in later years—of Gustavian or foreign conspira¬
cies behind popular unrest.
     In January 1812 the need for increased revenues and for strengthening the
 military caused the government to call an extraordinary riksdag, again in Ore-
 bro, which opened on 13 April. With much effort, a considerably augmented
 budget was hammered out. Appropriations were increased, as were sea tolls; the
 old land tolls had been abolished in 1810, and the graduated income tax of that
 year, which had proved fairly ineffective, was now repealed, evidently as a con¬
 cession to an increasingly conservative mood. Following the example of France,
 which in the Peace of Paris in January 1810 had renounced 3,500,000 francs in
 government debts to Swedish subjects, the Riksdag repudiated some 7,500,000
 riksdaler owed by the Swedish government to citizens of France and French
 vassal states. The savings of nearly a half-million riksdaler in interest payments
 allowed the National Debt Office to make further advances to the crown.
    The Riksdag meanwhile vested the financial administration of St. Barthel-
 emy—and all other possible overseas acquisitions—directly in the crown. Be¬
cause St. Barthelemy had by 1811 begun to operate at a profit, this concession
provided welcome resources for secret diplomatic and propagandistic purposes.
    A new conscription law was passed in May, authorizing the crown to call up,
as needed, men between the ages of twenty and twenty-five, by “class” accord¬
 ing to year of birth, for military training. All in fit condition were liable for
service, although those called could provide voluntary substitutes to serve in
their place. Eventually purged of this loophole, the conscription law of 1812
remains the basis of Sweden’s present-day universal military service. The
Riksdag likewise approved the construction of permanent barracks in several
towns and appropriations for new equipment.
    Karl Johan, at that very time negotiating a rapprochement with Russia based
on the renunciation of Finland, was anxious to shield himself from the criticism
of a press virtually uncontrolled under the constitutional law of March 1810. By
reviving and amending a tabled resolution on the press of quite a different nature
from the Orebro Riksdag of 1810, the government circumvented the constitu¬
tional requirement that an amendment to fundamental law be passed by two
successive riksdagar, to put through a new, restrictive press ordinance in July.
