                                         THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 329

    On 5 January 1813 the inhabitants of the realm were stunned by a government
ordinance reorganizing the entire monetary system. A new state bank (Rigsbank)
was established, superseding all existing credit institutions. All types of paper
currency then in circulation were to be replaced by a new rigsbankdaler, without
a metallic base but on the security of all real property at the rate of six old rigs-
daler to one rigsbankdaler. Payable daler for daler in the new currency, existing
taxes were increased six times over in real value, while converted to the new
exchange rate the national debt was reduced to one-sixth of its former real value.
Complicated provisions were made for the settlement of personal debts, depend¬
ing on monetary values on the dates incurred. The silver value of the old rigs-
daler soon declined further to about one-tenth of the new rigsbankdaler,38
    To the effects of devaluation and enormously increased tax rates there was
now added a special levy of 6 percent on all real property in the realm, assessed
at its silver value and with 6 1/2 percent interest on deferred payment, to provide
backing for the new banknotes. Large numbers of investors, creditors, and
savers were ruined, producing bankruptcies and much personal distress. Not
until 1838 would Denmark’s currency finally be stabilized at its silver value, at
the cost of a deflationary policy that kept the economy depressed for a genera¬
tion.
    Although the war had hurt the economy of the duchies, the well-managed
Giro- und Leihbank in Altona, established in 1776, had kept their own separate
currency remarkably stable, while that of the Kingdom went to ruin. Increas¬
ingly the Copenhagen government intervened in the operations of the Altona
bank, violating its guarantee of 1788. The ordinance of January 1813 finally
abolished the duchies’ separate monetary status and confiscated the holdings of
the Altona bank, thus confronting their inhabitants for the first time with the full
economic brunt of the war.
    Although Ernst Schimmelmann was convinced as finance minister that this
measure was unavoidable, it went against the grain of his own warm concern
for the duchies and numerous personal ties there. In Kiel, Countess Luise Stol-
berg was mortified that he should have signed “so ignominious a decree,” and
in February she wrote to A. P. Bernstorff’s widow, “I do not think Denmark
will have any joy of this in the long run, rather I see more and more clearly that
that country and ours cannot have the same interests. They are too different in
all respects.” To Schimmelmann, his brother-in-law Fritz Reventlow wrote in
righteous indignation from Emkendorf on 29 January:
  Have we not simply been sacrificed to the envy of the Danes, as hateful
  as it is misinformed? . . . One asks oneself whether the Terrays, the
  Maupeous, the Calonnes, those precursors of the French Revolution, ever
  made greater encroachments upon the rights of property, imposed heavier
  and more oppressive taxes, brought more confusion and ruin to the for¬
  tunes of the individual, offended more openly against the most sacred obli-
