326       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

This permitted the government to close down any periodical considered “harm¬
ful to public security or offensive to personal rights without reason or proof, or
of a consistently abusive nature.’’31
    As the weeks dragged by, the crown prince, his attention keenly engaged by
developments on the Continent, felt growing frustration with the restrictions on
royal power and the cumbrous workings of the Riksdag under the constitution
of 1809. He found. Queen Charlotta noted, that while “the Swedes are good-
natured as individuals,” when convened in a riksdag they were “certainly
neither humble nor amiable.” With certain higher officials of Gustavian back¬
ground he speculated over a new constitution to strengthen the crown.32
    In the end, Karl Johan let the project drop. He hardly needed to risk his popu¬
larity in such fashion, given his striking success at the Riksdag that ended in
August 1812. It had revealed that he now enjoyed the solid backing of the old
Gustavians, who saw in him the redeeming man of order, whereas the Men of
1809, owing to growing public disillusionment with their earlier failings, played
only a modest role. They dared not even openly oppose the repressive press
ordinance.
    Karl Johan was much interested in economic affairs, particularly agriculture,
which he tended to regard in the physiocratic tradition as the true basis of na¬
tional wealth. In 1811 he founded the Royal Agricultural Academy (Kungliga
Landtbruksakademien) as a semi-official department of government and in 1813
economic societies (hushallningssallskap) in each of Sweden’s twenty-four
counties (Ian). Political calculations were, as usual, not absent, for the economic
societies, chaired and partly appointed by the county governors, allowed the
central government greater control over county affairs through the unpaid ef¬
forts of local notables.33 The crown prince meanwhile actively encouraged sheep
raising, flax cultivation, herring fishing, and saltpeter production, as well as the
construction of roads, barracks, and the Gota Canal. Thus, before the great
European conflict ended in 1815, important steps had been taken toward Swe¬
den’s economic recovery.
    Through the Peace of Paris in January 1810, Sweden regained its Pomeranian
dependency. The new regime in Stockholm did not attempt to carry through
Gustav IV Adolf’s interrupted revolution from above. Instead of a four-Estate
Landtag on the Swedish model, the province was now granted a single-chamber
diet, elected by class, giving wider preponderance to the wealthier elements,
especially the landed proprietors, and allowing greater local autonomy. Since
there was no protection for peasant tenancies on private manors, landlords freely
compensated themselves for the loss of serf labor by absorbing them into the
demesne, reducing tenants to landless laborers, whose obligations to take regu¬
lar service were set forth in new ordinances in 1810 and 1811.34
