                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                327

    Despite Karl Johan’s assurances of goodwill and the St. Petersburg alliance
in March 1812, Alexander I continued to court the loyalty of his new Finnish
subjects. In the winter of 1812, the guberniya of Viborg—consisting of those
parts of southeastern Finland ceded to Russia by the Peace Treaties of Nystad
and Abo in 1721 and 1743 —was reunited with the new grand duchy. The
peasants of the region were thereby guaranteed their former liberties, to the ill-
concealed chagrin of Russian landowners there and elsewhere in the empire.
    To reorient Finland’s new administration toward the east, Alexander trans¬
ferred its capital from Abo to Helsingfors in April 1812. Following his meeting
with Karl Johan in Abo in August, the tsar-grand duke authorized the reestab¬
lishment of a small Finnish army, initially three regiments, which replaced
Russian forces withdrawn from Finland and St. Petersburg to fight the French,
and which demonstrated, both at home and abroad, his confidence in Finland’s
loyalty. The new Finnish regiments were equipped largely through voluntary
contributions in the grand duchy itself.
    These developments in 1812 were largely due to the efforts of Baron Gustaf
Mauritz Armfelt—Gustav Ill’s former favorite—who like other highly placed
Finns in Swedish service had faced the difficult choice of retaining his position
in Sweden or his properties in Finland. A visit to Finland in the spring of 1810
had dispelled his former anti-Russian prejudices while news of the Fersen Riot
in the Swedish capital in June had shocked and revolted him, evoking in his mind
the horrors of revolutionary Paris. He was disgusted by Sweden’s declaration
of war against Britain in December of that year, and after urging an anti-French
stance upon Karl Johan, he departed Sweden in March 1811 for St. Petersburg
and swore fealty to the tsar. An implacable foe of Napoleonic France, Armfelt
found a sympathetic hearing in the Russian capital and quickly gained the confi¬
dence of Tsar Alexander, with important consequences for both Finnish and
foreign policy. For Armfelt, the two were closely connected: satisfying the
Finns by generous concessions would encourage Sweden to turn to Norway for
compensation, thus paving the way for Russian-Swedish cooperation in the war
against Napoleon. Already in June 1811 he presented to Alexander a lengthy
memorandum urging peace with Turkey and alliance with Britain and Sweden
against France, the policy in fact followed in 1812.
    Meanwhile, Armfelt became the tsar-grand duke’s indispensable adviser on
Finnish affairs. From late August 1812 until April 1813, he served as Finland’s
acting governor-general. Thereafter, he managed Finnish affairs from St.
Petersburg, virtually independently of the Russian imperial administration,
during Tsar Alexander’s long absence in Germany and France, until his own
death at Tsarskoe Selo in August 1814.35
   Among numerous others of Finnish origin who left Swedish service to return
