                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               341

at least buy valuable time, during which much could happen. Napoleon might
yet turn the tables upon his enemies. The allies might fall out among themselves.
They might abandon the former French marshal Bernadotte. Karl Johan might
leave Sweden to become king of France. If the Swedish succession should again
fall vacant, might not Prince Christian Frederik yet gain his chance to unite the
three Nordic kingdoms? To succeed, Christian Frederik and the Norwegians
would have to take full responsibility, while Frederik VI maintained the appear¬
ance of scrupulously upholding the Treaty of Kiel. It was a gamble, but the
stakes were too high not to take it.
    Frederik Vi’s initial instructions to Christian Frederik may well have re¬
flected the strain and exhaustion of the moment. More likely they were intended
as apparent evidence, promptly communicated to Stockholm, of Denmark’s
good faith toward the peace settlement. There are, however, aspects of the
Treaty of Kiel that may best be understood as part of a last, desperate gamble.
Denmark did not hold out for the immediate cession of Trondheim Stift alone,
which thus allowed an intact Norway to form a common front against the
Swedes, while obtaining Karl Johan’s immediate withdrawal from the duchies,
lest they be held as a gage for Norway. The raising of the British blockade mean¬
while permitted large shipments of Danish grain across the Skagerrak, thus fore¬
stalling any immediate possibility that Norway could be starved into submission.
This, above all, proved Denmark’s greatest contribution to Norway in 1814:
without such provisionment, Knut Mykland has said, there could have been “no
national assembly, no elected king, no 17th of May.’’64
   Sweden, with its crown prince and main army in Belgium, was for the time
being powerless to take effective action. A governor-general was appointed for
Norway, but he could only bide his time across the border. Karl XIII, in a some¬
what vague declaration dated 19 February, promised the Norwegians their own
constitution.65 Karl Johan made repeated diplomatic representations to Copen¬
hagen, seeking to curb Christian Frederik in Christiania.
    Encouraged by some of his leading bureaucrats, Prince Christian Frederik
considered proclaiming himself king of Norway by right of succession and with
absolute sovereignty under the Lex Regia of 1665, pending the grant of a consti¬
tution. The legitimate succession was indeed crucial to his ultimate aim of re¬
uniting the Danish and Norwegian crowns. A tour through 0stlandet to
Trondheim, however, revealed strong sentiment for a constitution.
   In mid-February Christian Frederik held a meeting of twenty-one prominent
Norwegians at Carsten Anker’s country house at Eidsvoll to sound their opinion.
At this assembly of notables,” Professor Georg Sverdrup of the new university
argued effectively that the Lex Regia lost its force in Norway when Frederik VI
renounced his sovereignty, returning to the Norwegian people their right to
choose their own government. If they freely exercised this right, however, they
