                                         THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 343

 return by late February to Christiania, where he inveighed against the stupidities
 of his moonstruck compatriots. He vainly urged Christian Frederik to keep open
 the channels ot negotiation with Stockholm. He and his supporters meanwhile
 prepared for the approaching constitutional convention. The day was not yet
 lost, for although they now swam against the emotional tide, Norway might yet
 be compelled to give way to force majeure and accept a union with its more
 powerful neighbor to the east, as any thoughtful citizen could not but realize.
     While there was little advance notice and preparation, elections for the con¬
 stituent assembly generally proceeded smoothly. Christian Frederik now found
 it prudent to seek new sources of support. In 1813 he had concentrated on the
 merchant patriciate, but here, too. Count Wedel had the base of his support and
 as the weeks passed the prince saw himself abandoned by a number of influential
 merchants. He now set his main hopes on the public officials and peasants—as
 Frederik of Hesse had done before him—and used his control of the mainly
 indirect and on some points rather vague electoral procedures in their favor.
     The delegates who assembled at Eidsvoll on 8-9 April 1814 totaled 112, of
 whom none came from remote Nordland or Finnmark. The rural districts were
 represented by fifty-four delegates, the towns by twenty-five, the army and navy
 by thirty-three. More than half—fifty-seven of them—were public officials
 (including military officers and clergymen), thirty-seven were peasant land¬
 holders, thirteen were merchants.70 Two factions quickly emerged: the “Inde¬
 pendence’ and “Union” parties. These names are misleading, for many of the
 Independence men aspired to eventual reunion with Denmark, whereas the
 Unionists, considering complete independence unattainable, sought a separate
 existence for Norway as the sine qua non of a union with Sweden. As Yngvar
 Nielsen put it, “What Count Wedel had sowed in 1809 was for the time being
 harvested by Christian Frederik.” Since the prince, after opening the assembly
on 10 April, absented himself from its sessions, Christian Magnus Falsen
emerged as the tactical leader of the Independence party, which could generally
muster up to eighty votes. Wedel naturally led the Unionists, who could com¬
mand some thirty votes. Both vied for support among the undecided.71
     The basic task at hand was to draft a constitution with the least delay. To this
end, a committee of fifteen was appointed, including Falsen, Sverdrup, Wedel,
Jacob Aall, and Nicolai Wergeland; fourteen were public officials; four were
Unionists, the rest, Independence men. By 15 April the constitutional committee
was able to present its preliminary proposals. These were then debated in the
assembly while the committee received and considered numerous constitutional
drafts. The most significant of these, containing 250 paragraphs, was submitted
by Falsen and Johan G. Adler. On 2 May the committee presented its own final
draft in 112 paragraphs, which as modified in ensuing debate was adopted by
the assembly.
    As a compromise document, Norway’s new constitution contained a mini-
