                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               339

hearts not beat faster at [the thought of] breaking such bands?” wrote Luise
Stolberg in April:

  To be sure, the duchies would gladly belong to Denmark if they were not
  so basely treated. To see our rights and privileges denied—our contribu¬
  tions multiplied—a conscription more vicious than the Evil One—all
  decency offended—even our language threatened—how can all this affect
  [our] dependency?58

   Amid the German War of Liberation in 1813, the publicist August Wilhelm
Schlegel, now serving as Karl Johan’s private secretary, called upon the Hol-
steiners to rise in rebellion and join forces with Karl Johan, the new Gustav
Adolf the Great, to throw off Danish despotism and reclaim their old rights. The
Emkendorf circle welcomed the Swedish-Russian occupation of Holstein. On 30
December 1813 a delegation of the Ritterschaft, including Cai Reventlow and
Christian Stolberg, called on the Swedish crown prince to seek through him to
obtain a reduction in taxation for the duchies. If they had further, ulterior mo¬
tives, Karl Johan was evidently not prepared to listen. The day had not yet come
to realize the dream of Emkendorf.
   After departing Kiel on 15 January 1814, Karl Johan moved with all due
deliberation across Germany into Belgium, where he established his headquar¬
ters in Liege at the end of February. Here he played for more time as he was
visited by various Frenchmen connected with the group around Mme. de Stael
and Benjamin Constant interested in his candidacy for the French throne. He
held back from a direct attack on French soil and vocally opposed depriving
France of its natural frontiers. His resentful allies withdrew Prussian and Rus¬
sian units from his command and relegated Sweden to the coalition’s minor
powers.
    News from Norway was meanwhile disquieting by early March, giving Karl
Johan all the more reason to husband his Swedish forces. The Norwegians re¬
fused to accept the transfer of their allegiance. Again, Karl Johan faced a hard
dilemma: to take immediate action in Norway would forfeit any chance for the
French crown and the necessary support of his allies, whereas further delay
would give the Norwegians the chance to establish a regime of their own and
prepare to defend it. Under such circumstances Karl Johan made his belated
entry into Paris on 12 April, in the wake of his victorious allies. Already on 3
April the French senate had declared Napoleon deposed and the Bourbon pre¬
tender King Louis XVIII. Karl Johan and his Swedish army were already on
their way home to face the situation across the Keel by the time the coalition
concluded the first Peace of Paris on 30 May.

   Although Norway had been alive with rumors for the past month, news of
the Peace of Kiel struck like a thunderbolt, creating both confusion and indigna-
