                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 337

   The Danish troops fought stoutly but were poorly led and no match for the
Swedish and Russian veterans. After a lifetime of organizing and exercising his
beloved army, Frederik VI hesitated to throw it into an all-out trial of arms. The
Swedes and Russians advanced into Schleswig. Already on 15 December,
Frederik VI obtained an armistice.
   Upon the advice of the “council of good men” assembled to consider the
crisis, the Danish king accepted mediation from Austria, which proposed that
Denmark surrender Trondheim Stift to Sweden and join the anti-French coali¬
tion. Frederik VI bridled at such terms, and Karl Johan threatened to renew the
war unless he received all of Norway. Denmark’s strategic situation meanwhile
deteriorated, and Austria abandoned mediation. Frederik VI saw no alternative
but direct negotiations with Sweden.
    On the night of 14-15 January 1814, Denmark concluded the Peace of Kiel
with Sweden, surrendering all of Norway in full sovereignty to the king of
Sweden, in return for Swedish Pomerania and Riigen. Denmark undertook to
join the coalition with a corps of 10,000 men, for which Sweden would provide
a subsidy of one million riksdaler\ Sweden also pledged itself to seek additional
territorial compensation for Denmark in northern Germany at the final European
peace settlement.
    Certain features of the peace treaty are worthy of special note. While the first
Swedish proposal for Article IV called for Norway’s direct incorporation into
the Swedish state, this was revised on Karl Johan’s own initiative to specify that
Norway was ceded to the king of Sweden, to comprise a separate realm in union
with Sweden (“wn Royaume, et reuni a celle de la Suede").54
    The earlier and final versions of Article IV reflect long-standing differences
of view within the Swedish government. Gustav III had quite evidently aspired
to the direct incorporation of Norway into the Swedish state by right of con¬
quest, like the provinces taken from Denmark and Norway in 1645 and 1658,
and various of Karl Johan’s advisers continued to uphold this concept. Already
in 1800, meanwhile, an unidentified expert had counseled Gustav IV Adolf in
a long memorandum that Norway could only be won with the support of its
inhabitants, to be gained by promising autonomy in their internal affairs. Count
Wedel had made it clear in 1809 that a separate constitution would be the indis¬
pensable condition for a union with Sweden, and this position was firmly backed
by the Adlersparre faction across the Keel. Already in December 1810, only a
few weeks after arriving in Stockholm, Karl Johan secretly intimated his support
for such a program to sympathetic Norwegians. From that time forward, he sent
repeated assurances to his contacts there that Norway would have its own consti¬
tution and institutions in a federative union with Sweden, especially through
Georg Adlersparre’s revived intelligence and propaganda network from the
spring of 1813.55
   Knowing the strength of Swedish chauvinism, Karl Johan evidently did not
