 334       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

  tion, by now a highly emotional issue in Norway. The king directed Wedel to
  consult with the consistory of the University of Copenhagen, which recom¬
  mended that Norway be given its own university.
      Frederik feared, as he wrote to Frederik of Hesse the same month, that a
  Norwegian university would encourage “that harmful tendency toward separa¬
  tion of the two kingdoms, which is so prevalent.”47 The ongoing collection
  campaign in Norway, attended by much publicity, nonetheless forced his hand.
  On 2 September 1811 he at last signed a decree authorizing the establishment
 of a complete university in Christiania. The event was celebrated throughout
  Norway with exuberant manifestations of both national pride and gratitude
 toward the monarch. “It has been reserved for our generation,” wrote a pastor
 in Stavanger, “to see our fatherland raised to equal rank in culture and learning
 with the other enlightend nations of the world. ”48 When the new institution at
 last opened its doors in 1813, it was called the Royal Frederik University.
     By early 1812 Norway’s brief revival of prosperity was beginning to flag.
 Fishing was poor, the market for timber falling off, British licenses harder to
 obtain. The renewed Franco-Danish alliance pact of 3 March led to stricter
 prohibitions against British imports, hurting timber exports from 0stlandet,
 since the British demanded that Norway import British wares in return. Increas¬
 ingly Canadian timber was replacing Norwegian in the British market. The
 licensed trade collapsed as the British renewed their blockade. By summer it was
 apparent that Norway faced the worst crop failure in living memory, at a time
 when grain imports were again cut off. The winter of 1812-13 brought growing
misery throughout the land. On top of everything came the state bankruptcy and
monetary conversion in January 1813, bringing commercial confusion and
greatly increased taxation, which were especially burdensome to Norway with
its lack of credit facilities.
    Georg Adlersparre’s agents in Norway reported by the spring of 1813 that
 resentments were rapidly mounting against Denmark.49 Such discontent was
 expressed most vocally by the merchant class, but it was geographically more
 widespread than in 1809. Again misgivings were expressed over Norway’s
 future fate in union with Denmark. Wedel and his friends continued to look to
 a connection with Sweden. There was some speculation in mercantile circles
about establishing an independent Norway under British protection.
    Hunger stirred up endemic social tensions. During the spring and summer of
 1813, there were outbreaks of peasant unrest in a number of towns, directed
against merchants and officials suspected of hoarding grain. In Toten, Arendal,
and Trondheim, troops were used to restore order. During these disturbances,'
the peasants expressed no real discontent with the existing regime, and the out¬
breaks petered out after a good harvest in 1813. Yet they added to the disaffec¬
tion of the upper classes toward Copenhagen and its ruinous foreign policy.
    On 5 April 1813 Prince Frederik of Hesse wrote from Christiania that
