 342       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 would surely elect Christian Frederik as their king.66 This implied “state of
 nature” recalls the Swedish Riksdag’s demand in 1809 for “constitution first,
 then king.”
    The result was a compromise: the prince would serve as regent while conven¬
 ing a constitutional convention empowered to elect the monarch. His proclama¬
 tion of 22 February—three days after Karl XIII’s—was used as a kind of basic
 referendum to strengthen his position. It was promulgated on or around 25
 February in all parishes, at which time their members were invited immediately
 to swear to uphold and defend Norway’s independence, and thereafter to elect
 delegates to the constitutional assembly.
    There followed a widespread mood of euphoria, after weeks of uncertainty.
 In his diary Pastor Claus Pavels, the prince’s chaplain, in Christiania, caught the
 mood of those February days:
   What I dreamed of as a youth at the time of the French Revolution, that
   I might one day come to attend and speak in a national assembly, it seems
   will soon be fulfilled. . . . It is a wonderful age we live in. There are
   surely many lands whose climates I wished to exchange for our cold and
   discomfort, but I know no realm in Europe or the world where I would
   rather be a citizen than Norway.67

   This wave of nationalistic fervor nevertheless concealed some sober appre¬
hensions. On his tour Christian Frederik saw much misery in the timber-cutting
regions of Ostlandet. There a group of peasants asked him if Norway were now
at peace with Britain, which would be their “greatest good fortune.”68 In so
doing, they put their finger on the Achilles’s heel of his policy, for what Nor¬
wegian did not know from bitter experience the meaning of a British naval
blockade?
    What meanwhile of those who favored union with Sweden? It was surely
fortunate for Christian Frederik that Count Wedel was in Denmark in January
 1814, leaving his following leaderless at this critical juncture. A recently dis¬
covered draft from early February, in Kammerherre Severin Lovenskiold’s hand
and addressed to the king of Sweden, nonetheless shows the direction of their
thinking. It states in the name of the “Norwegian government” that through
Frederik VI s renunciation of sovereignty, Norway was now in the “original
state’ of a nation free to form its own government. It would be prepared to
accept union with Sweden on the basis of complete equality, with adequate
guarantees tor its separate national existence. But if Sweden refused such condi¬
tions, the Norwegians would resist by every means, leaving only a “devastated
and depopulated land.”69 This program is reminiscent of both Professor Sver¬
drup’s argument to Prince Christian Frederik and—more remotely—the Liikala
Note in 1788 from the Finnish Anjala conspirators to Empress Catherine II.
   The breakup of the ice on the Skagerrak finally permitted Count Wedel to
