 340       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 tion.59 On 24 January 1814 a courier arrived in Christiania bearing the Danish
 king s written instructions to Prince Christian Frederik to turn over the border
 fortresses to the Swedes and return to Denmark, to which was added an oral
 admonition not to place himself at the head of a Norwegian national uprising.
 The prince reacted indignantly. “The king has sacrificed Norway for all time,”
 he wrote the same evening in his diary, “and it will most certainly be lost to
 our family if I do not hold on to it.’’60
    The question is what Frederik VI himself really intended at this point. Al¬
 ready on 2 November 1813, immediately upon receiving rumors of Napoleon’s
 defeat at Leipzig, Christian Frederik had proposed that Norway negotiate its
 own peace with Britain. To separate Norway from Denmark would be too
dangerous, Frederik replied on 30 November. Yet this was a stratagem that
could not be put out of mind. It had been in the air since the previous spring
at least. General A. W. C. Kardorff urged it upon the king on 30 November,
and a few days later the Austrian envoy, seeking to mediate with Sweden on the
basis of Denmark’s cession of Trondheim Stift, pointed out how Austria had
relinquished the Tyrol in 1809 to preserve the state, but had since regained it.
On 7 December Frederik wrote to Christian Frederik that even if Trondheim
Stift were formally ceded, its loss could be prevented “if the Trondheimers said,
‘We will stand by our king!’ ” This, he hoped, might win the goodwill and sup¬
port of the coalition powers, as they now knew Karl Johan to be “a braggart and
most contemptible man.”61
   Christian Frederik had thereupon seized the opportunity to write the kina on
25 December:

   If Denmark s salvation now unavoidably requires separation from a part
   of the realm, and if that part of the realm does not wish for such a separa¬
   tion, I ask, and await Your Majesty’s reply: should I act independently of
   the connection with Denmark, or should I condemn Your Majesty’s most
   faithful subjects for disobedience and abandon a kingdom I could no
   longer govern in your name? ... It would in any case be better that I
   retained authority, rather than anyone else. When the storm had passed
   and Norway saved, or another ruler were on Sweden’s throne, then Fred¬
   erik VI would again be hailed [as king].62

   The courier who had borne this message at length returned and caught up with
Christian Frederik in Trondheim on 7 February with the full text of the Treaty
of Kiel and an oral reply from Frederik VI. -The king accepted all the proposals
  had made to him, the prince noted in his diary; “in the worst ease I should
place myself at the head of the Norwegian nation as its chief or its king.’’ It was
evident, too, that Frederik would give what covert support he could.63 An upris¬
ing in Norway at this juncture might by no means be a hopeless cause. It could
