 336       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 content in Norway and the growing threat of a showdown with Sweden, Frederik
 VI overcame his apprehensions and sent the prince to Christiania, armed with
 wide discretionary powers. In so doing, it seems not inconceivable that he was
 now prepared tacitly to envision as an extreme solution what he had until then
 most feared: Norway’s separation from Denmark, perhaps for the rest of his
 own lifetime, until Prince Christian Frederik ascended the Danish throne by
 hereditary right.53
    To deal with the new wartime crisis, Christian Frederik set up several central
judicial and fiscal institutions in Christiania and planned to revive the Govern¬
 ment Commission of 1808-9. A particular problem was an acute shortage of
currency and credit, which again raised the old question of a separate Norwegian
bank. The prince considered establishing a new loan and discount office (Ldn-
og diskontokasse) and in mid-December 1813 convened a meeting in Christiania
of seventy-two of Norway’s leading merchants to prepare its statutes. At length,
Copenhagen was prepared to go even further and authorize an essentially com¬
plete and separate bank for Norway, which might issue its own banknotes. Fol¬
lowing shortly the opening of the new university in Christiania, this concession
to a century-old Norwegian demand marked another important step toward what
might have become a new federative structure for the Danish monarchy, a turn¬
ing point which outside events soon prevented from turning.
    The bank meeting was a crucial move in Christian Frederik’s astute campaign
 to gain the goodwill of Norway’s merchant patriciate, that key element which
 in recent years had been most disgruntled over the effects of Danish foreign
 policy, in contrast to Frederik of Hesse, who had favored the bureaucrats and
peasants. Not least, he attempted to win over Count Wedel and his following
 among the greater merchants. By the time the bank meeting ended on 5 January
 1814, not only had the participants enthusiastically pledged their guarantee of
the new bank’s initial capitalization, but many had privately discussed acclaim¬
ing Christian Frederik as Norway’s king, thereby cutting adrift from the sinking
Danish ship of state. The meeting in Christiania was thus of more than merely
financial significance: it was a portent of the restoration of representative institu¬
tions in a land ruled by royal absolutism for the past century and a half.

   Following their victory at Leipzig in mid-October 1813, the allies began to
show differences in war aims. The Austrian chancellor, Prince Metternich, fear¬
ful of strengthening Russia and Prussia, again sought a negotiated peace,
whereas Russia, Prussia, and Britain were for pursuing the retreating French
across the Rhine. The resulting hiatus presented Karl Johan with his long-
awaited opportunity. While he sent Prussian and Russian units into Holland he
marched north with his main Swedish and Russian force. Driving a wedge
between Marshal Davout’s French corps, which fell back on Hamburg, and
Frederik of Hesse’s Danish force, he invaded Holstein on 5 December.
