                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 335

Norway had never been “in such an unfortunate situation as at this moment and
help must come immediately if it is still to be saved from ruin.”50 The following
month Frederik VI, after long hesitation, replaced him with his cousin and heir
presumptive, the twenty-four-year-old Prince Christian Frederik, as statholder
in Norway.
   Christian Frederik, who three years earlier had aroused some hopes during
the Swedish succession crisis ot 1810, had long shown a strong interest in
Norway, largely inspired by his close friend Carsten Anker, the great Christi¬
ania merchant, who had lived periodically in both Copenhagen and London. At
his enthusiastic reception in Christiania on 22 May 1813, the prince announced
that the [king s] command shall be my law, to win your confidence my en¬
deavor.”51 Given existing circumstances, such a program could not but imply
certain contradictions, of which Christian Frederik was already well aware. In
an undated memorandum to Frederik VI, evidently from the winter of 1813, he
had envisioned the situation that might arise if Sweden, backed by the coalition
powers, demanded the secession of Norway:
   I will not here consider philosophically a monarch’s right to cede a king¬
   dom to another state. When he renounces his right to the throne, when his
   dynasty does likewise for all time, the right to choose its king must revert
   to the nation, and surely the Norwegians would not elect a French soldier,
   even if he wears a Swedish coat and bears a Swedish sword; this land may
   be conquered for a time, but the nation will never submit. Unless it starves
   and as long as it has anything to live on, the war against its oppressors will
   be like the Spanish. Such a nation, true to its king and royal house, will
   not abandon Your Majesty.

On 30 April 1813, Carsten Anker wrote to the prince in the same vein:
   No devil is going to persuade me to be untrue to my king. . . . [But] if
   he loses Norway, that is, if he is compelled elsewhere by force of arms
   to cede it, then for God’s sake hurry up here and save us from Sweden,
   come up with your [claim to] your fathers’ patrimony, so that Norway may
   become independent until the storm has passed and Norway can again be
   united with Denmark.52

By the end of 1813 it would be apparent that a number of prominent Norwegians
were thinking of making the princt-statholder their king.
    Frederik VI was surely aware of the chance he took in making Prince Chris¬
tian Frederik in effect his viceroy in Christiania. He had long hesitated, despite
constant urging, to replace his vieq-statholder, Frederik of Hesse, with someone
capable of inspiring the same kind of personal following as the popular Prince
Christian (Karl) August in 1808-9. In 1811 and 1812, Christian Frederik had
begged to be sent to Norway. By the spring of 1813, faced with alarming dis-
