 338       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 divulge his views on this matter indiscriminately at home. Still, by January
  1814, he was morally committed to Sweden’s friends in Norway. Through
 generous terms, he might hope to reconcile the Norwegians to a change of
 dynasty, as Tsar Alexander had so successfully done in Finland. Critical opinion
 in Britain might be assuaged. Such an approach might also favorably impress
 liberals in France, opposed to both Napoleon and the Bourbons, thereby improv¬
 ing his chances for the French throne. Finally, considering the evident insecurity
 of his position in the face of growing conservative legitimism in Europe, a sepa¬
 rate Norwegian kingdom might conceivably offer him and his heirs a retreat in
 the case of an eventual Vasa restoration in Sweden. In any event, a federative
 union would suffice to ensure the strategic unity of the Scandinavian peninsula,
 ending the old threat of Sweden’s encirclement.
    It may have been largely due to the historical ignorance of the Swedish
negotiators that Denmark retained Norway’s ancient dependencies—Iceland, the
Fas roes, and Greenland. In any case, time was of the essence. The allies, who
in December had resumed their offensive against France, needed Karl Johan’s
forces and brought diplomatic pressure to bear on both sides to end the northern
stalemate. On 14 January there arrived in Kiel a British note threatening to cut
off subsidies if the Swedes did not immediately rejoin the allies. Six hours after
the peace was signed, Karl Johan broke camp and began to evacuate his forces
from the duchies. A more determined Danish resistance could have caused him
incalculable difficulties.
    Like the Treaty of Fredrikshamn five years earlier, that concluded in Kiel in
January 1814 would prove one of the most drastic, as well as one of the most
permanent, of the peace settlements of the Napoleonic era, depriving the Danish
state of the greater part of its European territory and more than one-third of its
population. In Denmark, now reduced to a small remnant of the former king¬
dom, it left deep bitterness and despair. Word reached Christian Frederik in
Norway that a frightful spirit prevails in Copenhagen. . . . The state seems
to have broken down; it is like an interregnum.”56 The popularity of the regime
had reached its lowest ebb.
    In the duchies reactions were more mixed, particularly among a higher nobil¬
ity long at odds with Copenhagen. Not long before. Princess Luise Augusta of
Augustenburg had written:

  In this war I feel like the famous donkey between two haystacks. I do not
  know whom I should wish to win. In my German heart, and indeed as a
  cosmopolite, I tremble lest Napoleon should bring about his universal
  monarchy, and my Danish heart trembles for our fatherland lest he should
  be defeated.57

  By 1813 some of the Holstein nobility no longer had any doubt that their
sympathies lay with the coalition and separation from Denmark. “How can our
