                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                345

gated at the same time, enfranchised only 0.3 percent of France’s population;
the First British Reform Bill, 10 percent in 1832; the Belgian constitution of
1840, 1.15 percent; and the Swedish electoral reform of 1866, 5 percent.73
Candidates for the Storting were to be residents of their districts, of which two-
thirds were to be rural and one-third urban.
   In no area was there greater unanimity than regarding basic civil rights and
obligations. The constitution guaranteed freedom of expression and from arbi¬
trary arrest, as well as the sanctity of personal property, including the venerable
odel and asete rights protecting family farms. No new restrictions might be
 imposed upon economic activity. Freedom of worship was permitted to all
 Christians, although after some debate Jews and Jesuits were forbidden to enter
 the kingdom and public officials were required to belong to the Lutheran state
 church. No new nobles might be created or manorial rights granted. The prin¬
 ciple of universal conscription was established, although as in Sweden two years
 earlier certain exemptions were allowed in practice.74
    The debates over the constitution, which at times waxed hot, illuminate the
 conflict between the two factions at Eidsvoll. The Unionists fought stoutly to
exclude hindrances to a dynastic union with another state; in this they had some
 success, for the Independence party did not want to close the door to a possible
 future reunion with Denmark. But the rivalry concerned not only home rule, but
who should rule at home. The Unionists strove vainly for a strong state council
and a bicameral legislature with greater powers to counterbalance royal author¬
ity. They likewise favored restrictive property qualifications for the vote, which
did not exclude a patriarchal concern for the welfare of the common people.
They meanwhile succeeded in putting off consideration of existing noble and
economic privileges, as well as special exemptions from conscription, until the
new Storting should meet. Some of these ideas found support within the Inde¬
pendence party as well: the Falsen-Adler draft constitution included a bicameral
legislature and would have excluded about half the peasant farmholders from the
vote, while Christian Frederik considered a nobility essential to a monarchy. In
the main, however, the Independence men were for a strong royal authority and
dependent state council, together with a basically unicameral legislature elected
by a wide popular franchise.75
    In this rivalry one may discern differing political temperaments, opposing
hardheaded “realists” to warmhearted “romantics.” “Should a good cause
count for nothing if one cannot calculate with pen and paper the outcome of the
struggle?” Claus Pavels mused in April. “If enthusiasm be called day-dreaming
and a religious-poetic viewpoint arouse derisive laughter, then farewell human
dignity and human felicity.”76 Sectional cleavages are also apparent, with the
greatest support for the Union party in 0stlandet, the region most dependent
upon foreign trade and most affected by war with Britain and Sweden.
    But more than that, the Unionists strove to preserve a more “aristocratic”
