 352       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 voted, by a majority of seventy-two to five, to accept union with Sweden. Signif¬
 icantly, however, it deferred consideration of any constitutional changes and of
 the formal election of the king—in that order. It was apparent that, like the Eids-
 voll assembly, it would follow that good Swedish maxim from 1809: “constitu¬
 tion first, then king.”
     Karl Johan, in nearby Frederikshald, communicated with the Storting
  through a Swedish commission in Christiania. To prepare the way for a closer
  union in the future, he sought in particular to obtain the right of the crown to
 create new nobles in Norway, to grant or deny naturalization as Norwegian citi¬
 zens, to appoint subjects of one kingdom to positions in the other, to name the
 speaker of the Storting, and to dispose freely over the military forces of both
  kingdoms. He nonetheless hesitated to push the Storting too hard, lest this pro¬
 duce further delay. As long as it accepted Karl XIII as king, he did not care
 whether this were through “recognition” or “election.” Provided the vital
 interests of Sweden and the union were protected, Karl Johan left it to the dis¬
 cretion of his commissioners “to agree to anything which, by contributing to
 mutual confidence between the nations, may further convince the Norwegian
 people that it is not its oppression but rather the mutual advantages of both king¬
 doms that is the object of the desired union.”90 For the present he was satisfied
 that the Eidsvoll constitution allotted extensive powers to the crown, especially
 in foreign policy and military matters. The experience of the past quarter-cen¬
 tury meanwhile convinced the former Napoleonic marshal that there was no
 constitution that could not eventually be modified.
     Christie and the majority in the Storting skillfully exploited Karl Johan’s
 anxiety to avoid delay and on one point after the other exacted concessions. The
 Swedish commissioners backed down regarding new ennoblements, naturaliza¬
 tion, mutual eligibility for official appointments, and the speaker of the Storting,
 while only after hard bargaining and Karl Johan’s threat to end the armistice did
 it agree to allow small detachments of the Swedish and Norwegian armies to
 exercise together at stated intervals and the use of Norwegian troops in an offen¬
 sive war outside Norway with the consent of the Storting. The Swedish commis¬
 sioners also accepted the stipulation that the crown consult with the Norwegian,
as well as the Swedish, state council before declaring war or concluding peace.
Thus both the council and the Storting gained a stronger and more independent
position than originally envisioned at Eidsvoll. It would indeed appear that the
Swedish commission, which included members of the Swedish state council, did
not vigorously oppose—or that it even quietly encouraged—these checks and
balances, owing to apprehensions over the crown prince’s autocratic propensi¬
ties in Sweden.91
   Karl Johan s patience grew thin with the approach of winter and of the Con¬
gress of Vienna. At last, on 4 November, the Storting “elected and recognized”
