 348       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 of the Independence party privately noted that the assembly, “on the nation’s
 behalf, elected a king—if perhaps only an interim king! ”81
     Indeed, amid the joyous celebration of the Seventeenth of May—which has
  remained Norway s national holiday—there was much cause for apprehension.
  Napoleon had abdicated the day after the Eidsvoll assembly had convened. In
  Paris Karl Johan was able, despite recent frictions, to gain the assurances of his
 allies, now including Austria, to honor their commitments to help him acquire
  Norway, thanks largely to Tsar Alexander’s support. A Russian corps, en¬
 camped outside Hamburg, was placed at his disposal to bring pressure to bear
 against Denmark. Britain again blockaded Norway by late April and continued
 its subsidy to Sweden. Karl Johan contemplated a Swedish-Russian attack
 through Jutland and thence against Norway, after which Denmark might be
 completely partitioned, leaving Sweden with Sjaelland, Fyn, and Bornholm. But
 the British were opposed to allowing any one power to control both shores of
 the Sound. On 28 May the crown prince arrived back in Sweden, followed by
 the main Swedish army.
    Both sides sought to promote their goals through negotiation. Already in
March Christian Frederik, convinced that Britain’s position was critical, had
sent Carsten Anker to London. Lord Liverpool’s cabinet found it convenient to
regard the Norwegian revolt as a Danish conspiracy to obstruct fulfillment of
the Peace of Kiel and declined to receive him. Unofficially, Anker was advised
that Britain would seek favorable conditions from Sweden, provided the Nor¬
wegians repudiated Christian Frederik. Meanwhile, he aroused much sympathy
for Norway both inside and outside Parliament.82 Christian Frederik’s soundings
elsewhere fared no better. It was apparent that no European government was
prepared to recognize Norway’s complete independence.
     In Copenhagen the Swedish minister made repeated demands that the Treaty
 of Kiel be fulfilled. On 14 March Frederik Moltke of the revived council
 strongly urged upon Frederik VI a national levee en masse, to bid defiance and
 defend Denmark’s independence and honor. But the latter had by now lost heart
 and a week later wrote to Christian Frederik, counseling him to transfer Norway
 to Swedish control as part of a “federative state,” to forestall his being deprived
by the great powers of the Danish succession.83 In May commissioners from the
great coalition powers arrived in Copenhagen to obtain compliance with the
Treaty of Kiel. Alarmed by their representations and by the Russian army corps
near Hamburg, Frederik VI forbade all further communication between Den¬
mark and Norway. The great gamble of January had turned into a nightmare.
    Christian Frederik meanwhile kept his options open. He was concerned about
the allied threat to Denmark, he wrote to Frederik VI on 2 April, but could not
deny Norway’s right to devise its own government. Honor required that he
accept its crown if offered him—if only to establish his son’s dynastic claim. Yet
if all Europe united against Norway, “only this or another assembly could
