                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               351

deliver Norway to Karl XIII; thus Sweden would not be bound to fulfill its com¬
mitments to Denmark under the treaty if it had to use force to acquire Norway.
By resorting to war, Sweden could quickly consummate the union without for¬
eign intervention and it could avoid relinquishing its Pomeranian territory and
paying a subsidy to Denmark of one million riksdaler. In Norway, despite wide¬
spread defeatism, national pride meanwhile required that honor be upheld,
however briefly.
    The basic purposes of the war for both sides were thus accomplished virtually
with the first shot. Karl Johan still hoped to win over the Norwegians through
liberal concessions. He thus refrained from inflicting a humiliating defeat upon
them and offered union under face-saving conditions preserving the appearance
of popular consent. While the Swedes had quickly demonstrated their military
superiority, they had no assurance of a prompt or easy victory should the Nor¬
wegians continue the fight from the mountainous interior, especially with the
approach of winter. The behavior of the coalition powers was unpredictable in
the event of a prolonged crisis in the North, while the widespread popularity of
the Norwegian cause in Britain was particularly disquieting. The powers were
furthermore due to meet shortly in Vienna to work out a general European peace
settlement, and Karl Johan could count on scant sympathy at what promised to
be a strongly legitimist conclave. Finally, too, he was informed by Mme. de
Stael and others in France that the restored Bourbon monarchy was by no means
secure. Liberal behavior in Norway might yet prove a strong recommendation
in France if its throne should again fall vacant.
    The Norwegian state council called for elections to a storting, which con¬
vened in Christiania on 7 October. Of its seventy-nine members, no fewer than
fifty were public officials, whereas eighteen were peasants, nine merchants, and
three mariners; again time was too short to obtain representatives from the two
northern stifter. Only eighteen of its members had been at Eidsvoll. Of the lead¬
ing Unionists who had been there, only Wedel was reelected, although he was
naturally destined to play a leading role.88 The large majority, composed of
former supporters of the Independence party, found a new leader in Wilhelm
Christie from Bergen. Wedel, disillusioned by what he considered his country¬
men’s quixotic irresponsibility and the personal abuse he had received from his
opponents, had come to favor a close union with Sweden through the revision
of both countries’ constitutions to make them essentially similar, a demand
which now held little appeal for either side.89 Christie and his followers—like
their Finnish colleagues at the Borga diet in 1809—strove to protect and
strengthen the existing constitution as the bulwark of autonomy within a union
with a stronger power.
   Already on 10 October the Storting received Christian Frederik’s abdication
and the latter departed for Copenhagen. After a lively debate, distinguished by
ringing declarations of Norway’s rightful freedom, the Storting on 20 October
