                                            THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               353

Karl XIII as Norway s king.92 Five days later, Karl Johan made his long-awaited
entry into Christiania.

   Thus the Norwegian-Swedish union was finally realized, although under
singularly ambivalent circumstances. Karl Johan himself had guaranteed Nor¬
way a separate constitution in the Treaty of Kiel but seven months later had
concluded the Convention of Moss with a de facto Norwegian government and
recognized its constitution without reference to the Kiel treaty. The juridical
status of the union thus remained open to future controversy, with the Swedes
claiming that the Storting had “recognized’' their rightful king under the Treaty
of Kiel and the Norwegians maintaining that it had freely “elected” him under
the existing Eidsvoll constitution.
   For both sides, the union was both a victory and a defeat. Although Norway
had been unable to maintain complete national sovereignty, its inhabitants could
find much consolation. The diarist Pavels, who in June had feared “heavier
chains than we have ever borne before,” could ask himself in August why
Norway should continue to fight:

   To be called Norwegian rather than Swede? We retain that name as long
   as the constitution is honored with as much right as when we were under
   Denmark’s sovereign king, and when personal respect no longer binds us
   to an individual, it is quite incidental where the constitutional king lives
   or what his name is.    .   .   .It might happen that he later tries to slip the
   fetters of slavery onto us, but where the nation, under the constitution, has
   so much to say, it would immediately notice and condemn any attempt
   upon our rights—and if they are not then respected, then let it rise up en
   masse!93

   In February 1814 Baron Armfelt in St. Petersburg had foreseen that “Nor¬
way will be more of an encumbrance than a gain to Sweden.” Karl XIII, who
according to his queen had hoped at first “to rule over the Norwegians on the
same basis as the king of Denmark,” and much chauvinist opinion in Sweden
were greatly upset by the lenient Convention of Moss and final form of the
union. In late September Hans Jarta asked prophetically, if “Sweden’s and
Norway’s constitutional, moral, and economic conditions are not woven to¬
gether early, what can, after a century or perhaps before, keep the Norwegian
people from resuming the fight for independence it has now attempted?”94
   For the present, however, the union was the great personal triumph Karl
Johan considered essential to consolidate his position in Sweden and Europe,
and it at last secured lasting peace and security to the Scandinavian peninsula
after centuries of conflict.
   An epilogue to the Norwegian Storting, which Karl Johan dissolved in person
on 26 February 1815, was the special Swedish Riksdag convened in the same
