344       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

mum of political philosophizing, although it rested firmly upon the principle of
popular sovereignty, over which both the Independence and Union parties were
in full agreement. It is thus an unadorned statement of fundamental law, remi¬
niscent, in Sverre Steen’s view, of the old Norse law codes in its straightforward
simplicity.72 Yet its structure reveals the underlying model of the French consti¬
tution of 1791, while details show influences from the Batavian and American
constitutions—both federal and state—and the Swedish constitution of 1809, as
well as the old Lex Regia. It would prove amenable to adaptation to changing
circumstances. Since Sweden adopted a new constitution in 1975, Norway’s
remains the oldest in the world, after the American.
    Like both the American and Swedish constitutions, the Norwegian sought a
separation between the executive, legislative, and judicial functions. The crown
was granted extensive powers, particularly regarding the appointment of offi¬
cials, the military forces, foreign relations, war and peace. A state council
(statsrad) of five, appointed by and responsible to the crown, was to advise or
to fulfill such assignments as the crown might delegate.
    In comparison, the legislature, named the Storting, was endowed with rela¬
tively limited powers. It was to meet every three years, unless specially con¬
vened by the crown, without whose permission its sessions could not exceed
three months. While the Storting possessed legislative power, the crown held a
suspensive veto and was authorized to issue decrees concerning internal order,
commerce, customs duties, and economic matters in general. The Storting had
the power of taxation, whereas the crown had virtually free disposition over
revenues, subject to the Storting's review of its accounts. A special state tribunal
(riksrett) might remove state officials for cause. Judges were assured of the
security of tenure essential to an independent judiciary.
    The Storting was organized on the basis of a modified unicameralism. While
all its members were to be elected on the same basis, it thereafter itself elected
one-quarter of its membership to a Lagting to review and confirm legislation
passed by the remaining three-quarters of the Storting, which comprised the
Odelting. If the Lagting twice rejected a proposal, it was then voted on in a
plenary session of the entire Storting, at which a two-thirds majority was re¬
quired to pass the measure.
    The right to vote was conferred upon all males over the age of twenty-five
who had resided in the country at least five years; who had served as public
officials, owned or for more than five years leased taxable rural land, or held
burgher rights in a town in which they owned property worth at least 300 riks-
bankdaler in silver; and who swore to uphold the constitution. Although this
franchise was limited, it was substantially wider than in any other European
country at that time. Stein Kuhnle has recently calculated that 45.5 percent of
all Norwegian men over the age of twenty five, or 10.3 percent of the total popu¬
lation, received the vote in 1814. In contrast, Louis XVIII’s Charter, promul-
