                                       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15               349

decide whether the nation should by necessity enter into a union with
Sweden, . . . and if I could no longer accomplish anything here, I would
return to my beloved Denmark.”84
   In the summer of 1813, shortly after Christian Frederik’s arrival in Norway
as Frederik Vi’s statholder, Count Wedel reputedly told him that if he did not
place himself at the head of an independent Norway, expel Karl Johan from
Sweden, and unite the Peninsula, the reverse would take place. By the spring
of 1814 the prince was increasingly preoccupied with the hope that neither the
coalition powers nor the Swedish people could long abide Bernadotte, and that
once he fell with the other “Napoleonides,” the way would be cleared for his
own election as successor in Sweden and thus for a federative Scandinavian
union. In June C. M. Falsen published an impassioned appeal for resistance to
union with Sweden under a “true French military despotism,’’ while holding out
the prospect of a free and honorable union under the “Nordic” Prince Christian
Frederik. Pastor Pavels, stirred by reports from Copenhagen, meanwhile envi¬
sioned a possible popular uprising in Denmark, leading to a constitution and
reunion with Norway.85 But ultimately the decision remained with the great
powers.
   On 31 May a special envoy reached Christiania from London, bringing assur¬
ance of Britain’s support for Norway’s autonomy under its own constitution in
a union with Sweden. At a meeting of the state council a week later, the decision
was made to convene the Storting to consider the British proposal. To give a
show of determination, however, the government mobilized the army to con¬
front the Swedish forces now assembling across the border.
   The allied commission arrived from Copenhagen on 30 June, and Christian
Frederik appealed to principles their own governments had recently proclaimed:
   I must avow that I have put my confidence in the great powers, that the
   same principles that have guided them in their efforts to liberate other
   peoples should likewise determine their conduct toward the Norwegian
   people, that they should not, at the very moment they are restoring free¬
   dom to the peoples of Germany and Spain, put the Norwegians in chains.

It was to no avail. The coalition powers, faced with the reconstruction of Europe
following the Napoleonic maelstrom, were not to be impressed with such rhet¬
oric. “Public opinion and the rights of peoples,” Christian Frederik noted
dejectedly, “seem to mean nothing to these gentlemen. Several times I heard
Steigentisch [the Austrian commissioner] say scornfully: ‘The people, bah! The
people have nothing to say in the sovereigns’ councils; that would turn the world
upside down.’ ”86 And he himself had abandoned the high ground of legitimism
in February for the revolutionary principle of popular sovereignty.
    Sympathetic as some of its members were toward Norway—or unsympathetic
toward Bernadotte—the commission could only offer to seek favorable terms
