 346        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 social order—the Norwegian context—whereas the Independence party sought
 to create a more “democratic” dispensation. In this regard, the social composi¬
 tion of the two factions seems revealing. The leading Unionists were wealthy
 men of private means: great merchants, ironmasters, landowners. The core of
 the Independence party consisted of public officials, and although it too included
 some merchants and even some titular nobles like Falsen, none were as rich as
 the most prominent Unionists. Knut Mykland thus speaks of what may be called
 the patrician and “bureaucratic” parties. From this perspective their respective
 orientations toward Sweden and Denmark become more comprehensible. While
 both parties aspired to constitutional self-government, Sweden had proud tradi¬
 tions of aristocratic parliamentarianism, Denmark of strong kingship and bu¬
 reaucratic rule. The constitution adopted in May 1814 inclined largely in the
 latter direction, establishing a powerful royal prerogative and a securely tenured
 officialdom. In his diary the Unionist G. P. Blom wrote bitterly that the “royal¬
 ists had now built “a veritable temple to a new sovereignty upon the burial
 mound of that which apparently had expired.”77
     The constitution raises a fundamental question. How, Halvdan Koht has
 asked from his Marxian perspective,

    could the upper classes holding power in Norway in 1814—the bureau¬
    cratic and burgher classes—bring themselves to establish a democracy
    which would necessarily—sooner or later—deprive them of their own
    power? Or more succinctly put: Why did they grant so wide a franchise
    to the peasant class?78

For this there would seem to be various explanations. There was a pressing need
for national solidarity in a time of emergency; hence winning the backing of the
peasant masses was indispensable. But one may also perceive, as Koht did not,
the effects of a long-term tendency—since the administrative reforms following
the Lofthuus revolt in 1787—toward a pragmatic alliance between the bureau¬
cracy and the peasantry versus the merchant oligarchy, strengthened by eco¬
nomic conflicts during the years of neutral trade and especially by the recent
wartime crises of provisionment in 1808-9 and 1812-13. The so-called Peasant
Paragraph of the constitution, allotting two-thirds of the Storting seats to the
rural districts, was astutely predicated upon the assumption that enfranchised
peasant farmers would tend to elect local officials, which indeed was the case
for some decades to come.
   As in Denmark, the representative of the crown had come to be perceived
by the peasant farmer as his advocate against selfish interests, rather than as their
defender. The new Norwegian regime was thus in essence the realization of that
democratic royalism implicit in the ideal of an “opinion-guided absolutism” as
described by Jens Arup Seip, which, he argues, must largely explain how in
