     350      THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

     from Sweden. Christian Frederik could not refuse their mediation. It was no
     longer a question of whether he should abdicate, but when and under what con¬
     ditions.
       Through the allied commission Christian Frederik offered his terms. He was
    prepared to relinquish the crown to Karl XIII if the Storting convened and de¬
    manded his abdication, provided Norway remained a separate realm under its
    new constitution. He declined to turn over the border fortresses to the Swedes
    in the interim and demanded an immediate end to the blockade.
       Karl Johan broke off negotiations and on 26 July launched an attack on
    Norway. The Norwegian army fought bravely, but its adversary was superior
    in numbers—some 45,000 versus 25,000 men—as well as in materiel, experi¬
    ence, and leadership. Secretly informed of the Norwegians’ defensive plans, the
    Swedes handily outmaneuvered them.
        Already a few days after the hostilities began, Karl Johan secretly initiated
    negotiations for an armistice on the basis that Christian Frederik immediately
    abdicate executive power to the state council and leave Norway. The latter,
    although no general, was an astute negotiator. Karl Johan offered a highly sig¬
    nificant concession: Norway might retain the Eidsvoll constitution, subject only
    to revisions permitting a union with Sweden, the latter to be worked out between
    the king of Sweden and the Storting.87 While he had repeatedly promised
,   Norway its own constitution, he had not previously recognized that prepared by
    what he considered an insurgent assembly. On these terms an armistice was
    concluded in the Convention of Moss on 14 August, less than three weeks after
    the outbreak of hostilities. Christian Frederik had rendered his last service to
    Norway, the news of which was received with mingled incredulity, outrage, and
    relief. In the event, the armistice ended Sweden’s last war in modern times, and
    Norway’s, until the German invasion of 1940.
       One cannot but wonder why Karl Johan broke off negotiations so abruptly
    and resorted to war, then on his own initiative so promptly offered the Norwe¬
    gians peace on essentially the same basis as previously, indeed on terms similar
    to what Christian Frederik himself had finally been prepared to concede, when
    he could have pressed his military advantage and imposed harsher conditions.
    Again, sources are lacking for any direct answer, but several important con¬
    siderations suggest themselves.
        Christian Frederik could surely have been compelled to offer further conces¬
    sions, but negotiations would have dragged out in time, and time was crucial.
    If military action were to cut the Gordian knot, it would have to be taken
    promptly, before the end of the brief Nordic summer. Not only was Karl Johan’s
    sensitive personal prestige at stake—within chauvinistic circles in Sweden as
    well as abroad—but mediation by the coalition powers might lead to binding
    restrictions upon a Norwegian-Swedish union. Moreover, as Karl Johan had
    stated repeatedly, it was Frederik Vi’s obligation under the Treaty of Kiel to
