                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 347

1814 Norway could so rapidly metamorphose from part of Europe’s theoreti¬
cally most absolutistic state into its most democratic.79
   The peasant delegates at Eidsvoll were among the most prosperous and best
informed of their class. Among them were parish functionaries, schoolteachers,
and noncommissioned officers. Several had been active Haugians. In general,
they played little part in the factional rivalry. Most, it would appear, had little
interest in constitutional government as such and held instinctively to their tradi¬
tional belief in a strong and benevolent king. Few, however, voted with the
Union party, since the Independence leaders played skillfully upon their preju¬
dices against the hereditary foe, impressing upon them that the Swedish peasant
was burdened with far heavier taxes, oppressed by an arrogant nobility, and
subject to military service in foreign lands.80
     Peasant mistrust toward the burghers meanwhile came to the fore. Although
 the “Peasant Paragraph” of the constitution assured rural voters control of a
 two-thirds majority of the Storting seats, the one-third of the seats to be filled
 by the far less numerous urban voters gave the latter five times as much repre¬
 sentation in proportion to the total population. It was therefore vigorously
 opposed by the peasant delegates, and indeed only passed by one vote.
     The peasant representatives meanwhile had more concrete concerns. A
 local officer of the peace (lensmann), Anders Lysgaard, proposed a whole
 program of reforms, including the abolition of all hereditary privileges; reduc¬
 tion of the bureaucracy; prohibition of the possession of more farm land than
 the owner was capable of working with his own hired folk and cotters; restor¬
 ation of the odel right in its older, more restricted form; and an end to controls
on sawing timber and distilling alcohol. Demands were thereafter raised among
the peasant delegates that only peasants should be entitled to possess and cul¬
tivate farmland; that agriculture and the cutting and sawing of timber be
 reserved for them; that nonpeasants be prohibited from acquiring farms as
absentee owners, as well as forest lands or sawmills; and that all remaining
church benefices be sold to raise bank capital. None of these proposals passed,
nor was the question of exemptions from conscription, which the peasants and
military officers strongly opposed, fully settled at Eidsvoll. In effect, the peas¬
ant representatives revealed a greater concern with economic and social than
with political questions, and while they sought to level the privileges of those
above them, they attempted to fortify their own position through new privileges
of their own. But as yet they were too few and too inexperienced. Their day
would come in the 1830s.
    On 17 May 1814 the new constitution was signed and the assembly unani¬
mously elected Christian Frederik to the throne, after a last-minute attempt by
the Unionists to defer the election until after the peace. He swore to uphold the
constitution and dissolved the Eidsvoll assembly on 19 May. Pastor J. H. Darre
