                         CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                        361

ical and social crises abroad—especially in Britain, America, France, and
French-dominated Europe—intensified and dramatized its own domestic con¬
flicts and rivalries.
   The economic transformation then gaining momentum, most notably in Great
Britain, made deep inroads into an ancient and traditional way of life in Scandi¬
navia. Although its industrial side would hardly affect the Nordic lands before
the mid-nineteenth century, in its agrarian aspect it strikingly illustrates E. J.
Hobsbawn’s view of the sociopolitical and the economic revolutions of the
period, centered on opposite sides of the Channel, as the “twin crater” of a single
 larger regional volcano,” whose eruption basically transformed life in the
Western world.6


   Certainly the most visible changes of the period were territorial. In no other
part of Europe was the map redrawn in more drastic or lasting fashion. Both
Sweden and Denmark lost vast domains, ancient and integral parts of their
respective realms. Yet while Sweden ceded Finland to the Russian tsar and Den¬
mark relinquished Norway to the Swedish king, both these lands gained self-rule
under their own constitutions. Norway thus recovered an autonomy lost in 1536,
whereas Finland became a separate political entity for the first time in its history.
In effect, the two Scandinavian monarchies of 1760 had become by 1815 four
Nordic nations under three monarchs.
    By the 1790s a new idea gained currency, that of uniting the existing king¬
 doms to form a greater Scandinavian state. While this appealed on cultural
 grounds to many intellectuals, especially in Copenhagen, it also offered the
 obvious practical solution to the perennial weakness of the North in the face of
the greater European powers. Unsuccessful attempts were made to bring such
a Scandinavian union into being in connection with the Swedish succession
crises of 1809 and 1810. Their failure was nonetheless no foregone conclusion
under the unsettled conditions of those years, and a united Scandinavia might
well have proved more durable in the long run than the Finnish-Russian, Norwe-
gian-Swedish, or indeed the Irish-British or Belgian-Dutch unions established in
that period.7
    From the geopolitical standpoint, however, the territorial reorganization of
 1809-15 realized the essential objectives of political Scandinavianism, since it
established natural frontiers between formerly rival powers and removed the
underlying bases of their enmity in Finland and Norway. Strategically, the
Scandinavian peninsula became an “island,” surrounded on three sides by water
and on the fourth by a sub-Arctic wilderness. Sweden’s cession of Ducal Pomer¬
ania in 1815 eliminated its last foothold on the far side of the Baltic and a poten¬
tial source of conflict with Prussia.
    By 1815, Sam Clason wrote, “Sweden, the Baltic state, was dead, the penin¬
sular state had been born.” Indeed, the territorial settlement transformed both
