362       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

Denmark and Sweden from extended maritime to concentrated continental
states.8
    Geopolitical reorganization led to ethnic consolidation. While neither of the
older monarchies were seriously disturbed by separatist discontents, awareness
of cultural and historical distinctiveness had been growing in both Finland and
Norway throughout the period and would, sooner or later, have led to mounting
friction with Sweden and Denmark respectively. What this might eventually
have involved is suggested by the subsequent history of the Norwegian-Swedish
union until its dissolution in 1905 and of the Finnish-Russian union until it ended
in 1917, as well as by Iceland’s relations with Denmark until it achieved full
independence in 1944.
   In the event, the emergence of five fully sovereign Nordic states by the pres¬
ent century has provided a firm foundation for what presently amounts to a kind
of super-state in the North, through voluntary cooperation on a basis of national
equality.
    Meanwhile, the most pronounced ethnic schism of the period 1760-1815,
between Danes and Germans, did not result in separation by 1815. The Danish
monarchy, with the duchies, remained the exception in the North, being in effect
less ethnically consolidated than before during the next half-century, until the
loss of the duchies to Prussia in 1864. Denmark’s southern frontier would not
be redrawn along ethnic lines until 1920, finally completing the process begun
in the North in 1809-15.
   The overall results of territorial and ethnic concentration would be the long
peace in the North and the possibilities for internal development it allowed.
Sweden has not fought a war since 1814; Norway and Finland were spared until
World War II. Denmark, owing to the problem of the duchies, would be less
fortunate, having to fight rear-guard actions in 1848-49 and in 1864, before it
too was drawn into World War II. Not disregarding these exceptions, the long
Pax Nordica has been of inestimable importance for the evolution of a distinctive
way of life and values in the North.


    No less significant were the political and administrative developments of the
period. The Napoleonic wars brought about changes of dynasty in Sweden, Fin¬
land, and Norway, replacing Vasas and Oldenburgs with Bemadottes and
Romanovs. Only Denmark remained under its old royal house.
    The years between 1760 and 1815 bear witness to profound changes of atti¬
tude toward the state. No longer could it be regarded as no more than the sum
total of the ruling prince s domains and as such the extension of the sovereign
and his dynastic interests. Increasingly the state emerged in informed public
opinion as a whole greater than its parts, distinct from the monarch and his par¬
ticular regime, a means to the public weal rather than an end in itself. “Must
one serve the king? Must one serve the state?’’9 Thus the younger Count Fersen
