                                 CHAPTER 14




                      Conclusions
                  Scandinavia by 1815




In July 1815, the month after Napoleon’s final defeat at Waterloo and the con¬
clusion of the Congress of Vienna, Frederik VI held his belated coronation in
Roskilde cathedral, surrounded by medieval pageantry and the tombs of his
ancestors since the days of the Valdemars. This costly ritual—against the back¬
ground of Denmark's postwar exhaustion and impoverishment—may stand as a
milepost, not only in Denmark but throughout the North. It would be followed,
three years later, by the crowning of King Karl XIV Johan in the medieval cathe¬
drals of Stockholm and Trondheim. The revolutionary era had run its course.
“At times my diary arouses sensations like those I imagine must be felt upon
treading Classic ground,” Claus Pavels reflected in March 1815, “and if one
compares its present low, prosaic tone with the great events it once displayed
 . . . generations seem to lie between these two periods —and yet it is only a few
months!”1 As elsewhere in Europe, the decade and a half beginning in 1815
would be a time of cautious political and social conservatism, of economic stag¬
nation and slow recovery, following the Napoleonic upheaval. Not until the
 1830s would the pulse of economic and political life again begin to quicken.
    Thus 1815 clearly marks the end of an era. Because the Nordic lands lay on
the periphery of the European continent, outside the well-beaten thoroughfares
of diplomacy and war, because they were too sparsely populated and poor in
resources to weigh heavily in the balance of power, because their voluminous
historical literatures remain largely locked away in languages known to few
foreign scholars, this epoch—like most others in their history—remains gener¬
ally terra incognita to the outside world. Little has been said about the North
in the general histories, and what has been said has all too often been erroneous.

                                       359
