                         CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                        363

expressed the dilemma confronting himself and his peers in 1789. It was a cen¬
tral question many others—in the North and beyond—would find themselves
asking in the troubled years up to 1815.
    Such a shift from traditional to conditional loyalties has been seen in different
contexts and judged accordingly. Finnish historians of the older school stressed
the weakening of the moral fiber of the Swedish-Finnish state through the indi¬
vidualistic and utilitarian values of the Enlightenment, leading to the ignominy
of 1808-9.10 Conversely, the Danes have taken pride in steadfast loyalty to their
king in the face of adversity. Historians in Sweden, Norway, Schleswig-Hol¬
stein, and even Iceland—like their English, American, and French counter¬
parts-have tended to vindicate the concept of a revocable social contract based
on the natural rights of the individual and the common good.
     Among contemporary European monarchs. none identified himself with the
  ideal of the “first servant of the state” more conscientiously than Frederik VI.
 He himself recognized, at least obliquely, what others in his lands on occasion
 expressed more directly: that his regime legitimized itself only so long as it pro¬
 vided for the welfare of the nation and its citizens. In Denmark there were few
 murmurs of discontent, even amid the tribulations of war and economic col¬
 lapse. In the duchies, however, there were those who denied that the government
 served their best interests and who were prepared to conclude that they would
 be morally justified in seceding from the Danish state.
     Having been seized from Sweden by military force, Finland in 1809 was
 permitted by its new sovereign, the autocrat of all the Russias, to retain Gustav
 Ill’s constitution of 1772, as amended in 1789, the first of the Nordic constitu¬
 tions of the period. Under the impact of military defeat, the Swedes in 1809
 renounced the same constitution in favor of a new one restoring a balance be¬
 tween the crown and the nation’s representatives. The Norwegians went farthest
 in 1814, repudiating Europe’s theoretically most complete absolutism for the last
constitution of this era and the most liberal in Europe in its time.
     Norway established a semi-unicameral legislature elected on a broad liberal
franchise. Sweden would not abandon representation through its four Estates
until they were replaced by a bicameral legislature in 1866, whereas Finland—
the last European country to retain the medieval Estates system—would make
the full jump to a unicameral legislature elected through the universal suffrage
of both sexes in 1906, a leap comparable to Norway’s nearly a century earlier.
     Throughout the period there are striking parallels between Finland and Nor¬
way. A question that has much concerned historians has been the degree to
which the Finns and the Norwegians during the eighteenth century—in particular
after 1760—evolved into self-conscious and self-sufficient national entities,
capable of managing their own affairs and both preserving and developing separ¬
ate cultures by 1809-14. It has been seen how the populations and economic
importance of both lands increased greatly during the period. In many respects
