360       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

Jacques Godechot largely summarized the view of international scholarship
when he stated in 1956 that Scandinavia during this era “remained calm.”2
   The present study should surely have disabused the reader of any such con¬
ception. The period is, however, of great significance, for although the Nordic
lands were never invaded, occupied, or reorganized by revolutionary or Napole¬
onic France, they underwent by 1815 as fundamental a transformation—terri¬
torially, dynastically, constitutionally, economically, socially, and culturally—
as any part of the Western world.
   In the first volume of his Age of the Democratic Revolution, R. R. Palmer
argued in 1959 that the whole of Western civilization was swept during the last
four decades of the eighteenth century by
   a single revolutionary movement, which manifested itself in different
   ways and with varying success in different countries, yet in all of them
   showed similar objectives and principles. . . . Revolutionary aims and
   sympathies existed throughout Europe and America. They arose every¬
   where out of local, genuine, and specific causes; or, otherwise, they re¬
   flected conditions that were universal throughout the Western World.3

By the same token, the forces of conservatism and counterrevolution rallied
around the same standards throughout the West. Palmer’s thesis has not lacked
its critics.4 Yet the example of the Nordic lands—particularly when the period
is extended to 1815—substantiates Palmer’s basic view to a considerably greater
degree than he himself realized when he formulated it. Not least, his concept
of a three-cornered struggle between autocracy, aristocracy, and democracy (in
the eighteenth-century sense) is repeatedly illustrated in both Scandinavian
monarchies.5
    The essential problems confronting the North were recognized already by
 1760: in Denmark and the duchies the peasant problem called for reform, on
both practical and ideal grounds; in Sweden parliamentary liberty was degener¬
ating into party strife, cut across by social conflict, hazardous to both public
order and national security; Norway, Finland, and the duchies were restive
within their traditional subordinate status; the independence and integrity of both
Scandinavian monarchies were increasingly precarious within the European
arena, due in large part to persistent rivalry and suspicion between them. The
basic solutions to these problems were likewise envisioned during the crucial
decade of the 1760s, even if their realization was sometimes long delayed.
   Scandinavia, in common with the rest of the Western world, was subjected
to the effects of war, at home and abroad, in 1757-63, 1775-83, 1788-90,
 1792-1815, including erratic swings between prosperity and impoverishment,
and effective pressures for internal reforms to provide for military needs. At the
same time, the North was open and receptive to the intellectual crosscurrents of
the secular Enlightenment, religious pietisms, and romantic sensibility. Polit-
