 354       THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 month to confirm the union. The constitutional relationship between the two
 kingdoms was set forth in an Act of Union, which following review by the
 Storting was promulgated on 6 August 1815.
    The Riksdag of 1815 was otherwise necessarily concerned mainly with finan¬
 cial matters, in the lively discussion of which a new parliamentary leader. Count
 Fredrik Boguslaus von Schwerin, emerged in the Noble Estate. He had opposed
 press controls at the Riksdag of 1812 and now undertook to form a “loyal oppo¬
 sition   on the   British   model,   evoking Karl   Johan’s   memorable outburst:
 “Opposition,   c’est conspiration/”95 The small opposition in       1815 made no
 appreciable difference, but it was the harbinger of a revival of Swedish party
 politics within the following decade.


    Both Sweden and Denmark were reckoned among the smaller powers at the
 Congress of Vienna, held between September 1814 and June 1815, but both had
 vital interests to protect. Karl Johan in Stockholm was anxious that neither
 Norway’s new status nor Sweden’s refusal to compensate Denmark according
to the Treaty of Kiel after the Norwegian campaign be called into question. He
was meanwhile apprehensive of reported legitimist cabals against him in Vienna.
   In the end, he need not have worried. For Tsar Alexander, the union of
Norway with Sweden and the stability of the Bernadotte succession were his
firmest guarantees for the union of the Grand Duchy of Finland with the Russian
Empire, hence of the future stability of the North. As he explained to Lord
Castlereagh:

   My capital had become impregnable, while Sweden, better concentrated,
   no longer had anything to fear. In this way both sides gained in security
   and all cause for dissention and alarm had been eliminated. If the laws of
   balance are not to be found herein, I know not where to look for them.96

Although Finland’s new situation, like Norway’s, was kept off the agenda in
Vienna, it played its indirect role by demonstrating the type of regime Alexander
I envisioned for the new Congress Poland.

   Denmark seemed to be faced with even greater perils by the early fall of
1814. It had been grievously mutilated by the loss of Norway. Not only did
Sweden now refuse to give the compensation promised in the Treaty of Kiel
but it proclaimed the treaty itself invalidated, thus technically renewing a state
of war. Russia had still not ratified a peace treaty with Denmark, and a^Russian
corps of some 45,000 men, encamped on Holstein soil following the French
capitulation of Hamburg, stood at Karl Johan’s disposal, which might overrun
the duchies and Jutland. Denmark’s military situation was hopeless; its finances
in ruins. It was meanwhile feared that the Congress of Vienna would construct
a new Germany including Holstein. Rumors were rife. The monarchy’s very
existence seemed in jeopardy.
