 356      THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15

 Confederation, which involved an obligation to establish representative assem¬
 blies there, a commitment long unheeded in Copenhagen.97


   Throughout the period from 1760 to 1815, no half-decade was more momen¬
 tous than that which brought the era to its close. During these years the great
 transformation of the political geography of the North which had begun with
 Finland s separation from Sweden and attachment to the Russian Empire was
completed by Norway’s separation from Denmark and attachment to Sweden.
 As had long been foreseen, both were inextricably bound together, parts of a
single process of territorial and strategic realignment.
   In the process, internal changes took place throughout the North. The loss
of Finland had precipitated a libertarian revolution in Sweden, but while the new
Swedish constitution of 1809 was retained, it came by 1815 to be applied in a
far more conservative spirit than its framers had intended.
   Although the Norwegians—like the Finns before them—had not themselves
sought to break their ancient political ties, Norway, like Finland, obtained its
own constitution, and indeed one more liberal than any in the Europe of that
time. It was, moreover, drafted with remarkably little friction. Historians have
often attributed much of the tumult of revolutionary France to a lack of political
experience under the old regime. From this perspective, the political maturity
and realism shown by Norway’s leaders in 1814 is impressive. Yet for all their
factional disputes, they belonged to a small elite—the “Generation of 1814”_
largely homogeneous socially and culturally, indeed often interrelated, within an
administratively unified land.

   The remainder of the Danish monarchy was likewise transformed to a high
degree. Already in the spring of 1813, Fritz Reventlow of Emkendorf wrote to
his brother Cai that “next to separation from Denmark,” the Duchies could
wish for nothing better than for Denmark to lose Norway in return for compen¬
sation in Germany, so that the resulting combination “could not be separated
from the Germanic body.      The balance between Danes and Germans would
thereby be redressed in favor of Deutschtum,98 His hopes—and Frederik Vi’s
apprehensions—would be largely fulfilled. The inclusion of Holstein in the
Germanic Confederation of 1815 thereafter prevented any direct incorporation
of both Holstein and Schleswig into the kingdom. Frederik Vi’s policy of 1806
was thus decisively defeated, despite later nineteenth-century attempts to pro¬
mote a helstat, or integral state. The duchies, including Lauenburg, now com¬
prised close to half the monarchy’s European territory and more than 40 percent
of its reduced population of about one and a half million. This would set the
stage for an increasingly intransigent confrontation between Dane and German
within what had become an essentially federative union, not unlike the others
that had just come into existence in the North.
  In pondering the events of the Scandinavian world in these years, one cannot
