                                        THE RESOLUTION, 1810-15                 357


but again reflect upon the role of the individual in history. Without discounting
long-term geopolitical trends, it is virtually impossible to envision the actual
course of events apart from the actions in particular of Napoleon and Alexander
I without, and of Karl Johan, Christian Frederik, and Frederik VI within.
   Of Karl Johan, it has been said that in electing him their crown prince, the
Swedes guessed wrong but chose right." Surely nothing would have seemed
more obvious in 1810, when Napoleon was at the zenith of his power, than that
his former marshal should join in the assault on Russia and restore Finland to
Sweden. That he should instead defy both his own and his adopted country’s
traditional loyalties was one of the most dramatic renversements of the Napole¬
onic era and surely something no one else could have accomplished. In retro¬
spect it is tempting to see in it an essential turning point in Napoleon’s fortunes,
as both contemporaries and later historians in Sweden have often tended to do.
“Those familiar with events, and especially circumstances in 1812 and 1813,”
wrote Count Trolle-Wachtmeister in his memoirs, ”... know that Napoleon
would not have fallen if the crown prince had not cooperated.” On St. Helena
in 1816, Napoleon himself called Bernadotte “the snake we sheltered in our
bosom” and “one of the chief active causes of our ruin,” who had given his
enemies “the key to our policies and to the tactics of our armies” and “showed
them the roads across the sacred soil.”100 While the importance of his role
remains imponderable in this respect, he would prove to be the only “Napoleon-
ide” to retain a European crown and found a lasting dynasty. Meanwhile, by
combining constancy of purpose with flexibility of means, Karl Johan suc¬
ceeded, against heavy odds, in unifying the Scandinavian peninsula. That the old
Jacobin should furthermore prove a stern authoritarian conservative was also
something various of his backers in 1810 had hardly reckoned on.
   Christian Frederik has received his share of criticism, at the time and since,
for shortcomings of both character and policy.101 Yet the twenty-four-year-old
prince, who previously had been excluded from any real responsibility, emerged
in 1813-14 as a political leader of impressive ability. Although his efforts did
not succeed in preserving Norway’s dynastic tie with Denmark, they did permit
the Norwegians to create their own state and thereafter to negotiate for an
acceptable union with Sweden.
   In contrast to these two practitioners of politics as the art of the possible,
Frederik VI is significant during these years mainly for his failings as a states¬
man and general. Stubbornly attached to absolutism, centralization, and the
integrity of the existing monarchy, he consistently gave way too late and only
half-heartedly to the imperative pressure of events. He failed to act promptly and
imaginatively in the Swedish succession crises of 1809 and 1810; to undercut
Sweden by joining its allies in early 1813; or later the same year to permit
Norway to do so separately. One wonders, for instance, what might have hap¬
pened if he had encouraged Christian Frederik to proclaim a separate kingdom
