 372       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

to compensate manorial proprietors by permitting them the unrestricted disposi¬
tion of their property. Had this come about, the results in Denmark and the
duchies would doubtless have been similar to those in much of northern Ger¬
many. There, manorial lords, to expedite large-scale commercial demesne
farming, carried out mass evictions of their peasant tenants, as in neighboring
Mecklenburg, or compensated themselves for the loss of tenant labor with a
sizable part of each former tenancy, as in Prussia, including the former Swedish
Pomerania.28 In Denmark, and to only a slightly lesser degree in the Duchies,
peasant lands remained in peasant hands, either as freeholds or as regulated
tenancies.
    Eli F. Heckscher has meanwhile compared the social results of enclosure in
Great Britain and Sweden. Whereas in Britain most of the agricultural land
already belonged to a handful of large landlords, who could consolidate their
lands following enclosure into a limited number of fairly large and economically
profitable tenant farms, in Sweden over half the land was held by peasant free¬
holders before the Enskifte ordinances of 1803-7, which therefore increased
peasant landholding through the division of common lands and of existing
properties. The North, like France and adjoining areas reorganized by revolu¬
tionary and Napoleonic France-but unlike Britain and most of eastern Europe-
would thus remain a stronghold of independent smallholders.
    In Denmark, the duchies, and Sweden, enclosure and land consolidation
 broke up old, tight-knit village communities and the social solidarity and inter¬
dependency they had preserved. The appearance of entire regions was changed
as settlement dispersed from compact villages and hamlets to individual farm¬
steads. By 1807 three-quarters of the peasant farms on the Danish islands and
half of them on Jutland had been consolidated, and about half of the peasant
farmers had relocated on their new holdings.30 At the same time, the dividing-up
of former common lands deprived numerous poor peasants without land of their
own of such rights of usage as they had customarily enjoyed in the past.
    The Nordic peasantries were thus becoming increasingly stratified between
haves and have-nots. The former, be it noted, included leaseholders, who if they
farmed substantial, indivisible tenancies, could often be more prosperous and
respected than the owners of small, frequently divided freeholds. The have-nots
included cotters or crofters—husmcend in Denmark or Norway, Hausler or
Kossaten in the German provinces, torpare in Sweden, torparit in Finland—who
occupied cottages on farms and manors, with perhaps a small plot of land
attached, in return for stipulated labor obligations. In addition there was a vari¬
ety of hired hands, day laborers, and paupers.
   Enclosure and land consolidation, together with more intensive cultivation
through crop rotation and the attendant increase in livestock, created a growing
need for farm labor, especially in Denmark. The Danish census of 1801 showed
that along with their families, there were 261,307 persons in the farmer class.
