 370       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

 run from agrarian reform. Speaking of the abolition of the stavnsband in Den¬
 mark, the poet Jens Christian Hostrup held that “those who lost the battle only
 gained thereby.”22 Release from public responsibilities and liabilities, land
 consolidation, the largely unregulated use of wage labor, the formation of new
 cotters' holdings from peasant tenancies and frequently their eventual absorption
 into the demesne—all proved more than adequate compensation for lost preroga¬
 tives in Denmark, Sweden, and the German lands, allowing for profitable large-
 scale commercial agriculture, in many cases down to the present day. Noblemen
 likewise continue to play a prominent role in politics, government service (espe¬
 cially the officer and diplomatic corps), social and cultural life. They would be
 represented by their own Estate in the Swedish Riksdag until 1866 and in the
 Finnish diet until 1906.
   Yet by 1815, no form of manorial property or public appointment remained
their exclusive privilege in either Denmark or Sweden. In Finland, Schleswig-
Holstein, and the former Swedish Pomerania, such vestigial privileges as still
existed in 1809 and 1815 would be more gradually eliminated. In Norway,
where nobility scarcely existed, further ennoblements were prohibited by the
constitution in 1814, and noble status would be abolished entirely in 1821, over
Karl XIV Johan’s indignant veto. In the Atlantic islands, a native nobility was
never established.
   The decline of the nobility reflects the transformation of the Scandinavian
kingdoms from expansive powers in the seventeenth century, requiring the
services of a numerous administrative and military class and with ample means
to reward it, to minor and contracting powers in the eighteenth. For Denmark,
the Peace of Liibeck in 1629 marked the crucial turning point, for Sweden, the
Peace of Nystad in 1721. The preconditions for a golden age of aristocracy, such
as still existed in much of eastern Europe and to a degree in Great Britain, no
longer prevailed in Scandinavia by the 1760s.23
    There seems a notable disparity between the relatively, modest differences in
privilege separating nobility from the upper levels of the commonality by the
 1760s and the intensity of antiaristocratic passions in the North. One is reminded
of Alexis de Tocqueville’s view that the essential similarity of the upper classes
in all but legal status was itself a powerful stimulus to class antagonism in pre¬
revolutionary France.24
    In the event, the Scandinavian nobility lost almost entirely such special status
as it possessed between 1760 and 1815, not through the abolition of its existing
privileges but through the granting of similar privileges to the other social
orders. Opportunities for advancement and social standing were opened up to
burghers, clergy, lower officials, and in Sweden and Finland, to those numerous
  nonnoble persons of quality ’ (ofralse stdndspersoner) who did not fit into any
of the old Estates but who constituted an increasing proportion of the emerging,
amalgamated middle classes. The most momentous changes nonetheless affected
