 368      CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

province of Skane, where a good two-thirds of all agricultural land in Malmohus
County (lari) would be consolidated by 1822, although in those areas of the
country covered by the ordinances of 1804 and 1807 the process was still only
beginning.18 Norrland, the northern two-thirds of the land, was still exempted,
as was the province of Dalarna, where in places fragmented and scattered hold¬
ings still exist. In Finland land consolidations continued to be governed by the
older Storskifte ordinances until well into the nineteenth century. Similarly,
Norway was not subject to the Danish enclosure ordinances, with the result that
land consolidations scarcely began before the 1820s. The Atlantic islands, with
their particular forms of sub-Arctic livestock raising, were never really touched
by these developments, and in the Faeroes an ancient system of communal agri¬
culture with widespread common lands is still practiced.
    Enclosures in the more fertile areas resulted in both more extensive and more
intensive types of arable farming, through a more widely dispersed settlement
pattern on individual farmsteads which brought new land under the plow and by
the more constant utilization of the soil made possible by new techniques of crop
rotation. Yet even outside the areas of large-scale land consolidations, farming
was becoming more extensive and more intensive in varying degree. Wide¬
spread internal colonization proceeded apace in northern Norway, Sweden, and
especially Finland, creating from the beginning farms of the newer type. Popula¬
tion pressures in old areas of settlement with limited arable land meanwhile led
to divisions of family farms into smaller and smaller holdings, requiring more
labor-intensive forms of cultivation.19 In parts of western Norway, for instance,
the plow was abandoned in favor of the spade on the steeper hillside fields.
Throughout the North the potato gained ground, thanks to the plentiful nourish¬
ment it could provide from small patches of poor soil.
   Farming was becoming increasingly commercial in the richer and more
accessible areas, producing not only for urban markets but for sizable segments
of the rural population unable to provide fully for their own basic needs. The
dependence of much of the Norwegian peasantry upon supplies of Danish grain,
even after the end of the Danish grain monopoly in 1788, is the classic case in
point. Meanwhile, Denmark and the duchies were able to export produce
abroad. Large estates, now purchasable by any enterprising citizen, consolidated
and enclosed, and employing wage labor and rational methods, continued to play
a leading role in production for the market and in local encouragement of
improved peasant farming. The trend toward commercial cultivation led in some
areas to the abandonment of old subsidiary occupations associated with subsist¬
ence farming.
    Agricultural yields were greatly increased. By around 1800, Sweden was
importing no more than 2-3 percent of its grain consumption, of which much
was used for distillation. The ratio of seed planted to grain harvested in Denmark
is estimated to have increased on the average to around 5:1, or by some 25 per-
