 364      CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

 they became more closely integrated than ever before, administratively, eco¬
 nomically, and culturally, with Sweden and Denmark, as Lars G. von Bonsdorff
 in particular has argued for Finland and Hans Jensen for Norway.11
     Yet at the same time, growing population, wealth, and relative importance
 within their respective realms also brought increased awareness in both Finland
 and Norway of particular regional interests, thus grievances against the central¬
 izing policies of Stockholm and Copenhagen, especially in times of economic
 or military crisis. The pre-romantic mood, from the 1760s on, fostered a height¬
 ened pride in the unique cultural values preserved in rich folk traditions, and in
 Norway’s case in a proud medieval past before the union with Denmark. In both
 Finland and Norway, small coteries among the elite classes—nobility and patri¬
 ciate, respectively-felt moved, already in the 1770s and 1780s, to speculate
 about breaking old political bonds to form new unions with Russia and Sweden,
 anticipating the final settlement of 1809-14. Yet surely more significant was a
 growing and assertive self-awareness among the broader strata of society, mani¬
 fested by the Lofthuus and Haugean movements in Norway and, as Pentti Ren-
 vall has argued, by an increasingly self-conscious solidarity among the Finnish
 representatives in the Swedish riksdagar between 1762 and 1800, particularly
 within the Peasant Estate.12 No less important were the high and constantly ris¬
 ing proportions of native-born civil, ecclesiastical, and military officials at all
 levels in both Finland and Norway during the period, as well as their evidently
 growing preference to serve at home, rather than in Sweden or Denmark.13
    There can be little doubt that had the Russians retained all of Finland in 1721
or 1743, the country would scarcely have been prepared to undertake the man¬
agement of its own affairs; Swedish Finland would surely have been reduced by
necessity to the same status as Russian “Old” Finland or the Baltic Provinces.
According to Einar Juva, Finland was no better prepared in 1788.14 Similarly,
had Karl XII seized Norway in 1718 or Gustav III done so in 1772, its incorpora¬
tion in a manner similar to the Danish and Norwegian, provinces annexed by
Sweden in the seventeenth century might not have been out of the question.
    With few exceptions, neither Finns nor Norwegians had desired to break their
existing ties in 1809-14. But when compelled by circumstance to assume re¬
sponsibility for their separate political existence, they proved admirably pre¬
pared by the experience of recent decades. Until the end of the eighteenth cen¬
tury , political tutelage under Stockholm and Copenhagen had served them well
in fostering their internal growth and development. But by then they were reach¬
ing the point of diminishing returns, after which their subordinate status within
larger, centralized states would have impeded progress. For the immediate
future internal autonomy within federative unions would provide scope for their
ongoing development.
   By 1815 there were constitutional regimes in three of the Nordic lands; most
conservative in Finland, most liberal in Norway, with Sweden in between. Den-
