                         CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                      365

 mark remained the exception: just as it retained its old dynasty, it would con¬
 tinue to be ruled under the royal absolutism established in 1660 for the next
 thirty-four years. Yet underlying similarities with the other Nordic countries
 were greater than they might seem. In 1813-14 Frederik VI abandoned his
 attempts at personal autocracy and restored the Danish state council; in 1815 he
 was compelled to accept practical limitations to his powers in the duchies.
 Thereafter, it was above all the bureaucracy that governed the Danish state—as
 it had, less effectively, in 1760. The same was no less true in Finland, where
 the tsar-grand dukes did not see fit to convene the Estates from 1809 until 1863.
 Sweden, after 1809-14, was essentially more administered than ruled until the
Riksdag gradually assumed a more active and independent role by the 1830s,
 while the commanding position of the bureaucracy in Norway, both in drafting
 the constitution of 1814 and in the Storting for at least the next decade and a
 half is unmistakable. In both kingdoms the strong hand of Karl Johan would be
 everywhere apparent to the end of his reign in 1844.
     It seems paradoxical that the period associated with the birth—or rebirth—of
constitutional liberty likewise witnessed the culmination of the bureaucratic state
(the embedsstat or dmbetsstat) throughout the North. This latter development
was, of course, part of an overall growth of administrative power and efficiency
throughout the Western world between the Seven Years’ War and the end of the
Napoleonic conflict, arising both from military demands upon the state and from
the appeal of the Enlightenment for strong government as the necessary instru¬
ment of humanitarian reform. While the Swedish and Danish monarchies en¬
gaged in protracted hostilities only during the last years of the period, impending
threats to Finland and Norway, Schleswig-Holstein and Swedish Pomerania, as
well as to neutral commerce, placed a premium upon effective government. The
implementation of the great reforms of the period, ameliorating the social, mate¬
rial, and cultural conditions of the Nordic peoples as a whole, in turn depended
upon the power of the crown and the competence, dedication, and honesty of
its servants.
    Royal autocracy and centralization reached their height in the North in 1806,
when both Gustav IV Adolf and Crown Prince Frederik resolutely governed
without benefit of councils or estates and incorporated Swedish Pomerania and
Schleswig-Holstein directly into their domains. By 1815 a retreat from this ad¬
vanced position was already well under way. The bureaucratic state, as experi¬
ence in Sweden, Finland, and Norway—to say nothing of elsewhere in Europe-
had shown, was capable of functioning, if need be, independently of the crown.
The apparent paradox, suggested above, was ultimately resolved by the mon-
archs and their functionaries themselves, who through their effective reforms
and firm political tutelage cleared the way, whether intentionally or not, for the
exercise of popular sovereignty.
    Sweden, after veering between the extremes of an exuberant but ineffectual
