 366       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

 rule by the Estates before 1772 and the severe limitation of their powers there¬
 after, established in 1809 a viable balance of political forces as the basis for a
 stable and effective parliamentary life from at least the 1830s on. By the same
 decade, parliamentary activity was on the increase in Norway. The Swedish and
 Norwegian constitutions of 1809 and 1814 would thereafter prove adaptable to
 a broadening democratization down to the present.
    In 1831, under pressure to establish the Landtag required by the Germanic
 Confederation for Holstein, Frederik VI established four local consultative
 assemblies (stcenderforsamlinger): for Holstein and Lauenburg, Schleswig, Jut¬
 land, and the islands (including Iceland and the Faeroes). By the end of his life
 in 1848, Christian VIII—who had been Norway’s elected king in 1814—con¬
 sidered a constitution for Denmark. This was granted by his successor, Frederik
 VII, in June 1849, at a time of renewed revolution throughout much of Europe,
 finally ending 189 years of royal absolutism. It was the measure of its success
that it had itself created the conditions which rendered it obsolete, thereby laying
the foundations for what would in time become—together with the other Nordic
nations—a showcase of working democracy. In 1863 Alexander II at last revived
the Finnish diet. By 1874 Iceland, too, would be granted its own separate con¬
stitution and legislative assembly with the ancient name of the Althing.
    Throughout the North old “Jacobins” of the 1790s and their political heirs
remained standard-bearers of the liberal cause in the early nineteenth century.
Well could Count Trolle-Wachtmeister describe the Swedish liberalism of the
 1840s as the “realization” of the “Swedish Jacobinism” of his youth.15 Count
Adolf Ludvig Ribbing, the Swedish regicide of 1792, then editor of the journal
Le vrai liberal in Brussels, could still proudly describe himself in 1817 as a
“sworn enemy of oppression and despotism of any hue, be it the imperial green,
the monarchial blue, or Robespierre’s tricolor,” and at the end of his life in 1838
he called himself the last of “those frightful men of 1792, whom some regarded
as arch-aristocrats and others as Jacobins.”16
    The quickening of parliamentary life in the North from the 1830s on coin¬
cided with the emergence of the peasantry as a major political force, reflecting
its steady advancement in prosperity, enlightenment, social standing, experience
in public affairs, and self-awareness. The Swedish Peasant Estate at last gained
full parity within the Riksdag in 1809. The Norwegian and Danish constitutions
of 1814 and 1849 provided for broad, liberal franchises without reference to
Estate, which gave land-holding farmers a predominance they soon learned to
exploit. The political role of agrarian parties would loom large in the North
through much of the nineteenth century and beyond.
   Throughout the period, not only wider European but specifically Nordic
interactions are manifest. The example of the freeholding Norwegian odelbonde
provided a model for peasant reforms in Denmark, which in turn spurred eman¬
cipation in the duchies. This step toward a basic social leveling called forth re-
