                        CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                     369

cent in the twenty years after 1788, during which both yields and exports of
grain approximately doubled. Thanks largely to the cultivation of clovers and
grasses through crop rotation, the number of cattle in Denmark rose by a third
between 1770 and 1800. In Norway grain production by 1814 was double that
estimated for 1723 and would by 1835 be calculated at two and a half times as
large.20
   While there were good crop years and bad, there were much more erratic
swings in other areas of the economy, resulting above all from the vagaries of
war and peace in Europe. The war years 1757-63, 1775-83, and 1792-1807
brought great prosperity to neutral Scandinavian merchants and shippers. The
involvement of the region itself in hostilities by 1807 proved devastating. After
1815 the fabled days of commercial prosperity remained no more than a
memory. The great merchant houses were bankrupted or reduced to a modest
trade in indigenous products, impeded after 1814 by new tariff barriers dividing
the formerly interdependent Danish and Norwegian markets.
   Decline in trade after 1815 meanwhile reflected contracting markets abroad
for Nordic goods and services. Great Britain, the major customer, was by now
mining and smelting its own iron and importing Canadian timber, as well as ship¬
ping in its own bottoms. Swedish ironmasters and Norwegian sawmill operators,
shipowners, and fishermen suffered accordingly. A generation would pass
before new technologies would enable them to recover lost ground.
    The war years between 1807 and 1814 ruined painstaking efforts to stabilize
state finances and monetary systems. Thereafter the destruction of neutral
commerce and the loss of foreign markets made financial recovery especially
arduous before the general European upswing by mid-century.
    The real and solid gains of the period thus remain in agriculture, and these
not even the long post-1815 recession would obliterate. It would be upon this
firm foundation that the future economic development and prosperity of the
North would build.

   Surely the most far-reaching transformations of the period were those affect¬
ing social structure. Count Anders Fredrik Skjoldebrand recalled in later life a
time, in the 1750s and 1760s, when Sweden still had “magnates” who “enjoyed
the consideration due to princes.” In 1803 Christian Colbjornsen still perceived
a “spirit of aristocracy” lurking within the “ruins of the fearsome temple of
wicked feudalism.”21 Both commentaries would apply on both sides of the
Sound. Although the aristocratic spirit was not dead, “feudalism”—to the extent
that flexible concept applied to Nordic society—lay in “ruins” by 1815.
   Nobility as such did not disappear. The old titles remained—and remain
today—in Denmark, Sweden, Finland, and the former German provinces.
Noblemen would long preserve the greater part of the old manorial lands, often
protected by entail. As proprietors they had by no means suffered in the long
