                        CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                       381

the mainstream of progressive change in eighteenth-century Europe as a whole
and that the French Revolution was in this sense the great aberration.54 Axel
Linvald called the Danish agrarian reforms
   the manifestation of the freeing of state power from the landowning class
   as necessary intermediaries between the government and the peasantry and
   the building of a bureaucracy and administration sufficiently independent
   of class interests as to be capable of completing the break with the feudal
   order begun in 1660, which has been the greatest internal accomplishment
   of Danish absolutism.55

    The Scandinavian experience is thus of considerable though generally ne¬
glected relevance to the ongoing debate among historians over the concept of
“enlightened despotism.” This has tended to concentrate upon the practice of
royal autocracy in the larger, primarily eastern European monarchies. Because
these were also great military powers, it has been easy enough for critics of the
concept—chiefly of the Anglo-Saxon and French libertarian schools—to claim
that concrete military needs, rather than enlightened humanitarian considera¬
tions, were the “real” levers of reform in the period, on the basis of a kind of
unstated moral Gresham’s Law whereby more mundane motives ipso facto
invalidate more ideal ones. The examples of the Scandinavian monarchies, even
though quantitatively affecting only a small part of Europe’s population, add to
a more finely shaded qualitative understanding of both the ethos and the practice
of enlightened government in the eighteenth century.56
    Since the Nordic lands were not great military powers, the demands of war,
while not absent, were not their constant and predominating concern. The close
examination of their programs of reform reveals what common sense suggests:
that mixed motives were ever present, then as now. It is meanwhile naturally
assumed that the ideals of enlightened absolutism derived from the secular
rationalism of the Enlightenment. This seems evident enough in the brief, fever¬
ish career of Johann Friedrich Struensee in Denmark and in the longer and more
variable career of Gustav III in Sweden.57 Yet the Danish monarchy in particular
offers some rather different perspectives of interest and surely wider relevance.
    The great trio of dedicated reformers. Counts A. P. Bemstorff, C. D.
Reventlow, and Ernst Schimmelmann, seem, as high aristocrats and deeply
religious men, curiously inappropriate to their roles as the instigators of far-
reaching social change—according, that is, to the conventional preconceptions
about enlightened absolutism. Although familiar with the secular values of
Enlightenment thought, their guiding inspiration came quite evidently from
other sources, in part a revivified aristocratic ideal of noblesse oblige—fortified
by Montesquieu’s concept of a vigorous, serving nobility as the mainstay of
monarchy—in part a warm religious piety combining orthodox Lutheranism
with the new pietist activism, with its stress upon walking humbly with thy God
