 378       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

     Simultaneously there emerged in Uppsala another circle of young romantics,
 whose influence upon national cultural life was more profound and long-lasting,
 who looked even further back for their heroic age. Founding the “Gothic Soci¬
 ety” (Gotiska forbundet) in 1810, they idealized the pre-Christian North, finding
 there an antithesis virtually unique in the European world to its common
 background in Greco-Roman antiquity and the inspiration to moral regeneration
 in the future. Through their journal, Iduna, founded in 1811, the “Gothicists,”
 above all Erik Gustaf Geijer and Esaias Tegner, the leading Swedish poets of
 their day, painted a glowing picture of a hardy Nordic race tilling the ancestral
 soil in health and contentment, uncorrupted by the civilization of more southerly
climes. The implication was that by returning to the simple tastes and rude
virtues of their forefathers, the Swedes might rise again from defeat and moral
decay to build a better and more firmly grounded future. It was a message old
even in Rousseau’s day, but it now provided the central core, in Sweden and
elsewhere, for the vital and creative national romanticism of the following cen¬
tury. By hard work and sacrifice, Tegner admonished his countrymen in 1811
to “reconquer Finland within Sweden’s boundaries” in his epic poem “Svea.”
    When arms speak the Muses fall silent, according to an old Latin dictum. Yet
this was scarcely the case in Denmark, any more than in Sweden: in both coun¬
tries the years of national tribulation witnessed the beginning of a great age in
literature and the arts. Nor, surely, was this fortuitous, for in Denmark, too, the
challenge of adversity evoked an appeal to moral renewal and national solidar¬
ity. Serving with the student corps during the British naval attack on Copen¬
hagen in 1801, young Adam Oehlenschlager, Denmark’s foremost poetic talent
of the time, was moved to write:

             A divinity sweeps over Copenhagen
             all pettiness, all grudges die today

             the spirit of yore has awakened from its slumber.45

Returning to Denmark after four years abroad in 1809, Oehlenschlager turned,
like the Swedish Gothicists, to Nordic antiquity as a source of strength and in¬
spiration for the future. Similarly, Nicolai Frederik Severin Grundtvig, begin¬
ning his long career as a pivotal figure in Denmark’s nineteenth-century cultural
life, looked upon Napoleon as God’s chosen instrument for the regeneration of
nations.
   It was in this vein that Frederik Stoud, a Danish government official writing
under the pseudonym “Frederik Cortsen,” in April 1815 published his Tabet af
Norge til Medborgernes Eftertanke (Norway’s Loss for the Reflection of
Citizens), urging that the Danes make up for Norway by reclaiming their own
undeveloped wastelands. Abandoning past dreams of easy commercial and
