 374      CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

farmers “petty barons and lords.” For Ole Feldbaek it was the cotter class that
“paid the price” for Danish absolutism’s compromise with the manorial propri¬
etors and the establishment of the new farmholding class.33 The greatest prob¬
lems facing Nordic society after 1815 would thus come to be rural overpopulation
and poverty, to be only gradually ameliorated by emigration, industrialization,
and social reform.
   The reforms of 1760-1815 did not create equality of condition, nor were they
so intended, but they did provide an essential equality of opportunity, removing
social and religious barriers to talent and ambition, and to the free circulation
of wealth and property. The result was a society already by 1815 based primarily
upon functional status and personal attainment and wealth, rather than upon birth
and breeding: on “class” in the modern sense, rather than “estate” in the
earlier tradition.
    To be sure, the tendency was generally for the middle classes of town and
countryside to seek to level upward, rather than downward: the Stockholm patri¬
cian Niclas Ebel in 1793 was not alone in not wishing “to be equal to any but
those above him,” as Baron Lars von Engestrom alleged. In Scandinavia, as
elsewhere in Europe, middle-class foes of aristocracy were often enough “in¬
attentive to the sense of the common people,” as the American John Adams,
himself no social leveler, claimed in the case of the Dutch “Patriots” in 1787.34
    History is, moreover, seldom a matter of straight-line progressions. Some
ground was unquestionably lost during the lean years of the early nineteenth
century, as is most evident in Denmark. There, freehold purchases virtually
stopped for three decades or more after 1807: of some 66,500 farmers in 1835,
over a third, or around 24,800, were still tenants, including some unsuccessful
former freeholders. The number of cotters grew as the proportion with some
land to till declined, and until 1848 they had little protection against arbitrary
treatment. In 1838 the government permitted landlords to appropriate to the
demesne limited parts of their tenant farms if they released the occupants from
labor obligations. Schools and relief to the poor suffered from insufficient
means. Press controls were again tightened in May 1814.35
    Yet in Denmark—as elsewhere in the North—the ideals and patterns of social
reform were set by 1815, the essential groundwork for the progressive democra¬
tization of society, to be taken up again by the 1830s. In 1800 the Swede Axel
Gabriel Silfverstolpe hailed Andreas Peter Bernstorff, “Denmark’s glory,” for
having “striven, in the right order, to make his nation one day worthy to receive
freedom and capable of maintaining it.”36 His words would apply to the reform¬
ers of the period throughout the North.
    The ordinance of 1799 on relief to the poor in Copenhagen meanwhile
embodied a principle likewise foreshadowing the Scandinavia of today: the
state s commitment to provide either employment or material support for its
needy citizens—a concept recalling the abortive French constitution of 1793. “If
