 382       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

 and loving thy neighbor as thyself. The role of “enlightened aristocracy” and
 of the new pietism as driving forces for humane reform in later eighteenth-cen¬
 tury Europe are facets of the debate on “enlightened despotism” thus far
 scarcely conceived, let alone examined.
    The actual accomplishments of reforming government in Scandinavia were
 notable in Europe by any standard, in part because the way had been prepared
 by earlier monarchs and their ministers. Again Denmark since 1660 offers the
 best, though not the only, example. According to Axel Linvald:
   Many different conditions gave the Danish Age of Enlightenment its par¬
   ticular distinctiveness. One factor is, however, decisive. Round about in
   Europe’s various countries the task at hand was to assure the ultimate vic¬
   tory of state power over the survivals of the old medieval social order. In
   Denmark, absolutism had long since overcome these forces. In most coun¬
   tries under enlightened despotism the work of practical reform had to take
   second place; in Denmark it gave the period its character.58

    Scandinavian examples likewise illustrate how the transformations finally
 effected bore the imprint of opposing forces and ideals. In Sweden Gustav III
and Gustav IV Adolf leveled social barriers while despising the revolution in
France. Their aristocratic opponents meanwhile hailed the French Revolution in
the name of a political liberty at last secured for the future in 1809, while gener¬
ally seeking to defend established privileges. Similarly, in the duchies liberty
and reform were the rallying cries of opposing camps. While liberal reformers
finally gained the emancipation of the peasantry from the stavnsband in Den¬
mark and from Leibeigenschaft in Schleswig-Holstein, the Danish government
characteristically adjusted the pace and scope of agrarian reform to allow the
accommodation of existing property owners while itself largely assuming the
protective role of the ideal manorial lord toward his tenantry espoused by
thoughtful conservatives.
    Consideration of reforms “from on high” must raise fundamental questions
concerning their ultimate effectiveness in bringing about the changes that mani¬
festly took place, perhaps most notably in Denmark. Earlier historians, such as
Hans Jensen and Axel Linvald, quoted above, have traditionally attributed the
leading role to government and its farsighted leadership. Sir James Mackintosh’s
description in 1791 of the French Revolution as a “grand experiment to ascer¬
tain the portion of freedom and happiness that can be created by political institu¬
tions” may well be applied to the Danish reforms of the period. A recent ten¬
dency is to stress long-term economic trends affecting population growth,
expanding markets, and rising prices. Already in 1891 Christen Christensen
(Horsholm) emphasized the Danish peasants’ own efforts to improve their lot
from the 1760s. In his great survey of Danish agrarian society from 1500 to
1800, published in 1978, Fridlev Skrubbeltrang was concerned primarily with
