                         CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                        379

colonial wealth, “we must conquer our own country.” His words recall both his
contemporary Tegner’s in Sweden and his later compatriot H. P. Holst’s
celebrated admonition in 1864, following Denmark’s loss of Schleswig-Holstein,
that “what has been lost without must be won within.”46
    It was thus on a note of quiet but determined optimism that the Nordic peoples
prepared to face an uncertain future by 1815. The same impression is thereafter
reinforced by the visual arts, then best represented in the serene and sunny
domesticity portrayed by the painters of the Danish “Golden Age,” such as C.
V. Eckersberg, Christen Kobke, and Constantin Hansen, in contrast to the
medieval otherworldliness or exotic and violent theatricality of such Continental
contemporaries as Caspar David Friedrich (a native of Swedish Pomerania) in
Germany, and Theodore Gericault and Eugene Delacroix in France.47
    Given the prevailingly positive response of Scandinavian romanticism to the
challenge of the future, it seems not unnatural that Erik Gustaf Geijer, the
acknowledged high priest of Uppsala Gothicism, should make his celebrated
apostasy to political liberalism in 1838, recalling the conversion of such leading
European conservative romantics as Victor Hugo by or during the 1830s.
    Neither Finland nor Norway were quick to embrace the romantic mood. By
 1815 facing new challenges and the search for new identities, they held firmly
to the Enlightenment faith in reasoned progress. For generations their educated
classes would continue to look to Stockholm and Copenhagen respectively for
cultural inspiration, thereby reinforcing their distinctiveness within new political
unions.48 But by the mid-nineteenth century, both would be caught up in the
creative surge of national romanticism, to the incalculable enrichment of their
emerging national cultures.

    Thus in all areas of life the Nordic lands were profoundly affected by the
developments of the revolutionary era, each in ways reflecting its own condi¬
tions and traditions. It may, in conclusion, be asked to what extent Scandinavia
itself underwent a “revolution” in these years.
    The answer is, of course, largely a matter of definitions. The term “revolu¬
tion” in present usage is generally taken to mean the violent overthrow of an
existing social and political order, involving the active participation of large
masses of people, as in the classic case of the French Revolution. It may, how¬
ever, also describe a transformation, not necessarily violent, in some area or
related areas of life so profound as to affect significantly society as a whole, like
the Industrial Revolution occurring in the same period. Despite palace revolu¬
tions and parliamentary coups, the assassination of one monarch, the deposition
of another, the popular election and abdication of a third, the abrogation of old
constitutions and the drafting of new, aristocratic conspiracies, popular rioting,
war and deprivation, Scandinavia cannot be said to have experienced revolution
