                        CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                     383

“normal developments,” rather than “acute situations.” Birgit Logstrup and
Thorkild Kjasrgaard have stressed the proprietors’ own growing inclination to
divest themselves of increasingly complex and burdensome public functions and
to face a conversion from tenant to wage labor. In 1982 Ole Feldbsk stated that
 so central —and vastly oversimplified —a question as whether it was legislation
that brought about social and economic changes, or vice versa, can still only be
answered by suppositions”; he sees in the period 1730-1814, “an interplay
between the general economic and social development and Danish absolutism’s
attempts to guide society.”59 For Scandinavia, as elsewhere, the question must
largely remain open, shading as it does into the imponderable enigma of free
will versus determinism in history.
    Scandinavian historians have long been much concerned with the question of
indigenous impulses versus foreign influences behind the reforms and conflicts
of the era.60 It should be clear at this point that both were involved. Yet it is
striking that virtually all of the most advanced ideas emerged in the North al¬
ready by the 1760s and early 1770s, and that in retrospect these ideas were dis¬
tinctly radical, not only for Scandinavia but for the wider Western world of that
time.61 In Scandinavia they would provide the blueprint for the controversies
and projects of the next half-century.62 Moreover, most of the basic social and
economic reforms of the period were initiated in the North before the French
Estates-General convened at Versailles in May 1789. The Younger Caps,
according to P. E. Brolin, already in the 1760s “represented the men of the
American and French Revolutions on Swedish soil.”63 Across the Sound, the
“party of Saint-Germain” and Dr. Struensee were no less radical.
    The American and French Revolutions thus encouraged but did not greatly
change the basic goals and ideals of Scandinavian reformers and radicals. There
are indeed suggestions that the most active phase of popular radicalism had
already passed by the end of the 1780s in both the Swedish and Danish mon¬
archies.64 Yet the great reforms of that crucial decade, while satisfying to most
Scandinavians, left enough undone to fuel discontents among radical minorities
inspired by the French Revolution up to the years of resolution between 1809
and 1815, and to some degree beyond.65
    How much of a watershed do the decades between 1760 and 1815 form in
the broader perspective of the evolution of modern Scandinavia? Certainly to
single out any limited span of years as the crucial divide must be to some degree
arbitrary, cutting out both earlier and later developments. “To think,” Ortega
y Gasset once wrote, “whether you want to or no, is to exaggerate.”66 Yet bear¬
ing this qualification in mind, it is hard to discern a more momentous half-cen¬
tury in the entire history of the North. In all areas of Scandinavian life during
the past two centuries essential lines of development can be traced to ideals
formulated and in large part realized in government and society between the
Seven Years’ War and the end of the Napoleonic conflict.
