376       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

opened broader horizons to the common man. It was, moreover, conceived as
an essential part of the agrarian reforms aimed at creating independent, enter¬
prising, and productive peasant farmers, above all in Denmark and the duchies.
The Danish School Ordinance of 1814 was thus the capstone of an integrated
program of social amelioration. Through broadening literacy, the guiding ideas
of the age filtered down from the classes to the masses. Slogans of the French
Revolution echoed in the streets of Abenra and Tender during the disturbances
of the early 1790s and in Stockholm during the fearsome Fersen Riot in 1810.
More significant in the long run, the vision of secular progress was beginning
to counteract traditional acceptance of this world as a “vale of tears,” as would
soon be demonstrated by the mass emigration of Scandinavian peasants across
the ocean to the New World in search of a new and better life, from the later
 1830s on.
     At the secondary level of urban borgerskoler and gymnasier, there were
 modest efforts from the 1790s to introduce curricula better suited to careers in
 commerce and public service. Characteristically for that age, it was the univer¬
 sities that remained most firmly wedded to past traditions of learning. In Swe¬
 den, meanwhile, a growing number of aspirants to the secondary schools and
 universities came from peasant backgrounds.
     No less influential than the spread of literacy—and closely related to it—were
popular movements of religious pietism. Of these, the greatest in this period was
 Haugianism in Norway, beginning in 1796, but it was by no means an isolated
phenomenon. Moravian pietism was already well established by the 1760s,
mainly in urban centers, throughout the North. Already in the 1750s there had
been a wave of emotional evangelism among the Finnish peasantry. The 1780s
witnessed the rise and fall of Ake Svensson’s small peasant perfectionist sect in
southern Sweden, and the following decade an upsurge of peasant pietism in
Fyn, Jutland, and the duchies, as well as Bishop Balle’s revival movement in
Copenhagen. With local Moravians, the Scottish Congregationalist John Patter¬
son in 1808-9 founded Stockholm’s Evangelical Society, which by 1814 counted
some 400 members. Throughout the nineteenth century the Nordic lands would
be swept by powerful waves of evangelical revivalism, on occasion assuming
the form of separatist cults.42
    These movements, among both the urban middle classes and the rural peas¬
antries, at once stimulated a sense of group solidarity, a concern with public
questions beyond the bounds of the local parish, organizational initiative and
experience, and a tendency toward private judgment and the rejection of tradi¬
tional authority in secular as well as spiritual matters. They were the first of the
great folk movements which over the following century would play so conspicu¬
ous a part in the democratization of state and society in the North. Characteris¬
tically, the new pietism welcomed the temporal success of the godly in this
world.
