 380       CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815

 in the first and more specific sense of the term. Yet in the second sense, which
 stresses results as opposed to process, it may well be argued that Scandinavia
 was “revolutionized” during this period.
     The eminent American historian of the period, Leo Gershoy, has summarized
 the “epochal social consequences” of the impact of the French Revolution upon
 Europe in 1789-99 as “the overthrow of feudalism, the vast transfer of real
 property, the winning of civil rights and liberties, and the opening of careers to
 talents, at least the talents of the propertied classes.”49 These criteria apply no
 less to the Nordic lands than to any other part of Europe, except France itself,
 and without the intervention of the French.
    Scandinavian historians have not hesitated to employ the term or concept of
 revolution in discussing events and developments in their countries during this
 period. Swedes speak traditionally of the revolutions of 1772 and 1809. Sverre
 Steen has called Norway’s Eidsvoll constitution of 1814 the “last offshoot of the
 great French Revolution.”50 In this period, Hans Jensen has written of Den¬
 mark, there took place

   the overthrow of the previous framework of society. Something new and
   significant was established in almost every area, and the total result was
   a strongly renewed, far more rationally ordered society. This was in truth
   the Danish revolution, which was accomplished under peaceful, bloodless
   forms; it produced consequences for the people corresponding to these
   obtained by the French people through contemporary developments during
   the great Revolution and the Napoleonic period, developments which
   demanded colossal sacrifices in blood.51

   If “revolution” this be, it was for the most part a “silent revolution.” Con¬
sidering in particular the final denouement in Sweden, Finland, and Norway
between 1809 and 1814—at the very end of the period—one is reminded of John
Adams’s observation that the real American revolution was “effected” before
the war for independence ever began.52
    At the same time, it was in large measure “revolution from above.” The role
played by strong royal authority has been emphasized more than once in this
study. French historians, notably Alexis de Tocqueville in the nineteenth century
and Georges Lefebvre in the twentieth, have stressed that in France a revolution
of liberty preceded a revolution of equality.53 In Scandinavia the process was
the reverse: it was the monarchs themselves who leveled most of the old corpo¬
rate privileges, before political insurrections in 1809, 1814, and 1849 would
found liberal constitutions.
    In all of this one cannot but reflect again upon the relative importance of revo¬
lution “from above” versus revolution “from below” in the shaping of the
modern Western world. One must again ponder Martin Gohring’s thesis that
reform by royal authority strong enough to override vested interests represents
