                        CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                       377

    Whereas pietism frequently condemned old practices, the growing prosperity
of the farmholding peasants would for some time to come generally serve to
reinforce the traditional folk cultures and provide the means for their final flow¬
ering. The mid-nineteenth century would thus be the golden age of Nordic
peasant culture in all its characteristic manifestations. But by that time it was
sustained by the agricultural profits of a market economy, which within a few
generations would largely destroy it through industrialization and emigration.
    For the educated classes, the decades between 1760 and 1815 were a time of
complex intellectual and cultural crosscurrents. The European Enlightenment
reached its zenith in outreach and influence at the very time its “disaggrega-
tion”-as Paul Hazard has called it-began.43
    In Scandinavia the work of such eminently rationalist bodies as the Swedish
Riksdag of 1809-10, the Borga diet in Finland in 1809, and the Eidsvoll assem¬
bly in Norway in 1814 should serve to recall that the party of Enlightenment by
no means lost its vitality by the early nineteenth century. Nonetheless, the com¬
plex of forces that would come to comprise an “Anti-Enlightenment”—Pre-
Romantic sensibility, religious pietism, and a variety of secular mysticisms—
were already well developed in the North by the 1760s, as Martin Lamm has
shown in fascinating detail in the case of Sweden in particular. As the preroman¬
tic synthesis of emotional enthusiasm for the light of Reason and a new dawn
for Humanity broke down amid the grim realities of the French Revolution and
the European war, an increasingly bitter battle was joined between what now
emerged as antithetical Weltanschauungen. In 1798 the poet Frans Michael
Franzen, recently returned to Abo from the Continent, eulogized:
                 In awesome beauty, like a ship aflame.
                 E’en now this century passes by,
                 Spreading glare and horror along its course.
                 Upon the night-enshrouded shore.44

    By the end of the period, the new romanticism was in full flood. While those
still holding to the Enlightenment credo represented a chastened optimism in
future progress through human reason—and generally classical canons of taste
as well—the romantics in their flight from the present turned from the future to
the past. Yet within the romantic camp in the North there came to be a signifi¬
cant cleavage, again perhaps best illustrated in Sweden. In Uppsala a coterie
around Per Daniel Amadeus Atterbom violently attacked both the Enlightenment
and classicism in his journal, Phosphorus, between 1810 and 1814, creating a
furor in established literary circles. Looking to Germany for inspiration, the
young “Phosphorists” extolled the Christian Middle Ages and contemptuously
rejected the new materialism and liberalism. In their escapism they recall such
European contemporaries as Chateaubriand, Tieck, Wackenroder, and Words¬
worth in his later years.
