                         CONCLUSIONS: SCANDINAVIA BY 1815                       375

expressed in the language of our day,” Kjeld Philip wrote in 1947, the ordinance
  could have been written today and could in general serve to characterize the
social policy of our time.”37


   Developments in the political, economic, and social spheres both reflected
and affected those occurring in cultural life between 1760 and 1815, including
the spread of literacy among the population at large and the conflict of ideas and
values among the educated and influential.
    Throughout the period, much thought was given to education, especially of
the broader masses. Opinion on its proper scope and content varied greatly,
emphasizing state or social utility, religious doctrine, or individual self-realiza¬
tion. The overall result was nevertheless a steady increase in the number of
primary schools, both rural and urban, throughout the North. In principle this
fulfilled long-standing requirements set forth in the Swedish and Danish ordi¬
nances of 1723 and 1739, which called for some modicum of local instruction
but provided neither means nor sanctions. New schools came about through the
local initiatives of dedicated pastors, landowners, and private societies.
    Progress was greatest in Denmark, where not only some very advanced
schools by the standards of the time but also teachers’ training seminaries were
established, culminating with the ordinance of July 1814, mandating the first
comprehensive system of primary education in the North and recalling recent
parallels in. for example, Prussia and France. In offering evening classes for
both young and old on their manors, Ludvig and Christian Ditlev Reventlow
meanwhile anticipated the characteristic Nordic folk high schools of a later
day.38 In Sweden, even without a corresponding school law before 1842, prog¬
ress had also been considerable. It has been estimated that while in 1768 only
some 10 percent of the rural parishes had either “fixed” or “ambulatory”
schools—the latter an itinerant schoolmaster—by 1802 the proportion had in¬
creased to at least 15-20 percent, and by 1814 to a good 45 percent. Parish
schools remained, however, unevenly distributed according to population den¬
sity and local wealth, from Visby diocese on the island of Gotland, where all
parishes maintained schools, to the northern diocese of Harndsand, with only
one fixed and fourteen ambulatory schools in 1814.39
    Nonetheless, in 1768, when the bishop of Harnosand could report no parish
schools at all in his diocese, many of the peasants there could read and write.40
In Iceland literacy was understood to be practically universal, without benefit
of any parish schools. Literacy in the North, thanks mainly to family instruction,
was thus much greater than the number and distribution of primary schools
would suggest. Carlo M. Cipolla has estimated that by 1850—less than a decade
after the school law of 1842—adult literacy in Sweden was as high as 90 per¬
cent.41
   Although the content of popular instruction remained rudimentary at best, it
