The Project Gutenberg eBook of A history of the Peninsular War, Vol. 4, Dec. 1810-Dec. 1811
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A history of the Peninsular War, Vol. 4, Dec. 1810-Dec. 1811
        Massena's retreat, Fuentes de Oñoro, Albuera, Tarragona

Author: Charles Oman


        
Release date: March 22, 2018 [eBook #56812]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/56812

Credits: Produced by Brian Coe, Ramon Pajares Box and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF THE PENINSULAR WAR, VOL. 4, DEC. 1810-DEC. 1811 ***




Produced by Brian Coe, Ramon Pajares Box and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)






TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  * Italics are denoted by underscores as in _italics_, and small caps
    are represented in upper case as in SMALL CAPS.

  * Obvious printer errors have been silently corrected.

  * Original spelling was kept, but variant spellings were made
    consistent when a predominant usage was found.

  * To aid referencing places and names in present-day maps and
    documents, outdated and current spellings of some proper names
    follow:

                  Albaracin, now Albarracín,
                Albuquerque, now Alburquerque,
                   Alemtejo, now Alentejo,
                  Algesiras, now Algeciras,
                    Almanza, now Almansa,
                  Arzobispo, now El Puente del Arzobispo,
          Baccelar (Manuel), now Manuel Pinto de Morais Bacelar,
                Ballasteros, now Ballesteros,
           Barba del Puerco, now Puerto Seguro,
                     Baylen, now Bailén,
                    Bussaco, now Buçaco,
                    Caamano, now Caamaño,
                    Caçeres, now Cáceres,
                    Canonge, now La Canonja,
                   Çaragoça, now Zaragoza,
                    Cattlar, now El Catllar,
                    Cordova, now Córdoba,
                    Corunna, now La Coruña,
                      Douro, now Duero (in Spain),
                                 Douro (in Portugal),
                Estremadura, now Extremadura (in Spain),
                                 Estremadura (in Portugal),
                   Estremos, now Estremoz,
                    Golegão, now Golegã,
                  La Baneza, now La Bañeza
                  La Bispal, now La Bisbal,
                     Lousão, now Lousã,
                    Majorca, now Mallorca,
                  Momblanch, now Montblanch,
                       Niza, now Nisa,
                Ona (river), now Güeña (río),
                Oña (river), now Oñar (río),
                   Ouguella, now Ouguela,
                  Pampeluna, now Pamplona,
                   Peñacova, now Penacova,
                  Peniscola, now Peñíscola,
                      Ripol, now Ripoll,
        São João de Ribiera, now São João da Ribeira,
                  Saragossa, now Zaragoza,
                   Senabria, now Sanabria,
                 Sta Olalla, now Santa Olalla,
              Tagus (river), now Tajo (Spanish), Tejo (Portuguese),
                   Tondella, now Tondela,
                   Torienzo, now Turienzo de los Caballeros,
                   Truxillo, now Trujillo,
                     Vierzo, now El Bierzo,
                   Vincente, now Vicente,
                   Vittoria, now Vitoria,
                      Xeres, now Jerez,