

Lastly, the compiler of the index, a weary task executed under many
difficulties, must receive my heartfelt thanks for much loving labour.

I must apologize to readers for some occasional discrepancies in
spelling which may be discovered in the text and maps. They are mainly
due to the fact that all along the Portuguese-Spanish frontier every
town and village is spelt differently by its own inhabitants and by
its close neighbours of the other nationality. I find it impossible to
avoid the occasional intrusion of a Portuguese spelling of a Spanish
locality, and vice versa. Matters are made still more hard by the
fact that the spelling of local names in Portugal (less so in Spain)
seems to have been much changed since 1811. It is difficult to avoid
occasionally an archaic, or on the other hand a too-modern, form for a
name. These slight errors, or discrepancies between names as spelled in
the text and in the maps, were nearly all caused by alterations between
the received spelling of 1811, followed in the maps I used, and that
of 1911. I do not think that they will cause any difficulty to the
reader, who will not e. g. find it hard to recognize that Foz do Arouce
is the same as Foz de Arouce or Casal Novo as Cazal Novo.

In a few cases the critic may find a slight difference in the numbers
of troops, or of killed and wounded, which are given in the text and in
the appendices. In almost all cases this results from the fact that the
official totals quoted in the text turned out not to work out in exact
agreement with the detailed list of items in the ‘morning states’ or
the complete casualty lists. These errors, always trifling, could not
be discovered till the arithmetic of the appendices had been verified,
sometimes when the text had already been printed off. The most frequent
discrepancies were found in comparing Wellington’s totals of Portuguese
strengths or casualties with the detailed official figures. In all
instances the differences are small, but the Appendices must be taken
to give the more exact numbers.

  C. OMAN.

  OXFORD:
  _July 1, 1911_.




CONTENTS


  SECTION XXIII
  THE WINTER CAMPAIGN OF 1810-11

  CHAPTER                                                   PAGE

  I. Masséna at Santarem. The deadlock on the Lower
  Tagus. December 1810-January 1811                            1

  II. Soult’s Invasion of Estremadura. January-March 1811.
  The Battle of the Gebora and the Fall of Badajoz            23

  III. Masséna’s Last Weeks at Santarem. January-March
  1811                                                        64

  IV. Events in the South of Spain. The Battle of Barrosa.
  January-March 1811                                          91


  SECTION XXIV
  MASSÉNA’S RETREAT FROM PORTUGAL

  I. Santarem to Celorico. March 9th-22nd, 1811              131

  II. Guarda and Sabugal. March 22nd-April 12th, 1811        173


  SECTION XXV
  EVENTS IN NORTHERN, EASTERN, AND CENTRAL SPAIN