

  [38] Soult to Berthier, no. 24 in Appendix to _Belmas_, vol. i.
  p. 472.

  [39] The total of the troops available against Mortier in
  December would have been, giving net totals, with sick and
  detached men all deducted:--

  _Spanish_:

  Ballasteros’s Division                                         5,000
  Mendizabal’s Division                                          6,000
  Permanent garrison of Badajoz                                  4,200
  5 battalions left behind by La Romana at Albuquerque,
     Olivenza, &c.                                               2,000
  Carlos de España’s brigade on the Tagus near Abrantes          1,500
  Cavalry of the Army of Estremadura                             2,600
  Artillery                                                        500

  _Portuguese_:

  Brigade of Line Regiments, Nos. 5 and 17, at Elvas             2,500
  Brigade of Cavalry under Madden, 3rd, 5th, 8th regiments         950
  Hamilton’s Division (with Hill), 2nd, 4th, 10th, 14th Line     4,800
  Portuguese Militia, 4 regiments, Beja, Evora, Villa Viciosa,
    Portalegre, in Elvas, Jerumenha, and Campo Mayor             4,000
  5th Caçadores (with Hill)                                        450
  Fane’s Cavalry (with Hill), 1st, 4th, 7th, 10th regiments      1,200
  Artillery (4 batteries)                                          600

  _British_:

  Hill’s Second Division                                         5,250
  13th Light Dragoons                                              350
  Artillery (3 batteries)                                          400
                                                                ------
                                                       Total    42,300
                                                                ------

  Mortier had in the 5th Corps 11,500 infantry, 1,200 cavalry, and
  about 700 artillery in his 7 batteries.

After having, as he thought, demonstrated to his master that it would
be useless to send Mortier alone, with 10,000 or 12,000 men, to make
an impossible dash at the Tagus, Soult made another proposal. He would
undertake not a mere raid, but the capture of Badajoz, the conquest of
Estremadura, and the destruction of the army of that province; but he
must take with him a force much greater than the mere 5th Corps. ‘The
enterprise is a big one, but ought to succeed--at least it will produce
a happy diversion in favour of the imperial army in Portugal[40].’ It
would call back La Romana from Lisbon, and possibly cause Wellington to
detach troops in his aid, and Masséna would have less in front of him
in consequence, and might resume the offensive.

  [40] Soult to Berthier, December 1, 1810, from Seville.

There was of course another course possible: Soult might have marched
for Estremadura not with the 13,000 men of the 5th Corps alone, nor
yet with the 20,000 men whom he actually took thither in January, but
with the greater part of the French Army of Andalusia, 35,000 or 40,000
men. To do so he would have had to abandon Granada, Malaga, and Jaen
on the one side, and his hold on the Condado de Niebla and the west
upon the other. He might even possibly have had to raise the siege of
Cadiz, though this is not quite certain. Many months after, in the
end of March, when all chance of the conquest of Portugal was over,
the Emperor told him that this would have been his proper course, and
read him an _ex-post-facto_ lecture on the advantages that might have
followed, if he had evacuated two-thirds of his viceroyalty and taken
an imposing force to sweep across the Alemtejo and assail Lisbon from
the southern side[41]. But it must be remembered that in December and
January all the orders that were sent him directed him to move no more
than a small corps--in one dispatch the Emperor calls it only 10,000
men. A supreme commander-in-chief present on the spot might have seen
his way to make the temporary sacrifice of the provinces which had cost
so many men to conquer and to hold, in order that every available man
might be sent against Lisbon, and the English might at last be expelled
from the Peninsula. But Soult was not such a commander-in-chief; he
was only one of the many viceroys whom Napoleon preferred to a single
omnipotent lieutenant. Was it likely that he would sacrifice half his
own territory, when no order to do so lay before him, in order that a
colleague, sent on a separate task with forces no less than his own,
might have every possible advantage? Soult is often blamed for not
having seen that the crushing of Wellington’s army was the end to which
all others should have been subordinated, and that it would have been
cheap in the end to surrender half or three-quarters of Andalusia,
and even to raise the siege of Cadiz, in order to secure that point.
He might have replied that his master was no less blind than himself:
dispatch after dispatch had ordered him to send a trifling detachment
towards the Tagus, not to mass every available man and march on Lisbon,
leaving Seville and the Cadiz lines exposed to all manner of dangers.
He was primarily responsible for the retention of the Andalusia that
he had conquered; it was for the Emperor, not for himself, to order
the evacuation of much or all of that great realm. The Emperor gave
no such directions: from September to January his whole series of
dispatches spoke of nothing more than the movement of a moderate force;
those of January 25th and February 6th approved of the course which
Soult had actually chosen, and took it for granted that he would not
move towards the Tagus till he should have captured Badajoz[42]. It
was not till March, when he began to see that all his arrangements
were going wrong, and that his scheme of times was erroneous, that the
Emperor began suddenly to launch out into criticisms of Soult, and to
complain that ‘to try to hold every point at a moment of crisis leads
to possible disaster,’ that ‘Seville, Badajoz, and the Cadiz lines were
the only necessary things,’ and that the Marshal ought to have 30,000
men or more with him at Badajoz instead of the 20,000 men whom he had
actually taken thither[43]. If so, why had the orders not been given to
that effect early in December, when Napoleon had just learnt from Foy
the state and position of the Army of Portugal, which had so long been
hidden from him behind Wellington’s screen of Ordenança?