

  [41] This dispatch of March 29 (Nap. _Corresp._, no. 17,531),
  which must have reached Soult about the end of April, when
  Masséna had long retired to Spain, told him that he should have
  withdrawn all the 4th Corps from Granada save the six Polish
  battalions, and have drawn in Godinot’s brigade from Cordova,
  i. e. have abandoned the whole eastern half of Andalusia, and
  have tried to hold nothing but the siege lines of Cadiz and
  the city of Seville. But this was ‘wisdom after the event.’ In
  December Napoleon was harping upon a diversion with 10,000 men
  to Montalvão and Villaflor, not ordering the evacuation of the
  greater part of Andalusia.

  [42] January 25, Napoleon to Berthier, ‘Il est nécessaire
  d’écrire au duc de Dalmatie _qu’après la prise de Badajoz_ il
  doit se porter sur le Tage, avec son équipage de pont, et donner
  les moyens au prince d’Essling d’assiéger et prendre Abrantès.’
  _Correspondance_, no. 17,295.

  February 5, Napoleon to Berthier, ‘Écrivez au duc d’Istrie
  (Bessières, now commanding the new “Army of the North”) ... que
  tout paraît prendre une couleur avantageuse, que si Badajoz a
  été pris dans le courant de Janvier, le duc de Dalmatie a pu se
  porter sur le Tage.’ [Unfortunately Badajoz did not surrender
  till March 11, and Soult was extremely lucky to get it so early.]
  _Correspondance_, no. 17,335.

  [43] Napoleon to Berthier, March 29, _Correspondance_, no. 17,531.

If we seek deep enough, we find the cause of all misdirections
in the fact that the Emperor persisted in guiding the movements
of all his army from Paris, and would not appoint an independent
commander-in-chief of all the Spanish armies, who should be able to
issue orders that would be promptly obeyed by every separate marshal
or general in each province. A moment’s reflection shows that the
_data_ as to the details of the situation in the Peninsula, from which
Napoleon had to construct his scheme of operations, always came to him
a month late. And when he had issued the dispatch which dealt with the
situation, it reached its destination after the interval of another
month, and had long ceased to have any bearing on the actual position
of affairs. A single example of how the system worked may suffice.
Masséna started Foy for Paris, with his great report on the state of
the Army of Portugal, on October 29. Foy reached Paris and saw the
Emperor on November 22 and the succeeding days. The detailed dispatches
to Masséna and Soult, consequent on Foy’s report, were not sent off
till December 4. On January 22nd Soult acknowledges the receipt
of the dispatch of that date, along with that of two others dated
November 28 and December 10, all of which arrived together, because
the guerrilleros of La Mancha had stopped the posts between Madrid and
Seville for a full fortnight after the New Year[44]. Of what value to
Soult on January 22 could be orders based on the condition and projects
of Masséna on October 29? The data at the base of the orders were
three months old--while Soult had been already for more than a month
engaged on a campaign undertaken on his own responsibility, without any
knowledge of the exact requirements of Masséna, or of the intentions of
the Emperor.