

  [79] ‘Hallarse la guarnicion en una total decadencia’ (opinion of
  Col. Ponce de Leon of 1st Barcelona). The garrison ‘no es de la
  primera classe en general’ (opinion of Col. Zamora of the Zafra
  regiment). ‘El soldado, cansado ya de la mucha fatiga, trataría
  de salvarse’ (opinion of Col. Hernandez of the Majorca regiment).

  [80] See Soriano da Luz, iii. 337-8.

Then came the oddest part of the proceedings. The Governor gave as his
opinion that ‘though an inner line of defence has not been contrived,
and though very few guns still remain serviceable in the bastions
of Santiago, San José, and San Juan, and though we have no succour
for sustaining the assault, I think we should defend the place with
valour and constancy to our last breath.’ After which he at once
commenced negotiations with the French _parlementaire_, in direct
contradiction to his own vote! Apparently he thought that thirteen
votes for surrender against four for resistance among his councillors
covered his ignominy. The worst part of his conduct was that he was
aware that an army of succour was on the march to help him. For Badajoz
had semaphore communication with Elvas, and on the preceding day the
Portuguese General Leite had telegraphed to him, by Wellington’s
orders, that Beresford had been detached with two divisions to hasten
to his aid on March 8th[81]. As a matter of fact, Beresford’s movement
into Estremadura was retarded, and his corps did not move off for some
days later, but Imaz did not know this, and he was certainly guilty of
concealing from his officers that prompt succour had been promised, and
was actually upon its way. The whole responsibility for the surrender
falls on him, because he allowed Alvo, and the other voters for
capitulation, to produce uncontradicted the statement that no relief
was probable, while he knew himself that it had been promised. It is
impossible to deny that this was pusillanimity reaching into and over
the border of treason.

  [81] D’Urban (Beresford’s chief of the staff) has in his
  diary under March 8th: ‘At 3 o’clock the Marshal crossed the
  river (Tagus) at Torres Novas and had an interview with Lord
  Wellington. The immediate relief of Badajoz, whose danger becomes
  imminent, has been judged desirable, this to be done with the
  2nd and 4th Divisions. The Marshal returned at 8. Orders sent to
  Punhete to throw the bridge of boats over the Tagus at Tancos for
  the re-passage of General Stewart (2nd Division) and the passage
  of General Cole (4th Division). The troops still on the south
  bank of the Tagus are thrown into march upon Portalegre [near
  Elvas]. Orders to Mr. Ogilvie, the commissary, to take measures
  for supplies southward. General Menacho’s last sally, in which he
  is unfortunately killed, has probably saved the place by gaining
  of time, even if but for a few additional days.’ On the evening
  of the 9th March the movement was stopped, on a false rumour that
  Masséna was offering battle near Thomar, but news of it had been
  sent to General Leite at Elvas, who passed it by semaphore from
  Fort La Lippe to San Cristobal, which safely received it. It was
  not till the 12th that the 2nd Division was ordered to Crato in
  the Alemtejo, and Beresford reached Portalegre only on the 20th,
  nine days after Badajoz fell. Wellington says (_Dispatches_, vii.
  360-1) ‘the Governor surrendered on the day after he received my
  assurances that he should be relieved, and my entreaty to hold
  out till the last moment.’ Cf. ibid., 367.