

  [97] Mr. Fortescue writes: ‘This was unfair. Perceval and
  Liverpool had deliberately turned their backs upon Pitt’s old
  policy of spasmodic efforts all over the world, in favour of a
  steady and persistent feeding of the war in one quarter--the
  Peninsula. Wellington himself had approved the change in his
  letters of 1810, had named the amount of money that he wanted,
  and fixed the figure of the reinforcements that he asked. But in
  1811 he never ceased to ask for more men and more money, till
  Liverpool was obliged to remind him very gently, that he was
  going far beyond his own estimates.’ He had got to the stage
  of writing that Government having embarked on the contest, and
  chosen the best officer they could find, must give him the
  largest army they could collect, and reinforce it to the utmost,
  without asking precisely how many men were wanted, and for what
  precise objects. It was Mr. Fortescue who indicated to me two
  important passages about Liverpool which are omitted from the
  printed version of Wellington’s letters to Pole of January 11 and
  March 31, 1811, in _Supplementary Dispatches_, vii. pp. 40-3 and
  93.

  [98] See especially Wellington to Dudley Perceval (the
  premier’s son), June 6th, 1835, a protest against Napier’s wild
  misrepresentations.

During all these weeks of waiting Wellington was also troubled by
problems with regard to the internal state of Portugal. Two main
sources of worry can be traced in his correspondence. The first was
the inefficiency of the Portuguese commissariat, which bid fair to
cause absolute starvation among those brigades of the national army
which were not incorporated with British divisions and supplied from
the British stores. Slow and irregular forwarding of provisions to
the corps stationed in advanced or remote positions led to a dreadful
increase in the number of sick. We find Wellington complaining that
regiments which had 1,200 men in line at Bussaco could only show 1,000
or 900 under arms in February, although they had received considerable
drafts from their dépôts at midwinter. D’Urban’s daily notes bear out
the statements of the Commander-in-Chief. He asserts with indignation
that by ‘the villany of commissaries,’ the same quantity of flour
which provided 15½ rations for the British soldier was returned
as having given only 9 to the Portuguese--the balance having been
embezzled. Allowances, of course, must be made for the difficulties of
a government of whose territory a good third had been depopulated by
the orders of Wellington. But the trouble does not seem to have been
so much the actual want of food-stuffs at head quarters[99]--great
quantities were got from the Alemtejo and the north--as the
inefficiency of distribution, which left outlying brigades sometimes
foodless for two or three days at a time. Clothing and shoes were also
very slow in arriving at the front. At the bottom the cause of all this
inefficiency was probably (as Wellington observes in one letter[100])
the want of money to keep up an adequate transport service, and it
might be pleaded that in the distressful condition of the country the
deficit was no fault of the government, but unavoidable. Wellington’s
view was that with greater economy in civil expenses, and more careful
supervision of commissaries and contractors, there was money enough
to pay for all necessary military objects. He was probably right, but
there is small wonder if a provisional government like the Regency
found it hard to introduce administrative reforms in the midst of a
crisis, and with the enemy almost at the gates of the capital. After
all, the effort which Portugal had made was splendid, and the whole
nation had accepted the awful necessity of the depopulation of its
central provinces with a loyalty that was surprising, if we consider
the magnitude of the sacrifice.