

  [117] Journal of Noël of the Artillery of the 8th Corps, p. 137.

  [118] For general statements as to the miserable state of the
  material of the army see Masséna’s dispatch to Berthier of March
  6, 1811.

On March 3rd Masséna issued the orders which marked his determination
to retreat at once. Ney was directed to march on the next day from
Thomar, with Marchand’s division and some cavalry, and join Drouet
at Leiria in the rear--they were ultimately to be the covering force
of the retiring army. On the 5th Reynier was directed to send back
his first division (Merle) from Santarem towards the rear, while the
second division (Heudelet) continued to hold the old lines. On this
same day Ney’s second division (Mermet) evacuated Torres Novas, and
marched northward to Ourem near Leiria, while one of Junot’s divisions
(Solignac) massed itself at Pernes, to await the arrival of the other
(Clausel), which was to hold the outposts till the last moment. This
was the critical day of the concentration, for of the eight divisions
forming the Army of Portugal five had started off, leaving three
(Heudelet at Santarem, Clausel on the Rio Mayor, Loison at Punhete) to
hold the old positions. If Wellington had attacked in force on the 5th,
it seems certain that he must have destroyed these covering forces,
which in their scattered position could not possibly have held their
ground. But the British general, as we shall see, was engaged in a
scheme of his own, and did not at first detect the full meaning of the
French movements.

For Wellington at this moment was busy in developing an encircling
attack on the whole of the French positions, and it was not yet
ready[119]. On February 23rd he had made up his mind to strike the
moment that a large body of reinforcements, already overdue from
England and the Mediterranean, should have arrived. The plan was that
the main army, while holding Reynier in check at Santarem with one or
two divisions, should attack Junot on the Rio Mayor with the bulk of
its force. At the same time Beresford, drawing his corps to the north
of the Tagus by the boat-bridge at Abrantes, was to fall upon Loison at
Punhete, and (as it was hoped) thus distract Ney, whose duty would be
divided between the succouring of Junot and that of the division on the
Zezere. But, even if he turned most of the reserves in the direction of
the Rio Mayor, the long distance would prevent them from arriving in
time. Junot would almost certainly be overwhelmed by superior numbers,
while Reynier was being ‘contained,’ and while Ney’s columns were still
far off.

  [119] This plan comes out in full in the diary of Beresford’s
  Chief of the Staff. D’Urban writes under the 23rd February: ‘The
  Marshal tells me that Lord Wellington means to attack, and his
  (Beresford’s) own share is that he must turn and force the French
  left, when the reinforcements should arrive. Some of them are
  already on their march up from Lisbon. On their arrival Lord
  Wellington will attack the French right, on the Rio Mayor, while
  Marshal Beresford crosses the Tagus at Abrantes, and attacks the
  force on the Zezere at the same time. Orders to inquire how far,
  in attacking the corps at Punhete, Amoreira can be turned, and
  the heights of Montalvão gained, with consequent advantage of
  ground in coming on the enemy upon the Zezere.’ The local reports
  were prepared by D’Urban on the 25th. The only allusion to the
  plan in the Wellington dispatches is in the last paragraph of the
  letter to Lord Liverpool of February 23rd, in which the phrase
  occurs, ‘I cannot venture to detach troops [to Estremadura] even
  after the reinforcements shall arrive: and if the weather should
  hold up a little I must try something else-of greater extent but
  more doubtful result.’