

  [112] ‘Bientôt viendrait le moment où on serait forcé de se jeter
  sur l’une ou sur l’autre rive; et alors on pourrait trouver les
  têtes-de-pont entourées par une contrevallation de l’ennemi, ou
  bien l’armée se verrait forcée à recevoir bataille avec un fleuve
  au dos, en voulant se porter sur la rive droite.’ Masséna to
  Berthier, March 6.

If the army were so lucky as to get off entire into the barren
Alemtejo, and to unite with the 5th Corps on the Guadiana, Wellington,
as Junot had pointed out, would have a free hand in northern and
central Portugal, and would sweep Claparéde out of it, while he need
not be seriously alarmed at any attack on Lisbon from the south of the
Tagus, for the city was covered by the Almada lines[113] and could
not be harassed from this quarter. Meanwhile the Army of Portugal
would be cut off from all the supplies and reinforcements which were
accumulating for it on the frontier of Spain, at Ciudad Rodrigo and
Salamanca; ‘it would be going off to a distance from its real line of
operations and of communications.’

  [113] It is interesting to see from Masséna’s dispatch of March
  6 that he was aware of the existence both of the Setubal and the
  Almada fortifications.

Masséna then came to the point: having argued down the schemes of
Reynier and Ney, he developed his own determination, which was to
hold on for the few days more that seemed possible. The marauding
operations that fed the army were rapidly growing less productive, and
the moment was approaching when the daily plunder would no longer meet
the daily consumption, and then, in case the long-expected Soult did
not appear, the army must retire on to the line of the Mondego[114].
There, in a country comparatively undamaged, Masséna hoped to hold out
some fifty or sixty days at the least: the whole 9th Corps would be
available for opening and maintaining the communications with Almeida
and Ciudad Rodrigo, and reinforcements and stores would easily be
brought forward[115]. But no further offensive movements could be
contemplated; the army was exhausted and needed a long rest; in the end
it would probably have to retire within the borders of Spain--perhaps
to Alcantara on the Tagus, perhaps into Leon.

  [114] Foy, present at the council, where he was asked to comment
  on the Emperor’s last orders, which he had brought himself,
  renders Masséna’s decision in his diary as: ‘Que faut-il donc
  faire? Tenir ici le plus longtemps que nous pourrons: voir d’ici
  là ce qui se passera dans l’Alemtejo: puis, si rien n’est changé,
  nous transporter sur le Mondego, en laissant un corps d’armée à
  la rive gauche de cette rivière.’ [_Vie Militaire_, p. 131.]

  [115] This comes from Masséna’s dispatch to Berthier of March 6th.

Ney and Reynier seem to have retired from the conference rather talked
down than convinced, and the latter sent in to his Commander-in-Chief a
sort of protest, taking the form of a précis of the meeting, in which
the arguments used and the result arrived at were so misrepresented
that Masséna caused a formal document to be drawn up and signed by five
other generals present at the council, in which it was declared that
the précis was wholly incorrect. Apparently Reynier had intended to get
his protest to the Emperor’s hands, in order to free himself from any
responsibility in approving a retreat which he thought that his master
would condemn[116].