

  [140] These battalions were, I believe, Ciudad Real and 4th
  Walloon Guards.

  [141] As the names of the Spanish battalions engaged in this
  expedition have never before been collected, it may be worth
  while to mention here that they were--Lardizabal’s division:
  Campomayor, Carmona, Murcia (2 batts.), Canarias; Anglona’s
  division: Africa (2 batts.), Sigüenza, Cantabria (2 batts.),
  Voluntaries de Valencia.

On arriving at the bridge of Facinas and the village of Bolonia, ten
miles outside Tarifa, La Peña had to make up his mind whether he would
march against the rear of the French lines before Cadiz by the track
nearer to the coast, which passes through Vejer de la Frontera, Conil,
and Chiclana, or by the inland road through the mountains, which runs
past Casas Viejas to Medina Sidonia. The two roads at their bifurcation
are separated by the long lagoon of La Janda, a very shallow sheet of
water, seven miles long, which nearly dries up in summer, but was at
this moment full to overflowing from spring rains[142]. To take the
inland route across the mountains was by far the better course. The
road was not good, but if the Allies could reach Medina Sidonia with
their army intact, Victor would be forced to come out and attack
them, at a great distance from his Lines. For it would be practically
impossible for the Marshal to allow La Peña and Graham to establish
themselves at Medina, in the rear of his head quarters, and backed by
the Sierra de Jerez, from whose skirts they could send out as many
detachments as they pleased, to cut the communication between Seville
and the Lines. There was little danger of being taken in the rear by
troops sent by the distant Sebastiani, whose nearest forces were at
Marbella, eighty miles away, and whose attention was at this moment
fully taken up by the local guerrilleros, who had been turned loose on
him. Indeed, Sebastiani for some time thought that the expedition was
directed against himself, and was preparing to concentrate and take
the defensive. The only drawbacks to the Medina Sidonia route were
there would be no chance of communicating along it with the garrison of
Cadiz, and that the question of provisions might grow serious if the
campaign were protracted, for the region was barren and the army ill
provided with transport. But a few days would settle the affair--Victor
would be compelled to come out at once and fight, with every man that
he could bring, and while he was engaged at Medina, there would be
nothing to prevent the 7,000 Spaniards in Cadiz from crossing the
harbour and destroying the ill-garrisoned Lines. This in itself, even
if the Allies failed to hold back the Marshal, would have an immense
effect all over Andalusia[143].

  [142] I do not know these roads, nor the field of Barrosa, but
  Colonel Churcher, of the Royal Irish Fusiliers, who is well
  acquainted with them, tells me that the track (five miles inland
  from the coast) marked on the British staff map of 1810, from
  Bolonia to Vejer, is no proper road at all, and unfit for wheeled
  traffic to this day; while the Tarifa-Medina Sidonia road is bad,
  but can carry vehicles. He tells me that he has actually crossed
  the Laguna de la Janda at its centre in dry weather, so shallow
  does it become.