

  [138] Graham survived Barrosa for thirty years, lived to be
  ninety-six, and after Waterloo founded the United Service Club,
  as a place of rendezvous for his old Peninsular comrades, who
  looked upon him as a kind of father.

After many tiresome delays[139] the English contingent sailed from
Cadiz on February 21st, but met with such fierce west winds, when it
neared Cape Trafalgar, that the convoy could not make the difficult
harbour of Tarifa, and was blown past it into Gibraltar Bay, where
Graham landed on the 23rd at Algesiras. Here he found waiting for him
a ‘flank battalion’ of 536 bayonets, which General Campbell had made
up for him out of the six flank companies of the 1/9th, 1/28th, and
2/82nd. From Algesiras the troops marched on the 24th to Tarifa, where
they picked up another reinforcement provided by Campbell, the eight
battalion companies of the 1/28th, which had been doing garrison duty
in that little fortress--460 men in all. Having now just 5,196 men,
Graham divided the infantry into two brigades. The first under General
Dilkes numbered 1,900 bayonets: it was composed of the two composite
battalions of the Guards, together with the flank battalion from
Gibraltar and two companies of the 95th Rifles. The second brigade,
under Colonel Wheatley, had 2,633 bayonets, and consisted of the
1/28th, 2/67th, 2/87th, and another ‘flank battalion’ under Colonel
Barnard, composed of the two light companies of the 20th Portuguese
(the only troops of that nation which served in the expedition), those
of the 2/47th, with four more companies of the 95th Rifles. There were
only 206 cavalry--two squadrons of the 2nd Hussars of the King’s German
Legion--and ten guns under Major Duncan.

  [139] The delays in the start caused an unexpected conjunction
  in the mountains of the south. Beguines and his roving brigade,
  warned to be ready to join in the campaign by the 23rd, came
  down from the Ronda mountains in search of the army, advanced
  as far as Medina Sidonia, and skirmished there with Victor’s
  flank guard, two battalions under General Cassagne, which were
  always kept watching the mountains (March 25). Beaten off,
  Beguines retired to his usual haunts, and waited for signs of the
  expedition. His premature attack--premature through no fault of
  his own--called Victor’s attention to his rear, and caused him
  to fortify Medina Sidonia, and to reinforce Cassagne with three
  battalions and a cavalry regiment.

The Spanish contingent had sailed three days after Graham, had met
with the same rough weather, and had been much beaten about. But the
troops began to arrive at Tarifa on the 26th, and were all ashore on
the 27th. La Peña assumed command, was all politeness, and made over to
Graham two unbrigaded battalions of his own, to bring up the force of
the two small British brigades to a higher figure[140]. The rest of his
troops were organized in two divisions under Lardizabal and the Prince
of Anglona, the first five, the second six battalions strong[141]; he
had brought fourteen guns, and four squadrons of horse under an English
colonel in the Spanish service, Samuel Whittingham, an officer who did
not add to his laurels during this expedition.