

[Illustration: THE BARROSA CAMPAIGN]

Meanwhile Cassagne, at Medina Sidonia, was sent orders to find out
exactly what was in front of him, and if there was no solid force, to
march to join the main body on the morning of the 5th. He must have
received the order to do so somewhere in the afternoon of the 4th.

Victor’s force was not so large as he would have wished. Soult
had taken from him six battalions of infantry and three cavalry
regiments, reducing the total of the 1st Corps left at or near Cadiz
to twenty-three battalions of infantry, three regiments of cavalry,
and four or five field batteries, about 15,000 men in all. There were
also present in the lines 3,500 men more not belonging to the corps,
viz. about 1,000 artillery and 800 engineers and sappers belonging
to the siege train, and 1,600 marine troops from the flotilla which
had been constructed in Cadiz bay. These of course were useless for
field operations; but they served to man the lines, with the addition
of three battalions--2,000 men--from the fighting force, the least
that Victor thought he could spare. For the garrison of Cadiz and the
English fleet might attack in force any point of the Lines during the
absence of the main body. This left 13,000 men available for field
operations: but Cassagne was still absent at Medina Sidonia, with five
battalions, a battery, and one of the three cavalry regiments, making
3,100 men in all. There were therefore only 10,000 men left to face La
Peña and Graham, till Cassagne should come up. Victor, according to his
own dispatch, much over-estimated the force of the Allies, which he
states as 8,000 English and 18,000 Spaniards, so that he went to work
in rather a desperate mood, thinking that he had to fight very superior
numbers, and that his only chance was to make a sudden and resolute
attack when he was not expected. As a matter of fact he overstated the
enemy by nearly a half, since there were really marching from Vejer
only 5,000 English and under 10,000 Spaniards altogether, and no help
could come to them from Cadiz till Villatte should be driven off.

Each of the three divisions which Victor had under his hand was short
of several battalions; Ruffin’s, the 1st Division, and Leval’s, the
2nd, had each a battalion in the Lines and another detached with
Cassagne at Medina. Villatte’s, the 3rd, had one in the Lines and three
with Cassagne. Hence they took the field, Ruffin and Leval with six
battalions each, Villatte with five only. The respective forces were
3,000, 3,800, and 2,500 bayonets[145]: each unit had its divisional
battery with it. Of the two cavalry regiments, the 1st Dragoons, 400
sabres, was with Ruffin, the 2nd Dragoons, 300 sabres, with Villatte.
On the evening of the 4th Ruffin’s and Leval’s men were concentrated
at Chiclana, hidden behind the woods which cover it; Villatte was on
the ridge of the Torre Bermeja, between the Almanza creek and the sea,
right across the track leading from Vejer to Cadiz, and looking both
backward and forward, with his attention ready for Zayas as much as for
La Peña.