

  [145] It chanced that the battalions in Leval’s division were
  individually stronger than those in the others--averaging 640
  men each, against little over 500 in Villatte’s and Ruffin’s
  divisions--officers not counted. The brigading was--Ruffin, 1/9th
  Léger, 1/96th Ligne, 1 and 2/24th Ligne, 2 Provisional battalions
  of grenadiers, Leval 1 and 2/8th Ligne, 1 and 2/54th Ligne,
  1/45th, 1 Provisional battalion of grenadiers. See Appendix at
  end of volume giving exact strength.

Meanwhile the Allies were marching straight into the middle of the trap
which Victor had prepared for them. After passing Conil, the road on
which their army was moving turns inland towards Chiclana, while a mere
track follows the beach towards the Santi Petri. It was along this that
La Peña was intending to move. But in the dark the head of the column
followed the main road, and went several miles along it. At dawn the
error was discovered, and the army, cutting across an open heath, got
down to the beach[146].

  [146] See Graham’s diary, p. 465.

The point which the allies had now reached was a mile or so south-east
of the coast-guard tower of Barrosa, where an isolated eminence called
the Cerro del Puerco (Boar’s Hill), crowned by a ruined chapel, looks
out upon the heathy plain of Chiclana to the north, and a scrubby pine
wood (covering much of the ground towards the beach) to the west[147].
The advanced cavalry got upon the hill unhindered soon after daybreak,
and met no enemy, nor did patrols sent into the wood discover him for
some time. Presently, however, news came back from the front that a
French force had been discerned, drawn up between the Almanza creek and
the sea, and blocking the way to Cadiz. Being outside the wood it was
very visible, and seemed to be about a strong brigade of infantry with
a squadron or two of horse. This was, of course, Villatte, waiting for
the advance of the Allies. No other hostile troops were to be seen.

  [147] The pinewood is now much shrunken, and covers only the
  northern part of its original breadth. See an article on the
  topography of Barrosa by Colonel Verner in the _Saturday Review_
  for March 9, 1911.

La Peña now told Graham that, despite of the fact that the men had been
under arms for fourteen hours, and had marched as many miles in the
dark, he was about to thrust this French force out of the way without a
moment’s delay. Lardizabal, with the vanguard division, was to attack
it at once, while the rest of the army took up a position to cover him
from any possible movement of the enemy from the direction of Chiclana.

About nine in the morning Lardizabal with his five battalions reached
Villatte’s front, deployed and attacked him. The forces were about
equal, and the attack was repulsed with some loss; La Peña then ordered
up the leading brigade of Anglona’s division to support the vanguard.
A sharp engagement was going on, when a new fire broke out behind
Villatte. Zayas, from the Isle of Leon, had recast his bridge across
the Santi Petri, and was advancing to take the French in the rear.
Villatte saw his danger, gave up his position across the peninsula,
and hastily fell back towards the passage of the shallow Almanza
creek, near the mill of the same name. He recrossed it, not without
some difficulty, and then drew up to defend the passage. Lardizabal
was prevented by La Peña from pursuing him, and halted opposite. The
skirmish had been hot: Villatte had lost 337 men, the Spaniards a few
more. But they had achieved their purpose, and the connexion with Cadiz
had been duly established.