

  ‘Now cheer up, my lads, ’tis to glory we steer,’

a tune to which he was much addicted at all times in and out of season.

  [151] All this from the graphic description in the autobiography
  of Blakeney, Browne’s adjutant, p. 188.

About the same time, or a few minutes later, Barnard’s and Bushe’s
scattered and uneven line burst out of the northern edge of the wood a
mile away, and found themselves facing Leval’s division at the distance
of only some 400 yards. This force, quite unaware that any enemy was
yet near, was advancing in two columns each of three battalions, the
right one composed of the 54th regiment and a battalion of _grenadiers
réunis_, the left of the 8th regiment followed by a single battalion of
the 45th. Their divisional battery was following on their left rear.
Barnard, who got a little further to the front than the Portuguese, was
facing the French 54th, Bushe, who was drawn back a little in échelon,
was opposite the French 8th. They had hardly opened their fire, which
had great effect because the enemy had no screen of voltigeurs out
to cover him, and was caught unprepared for an infantry fight, when
Duncan’s ten guns, which had made extraordinary good pace through the
wood, appeared, and unlimbering at its edge began to fire shrapnel into
the leading battalions of the French. Behind them the two companies of
the 47th, which properly belonged to Barnard’s provisional battalion,
took post as their supports.

Thus the battle was suddenly begun on both fronts, but Graham had
only 500 men up on one side, and 900 with the guns on the other. The
main body was coming on through the wood behind in an extraordinarily
mixed order. When Graham gave orders to Wheatley’s brigade to face to
their right flank and push through the wood northward, and to Dilkes’s
brigade to turn about on the road and return to the Cerro by the way
they had come, there was no small confusion. By some misunderstanding
the rear companies of the 67th, which was the last battalion in
Wheatley’s brigade, faced about and followed Dilkes, though the leading
companies went off with their proper companions, the 28th and 87th. On
the other hand, by a compensating mistake, the two companies of the
Coldstream Guards, which belonged to Dilkes, turned north into the wood
and followed Wheatley[152]. The brigades exchanged, as it were, 250
men with each other. In addition the battalions, owing to the sudden
inversion of their column of march, were all out of their proper order
in their brigades, and went into action ‘almost anyhow.’

  [152] The biography of General Dilkes seems to explain this
  matter. Duncan, the artillery commander, thought that he would
  be going into action without any infantry supports, and rode to
  the nearest brigadier--this was Dilkes--to ask him to lend a
  few companies to cover the guns. Dilkes assented, and told the
  Coldstream companies in the middle of his column to fall out
  and follow the guns. But Graham had already set aside the two
  companies of the 47th, from Barnard’s battalion, for the same
  purpose. When Duncan found them waiting for him in the edge of
  the wood, he told the officer commanding the Coldstreamers that
  he was not wanted, and these two companies marched off and fell
  into line in a gap in the front of Wheatley’s brigade.