

A great responsibility now fell on the Spanish officers on the Cerro;
they were under orders to evacuate the heights when Graham should have
got away westward. What were they to do when it suddenly became clear
that they were themselves about to be attacked? They might attempt
to defend the hill with the one British and five Spanish battalions
which lay, unseen to the French, under the seaward slope of the Cerro:
or they might simply obey orders, and retire towards the main body,
abandoning their dominating position. The latter course was the one
taken. The five Spanish battalions streamed down the seaward face of
the hill in no very good order, and fell in there with the baggage
of the whole army. All together began to retire northward; there was
a block on the beach, the baggage mules were driven right and left,
and many got loose and bolted. Meanwhile Whittingham with the cavalry
(three Spanish[149] and two K.G.L. squadrons) ranged himself across the
track, where he was soon faced by the French dragoons, who had galloped
round the south-eastern face of the heights with remarkable celerity.

  [149] The rest of the Spanish cavalry being now with La Peña by
  the Almanza creek.

Whittingham’s retreat was not made without a protest against it by
Colonel Browne, who urged, firstly, that it was madness to abandon the
height, secondly that he had Graham’s orders to stand there, and could
obey no others. The cavalry general replied that, for his part, he had
resolved to retire, and offered to lend Browne one of his squadrons to
cover his retreat towards the British division, if he would not follow
him to the coast track. The fiery colonel made no reply, but turned to
his battalion and ordered it to occupy the ruined chapel on the top of
the Cerro and the neighbouring thickets, and to prepare for action.
But in half an hour, seeing Whittingham’s column far off at the foot
of the hill, and six French battalions coming in upon him, Browne gave
way and descended into the pine wood in search of Graham[150]. The
French--Ruffin’s division--took possession of the heights, and planted
a battery upon them.

  [150] There is a lively account of the altercation in the memoirs
  of Browne’s ardent admirer Blakeney (_A Boy in the Peninsular
  War_, p. 187).

Meanwhile we must return to Graham, concealed in the wood, and marching
(as it were blindfold) across the front of Leval’s approaching column.
He had no cavalry with him, but presently two mounted guerrilleros rode
up in haste, and told him that the French were close on his flank.
Riding back to the rear of his division, he saw from the edge of the
forest Beguines’s troops pouring down the near side of the Cerro, and
Ruffin’s mounting its northern ascent. Leval was also visible to the
left.

Graham’s mind was made up in a moment: ‘A retreat in the face of the
enemy,’ he writes, ‘who was already in reach of the easy communication
by the sea-beach, must have involved the whole allied army in the
danger of being attacked during the unavoidable confusion, while the
different corps would be arriving on the narrow ridge of Bermeja at
the same time,’ i. e. he saw that he himself coming out of the wood,
Whittingham and Beguines from the shore track, and the main body
returning from the Almanza creek bridge, would meet in disorder on
the narrow neck of the peninsula by the Torre Bermeja, and would be
unable to form an orderly line of battle. Even if they did, and then
held their ground, the object of the whole expedition was lost, and the
French, in possession of the Cerro del Puerco, once more blocked the
army into Cadiz.