

About noon La Peña sent orders to Graham to evacuate the Barrosa
position, and draw in closer to the Almanza creek, to join the rest of
the army. Meanwhile he would be relieved on the hill by five battalions
of Cruz Murgeon and Beguines[148], to which rearguard there was added
one British battalion, Browne’s composite unit consisting of the six
flank companies of the 9th, 28th, and 82nd. Whittingham and the
cavalry were to flank this force on the coast track, somewhere near
the tower of La Barrosa. This force was to move off in its turn, when
Graham should have reached the main body, for the Spanish general had
resolved not to hold the Cerro, considering that an army of 14,000
men should not be spread out over four miles of ground, but be kept
more concentrated. Graham entirely disagreed with this movement; if
the Allies came down and crammed themselves into the narrow peninsula
between the sea and the Almanza creek, there was nothing to prevent
Victor from seizing the Barrosa heights, and placing himself across
their front, in a way which would block them into the cramped position
which they had assumed. The move practically threw them back on Cadiz,
and sacrificed all the results of the toilsome flank march in which
they had been so long engaged. Graham had in the morning urged on La
Peña the all-importance of retaining the hill, but now saw his advice
rejected. Obeying orders, however, he set his column in march towards
the Torre Bermeja and the Almanza creek, through the pine wood. At the
same time the rearguard under Beguines and Cruz Murgeon ascended the
Cerro, and took up the post which the British division had left.

  [148] Cruz Murgeon was commanding the two battalions attached to
  the British division, Ciudad Real and 4th Walloon Guards.

The British column did not descend to the rough track along the coast,
but used a fair wood path right through the middle of the pine forest,
which saved them a couple of miles of détour, and was practicable for
artillery. They were soon filing along between the pines, lost to
sight, and themselves unable to see a hundred yards in any direction.

At this moment, about 12.30 p.m., Victor suddenly broke out of the
woods in front of Chiclana with the 7,000 men of Ruffin’s and Leval’s
divisions. He was tired of waiting for Cassagne, for he had now got
news that the force at Medina had started late in the morning, instead
of at dawn, and would not be up for two or three hours more. His
cavalry had just reported to him that the Cerro seemed to be abandoned,
and that the troops formerly holding it were marching across his
front through the forest. Since the main body of the enemy had been
located opposite Villatte, on the Almanza creek, there seemed to be a
good chance of seizing the important Barrosa position unopposed, and
of striking the rear division of the Allies while it was defiling,
strung out helplessly in a wood road, across the front of the advancing
French. The orders given by the Marshal sent his cavalry regiment
(three squadrons of the 1st Dragoons) to turn the heights by their
south-eastern flank, and seize the coast track, while Ruffin ascended
the Cerro by its gently sloping northern front, and Leval struck at the
troops known to be in the wood. The French, being quite fresh, came on
at a great pace; the Marshal had explained to his subordinates that
haste was everything. They were clearly visible to the rearguard left
on the heights, partly visible to La Peña, who could see their flank up
the trough of the Almanza creek, but wholly invisible to Graham and his
troops in the wood.