

The alternative was to take the offensive before the two French columns
had united, and to attack them while they were still coming upon the
ground, and before they had drawn up in any regular order. It was
evident that they were hurrying forward without any notion that they
were liable to be thrown on the defensive at a moment’s notice. In
three minutes Graham had made up his mind to attack himself, instead
of allowing himself to be chased into the Bermeja position. The wood,
in which his division lay concealed, enabled him to hide his movement,
though it made that movement perilously disorderly. The orders given
were simple: the leading brigade, that of Colonel Wheatley, was to
push straight through the wood till it reached the northern edge,
and then form there, and attack Leval. The rear brigade, that of
General Dilkes, was to counter-march down the wood-path on which it
was engaged, till it too cleared the wood, and then to form up and
attack Ruffin on the slopes of the Cerro del Puerco. The ten guns, in
the centre of the marching column, were to push up a side track which
seemed passable, and to form on Wheatley’s right, in the centre between
the two brigades. Meanwhile these movements would take some time to
execute, and the French were coming closer to the wood every minute.
It was necessary to hold them back at all costs till a line could be
formed. With this object Graham resolved to throw forward on each front
a light infantry force, which should engage the enemy, regardless of
order and of losses, till the main body got up. On the left Barnard’s
four companies of the 95th Rifles and the two companies of the 20th
Portuguese under Colonel Bushe, about 700 men in all, were ordered to
break through the wood directly before them, without any attempt at
formation, and when they reached its edge, to sally straight out at
Leval’s front, in the best skirmishing line they could make. On the
right there was a force already to the front--Browne’s flank battalion,
536 muskets, which had just descended unwillingly from the Cerro, and
was visible at its foot.

This last force was near Graham as he sat on his horse among the trees
at the wood’s end. He cantered up to Browne, and asked him why the
Cerro had been abandoned. ‘Because five battalions of Spaniards went
off before the enemy came within cannon-shot,’ was the reply. ‘Well,
it’s a bad business, Browne; you must instantly turn round again and
attack.’ The flank battalion began to extend into skirmishing order,
when Graham, after a moment’s reflection, said, ‘I must show something
more serious than skirmishing. Close the men into compact battalion!
And then attack in your front and immediately.’ Dilkes’s brigade was
coming up, but was still a mile away in the wood, and Browne came out
of the trees into the open absolutely isolated, to attack uphill six
battalions and a battery with a two-deep line of just 536 men[151].
Blakeney says that his colonel rode into action singing the old naval
song--