

The Marshal, who was present in person on the top of the Cerro, then
brought up his reserve, the two battalions of grenadiers under General
Chaudron Rousseau. He himself and the brigadier were both distinctly
seen leading on the column, the Marshal waving his large white-plumed
hat over his head. This charge was delivered against the right of
Dilkes’s line, where the 3rd Guards and wing of the 67th lay, that of
the 24th Ligne had been more against the centre and the 1st Guards. But
the result was the same, though the contest was more long and bloody.
The grenadiers are said to have struggled forward, losing heavily at
each step, till their front was within a very few yards of Dilkes’s
line: it was only then that they halted and began to fire--a fatal step
in such a contest, where impetus was the sole chance of the attacking
mass, and superiority in musketry fire (owing to the longer front)
was on the side of the English line. This of course was a terribly
murderous business to both sides, as the figures presently to be quoted
will show. But as in all similar contests during the Peninsular War,
the line hit harder than the column. The four French battalions began
at last to give way, and could not be kept together. Then Victor tried
to bring in the two left battalions of his line to their aid, but these
two units were pestered and impeded, when they began to move off from
their first position, by the remains of Browne’s flank battalion, which
(though reduced to under 300 muskets) began to press forward again,
when the troops hitherto in their front commenced to move off to the
right. ‘They darted from behind trees, briars, brakes, and out of
hollows,’ says Blakeney. ‘I could imagine myself like Roderick Dhu upon
Benledi’s side--it was a magic effect. We confidently advanced up the
hill and, unlike most advances, in this one our numbers increased as
we proceeded, soldiers of the flank battalion joining at every step.’
This scattered little force hung on to the flank of Victor’s right, and
prevented it from rallying the broken force now recoiling from in front
of Dilkes. The flankers had even the good fortune to capture a howitzer
from the left of Victor’s battery placed by the chapel on the hilltop;
another gun was taken by the 1st Guards in their forward progress.

It must have been just at this crisis that the whole French mass broke;
up to this moment it had been recoiling sullenly, still keeping up
some fire from its rear. But now the observer saw[153], ‘with loud and
murmuring sounds, Ruffin’s division and Rousseau’s chosen grenadiers
rolling with a whirling motion down into the valley below, leaving
their two brave generals mortally wounded on the hill, which was left
in possession of their bloodstained conquerors.’

  [153] Blakeney, p. 195.

The exhausted victors halted for a short time to re-form, and were in
a more orderly line than they had hitherto shown when they commenced
to follow the enemy down the slope. The casualties in this part of
the field may now be stated, for neither party was to lose many more
men in the last episode of the fight. Dilkes’s brigade and Browne’s
flank battalion had gone up the hill with 76 officers and 1,873 men.
They lost 25 officers and 588 men--about 10 men out of every 31 in the
fight. The French loss was positively more, proportionately not quite
so great. In the six battalions of Ruffin and Chaudron Rousseau there
seem to have been about 108 officers and 3,000 men present; of these 36
officers and 840 men were left on the hill, i. e. 10 men in every 35.
The trophies remaining with the victors were two guns and 107 unwounded
prisoners, beside the multitude of disabled men left on the slope[154].