

But while a line of some sort was being formed, the screen of light
troops which Graham had thrown forward, to detain the enemy, during
the deployment of the main body, had done its duty by allowing itself
to be knocked to pieces while attacking fivefold numbers. It had to be
sacrificed to gain time, and carried out its orders completely. We will
take the fortunes of the right-hand force first.

Browne’s composite battalion had started from a position close under
the edge of the pine wood; it had first to cross a broad but shallow
ravine, and then to climb the gentle slope of the Cerro, where it
became fully visible to the enemy, though there was a little cover
here and there upon the hillside, in the form of scattered bushes and
slight dips in the ground. The French allowed the line to advance a
little way up the ascent, and then opened upon it both with a field
battery placed close to the chapel on the summit, and with the musketry
fire of the three battalions which formed their right wing. Blakeney,
our ever-useful authority for this side of the battle, says that the
first salvo of the French knocked over more than 200 officers and men
out of 536 forming the line. Browne ordered the men to close to the
centre, and endeavoured to continue his climb; this was done with much
difficulty, but, before the advance could be resumed, more than fifty
men more were killed or wounded. All the exertions of the colonel could
not form a third line--fourteen officers out of twenty-one were down,
and more than half the rank and file. The remainder now scattered;
the men did not retreat, but threw themselves down, and commenced
independent firing from behind bushes, hillocks, and any other cover
they could find. The French made no attempt to fall upon them by
descending the hill, as would have seemed natural. The reason was that
by the time that the flank battalion had been disposed of, the main
body of Dilkes’s brigade had come out of the wood, and was visible
forming up at the foot of the hill to deliver the real assault.

The Guards had obtained the necessary time to come up and choose their
ground through the absolute martyrdom of the flank battalion. Dilkes
did not repeat the attack on the same slope over which Browne had
advanced, but pushed some distance to the right, where the hillside
showed more cover in the way of scattered bushes and trees, and some
dead ground hid the men by its steepness from the fire of the battery
on the crest above. Blakeney describes them as strung out on a most
irregular front, a confused mass rather than a formed line. The whole,
while advancing, kept taking ground to their right, so as to come up
the hillside opposite Ruffin’s left wing. Their extreme flank was
covered by Norcott’s two companies of rifles in more extended order.
Partly owing to the cover, partly to the difficulty found by the French
guns in getting their fire to bear, Dilkes’s brigade got wellnigh to
the top of the hill before it suffered any very serious losses. But on
clearing the last underwood, and reaching smooth ground, it was charged
by the four battalions of Ruffin’s left--two of the 24th Line supported
by the two reserve battalions of _grenadiers réunis_. This was the
crisis of the battle in the southern half of its progress. By all the
rules of French military art four battalion columns, fresh and well
ordered, charging down hill, should have been able to break through a
disordered line of decidedly inferior strength pushing upwards against
them. Dilkes had only 1,400 men, the four French battalions just over
2,000. Nevertheless, the impossible happened. When the two columns of
the 24th Ligne came down, with drums beating and levelled bayonets,
against the centre of the firm, if disorderly, line in front, they
were checked by the furious fire that broke out against them from the
semicircle into which they had pushed. This was one more example of the
fact established at Maida five years before, and reaffirmed at Vimiero,
Talavera, and Bussaco, that no column could break the British line by
mere impetus. In this case the French had every advantage, since they
were absolutely intact troops, and had the ground entirely in their
favour, while the Guards and the wing of the 67th opposed to them had
marched two miles in haste, had then climbed a steep 200-foot slope
under fire, had lost their order, and were firing up hill. But the fire
was delivered with astounding accuracy, considering that the men were
blown with their climb and dreadfully exhausted. The whole head of
each of the descending columns was blown to pieces. The rest came to
a standstill, and crowding together in a disorderly clump, opened an
irregular fire against the British line.