

Victor was therefore able on the 8th to reoccupy the evacuated southern
wing of his lines, and to issue an absurd dispatch, in which he claimed
that Barrosa had been a victory. But for the loss of 2,000 men, and a
severe shock inflicted on the morale of his troops, he was in exactly
the same position that he had held on the 4th. The whole fruits of
the battle of Barrosa had been lost. What they might have been it is
possible up to a certain point to foresee. Supposing that Graham and
not La Peña had been in command, the army, raised to nearly 20,000
men by the junction of Zayas and of the 2,000 Anglo-Portuguese still
in Cadiz, would have marched on Chiclana upon the 6th. Victor would
have blown up the Lines and retired towards Seville, but there would
have been no reinforcements for him there, and he could only have been
brought up to fighting strength by the calling in of Sebastiani and
Godinot. But, if these generals came up to his aid, Granada and Cordova
would have had to be evacuated, and the insurgents would have swept all
over Eastern Andalusia. The Allies could not have held the field, for
even before Soult’s return from Badajoz there were still 50,000 French
troops south of the Sierra Morena. The siege of Cadiz would ultimately,
no doubt, have been recommenced, Granada and Cordova reoccupied. But
meanwhile the immense work spent on the Lines would have had to be
recommenced _de novo_, and the ascendancy of the French arms in the
south would have received a rude shock. Possibly Soult might have blown
up Badajoz after its fall on March 12th, instead of holding it, for
he would have required all his strength to reconquer Andalusia. But
further than the immediate result of the inevitable raising of the
siege of Cadiz it is useless to make speculations.

The alarms of the French in Andalusia did not end with Victor’s
reoccupation of the lines. Another episode was still to be played out
before matters settled down. The indefatigable Ballasteros, having
rested for a short time in Portugal, came back into the Condado de
Niebla in the end of February with 4,000 men. He defeated on the Rio
Tinto General Remond, whose weak column was the only French force left
west of the Guadalquivir since Gazan’s departure (March 2). He then
marched promptly on Seville, having good information of the weakness
of the garrison that had been left there. On March 5th, the day of
Barrosa, he was at San Lucar la Mayor, only twenty miles from the great
city. The governor, Daricau, came out against him and joined Remond
with 1,600 men and three guns, all that he could dispose of, leaving
Seville in the hands of a miserable garrison, composed of convalescents
and _Juramentados_ of doubtful faith. If Daricau had been beaten, the
city and all its establishments must have been lost in a day. But
Ballasteros refused to fight, and retired behind the Rio Tinto, having
had false news that a force sent from Estremadura by Soult was on
his flank. Daricau returned to Seville on March 9th, leaving Remond
to observe Ballasteros, and was joined by some detachments sent very
tardily by Godinot to strengthen the garrison. But he had received
such alarming accounts of the results of the battle of Barrosa, that
he sent these troops on to Victor, and remained with a very weak force
in the city. But on March 9th Ballasteros, suddenly coming back from
the Rio Tinto, surprised Remond at La Palma, took two guns from him,
and drove him back into Seville. On the 11th the Spanish general was
back at San Lucar, and causing great dismay to Daricau, who sent urgent
demands for help to Soult. Since Barrosa he could look for no help from
elsewhere. He was saved by the rumour of the capitulation of Badajoz,
which frightened Ballasteros away, for the Spaniard rightly judged that
Soult could, and must, send a considerable force against him, now that
his hands were freed.