

  [159] These two companies, whose losses, as it is seen here, were
  heavy, must have been engaged with part of the left battalion of
  the French 54th.

Just as Leval’s division arrived near the Laguna, it was joined by the
wrecks of Ruffin’s, descending in disorder from the northern slope of
the Cerro. It says much for the resolution of Victor that he succeeded
in halting the two disorganized masses, and deployed two or three
comparatively intact battalions and the ten guns which remained to him,
to cover the rallying of the rest. At the same moment his cavalry, the
1st Dragoons, which had galloped away round the east side of the Cerro
when Ruffin was beaten off it, came in and drew up on the right and
left of the whole. It was a bold bid to secure an unmolested retreat,
for no more could be hoped. Some time was available for rallying the
troops, for Graham had also to get his exhausted men into order. They
came up at last, Wheatley’s brigade on the left, Dilkes’s on the
right, the guns in the centre. The latter were set to play on the
new front of the French, which they did with great effect, the enemy
being in a cramped mass. The skirmishers went forward, and a third
separate engagement seemed about to begin, when a small new force
intervened. This was one of the two squadrons of German hussars, which
had followed the French dragoons around the back of the Cerro, not on
the orders of Whittingham, who made no haste to pursue, but on those
of Graham’s aide-de-camp Ponsonby, who had carried them off on his
own responsibility. Coming like a whirlwind across the lower slope of
the hill, this squadron upset the French squadron of the 1st Dragoons
which formed Victor’s flank guard on this side, and drove it in upon
the infantry. Small though the shock was, it sufficed to upset the
equilibrium of the demoralized French divisions. They went off in a
sudden rush, leaving behind them two more guns, and streamed across the
plain towards Chiclana.

The battle was over; there was no pursuit, for the cautious
Whittingham came up ten minutes too late with the rest of the cavalry,
in time to see the last of the enemy disappearing in the woods. With
him came up also the two infantry battalions under Cruz Murgeon, and
these were the only Spanish troops that Graham saw during the battle.

It may be noted that we have hitherto not had occasion to say one word
of General La Peña or his two infantry divisions since the main action
began. On being informed, at the same time as Graham, of the approach
of Victor from Chiclana, La Peña had no thought save to defend the
isthmus by the Torre Bermeja against the approaching enemy. He drew
up his own eleven battalions across it in a double or treble line,
while Zayas, with those which had come out of Cadiz, watched Villatte
across the Almanza creek. When Beguines appeared from the Cerro by
the coast-track, he was put into the same mass, which must have risen
to something like 10,000 men. Presently news came from the wood that
Graham had faced about and was fighting the French. La Peña, as his own
dispatch shows, concluded that the English must inevitably be beaten,
and refused to stir a man to support them or to bring them off. Zayas
repeatedly asked leave to march up to join Wheatley’s flank, or to
cross the Almanza and to attack Villatte, but was refused permission.
The first report, to the effect that Graham was driving the French
back, La Peña refused to credit. It was not till the fugitives of
Leval’s division were seen retreating past the head of the Almanza
creek, that he could be got to accept the idea that Graham was
victorious. And when pressed to join in the pursuit by Zayas, he merely
said that the men were tired, and the day far spent. The reaping of the
fruits of victory might be left for the morrow.