

  [156] Surtees, _Twenty Years in the Rifle Brigade_, p. 119.

The fight, owing to the French centre being slightly advanced, began a
little earlier there than on the wings, the first clash being between
the column of the French 2/8th, led by Vigo-Roussillon, and the line
of the 2/87th, led by that enthusiastic fighter, Major Gough. We have
narratives from both of them, and each insists that he kept down the
fire of his men till they were within a very short distance of the
enemy--sixty yards, says Vigo-Roussillon, twenty-five, says Gough.
There was then a single volley exchanged, and the French column, much
the harder hit of the two, broke up. ‘As they were in column when
they broke,’ says Gough, ‘they could not get away. It was therefore
a scene of most dreadful carnage, and I must own my weakness; as I
was in front of the regiment I was in the very middle of them, and I
could not cut down one, though I might have twenty, they seemed so
confounded and confused[157].’ There was indeed a fearful crowding and
_mêlée_ here, for the 1st battalion of the French 8th, yielding before
the fire of the British guns and the troops to the right of Gough,
the wing of the 67th, fell back sideways against their own second
battalion, and became mixed in one mass with them. Thus the 87th were
sweeping before them, and ploughing through, a crowd of some 1,400,
or allowing for previous losses, 1,200 men, while the companies of
the 67th were firing into its flank and rear. The 8th Ligne suffered
worse losses than any other troops on the field that day, save Browne’s
heroic flank battalion, losing about 50 per cent. of the men who went
into action--726 killed, wounded, and taken out of 1,468 present.
The colonel, Autié, was killed, and one of the two battalion chiefs,
Lanusse, while the other, Vigo-Roussillon, was wounded and taken
prisoner. The eagle was captured from the middle of the 1st battalion
after a desperate struggle with the colours-guard; Ensign Keogh of
the 87th, who first got hold of it, was bayonetted twice and killed;
Sergeant Masterson[158] then ran the _aquilifère_ through with his
pike, dragged the eagle away, and kept it during the rest of the
_mêlée_. This was the first eagle captured by the British during the
Peninsular War, and its arrival in London was rightly made an occasion
of considerable pomp and ceremony. The eagle was presented to the
Prince Regent in person, who granted to the 87th the right to bear an
eagle and a laurel wreath above the harp on the regimental colours
and appointments, and the title of the ‘Prince of Wales’s Own Irish
Regiment.’ Gough was given a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy at once, and
Sergeant Masterson, who had captured the eagle, received a commission
in his own regiment; he and his descendants have served in it almost
throughout the nineteenth century.

  [157] See letter in Rait’s _Life of Lord Gough_, vol. i. p. 53.

  [158] A hereditary name of glory in the 87th. The present
  representative of the family won his Victoria Cross at Ladysmith
  in 1900.