

  [162] Lapéne, _Campagnes de 1810-11_, p. 121.

On the morning of the 6th the French retired behind the Saltillo river,
leaving the 3rd Division (now commanded by Cassagne, for Villatte had
been wounded) on the further side, with orders to retire when seriously
attacked, and to issue a signal for the blowing up of all the forts
of the south wing of the Lines, at the moment that the retreat should
begin. Cassagne was then to rejoin the Marshal behind the Rio San
Pedro, beyond Puerto Real, skirmishing as he went. But no trace of the
Allies was to be seen on the morning of the 6th, and Cassagne was not
forced to move back, though by mistake one battery was blown up without
the signal being given[163]. The only sign of life on the part of the
enemy was that a swarm of English gunboats and launches appeared at
the north end of the lines, and threw ashore 600 seamen and marines,
who occupied Puerto Santa Maria for some hours, and destroyed all the
smaller batteries between that place and Rota unhindered. For the
French had concentrated in the fort of Santa Catalina and abandoned
all their minor posts. But the flotilla withdrew at dusk, leaving
Victor much puzzled as to the purpose of his adversaries. On the
morning of March 7th he sent out a cavalry reconnaissance of several
squadrons, which brought back the astonishing news that it had explored
the whole of the country between Chiclana and the sea, including the
battlefield, and had seen no hostile troops, save a large encampment on
the Bermeja isthmus, just above the bridge of boats leading into the
Isla de Leon.

  [163] See, for a curious note concerning this incident, Lapéne,
  Appendix, p. 256.

What had happened was that La Peña had determined to give up the
expedition and retire to Cadiz. He had declined to listen to a
proposition made by Graham and Admiral Keats that he should advance
cautiously towards Chiclana, while the British naval and land forces
made a combined attack upon the Trocadero[164]. He did not even send
out cavalry patrols to discover what had become of Victor; if they had
gone forth, they would have found that the Marshal had retired beyond
the Saltillo, and would have discerned his preparations for a general
retreat. But after remaining encamped by the Torre Bermeja during the
whole of the 6th and the greater part of the 7th, the Spanish army
crossed the bridge of boats into the Isla, and took it up behind them.
Only Beguines and his three battalions were left on the continent,
with orders to return to their old haunts in the Ronda mountains. This
little force retired to Medina Sidonia on the 8th, and repulsed there
a French column of 600 men which came up to occupy the town. But next
day a whole brigade marched against them, whereupon Beguines evacuated
Medina and went off towards San Roque and Algesiras.

  [164] It is sometimes asserted that La Peña proposed to continue
  the campaign, and was foiled by Graham’s departure into the Isla.
  But we have Graham’s own statement, in his dispatch to Henry
  Wellesley of March 24, that no such proposal was made. ‘The only
  regret expressed to me at Head Quarters on the morning of the
  6th, on knowing of my intention to send the British troops across
  the Santi Petri, was that the opportunity of withdrawing the
  Spanish troops during the night was lost, and on my observing
  that after such a defeat there was no risk of attack from the
  enemy, a very contrary opinion was expressed.’