

When, therefore, the Marshal, as we have already seen[165], came back
in haste to Andalusia with Gazan’s division, fearing that he might find
Ballasteros in Seville, and Graham pursuing Victor from the evacuated
lines of Cadiz, he was agreeably surprised to find that both dangers
had been avoided, and that the crisis in Andalusia was at an end. His
further movements belong to a different campaign, and will be related
in their due place.

  [165] See p. 62 above.

Meanwhile Graham and La Peña were engaged in a violent controversy. The
British general had sent the most scathing comments on his colleague’s
conduct to the ambassador, Henry Wellesley, and to Wellington, and made
his complaints also to the Regency. La Peña on the other hand claimed
the credit of the victory of Barrosa for his own skilful management;
according to his magniloquent dispatches all had gone well, till Graham
spoilt the campaign by taking his division back to Cadiz. The Regency
seemed partly to believe him, as they conferred on him the Grand Cross
of the Order of Charles III, though at the same time they offered
Graham the title of a grandee of Spain, which he refused, for he would
not be honoured in such company. But Spanish as well as British public
opinion was so much against La Peña, that he was almost immediately
deprived of his command, which was given to the Marquis Coupigny; while
Graham, whose strong language had made it impossible for him to be left
in contact with the Regency, was withdrawn to serve with Wellington in
Portugal, and made over the charge of the Anglo-Portuguese troops at
Cadiz to General Cooke. Summing up the results of the Barrosa campaign,
we may say that all it had accomplished was so to alarm Soult that he
came back in haste from Estremadura, leaving there under Mortier a
force far too weak to threaten any harm to Wellington and Portugal. But
even if Barrosa had never been fought, Soult would have been harmless
in any case, because Masséna was gone from Santarem before Badajoz
fell.




SECTION XXIV

MASSÉNA’S RETREAT FROM PORTUGAL




CHAPTER I

SANTAREM TO CELORICO. MARCH 9TH-22ND, 1811


On the 9th of March Wellington began at last to discover the real
position of the various French corps; till their rear was well past
Thomar, it had been difficult to divine the main trend of their
movements, for the various columns had been crossing each other’s
routes in a very puzzling fashion. But it now became clear that Masséna
was intending to use all the three lines of communication which lead
from the plain of the Tagus to the lower valley of the Mondego. Reynier
and the 2nd Corps, after passing Thomar, had taken the bad mountain
road by Cabaços and Espinhal, far to the east, and would come down on
to the Mondego near the Ponte de Murcella, a little above Coimbra.
The 8th Corps had taken the central road, that by Chão de Maçans and
Ameiro, which joins the main Lisbon-Coimbra _chaussée_ at Pombal.
Loison and his division, having crossed the route of Reynier, fell
into the Chão de Maçans road behind Junot. Ney, after holding Leiria
till the 9th, with the divisions of Marchand and Mermet, fell back on
that day a march along the great road in the plain (the Lisbon-Coimbra
_chaussée_ mentioned above), and then halted. In front of him was
marching Drouet with Conroux’s division of the 9th Corps, escorting the
main train of the army, such as it was; it reached Travaço do Baixo,
five miles south of Pombal, on the night of the 9th. Montbrun’s reserve
cavalry was all with Ney. Of the three columns Reynier’s was 11,000
strong, that formed by Junot with Loison in his rear had about 16,000
men, that of Ney and Montbrun, with Conroux in front of them, comprised
over 20,000 sabres and bayonets. The main fact to be borne in mind by
the British general was that Reynier had been sent on an external
road, separated by a very difficult mountain chain from those followed
by the other two columns, but that Ney and Junot would undoubtedly
unite at Pombal, where their roads met, so that a mass of 35,000 men
would be collected at that important centre of communication on the
10th or the 11th. But Reynier could not join them till the columns
should have got down to the Mondego, some days later[166]. Masséna was,
rightly enough, trying to use as many roads as possible, both to avoid
overcrowding of troops and trains on a single road, and also in order
that wider foraging might be possible, when the army should get out of
the devastated region north of Thomar, and descend into the valley of
the Mondego, where it was hoped that food would be far more procurable.
But the result of the disposition was that Reynier would not be
available for several days, if the British threw their main force on to
the rear of Ney and Junot and brought them to action.