

When it is remembered that La Peña was only two miles from Wheatley’s
fighting-ground, and three from the Cerro, his conduct seems astounding
as well as selfish. Graham’s fight lasted nearly two hours. La Peña
could have ridden over, to see what was going on, in a quarter of an
hour. He refused to stir, and deliberately sacrificed his allies,
because he had got a comfortable, almost an impregnable, position
across the narrow isthmus, and would not move out of it, whatever might
happen to Graham. This timid and selfish policy was an exact repetition
of his betrayal of Castaños at Tudela in 1808. With his 10,000 men
he could have crushed Villatte if he had advanced on one front, or have
annihilated the remnants of Ruffin and Leval, if he had chosen to act
on the other.

[Illustration: BARROSA]

He had his reward: next morning Graham, after collecting his wounded
and his trophies, recrossed into the Isle of Leon, formally giving
notice that in consequence of yesterday’s proceedings, he was forced to
withdraw his consent, given in February, to serve under La Peña, and to
fall back on the discretional orders given by the British Government
not to undertake any operations in which he was not himself in chief
command. It is impossible to blame him; no one could deny, after what
had happened on the 5th, that it was absolutely unsafe to go out in La
Peña’s company. Wellington sent his complete approval to Graham, well
remembering his own experiences with Cuesta in 1809. ‘I concur in the
propriety of your withdrawing to the Isla on the 6th,’ he wrote, ‘as
much as I admire the promptitude and determination of your attack on
the 5th[160].’

  [160] Wellington to Graham, from Santa Marinha, March 25th.
  (_Dispatches_, vii, 396.)

The division marched back into the Isla with only 4,000 men in the
ranks; 1,238 had fallen or been disabled at Barrosa--almost one
casualty among every four men in the field. But Victor had been hit
much harder; out of 7,300 men in the divisions of Leval and Ruffin much
more than one in four, viz. no less than 2,062, were _hors de combat_;
262 had been killed, 1,694 wounded, 134 unwounded prisoners were taken,
along with the eagle and five guns[161]. The units that had fought in
the Cerro and on the heath by the wood were absolutely demoralized; it
would have been impossible to put them in line again for several days.

  [161] See the figures of losses in Appendix No. V.

If the slightest push forward had been made on the 6th, it is certain
that the siege would have been raised. Victor had rallied the broken
troops behind the wood of Chiclana on Villatte’s comparatively intact
division, and had been joined in the late afternoon by Cassagne’s 3,000
men, who had at last come up from Medina Sidonia. But there was panic
all along the Lines: while the battle had been going on, English and
Spanish gunboats had threatened their garrison, and had made small
disembarkations at one or two points; a battery had been captured
near Santa Maria. If a more serious attack were made from the sea
next morning, it was clear that the line would break at some point.
‘The sinister phrases “destruction of the forts” and “abandonment of
the position” flew from mouth to mouth[162].’ Victor called a council
of war, and proposed to offer a second battle behind Chiclana; but
he found little support among the generals. It was finally decided
that, if the Allies should come on in full force next morning, only
such resistance should be made as would allow time to blow up most of
the forts, and burn the stores and the flotilla. The 1st Corps would
retreat on Seville. Victor proposed that one or two positions, where
there were solid closed works, like Fort Sénarmont and the Trocadero,
should be left garrisoned, and told to defend themselves until the army
should return, strengthened by Soult and Sebastiani, to relieve them.
It is doubtful whether he would really have risked this move, since the
time of his return would have been most uncertain, and he might very
probably have been making a present to the enemy of any troops left
behind in isolated posts.