

  [154] For further details see the letters of General Dilkes,
  Colonels Norcott, Stanhope, and Onslow, and Major Acheson, in
  Wellington’s _Supplementary Dispatches_, vii. pp. 127-31.

While this bloody business had been going on upon the Cerro del
Puerco, it may be asked what were the Spaniards on the coast road
doing--Whittingham’s squadrons and the five battalions of Cruz Murgeon
and Beguines. The last named, with his three battalions, shepherding
what was left of the baggage-train, quietly marched off along the sea,
and joined La Peña by the Torre Bermeja. Whittingham was of a little
positive use; he continued all through the fight to ‘contain’ and
occasionally to bicker with the French cavalry regiment (1st Dragoons)
that faced him near the Torre Barrosa. The two battalions of Cruz
Murgeon supported him. This force certainly did not do its share--180
German Hussars, 300 Spanish horse, and 1,000 Spanish foot simply kept
out of action 400 French horse. This was something, but not much,
for the dragoons could not have interfered very effectively on the
hill against Dilkes’s advance, because the south side of the Cerro
is too precipitous for horsemen. In short, Whittingham’s statement
in his report to La Peña, that ‘all the cavalry fulfilled its duty
brilliantly’ is a sad overstatement of the case.

Let us turn now to the other half of the fight, where Wheatley’s
brigade and Duncan’s guns were facing Leval on the open plain just
outside the edge of the wood. At the moment when Browne attacked the
Cerro, Barnard’s rifles and Bushe’s Portuguese were throwing themselves
in a no less resolute fashion upon the six French battalions in their
front. They had the advantage of being invisible to the enemy till
they emerged from the wood, only 300 yards in his front, and of being
supported, within a few minutes of their arrival, by Duncan’s ten guns,
while Browne had no artillery assistance whatever, and was seen by the
French for half a mile before he got near them.

The confusion in Leval’s division on being suddenly attacked by an
unexpected swarm of skirmishers pouring out of the wood was extreme.
So much were they taken aback, that Vigo-Roussillon of the 8th Line
assures us in his memoirs that a false alarm of cavalry was raised,
and that his regiment, and the first battalion of the 54th, formed
square before the mistake was recognized, and caught some shells from
Duncan’s guns in that uncomfortable situation, before they had time to
deploy for action against infantry. This they had to do under a heavy
fire from Barnard’s riflemen, who had advanced quite close to them.
Leval’s fighting formation was the usual ‘column of divisions,’ i. e.
a front of two companies and a depth of three in each battalion, or
(since these units averaged 650 men each, and the companies over 100
bayonets) a front of seventy-two men and a depth of nine. The length of
Barnard’s skirmishing line, with his 400 rifles, seems to have covered
the front of the right battalion of the 54th and the left battalion of
the 8th--some 1,300 men. The 95th did considerable execution on them
while they were getting out of square formation: but when the columns
advanced firing, the skirmishing line had to fall back. Its loss
was heavy--sixty-five killed and wounded; among the latter Barnard,
commanding the battalion. The next troops whom the French encountered
were the flank companies of the 20th Portuguese--330 men only, who had
advanced on the right rear of the 95th, supporting them in échelon.
This was a new corps, which had been sent to Cadiz the moment it was
raised in 1809, and had never been under fire before. Considering
their hopeless position, alone in front of an advancing division, the
Portuguese behaved very well; they held their ground for some time,
while their colonel, Bushe, as is recorded by an eye-witness, rode
slowly backward and forward behind them with his spectacles on, crying
as the balls whistled past, ‘Que bella musica,’ to encourage his men.
But he was soon mortally wounded[155], and after his fall the line
melted away and drifted to the rear, after having kept a battalion of
the French 8th engaged for some minutes: proportionately its loss was
much the same as that of the Rifles--56 killed and wounded out of 332
present--one man in six.