

  [166] The forces of the French corps five days later (but the
  numbers were much the same still) were, to be exact [Return of
  March 15 in French _Archives Nationales_]--

  Reynier’s 2nd Corps                    10,251  men
  Junot’s 8th Corps                       9,794   ”
  Loison’s Division                       4,734   ”
  Ney’s other Divisions, horse and foot  11,066   ”
  Montbrun’s Reserve Cavalry              2,435   ”
  Conroux’s Division of the 9th Corps     5,000   ”
  Artillery Reserves, Train, Sappers,
    Marine Battalion, &c.                 5,855   ”
                                         ------
                                  Total  49,135  men

  all exclusive of sick and wounded.

The road Leiria-Coimbra was moreover both the best and the shortest
of all those that led from the position now reached by Wellington’s
marching columns to the valley of the Mondego. By following it, and
hustling hard the French column that had taken it, the commander of
the Allies might hope to reach Coimbra in time to prevent the French
from taking up a secure position on the lower Mondego, and establishing
themselves in cantonments on its banks. For it was his main object to
turn them away from Coimbra and the coast-plain, and to force them up
into the eastern mountains and towards the borders of Spain. At first
he did not think that the line of the Mondego could be held against
the retreating French by the trifling Portuguese militia force that
lay behind it--Trant’s seven battalions at Coimbra, Wilson’s four at
Peñacova, which did not amount together to more than 5,000 or 6,000
troops of very inferior quality. He issued orders to those generals
to retire, without committing themselves to an attempt to defend the
line of the river--Trant had better go behind the Vouga, Wilson might
retire on Vizeu; both would ultimately join the northern reserves under
Baccelar, and co-operate with that general in defending the city of
Oporto[167]. But Wellington hoped that matters would never reach the
point at which the safety of Oporto came in question, for he thought
that he would be pressing the rear of the French so hard in a few
days, that they would be thinking of other things than taking the
offensive against northern Portugal. He would do his best to thrust
them north-eastward, towards the frontiers of Spain. As a matter of
fact we shall see that he more than fulfilled his own forecast, for the
French were so hotly pursued that they never succeeded in crossing the
Mondego or seizing Coimbra. When they had reached its gates, Masséna
refused to take the risk of passing the river at a moment when his rear
was in such dire trouble that the whole army would have been in danger
of destruction, if he had been attacked when the actual operation of
passage was in progress.

  [167] Wellington to Baccelar, March 8: ‘I conclude that Colonel
  Trant will have retired from Coimbra upon the bridge of the
  Vouga, which he should destroy, and from thence on Oporto. The
  enemy have no boats, and I hope to be able to press them so hard
  that they can get none on the Mondego.... If the enemy should
  turn toward Vizeu, you will of course do all that you can to
  annoy them in their march, but send all your baggage, &c., across
  the Douro.’ (_Dispatches_, vii. p. 347.)