

  [155] Vigo-Roussillon says that he personally captured Colonel
  Bushe, who was riding away slowly from the front, disabled by
  a wound. This seems contradicted by the very circumstantial
  evidence of Bunbury, adjutant of the 20th Portuguese, who says
  that Bushe had his horse shot under him, and was mortally
  wounded, that he declined being sent to the rear, and was propped
  up and left behind by his own orders. French soldiers were seen
  rifling him as he lay.

The first act of the drama on this front was thus complete; the
detaining force sent out by Graham had been, as he expected, driven
in with loss, though not an appalling loss of 50 per cent., such as
Browne’s gallant flankers had suffered on the Cerro. But the main body
was now up, and had formed in the edge of the wood, to the left of
Duncan’s guns, with no loss or interruption, since it had been well
covered all the time. There were now some 1,400 men in line: the 28th,
450 strong, on the left, then the 211 bayonets of the Coldstreamers,
the 87th, nearly 700 strong, in the centre; beyond them the right wing
of the 67th, about 250 bayonets, next to the guns, which were still
under the protection of the flank companies of the 47th which served as
their escort throughout the fight. The broken screen of light troops
which had just retired was by no means out of action; the 95th formed
up again behind the 28th, the Portuguese behind the 87th, and both were
used again before the battle was over.

The formation of the French at this moment was an uneven line of
four battalion columns,--counting from their left, 1/8th, 2/8th,
2/54th, 1/54th; the other two battalions were in reserve, the 1/45th
behind the French battery, which was now engaged with Duncan’s guns,
the provisional battalion of grenadiers more to the right, and some
distance behind the 54th regiment. The whole was advancing, but slowly:
the battalions in the front line were firing; the centre was a little
more to the front than the wings, the 2/8th being ahead of the other
battalions because (as its _chef de bataillon_ remarks in his memoir)
he only allowed his men to fire volleys by order, while the units on
his right and left were using independent fire. All had suffered in
the previous fight with Barnard and the Portuguese, and much needed
time to re-form, which was not granted them, because the English main
line charged the moment that the light troops had cleared off from its
front. It is curious to note in the French memoirs that the authors
all write as if they had an oppressive feeling that the superiority of
numbers was against them, and that they were being led to a forlorn
hope. This was caused partly by the immense extent of the British line
in proportion to its depth, still more by the happy existence of the
wood behind Wheatley’s brigade. It had already vomited out two lively
attacking lines, and the enemy presupposed a third in reserve; nearly
all the French narratives definitely say that they were attacked by
three lines, while really there was only one, with the screen of light
troops, which had already been used up. As to the complaint concerning
inferior numbers, it is certain that Leval’s division had 3,800 men,
and Wheatley’s brigade only 2,500. The only superiority of the British
was that, in the artillery duel now going on to the right of the line,
they had ten guns to six, and soon crushed the French battery, so that
it gave no effective support to its infantry. Only one of the French
battalions attempted to deploy into line--this was the 2nd of the 54th,
which lay opposite the British 28th--the others kept on from first
to last in column of divisions. An eye-witness (Surtees of the 95th)
remarks, ‘they never got into line, nor did they ever intend to do so,
I believe, but advanced in solid bodies, firing from their front[156].’