

It is clear that if Masséna had intended to make a serious blow at
Coimbra, he ought to have done so at latest on the 10th or 11th,
before the English army was close enough to hinder him. Junot’s corps,
which was entirely covered by Ney and the rearguard, was well placed
for a blow at the city, as it was little more than ten miles from the
Mondego and the broken bridge. But Masséna did not march Junot in
this direction, but kept him in a position to support Ney, while only
some squadrons of Montbrun’s cavalry were sent against Coimbra. That
general’s proceedings showed great timidity and feebleness. On the
afternoon of the 10th, according to Trant’s dispatch, his advanced
guard appeared on the Monte de Esperança, the height opposite Coimbra,
and was seen to send down reconnoitring parties towards the banks of
the river, both above and below the city, leaving unmolested the broken
bridge, behind which were the guns placed in the battery which Trant
had thrown up to protect his retreat. Much rain had fallen on the
preceding night, the river was full, and Montbrun’s scouts reported to
him and to his companion the Engineer-colonel Valazé that they could
not find the fords which, as they had been told, were situated at the
spots that they had visited. On the following day (March 11th), while
the skirmish of Pombal was going on, Montbrun moved in nearer to the
city, showing artillery and a cavalry brigade at the Cruz dos Moroiços,
and occupying the convent of Santa Clara, which lies less than a mile
from the bridge. One of his squadrons tried to pass at the ford of
Pereira, five miles below the city, but owing to the strength of the
current failed completely, the men who first tried the water regaining
with difficulty the bank from which they had started. Nothing more was
done by the French that day, and Montbrun reported to Masséna that he
had received information that the whole of the brigades of Trant and
Silveira were in Coimbra, and that he had seen artillery in position at
the bridge[172]. The real force opposed to him was seven battalions
of Militia, some 3,000 men, and six guns. This was the last day on
which it would have been possible for the French to seize Coimbra,
for from the 12th onward Wellington was pressing them so hard that,
if they had set themselves to force the passage, and had succeeded,
their rearguard, and probably a great portion of their main body, would
have been destroyed. For Ney, with all his tactical skill, could not
have shaken off his pursuers in such a way as to allow 30,000 men to
file over a single bridge, hastily repaired, when the Allies were in
hot pursuit. The French engineers, indeed, reported that it would take
several days to mend the bridge, even when the Portuguese had been
driven away from the further bank. The main comment suggested by all
this is that, since Masséna was intending to hold out on the Mondego,
and to occupy its northern bank, according to his own dispatch sent to
Napoleon, he ought to have taken measures to secure a safe passage many
days back--at the first moment when his retreat began on the 5th of
March. Part of the mass of troops accumulated at Leiria ought to have
marched for Coimbra on March 6th. It was altogether too late to send a
mere flying cavalry force to appear in front of the place on March 10th.