

  [177] Marbot says that the officer arrived four hours after the
  evacuation of Condeixa, though that place is only five miles from
  Fonte Cuberta (_Mémoires_, ii. 443). Fririon makes a much graver
  accusation against Ney, viz. that he sent no messenger at all,
  and that the allied cavalry were discovered by an officer named
  Girbault on Masséna’s staff.

  [178] For an account of this curious affair see Fririon, Noël
  (who was with Loison at the moment), Pelet, and Marbot. The
  latter (as always) gives the most picturesque and probably the
  least trustworthy account. He forgets to mention that Fonte
  Cuberta was occupied by Loison’s 4,500 infantry, and writes as
  if a squadron of hussars had retired before Masséna’s escort
  of 50 men. According to him the Marshal’s night-retreat was
  much disturbed by the misadventures of his mistress (Renique’s
  sister), whose horse repeatedly fell in the dark and rolled over
  her, to his intense anxiety. Masséna’s dispatch says only, ‘Le
  duc d’Elchingen abandonna la position de Condeixa plus tôt que
  je ne le croyais. Le poste de Fonte Cuberta était découvert, et
  l’artillerie qui s’y trouvait compromise. J’ai gagné avec elle
  la grande route par une marche de flanc, à portée de canon de la
  ligne ennemie, par un beau clair de lune.’

This incident led to a furious quarrel between Masséna and Ney, for
the former asserted, as it seems, that the latter had promised to hold
Condeixa for a whole day or more, and had moved off at noon out of mere
malice, so as to leave his chief in an exposed position. If we may
believe the narrative of Masséna’s aide-de-camp, Fririon, he asserted
that Ney had deliberately wished to get him captured, and had executed
his retreat ‘clandestinement’[179]. It was impossible to persuade him
to the contrary, and he saved up his wrath for the next occasion when
he should be able to convict Ney of open disobedience, and not of
mere errors of judgement. There can be no doubt that he was doing an
injustice to his lieutenant in suspecting him of such a monstrous plot:
Ney was a man of honour; Masséna had himself such a doubtful record for
probity that we can well understand his suspicion of others. In truth,
what happened was that the younger Marshal had promised to defend
Condeixa longer than was really possible, when Wellington (as on this
day) was in his happiest mood, and manœuvring with a skill which made a
long resistance impracticable.

  [179] ‘Le Maréchal Masséna crut voir dans ce mouvement opéré à
  son insu l’intention de le faire tomber, lui et son état-major,
  entre les mains de l’ennemi. Le Général Fririon chercha à lui
  faire entendre qu’il devait attribuer ce fait à un oubli plutôt
  qu’à un sentiment de malveillance. Mais il lui fut impossible de
  le persuader. “Cette conduite est inexcusable,” lui dit Masséna;
  “le mouvement rétrograde de ces deux divisions était exécuté
  clandestinement; c’est un acte que rien ne peut justifier.”’
  (Fririon, pp. 150-1.)