

The bringing up of the rear divisions took time. Meanwhile the
Light Division with Pack’s Portuguese and the attached cavalry,
now united under the temporary control of Sir William Erskine (for
Robert Craufurd, the natural commander of such a vanguard, was on
leave in England), kept close to Ney’s heels, and on the 10th were
at Venda Nova, immediately in front of his position at Pombal. The
4th Division were at Cacharia on the same night, the 1st and 6th at
Acentis and other villages near Thomar, the 3rd at Leiria, the 5th
at Porto de Mos. All these marches were executed through a country
full of scenes of horror: Picton, not a man easily to be moved by
sentiment, wrote, ‘Nothing can exceed the devastation and cruelties
committed by the enemy during his retreat: he has set fire to all the
villages and murdered all the peasantry for leagues on each flank of
his march[169].’ The large town of Leiria was burning in five places
when the Light Division reached it. The great historic monasteries
of Alcobaça and Batalha had been wrecked in mere spite--the former,
according to Wellington, by direct order from the French head quarters.
Every by-road and ravine was strewn with corpses; a note from Grattan’s
interesting journal of the marches of the 88th gives an average picture
of what the British army saw. ‘At the entrance of a cave,’ he writes,
‘lay an old man, a woman, and two young men, all dead. The cave, no
doubt, had served them as an asylum in the preceding winter, and
appearances warranted the supposition that these poor creatures, in a
vain effort to save their little store of provisions, fell victims to
the ferocity of their murderers. The clothes of the young peasants were
torn to atoms, and bore testimony that they did not lose their lives
without a struggle. The hands of one were dreadfully mangled, as if in
his last efforts he had grasped the sword which ultimately dispatched
him. Beside him lay his companion, his brother perhaps, covered with
wounds. A little to the right was the old man: he lay on his back with
his breast bare; two large wounds were over his heart, and the back of
his head was beaten to pieces. Near him lay an old rusty bayonet lashed
to a pole; one of his hands grasped a bunch of hair, torn no doubt from
the head of his assassin; the old woman had probably been strangled, as
no wound appeared on her body. At some distance from the spot were two
wounded soldiers of the French 4th Léger, abandoned by their comrades.
These poor wretches were surrounded by half a dozen Portuguese, who
were taking on them the horrible vengeance common during this contest.
On our approach they dispersed and fled: both the Frenchmen were still
alive, and asked us to shoot them. We dared not, and when we had
passed on, we could perceive the peasants descending from the hill,
like vultures who have been scared from their prey, but return with
redoubled voracity.’

  [169] Picton to Col. Pleydell, a letter printed in Robinson’s
  _Life of Picton_, i. 385.