

Before the marching divisions came up from the rear, there was a
cavalry skirmish in front of Pombal between Arentschildt’s Light
Horse (16th and 1st Hussars of the K.G.L.) and some of Montbrun’s
dragoons, which was of little importance as to results, but assumes
such a different complexion in the narratives of the combatants on the
opposite sides that it is hardly possible to believe that they are
writing of the same event[170].

  [170] Narrative of Delagrave: ‘La cavalerie anglaise se déployait
  avec une certaine audace, et semblait vouloir provoquer un
  combat. Le Général Montbrun s’avança fièrement pour l’accepter.
  Les Anglais avaient des chevaux plus frais que les nôtres, et
  ils semblaient s’en prévaloir. Mais nos gens avaient pour eux le
  vrai courage et le sang-froid. Quelques escadrons de dragons,
  les plus avancés, en voyant qu’on les chargeait au grand galop,
  s’arrêtèrent et poussèrent le sabre en avant, et dans cette
  position reçurent de pied ferme l’ennemi. Cette manœuvre eut
  un plein succès. L’ennemi fut rompu, désuni, il eut beaucoup
  d’hommes et de chevaux tant tués que blessés. Ensuite les nôtres,
  dont pas un n’avait été touché, tirant un prompt parti de leur
  bon ordre, et du désordre des Anglais, chargèrent à leur tour,
  et eurent en quelques minutes bon marché de cette troupe, qui
  avait d’abord montré tant d’audace.’ (_Campagne de Portugal_, pp.
  191-2.)

  Narrative of Tomkinson, 16th Light Dragoons: ‘We followed the
  enemy up to the Pombal plain, where they showed eight squadrons
  formed on the heath in front. The Hussars advanced with one
  squadron in front and three in support, on which the enemy’s
  skirmishers retired, and the whole eight squadrons began to
  withdraw. We passed the defile in our front, and came up in time
  to join the Hussars in their charge. We charged and broke one
  squadron of the enemy, drove that on to the second, and so on,
  till the whole eight were altogether in the greatest confusion,
  when we drove them on to their main support. We wounded several
  and took a few prisoners, and should have made more, but that
  they were so thick that we could not get into them. The French
  officers called on the men supporting to advance: but not a man
  moved.’ (_Diary_, p. 79.)

  The returns show that the total loss of the British cavalry was
  nine men on this day. Six belonged to the Hussars. The report
  states that one officer and eleven men of the French were taken
  prisoners (see Beamish, _History of the K.G.L._, i. p. 820).
  Wellington’s dispatch merely says, ‘The Hussars distinguished
  themselves in a charge, made under the command of Colonel
  Arentschildt.’

During the hours on the 10th of March, while the English columns were
toiling up from the rear to join the Light Division, Ney’s and Junot’s
corps remained stationary, the former at the town of Pombal, the latter
at Venda da Cruz, five miles behind it, resting, and seeking (mostly
in vain) for provisions. Masséna was determined not to move backward
before he should be obliged. Montbrun’s dragoons reconnoitred as far as
the bridge of Coimbra, which they found with two of its arches broken,
and cannon visible on the further side. The small force in sight was
the rearguard of Trant’s Militia brigade, which (in accordance with
Wellington’s orders) was preparing to draw back towards the Vouga,
but held on to Coimbra till a serious attack should be delivered.
Masséna thereupon ordered his engineer, Colonel Valazé, to search for
a convenient spot below the town, at which a flying bridge might be
thrown across the Mondego. On this day Reynier and the 2nd Corps, far
off on the eastern mountain road, reached Espinhal, the first village
beyond the Serra da Estrella. As that place has a by-road leading to
Coimbra, this detached body was getting nearer to a possible reunion
with the main body.