

On the morning of March 11th the 3rd Division joined Wellington’s
vanguard after a toilsome march, and the 4th Division, heading the
column which came from Thomar, was reported to be in supporting
distance. Ney, apparently having detected the arrival of British
reinforcements, then drew back one of his divisions, and left the
other (Mermet) in position on the heights behind the town, with a
single battalion holding the lofty but ruined castle which dominates
the place. Wellington, on perceiving that the enemy was drawing back,
ordered Elder’s battalion of Caçadores[171], supported by two companies
of the 95th Rifles, to charge across the bridge and occupy the town,
while the rest of the Light Division advanced in support, and Picton
moved to the left, to cross the stream lower down. The attacking
force passed the narrow bridge under fire, cleared the nearer streets
and assailed the castle and the small force left there. Seeing his
rearguard in danger of being cut off, and noting that Elder’s force
was small, Ney came down from the heights with four battalions of
the 6th Léger and the 69th Ligne, thrust back the Caçadores and the
supporting rifle companies, and brought off the troops in the castle.
He barricaded the main street, and set fire to the houses along it in
several places before departing; these precautions detained for some
minutes the main column of the Light Division, which was hurrying
up to reinforce its van. The French were all retiring up the hill
before they could be got at, and only suffered a little from Ross’s
guns, which were hurried up to play upon the retreating column, as it
re-formed in the position beyond Pombal. By the time that the Light
Division had disentangled itself from the burning town, and Picton had
crossed the stream on the left, the day was far spent; and Ney retired
at his leisure after dark, without having been further incommoded.
The British followed, and encamped on the further side of the water,
ready for pursuit next morning. Ney was much praised for the tactical
skill which he had shown in saving his rearguard, and Erskine was
thought to have handled the Light Division clumsily. The French
losses, trifling as they were, much exceeded those of the Allies--they
lost four officers and fifty-nine men, all in the 6th and 69th. The
Caçadores lost ten rank and file killed, and an officer and twenty
men wounded--the two companies of the 95th had an ensign and four men
wounded--a total of thirty-seven, little more than half the French loss.

  [171] No. 3 of that arm.

Late on this day the 4th Division came up, and the 5th, 6th, and 1st
were reported to be close behind, so that Wellington had his main body
at last collected. He started the decisive operations on the following
morning at 5 o’clock, advancing in three columns towards Venda da Cruz,
where Ney had been located on the previous night by the cavalry scouts.
Picton and the 3rd Division were on the right, Pack’s Portuguese in
the centre, the Light Division on the left, with the 4th Division
supporting on the high-road, and the rest following behind. But the
enemy had retired at an equally early hour, and was not to be found at
Venda da Cruz. He had gone back to Redinha, where there is a bridge
over the Souré river, forming a defile behind the village, and a high
plateau flanked by woods in its front. Mermet’s division formed on
the plateau, with Marchand’s in support, while the rest of the French
were not far off, Loison’s division being at Rabaçal, three miles to
the east, and Junot’s corps at Condeixa, five miles behind Redinha.
Drouet, with Conroux’s division, had started during the night on the
road for Ponte de Murcella and the Spanish frontier, escorting a convoy
of 800 sick and wounded and the small remains of the reserve park of
the army. He had orders to clear the _chaussée_ and to get into touch
with Claparéde, who was now lying with the other division of the 9th
Corps at Celorico. This detachment would have revealed to Wellington,
had he known of it, that Masséna was more anxious to secure his line of
communication with Spain than to seize Coimbra and establish himself
on the line of the Mondego. For a good general, intending to take
risks in a general action, does not detach 5,000 men on the eve of the
decisive day. It is only second-rate commanders who (like King Joseph
at Vittoria in 1813) commit such mistakes.