

[Illustration: REDINHA]

Accordingly, on the early morning of March 13th the decisive step which
committed Masséna to a retreat towards Celorico and the 9th Corps was
taken. The 8th Corps was marched off, covering the train, along the
road which leads by Miranda de Corvo to the Ponte de Murcella and the
upper Mondego, instead of toward Coimbra, now only eight miles away.
To cover its flank Loison’s division was moved from Rabaçal, where it
had lain on the day of the combat of Redinha, to Fonte Cuberta. Ney
remained behind at Condeixa with his two old divisions, to cover the
fork of the roads, and to detain the Allies as long as possible, while
Junot and the trains were toiling along the bad and mountainous road
towards Miranda de Corvo. The 2nd Corps was still kept at Espinhal,
where it was observed by Nightingale’s brigade, which had dogged its
steps at a cautious distance since the 9th.

These arrangements did not work very well, for Ney was turned out of
the Condeixa position, much earlier than he or Masséna had expected, by
Wellington’s skilful manœuvres. The movement used against him was much
the same as at Redinha; the 3rd Division marched by a mountain path to
turn his left, while the 6th Division, coming in from Souré by a wide
sweep, appeared at Ega, almost behind his right wing, and threatened
to get between him and Coimbra. Meanwhile the 4th and Light Divisions,
with the rest of the army behind them, were halted on distant heights
in his front, ready to attack when the turning movements should become
pronounced. Ney was, very properly, anxious about his retreat, for
he could not any longer (as at Pombal and Redinha) give back to his
rear, but was forced to take a side direction, in order to follow the
8th Corps on the Miranda de Corvo road. The moment that he saw Picton
making for this road, to cut him off from the rest of the French, he
set fire to the town of Condeixa and moved off in great haste, just
avoiding Picton, to Casal Novo, a village five miles east of his first
position, where he formed up again at dusk. The day’s operations had
been almost bloodless; nothing more than a few musket shots were
exchanged by the skirmishers of the two sides. But they had been of
the highest strategical importance, since they ended in the complete
abandonment of the attempt to reach Coimbra by the French.

Incidentally, the rapid fashion in which Ney had been evicted from the
cross-roads at Condeixa nearly led to disaster some of the outlying
fractions of the French army. Masséna himself had halted at Fonte
Cuberta, six miles to the south-east, with his staff and Loison’s
division, which was escorting the reserve artillery of the 6th and
8th Corps. He was intending to cover Ney’s left from any wide turning
movement by the British. The road on which this village lies falls
into that from Condeixa to Miranda de Corvo about three miles from the
first-named place. Ney, when preparing to evacuate Condeixa, sent an
aide-de-camp to advise the Commander-in-Chief that he was about to
retire. But the officer charged with the message lost his way, and only
arrived at Fonte Cuberta late in the afternoon with the dispatch[177].
By this time Ney had already reached Casal Novo, some distance beyond
the point at which the Fonte Cuberta road fell into his line of
retreat. Masséna and the division in his company were therefore cut
off from their proper route for retiring on to the main army. Within
a few minutes after the arrival of Ney’s messenger, a patrol of the
German hussars arrived at the village, and nearly rode into Masséna and
his staff, who were dining in the open air under a tree outside its
entrance. There was a mutual surprise; the Marshal’s escort of fifty
men ran to their arms, while the hussars halted, not understanding what
they had come upon. If they had charged, Masséna might have been taken
or slain, as several French narrators assert. He mounted and galloped
back in haste towards Loison’s infantry, who were camped in and beyond
the village. The hussars went off to report to their squadron commander
that Fonte Cuberta was still occupied--it had been with the object of
obtaining information on this point that the reconnaissance had been
sent out. Masséna hastened to put Loison’s men under march for Casal
Novo, by a very rugged side-track, called up Clausel’s division to
cover him, and got off in the dusk unhindered, save by a few flank
skirmishers belonging to Picton’s division, who came upon him in the
dark and were brushed away with ease[178].