

  [175] Of the fourteen French officers killed and wounded no less
  than thirteen were from the 25th Léger, and 27th and 50th Ligne
  of Mermet’s division.

During this day the 6th Division, moving apart from the rest of the
army, marched north-westward to Souré, and so got upon the western
route to Coimbra. It was apparently Wellington’s intention to push this
detachment round the western or seaward flank of the French army, so as
to threaten with it the right wing of any position that the enemy might
take up across the Coimbra _chaussée_. Indeed, having found no hostile
force of any sort in front of it, the 6th Division was able to push
in quite close to Coimbra on the next day, and to take up a position
at Ega, which menaced Ney and Junot’s march across its front if they
should still continue their retreat in the original direction. It was
probably the movement of this division which caused the French to
believe that Wellington had landed a detached force from ships at the
mouth of the Mondego, and was pushing it forward towards Coimbra: an
account of the march of this imaginary corps is to be found in several
narratives[176].

  [176] e. g. in Delagrave, p. 201: ‘Deux colonnes des siens
  remontaient le Mondégo, le long des rives: celle qui avait
  débarqué à Figuieras avait pour but principal de couvrir
  Coïmbre.... L’autre, qui remontait la rive gauche, avait été
  détachée de l’armée ennemie avec ordre de déborder et d’attaquer
  la droite des Français.’ Belmas also speaks of this imaginary
  force.

Condeixa, to which Ney had retired on the evening of the combat
of Redinha, is a most important strategical point, since here the
_chaussée_ leading to Coimbra is joined by the last crossroad which
meets it south of the Mondego, that which runs eastward to the Ponte de
Murcella and the Spanish frontier. As long as the French held Condeixa,
they were in a position to choose between an attack on Coimbra and
a retreat up the south bank of the river towards Almeida and their
base. And with Wellington at his heels, Masséna had now to make his
choice between the two courses. His dispatch of March 19th to Berthier
informs us that he resolved for a moment to offer battle to the Allies
at Condeixa, with the 6th and 8th Corps, calling in perhaps (though
he does not mention it) the 2nd Corps from Espinhal, which is no more
than twenty miles away. The reasons which he gives for not doing so are
firstly, that, since the departure of Drouet and his division on the
11th, his whole force was no more than half that of Wellington; as a
matter of fact he had still 45,000 men, his adversary just about the
same number. Secondly, that the morale of the army was impaired by long
privations and short rations. Thirdly, that the stock of ammunition was
dangerously low, and the artillery horses could hardly move. Fourthly,
that he was hampered by the fact that his lieutenants (he is alluding
to Ney in especial) were set on abandoning Portugal, ‘which contributes
in no small degree to a lack of that harmony which ought to reign in
an army.’ Fifthly, that a defeat at Condeixa would mean the inevitable
loss of all his artillery, train, wounded, and baggage, while a success
would not seriously injure Wellington, who could always retire on to
the Lines of Torres Vedras. Sixthly, that being in the midst of a
population roused to fury by the ravages of his army, he found that he
could gather in little or no food, and was fast using up the stock that
he had brought with him. Taking all these points into consideration,
and being informed by Montbrun that, even if he succeeded in seizing
Coimbra, its bridge would take two days to repair, he had resolved to
avoid a general action, to abandon any attempt to pass the Mondego, and
to draw back towards the 9th Corps and the Spanish frontier, where he
could find the food and the new equipment which the army needed.