

  [172] Some French authorities, favourable to Masséna, assert
  that he was not responsible for the failure to occupy Coimbra,
  that Ney, on the 10th, had been told to send Marcognet’s brigade
  to support Montbrun, who said that he could not succeed without
  infantry help (Pelet, _Notes sur la campagne de Portugal_, p.
  334). But Ney, it is said would not detach the brigade. This
  seems most improbable, for (1) Junot’s corps, which was in
  Ney’s rear and five miles nearer to Coimbra, would have been
  the natural source from which to seek for infantry supports for
  Montbrun, and (2) Masséna does not accuse Ney of this particular
  piece of disobedience in his report to Berthier of March 19, nor
  in the later one of March 22, when he is giving his reasons for
  superseding his colleague and sending him home to France. He
  simply says, in recounting his reasons for not seizing Coimbra,
  that Montbrun and the engineers reported ‘that the river was in
  flood, that the bridge had two arches broken, that the left bank
  was occupied by the forces of Trant and Silveira, and defended by
  cannon. It would have required several days to repair the bridge
  and to drive the Portuguese out of Coimbra; there was no pontoon
  train with the army, and not a single boat on the Mondego. In
  face of the danger of being attacked by Wellington’s whole force
  while the passage was in progress, he resolved to renounce it.’
  The one battalion of infantry which was sent to Montbrun’s aid on
  the 12th came from Solignac’s division in Junot’s corps--as might
  have been expected.

On March 12th Montbrun was prowling ineffectively along the south bank
of the Mondego, and setting his horse artillery to engage in a futile
exchange of fire with Trant’s guns, while a battalion of infantry
borrowed from Junot tried to creep upon the bridge, but was detected
and driven off by grape. But Ney was already engaged in such sharp
fighting at Redinha that he could not have drawn his troops off, or
have escaped towards Coimbra, even if the passage of the Mondego had
been forced. Wellington, it will be remembered, was advancing towards
the 6th Corps in the morning, when he found that it had retired from
Venda da Cruz on to another position. His cavalry discovered that not
only was he in presence of the 6th Corps, but that another French
column was on his flank at Rabaçal (this was Loison’s division).
Moreover, the 8th Corps was known to be not far off, for stragglers
and sick from it had been picked up upon the preceding day. Seeing
therefore that he might be called upon to face some 30,000 men, the
British general resolved not to open the fight over hastily. When his
three leading columns came up, Pack in the centre, Picton on the right,
the Light Division on the left, they were halted in front of Mermet’s
line, and deployed; but no attack was made till the 4th Division had
reached the front line and joined Pack, while the 1st and 5th were
close behind. Then, at two o’clock in the afternoon, an encircling
attack was made on Mermet’s rearguard, the wings being thrown forward,
while the centre was somewhat held back. The 3rd Division, entering
the woods on the French left, the Light Division those on their right,
advanced as quickly as they could through difficult ground. Pack and
the 4th Division halted beyond musket-range of the centre, but suffered
a little from artillery fire while waiting for the flank attacks to
develop. After some twenty minutes of hot skirmishing among the trees,
Mermet’s flanks were turned by Picton on the side of the hills, and
by the Light Division on the side of the plain, and Ney hastily drew
back his front line behind the stream and the defile, where Marchand’s
division was waiting in support. The retreating battalions were
somewhat jammed at the bridge, and lost heavily, while passing it only
a few yards in front of the skirmishers of the Light Division. Picton
tried to ford the stream higher up, in order to cut off the retreating
force before it could reach its supports, but failed, the water turning
out too deep and rapid for passage[173].