

  [196] See _Dispatches_, vii. p. 366.

  [197] There is a bitter letter from Pack of March 21st in his
  _Memoirs_ concerning the ‘bad commissariat and worse medical
  establishment of an inefficient and penniless government which no
  officer can serve with pleasure or advantage,’ which quite bears
  out Wellington, _Dispatches_, vii. p. 371.

  [198] Wellington had called Beresford up to him on May 9th, and
  the latter was present at Pombal and Redinha. He rode hastily
  back to pick up his forces, which were to form the Army of
  Estremadura, on the 16th and reached Thomar on the 17th March.

It will be remembered that the 2nd Division and Hamilton’s Portuguese
had been left behind near Abrantes when Wellington determined, on
March 9th, not to send an expedition against Soult, till he could
make it up to a force sufficient to cope with the army that was
beleaguering Badajoz. They were not to commit themselves to any
offensive operations, or to cross the Portuguese frontier, till the
reinforcements arrived, but were to move a stage on their way toward
the south. Accordingly the head quarters of the 2nd Division were
at Tramagal on the 14th, with its attached cavalry (the 13th Light
Dragoons) at Crato in advance, while the Portuguese horse of Otway had
been sent to watch the roads to Elvas by Portalegre and Estremos. Here
there was a halt for a week, Beresford being absent with Wellington
for five days, and it was not till the 17th that the movement towards
Estremadura began again, on his return. Meanwhile Masséna, oddly
enough, knowing of the existence of a considerable allied force at
Abrantes, and not feeling it on his own flank, formed a theory that it
must have been sent in a long sweep up by the Zezere, to drop into the
upper Mondego valley and cut him off from Spain. Nervousness as to this
imaginary movement had no small effect on his main operations[199].

  [199] Masséna to Berthier, from Maceira, March 19: ‘D’après les
  rapports, le général Hill [he means Beresford, who had been in
  charge of Hill’s former command since December] se portait avec
  sa division et un gros détachement de Portugais à travers les
  montagnes du haut Zézère, se dirigeant sur la rive gauche du
  Mondégo. Dès ce moment j’ai abandonné l’espoir de garder cette
  rive sans risquer une bataille.’ ... ‘Dans l’état actuel des
  choses et d’après les mouvements que l’ennemi peut faire sur mes
  flancs, par le Mondégo ou par les montagnes de Guarda, où s’est
  dirigé le corps de Hill, il est nécessaire de rapprocher l’armée
  de notre base d’opérations’ [i. e. to retreat into Spain].

By sending off Cole and De Grey to join the future Army of Estremadura,
on the 16th March, Wellington reduced the force about him by 7,000
men, and had no more than 38,000 left on the Ceira. The newly formed
7th Division, which was marching up from Lisbon, and would ultimately
replace Cole with the main army, was at this moment only reaching
Santarem; it did not come up to the front till March was at its end.
For the rest of his operations against Masséna, therefore, Wellington
was more than ever in a state of numerical inferiority, and forced to
be cautious. But he was in a confident mood, foreseeing that the enemy
could not now stop in Portugal, and must be starved into a prompt
retreat over the frontier.