

Accordingly, on the afternoon of the 17th, Masséna ordered the 8th
Corps to break up hastily from its camps and to march all night to
Galliges, on the high road beyond Reynier’s left. This was done, and
Junot hurried off, leaving hundreds of foragers scattered on the slopes
towards the Mondego, whither they had been sent out in search of food
during the day. Ney remained behind at the Ponte de Murcella, to keep
the passage as long as possible; he was uncertain, as was Masséna,
whether there was in his front only a cavalry screen or a serious force
of all arms.

On the morning of the 18th this problem was solved, for the Light
Division came down to the river, drove Ney’s rearguard across it, and
opened a cannonade against the troops of the 6th Corps visible on the
opposite bank. No serious attempt was made to pass, the intention being
only to hold Ney to his ground as long as possible by demonstrations,
while the real crossing was made far up-stream. This plan had the
desired result. In the afternoon Ney received the news that the Allies
had begun to cross the Alva at the ford of Pombeiro, from which they
had driven off one of Reynier’s battalions. If any considerable force
got over the river at this point, the 6th Corps was cut off from the
rest of the army; accordingly the Marshal ordered his three divisions
to march off without a moment’s delay; ‘I never saw _Johnny_ go off
in such confusion,’ says a Light Division diarist[203]. The cavalry
brigade of Arentschildt sent out reconnoitring parties, who forded the
river, while the engineers rigged up a temporary wooden bridge close to
the Ponte de Murcella[204], by which the 6th and Light Divisions were
able to cross at dawn on the following day.

  [203] Diary of George Simmons of the 95th, p. 146.

  [204] Napier says, ‘by an ingenious raft contrived by the
  staff-corps’ (iii. 126), but Tomkinson of the 16th Light Dragoons
  and Simmons speak of a wooden bridge.

On the left the decisive crossing at Pombeiro had been made by the
Guards’ brigade of the 1st Division[205]: Reynier made no attempt
to support the single battalion at the ford, but called it in, and
drew up in battle order on the Serra de Moita some distance above
the river. There was no fighting here, and after dusk the 2nd Corps
decamped, taking the road Galliges-Chamusca-Gouvea-Celorico, which runs
parallel to and above the Alva; the 6th Corps fell in behind the 2nd;
the 8th, which had already got further to the east during the march
of the preceding night, led the column and was beyond Galliges in the
afternoon[206].

  [205] So the diary of Captain Stothert of the 3rd Guards, p.
  250. He puts the crossing later in the afternoon than the French
  sources, but the whole 1st Division was across by dark. Several
  French critics (e. g. Delagrave) blame Reynier for not stopping
  the small force that first crossed.

  [206] These movements are best given in Fririon’s diary:
  Sprünglin gives some help for the 6th Corps.