

  [183] Late Champlemond’s, heavily engaged against Reynier at
  Bussaco.

  [184] viz. Ashworth’s (late A. Campbell’s), Spry’s, Madden’s
  (late Eben’s), and Harvey’s, of which the third had only one
  regiment engaged at Bussaco, and the others had been on parts of
  the line not attacked by the French.

[Illustration: CASAL NOVO]

That Wellington’s system was sound was sufficiently proved by an
incident of the next morning’s march, when the army suffered the only
check which it was destined to meet during the campaign, and lost more
men than on any other day of this eventful month. At early dawn on the
14th there was a dense fog; notwithstanding this, Sir William Erskine,
who was commanding the vanguard, composed of the Light Division,
Pack’s Portuguese, and Arentschildt’s cavalry brigade, thought fit to
march straight at the enemy, his orders of the preceding night being
to stick to Ney’s heels. The French rearguard, Marchand’s division,
was holding the village of Casal Novo[185], a strong post on a rising
ground, surrounded with stone walls and enclosures, while the rest of
the 6th and 8th Corps were defiling along the road to Chão de Lamas and
Miranda de Corvo. The Light Division, heading the advancing column, ran
into the pickets of the French, whereupon Erskine ordered out three
companies of the 52nd and sent them forward to clear the way. They were
soon heavily engaged, for Marchand was in force. When the fog lifted
daylight showed the five battalions of the Light Division clubbed on
the road, under the front of the enemy’s line of a battery and eleven
battalions, ranged on the height of Casal Novo. Pack’s Portuguese and
the 3rd Division were some distance off, coming along the defile which
leads from Condeixa. The Light Division had to extend and fight hard
in order to keep its ground, while the main body was coming up and
developing a flanking movement against the French. It lost heavily
of necessity, and was only released from a dangerous position by the
movement of Picton and the 3rd Division to the right, which forced the
French to abscond. Marchand’s division then fell back behind Mermet’s,
which was in position two miles to the rear, between the villages of
Casal de Azan and Villa Seca[186]. This second position was properly
turned, and carried without loss, if with some delay. Then the enemy
was discovered in the afternoon in a third and still more formidable
post, on the heights of Chão de Lamas. This was treated in the same
fashion, the Light Division and Pack’s Portuguese turning its left,
Picton its right, while the main body, coming up from the rear, halted
opposite its centre. Ney then gave up his position, and fell back six
miles down hill, towards Miranda de Corvo on the banks of the Eça
river, where the 8th Corps and Montbrun’s cavalry were waiting for him.
The pursuers, tired out by a running fight of twelve hours, during
which they had gained fourteen miles of ground, halted in front of
him. Their loss had been 11 officers and 119 men in the British, and
25 in the Portuguese ranks, a total of 155. More than half fell in the
mismanaged business of the early morning, in which the 43rd, 52nd,
and 95th lost 9 officers and over 80 men, in an utterly unnecessary
combat. This was the first of two exhibitions of wrongheadedness by
which the newly arrived general, William Erskine, lost Wellington’s
confidence. The second, on April 3rd, was (as we shall see) to be a
still more discreditable affair. The French loss at Casal Novo and in
the succeeding skirmishes of the day was apparently much smaller than
that of the British, though the official figure of 55 killed and
wounded seems very low[187]. On this morning the British, for the first
time during the retreat, began to take prisoners on a considerable
scale; there were more than 100 captured between Casal Novo and Miranda
de Corvo, partly skirmishers cut off during the long bickering in woods
and enclosures which filled the day, partly stragglers and marauders,
who were taken in the country-side while wandering away from their
colours.