

  [190] Napier calls the village Foz de Aronce, and this spelling
  of it (probably caused by an uncorrected printer’s error)
  has been perpetuated by every English writer on the War. Yet
  Wellington has it rightly spelt with the ‘u’ in his dispatch
  (vii. p. 370) as ‘Foz de Arouce.’ Masséna, in his, calls it Foz
  d’Arunce, which is incorrect. Delagrave, Fririon, and other
  French narrators follow him, sometimes with the variants Aronce
  or Arounce. There is no doubt that the name is spelt with a ‘u,’
  and always has been, by the Portuguese.

  [191] All Marchand’s division and a brigade of Mermet’s (25th
  Léger and 27th Ligne) remained behind. Only Labassée’s brigade of
  Mermet’s division crossed the water, with Loison’s division.

  [192] I studied the ground at Foz do Arouce on September 28,
  1910. The bridge is only four and a half yards broad, and 107
  long. It was approached in 1811 by the road in a sharp turn,
  which has now been straightened out, so was far more difficult
  to cross than it is now. The gap between the hills in which the
  village lies is about 200 yards broad. The heights on the French
  left are much higher than those on their right.

Wellington’s pursuit this morning started very late. The burning of
the French baggage and of the town of Miranda had been noted in the
last hours of the night. But at dawn a heavy fog arose, and Wellington
refused to move his masses till it was certain that the French were not
still in position on the heights beyond the river with all their 44,000
men. For if Masséna were seeking a battle, as was quite possible, now
that he had concentrated all his three corps, it would be reckless
to attack him when every man of the allied army had to file over a
narrow bridge. It was not till reconnaissances had pushed across the
Eça, and had explored the burning town, and the ground beyond for some
miles, that orders were issued for the army to march on. Even then the
fog had not lifted, and the morning was some hours old before the 3rd
and Light Divisions were on their way. They followed the retreating
French up the long ascent, picking up many sick and stragglers, and
at about four o’clock in the afternoon came in sight of the enemy in
their new position behind the Ceira, with a formidable front extending
for several miles along the hills, and Ney’s rearguard visible on
the lower eminences on the hither side of the stream. Picton and
Erskine halted, thinking that it was too late in the afternoon to
undertake a serious attack, and that Wellington would wait, as usual,
for his supports to come up. They had directed their divisions to
encamp and thrown out their pickets, when the Commander-in-Chief rode
up, not long before dusk. Surveying the enemy, and seeing that few
battalions were under arms, and that Ney was evidently expecting no
fighting--his cavalry indeed had given him no proper warning of the
approach of the Allies--Wellington resolved to strike at once, though
his nearest reserve, the 6th Division, was still some way off. Picton
was told to attack the French left, the Light Division their right.
The first blow was very effective and partook of the nature of a
surprise, for the enemy was caught unprepared. Some companies of the
95th Rifles, penetrating down a hollow road, arrived almost unopposed
in the village of Foz, quite close to the bridge, while the rest of
the Light Division was holding Marchand’s troops engaged in a frontal
fight, and Picton was making good way against the brigade belonging
to Mermet, which formed the French left. The noise of close combat
breaking out almost in their rear, at a spot which seemed to indicate
that the bridge was in danger, and their retreat cut off, caused a
panic in the French right-centre, and the 39th regiment broke its
ranks and hurried towards the bridge, where it met and became jammed
against Lamotte’s cavalry, who were hastily returning to take up the
position from which they had unwisely retired an hour or two before.
Finding the passage impossible, the fugitives turned to a deep ford a
little down-stream and plunged into it, where many were drowned and the
regimental eagle was lost[193], while their colonel was taken prisoner.
Ney saved the situation, which had arisen through his own disobedience
to Masséna’s orders, by charging, with the third battalion of the 69th
regiment[194] the rifle companies which had got into Foz do Arouce
and were threatening the bridge. They were driven back on to their
support, the 52nd regiment, and the passage having been cleared by the
Marshal’s exertions, the troops to the left and right crossed it in
some disorder, and took refuge on the opposite bank. They were shelled
during their defile, not only by Ross’s and Bull’s horse artillery
batteries, but by some guns belonging to their own 8th Corps, which
in the deepening twilight failed to distinguish between pursuers and
pursued. By the time that night had fully set in, the French rearguard
was all over the river, and the bridge was blown up. If the attack had
been delivered an hour earlier, it is probable that Ney would have
suffered losses far greater than he actually endured--perhaps 250[195]
men killed, wounded, drowned, or taken--for the British divisions were
prevented by the failing light from acting as effectively as they
otherwise might against the masses hastily recrossing the bridge.
Wellington’s loss was trifling--4 officers and 67 men, nearly a third
of them in the rifle companies which had broken the French centre for
a moment, and had then been driven back by Ney. The small remainder
of the baggage of Marchand and Mermet was captured on this occasion,
including some biscuit, which proved most grateful to the Light
Division, as it had, like the rest of the British army, outmarched its
transport.