

His conviction that the crisis was over is shown by another dispatch
of the 20th March, in which he directs that the whole of the Lisbon
Militia and Ordenança be dismissed to their homes, the former on
furlough, the latter for good. The Militia of the lower Beira (the
Castello Branco country) and of northern Estremadura were also to
return to their native districts, to be sent on leave or kept under
arms according as further events might determine[200]. Thus the Lines
of Torres Vedras were left ungarrisoned, there being no further danger
to be feared in the direction of Lisbon.

  [200] Wellington to Beresford. (_Dispatches_, vii. 375-6.)

There was still much work, however, for the Militia of the North,
Trant’s and Wilson’s brigades, who were brought down to the middle
Mondego, and sent successively to Peña Cova, Mortagoa, and Fornos,
to guard the fords and restrain the French from endeavouring to raid
the north bank of the river. It was unlikely that they would make a
serious attempt to cross in force into the barren country under the
Serra de Alcoba, when they were in such a desperate plight for food,
and would have the allied army close behind them, for the troops were
to march again on the 17th. The middle Mondego, it must be remembered,
was bridgeless, and in flood from the spring rains: even if Masséna had
driven off Trant and Wilson, it would have taken him a long time to
build a bridge (since he had no pontoons) and Wellington would have
been pressing him in the rear before he had got more than a vanguard
over the water. The Marshal seems never to have contemplated at this
date a movement on to Coimbra or Oporto by the north bank of the
Mondego, such as is suggested as possible by some of the commentators
on the campaign: after the day of Condeixa a retreat eastward was
always in his mind[201]. His army was too dilapidated to make the
least offensive stroke. ‘I think it necessary for the interests of his
Imperial majesty,’ wrote Masséna on the 19th, ‘to bring the troops
back nearer to our base of operations by our fortresses [Almeida and
Rodrigo], in order to let them recover a little from their fatigues and
long privations, and to allow me to replace so much equipment which is
now entirely lacking[202].’

  [201] ‘Rien ne nous empêchait,’ says Masséna’s biographer Koch,
  ‘de passer à gué le Mondégo, et de nous rendre maîtres de la
  Sierra de Alcoba, d’où nous menacerions Coïmbre et toute la
  contrée comprise entre le Mondégo, le Duero et la mer.’ But there
  _was_ a hindrance--or rather three hindrances--the Mondego was
  not fordable at the moment, and what was more important, the
  starving army could not have lived on the country-side north of
  the Mondego. Moreover the passage of the Mondego with a lively
  enemy at his heels would have been too dangerous for Masséna,
  who had already refused to accept such conditions on the day of
  Condeixa.

  [202] From Masséna’s dispatch to Berthier, March 19.