

  [193] It was found in the river at low water and sent to London.
  The loss is mentioned in George Simmons’s diary under March 16.
  Wellington sent it home in July. (_Dispatches_, viii. p. 78.)

  [194] So both Masséna’s dispatch, and Fririon, who was present
  with the brigade of which the 69th formed part. Marbot is wrong
  in saying that it was the 27th. All the narratives on the French
  side are very confused, and differ widely.

  [195] Sprünglin says 400, Masséna, in his dispatch to Berthier,
  under 200, Marbot 150, _Victoires et Conquêtes_ 400. Sprünglin,
  as Ney’s aide-de-camp, had the best chance of knowing. But
  Martinien’s lists, in which I can only find ten or twelve
  casualties among officers, suggest a smaller total, roughly
  perhaps 250.

It may not be out of place to note that the combat of Foz do Arouce
bore a singular resemblance to Craufurd’s combat on the Coa of July
24, 1810. In each case a rearguard was tempted to stay too long beyond
an unfordable river and a narrow bridge, by the defensible nature of
the position in which it found itself, and nearly suffered a complete
disaster. The only difference was that Ney had at least double as
strong a force as Craufurd, and had also a whole army in line beyond
the river to support him, while the British general had no reserves
near. In each case the endangered detachment got away by dint of hard
fighting, with appreciable but by no means crushing losses. It is
curious that the tables were exactly turned between pursuer and pursued
in these two fights--in 1810 it was Ney who by a sudden assault hustled
the Light Division over the Coa. In 1811 the Light Division was at the
head of the striking force which thrust Ney over the Ceira, If Craufurd
had been in command instead of the incapable Erskine, there can be
little doubt that the matter would have been pushed to a more decisive
conclusion, despite of the dusk.

[Illustration: FOZ D’AROUCE]

On the morning of March 16th, the hills beyond the Ceira, where a whole
army had been visible on the preceding day, were now seen to be almost
void of defenders--only a trifling rearguard was visible watching the
broken bridge from a distance. Wellington sent scouts over the river
to reconnoitre, but did not cross it in force. He had accomplished
his main design of thrusting the French off the Coimbra road and into
the mountains, and he had entirely outmarched his provisions. He had
now got so far from his base at Lisbon that food sent up from thence
had far to travel, and he had not yet succeeded in setting up an
intermediate dépôt at Coimbra, though store-ships were already ordered
from Lisbon to its port of Figueira[196], now that there was no danger
of the enemy crossing the lower Mondego. During the last week the army
had used up all that it carried with it, and the Portuguese brigades,
badly supplied by the native commissariat, had run short even before
the British. Pack’s and Ashworth’s men had received no regular rations
for four days[197], and had only kept up to the front by gleaning in
the deserted bivouacs of the French, and borrowing the little that
the British commissariat could spare. Everything had run dry by the
16th, and Wellington considered that no great harm would be suffered
by waiting a day on the Ceira, for the first convoy to come up from
the rear, since the French were now in rugged ground, where they could
not make any long attempt to stand for sheer want of food. They must
continue their retreat or starve in a depopulated country. Accordingly
Wellington settled down at Lousão and took stock of the general
position of affairs: the result of his halt was an immense discharge
of arrears of correspondence--he had written only one dispatch between
the 10th and 16th of March, but got off seventeen on the last-named
day. Some of these are very important, as showing that he regarded the
crisis as over, and the ultimate evacuation of Portugal by the French
as certain. The most notable are two orders to Beresford[198], making
over to him once more the 4th Division and De Grey’s heavy dragoons for
the expedition into Estremadura, which now had as its object not the
relief of Badajoz (whose capitulation was known) but the holding back
of Soult from Campo Mayor and Elvas.