

  [185] I walked round Casal Novo on September 28, 1910. It is
  a very small place, under a low undulation of the high-lying
  plateau which the road crosses.

  [186] There is a good account of the combat of Casal Novo in
  William Napier’s _History_, iii. 119-20, and a still more
  striking one in his biography, pp. 55-7, containing some
  distressing anecdotes. He was severely wounded, as was also his
  brother George Napier of the 52nd, whose narrative is quite
  as interesting as William’s. It is he who describes Erskine’s
  reckless action best--informed by Colonel Ross that the French
  were still in Casal Novo ‘he kept blustering and swearing it was
  all nonsense--that the captains of the pickets knew nothing about
  the matter, and that there was not a man in the village. Just as
  he spoke the dense fog began to clear, and bang came a shot from
  a twelve-pounder, which struck the head of our column and made a
  lane through it, killing and wounding many. Then came a regular
  cannonade, but the wise Sir William was sure it was but a single
  gun and a picket supporting it, and desired Colonel Ross to send
  my company against its flank,’ &c. Costello of the 95th has also
  left a very good and lively narrative of the day’s work.

  [187] The losses of the 14th (Casal Novo) and the 15th (Foz do
  Arouce) have unfortunately got mixed in Martinien’s invaluable
  casualty lists, most of them being credited to the 14th, with the
  wrong heading ‘Condeixa’--which appears to mean Casal Novo. In
  some regiments the dates and names have not got wrong, e. g. we
  know that on the 14th the 27th regiment had 3 officers wounded,
  and 3 more at Foz do Arouce on the following day. But e. g. in
  the 39th Ligne Colonel Lamour is down as ‘blessé le 14 mars à
  Condeixa,’ while he was certainly wounded at Foz do Arouce on the
  15th, where he was also taken prisoner. The total of officers
  recorded as hit in the 6th Corps on the 14th-15th is 22, of whom
  10 were certainly casualties of the 14th. This must surely imply
  more than 55 in all, killed and wounded. At the low rate of 10
  men per officer it would give 100--at the normal rate of 20 per
  officer it would be 200. But the last is probably too high. It
  was on this day that Marbot had his famous encounter with a rifle
  officer (_officier de chasseurs à pied_) and two hussars, of whom
  (according to his narrative) he slew the first and wounded the
  other two. It cannot be disputed that he had a fight, for he is
  down as wounded in the official lists. But he certainly did not
  kill a rifle officer. The only light division officer slain that
  day was Lieutenant Gifford, who was killed by a ball in the head
  at Casal Novo. It is also to be noted that there are no cavalry
  casualties in the return of March 14, or indeed since Redinha.
  Marbot’s supposed victims thus disappear!

On this evening Reynier and the 2nd Corps, so long divided from the
rest of the French army, joined the main column. From March 10th to
March 13th they had lain at Espinhal, resting after the difficult
passage of the mountains, and endeavouring, without much success, to
scrape together food to fill their depleted stores. Being closely
observed, though not attacked, by Nightingale’s brigade, they could not
scatter very far for marauding. But on the 14th Wellington, during the
Casal Novo fighting, threw out Cole’s 4th Division far to his right
to Penella, where it got into touch with Nightingale. Seeing that
there was now a serious force in front of Reynier, and that it might
thrust itself between him and the rest of the army, Masséna bade his
lieutenant break up without delay, and come in to Miranda de Corvo.
This was easily done by a ten-mile march in the afternoon, and the 2nd
Corps camped on the further side of the Eça river that night. Thus
the whole French army, save Conroux’s division, was concentrated, and
44,000 men under arms, dragging behind them a baggage-train that was
still considerable, and over 5,000 sick and wounded, were gathered in
the defile and the little plain north of it, with a most forbidding
mountain range in their front, and the pursuing columns of Wellington
in their rear.