

On the 16th, the day after the combat of Foz do Arouce, the 2nd and
8th Corps marched before dawn, in drenching rain, and retired as far
as the Alva river, where the bridge of Ponte de Murcella, repaired for
a moment by Drouet when he passed it a few days before, had again been
broken by Wilson’s Militia. It took all the day to repair it, and by
the evening only the artillery had been sent across. The divisions of
Mermet and Loison followed at a distance, leaving behind the much-tried
battalions of Marchand, which Ney had once more chosen to form his
rearguard. He drew them up across the road a few miles from the Ceira,
expecting to be attacked once more in the morning. But to his surprise
Wellington did not cross the river, and only sent a few scouts to
discover the position of the Marshal. Meanwhile his engineers mended
the bridge at Foz.

On the 17th, at dawn, Masséna sent the 8th Corps across the repaired
bridge of Ponte de Murcella, after which it halted at Cortiça, Moita,
and other villages beyond the Alva river, whose passage it was prepared
to defend. But the 2nd Corps was marched up-stream to Sarzedo, the next
ford, and placed there in position, with a detachment beyond the river
at the town of Arganil on its south bank. The 6th Corps, following the
other two, crossed the Alva at Ponte de Murcella later in the day, and
joined the 8th; it left a small detachment beyond the bridge to observe
the expected arrival of the Allies. Of the horsemen, Montbrun’s heavy
dragoons watched the lower course of the Alva, from Ponte de Murcella
to its junction with the Mondego, while Junot’s corps-cavalry was sent
up the Alva eastward, to hold the fords beyond Arganil.

These dispositions seemed to indicate an intention to make a serious
stand behind the Alva, where the positions are very strong. The river
is a fierce mountain torrent in a deep bed, with precipitous banks, and
very few fords. Wellington had fixed on this line, during the Bussaco
campaign in the preceding autumn, as the position where he should await
the French if they advanced by the south bank of the Mondego, and had
thrown up earthworks on each side of the Ponte de Murcella. These were,
of course, useless to Masséna, since they looked the wrong way; but the
river line was almost as defensible from the north bank as from the
south, and presented a very formidable obstacle to the pursuing enemy.

By the evening of the 17th Wellington was once more in touch with the
enemy. The cavalry brigades of Slade and Arentschildt had crossed the
bridge of Foz do Arouce, and followed the 6th Corps to the Alva, with
the 6th and Light Divisions behind them. The infantry, however, did not
show themselves, but encamped in the hills, some miles from the Ponte
de Murcella. They found the road strewn with dead or dying mules and
horses, and took a certain number of French sick and stragglers.

But Wellington had no intention of forcing the Ponte de Murcella
position; while two divisions took this road, the rest of the army
(1st, 3rd, 5th Divisions, and the Portuguese independent brigades)
were marched eastward by the steep road along the top of the watershed
between the Ceira and the Alva, the route Furcado-Arganil, towards
the fords of the upper Alva. They drove out of the last-named place
Reynier’s observing detachment, which reported that it had seen the
Allies in great force marching up-stream. This news convinced Masséna
that his adversary was intending either to cross the ford of Sarzedo
and attack Reynier, or to move still further up the valley, and to pass
the Alva in its upper course, so throwing himself across the main road
to Celorico, by which the Army of Portugal was intending to retreat.
Nothing but cavalry scouts having been seen opposite the Ponte de
Murcella, it was supposed that Wellington’s whole army was marching on
Arganil.