

The situation appeared so grave to Masséna that he resolved to lighten
his army so far as was possible, in order to allow it to march faster.
On this night there was a general destruction not only of all wheeled
vehicles, save a minimum of ammunition waggons, but of all the baggage
of the army, regimental as well as personal. Ney set the example by
burning his own carriages, and abandoning all that could not be carried
on pack mules[188]. The sick and wounded were transferred from waggons
on to beasts of burden--a change which caused the death or abandonment
of many hundreds of them during the next two days. A strict inspection
was made of all the surviving draught and pack animals, and when those
still in a fair state had been set aside for the carriage of the sick
and the ammunition, an order was issued that all the rest should be
put to death. To avoid the noise which would have been caused by
shooting them, the officer charged with this duty caused them all to be
hamstrung, a cruel device which was surely unnecessary, for they could
have been killed as easily as mutilated by the sword or knife. The
horrid sight of more than 500 live horses, mules, and asses sprawling
or hobbling in a bleeding mass, just outside the village of Miranda
de Corvo, was never forgotten by those who witnessed it[189] in the
pursuit of the following morning.

  [188] For details see the diary of Ney’s aide-de-camp Sprünglin
  (p. 470). It is astounding to find Masséna in his dispatch of
  March 19 to Berthier stating that between Miranda de Corvo and
  Foz do Arouce ‘nos équipages et nos malades ne cessaient pas de
  filer, et rien absolument n’est resté en arrière.’

  [189] ‘The most disgusting sight was the asses floundering in the
  mud, some with throats half cut, the rest barbarously houghed.
  What the object of this was I never could guess. The poor
  brutes could have been of no use to us, for they could not have
  travelled another league. Their meagre appearance, with backbones
  and hips protruding through their skin, and their mangled limbs,
  produced a feeling of disgust and commiseration.’ (Grattan, p.
  58.)

  ‘It was pitiable to see the poor creatures in this state, yet
  there was something ludicrous in the position which many had
  taken when thus cruelly lamed. They were sitting in groups upon
  their hinder ends, staring in each other’s faces, as if in deep
  consultation on some important subject.’ (Donaldson of the 94th,
  p. 106.)

The sacrifice of the baggage was the preliminary to a desperate and
fatiguing night march. The 2nd Corps started off first, then the 8th,
leaving the 6th as usual to bring up the rear. After firing Miranda de
Corvo, in order that the conflagration in the narrow street leading up
from the bridge might delay the advance of the Allies, Ney followed
the rest of the army at one in the morning. All marched slowly in the
dark for ten miles of an uphill road, and before noon reached the
long descent into the valley of the Ceira, at the village of Foz do
Arouce[190]. The 2nd and 8th Corps crossed the stream with much delay,
at a bridge which had been somewhat injured by the local Ordenança but
was still serviceable. They deployed on a range of commanding heights
on the further side, and encamped. Ney, always eager to carry on the
detaining process which he had hitherto practised with such skill, only
sent three of his six brigades across the river[191], though Masséna
had ordered him to pass, and to destroy the bridge. He remained with
the rest and Lamotte’s light cavalry, posted on two long hills with the
village of Foz between them, on the hither side of the water. Though he
had a good position, yet the defile to the rear was a dangerous thing
for such a large body of troops, since the Ceira was in flood, and
every man had to retire over the single damaged bridge. Moreover the
troops, tired by the night march, guarded themselves badly; in especial
the cavalry, which ought to have watched every road, with vedettes out
for many miles to the front, huddled together near the river for the
convenience of water and grazing: General Lamotte indeed crossed the
Ceira with great part of his men, and seems to have kept no look-out
whatever[192].