

But Loison’s division was not the only French force which was in
serious danger on March 13. Montbrun had lingered in front of Coimbra,
till his retreat also was imperilled by the loss of Condeixa and its
all-important bifurcation of roads. At eight o’clock in the morning
he had made his last vain attempt to win his way into the city--this
time by negotiation. He sent a _parlementaire_ on to the broken bridge,
with a demand that Trant should give up the place, and a promise that
the citizens should suffer no harm, and the garrison should be allowed
free egress. This last was really not his to grant, for during the
night Trant had removed everything from the city except a battalion
of Militia and the two guns at the bridge. The sergeant in command of
these pieces (a certain José Correia Leal, whose name the Portuguese
have very properly preserved) adroitly wasted time by detaining the
French officer. He told him that he must wait till an answer came from
Trant, whose absence he kept concealed, and then, after some hours,
said that his commander had gone to visit a distant point of the river
defences, from which he would not be back till the next morning[180].
Meanwhile, if any attempt were made to attack the bridge, he had orders
to blow up several more arches, which were mined. Time drifted on, and
meanwhile Montbrun received at noon the news that Ney was forced to
give up Condeixa[181], i. e. that there was no more prospect of using
Coimbra as a crossing-point. Moreover his own retreat was in danger, if
an English detachment should march straight from Condeixa towards the
bridge, a distance of only eight miles. The French general was obliged
to abscond, and the only route open to him, since the _chaussée_ was
lost, was a rough path which, after coasting along the south bank of
the Mondego for some time, turns up into the valley of the Eça[182],
and so reaches Miranda de Corvo. After blowing up many of his wheeled
vehicles, Montbrun hastened to take this track, and escaped by it,
though he was discovered and pursued by some of Wellington’s cavalry
patrols, who pressed his rearguard and made many prisoners. But the
division of dragoons, with the infantry battalion attached, and the two
horse artillery batteries--their caissons had to be destroyed because
of the badness of the road--ultimately reached Miranda with no great
loss.

  [180] For all this see Soriano da Luz, iii. pp. 360-1.

  [181] According to Delagrave he got the news neither from Ney nor
  from an aide-de-camp of his own whom he had left with the 6th
  Corps to transmit information, but from an emissary of Masséna
  named Girod, who thought of him when the proper authorities
  failed to do so.

  [182] Called the Deuça by Napier and other writers--an erroneous
  contraction of Rio de Eça.

This was a truly important day, the most critical in the whole
campaign, since at its end Coimbra was safe, and the whole French army
had been turned on to the road towards Spain. Wellington was satisfied,
and had no reason to be otherwise. The accusation made against him by
many critics of over-caution, which is said to have prevented him from
destroying Loison’s and Montbrun’s detachments, seems unjustifiable.
The cardinal fact that he was not superior in numerical strength to
the army that he was pursuing is too often forgotten; indeed, the
French writers from Masséna down to to-day have nearly always credited
him with 50,000 or 60,000 men, whereas he had barely 45,000, of whom
only 32,000 were British, and the Portuguese were still in great part
untried troops; for though those of them who had passed the test of
battle (Pack’s and Power’s[183] brigades, the Caçadores in the Light
Division, and the artillery) had done admirably hitherto, there were
still four whole brigades which had never been in serious action
since they were reorganized in 1809[184]. Nothing was to be risked,
and partial attacks by unsupported vanguards were to be eschewed,
when (as Wellington remarked in his dispatch of March 14) ‘the whole
country affords advantageous positions to a retreating army, of which
the enemy has shown that he knows how to avail himself. They are
leaving the country, as they entered it, in one solid mass, covering
their rear on every march by one (or sometimes two) _corps d’armée_,
in the successive positions which the country affords, which _corps
d’armée_ are closely supported by the rest.’ A general action against
equal or superior numbers ranged on a strong hill-position was clearly
inadvisable, and the plan of manœuvring the enemy out of each line that
he took up by a short flanking movement was infinitely preferable.
Flanking movements take time, and unless the enemy is very slow or very
rash, have effective rather than brilliant results. But Wellington
never ‘played to the gallery’; he was no vendor of bulletins; he had
a small army which it was difficult to reinforce, and he could not
afford to waste his precious men in hazardous combats. It would have
been of little profit to him if he had destroyed a division or two of
the enemy, and had then arrived on the Spanish frontier with an army
diminished by 10,000 men. The enemy had unlimited supports behind him;
he had practically none. For when he had taken out his field army, and
had detached Beresford to Estremadura, there were no regular troops
left in Portugal save the newly formed 7th Division, which was coming
up from Lisbon to join the main body.