

  [217] Noël, _Souvenirs militaires_, p. 141.

  [218] Grattan’s _With the Connaught Rangers_, 1809-13, p. 58.

The accusations of timidity and over-caution which these contemporary
chroniclers lavish upon each other’s generals are equally absurd.
Wellington is always rallied by the French for want of courage and
enterprise, because he did not at once dash the first two or three
battalions that came up against a division in position, but waited for
his supports. And Ney is criticized by both English and French writers
for having sometimes withdrawn from the fight over early, because
at Condeixa and on the Alva he hastened to get out of a dangerous
situation. Both generals, in reality, acted with perfect tactical
correctness; armies do not meet for the purpose of putting in the
maximum of fighting, without regard for ends or consequences, and the
commander who attacks before he has a sufficient force collected is
blameworthy just in the same degree as the commander who holds out too
long in a hazardous position.

Most of the French criticism on Wellington is based on the false
hypothesis that his army outnumbered Masséna’s during the whole
retreat, and that he therefore should have achieved greater results.
As a matter of fact, as we have seen, he was never stronger than the
enemy, because he had been forced to detach Beresford’s two divisions
against Soult before he started. And when, in the later stages of
the retreat, the French were short of Conroux’s division of the 9th
Corps, which had gone on to Celorico ahead of the main army, it must
be remembered that Wellington from March 16th onwards was deprived
of Cole’s division and the heavy dragoons, who had been sent off
southward to join Beresford. A pursuing army dealing with a superior
retreating army must act with the greatest caution, lest it should
suddenly run up against the enemy’s whole force, and find itself
committed to an offensive action against greater numbers in a strong
position. Wellington never fell into this trap; he manœuvred the French
out of every line which they took up, without incurring any danger,
or allowing his adversary any chance of harming him. While giving all
credit to Ney for the brilliant rearguard tactics by which he often
held back the pursuers for half a day, it is necessary to give equal
credit to Wellington for having fought his way through half a dozen
formidable lines of defence, with a minimum of loss, and without once
exposing himself to the chance of a serious check. After all, his
object was to drive Masséna away from the Mondego and towards Spain,
and that object he achieved in the most triumphant fashion.[219]

  [219] The student must he specially warned against Fririon’s
  figures for French losses. Though he was Masséna’s aide-de-camp,
  and wrote a quasi-official account of the whole retreat, his
  numbers are wholly untrustworthy. He states (p. 149) that the
  6th Corps only lost 179 killed and wounded between March 1 and
  March 15. The actual losses were Pombal, 63; Redinha, 227; Casal
  Novo, at least 55; Foz do Arouce, at least 250 = 600. Similarly
  he states the loss at Sabugal at 250; the official casualty list
  sent in to the Marshal gives a total of 750. Fririon, from his
  position, must have seen, or at least could have seen, these
  figures.