

On the night of the 18th-19th and the following morning the whole
French army made a most protracted and fatiguing march, which cost
them many stragglers and much material. This was the longest stage
which Masséna made during the whole retreat, more than twenty miles of
mountain road being covered in one stretch. On the evening of the 19th
the head of the 8th Corps was at Pinhanços, that of the 2nd at Çaragoça
and Sandomil, that of the 6th at Chamusca. The British cavalry in
pursuit picked up an immense number of prisoners this day, mainly small
parties of foragers belonging to the 6th and 8th Corps, who had been
marauding in the direction of the Mondego when their regiments received
sudden orders to march: they returned towards their camps to fall into
the hands of the British cavalry. Arentschildt’s brigade alone took 200
this day[207], and the total according to Wellington’s dispatch was
600 men[208]. Among them were an aide-de-camp of Loison’s and several
other officers. Some droves of oxen were captured from the foragers
and from the rear of the 6th Corps, and this was the only food which
the British vanguard got that day, for once more, as several diarists
ruefully note, ‘biscuit was out.’ The pursuers state that ‘quantities
of tumbrils, carts, waggons and other articles were abandoned by
the enemy’[209], and no doubt were right, though Masséna wrote that
evening from Maceira, ‘Nous n’avons pas laissé en arrière un malade,
un blessé, ni la moindre voiture d’artillerie ou de bagages’[210]. But
his dispatches frequently contained what he knew that Napoleon would
desire to see rather than the truth. Considering the difficulties of
the retreat, and the skilful way in which he had conducted it, he might
have been contented with his actual achievements, and need not have
padded out his reports with ‘terminological inexactitudes’. It must be
confessed that his aide-de-camp Fririon played a good second to him
when he wrote in his journal that between the 15th and 31st of March
the Army of Portugal left behind only twenty prisoners and fifty men
lost while marauding[211].

  [207] Tomkinson’s diary, p. 87.

  [208] _Dispatches_, vii. p. 375.

  [209] Simmons’s diary, p. 148.

  [210] Masséna to Berthier, from Maceira, March 19th.

  [211] Fririon’s _Campagne de Portugal_, p. 176.

[Illustration: THE LOWER MONDEGO. To illustrate the First Stage of
Masséna’s Retreat.]

On the morning of the 20th March Wellington’s army was all across
the Alva, but only the cavalry and the Light, 3rd, and 6th Divisions
continued the pursuit. The small convoy received on the 17th was
exhausted, and what little food remained was made over to the three
divisions named above, while the 1st, 5th, and Pack’s and Ashworth’s
Portuguese halted for five days at Moita and the neighbouring villages,
till the first train of provisions sent up from Coimbra should arrive.
Of the troops which could still be fed, the Light Division pushed on
as far as Galliges that night, the 3rd and 6th were behind them. The
French, thanks to their desperate night march, were already a long way
ahead, and it was late on the 20th before the cavalry overtook, near
Cea, their extreme rearguard, two battalions of Heudelet’s division and
a hussar regiment. General Slade, whose brigade was leading, refused to
attack them until infantry and guns came up to his aid, and the French
slipped away before Elder’s Caçadores and Bull’s battery reached
him[212]. ‘This was the second day without bread, and the third without
corn for the horses, and we had marched nearly five leagues,’ explains
a cavalry diarist[213]. The pursuers were as harassed as the pursued,
and could go no further, but Slade was thought to have shown weakness.
He picked up a good many stragglers and sick, and found the road strewn
with broken vehicles and dying mules.