

  [226] Ney’s aide-de-camp Sprünglin says in his diary (p. 474)
  that Ney hesitated for some time before rejecting the idea of a
  _coup de main_ against Masséna, which was hotly urged upon him,
  and opines that it would have been successful and most popular
  with the army.

Masséna started off his aide-de-camp Pelet for Paris next day,
with orders to get to the Emperor without delay, and explain the
situation before Ney could tell his tale. This his emissary succeeded
in doing, and his representations to Napoleon were backed by those
of Foy, who had borne Masséna’s earlier message of March 9, and
was still in Paris. The Emperor seems to have approved of Masséna’s
stringent dealing with his subordinate, and even to have expressed his
satisfaction with the new plan for marching the Army of Portugal to the
middle Tagus[227]. He also declared that corps-commanders of the type
of Ney and Junot were a mistake, and that to avoid further friction
he would cut up the whole army into divisions, and abolish the corps
altogether. But at the same time he allowed Ney to return to Paris,
gave him a mere formal reproof, and then continued to employ him in
posts of the highest importance. Next year the Marshal was to win his
last title of ‘Prince of the Moscowa’ under his master’s eye, on the
field of Borodino.

  [227] Foy to Masséna, April 8, 1811: ‘J’ai dit à Sa Majesté que
  vous paraissiez être dans l’intention de porter votre quartier
  général à Guarda, mais que (ne pouvant pas vivre dans cette
  position) vous seriez probablement obligé de descendre jusqu’à
  Alcantara. Cette position a paru à l’Empereur propre à protéger
  également le midi et le nord de l’Espagne.’

  Some parts of this interview of Foy with Napoleon, related in
  his usual vivid style, are too good to omit. ‘Did Masséna really
  intend to force the passage of the Tagus? He did? Well then, he
  would have destroyed his army if he had tried. But I was not
  worried about it; I knew he would never try to cross. Would
  Masséna pass the Tagus, he who in the Isle of Lobau [Wagram
  campaign of 1809] would not try to pass a mere brook! The moment
  you told me that he had returned from in front of Torres Vedras
  I knew that he would come back, and refuse to risk a general
  engagement.... Wellington is a cleverer man than Masséna: he kept
  his eye fixed on Claparéde’s division; if Claparéde had been
  brought forward, the English would have expected to be attacked,
  would have gone back into their Lines.... Portugal is too far
  off--I can’t go there myself. The business would take six months,
  and in that six months everything would be hung up in Europe,’
  &c. See Foy’s _Vie Militaire_, pp. 139-40.

Ney having been superseded and banished, Masséna could carry out his
wild plan for a march towards northern Estremadura through the midst
of the Portuguese mountains. On the 23rd the 6th Corps was brought
into Celorico, and its artillery moved forward as far as Ratoeiro on
the Guarda road. The 8th Corps left Celorico and moved in the same
direction, with its cavalry at Ponte do Ladrão in advance. Drouet
with Conroux’s division had already gone back towards Almeida, with
the sick and wounded of the whole army; he was ordered to take post
at Val-de-Mula on the Turon, between Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo. His
other division, that of Claparéde, was sent from Guarda to join him on
the same day. Drouet, according to some versions of the events of this
critical week, had moved back of his own accord without waiting for
Masséna’s orders. But it is clear that there was absolute necessity to
tell off some covering force for the frontiers of Leon, if the main
army was to be drawn away to the central Tagus, lest Wellington should
send off a detachment to attack Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo, and find
nothing to hinder him.