

For the next five days the march southward and eastward was continued.
After a rest of only two nights at Guarda, the 2nd Corps moved on the
24th of March by two bad parallel roads through the hills, and encamped
with its first division at Sortelha and its second at Aguas Bellas:
a flanking detachment of cavalry occupied Belmonte, further to the
west, in order to keep a look-out on the valley of the Zezere. The
8th Corps took up the position which the 2nd had evacuated at Guarda:
it is recorded to have lost many of its already depleted stock of
horses in climbing the steep ascent into that town, which stands on
the very summit of the Serra da Estrella, at a height of over 3,400
feet above sea-level. No other town in Portugal lies so high. The 6th
Corps followed the 8th, but halted short of Guarda, to cover the slow
progress of its artillery, which had to be dragged up the defile with
doubled teams, so that half the guns and vehicles had to wait at the
bottom, while their beasts were assisting to draw the first section to
its lofty destination.

The 25th saw the head of the 2nd Corps at Val de Lobos on the road
to Penamacor; the main body painfully trailed along behind. Junot
and the 8th Corps left Guarda, but took, not the path that Reynier
had followed, but an equally difficult one leading to Belmonte. But
the guns could not proceed with the infantry divisions. They had to
be left at Guarda, the Belmonte road being pronounced absolutely
impracticable for them: this was a serious check to Masséna, who had
counted on using this route for the whole corps. Of the 6th Corps one
division (Marchand) entered Guarda, a second (Loison’s old division,
now commanded by Ferey) halted at Rapoulla, at the foot of the great
mountain on which that town lies. The other division (Mermet) had taken
a flanking turn, more in the plain, and lay at Goveias, fifteen miles
north-east from Guarda, with a rearguard at Freixadas on the road to
Almeida.

On the 26th, the last day on which it can be said that Masséna’s insane
scheme for marching to Estremadura was still being carried out, the
whole 6th Corps closed up on Guarda; the 8th Corps at Belmonte sent
out reconnaissances towards Covilhão, Manteigas, and the Zezere; but
the 2nd, which was heading the column of march, was completely stuck
in the mountains between Sortelha and Penamacor. It must have seemed
a bitter piece of irony to Reynier when he received orders ‘to profit
by his stay in his position to collect grain, and bake bread and
biscuit[228],’ for he was in an almost entirely uninhabited country,
on the watershed between the sources of the Coa and the Zezere, with
the Sierra de Meras, the frontier-range between Spain and Portugal, in
front of him.

  [228] Fririon, _Campagne de Portugal_, p. 175.

Next morning (March 27) Reynier, though he had the example of Ney’s
fate before him, was driven by sheer necessity into sending an
argumentative dispatch to the Commander-in-Chief, who had now got
as far as Guarda. He begged him to give up his great plan: ‘no food
could be procured for the whole way from Guarda to Plasencia; if the
corps ever got to the latter place, it would find no resources there,
for the Coria-Plasencia country does not grow its own corn, but is
fed in ordinary times from the valley of the Tietar and other distant
regions.’ This Reynier knew from his own experiences in that region,
when he had been observing Hill in the preceding summer. He also warned
Masséna that he was taking the army into an _impasse_, for the Tagus is
a complete barrier between northern and southern Estremadura, and could
not be crossed save at the ferry of Alconetar, where there were now no
boats, the bridge of Alcantara (now broken), and that of Almaraz, where
there was only a flying bridge of pontoons[229].