




SECTION XXIV: CHAPTER II

GUARDA AND SABUGAL. MARCH 22ND-APRIL 12TH, 1811


At noon on March 22nd, the day following that on which the French head
quarters had reached Celorico, Masséna issued a new set of orders,
entirely contradictory to those which he had been giving during the
last fifteen days. Though on the 19th he had stated his intention
of ‘falling back closer to his base of operations on the fortresses
[Almeida and Rodrigo], and giving the army a rest after its fatigues
and privations[220],’ he now proposed to plunge back once more into
the mountains, and to swerve aside from his places of strength and his
dépôts. The commanders of the corps received the astounding news that
it was the intention of the Commander-in-Chief to turn south-eastward,
towards the Spanish frontier and the central Tagus, with the object
of taking up a position in the Coria-Plasencia country, from which he
would threaten central Portugal on a new front. This necessitated a
march from Celorico through the mountains of Belmonte and Penamacor,
and then across the Sierra de Meras, into the thinly-peopled plateau of
northern Estremadura.

  [220] Dispatch to Berthier, from Maceira, of that date.

Supposing that the centre of the Iberian peninsula had been a fertile
plain resembling Lombardy or Flanders, there would have been something
to say for this plan. Still more might it have been advisable if the
French army had been a fresh and intact force just opening a campaign.
Pelet, Masséna’s chief aide-de-camp, tries to justify the proposal by
saying that ‘it was more conformable to the general rules of strategy;
we should have connected ourselves with the 5th Corps in Estremadura,
with the Army of the Centre, and the general pivot of operations at
Madrid; we should have brought Lord Wellington back to the position
that he had quitted; we should have kept the results of the advantages
recently won in Estremadura, which were so soon to be lost; we should
also have had the means to menace once more Central Portugal and the
Lines of Torres Vedras[221].’ This is all very plausible, but it omits
the crucial facts that the Army of Portugal was tired out, destitute
of munitions, and almost destitute of food, and that it was proposed
to lead it across two difficult ranges of mountains full of gorges and
defiles, into a region which was one of the most thinly peopled and
desolate in all Spain, where there was not a single French soldier,
much less a dépôt of any sort. This was the same district in which
Victor had starved in 1809, and in passing through which Wellington
had suffered so many privations on the way to Talavera. It had been
visited in February by a flying column under Lahoussaye, sent out from
Talavera, which had got as far as Plasencia and Alcantara, and then
retired, because it was absolutely impossible for 3,000 men to live in
it.

  [221] Pelet’s _Appendice sur la Guerre d’Espagne_ in _Victoires
  et Conquêtes_, 21, p. 336.