

  [212] According to Fririon’s diary the H.A. guns arrived in time
  to shell the rear battalion and kill one officer.

  [213] Tomkinson, p. 87: ‘Every one talked loudly of Slade’s
  conduct through the day.’

Meanwhile Masséna had divided his army into two columns at the fork of
the roads near Maceira. The 2nd Corps, taking, on the right hand, the
southern and more hilly route, reached Gouvea. The 8th Corps, taking
the northern fork, got to Villacortes, and sent its cavalry on ahead to
the bridge of Fornos, which they found broken and guarded by Trant’s
Militia. The 6th Corps, following the 8th, lay at Pinhanços. Since
leaving the Ponte de Murcella the French were a little less pressed for
food: the district through which they were now passing was fertile, and
had not been raided before; most of the peasantry had returned to it
during the winter. Hasty plundering on both sides of the road brought
in a certain amount of food, especially in the way of cattle, which
had been sent up into the hills, but were often discovered by skilled
marauders. There was continual bickering with the Ordenança, one party
of whom, only 300 strong, tried, with more courage than discretion, to
defend the village of Penalva against the advanced guard of the 2nd
Corps. All along the road the pursuing Light Division found the dead
bodies of peasantry, mixed with those of the French sick who had fallen
by the way.

On the 21st the 8th Corps reached Celorico, where Drouet was found
in position with Conroux’s division of the 9th Corps. The 6th Corps
reached Carapichina and Cortiça. The 2nd, turning off at Villacortes on
the Guarda road, had a most distressing mountain march to Villamonte.
The pursuing infantry of the Light and 3rd Divisions reached Pinhanços
and Maceira, with the cavalry five miles in front, at the convent of
Vinho. They had now dropped fifteen miles behind the French rear,
and were quite out of touch with it, but continued to pick up
stragglers--200 men are said to have been taken on that day[214].
Like the enemy, they were now commencing to get a little food from
the country. ‘The peasants, who had all fled to the mountains on the
enemy’s retreat, on seeing us come down, baked bread for the troops,
and gave us whatever they had left. They had suffered a good deal,
all the principal houses had been burnt, and those left a good deal
destroyed, but the [French] troops had not been able to discover all
the corn, &c., concealed[215].’

  [214] Simmons of the 95th, diary, p. 148.

  [215] Tomkinson’s diary, p. 88.

On the 22nd the French army had reached the end of the main retreat.
Two corps were concentrated in and near Celorico[216], the other
(Reynier) reached Guarda, where it found Claparéde’s division of
Drouet’s corps, which had been there for some weeks. They were now only
three marches from Almeida and four from Ciudad Rodrigo; communication
with these two places was open, for Drouet and the 9th Corps had
now come into touch again with the Commander-in-Chief, and were
available for keeping the roads safe. The English had been outmarched,
and Masséna might have retired to Almeida and Rodrigo practically
unmolested, by a good _chaussée_. But this was not to be the end of the
campaign, as every one in the French army, save its Commander-in-Chief,
fervently desired. For generals and rank and file alike were tired
out, and yearned for a cessation of mountain marches, and a rest in
well-provisioned cantonments, before they should be called upon for
another effort. But another and a most unexpected episode was to take
place before the weary columns reached Rodrigo. Masséna made one more
attempt to ‘save his face,’ and to avoid being thrust over the Spanish
frontier, along the road on to which his adversary had forced him.
This led to a fortnight more of manœuvres in the mountains, and to the
combats of Guarda and Sabugal, after which the French Marshal had to
pocket his pride and acquiesce in the inevitable. These operations are
of a character so different from those which preceded them that they
must be treated as a separate story. The retreat from Santarem really
ended at Celorico. The events between March 22nd and April 4th must be
dealt with apart, since they practically amounted to a belated attempt
on the part of Masséna to seize the offensive once more, and to shift
the scene of war without his adversary’s consent. The project failed,
and (as we shall see) was hopeless from the first.