

  [229] For all this see Koch’s _Vie de Masséna_, pp. 413-20.

At the same time Junot was writing from Belmonte to say that he could
go no further; not only had he been forced to leave all his guns behind
at Guarda, but ‘les troupes meurent de faim, et ne peuvent pas se
présenter en ligne.’ He had scoured the country as far as Covilhão with
his cavalry, in search of food, with the sole result of ruining the few
horses that were still in passable condition.

In short, the game was up--it ought never to have been begun--and
Ney’s remonstrances (though not his insubordination) were completely
vindicated. On March 28th Masséna reluctantly conceded that a prompt
retreat into Spain was the only course possible. But he chose to base
his change of plans not on the true ground, viz. that he had ordered
the army to perform an impossibility, but on two other facts. A report
had just been received from Drouet; that general, on reaching the
neighbourhood of Almeida, had sent word that the fortress was in the
utmost danger, for it had only fifteen days’ food[230], and, if the
9th Corps had to retire, it would fall from starvation in a fortnight.
The state of Ciudad Rodrigo was little better. He therefore besought
the Prince of Essling not to expose these two all-important places, by
carrying the Army of Portugal off to the valley of the Tagus. This gave
a strategical reason for surrendering the new scheme of campaign, but
there was also a moral one. ‘Lassitude reigns in the Army of Portugal:
many of its regiments were in the expeditions of the Duke of Dalmatia
[Soult’s Oporto campaign of 1809] or that of the Duke of Abrantes
[Junot’s Vimeiro campaign of 1808]. The officers murmur, and, as I must
again repeat, the army must have two or three months of rest to recover
itself. I was the only soul who was determined to hold on in Portugal,
and unless I had set my will to it in the strongest fashion, we should
not have stopped fifteen days therein.... The troops are good, but
they need repose. Living by marauding, even though it was organized
marauding, such as we have been compelled to authorize, has in no
small degree weakened discipline, which is in the greatest need of
restoration[231].’ All this was very true, but it had been equally true
on March 22nd, when Masséna gave his orders for the march on Plasencia.
The root of his failure lay neither in the state of Almeida, nor in
the demoralized condition of the army, but in the fact that he had
directed his troops to execute a movement which was impossible without
magazines to live upon, or roads to march upon[232].

  [230] This was a gross exaggeration, as it turned out that there
  was forty days’ food in hand. Masséna accused Drouet of drawing
  on the rations for his own 9th Corps to an inexcusable extent.

  [231] Masséna to Berthier, March 31, from Alfayates.

  [232] When Reynier marched from Coria to Guarda in
  September 1810, he had been obliged to make the vast circle
  Coria-Alfayates-Sabugal-Guarda, in order to avoid the miserable
  mountain roads.