

Masséna’s maps were very bad--the actual set used by his head-quarters
staff is in existence, and can be seen at Belfast[222]. But his
intelligence department must have been worse than his maps, if he was
unaware of the character of the country on the border of Portugal and
Spain, and of that lying beyond, in northern Estremadura. He might
have asked information about it from Reynier and Ney, who had both
crossed it, but he did not. Most striking of all, however, is the
ignorance shown in these orders of the physical and moral state of
the French army. If it had ever reached Plasencia, it would have got
there without a gun or a baggage mule--the caissons and carriages were
almost all gone already. A single set of figures may serve to show
the situation: the artillery of the 8th Corps started from Almeida in
September 1810 with 142 wheeled units--guns, caissons, waggons, &c.,
and 891 horses. It got back to Ciudad Rodrigo on April 4, 1811, with
49 guns and caissons drawn by 182 horses, having lost 93 vehicles and
709 horses. Forty-one of the caissons and waggons had been destroyed
before the commencement of the retreat, the rest had been dropped
between Thomar and Celorico[223]. There were left at the end of March
only 24 guns with 25 caissons of ammunition, to draw which required
all the horses remaining. How long could this artillery have fought
with only one caisson of ammunition per gun left? How many horses would
have been alive after another hundred miles of mountain roads? Even if
some guns had got to Plasencia, how long would it have taken to get
them ammunition from Salamanca or Madrid, the nearest dépôts? The same
question would be no less forcible with regard to infantry ammunition,
which was depleted to an equal extent with that of the artillery.

  [222] Captured at Vittoria, they were long after given to Belfast
  University.

  [223] All these interesting figures come from the diary of
  Colonel Noël, commanding the artillery of Clausel’s division; see
  his memoirs, pp. 137 and 146.

But it is even more important to remember that the Army of Portugal was
also in desperate straits for boots and clothing. In many regiments
a third or a quarter of the men had no footgear but ‘rivlins,’ or
mocassins made every few days from the hides of cattle. The uniforms
were in rags; many soldiers had nothing that recalled the regulation
attire but the _capote_ that covered everything.

Yet the main thing of all was the moral aspect of affairs. The army
would fight when it was its duty, as French armies always have done,
but it was discontented, sulky, angry with the Marshal, to whom it
attributed its miseries--though its indignation might have been
more justly reserved for the Emperor, who had set his lieutenant an
impossible task. The rank and file had sunk low in discipline, as must
be always the case when troops have been living by daily plunder for
six months. And this same want of discipline was most evident among
the generals, who, now that Masséna had failed, openly criticized him
before their staffs, and often neglected his orders. Masséna suspected
Ney, Junot, and Reynier alike of intending to denounce him to the
Emperor as a blunderer. It will be remembered that he had already
detected Reynier in a trick of this description[224]. Ney had been
girding at his orders with fury ever since the retreat began, and was
telling all who cared to listen that a hasty return to Spain was the
only possible policy, and that the dream of holding out on the Mondego
or the Alva was absurd.