

  [216] Ney remained quiet at Cortiço and Carapichina this day, but
  was only ten miles from Celorico, and so may be considered as
  part of the same body as the 8th Corps.

Before dealing with it, a few remarks on the general character of the
operations that had taken place between March 9th and March 22nd must
be made. When reading in succession two narratives of Masséna’s retreat
from Santarem to Celorico, one by an English and one by a French
eye-witness, it is often difficult to realize that the two writers are
describing the same series of operations. Most of the French conceive
the retreat to have been a series of triumphant rearguard actions, in
which their army got off practically unmolested, under cover of the
skilful operations of a small covering force. On the other hand, the
English tell the tale as if the whole French army was easily hunted out
of Portugal by inferior numbers, foiled in repeated attempts to occupy
a permanent position in the valley of the Mondego, and finally thrust
back in a direction which it did not intend to take. Where the French
tell of nothing but an orderly retreat and small losses, the English
speak of the capture of hundreds of prisoners, and the destruction of
the whole baggage-train of the retiring army.

To a certain extent the mental attitudes of both sets of narrators can
be understood and justified by the impartial student. When a rearguard
action takes place, the covering force left behind by the retiring army
always thinks of itself as being opposed to the whole pursuing host.
It considers itself to be braving the assault of immensely superior
forces, and if it holds its own for a time and gets off without
crushing losses, is well satisfied with its own conduct. This is both
justifiable and comprehensible. But to the pursuer the same rearguard
action presents an entirely different moral aspect. The few squadrons
and battalions forming the head of his advance find themselves suddenly
brought to a check by a considerable hostile force arrayed in a
formidable position. They are forced to halt till their supports begin
to come up, from five, ten, or fifteen miles in the rear. Then, when
a body of reserve has begun to accumulate behind them, they launch
themselves upon the enemy, who gives ground after more or less fighting
and retires. The leading brigade or division of the pursuers considers
that it has victoriously driven the whole hostile army from its strong
position, and is no less satisfied with itself than is the force to
which it has been opposed. In short, all rearguard actions begin with a
check to the pursuers; they all end with the retreat of the defenders.
This is their necessary course; both parties, if their generals play
the game properly, may be content with themselves; the one has gained
time for the escape of the main body of the retreating host, the other
has cleared the way for the progress of the pursuing army. The only
method in which their relative merits can be tested, is by asking
whether the rearguard detained the advanced guard as long as might have
been expected, inflicted disproportionate losses upon it, and got away
with the minimum of loss to itself, or whether, on the other hand, the
advanced guard evicted its opponents from their position at a rapid
rate, with small sacrifices, and with considerable punishment inflicted
on the enemy. The mere facts that the rearguard held back the pursuers
for some hours, and that the advanced guard ultimately carried the
enemy’s position, are obligatory incidents of such fights. When we come
to examine the details of the combats which took place between the 11th
and 19th of March, we shall neither hold with the French narrators that
for many days Ney and two divisions of the 6th Corps fought and held
back Wellington’s whole army, nor with the English narrators that the
Light and 3rd Divisions, unassisted by their comrades, hunted 40,000
French out of the valley of the lower Mondego. Yet it is true that of
forty-four French infantry officers, who were killed or wounded in
Portugal between these dates, no less than thirty-seven belonged to
the divisions of Marchand and Mermet, while, similarly, of twenty-nine
British and Portuguese officers hit in the same period, no less than
nineteen belonged to the Light Division and eight more to the 3rd.
Clearly therefore Ney did not contend with the whole British army,
but only with its two leading divisions, and those two divisions did
not contend with the whole French army, but only with the two units
which formed its rearguard. Fine writing on both sides, as to struggles
against overwhelming odds, must be disregarded. Still more so may
the exaggerated estimates as to loss inflicted on the enemy which
are to be found in the narratives of most of the first-hand writers.
What they are worth may be guessed from Marbot’s statement that the
British lost 1,000 men at Redinha--Noël raises this liberal estimate
to 1,800[217]--the real casualty list being 240. Similarly Grattan
tells us that the French had 1,000 men _hors de combat_ at Foz do
Arouce[218], when their actual loss seems to have been about 250.