

  [224] See p. 80.

It was probably not on mere strategic grounds, but because he was
determined to assert himself, to prove that he was master of his own
movements, and that he was not yet a beaten man or a failure, that
Masséna issued orders on the 22nd for the 2nd Corps to make ready to
move southward, not northward, from Guarda, and for the 6th and 8th
to prepare to follow on the same route. This provoked an explosion
of wrath on the part of Ney, who in the course of four hours of the
afternoon wrote three successive letters to his commander, in terms of
growing irritation. In the first, which was sent off before receiving
the detailed orders for the new movement, he merely set forth all
the objections to it, and inquired whether Masséna had the Emperor’s
leave for such a general change of plans. In the second, after he had
received and read the orders, he protested formally against them, and
said that, unless positive instructions from Paris authorizing the
new scheme had been received, the 6th Corps should not march. He gave
many arguments, and they were incontestably true. ‘The army has need
to rest behind the shelter of Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo, in order
to receive the clothing and shoes which are absolutely necessary,
and which must be brought up from the magazines. Your Excellency is
mistaken in thinking that food can be got in abundance in the region
of Coria and Plasencia. I have marched through that country [during
the attempt to cut off Wellington’s retreat from Talavera in 1809],
and it is impossible to exaggerate its sterility or the badness of its
roads. Your Excellency will not get one single gun so far, with the
teams that we have brought out of Portugal. Moreover this manœuvre, so
singular at this particular moment, would entirely uncover Old Castile,
and compromise all our operations in Spain. I am fully aware of the
responsibility which I take upon myself in making formal opposition
to your intentions, but, even if I were destined to be cashiered
or condemned to death, I could not execute the march on Coria and
Plasencia directed by your Highness, unless (of course) it has been
ordered by the Emperor[225].’

  [225] The three letters are all printed in full in Fririon’s
  _Memoir_, and the second of them in _Belmas’s Pièces
  justificatives_, p. 507.

Within two hours of the second letter Ney sent in the third, which
was no mere protest, nor even a mere refusal to move, but an open
declaration of his intention to march back to Almeida. ‘I warn your
Excellency that to-morrow I shall leave my positions of Carapichina
and Cortiço, and échelon my troops from Celorico to Freixadas, and
on the day after they will be between Freixadas and Almeida. This
disposition is forced on me, in order to prevent the whole force from
disbanding, under the pretext of searching for the food necessary for
its subsistence, for food is now absolutely lacking.’

Unless he was to surrender his authority altogether, and obey
his subordinate, Masséna had now to strike. Ney had put himself
absolutely in the wrong in the way of military subordination, though
he was as absolutely in the right in the way of strategy. And the
Commander-in-Chief had every technical justification when he formally
deposed him from the command of the 6th Corps, and directed him to
leave for Valladolid without delay, and there await the orders of the
Emperor. Loison, the senior of the three divisional generals of the
6th Corps, was ordered to take over its command next morning. Several
of Ney’s partisans urged him to refuse obedience, to seize the person
of Masséna, and to declare himself Commander-in-Chief of the Army of
Portugal. We are assured that he would have been backed in the step by
the whole of his own corps, and would have met no resistance from the
others, for Masséna was universally disliked, and every man wished to
continue the retreat on Almeida of which Ney was the advocate[226]. But
he shrank from levying open war upon his chief, and departed among the
tears of the whole 6th Corps, of which he knew every officer and many
men by sight. It had been under him, without a break, since he first
formed it at the camp of Montreuil, near Boulogne, in 1804.