

Sabugal, a little walled place with a ruined Moorish castle, lies in
a projecting bend or hook of the Coa, which turns back just above the
town at right angles to its original course, which is directly from
east to west. The river is not far from its source, and though its
banks are steep its waters are narrow, and there are many fords both
above and below Sabugal. If a strong turning column, concealing itself
in the hills, passed along the south bank of the Coa, and crossed the
river some miles above the town, it could throw itself upon the rear of
the 2nd Corps and cut it off from its retreat on Alfayates. Meanwhile
a general attack by Wellington’s main body would drive it from its
position straight into the arms of the turning column, and there would
be a good chance of inflicting a crushing defeat upon the corps,
perhaps of capturing it wholesale. If the attack were delivered by
surprise at dawn, the whole matter ought to be completed before either
the 6th or the 8th Corps could get up to the support of Reynier. When
at last they could appear on the field, the 2nd Corps would be already
demolished, and Wellington was prepared to risk a general action.

It was with this design that his movements of the 1st and 2nd of April
were planned. The 1st, 5th, and 7th Divisions were brought up from
Celorico to Guarda, and from thence to join the Light, 3rd, and 6th
Divisions which were already lying along the Coa over against the
French lines. The 6th Division was left at Rapoulla de Coa, facing
Loison’s centre, and a single battalion of the 7th Division observed
the bridge of Sequeiro opposite his northern flank. These troops
showed themselves freely, and kept Loison anxious, for nothing seemed
more likely than that the general attack would be directed against
him. Meanwhile the whole of the rest of the army, five divisions and
two cavalry brigades, over 30,000 men, was launched against Reynier.
The turning column was to be formed by the Light Division and the two
cavalry brigades, who were to ford the Coa at two separate points two
and three miles respectively above Sabugal. If Erskine, who was to
command it, so decided, the column might cross even higher up: it was
intended that it should appear far beyond Reynier’s left wing, and
should strike over the hills of Quadraseis to the village of Torre
on the Alfayates road, where it would be placed across his line of
retreat. The ground in that direction was open and favourable for
cavalry. Meanwhile the enemy was to be given no chance of falling
upon this detachment, since he was to be attacked in front with very
superior forces. Picton and his division were to cross an easy ford a
mile south of Sabugal, the 5th Division was to assail the town-bridge
at the same moment. The 1st and 7th Divisions were a few miles behind,
ready to support the two leading columns in the front attack. It was
intended that the turning force should cross the Coa first, but only
so far ahead of the frontal attacking force as to make it certain that
it should not get engaged with the main body of the enemy, before the
3rd and 5th Divisions were coming into action. The French pickets
having been pushed close back to the river on the preceding day by the
cavalry, it was certain that they would see nothing of the movements
till they were well developed.