

  [242] As late as May 1 the regimental statistics show that the
  3rd Dragoons had only 139 available horses, sick or sound, and
  the 10th Dragoons only 233, They had started the campaign with
  563 and 535 respectively.

Wellington, meanwhile, having discovered by the explorations of
his horse, that the enemy was standing firm on the Coa, resolved
to dislodge them from their last hold on Portugal. To do this he
required his whole force, and the 1st and 5th Divisions moved onward
from Celorico to Freixadas on the 31st, to come up into line with
the 3rd, 6th, and Light Divisions. With them there was now present
the long-expected 7th Division, which reached the front at the end
of the month, though incomplete. For the light brigade of the German
Legion had arrived at Lisbon more than a fortnight late, and only four
battalions in the British service[243] and five of Portuguese[244] were
at present allotted to the newly formed unit. But in addition several
newly landed battalions[245] came up and joined the old divisions,
so that nearly 6,000 infantry in all were added to the army. After
deducting many men left behind from sickness or exhaustion[246], during
his advance over the wasted regions of Beira, Wellington had now about
38,000 men with him, a force very nearly equal to that of the enemy,
which on the 1st of April had sunk to 39,905 including officers, if the
9th Corps, now in the vicinity of Almeida, be omitted.

  [243] We cannot say ‘four British battalions,’ for two of
  them were foreign corps, the _Chasseurs Britanniques_ and the
  Brunswick Oels Light Infantry. The two line regiments were the
  51st and 85th.

  [244] 7th and 19th Line and 2nd Caçadores, forming Collins’s
  brigade.

  [245] viz. 2/88th for 3rd Division, 2/52nd for Light Division,
  1/36th for the 6th Division.

  [246] Including Pack’s whole brigade.

The plan which Wellington evolved for the final eviction of the French
from Portugal was to turn their left wing on the side of Sabugal,
while containing their right wing (the 6th Corps) on the central Coa.
Occupation was at the same time found for the 9th Corps, as Wilson’s
and Trant’s Militia brigades were directed to cross the Coa near its
confluence with the Douro, and to threaten Almeida from the north side,
a move which could not fail to have the effect of keeping Drouet pinned
down to his present position, since his special task was the protection
of that place. It is a little difficult to make out why Wellington
chose to break in upon the French left rather than their right. From
the strategical point of view it would have been preferable to cross
the Coa north of the flank of the 6th Corps, and to throw the whole
weight of the British army so as to drive the French southward, towards
Sabugal and Alfayates. For they would thus be separated from the 9th
Corps, thrust into the barren and nearly roadless mountain district of
the Sierra de Gata and the Sierra de Meras, and cut off from Almeida
and even from Ciudad Rodrigo, which they were desirous of covering.
Whereas to turn their left wing would only have the effect of pushing
them back on their natural line of retreat towards Rodrigo, and would
press them towards rather than away from the 9th Corps. The British
general’s course seems, however, to have been guided by tactical
rather than by strategical considerations. He thought that he had a
good opportunity of catching the 2nd Corps at Sabugal in an isolated
position, and crushing it, before the 6th or the 8th could come up to
its help. And but for a chance of the weather it seems that he might
have accomplished this design with complete success.