

  [250] This statement is made by Tomkinson in his diary on April
  3, p. 94.

  [251] Many details in this narrative of the combat of Sabugal
  will be found to differ from those given in earlier histories. I
  have been relying for the French movements largely on the life
  of General Merle, the officer who was in charge of most of the
  fighting, and had the best chance of giving a correct story.
  [Braquehay’s _Le Général Merle_, pp. 160-1.]

So ended, in comparative disappointment, an operation which would
have had glorious results if the fog had not intervened, and which
might, even with that drawback, have been much more decisive if Sir
William Erskine had shown ordinary prudence and ability. The actual
combat, as Wellington truly observed, ‘was one of the most glorious
that British troops were ever engaged in,’ for the Light Division,
with its 3,500 bayonets, had fought the whole of the 2nd Corps save
one brigade, and had punished its adversaries in the most exemplary
style, without suffering any corresponding loss. ‘Really these attacks
in column against our line are very contemptible,’ wrote Wellington to
Beresford next morning. The chief glory lay with the 43rd, who fought
three separate contests with three successive bodies of opponents,
and counted very nearly half of the total British loss in their
ranks. Beckwith, their brigadier, was the admired of all beholders;
eye-witnesses relate with pride how he rode first in the advance and
last in the retreat, with blood streaming from a wound on his temple,
keeping the men in rank, checking those who showed a tendency to
quicken the pace, and directing the fire with perfect coolness. It
was in a great degree the confidence inspired by his cheerful and
resourceful leading which enabled the brigade to keep up the fight
against impossible odds, down to the moment of the arrival of Drummond
and the supports upon the scene.

[Illustration: SABUGAL]

The total loss of the French was 61 officers and 689 men; this fearful
proportion of losses in the commissioned ranks was due to the gallantry
with which they threw away their lives in bringing up to the front
the shaken and demoralized soldiers, who could not face the English
musketry. One gun and 186 unwounded prisoners were taken. The British
loss was only 169--that of their Portuguese companions no more than 10.
Of the total of 179 no less than 143 were men of the Light Division,
of whom 80 belonged to the 43rd; Picton’s troops, only engaged for a
few minutes at the end of the combat, had twenty-five casualties. The
horse artillery lost one, the German hussars two men wounded. It is
sufficiently clear from these figures who had done the fighting that
day[252].

  [252] See the tables of the French and British losses in Appendix
  No. VI. Fririon, as chief of the staff, must have seen and passed
  the French return giving 750 casualties, yet in his narrative
  allows for only 250, saying, ‘On a beaucoup exagéré les pertes:
  les chiffres que nous donnons sont très exacts.’ This is only one
  example of his habit of falsifying figures, in which he rivalled
  Masséna and Soult.