

  [234] Pack’s Portuguese were so exhausted and sickly that they
  were left behind for a rest, and to wait for more food, at
  Mangualde on the upper Mondego.

On the 26th the cavalry pushed out from Celorico[235], Arentschildt’s
brigade took the Almeida road, Hawker’s (this colonel was in temporary
command of the 1st and 14th, while Slade managed the whole vanguard)
pushed towards Guarda. Each swept the villages on the flanks of its
route. The result of the exploration was to show that a very large body
of the enemy had retired on Guarda, and a very small body on Almeida.
A patrol of the 16th Light Dragoons hit on Mermet’s rearguard and took
an officer and eighteen men from it. The reports of the following day
came to much the same--it began to be clear that almost the whole
French army must have gone to Guarda, and at last Wellington began
to have the first news of Masséna’s southward movement, though he did
not yet grasp its meaning. ‘The French appear to stick about Guarda,’
he wrote to Beresford, ‘and yesterday they had some people well on
towards Manteigas: but I have heard nothing of them from Grant [the
famous scout and intelligence officer] and I conclude they were only a
patrol.’ Now Manteigas is at the source of the Zezere, near Covilhão,
and this ‘patrol’ was nothing less than Junot’s flank cavalry,
exploring out from Belmonte, which the 8th Corps had reached on the
preceding day. But so little did Wellington guess what was running in
Masséna’s mind, that he wrote on this day that he was proposing to take
a short turn to the Alemtejo to supervise Beresford’s operations (which
were hanging fire in the most discouraging fashion), as soon as the
French were over the frontier[236].

  [235] ‘General Slade had been in Celorico the whole of
  yesterday,’ complains Tomkinson of the 16th, ‘and yet had not the
  least idea where the French had retired to.’ Diary, p. 89.

  [236] Wellington to Henry Wellesley, March 27, from Gouvea.

Meanwhile Wellington made up his mind that, since the enemy persisted
in lingering at Guarda, he must manœuvre them out of that lofty city.
But imagining that two, if not three, corps were concentrated in its
neighbourhood, he would not attack till his rear had come up from the
Alva to Celorico. This did not happen till the 29th, when the 1st
Division reached that place, with the 5th close behind. But on the
previous day he had already started off Picton to cross the Serra da
Estrella by the mountain road by Prados, and the Light Division with
Arentschildt’s cavalry to take the longer route on the other bank
of the Mondego, which goes to Guarda via Baracal, Villa Franca, and
Rapoulla. A flanking detachment, composed of a wing of the 95th Rifles,
came upon a small rearguard left behind by Mermet at Freixadas, and
turned them out of the village, taking a few prisoners (March 28).

On the 29th the Light Division and the two cavalry brigades moved in
upon Guarda from Rapoulla, while Picton closed in from the west, on
the side of the higher hills, and General Alexander Campbell, with
the 6th Division, advanced between the other two columns, by the road
on the east side of the Mondego which passes through Ramilhosa[237].
The three converging columns appeared upon the heights around Guarda
within a few hours of each other, Picton being first on the spot. The
French had hardly any warning, for the cavalry screen had kept the
British hidden till the last. Picton found Mermet’s and Marchand’s
divisions on the plateau of Guarda, with Ferey’s at its foot on the
eastern side, already starting on its march for Adão, which was to be
the commencement of the general retreat that Masséna contemplated on
the next day. It seems clear, from French sources, that Loison was
practically taken by surprise. Fririon, the chief of the staff of the
Army of Portugal, says that, visiting Guarda to see how the 6th Corps
was arranged, he found Maucune’s brigade encamped in a ravine dominated
on all sides, with only one battalion on the hill on which Picton
appeared a few minutes later, and the rest in a position where they
were perfectly helpless. There was no other covering force at all out
in front of the town. Hence, when the British closed in, Loison got
flurried, and, seeing the Light Division threatening to press in on his
rear, absconded at once without fighting. As his force was still nearly
15,000 strong, and Wellington had as yet only three divisions, of no
greater numbers, in front of the formidable hill of Guarda, it seems
that the flight of the 6th Corps from such a position was somewhat
ignominious. Ney would undoubtedly have fought a brilliant detaining
action with his rearguard[238].