

Blinding rain came on at this moment, and much diminished the efficacy
of the British fire. Attacked by double numbers of fresh troops,
Beckwith’s brigade was thrust back for some distance. But they rallied
behind some stone walls of enclosures, just as the shower ceased, and
after an obstinate contest of musketry, stopped the French regiments,
who, falling into disorder, retired up the slope to re-form. Though
conscious that he was now engaged against hopeless odds, and though he
could see nothing of Drummond’s brigade or the British cavalry, which
ought by this time to have come up to his support, Beckwith went up
the hill a second time in pursuit. When he reached the crest he came
upon the divisional battery of Merle, drove it off, and captured one
howitzer. Immediately after, he was outflanked on his left by infantry,
apparently the rallied 4th Léger, while on the right he was charged by
two squadrons of chasseurs and hussars, all that the depleted cavalry
brigade of Pierre Soult could put in line that day. The 43rd and their
comrades were hardly pressed, and had to give ground, but sheltering
once more among the enclosures, refused to relinquish their position
on the slope. The captured howitzer lay out in their front, in an
open space swept by the musketry of both parties. Desperate attempts
were made by groups on each side to rush out and bring it in, but to
no effect, as the cross-fire was too heavy. Beckwith’s brigade was
in a most dangerous position, only preserved from annihilation by
the fact that the mist and rain prevented the enemy from recognizing
the smallness of the force opposed to him--two and a half battalions
against eleven, or 1,500 men against 3,500.

At this moment assistance at last arrived--the 2nd Brigade of the Light
Division under Drummond appeared on the scene. It consisted of the two
battalions of the 52nd, the 1st Caçadores, and four companies of the
95th, about 2,000 bayonets. Having lost touch of the 1st Brigade at
the ford, it had taken a route much more like that originally intended
by Wellington to be employed, and had come up the back slope of the
heights, far to the right of Beckwith, without meeting any enemy. The
noise of the combat attracted Drummond to his left; he changed his
direction, and was coming over the hillside and approaching Beckwith
when he received a most ill-advised order from Erskine--who was with
the cavalry some way to his right rear--directing him not to advance
or engage[249]. But to have held back would have meant to allow the
1st Brigade to be destroyed. Disregarding the order, Drummond deployed
the 1/52nd, the Caçadores, and the 95th on the right of the enclosures
where Beckwith was fighting, with the 2/52nd in reserve, and advanced
firing. This attack by a fresh force was too much for the French 2nd
and 36th, who had suffered severely in the earlier fighting. They
gave way, and Drummond, with Beckwith following in échelon on his
left, regained the crest of the heights and recaptured the French
howitzer. The two brigades were still engaged in a fierce struggle with
Merle’s division when Reynier brought up the 2nd Brigade of Heudelet’s
division, the seven battalions of the 17th Léger and 70th Ligne, which
had formed the centre of his original line of battle. These troops
attacked the left flank of the Light Division, Beckwith’s men, and put
them in grave danger, for the much-tried 43rd and 3rd Caçadores were in
great disorder. At the same time the two French squadrons charged again
upon the flank of the 52nd. Fortunately a stray squadron of the 16th
Light Dragoons came up and assisted in repulsing them. This was the
only aid given by the cavalry this day; Erskine contrived to keep them
useless, countermarching in the mist, some way from the fighting front.