

Unfortunately the morning of the 3rd of April was one of dense
fog--good for concealing the march of the troops, but bad in that it
prevented the troops from discovering their objective. Both Picton
and Dunlop (who was commanding the 5th Division in Leith’s absence on
leave) resolved not to move, and sent to Wellington, who was hard by,
for orders. Not so the rash and presumptuous Erskine, who repeated this
day the precise mistake that he had made at Casal Novo three weeks
back. Without coming himself to the front, he sent an aide-de-camp to
the Light Division, to bid it descend to the river and cross at the
ford which had been assigned to it in the general scheme. The cavalry
were also ordered to move forward and take the other ford, more to the
right, by which they were to get into the enemy’s rear.[247]

  [247] Details may be verified in Wellington, _Supplementary
  Dispatches_, xiii. p. 611.

Beckwith’s brigade, the leading one of the Light Division, consisted of
the 1/43rd, Elder’s Caçadores (the 3rd of that arm), and four companies
of the 1/95th Rifles. It was waiting in column, on the road above the
river, when Erskine’s aide-de-camp rode up, and asked the brigadier
in a peremptory tone ‘why he did not cross.’ Beckwith at once struck
off in the direction where he supposed the ford to be, but, missing
his line in the fog, did not march sufficiently far to the right, and
reached the Coa not at the true ford but at a hazardous passage nearly
a mile nearer to Sabugal[248], where the water came up to the men’s
arm-pits. Drummond’s brigade followed at a distance, and used the
same wrong path. The cavalry, to whom Sir William Erskine had joined
himself, taking their bearings from the Light Division, came down to
the river not very far to its right, at a point some two miles more
to the west than was intended. They lost much time in searching for a
ford; by the time that they found one, the Light Division was already
heavily engaged, and the passage ultimately discovered was so close to
that force that the Dragoons came up almost in Drummond’s rear, instead
of far out on his flank.

  [248] Wellington’s orders were to cross 2 miles at least above
  Sabugal. The actual crossing was only 1¼ miles above.

Reynier’s pickets were close to the water’s edge, and opened a
scattering fire on the head of Beckwith’s column while it was still
struggling across the river. But they were easily driven off, and the
brigade formed up on the further side, in the usual order of the Light
Division, with a very strong skirmishing screen, composed of four
companies of the 95th and three of Elder’s Caçadores. The 43rd and the
other half-battalion of the Portuguese came on in line, a few hundred
yards behind the riflemen. They were still smothered in the fog, and
could discover nothing more than that they were pursuing the French
pickets up a gentle slope, mostly unenclosed waste ground, but cut up
by a few fields with low stone walls. Pushing forward briskly, they
presently came upon a French regiment, which was already under arms,
and preparing to show a front against them. What had happened in the
mist was that the Light Division, instead of getting round the flank
of Reynier’s position, had struck directly against it. The 2nd Corps
had been established on the long hill behind Sabugal and above the Coa,
ready to resist a frontal attack, with Merle’s division on the left and
Heudelet’s on the right, above the town. Beckwith had struck upon the
4th Léger, the left regiment of the left-hand division of the corps.
Merle, warned by the fire of the pickets, was making a new front, _en
potence_ to the general line of the French army, and had just got the
four battalions of the extreme flank regiment drawn out. They were,
as usual, in column of divisions, (double companies), with a weak
skirmishing line in front, which was at once driven in by the Rifles
and Caçadores. Merle then led down his four columns against the screen
of light troops which covered Beckwith’s line, and drove them back with
considerable loss to himself, and little to his opponents, since he had
only skirmishers to shoot at, while his own compact battalion columns
were very vulnerable. The light troops fell back to each flank of the
line presented by the 43rd and the formed companies of the Caçadores,
and then halted and turned upon the enemy. The balance of numbers was
now in favour of Beckwith’s brigade, for though he had only two and a
half battalions and the enemy four, the French units were very weak,
the 4th Léger having only 1,100 men, while the 43rd alone was a strong
battalion of 750 bayonets and its auxiliary light troops were at least
600 more. It was not surprising, therefore, that the French regiment
soon went to the rear, badly hit, after a short sharp exchange of
volleys. Beckwith followed, pushing the enemy through a small chestnut
wood, till he arrived at the southern summit of the ridge on which the
French line had been drawn out. Here he found himself confronted by
the seven battalions of the 36th of the Line, and the 2nd Léger, the
remaining regiments of Merle’s division, which were hurrying along the
crest to the assistance of their comrades of the 4th Léger.