

  [237] Napier (iii. 129) is wrong in saying that the movement
  was ‘Supported by the 1st, 5th, and 7th Divisions.’ These only
  reached Celorico that day, and were fifteen miles from the field.
  See Diary of Stothert of the Guards, p. 232. Napier was misled
  by the vague wording of Wellington’s dispatch to Lord Liverpool
  (vii. 425), from which it might be supposed that these divisions
  were up.

  [238] The 3rd Division arrived some time before the 6th and the
  Light were in actual touch with the enemy.

  Picton writes about this: ‘Masséna with full 20,000 men was on
  the heights, and in the city of Guarda, when I made my appearance
  at 9 in the morning, with three British and two Portuguese
  regiments.... He ought immediately to have attacked me, but
  allowed me to remain within 400 yards of his main body for about
  two hours, before the other columns came up. But of course their
  movements were alarming him, and decided him not to hazard an
  attack, the failure of which would have probably brought on the
  total discomfiture of his army.’ Letter in Robinson’s _Life of
  Picton_, vol. ii. pp. 3, 4.

Loison went off in great haste on the two roads open to him, both
leading south-east towards the Coa: one by Adão and Pega towards
Sabugal, the other by Villa Mendo and Marmeleiro to Rapoulla da
Coa. The British infantry could never come up with him. The cavalry
pressed his rear, and made many prisoners, mainly foraging parties
which were straggling in to join the main body. A patrol of the 16th
Light Dragoons captured 64 men in one party, and took 150 sheep and
20 oxen[239]. The total number of prisoners was between two and three
hundred. But the French rearguard of three battalions of infantry kept
well together, and was in too good order to be broken by unsupported
squadrons of cavalry. The main body of the 6th Corps marched all
day towards the fords of the Coa, but had not reached that river at
nightfall. One of its columns encamped at Pega, the other at Marmeleiro.

  [239] See Tomkinson’s Diary, p. 90.

On the next morning (March 30) Masséna was in a very dangerous
situation: his three corps were still unconcentrated, and Junot was
lingering at Belmonte, from which he only moved that morning towards
Sabugal. If Wellington had known of the isolated position of the 8th
Corps, he might, by pushing down a column from Celorico, have cut
off its line of retreat towards the Coa, where the 2nd Corps was
awaiting it. But by ill-luck no reports came to hand about Junot, and
Wellington was under the impression that two, and not one, corps had
been holding Guarda when he attacked it[240]. He was aware that Reynier
was at Sabugal, but did not apparently receive any information which
demonstrated that there was another heavy column in this direction,
now commencing to move straight across the front of his own advanced
guard. Junot was able to extricate himself by two painful marches over
villainous cross-roads in the mountains, from Belmonte to Urgueira
(March 30) and from Urgueira to Sabugal (March 31). He was only able
to win salvation because he had left all his artillery behind him at
Guarda, and was therefore able to go wherever infantry could climb.
His guns had been given in charge to the 6th Corps, and formed part of
the column under Ferey that marched by Pega to the Coa.