

  [240] Wellington to Beresford, from Celorico, March 30:
  ‘Yesterday we manœuvred the French out of Guarda. Masséna was
  there, some say with his whole army, I think certainly with two
  corps: not a shot was fired.’ (_Dispatches_, vii. 412.) Same day
  to Charles Stuart: ‘They were much stronger than we: I had only
  three divisions on the hill.’ (_Dispatches_, vii. 418.)

Meanwhile the 6th Corps had to complete its retreat to the line of
the Coa, and reached it in the afternoon, harassed but not seriously
damaged by the two British cavalry brigades, of which Hawker’s followed
the column on the northern and Arentschildt’s that on the southern
of the two parallel roads on which Loison was moving. All accounts
agree that General Slade, who was directing both brigades, showed
over-caution, and missed several fair opportunities of attacking the
enemy’s rearguard, in open ground very favourable to cavalry and
horse-artillery tactics[241]. He only picked up a few stragglers, and
the enemy was safely across the Coa by nightfall, Marchand’s division
at Ponte Sequeiro, Ferey’s and Mermet’s at Bismula, seven miles further
to the south, where they were now only eight miles from Reynier’s right
wing at Sabugal. The British had not yet detected Junot’s flank march,
which was hourly bringing him nearer to safety.

  [241] Napier’s statements (iii. 129) are quite borne out by
  Tomkinson’s Diary: ‘In the rear of Pega is an open plain of two
  miles which the enemy had to pass: as usual we looked at them
  for half an hour: then the guns were ordered up, and in place
  of firing at the main body could only get within range of their
  pickets ... we continued to follow, and, although they had no
  cavalry, our general was afraid to go into the plain to get the
  guns in range of the infantry: they of course got clear off.’
  (Diary, p. 91.)

On the 31st the 8th Corps escaped from its dangers, reached Sabugal,
and, passing behind Reynier, pushed on ten miles further to Alfayates,
where it halted for a much-needed rest. The troops were reduced to the
last extreme by exhaustion and hunger. At Alfayates, within three miles
of the Spanish frontier, and only two marches from Ciudad Rodrigo, they
at last began to receive regular provisions, and had nearly got out of
the mountains into the rolling upland of southern Leon.

Why Masséna, the moment that he knew that Junot was safe, did not
continue to retreat on to his magazines it is hard to say. But he
remained for two days more behind the upper Coa, and thereby exposed
himself to continued danger, for his army was strung out on too thin
a line, watching twenty miles of the river. Apparently he thought,
from seeing no British infantry on the 30th and 31st, that Wellington
had halted at Guarda, and did not intend to continue the pursuit on
Sabugal. His own forces continued in their old positions throughout
the 1st and 2nd of April, save that all Montbrun’s reserve cavalry was
sent to the rear, to the valleys of the Agueda and the Azava, to rest
and recover itself, the larger proportion of the surviving horses being
quite unserviceable. The corps-cavalry of Reynier, Junot, and Loison
also sent back many dismounted men, and hundreds more whose mounts
were incapable of use for the present, so that the brigade of light
horse attached to each was reduced to a few hundred sabres, many of the
regiments having only one efficient squadron left, and none more than
two[242]. The retreat from Santarem had practically disabled the French
cavalry.