

On March 29 Masséna gave the orders which marked the abandonment of
his great plan, and commenced his retrograde movement towards Ciudad
Rodrigo. Reynier and the 2nd Corps, abandoning the mountain roads,
came down by a lateral march to Sabugal in the upper valley of the
Coa: they were to stop there till Junot and the 8th Corps, coming
in from Belmonte, should have reached them and passed behind them.
The 6th Corps meanwhile was to halt at Guarda till the 8th Corps had
extricated itself from the mountains, but it was ordered to throw back
one division (Ferey’s) to Adão on the Sabugal road, eight miles to the
south-east, as the first échelon of its forthcoming movement of retreat
towards the Coa. Masséna himself and the head quarters of the army
moved from Guarda on the morning of the 29th to Pega, a village some
miles nearer the Coa than Adão.

On this morning the British army, of which Masséna had heard
practically nothing for eight days, put in its appearance in the most
forcible fashion, falling upon the enemy just as he was in the midst of
a complicated movement, with his three corps separated from each other
by distances of some twenty miles.

Wellington, it will be remembered, had halted about half of his army on
the Alva upon March 20th, for sheer want of provisions, sending on only
the two light cavalry brigades and the 3rd, 6th, and Light Divisions to
pursue Masséna on the Celorico road. He had no doubt that the enemy was
about to retire from Celorico and Guarda towards the Spanish frontier
with the smallest delay--the policy of Ney and of every one else in
the French army save Masséna himself. On the 24th, Slade’s dragoons
occupied Celorico, and reported that the enemy had left it on the
preceding day; two columns were traced: the larger [6th and 8th Corps]
had gone towards Guarda, the smaller [Drouet with Conroux’s division of
the 9th Corps] had taken the high-road towards Freixadas and Almeida.
There was nothing yet to indicate to Wellington Masséna’s intention of
proceeding in the direction of Estremadura and the middle Tagus. He
wrote on the 25th to General Spencer, ‘The French have retired from
Celorico, and appear to intend to take up a line on the Coa. Their left
has gone by Guarda, apparently for Sabugal’--and to Beresford, ‘The
French have gone towards the Coa: their left will cross at Sabugal, I
should think, and their right about Pinhel and Almeida[233]’.

  [233] Both dispatches are dated from Santa Marinha, March 25th.

On this day (March 25) the first convoy of provisions from the new base
established at Coimbra reached the camps on the Alva, and Wellington
was at last able to set the 1st and 5th Divisions and Ashworth’s
Portuguese in motion[234]. They started on the Celorico road, and
reached Galliges that night. No news had yet come in of the southward
movement of the French from Guarda, which had begun on the preceding
day. The vanguard of the army had now established itself in Celorico,
which was reached by the Light and 3rd Divisions on the 25th-26th: they
had come up very slowly, being sadly distressed for food, and therefore
forced to make very short stages. Only one ration of bread had been
given out in the last four days.