

  [249] This fact comes from a MS. note by Sir John Bell of the
  52nd, in my possession. He writes: ‘Just as the 2nd Brigade
  changed its direction, the General, being at some distance, sent
  an order for it not to engage. But the staff officer who carried
  it, and Drummond, seeing how matters stood, took the liberty of
  forgetting the message, so that Beckwith should have the full
  benefit of the support at hand. No question was ever asked as to
  the non-delivery of the order.’

At this moment the fog suddenly lifted, and both Wellington and Reynier
were able to make out the face of the battle. The sight was not
altogether comforting to either of them: Wellington could see the Light
Division on the crest, opposed by a very superior enemy (the proportion
was about five to three at this moment) and with their left flank
turned by the column which had just come up. Reynier, on the other
hand, saw the masses of Picton’s and Dunlop’s divisions halted close
above the fords, at and below Sabugal, and just preparing to cross. He
had so stripped his centre and right, while bringing up troops to crush
the Light Division, that only the two regiments forming Heudelet’s 1st
Brigade, the eight weak battalions of the 31st Léger and 47th Ligne,
about 3,300 bayonets, were left to occupy two miles of slope on each
side of the town of Sabugal. Reynier saw that they must be scattered
by the approaching onset, for 10,000 men were hurrying down towards
the fords, and gave instant orders for a general retreat. The intact
brigade was to abandon Sabugal and the heights, concentrate, and go off
at the double, to take up a position a mile to the rear, on the road
to Alfayates. Merle’s shattered troops on the crest, facing the Light
Division, were directed to make off in such order as they might, taking
the artillery with them, and to seek refuge behind this reserve. To
prevent Beckwith and Drummond from pursuing them, the 2nd Brigade of
Heudelet, the 17th Léger and 70th, were ordered to keep up a defensive
fight upon the heights where they had just come into action.

This brigade was thereby exposed to grave danger, for while it was
doing its best to ‘contain’ the Light Division, Picton, coming up
from the river at a furious pace, with the 5th Fusiliers deployed in
his front, rushed in upon its flank, and drove its battalions one
upon another. The 17th and 70th were overwhelmed and thrust down the
back of the hill with a loss of 400 men, of whom 120 were unwounded
prisoners. Their wrecks took refuge with the other brigades, which
retired as rapidly as they could along the Alfayates road, with the
31st Léger and 47th Ligne, the only intact body, covering the flight
of the rest. The British 5th Division had crossed at Sabugal without
meeting opposition or losing a man, but was too far to the left to be
of any use in urging the pursuit. That duty fell to Picton, who was
pressing the French rearguard when the rain, which had been falling for
almost the whole morning, became absolutely torrential, and hid the
face of the country-side so thoroughly that Wellington commanded the
whole army to halt. It is said that this order was given on the false
intelligence that the 8th Corps was visible coming up from Alfayates to
join Reynier[250], a report for which there was no foundation whatever.
Erskine and the cavalry never touched the retreating force, save one
squadron of the German hussars, who happed upon the French transport
column, and captured the private baggage of Reynier himself and General
Pierre Soult[251].