

  [269] Since the disaster at Puebla de Senabria (vol. iii. p. 270)
  Serras had drawn in his left flank and abandoned the Galician
  foot-hills.

While affairs stood thus in the north, King Joseph and his ‘Army of
the Centre’ were profiting for many months from the absence of any
danger upon the side of Portugal. Indeed, the period between September
1810 and April 1811 were the least disturbed of any in the short and
troublous reign of the _Rey Intruso_, so far as regular military
affairs went. There was no enemy to face save the guerrilleros, yet
these bold partisans, of whom the best known were the Empecinado and
El Medico (Dr. Juan Palarea) on the side of the eastern mountains, and
Julian Sanchez more to the west, on the borders of Leon, sufficed to
keep the 20,000 men of whom King Joseph could dispose[270] in constant
employment. Such a force was not too much when every small town, almost
every village, of New Castile had to be provided with a garrison.
Roughly speaking, each province absorbed a division: the Germans of
the _Rheinbund_ occupied La Mancha, Lahoussaye’s dragoons and the
incomplete division of Dessolles[271] held Toledo and its district, the
King’s Spaniards the Guadalajara country, leaving only the Royal Guards
and some drafts and detachments to garrison the capital. It was with
considerable difficulty that Joseph collected in January 1811 a small
expeditionary force of not over 3,500 men[272], with which Lahoussaye
went out, partly to open up communications with Soult in Estremadura,
but more especially to search for any traces of the vanished army of
Masséna in the direction of the Portuguese frontier. Lahoussaye started
from Talavera on February 1, communicated by means of his cavalry with
Soult’s outposts between Truxillo and Merida, and then went northward
across the Tagus to Plasencia, from which his cavalry searched in
vain, as far as Coria and Alcantara, for any news of the Army of
Portugal. From Plasencia he was soon driven back to Toledo by want of
supplies. Joseph had directed him to seize Alcantara, re-establish its
broken bridge, and place a garrison there; but this turned out to be
absolutely impossible, for it would have been useless to leave a small
force in this remote spot, when it was certain that it must ere long
retire for lack of food, and might well be cut off by the guerrilleros
before it could reach Talavera, the nearest occupied point[273].

  [270] The King in all his dispatches seems to understate his own
  force. He sometimes calls it only 15,000 men. But a muster roll
  of the Army of the Centre, which I have copied from the Archives
  de la Guerre, for February 15, 1811, shows a total of 20,000,
  viz. Dessolles, 3,300, German Division, 5,200, Spaniards, 4,200,
  Lahoussaye, 2,500, Treillard’s Light Cavalry, 1,400, Artillery
  Train, Sappers, &c., 1,500, Royal Guards, 2,000 of all arms.
  In addition there were 5,000 drafts for Soult detained in New
  Castile, but about to start for Seville.