

Considerable as was this force, it did not accomplish all that the
Emperor hoped, even when directed by a single commander of solid
military talents. Bessières, though a capable officer, was not a
genius, and the tasks assigned to him were so multifarious that after a
short time he began to grow harassed and worried, and to cavil at every
order that was sent him. He was directed to ‘suppress brigandage,’
i. e. to put down the guerrilleros, to support the Army of Portugal
against Wellington whenever necessary, to keep an eye upon the Spanish
regular forces in Galicia and the Asturias. This, he declared, was
more than could be accomplished with the forces at his disposal. ‘If I
concentrate 20,000 men all communications are lost, and the insurgents
will make enormous progress. The coast would be lost as far as Bilbao.
We are without resources, because it is only with the greatest
pains that the troops can be fed from day to day. The spirit of the
population is abominably bad: the retreat of the Army of Portugal has
turned their heads. The bands of insurgents grow larger, and recruit
themselves actively on every side.... The Emperor is deceived about
Spain: the pacification of Spain does not depend on a battle with the
English, who will accept it or refuse it as they please, and who have
Portugal behind them for retreat. Every one knows the vicious system
of our operations. Every one allows that we are too widely scattered.
We occupy too much territory, we use up our resources without profit
and without necessity: we are clinging on to dreams. Cadiz and Badajoz
absorb all our means--Cadiz because we cannot take it, Badajoz because
it requires a whole army to support it. We ought to blow up Badajoz,
and to abandon the siege of Cadiz for the present. We ought to draw in,
get solid bases for our magazines and hospitals, and regard two-thirds
of Spain as a vast battlefield, which a battle may give us or cause us
to lose, till the moment that we change our system and take in hand the
real conquest and pacification of the country,’ &c.[264]

  [264] Bessières to Berthier, printed in the Appendix to Belmas,
  vol. i. p. 562.

All this means that Bessières found it impossible to pacify the North,
and concluded that it was useless to try to complete the conquest
of Andalusia or Portugal, when that of Navarre and Santander was so
far from being secure that no small party could go two miles from
a garrison town, without a large probability of being cut off by
the insurgents. He would have had his master abandon Andalusia and
Estremadura, in order to concentrate such masses of troops in the north
that the guerrilleros should be smothered by mere numbers, that every
mountain village should have its garrison. There was small likelihood
that his views would find favour at Paris; the Emperor knew well enough
the effect on his prestige that would result from the abandonment
of the siege of Cadiz, following upon the retreat of Masséna from
Santarem. It would look like a confession of defeat, a renunciation of
the great game of conquest; if the French armies retired beyond the
Sierra Morena, the results of eighteen months of victorious campaigning
in the south would be lost, and the Cortes at Cadiz would once more
have a realm to administer. Hence all that Napoleon did for Bessières
was to send him in June two new divisions for the strengthening of the
garrisons of the North[265], and to bid him fortify every important
station on the high-road to Madrid, and even the main bridges of the
upper Ebro. A few months later he recalled him, partly because he
considered him a pessimist, partly because Bessières quarrelled with
King Joseph, who was continually soliciting his removal. But before the
Duke of Istria departed he had many more troubles to go through, as
will be seen.