

  [259] See vol. iii, Appendix, p. 543.

  [260] When Foy went back from Thomar on March 5 to Rodrigo
  his escort was taken from the 9th Corps, not from the Army of
  Portugal, so does not count. See _Pièces Justificatives_, No. 45,
  in Foy’s _Vie Militaire_, p. 357.

Yet there can be no doubt that Masséna was hardly treated. That the
expedition of Portugal failed was, in the main, no fault of his.
Neither he nor his master, nor any one else on the French side, had
foreseen Wellington’s plans--the devastation of the country-side, which
rendered it impossible for the invader to live long by marauding, and
the systematic fortification of the long front of the Lisbon Peninsula.
For the actual game that was set before him, Masséna had not been given
sufficient pieces by the Emperor. As Wellington had said more than a
year before[261], the French could not turn him out of Portugal with
less than 100,000 men, and Napoleon had only provided 65,000. Moreover,
as the British general had added, he should so manage affairs that
100,000 French could not live in the country if they did appear; and
this was no vain boast.

  [261] See pp. 167-8 of vol. iii.

Masséna, then, was sent to accomplish an impossible task, and his
merit was that he came nearer to his end than Wellington had believed
possible, before he was forced to recoil. Many of the French marshals
would never have got to Coimbra: certainly none of them would have
succeeded in holding on at Santarem for three months. There can be
no doubt that the Prince of Essling did not exaggerate when he wrote
to Berthier[262], on March 31st, that it was his own iron will alone
which had kept the army so long and so far to the front--that but for
him it would have recoiled on to Spain many weeks earlier. His heroic
obstinacy gave his adversary many an uneasy day, while it seemed in
January and February as if the calculation for famishing the French
had failed. Masséna, in short, had done all that was possible, and
the general failure of the campaign was not his fault, any more than
it was that of Soult, on whom the blame has always been laid by the
elder marshal’s advocates. We have shown in an earlier chapter[263]
that Soult did all and more than all that Napoleon had directed him
to accomplish. If he had literally obeyed the tardy orders that
reached him from Paris he would only have exposed the 5th Corps to
defeat, if not to destruction. The _ex post facto_ rebukes that the
Emperor sent him were unjust. We are once more driven back to our old
conclusion that the determining factors in the failure of the campaign
of Portugal were firstly that Napoleon refused to appoint a single
commander-in-chief in the Peninsula, to whose orders all the other
marshals should be strictly subordinate, and secondly that he persisted
in sending plans and directions from Paris founded on facts that were
seven weeks late, or more, when his dispatches reached the front. On
this we have enlarged at sufficient length on an earlier page.