

  [253] In the Diary of Tomkinson of the 16th Light Dragoons there
  is a curious note as to the capture of a ‘caravan’ or large coach
  belonging to the head-quarter staff, and more especially to
  Masséna’s Portuguese adviser, the Marquis d’Alorna, on April 7th.
  Sixty-five infantry were captured by the regiment on the same day.

  [254] See letters to Beresford of April 6th and to Charles Stuart
  of April 8th, in _Dispatches_, vii. pp. 430-5.

Wellington’s ambition at the moment did not go beyond the hope of
recovering Almeida, which he conceived to be doomed to fall, and
possibly Ciudad Rodrigo also, if the enemy should be forced to fall
back towards Salamanca. But Almeida, at least, he was determined to
make his own, and the first necessity was to clear away the 9th Corps
from its neighbourhood. He was convinced that Drouet would retreat when
he heard that Masséna had retired to the Agueda, and thought that his
motions might be quickened by a demonstration. The 6th Division and
Pack’s Portuguese were destined for the blockade of Almeida, but they
would not be up for some days, and meanwhile Trant’s Militia, which
was already on the lower Coa, was directed to push in boldly upon the
place, and promised the support of Slade’s cavalry brigade on the 7th.
Trant, always daring and full of enterprise, pressed forward to Val
de Mula, on the further side of Almeida, and met there Claparéde’s
division on its way towards the Agueda--Conroux had already departed.
The Militia engaged in an irregular fight with the French, who turned
promptly round upon them, and seemed likely to make havoc of them near
the village of Aldea do Obispo. But just as the attack grew threatening
Slade’s dragoons appeared from the south, with Bull’s horse artillery
battery, and drew up on the flank of the enemy’s troops. The artillery
were already beginning to enfilade them, when Claparéde, forming his
division into battalion squares, made a hasty retreat towards the
Agueda, and passed it at the bridge of Barba del Puerco. Erskine,
who was in command of the expedition, did not press him hard, and
the French, according to their own account, only lost 7 killed and 4
officers and 24 men wounded, all by cannon shot, for the dragoons were
not allowed to charge home[255]. Slade captured, however, some baggage
and a good many stragglers, marauders, and guards of small convoys, who
were surprised in the open rolling country before they could get over
the Agueda.

  [255] Napier (iii. 135) says that the French lost 300 men, which
  contrasts strangely with the official numbers given by the
  French. Probably Drouet gave only the actual loss in action,
  while the British accounts speak of all the stragglers taken that
  day as if they had been captured in the fight. The 16th certainly
  got 65 prisoners from a convoy guard.

Wellington could now surround and blockade Almeida; he had been
nourishing some hopes that the French might evacuate it, when Drouet
departed from its neighbourhood, for he was aware that its stores had
run very low. But when it became evident that the place was not to be
abandoned, he realized that it would take some weeks to reduce it, for
he had no battering-train whatever, indeed there were no heavy guns
nearer than Oporto and Abrantes. It was not till the following autumn
that a proper siege-train was organized for the Anglo-Portuguese army.
Almeida could only be attacked by the weapon of famine; Badajoz, which
was beleaguered at the same time, had to be battered with a few guns
borrowed from the ramparts of the neighbouring fortress of Elvas. The
British army had now been two years in Portugal, yet Wellington still
lacked the materials for conducting the smallest offensive operation
against strongholds in the hands of the French.