

  [262] Dispatch printed in Fririon, p. 157.

  [263] See above, pp. 24-5.




SECTION XXV

EVENTS IN NORTHERN, EASTERN, AND CENTRAL SPAIN




CHAPTER I

KING JOSEPH AND HIS TROUBLES


While following the fortunes of Wellington and Masséna, during the
first four months of 1811, we have been compelled to leave almost
untouched the sequence of events in the rest of Spain; not only the
doings of Suchet and Macdonald in the far east, which had no practical
connexion with the campaign of Portugal, but also the minor affairs
of the southern and central provinces. Only Soult’s expedition to
Estremadura, which came into close touch with Wellington, has been
dealt with. It is time to explain the general posture of the war in the
Peninsula, during the time when its critical point lay between Lisbon
and Abrantes, where Masséna and Wellington stood face to face, each
waiting for the other to move.

What was going on in Portugal was, as we have already seen, practically
a secret to the French in Spain. For the Portuguese Ordenança and the
Spanish guerrilleros had done their work of blocking the roads so
well, that no accurate information penetrated to Madrid, Valladolid,
or Seville from Santarem. It was only at rare intervals, when Foy
and other officers cut their way through this ‘fog of war’ that the
condition of affairs on the Tagus became known for a moment. The fog
descended again when they had passed through on their way to Paris,
and given their information as to the fortunes of the Army of Portugal
during the weeks that preceded their departure. The gaps in the
narrative were very long--nothing got through between the departure of
Masséna from Almeida on September 15, 1810, and Foy’s first arrival
at Ciudad Rodrigo on November 8th. There was another lacuna in the
knowledge of the situation between that date and the passage of
Masséna’s second successful messenger, Casabianca, from Santarem to
Rodrigo in the earliest days of February. And after Casabianca had
passed by, the next news came out through Foy’s second mission, when
he started to announce the oncoming retreat on March 5, and got to
the borders of Leon on March 13. The only way in which King Joseph at
Madrid, or the generals of the ‘military governments’ of Old Castile,
or Soult in Andalusia, felt the course of the war on its most important
theatre, was that they were for many months freed from any anxiety
about the movements of Wellington. He was ‘contained’ by Masséna, and,
however he might be faring, he had no power to interfere by armed force
in the affairs of Spain. The French for all this time had to deal only
with the armies of the Cortes, and with their old and irrepressible
enemies the guerrilleros of the mountains.

While the fate of the Portuguese expedition was still uncertain,
while it seemed possible to Napoleon that Masséna might cling to his
position at Santarem till Soult came up to join him on the Tagus,
a considerable change was made with regard to the French troops in
northern Spain. Convinced at last there was little to be said in favour
of that system of many small ‘military governments’, in Old Castile
and the neighbouring provinces, which he had created in 1810, the
Emperor resolved to put them all under a single commander. This would
give him six less independent generals to communicate with, and would
ensure for the future a much better co-operation between the divisions
which occupied the valley of the Douro and the Pyrenean regions. The
six military governors had been each playing his own game, and taking
little notice of that of his neighbours. Their enemies were mostly the
guerrillero bands of the Cantabrian hills and of Navarre. Each general
did his best to hunt these elusive enemies out of his own department,
but took little heed of their trespasses on his neighbours’ territory.
Evasive and indomitable partisans like Mina in Navarre, Julian Sanchez
in Old Castile, and Porlier and Longa in the Cantabrian sierras, found
it comparatively easy to shift their positions when the pressure on one
region was too great for them, and to move on into another--they were
sure that the hunt would soon slacken, and that they could return at
their leisure to their old haunts. The Emperor thought that it would
be possible to make an end of them, if all his garrisons and movable
columns in northern Spain were put under a single commander and moved
in unison under a single will. Hence came the decree of January 8,
1811, creating the ‘Army of the North,’ and handing it over to Marshal
Bessières, whose name was still remembered in those regions owing to
his old victory of Medina de Rio Seco. His authority extended over the
troops stationed in Navarre, Biscay, Burgos, Valladolid, Salamanca,
the Asturias, and Santander, including not only the regular garrisons
of those provinces but the two divisions of the Young Guard, which had
replaced Drouet’s corps in Old Castile, and the division under Serras
which watched Galicia from the direction of Benavente and Astorga. The
total of the forces placed under his orders amounted to 70,000 men, of
whom 59,000 were ‘présents sous les armes,’ the rest being in hospital,
or detached outside the limits of the territory assigned to the Army of
the North.