

[Illustration: MAP TO ILLUSTRATE the LAST STAGE of MASSÉNA’S RETREAT
and the CAMPAIGN of FUENTES de OÑORO]

It was known, however, that the stores in Almeida had run low, for the
9th Corps had been consuming them while it lay close by, in spite of
Masséna’s strict directions to the contrary. But starvation knows no
laws. As a matter of fact there were still over thirty days’ rations
in the magazines, though it had been reported both to Wellington and
to Masséna that the stock had run down much lower;[256] Drouet had
falsely stated on one occasion that there was only enough to last for
fifteen days. The British general fancied that four weeks’ blockade
might reduce the place, and thought that he was quit of the Army of
Portugal for a much longer space of time. He even hoped to effect
something against Ciudad Rodrigo[257], which was also under-victualled,
for on reaching the frontier Masséna had been forced to indent upon it
for supplies for his broken host. If the French retired to Salamanca,
as seemed quite probable, Wellington had hopes that he might be able
to starve out Rodrigo. But he was not intending to throw his troops
around it; they were to remain on the Dos Casas and the Azava, covering
the siege of Almeida, but only observing the Spanish fortress with
cavalry. For the cutting of the road between it and Salamanca only
irregular forces were to be used: Wellington would not send any of his
own divisions forward beyond Rodrigo, but requested the daring and
resourceful guerrillero chief Julian Sanchez to throw his bands in this
direction, the moment that the French army should have retired from the
Agueda. Sanchez had been for many months already occupied in similar
work, having spent all the winter in raids to cut off convoys and small
parties passing from Salamanca to Ciudad Rodrigo, or from that place to
Almeida. He had been hunted, often but vainly, by General Thiébault,
the governor of the province, whose columns he had usually succeeded
in avoiding, while he was always at hand to fall on weak or incautious
detachments on the march[258].

  [256] Wellington, _Dispatches_, vii. p. 448.

  [257] But, as he wrote to Beresford on April 14, ‘I was not very
  sanguine of the results of the blockade of that place, and had
  indeed determined not to make it in any strength: and now it is
  useless to keep anybody on the other side of the Agueda save for
  food and observation.’ (_Dispatches_, vii. 457.)

  [258] For the state of semi-blockade in which Sanchez had kept
  Ciudad Rodrigo, see the Memoirs of the Duchess of Abrantes (vii.
  pp. 275-7), who was beleaguered there while her husband was in
  Portugal. For the hunts organized against him by Thiébault, see
  the latter’s _Memoirs_, iv. 449-51, &c. Sanchez intercepted
  numbers of dispatches which were of great use to Wellington, as
  they kept him informed of the state of the French in northern
  Spain.

On April 8th, as Wellington had expected, the Army of Portugal resumed
its march into the interior of the kingdom of Leon, all the three corps
passing the Agueda, and retiring, Reynier to San Felices el Grande,
Junot to Santi Espiritus, Loison to Alba de Yeltes. Junot, while
passing, had been ordered to send into Rodrigo a reinforcement for the
garrison; he detached a battalion of the 15th and another of the Irish
Legion, which brought up the troops in the place to 3,000 men. From the
8th to the 11th the retreat continued, till at last the 6th Corps went
into cantonments at Salamanca, Alba de Tormes, and other neighbouring
places, the 2nd at and about Ledesma, and the 8th at Toro, behind the
others. Drouet and his two divisions held the line of observation
against the Anglo-Portuguese, with head quarters at San Muñoz. So
ended, fifty miles within the borders of Spain, the movement that had
begun at Santarem and Punhete.