

The effective of Masséna’s army, was on April 15th 39,546 sabres and
bayonets. It had started in September 1810 with 65,050 officers and
men, and had numbered 44,407 on March 15th. The exact loss, however,
was not the mere difference between its force of September 15, 1810,
and of April 15, 1811 (25,504), for it had received at midwinter two
drafts under Gardanne and Foy, amounting to 3,225 men in all[259]. On
the other hand, the figures of April 15th do not include two convoys of
sick sent back into Spain, one of 82 officers and 833 men dispatched
under the charge of Drouet from the Alva on March 11, and a second and
larger one sent back from Celorico to Almeida on March 22, along with
which went some dismounted cavalry, and some artillery which could
no longer follow the army. The whole may have amounted to 3,000 men.
Both of these convoys dropped large numbers of dead and stragglers
by the way, but it is impossible to ascertain their total. We must
also deduct the escort of an officer, Major Casabianca, sent from the
front to Ciudad Rodrigo on 21st January, who took 400 men[260] with
him and never returned. Deducting the 4,315 thus sent back to Spain,
and setting them against the 3,225 received from thence, it appears
that Masséna’s total loss must have been just under 25,000 men, or 38
per cent. of his original force. Of these Wellington had some 8,000
as prisoners, including the 4,000 captured in the hospital of Coimbra
on October 7th, 1810. The remainder had perished--not more than 2,000
in action, the rest by the sword of famine. Wellington’s scheme had
justified itself, though its working out had taken many more weeks than
he expected. Nor was the mere loss in men all that the Army of Portugal
had suffered. It returned to Leon stripped of everything--without
munitions, uniforms, or train. It had lost 5,872 horses of the 14,000
which it had brought into Portugal, and practically all its wheeled
vehicles; there were precisely 36 waggons left with the army. The men
were still ready to fight fiercely when they saw the necessity for
it, but were sulky, discontented, and perpetually carping against the
Commander-in-Chief, whose last unhappy inspiration--the projected
march from Guarda to Plasencia--had filled up the measure of their
wrath. And indeed they had good reason to be disgusted at it, for it
was wholly insane and impracticable. But every misfortune of the last
six months--the bloody repulse at Bussaco, the loss of the hospitals
and magazines at Coimbra, the long starvation at Santarem, the slow
and circuitous course of the retreat, was imputed to Masséna’s
account by his chief subordinates as well as by his rank and file.
What the generals muttered in the morning was loudly discussed around
every camp-fire at night. The whole army had lost in morale from six
months of systematic marauding, was quite out of hand in the way of
discipline, and had no confidence in its leader, who was absolutely
detested. The departure of Ney, who was liked and admired by all ranks,
had been a great discouragement, because his skilful handling of the
rearguard during the retreat had been understood and appreciated, while
Masséna was cried down as a tactician no less than as a strategist on
the general results of the campaign. A general whose troops no longer
rely on him cannot get the best out of his army, and for this reason
alone Napoleon was justified in removing the old Marshal from his
command in April, when the full tale of the retreat had reached him.