

  [265] See below, p. 225. Divisions Souham and Caffarelli.

The main difficulties of the Army of the North arose from geographical
facts. While the plains of Leon and Old Castile could be scoured by
cavalry, and easily traversed by flying columns, so that it was not
impossible to keep some sort of order in them, this flat upland was
bordered on the north by the long chain of the Cantabrian sierras
and their foot-hills, broad, rugged, and nearly roadless. Behind
these again lay the narrow and difficult coast-land of Asturias and
Santander, cut up into countless petty valleys each drained by its
own small river, and parted from its neighbours by spurs of the great
sierras. How was this mountain region, seventy miles broad and two
hundred long, to be dealt with? The French had no permanent garrisons
on the coast between Gijon, the port of Oviedo, which was generally
occupied by a detachment of Bonnet’s division, and Santander, not far
from the borders of Biscay[266]. This last Bessières describes as ‘a
bad post from every point of view, only to be defended by covering
it with large bodies of troops,’ and only accessible by a series of
difficult defiles. In the Cantabrian highlands dwelt Longa and Porlier,
with bands which had assumed the proportions of small armies; they
could communicate with the sea at any one of a dozen petty ports,
and draw arms and supplies from the British cruisers of the Bay of
Biscay. Even Mina would occasionally get in touch with the sea through
this coast-land, though his main sphere of operations was in Navarre.
There were dozens of smaller bands, each based on its own valley, but
capable of joining its neighbours for a sudden stroke. Again and again
French columns worked up into these sierras from the plain of the
Douro, and went on a hunt after the patriots. Sometimes they caught
them and inflicted severe loss; more often they were eluded by their
enemies, who fled by paths that regular troops could not follow, into
some distant corner of the mountains. It was impossible to garrison
each upland valley with a force that could resist a general levy of
the insurgents. Even little towns like Potes, in the Liebana, Longa’s
usual head quarters, which were repeatedly taken, could not be kept.
The ‘Army of the North’ would have required 150,000 men instead of
the 70,000 whom Bessières actually commanded, if it was to master the
whole of this difficult region. Indeed, Cantabria could only have been
conquered by an enemy possessing a sea force to attack it in the rear,
and occupy all its little ports, as well as an overwhelming land army
operating from all sides. To the end of the war Longa and Porlier,
often hunted but never destroyed, maintained themselves without any
great difficulty in their fastnesses. Nothing but the general despair
and demoralization that might have followed the extinction of the
patriotic cause in the whole of the rest of Spain, could have brought
the war in this region to an end. Nothing of the kind occurred: the
Cantabrians kept a high spirit; they won many small successes, and
they were perpetually helped by the British from the side of the
sea. Bessières had a hopeless problem before him in this quarter,
considering the size of his army.