

  [266] Bessières soon after his arrival put a garrison in Santoña,
  between Santander and Bilbao.

But this was not his only trouble; Bonnet in Asturias was holding
Oviedo and the district immediately round it with a strong division,
which varied at one time and another from 6,000 to 8,000 men. He was
very useful in his present position, because he cut the Spanish line of
defence along the north coast in two, and because he seemed to threaten
Galicia from the north-east. The threat was not a very real one, for
he had not enough men to deliver an attack on eastern Galicia and at
the same time to hold Oviedo and its neighbourhood. But he was a source
of trouble as well as of strength to his superiors, for it was very
difficult to keep in touch with him through the pass of Pajares, and
if he were to be attacked at once by the Galicians and by a British
landing-force, his position would be a very dangerous one. He had
been put to great trouble by Renovales’s naval expedition in October
1810[267], though this was but a small force and had not received any
real help from Galicia along the land side. Bessières, after he had
been a few months in authority, was inclined to withdraw Bonnet to
the south side of the sierras, and to abandon Oviedo, but was warned
against such a move by his master, who said that this would be ‘a
detestable operation,’ as it would relieve Galicia from the threat of
invasion, allow of the re-formation of a Junta and an army in Asturias,
and necessitate a heavy concentration at Santander[268]. Nevertheless
the Marshal did at one crisis withdraw the division from Oviedo.

  [267] See vol. iii. pp. 486-7.

  [268] _Correspondance_, no. 17,785, 8th June, 1811.

Between Bonnet in the Asturias and Ciudad Rodrigo, the long front
against Galicia was occupied by a single weak French division, that
of Serras, whose head quarters were at Benavente, his advanced post
at Astorga, and his flank-guards at Leon and Zamora[269]. If the army
of Galicia had been in good order this force would have been in great
danger, for it was not strong enough to hold the ground allotted to it.
But when Del Parque in 1809 drew off to Estremadura the old Army of
the North, he had left behind him only a few skeleton corps, and the
best of these had been destroyed in defending Astorga in the following
year. The formation of a new Galician army of 20,000 men had been
decreed, and the _cadres_ left behind in the country had been filled up
in 1810, but the results were not satisfactory. The Captain-General,
Mahy, was a man of little energy, and spent most of it in quarrels
with the local Junta, whom he accused of conspiracy against him, and
charged with secret correspondence with La Romana and his party. He
seized their letters in the post and imprisoned two members, whereupon
riots broke out, and complaints were sent to the Regency at Cadiz. This
led to Mahy’s recall, and the captain-generalship was given to the
Duke of Albuquerque, then on his mission to London. He died without
having returned to Spain, so that the appointment was nugatory, and
the Regency then gave it to Castaños, who was at the same time made
Captain-General of Estremadura, after the death of La Romana and the
disaster at the Gebora. Castaños went to the Tagus, to rally the poor
remnants of the Estremaduran army, and while retaining the nominal
command in Galicia never visited that province, but deputed the command
in it to Santocildes, the young general who had so bravely defended
Astorga in the preceding spring. He had been sent prisoner to France,
but was adroit enough to escape from his captivity, and to make his
way back to Corunna. His appointment was popular, but he got no great
service out of the Galician army, which was in a deplorable condition,
and hopelessly scattered. The Junta kept many battalions to garrison
the harbour-fortresses of Corunna, Vigo, and Ferrol, and the main
body, whose head quarters lay at Villafranca in the Vierzo, did not
amount to more than 7,000 men, destitute of cavalry (which Galicia
could never produce) and very poorly provided with artillery. There was
another division, under General Cabrera, some 4,000 strong, at Puebla
de Senabria, and a third under Barcena and Losada on the borders of
the Asturias, opposite Bonnet. The whole did not amount to 16,000 raw
troops--yet this was sufficient to hold Serras in observation and to
watch Bonnet, who was too much distracted by the Cantabrian bands to
be really dangerous. But in the spring of 1811 the Galicians could do
no more, and Wellington was much chagrined to find that he could get
no effective assistance from them, after he had driven Masséna behind
the Agueda, and so shaken the hold of the French on the whole kingdom
of Leon. It was not till June that Santocildes found it possible
to descend from the hills and threaten Serras. This led to a petty
campaign about Astorga and on the Orbigo river, which will be narrated
in its due place.