

On the afternoon following the combat of Sabugal, Masséna abandoned
the line of the Coa, drawing back the 6th Corps to join the other two
at Alfayates. Next morning (April 4) at early dawn the whole army made
a forced march to the rear, for there seemed every probability that
Wellington would appear, to force on a general action, during the
course of the day, and it was necessary to avoid the chance of being
thrust against the Sierra de Gata, and cut off from Ciudad Rodrigo.
Accordingly the 2nd Corps covered more than twenty miles, and did not
halt till it had reached Fuentes de Oñoro; the 6th Corps, marching a
less distance, halted at Fuente Guinaldo on the direct road to Ciudad
Rodrigo. The 8th Corps, on a road between the other two, stopped at
Campillo; the reserve cavalry of Montbrun, which was in such bad
condition that it had to be covered by the infantry, instead of acting
as their screen, drew back to El Bodon, and other villages in the
immediate vicinity of Rodrigo. By this movement Masséna recovered his
communication with the 9th Corps, which still lay on the Turon near
Almeida, for the 2nd Corps was now within fifteen miles of Drouet’s
head quarters at Val de Mula, while the 6th and 8th Corps covered
the roads to Ciudad Rodrigo. On the following day (April 5) the two
last-named corps drew back to Carpio, Marialva, and other places within
a few miles of that fortress, but the 2nd Corps remained at Fuentes de
Oñoro, in order to keep touch with the 9th till the latter should have
evacuated a position which had now become dangerous and over-advanced.
For if Masséna went back to the Agueda, Drouet could not linger near
Almeida, lest he should be cut off from the main army.

Meanwhile Wellington had occupied on the 4th Masséna’s old head
quarters at Alfayates, and sent forward his cavalry to Albergaria,
Alamedilla, and other villages, where they came in touch with the
outposts of the 2nd and 8th Corps. The Light Division felt for any
traces of the French at Val de Espinha and Quadraseis, and finding
none pushed on to Alfayates. The 1st and 3rd Divisions came to that
place also on the next day. By that evening (April 5) it was certain
that Masséna was falling back to Ciudad Rodrigo, perhaps even further
to the rear. The state of his army, of which Wellington had ample
evidence from the capture of more sick, stragglers, and baggage during
this and the two next days[253], rendered it extremely likely that the
French would not be able to halt till they reached their magazines
at Salamanca. The British general had no intention of following the
enemy far into Spain; he had again outmarched his supplies, for the
new base at Coimbra had only just been established, and convoys from
it were coming in slowly and with great delays, since they had to be
brought up over the wasted and depopulated region which the French
had just evacuated. Till he had some magazines accumulated nearer the
frontier, he could not dream of a serious offensive movement into Leon.
His letters at this time are full of laments as to the state of the
Portuguese troops, especially of the brigades which were fed by their
own commissariat. They had dropped so many sick and stragglers in the
advance, that on April 8th they were 2,500 short of the number with
which they had started from the Lines of Torres Vedras: the brigade
in the 5th Division had fallen to 1,061 rank and file from 1,400
with which it had set out--that in the 3rd Division to 1,190 from
1,319. Pack’s brigade had been left behind on the Mondego from sheer
inability to march, and had not been able to join in the Guarda and
Sabugal operations[254]. It was necessary to wait till the ranks were
fuller--the men were not lost but left behind exhausted, and could be
collected when a systematic supply of food was procurable. The allied
army could not dream of entering Spain with the intention of living by
plunder and requisitions, as the French habitually did.