

  [285] Sometimes on absolutely false information, due to the
  Emperor’s vast distance from the theatre of war leading him to
  make hypotheses which had been falsified, because of the mistaken
  premises on which he grounded them. For example, on March 30,
  1811, he told Berthier that Masséna’s head quarters were at
  Coimbra, and that a detachment of his army occupied Oporto, and
  these ‘news’ were to be sent on to Soult (_Correspondance_,
  17,531). On that day Masséna was already behind the Coa on his
  retreat to Ciudad Rodrigo.

  [286] Compare the dispatches of March 30, where it is
  demonstrated that Soult has nothing to fear for Badajoz, because
  Wellington cannot detach more than 15,000 men against it,
  and that of December 12, where it is demonstrated that Soult
  having 80,000 men should be ashamed of himself for allowing the
  ‘affront’ of Arroyo dos Molinos to be put upon him by Hill and
  6,000 British.

  [287] ‘Il ne faut pas se diviser: il faut réunir ses forces,
  présenter des masses imposantes: toutes les troupes qu’on
  laisse en arrière courent le risque d’être battues en détail,
  ou forcées d’abandonner les postes,’ &c. Napoleon to Soult,
  _Correspondance_, December 6, 1811.

It was useless, therefore, for the Emperor to reiterate his orders
that his marshals were to join their armies and ‘livrer enfin une
belle bataille’ against Wellington[288]. It takes two sides to fight a
battle, and Wellington was determined never to accept a general action,
when the numbers were hopelessly against him. He would give back into
Portugal, and the enemy could not follow him for more than a march or
two.

  [288] Napoleon to Berthier; orders for Bessières and Marmont of
  May 26, 1811.

Meanwhile, though he could not undertake to descend himself into
Portugal, Napoleon did not cease to pour troops across the Pyrenees.
It is often said that after Masséna’s expedition of 1810 he began to
neglect the Peninsula, and to turn all his thoughts towards the growing
tension with Russia. This is not correct; it ignores the fact that the
French armies in Spain rose to their highest numbers during the year
1811. While not ceasing to send their regular drafts to all the corps
there engaged, the Emperor dispatched three new divisions of his best
troops to the front during the summer. These were no collections of
newly-raised fourth battalions or _régiments de marche_, but old units
of high reputation, drawn partly from the Army of Italy, partly from
the garrisons of the coasts of France. One division, under General
Souham, ultimately went to join the Army of Portugal, the second, under
General Caffarelli, was absorbed in the Army of the North, the third,
under General Reille, was sent to reinforce the garrison of Navarre
and Aragon, where Suchet wanted fresh troops to occupy the land behind
him, when he was pushing forward towards Catalonia and Valencia. In
addition, two fresh regiments of Italian troops were requisitioned from
the Viceroy Eugène Beauharnais for service in eastern Spain[289]. The
total reinforcement to the armies beyond the Pyrenees amounted to some
25,000 men, in addition to the regular annual draft of conscripts. The
deficit in the strength of the French forces caused by Masséna’s losses
in Portugal was more than made up, and the gross total in October 1811
amounted to no less than 368,000 men. Nothing was withdrawn from the
Peninsula till the following winter.