

  [296] This narrative of the fall of Tortosa is mainly derived
  from the sources given by Arteche, especially Yriarte’s
  narrative, and from Schepeler and Vacani. These in some details
  differ from Suchet’s story repeated by Belmas, though there is
  no fundamental discrepancy. But it is clear that Alacha was
  even more to blame than the French versions would give us to
  understand.

  [297] Vacani, iv. 420-1.

In this disgraceful way fell Tortosa, after only eighteen days of
siege, twelve of open trenches, and four of bombardment. The French
lost no more than 400 men, nearly half of them among the sappers and
artillerymen[298], for the infantry only suffered in repelling the
sorties. The Spaniards had about 1,400 killed and wounded, but as the
garrison marched out only 3,974 strong and had started with 7,179,
it is clear that there had been other wastage. During the last days
of the siege the Urban Guard disappeared, and the commanders of the
regular troops were complaining bitterly of desertion among their men.
Indeed, from the governor downwards, there seems to have been too much
demoralization in all ranks. The second in command, Yriarte, and many
other officers did their duty, but the defence was not what might
have been expected from Catalans, with the example of Gerona before
their eyes. From the start Suchet had the mastery, and largely owing
to the mismanagement of his adversaries; if (for example) they had
kept proper watch, he would never have been able to start his first
parallel at the distance of only 160 yards from the walls--this piece
of luck saved him many days of work. But if the defence was unskilful,
and anything rather than resolute, the main responsibility falls on
the governor, whose conduct was calculated to discourage even the most
zealous subordinates. For he sometimes pleaded his age and infirmity,
and declared that he handed over all responsibility to the second in
command, shutting himself up in the castle for whole days at a time;
but on other occasions he interfered in details, countermanded orders,
and practically resumed charge of the defence. But to call a council
of war, to receive its opinion in favour of protracted defence, and
then to capitulate behind its back was worst of all. Such conduct
was absolutely ignominious, and it was not without reason that the
Catalan Junta ordered him to be tried (in his absence) for cowardice
and treason. He was condemned to death, and the sentence (grotesquely
enough) carried out upon his effigy, while he was safe in France, a
prisoner on parole.

  [298] The figures of 400 killed and wounded given by Belmas seem
  very low, but are borne out by the invaluable lists in Martinien,
  who shows that only some thirty officers were killed or wounded
  at Tortosa, of whom twelve belonged to the engineers, artillery,
  and sappers. Thirty officers hit imply (at the usual rate of one
  to twenty men) 600 casualties, but it is very possible that there
  were no more than 400 and odd, for the engineer officers, of whom
  six were killed or hurt, ran special risks.