

  [314] The consumption of the Estremos magazines by Mendizabal’s
  men will be found mentioned in the pamphlet (written under
  Beresford’s direction) called ‘Strictures on Napier’s Peninsular
  War’ [London, 1832]. ‘When the Marshal (Beresford) put his
  corps in motion from the Tagus he was informed that the British
  Commissary in the Alemtejo had from 200,000 to 300,000 rations
  in store for his use. But this officer had also been ordered to
  supply the Spanish division lately in that province, and (most
  incautiously) issued for its service whatever its commander
  required. Owing to this inadvertence on the part of the
  Commissary (whose name, I think, was Thompson), when Marshal
  Beresford arrived the store was _absolutely empty_’ [p. 61].
  His name _was_ Thompson, and he was immediately superseded by
  Wellington’s order (_Dispatches_, vii. 426).

Campo Mayor was an old-fashioned fortress, which had not been
remodelled since the War of the Spanish Succession, its greatest
weakness was that an outlying fort (São João), only 200 yards from the
walls in a commanding position, had been dismantled, but not blown
up and levelled to the ground. It overlooked one of the bastions of
the place, and had only to be seized in order to provide an admirable
starting-place for operations against the enceinte. No serious
attention had been paid to Campo Mayor of late, the much stronger place
of Elvas, only eleven miles away, having absorbed all the attention of
the Portuguese government. The Spaniards had been garrisoning it for
the last six months, but when they hastily departed the Governor of
Elvas threw into it half a battalion of the Portalegre Militia (about
300 men) and a company of artillery. This handful of men, aided by the
Ordenança of the place, were all that were at the disposition of the
very gallant and resourceful old engineer officer, Major José Joaquim
Talaya, who was left in charge of the place. As the population was
under 3,000 souls, the levy of the Ordenança cannot have amounted to
more than 300 men, and many of these (as was still the case in most
parts of Portugal) had no firearms, but only pikes. But the chief
magistrate (_juiz de fora_), José Carvalho, served at the head of them
with great energy, and we are assured that (contrary to what might
have been expected) the citizens took a more creditable part than the
militiamen in the defence[315].

  [315] Soriano da Luz, iii. pp. 531-2.

With no regulars save the company of artillery, and no more than 800
men in all to protect a long enceinte, it might have been expected that
Talaya could make no defence at all--indeed he might have evacuated
the place without any blame. But being a man of fine resolution, and
recognizing the fact that he was doing the greatest possible service
by detaining 7,000 French before his walls, and thereby covering Elvas
and allowing time for Beresford to arrive, he resolved to hold out as
long as possible. The French seized Fort São João on the night of their
arrival (March 14th) and opened trenches on each side of it, commencing
at the same time three batteries, of which two were sheltered by the
dismantled work. Next morning two of these works were in a position to
open fire on the town, since the heavy guns for them had only to come
from Badajoz, a mere nine miles away.