

  [335] This must have been Wellington’s Celorico dispatch of March
  30, saying that ‘between chevalets (trestles), boats, Spanish and
  English pontoons, and a ford, I should hope that the Guadiana may
  be passed in safety’ (_Dispatches_, vii. 414.)

  [336] D’Urban’s _Narrative_, p. 10.

  [337] Beresford maintained that troops on the right bank could
  be protected by the fire of the guns of Jerumenha, which is in
  a lofty position, commanding the Spanish shore. But they would
  have been of little use if the French had attacked at night.
  (_Strictures on Napier_, p. 177.)

During the 6th Hamilton’s Portuguese passed with infinite slowness
on the flying bridges, and the cask and pontoon bridge being at last
completed, Cole’s 4th Division and Long’s cavalry began to file over
it at dusk, an operation so tedious that the last of them were not
over till the following dawn. Ere they were all across a ‘regrettable
incident’ occurred: the advanced cavalry pickets were formed on the
night of the 6th-7th by Major Morris’s squadron of the 13th Light
Dragoons. Owing to bad staff work in the placing of them (as D’Urban
and General Long both assert), the main guard of this squadron was
surprised by French cavalry in the dusk of the morning, and captured
almost entire, two officers and fifty men being taken. The assailants
found that they had run into the camp of a whole army, and promptly
retired before they could be touched.

At last Latour-Maubourg had given signs of life; this reconnaissance
had been conducted by a flying column of two cavalry regiments and
four battalions, under General Veilland, sent out to Olivenza from the
camp of Girard’s division, with the very tardy purpose of hindering
Beresford’s passage. Veilland reported to his chief that the enemy was
across in such strength that he could do nothing. The appearance of
20,000 men on the Spanish bank of the Guadiana, so far to the south
of Badajoz, placed Latour-Maubourg in a very delicate position: if he
stayed twenty-four hours longer in his present camp close to Badajoz,
he lost his communications with Andalusia, and might be pushed eastward
up the Guadiana, out of touch with Soult, and having no retreat save
towards the distant Army of the Centre. It was even possible that a
rapid advance of the Allies might drive him into Badajoz, the last
thing that he would desire. Accordingly he concentrated at Albuera,
twelve miles south of that fortress, as a preliminary move, and
prepared to fall back from thence by the great southern _chaussée_,
towards Llerena and the Sierra Morena, where he would preserve, and
shorten, his line of communication with Soult. Phillipon was left
with 3,000 men in Badajoz, which was now quite beyond danger from a
_coup de main_, and able to take care of itself for some weeks, till
reinforcements should come up from Andalusia for its relief. With great
unwisdom Latour-Maubourg left Olivenza garrisoned also; it was, as
had been shown in January, contemptible as a fortress, even when held
by a large force, and the French general placed in it only a single
weak battalion of under 400 men. There were still on the walls the
few guns that had been taken from the Spaniards--no more than fifteen
were mounted, and several of these only on makeshift carriages. Why
Latour-Maubourg chose to sacrifice a battalion it is hard to see;
Napoleon wrote to Soult a month later to condemn the policy of small
garrisons in the strongest terms[338]. At the best Olivenza, when
so weakly held, could not hold out for more than a few days, and if
Beresford had tried to rush it by escalade, when first he arrived
before its walls, he must undoubtedly have succeeded, for 400 men
cannot defend three miles of enceinte against a serious assault. There
were some magazines in the place, and a small hospital of sick, who
could not be removed[339]. But it was obviously absurd to throw away a
battalion of sound men to keep them from capture for a few days. It has
been suggested that Latour-Maubourg merely wanted to gain time[340];
but the time gained was trifling--Olivenza only held out five days--and
might have fallen much sooner.