

  [345] These were the companies of Bredin, Baynes, Raynsford, and
  Glubb; see vol. iii. p. 559.

  [346] Dickson, _Journal_, pp. 405, 448.

The space of time before the siege-train for Badajoz could be got ready
was employed by Beresford in clearing southern Estremadura of the
enemy. Having left a brigade of the 2nd Division at Talavera Real, a
battalion of the Lusitanian Legion (from Cole’s division) in Olivenza,
and some squadrons of Portuguese cavalry round the southern front of
Badajoz, to watch the garrison, the army marched for Santa Marta and
Zafra, on the high-road to Seville, with its own cavalry in front, and
Penne Villemur’s Spanish squadrons on the left (April 16th-18th). The
bulk of the infantry went no further forward, because Latour-Maubourg
withdrew into the Sierra Morena on the rumour of its approach. The
cavalry continued the pursuit--at Los Santos on the 16th its leading
regiment, the 13th Light Dragoons, had a smart affair with the French
rearguard (2nd Hussars), and routed it with the loss of three officers
and many men[347]. After this Latour-Maubourg never stopped till he had
reached Guadalcanal, on the borders of Andalusia, evacuating Llerena
and the other towns on the Estremaduran slope of the mountains (April
19th). Beresford thereupon left his British cavalry at Zafra, and
Penne Villemur at Llerena, to watch the passes, while he drew back his
infantry divisions to take in hand the siege of Badajoz (April 20th),
with the exception of the brigade of Colborne, which was sent out with
some Spanish horse to demonstrate against Latour-Maubourg, and to drive
him still further southward if he showed signs of irresolution.

  [347] Long says that the 13th took about 150 prisoners
  (_Vindication_, p. 104), but the French accounts do not
  acknowledge anything like such loss.

While these operations were in progress, there was a short and
unexpected diversion in the extreme south-west corner of Estremadura,
caused by the appearance of an outlying French column in that quarter,
which had no connexion with Latour-Maubourg. A word as to this is
necessary, since its result was to bring a new Spanish force into
Beresford’s sphere of operations. When Soult returned to Andalusia
in the middle of March, his first care was to drive off Ballasteros
and the other detachments which had been threatening Seville in his
absence. They gave back into the Condado de Niebla, as has already been
mentioned. But at the end of the month the situation was complicated
by the news that an expedition from Cadiz, the division of Zayas,
had landed at Moguer, in the estuary of the Rio Tinto, and seemed
about to join Ballasteros. If this junction had been made, the force
collected in the west would have been too large to be safely neglected.
Wherefore Soult sent out General Maransin and the Prince of Aremberg,
the former with seven battalions of Gazan’s division, and the latter
with two cavalry regiments, to attack the Spaniards. At the approach
of this column of 4,500 men Zayas re-embarked, losing 300 men from
his rearguard in so doing (April 1). Ballasteros retired into the
mountains. Maransin thought it his duty to endeavour to make an end
of this active and elusive adversary, whose constant appearances and
reappearances on the flank of Seville had caused so much trouble.
Sending back his cavalry and guns, he plunged into the hills with
his infantry, and for twelve days hunted Ballasteros up and down the
rugged upper valleys of the Odiel and the Rio Tinto. On April 12th
Ballasteros, gradually pushed northward, came down to Fregenal, on the
borders of Estremadura, where he offered battle, but was beaten, and
fled to Xeres de los Caballeros. Maransin pursued, and reached that
place on the 11th, while Ballasteros retired to Salvatierra de los
Barros, not far from Santa Marta, and close on the flank of Beresford’s
army. Maransin, who had long been cut off from touch with other French
detachments, was wholly unaware that he had run into the neighbourhood
of a British force, and would have been captured, or defeated, if he
had stayed a day longer at Xeres, for Ballasteros had called for help
to Beresford, and the latter was preparing to throw two divisions upon
his flank and rear[348]. Letters from Latour-Maubourg to Maransin,
to warn him of his danger, were intercepted by the guerrilleros and
sent to the British camp[349]. But an _Afrancesado_, one of the
principal inhabitants of Xeres, warned the French general just before
it was too late: and, hastily leaving his position at night, Maransin
retired into Andalusia via Fregenal and Aracena, and ultimately joined
Latour-Maubourg by a circuitous route.