

  [338] _Correspondance_, xxi. 146: ‘Vous voyez que ce que j’avais
  prévu est arrivé, qu’on a eu la simplicité de laisser du monde
  dans Olivenza, et de faire prendre là 300 hommes,’ &c. This
  was alluding to an earlier order to Soult not to make small
  detachments, and to blow up Olivenza.

  [339] Ninety-eight sick attended by sixteen surgeons were
  comprised in the surrender on April 15th.

  [340] This is Lapéne’s view, who says that the 400 gallant men
  were knowingly sacrificed in this hope: ‘L’intérêt de l’armée a
  demandé le sacrifice’ (p. 146).

Beresford’s train and guns having joined him beyond the river on
March 8th, he moved to Olivenza on the 9th, in an order of march
ready to deploy into an order of battle in case Latour-Maubourg
should turn up with his small field force. The town was summoned on
the same afternoon, and when the governor refused to surrender, the
4th Division, still almost unable to move for want of the shoes which
were daily expected from Lisbon, was left to besiege it, with the aid
of heavy guns to be brought from Elvas, only fifteen miles away. The
extreme weakness of the garrison was not known, or the Marshal would
not have wasted time by ordering regular approaches to be made. The
rest of the army bivouacked on the Badajoz road a few miles beyond
Olivenza, and on the following day occupied Valverde, and pushed its
cavalry to Albuera, cutting the _chaussée_ between Badajoz and Seville.
No enemy could be found, and it was ascertained that Latour-Maubourg’s
rearguard was at Santa Marta, ten miles to the south, and the rest
of his troops far beyond it. On the 11th the infantry, minus the 4th
Division, were at Albuera, while the bulk of the cavalry marched to
find out how far southward the enemy was ready to withdraw.

Central Estremadura, at any rate, was now in Beresford’s hands, and
he was in a position to carry out Wellington’s orders to drive the
5th Corps over the Sierra Morena and invest Badajoz. In accordance
with his instructions he had seen Castaños on March 30th, and settled
with him that the wrecks of the old Army of Estremadura--now about
1,000 horse and 3,000 foot--should join in the campaign. Castaños, who
showed himself both eager and obliging, had promised that his infantry
should seize the bridge of Merida, and that, when it was occupied,
his cavalry, under Penne Villemur, should join in the movement to
sweep Latour-Maubourg over the mountains, operating on the eastern
road (Merida-Ribera-Usagre-Llerena), while the allied cavalry took
the western one (Albuera-Los Santos-Fuente Cantos-Monasterio). These
promises were carried out: Morillo’s infantry division occupied
Merida on the 10th, and next day Penne Villemur’s cavalry had reached
Almendralejo.

The siege of Olivenza gave little trouble. The only difficulty was the
improvising of a siege-train, even on the very modest scale required to
deal with such a weak place. It was invested, as we have seen, on the
9th. On the 10th Major Alexander Dickson of the Portuguese artillery,
and Captain Squire of the Engineers reconnoitred the place, and
determined that the proper starting-point for the attack was the same
ruined lunette, outside the walls, which the French had chosen as their
first base in January. On the night of the 11th this point was occupied
with the loss of one man only, killed by the enemy’s ill-directed fire.
A battery for six guns was constructed in the gorge of the ruined work,
but the pieces themselves, which Dickson went to choose from Elvas, did
not arrive till the 14th; the cask-bridge at Jerumenha being too weak
to bear them, they and their ammunition had to be ferried over on the
flying bridges. The six 24-pounders were placed in position that same
night. At daybreak they opened, and by the time that they had fired
seventy rounds each, long ere noon, a practicable breach was made in
the nearest bastion. Thereupon the governor, seeing that to have stood
an assault with his handful of men would have been madness, surrendered
at discretion. He marched out with only 9 officers and 357 men under
arms, giving up also 96 sick, and some commissaries and medical
officers. Several of his miserable stock of fifteen guns were found to
be practically useless save to make a noise, for (as has already been
mentioned) they were fixed not on proper carriages, but on the main
timbers and wheels of ox-carts, and could not be elevated or depressed.
The governor deserves some credit for having held out five days; if the
Allies had been aware of the weakness of the garrison, they would have
swamped it at once by an escalade.