

  [348] D’Urban visited Ballasteros’s camp on the 14th and settled
  with him all the details of a joint march against Maransin
  (whom they wrongly supposed to be d’Aremberg, not knowing that
  the latter had returned to Seville with the cavalry). ‘If
  d’Aremberg takes the bait, and follows Ballasteros, he must be
  lost altogether; even if he halts at Xeres we ought to get hold
  of him,’ writes D’Urban in his diary. But Maransin fled on the
  morning of the 15th.

  [349] D’Urban’s diary under the 17th April.

Ballasteros stayed behind in Estremadura, and the allied force in
that province was strengthened by his 3,500 men. But this was not
all: the Regency at Cadiz resolved to place a considerable army in
this direction, their own city being more than amply garrisoned, and
expeditions to the south being unpopular since the fiasco that followed
Barrosa. On April 25th General Blake took the two divisions of Zayas
and Lardizabal (both of which had fought at Barrosa), and landed with
them at Ayamonte, the port in the mouth of the Guadiana. From thence he
moved up along the Portuguese frontier, and joined Ballasteros near
Xeres de los Caballeros about a fortnight later. Between them they had
over 10,000 infantry and about 800 cavalry, but few guns, for Blake
found it difficult to horse the batteries that he had brought with
him, and left all save six pieces behind, at Ayamonte, to follow when
they could procure teams. They had not rejoined him four weeks later,
when the battle of Albuera was fought. The presence of Blake was not
altogether an unmixed benefit, for he was independent of Castaños,
who commanded the ‘5th Army’ or old Estremaduran force, and the two
generals were ancient rivals and did not seem likely to co-operate with
any cordiality. But if Soult was to make his appearance for the relief
of Badajoz, it was as well that the Allies should be as strong as
possible on the front by which he must attack.

Before, however, Blake had arrived in Estremadura, the investment of
Badajoz had begun. It was directed by Wellington himself, who dropped
suddenly into the middle of the campaign on the 20th, when he arrived
at Elvas. Having seen Masséna retreat to Salamanca, and break up his
army into cantonments, he now considered that it was safe for him to
pay the visit to the south which he had always projected. Leaving
Sabugal on April 16th, he rode across country by Castello Branco and
Niza, and reached Elvas on the fifth night. The next day but one he
conducted a reconnaissance of Badajoz, escorted by a brigade newly
landed at Lisbon, which he had ordered to join Beresford--Alten’s two
light battalions of the King’s German Legion. The examination of the
defences of the fortress was made under some difficulties, for at the
moment when Wellington was riding round the walls a large working
party of the garrison, which had been dispatched to cut timber in
the woods to the south, was returning into the place. Phillipon, the
governor, thinking that Wellington’s escort was a detachment sent
to cut off his workmen, came hastily out of the fortress with three
battalions, and swept off the high-road two companies of the Germans
who were accompanying the head-quarters’ staff, with the loss of fifty
or sixty men. The working party hurried to join their friends, and got
into the gate before the main body of Alten’s brigade could come up.
This interruption being over, Wellington completed his survey of the
whole circuit of Badajoz, and on the next day (April 23rd) issued
elaborate orders to Beresford, concerning the policy to be observed in
Estremadura during the siege. He had never intended to stay more than a
few days in the south, to supervise affairs, and on the 25th a dispatch
received from Sir Brent Spencer, the senior officer left with the
main army in the north, reported such activity of the French in that
direction that he rode hard for the frontiers of Leon, where he arrived
on the 29th.