

On the next morning (April 16th) Cole and the 4th Division, who had
at last received their much-needed supply of shoes, marched to join
the rest of the army. A Portuguese garrison was thrown into Olivenza,
but there was no intention to hold it, if the enemy should come up
again. It was only a man-trap. Beresford might now have invested
Badajoz, if it had pleased him so to do. But he thought it better to
drive Latour-Maubourg completely out of Estremadura, and across the
Sierra Morena, before taking the siege in hand. The main reason for his
resolve was that it was clear that a week or ten days at least would be
required to organize a battering-train at Elvas, for the bombardment
and breaching of the fortress, and he thought it more profitable to
spend this interval in pushing the French as far from Badajoz as
possible, rather than in sitting down before it to no purpose, and
waiting for the appearance of the siege-train. It was apparently an
omission on Wellington’s part not to have ordered General Leite, the
governor of Elvas, to begin making preparations for the gathering of a
park and the collection of a large body of artillerymen, on the same
day that he finally launched Beresford’s[341] force into Estremadura
(March 16). But this had not been done, and it was not till April 18th
that Major Alexander Dickson, who had already learnt what was available
in Elvas while organizing the little train required for the capture
of Olivenza, was directed to take in hand the much larger and more
difficult task of collecting the men and material destined for the
siege of a first-class fortress[342]. This delay seems extraordinary:
did Wellington think on March 16th that Badajoz, only five days in
the hands of the French at the moment, would be incapable of defence
when Beresford should appear in front of it about the 25th of that
same month? It is quite possible that this would have been the case,
and that the French would have blown it up, if the Jerumenha bridge
had been standing ready for the passage of the army on the next day,
as Wellington had supposed. The _Dispatches_ give us no help on this
point; Wellington speaks of investing Badajoz, but gives no hint as
to how the investment was to be followed up, till March 27th, when he
observes to Beresford that ‘Elvas must supply the means for the attack
on Badajoz, if possible; if it has them not, I must send them there;
this will take time, but that cannot be avoided[343].’

  [341] Dickson’s _Journals_, recently published by Major Leslie,
  R.A., are the first and most important source in which to study
  the two early British sieges of Badajoz, as well as the smaller
  matter of Olivenza. I am using them perpetually all through the
  following pages.

  [342] This date is that given by D’Urban’s _Journal_.

  [343] _Dispatches_, vii. 407. From Gouvea, March 27.

Elvas, as matters turned out, did ‘supply the means,’ but the resources
to be found there were so limited that, as was wittily said at the time
by Picton, Wellington, both in May and in June 1811, ‘sued Badajoz _in
forma pauperis_,’ and if the place had fallen it would have been almost
a miracle, for no sufficient material to ensure its capture had been
collected even by the month of June. The main difficulty arose from the
fact that Wellington had never been provided by his Government with a
siege-train. Looking upon the war in Portugal as essentially defensive
in character, the Home authorities had forgotten that it might have
offensive episodes, and that a great siege might not impossibly be one
of them. The British army in Portugal possessed nothing in the way of
artillery save the ordinary horse and field batteries (or ‘troops’ and
‘companies’ as they were then called), with their 3, 6, and 9-pounder
guns. If a few hundred men were told off to heavy pieces in the Lisbon
lines during the preceding autumn, it was not that they were intended
for such service--they were parts of incomplete or unhorsed batteries,
which had not taken the field when the campaign of 1810 began, and
were waiting to complete their equipment. The British army in Portugal
was absolutely destitute of artillery destined for and trained to the
working of siege-guns. The only British pieces of heavy calibre used
in the spring of 1811 were ships’ cannon lent by the commander of the
squadron in the Tagus.