

Beresford’s delay in crossing the Guadiana, therefore, was unfortunate,
but apparently inevitable, and there seems no reason to blame him for
it. On April 3rd the engineers reported that the bridge at Jerumenha
would be ready that evening, and the three divisions concentrated on
the left bank: the water was low, and a difficult ford for cavalry had
been found above the bridge, by which a squadron of dragoons passed,
and established a chain of pickets on the Spanish side. No French were
seen abroad, though it was discovered that they still had a garrison
in Olivenza, only six miles away. It is difficult to make out why no
attempt was made to obstruct the building of Beresford’s bridge--the
enemy had five regiments of cavalry in Estremadura, and 6,000 infantry
of Girard’s division were available for field service. Even a small
detachment with some guns would have made it impossible for the
British engineers to complete their work. But the Allies found a great
advantage in the fact that Mortier had just received orders to return
to Paris, and had on March 26th handed over the command of all the
troops on the Guadiana to Latour-Maubourg, who was a good divisional
general on the battlefield, but a very indifferent strategist. All
his manœuvres during the following month were weak and confused. How
it came that from the 30th of March to the 7th of April no French
cavalry were seen opposite Jerumenha, much less any serious force
sent to disturb the bridge-building, it is impossible to conceive. By
all accounts the horsemen who should have been in front of Olivenza
were at this time mainly employed in scouring the villages of Central
Estremadura for cattle and corn, and escorting what they could seize
into Badajoz and the camp of Girard’s division.

On the morning of March 4th, when the allied troops should have crossed
the Guadiana, Beresford was brought the untoward news that the river
had risen three feet in the night, had swept away the trestles, and
forced the engineers to draw back the five pontoon boats in the central
stream to the Portuguese bank. The squadron beyond the river was cut
off from the army, and communication with it was only restored during
the day, by rigging up a flying bridge composed of a raft and a rope.
The cavalry ford above the destroyed bridge was of course impassable.
Throughout the 4th and 5th the water continued to rise, from storms
higher up the river apparently, for there was no rain at Jerumenha.

The position was exasperating to the highest degree. ‘Establishing a
permanent bridge is out of the question,’ writes D’Urban, the chief
of the staff, in his journal. ‘The means are anything but secure
either for passing the army (tedious beyond measure, too, no doubt),
or for establishing a communication afterwards for supplies and other
purposes. Nevertheless the general state of things, and above all
Lord Wellington’s reiterated orders received this morning, render it
necessary to pass[335].’ The engineers, put upon their mettle, finally
made the five Spanish pontoon boats into two flying bridges worked by
ropes. On these a battalion of infantry was passed across the river,
and stockaded itself on the other side. Later in the day (April 5) some
small tin pontoons arrived from Lisbon, and out of these, helped by
all the wine-casks of the neighbouring villages, collected in haste,
a floating bridge was constructed, ‘not very substantial, but, upon
trial, found capable of admitting infantry to pass in file[336].’ It
was not ready till noon on the 6th, but by the two flying bridges the
whole 2nd Division and three squadrons of cavalry were passed on the
night of the 5th-6th. What might have happened it Latour-Maubourg
had concentrated at Olivenza, and fallen on the first two or three
battalions that crossed with a force of all arms, we had better not
inquire[337]. A disaster on a small scale might very possibly have
occurred. But not a Frenchman was seen.