

  [333] Napier censures Beresford for not crossing at Merida,
  thirty miles east of Badajoz. But (1) Wellington’s orders
  directed him to use Jerumenha; (2) to march to Merida would have
  been to pass across the front of an enemy who had a bridge-head
  at Badajoz, from which he could push out detachments to cut the
  line of communication, Campo Mayor to Merida; (3) Elvas was the
  only possible base, and the only place where magazines could be
  safely formed, or munitions, siege artillery, &c., procured; (4)
  the road Campo Mayor-Merida was very bad; (5) Merida was within
  reach of the French Army of the Centre, which had detachments at
  Truxillo and Almaraz.

The delay of a week thus caused was of the less importance, however,
because of another contretemps. There were no stores ready to feed the
army when it should cross the Guadiana. The 200,000 rations at Estremos
which Wellington (as it will be remembered) had promised to Beresford,
were found to have been entirely consumed by the wreck of Mendizabal’s
army, who had been lying there for the last three weeks. There was
nothing to lade upon the mules and carts of the expeditionary force;
the troops were in great difficulties from day to day, ate the 8,000
rations at Campo Mayor, and were finally forced to indent upon the
stores of the garrison of Elvas, which ought to have been sacred to the
defence of the town.

Lastly, and this was perhaps the most important of all, the shoes of
the 4th Division, which had marched continuously from the 6th to the
22nd of March, first from the Lines to Espinhal, and then from Espinhal
to Portalegre, were completely worn out. Cole protested against the
division being moved till it was reshod. No footgear could be found
at Elvas, and though an immediate requisition was sent to Lisbon,
the convoy bringing the shoes would obviously take a week or so to
get up[334]. From the 26th of March to the 3rd of April Beresford
was perforce immovable. This loss of eight days was apparently the
reason why Badajoz did not fall into his hands a little later, for the
fortifications, which were still in a dangerous state of disrepair
on the 25th, were practically tenable by the second week in April.
The stores in the fortress were a less important matter. Imaz when
he surrendered had over a month’s rations for 9,000 men, which, even
when a certain amount had been consumed by Soult’s field army, left
a nucleus sufficient to keep the garrison of 3,000 men placed in the
town by Mortier out of need for many weeks. In addition, cattle had
been requisitioned all over Estremadura. The small movable force of
8,000 men which was available for observing Beresford, was now living
entirely on the country-side, in order to spare the stores of Badajoz.

  [334] These notes as to Beresford’s difficulties are taken
  partly from the Journal of his chief of the staff, D’Urban,
  partly from the latter’s detailed report on the Estremaduran
  campaign, published in 1832, but written in 1811, partly from
  the _Strictures on Napier’s History_, vol. iii, written under
  Beresford’s eye. The latter might be considered suspicious if
  they were not completely borne out by the two former, as well as
  by Wellington’s _Dispatches_, vii. 414, 426, 432.