

For such work as was now before them, therefore, the Allies had to
depend entirely on what the Portuguese arsenals could supply. But
all that could be found in them was now mounted on the interminable
redoubts of the Lisbon lines, save such as had been sent to strengthen
Elvas, Abrantes, and Peniche. Practically every gun in Portugal was
defending some work, small or great; they had all been requisitioned
down to the most antique and imperfect pieces. The walls of Elvas were
a perfect museum of ancient artillery: among the heaviest pieces,
carefully sorted out because of their calibre, and chosen for the
siege-train that was to batter Badajoz, were to be seen not only many
24-pounders bearing the arms and cyphers of the earliest kings of the
house of Braganza, João and Affonso, but still older brass guns of
enormous length, showing the names of Philip III and IV of Spain, and
dating back to the years before 1640, when Portugal was a discontented
province of the Hapsburg kings[344]. It seems almost incredible, but
is actually a fact, that some of the cannon used by Wellington’s men
against Badajoz were just two hundred years old. Those that were
not quite so antique were mainly pieces of early eighteenth-century
pattern, without the later improvements invented by the French
scientific artillerymen of the days of Louis XV and Louis XVI: for the
Lisbon arsenal had persisted in using old models long after they had
been dropped in the larger countries of Europe.

  [344] Dickson, in his _Journal_, p. 448, specially mentions this
  curious fact, and notes the name of Philip III and the dates
  1620, 1636, 1646, 1652 on some of the guns he used.

The gunners for the siege were of course mainly Portuguese, though
a few were afterwards drawn from the imperfect British companies at
Lisbon[345]. Those first employed were borrowed from the garrison
of Elvas; they comprised a great number of recruits only partially
trained, but did their best. It was the guns, not the men, that were at
fault--or rather, both the guns and the ammunition, for the Portuguese
cannon-balls in store, dating from all ages, varied much in size, and
Dickson had to sort each convoy of 24 lb. or 12 lb. shot into batches,
some of which were rather small and some rather large, and to apportion
them to particular pieces. The old brass seventeenth-century guns,
being generally worn from long use, needed the biggest shot, and even
these were so large in the bore that the balls fitted loosely, and
the discharge suffered from ‘windage.’ The impact of such shot was
not half what it should have been[346]. With such tools to employ, it
is not wonderful that the Anglo-Portuguese artillery made a poor show
at the first siege of Badajoz. But worst of all was the fact that the
number of pieces was at first far too small--Elvas could only spare a
certain part of the armament of its walls, and it was not till some
weeks had passed that guns, British and Portuguese, could be brought
up from Lisbon, and with them drafts of artillerymen of both nations.
But twenty-three guns and 400 artillerymen were all that Dickson could
collect for the first siege, and these were not ready till April was
out; indeed, it was no small achievement to organize a siege-train of
any sort between April 18th and May 6th, from the sole resources of
the fortress of Elvas. Of the additional hindrance caused by the small
numbers and the inexperience of the engineer officers, and the total
lack of trained sappers, we shall speak in the proper place.