

The orders dictated to Beresford governed the whole course of the
campaign in Estremadura during the next month, and were of the highest
importance. Wellington directed that the siege of Badajoz should be
begun the moment that the guns and material were ready, but warned
his colleague that its commencement would infallibly bring Soult
to the relief of the place, with every available man that he could
scrape together from Andalusia. It was impossible to calculate what
the strength of his army would be: if he raised the siege of Cadiz or
evacuated Granada, so that he could bring a very large force with him,
Beresford was to retire behind the Guadiana, and assume a defensive
position on the Caya river in front of Elvas. If forced from thence,
he must retire even as far as Portalegre should it be necessary. But
if Soult (as was more likely) came up with a force which was not
absolutely overwhelming in numbers, ‘Marshal Beresford will consider
of and decide upon the chance of success, according to a view of the
relative number of both armies, and making a reasonable allowance for
the number of Spanish troops which will co-operate with him.... If
he should think his strength sufficient to fight a general action to
save the siege of Badajoz, he will collect his troops to fight it. I
believe that, upon the whole, the most central and advantageous place
to collect the troops will be at Albuera.... All this must of course
be left to the decision of Sir William Beresford. I authorize him to
fight the action if he should think proper, or to retire if he should
not[350].’

  [350] _Dispatches_, vii. 491-2.

The co-operation of the Spaniards was the crucial point. Unless it were
assured, Wellington considered that Beresford must assume the more
cautious and defensive attitude. If it were secured, the bolder policy
might be pursued. The lines which Wellington laid down were in the
main those which had already been suggested by Beresford: (1) Castaños
must undertake to keep the horse of Villemur in the Sierra Morena,
closely observing Latour-Maubourg, but forbid him to engage in any
fighting; he must retire if pressed; the infantry of the 5th army must
stay at Merida, as at present, but be ready to join Beresford if Soult
invaded Estremadura. (2) Ballasteros was to take a similar position on
the other flank, with his head quarters at Burguillos (near Zafra)[351]
and his advanced posts at Fregenal and Monasterio; if Soult moved
forward, he was to join Beresford without attempting to fight. (3) When
Blake’s army had landed, it was to pass up the Guadiana, and take post
at Xeres de los Caballeros; on any alarm from Soult, it was (like the
other Spanish troops) to join Beresford at once. If these arrangements
worked, at least 15,000 Spaniards would be in line at Albuera, the
chosen position, to assist in holding back Soult. And, as we shall
see, the scheme did work exactly as Wellington had designed, and the
whole force was collected. (4) Lastly, and this was all-important,
when the allied forces were concentrated, they must be placed under a
single commander, and not worked with divided authority and divided
responsibility, as had been the case in the Talavera campaign of 1809.
Concerning Blake there could be no difficulty, as he was junior to
Castaños, and the latter had consented to place himself at Beresford’s
disposition when they met at Jerumenha on March 30th. Too much praise
cannot be given to his reasonable and conciliatory conduct, which alone
rendered possible the co-operation of all the allied forces during the
ensuing campaign.