

  [364] Memorandum for Berthier (_Correspondance_, 17,531), dated
  March 30. ‘Le quartier général de l’armée de Portugal reste à
  Coïmbre. Oporto est occupé par un détachement.... Le Prince
  d’Essling tiendra à Coïmbre, menaçant Lisbonne, qui sera attaquée
  après la récolte.’ At this moment Masséna’s army was just
  reaching the Spanish frontier, in its final retreat from Guarda!

  [365] _Correspondance_, 17,591. ‘Vous ferez connaître au Prince
  d’Essling ... qu’il doit presser l’armament d’Almeida.... Il doit
  prendre des mesures pour couvrir Almeida et Ciudad Rodrigo, et
  d’un autre côté pour se mettre en communication avec Madrid et
  Séville.’

  [366] _Correspondance_, 17,701.

One most important measure, however, was taken at this time, by which
the Emperor did succeed in affecting the general course of affairs on
the frontier of Portugal. On April 20th he made up his mind to recall
Masséna, and to send a new chief to the Army of Portugal. Five days
before, Marshal Marmont, newly returned from commanding in Dalmatia,
had received orders to start at once for Spain, where he was to replace
Ney at the head of the 6th Corps. Whether the Emperor had already
made up his mind on the 15th that Marmont was to replace Masséna,
not to serve under him, it is impossible to say. But he at any rate
concealed his purpose from the younger Marshal, who had been some days
in Spain before he received on May 10th the dispatch of April 20th
which made him commander of the Army of Portugal[367]. Probably the
news that Masséna had failed in his design to hold Coimbra, which Foy
had elaborately explained to the Emperor, and had fallen back behind
Ciudad Rodrigo, had provoked his master to dismiss him from command.
Foy’s report had caused Napoleon to believe that Masséna could stop
on the Mondego and hold Wellington in check. The imperial dispatch of
March 30 (as we have already seen) speaks of Masséna’s stay at Coimbra
as a settled fact, and states that Oporto is or will soon be in his
hands. On April 9 Napoleon knew that the Marshal had lost Coimbra
and fallen back on Guarda[368], but continued to send him elaborate
instructions. It was apparently the receipt of Masséna’s dispatch of
March 31st from Alfayates, confessing that he was completely foiled,
and that he must retire beyond the Agueda, as far as Zamora and Toro,
since the spirit of the army was so broken that he dared not risk a
general action[369], which determined the Emperor to supersede him.
This document must have reached Paris about the 15th or 16th, and would
suffice to explain Napoleon’s anger. For a Commander-in-Chief who
confesses that he has lost the confidence of his army is a dangerous
person to retain in power. There was ample evidence from Masséna’s
earlier letters that he had quarrelled not only with Ney but with most
of his other superior officers; if the general feeling of the army
was also against him, he was not likely to get much good service out
of it. Possibly there may have been also a feeling of wounded _amour
propre_ in the Emperor’s breast, when he reflected how, relying on
Masséna’s assurances, he had informed Soult, King Joseph, and Bessières
that the Army of Portugal had its head quarters at Coimbra, and would
attack Lisbon in the autumn[370], so that ‘a hundred thousand men,
using Coimbra and Badajoz as their bases, would complete the conquest
of Portugal, a conquest which would drag England into a crisis that
would be of the highest interest.’ Napoleon did not like to be made
ridiculous before his subordinates, by having been induced to publish
an absurd misstatement of fact, leading up to a vainglorious prophecy
which appeared most unlikely to be realized.