

  [357] 14th Light Dragoons and 1st Hussars K.G.L.

  [358] See above, p. 199.

  [359] Sometimes called Pamplona’s brigade in Wellington’s
  dispatches of this date, Colonel Pamplona having been in
  temporary command during Ashworth’s absence.

  [360] Barbaçena’s Portuguese on the lower Coa, below Almeida: the
  British 1st Royals and 16th Light Dragoons on the upper Coa.

But considering that things were at present at a standstill on the
northern frontier, and that nothing serious could be undertaken
there, till the line of supplies was organized and Almeida captured,
Wellington now resolved to pay the long-deferred visit to Estremadura
which he projected as far back as the commencement of Masséna’s
retreat. ‘At this moment,’ he wrote to Lord Liverpool, ‘the first
object is certainly Badajoz.’ Till that place should have been
recovered and regarrisoned, he could never feel quite safe on his
southern flank. A diversion on the part of Soult in the Alemtejo,
threatening Lisbon from the south, would always be a dangerous and
tiresome possibility, until Badajoz was once more in the hands of the
Allies, and all Estremadura recovered and held by a competent force.
The future was inscrutable--for all Wellington knew the Emperor might
appear in person, before the summer was over, to take up the Spanish
problem; or, on the other hand, the affairs of Eastern Europe might
cause him to shut off all reinforcements from the Peninsula, and to
turn his attention to a Russian war. But whatever might happen, it was
well to have the Portuguese frontier properly covered in the south.
Supposing the French made another march on Lisbon, it was necessary to
be free of danger in the rear. Supposing that they showed weakness, and
dropped the offensive, the possession of Badajoz and Estremadura gave
facilities for disquieting the Army of Andalusia, perhaps for raising
the siege of Cadiz, which could not be secured in any other fashion.

Meanwhile Wellington formulated three possible courses[361] which
the French might pursue during the next two months, before new
reinforcements could reach them from France, or the Emperor make his
appearance--if so he should decide to do. These three possible courses
were: (_a_) Masséna might call on Bessières, and induce him to join the
Army of Portugal at once with all his disposable troops, in order that
they might save Almeida by driving off the British army. (_b_) Masséna
might allow his troops a long repose in cantonments, relieving the Army
of the North in its present charge of Old Castile, while Bessières,
with such part of his corps as he could collect, might invade Galicia,
to clear the French right flank. (_c_) Masséna might give his troops
the repose that they needed, and, after some interval, might pass south
into Estremadura, to join Soult in operations on the Guadiana, while
leaving Bessières in charge of the defence of the frontiers of Leon.
It will be seen that the French actually adopted first plan (_a_), the
endeavour to save Almeida by a junction of the Armies of Portugal and
the North, and then, a month later, plan (_c_), a concentration in
Estremadura to save Badajoz. Oddly enough, Wellington conceived that
the first plan was the least likely of the three, apparently because
he over-estimated the time which it would take Masséna to reorganize
his army and resume active operations. He did not make enough allowance
for the old Marshal’s obstinacy, and for the pride which forbade him
to allow Almeida to fall without any effort being made to relieve it.
But though he thought this scheme the least likely for the French to
adopt, he made full provisions for dealing with it, in case it should
be the one they selected. His second suggestion, that Bessières might
hand over the charge of Old Castile to Masséna, and proceed to invade
Galicia, was founded on an insufficient knowledge of the present
situation and difficulties of the Army of the North. Bessières, though
the gross amount of his forces was large (over 70,000 men), was much
too obsessed and worried by the guerrilleros to dream of concentrating
a force large enough to make a serious invasion of Galicia. We shall
find him, three weeks after the date of Wellington’s dispatch,
declaring that he could only collect 1,600 cavalry and one battery to
form a field force, because any movement of his infantry would imperil
the whole fabric of the French supremacy in northern Spain. If the
objection be raised that this plea of his was only put forth in order
to disoblige Masséna, and to save himself from responsibility, no
such objection can be made to his statement of June 6th--made after
Masséna’s recall--to the effect that if he were forced to concentrate
20,000 men for any purpose, all communications with France and Madrid
would be lost, and the whole of the country-side, from the Guadiana to
the Bay of Biscay, would blaze up in one general insurrection[362].
Supposing that Masséna and Bessières had been on the best of terms,
and that the former had proposed to take over the charge of the region
occupied by the latter, in order to set the Army of the North free for
field operations, Bessières must have replied that he would not be able
to produce enough men to ‘contain’ the British army, and at the same
time to attack Galicia. Wellington’s hypothesis therefore was faulty;
he undervalued the work of the guerrilleros, who were occupying, for
his benefit, the attention of a much greater part of the French army
than he supposed. The idea that the enemy might make a blow at Galicia
was inspired by his knowledge of the weakness of that province, where
Mahy had put everything out of gear, and Santocildes had not yet begun
the process of reorganization. Knowing how disastrous the appearance of
a French corps in this quarter might prove, he feared it more than was
necessary[363].