

On the day of Wellington’s departure from Elvas heavy rain fell, and
the Guadiana rose high, not merely washing away the cask-bridge at
Jerumenha, but rendering the working of the flying bridges impossible.
This was a serious matter; not only did it put a temporary stop to the
communications between Elvas and the army, but it raised the question
as to what might happen if a similar mischance were to occur when
Soult was invading Estremadura. For if the Jerumenha bridges should
break when the Allies were concentrated at Albuera, they would have no
line of retreat and an impassable river behind. Beresford, with this
possibility in his eye, ordered an alternative line of communication
to be established via Merida, and sent a brigade of the 2nd Division
thither to reinforce the Spaniards of Morillo, and a day later the
whole 4th Division. His anxiety on this point did not cease till,
on the 5th of May, a strong pontoon bridge had been built at the
point selected by Wellington, the place where the Caya falls into the
Guadiana. By this time the Jerumenha bridges were again in working
order, but it was clear that it would be a mistake to trust the whole
safety of the army to them.

It was only on this same day (May 5) that Colonel Fletcher and
Major Alexander Dickson reported to Beresford that they were ready
to produce the means for the attack on Badajoz: the former had his
stock of platforms, fascines, and gabions prepared; the latter had
organized the first convoy of artillery and ammunition from Elvas. On
the 6th, therefore, the investment of Badajoz on the south side of the
Guadiana was completed by the British brigades of Lumley and Alten
and the Portuguese brigade of Fonseca, while on the following day the
brigade of Kemmis and the 17th Portuguese (part of the garrison of
Elvas) appeared opposite San Cristobal, and shut in the place on the
northern bank of the river. The rest of the infantry[352] encamped
as a support of the besieging force in the woods between Badajoz and
Albuera, but the cavalry still remained in southern Estremadura,
and Colborne’s brigade had been for some days (April 30th-May 11th)
executing a demonstration in the Sierra Morena, with the object of
keeping Latour-Maubourg employed. This last operation, owing to
Colborne’s skilful management of his column of 2,000 infantry and
two squadrons each of Spanish and Portuguese horse, had been very
successful. On hearing of British infantry in his front, the French
general evacuated his posts on the crest of the mountains, Guadalcanal,
Fuente Ovejuna, Azuaga, and Monasterio, and fell back south-eastward
towards Constantina on the Cordova road, abandoning the direct line
of retreat on Seville, which he had hitherto covered. Colborne, after
clearing all these places, extended his march eastward into a very wild
and unexplored country, and summoned the isolated castle of Benalcazar,
the only French garrison left north of the Sierra Morena. When it
refused to listen to a summons, he had to leave it, having neither guns
to batter it nor time to waste. From thence he returned by a circular
sweep through Campanario to Almendralejo, where he once more was in
touch with the British army (May 11th).