

  [351] Not to be confused with another Burguillos on the
  Guadalquivir, north of Seville.

Wellington therefore, as is clear, foresaw the whole course of
subsequent operations, and even fixed the exact battle-spot on which
the fate of Soult’s attempt to relieve Badajoz would be decided. The
only point left to Beresford’s decision was whether the strength of the
French army was such as to render a successful resistance possible.
And when we come to consider the respective forces at the disposition
of the two parties, it can hardly be urged that Beresford was wrong to
accept battle. That his victory was a hard-fought and costly one came
from minor tactical circumstances, which will be explained in their due
place.

As to the details of the projected siege of Badajoz, Wellington
laid down an equally clear policy. All guns and material were to be
collected in Elvas, Campo Mayor, and Olivenza, and not to move till
everything was ready. The main communications of the army were to be
across a floating bridge to be constructed at the junction of the
Caya and the Guadiana, five miles below Badajoz and six from Elvas.
The permanent bridge of Merida and the temporary bridges at Jerumenha
would be subsidiary resources. Lastly, and here was the most important
point, the general scheme to be pursued was that the besiegers should
first reduce the outlying defences of Badajoz, Fort San Cristobal on
the north bank of the Guadiana, the Pardaleras and the Picurina on the
south bank. Only when all these were taken would operations against the
city itself be begun. To quote the concluding paragraph of Wellington’s
memorandum: ‘When the British army shall be in possession of San
Cristobal, Picurina and Pardaleras, Marshal Beresford will determine
upon the point at which he will attack the body of the place. It is
believed that, upon the whole, one of the south faces will be the most
advantageous.’

There can be no doubt that all the mishaps of the two first British
sieges of Badajoz had their origin in these original orders of
Wellington, which were drawn up on the advice of his chief engineer,
Colonel Fletcher. The great mistake was the choosing of the almost
impregnable fort of San Cristobal as one of the three first points
of attack, and the making all subsequent operations depend upon its
capture. No doubt the possession of this lofty and commanding work
would render the fall of Badajoz certain, since it overlooked the
castle and all the northern end of the city. But it was the strongest
part of the whole defences, and when the miserable and antiquated train
of artillery at Beresford’s disposition is taken into consideration,
and it is remembered that the siege was to be conducted ‘against time’
as it were, i. e. with the hope that it might be concluded before Soult
could collect a relieving force, it is clear that San Cristobal ought
to have been left alone. The other points designated by Wellington, the
Pardaleras and Picurina, were much more accessible, and the capture
of one or other of them would have brought the besiegers close to the
walls, though neither of them commanded the whole city in the same
fashion as San Cristobal. The best commentary on the sieges of 1811
is that a year later, at the third and successful leaguer, Wellington
left the high-lying fort on the other side of the Guadiana entirely
alone. The original orders of 1811 gave three separate and distinct
objectives, and none of these were to be mere ‘false attacks,’ since
it is distinctly said that operations against the enceinte were only
to begin when all three of the forts were in British hands. Wellington
was not a trained engineer; he was dependent on the advice of the
officers of that arm, and it seems that they gave him bad counsel, as
they certainly did to Beresford during the subsequent weeks. The most
puzzling thing is to make out why Colonel Fletcher and his colleagues
ignored Soult’s precedent; the French engineers had concentrated their
attack on the Pardaleras front as their sole objective, for their
other operations were false attacks. The English engineers, instead of
concentrating their efforts in the same way, wasted their work on three
separate points, which was all the more inexcusable because they knew
that the resources which their comrades of the artillery arm had at
their disposition were most inadequate for a great siege. Hence came a
very costly and deplorable series of failures.