

  [353] So D’Urban’s diary under May 11th. The loss was over 400
  men, of whom 207 were in the 40th, 118 in the 27th, 75 in the
  97th, and 38 in the 17th Portuguese. The French lost about 200
  men only.

Seeing the San Cristobal attack faring so badly, the engineers got
leave to erect a second battery on that side, further down the hill,
which was intended to check the enfilading fire from the other side
of the Guadiana. More guns were brought up to the original battery,
to replace those that had been damaged. But both batteries were
overpowered and badly maltreated on the morning of the 12th. A few
hours later news arrived from the south, sent by Ballasteros, to
the effect that the French were in motion from Seville with a large
relieving army, and were marching hard across the Sierra Morena, just
as Wellington had expected; they had reached Santa Olalla on the 11th,
and were already in touch with Latour-Maubourg. Since their force was
estimated at only 23,000 men--not far from the real amount--Beresford
resolved to fight, and sent requests to Castaños, Ballasteros, and
Blake to concentrate on Albuera, the battle-ground selected by
Wellington. It was fortunate that Blake was now in close touch and
available--he had reached Fregenal on the 9th and Barcarrota on the
12th, so that his arrival was certain, unless some unforeseen accident
should occur. Without his aid it would have been doubtful policy to
wait for Soult and risk a general action: but with his 10,000 men in
line the Allies would have wellnigh 35,000 men available, if every unit
came complete to the field.

[Illustration: BADAJOZ The Two British Sieges (May & June 1811)]

Meanwhile, pending the confirmation of the news of the French advance,
Beresford’s engineers asked leave to open another parallel, and
1,400 men had been paraded for the purpose of starting it, when
complete details as to Soult’s progress came to hand. It had been so
rapid that the Marshal at once ordered all the siege operations to
be discontinued, though the engineers tried to persuade him to risk
two days’ more work, by the vain promise that they would undertake
to produce two practicable breaches in that space of time. Beresford
wisely refused to listen to them, and ordered that all the guns and
ammunition should be returned at once to Elvas, with such of the siege
stores as could be readily moved. But the mass of gabions and fascines
had to be burnt, as these would be profitable to the garrison, and
would certainly be carried into the town if they were left intact.
The troops, English, Portuguese, and Spanish (three battalions of
Castaños’s infantry had come up from Merida), were ordered to prepare
to march for Albuera in successive detachments, the 4th Division and
the Spaniards being left to the last in the trenches, to cover the
removal of the guns and stores.

Beresford’s total casualties in this mismanaged fragment of a siege,
from May 6th to May 12th, had been 533 British and 200 Portuguese, or
733 in all, lost in the trenches and in the sortie. It will be seen
that the sortie cost far more lives than the actual beleaguering work.
All the British loss save seven casualties was in Kemmis’s brigade of
the 4th Division[354], which lay on the Cristobal side, and suffered
both in the trench-building and in the sortie. The Portuguese loss was
partly in the 17th Line, which acted with Kemmis, partly among the
artillery.