

  [352] Hoghton’s brigade of the 2nd Division, Myers’s and Harvey’s
  brigades of the 4th Division, Campbell’s brigade of Hamilton’s
  Portuguese division.

The first episodes of the siege of Badajoz were not very encouraging to
the besiegers. On the 8th trenches were opened opposite all the three
points of attack designated by Wellington, the Picurina and Pardaleras
forts on the south side, and San Cristobal on the north. In each case
the first parallel was started at about 400 yards from the walls;
Dickson had told off fourteen 24-pounders and two 8-inch howitzers for
the work on the left bank, five 24-pounders and two other howitzers for
the attack on San Cristobal. More energy was displayed in this last
quarter than in the others, apparently from the notion that if this
commanding work could be subdued the rest of the siege would be an
easy matter. But the results were disappointing: on the stony slopes
of San Cristobal there was little earth to throw up, and the spade
gritted against rock at three inches from the surface. At the end of
the first night’s digging the trench was but a seam, and there was only
one section at which about ten men could work under cover. The rest had
to be abandoned during daylight, for the enemy kept up a furious fire,
not merely from the fort, but from the citadel on the other side of the
river, whose flank battery enfiladed the projected trench. Three out
of nine engineer officers present on this front were killed or wounded
in the first twenty-four hours, and many of the workers from Kemmis’s
brigade and the 17th Portuguese. It soon became obvious that the
trenches would have to be built with earth from a distance and gabions,
rather than excavated. Nevertheless, a battery for Dickson’s five
24-pounders was sketched out, and began to be visible to the enemy. On
the night of the 10th Phillipon sent up a reserve battalion into San
Cristobal, and executed a sortie upon the British works. It penetrated
into the trenches, but was driven out after a sharp struggle by the
covering party. But, pursuing too far, the British came under the guns
of San Cristobal, and had to retire to their trenches with lamentably
heavy loss[353]. Next day the battery was completed, despite of a
deadly fire both from the fort and the castle, and opened upon its
objective. But it was completely overmastered, and before night four
of its five guns had been damaged or dismounted; three more engineer
officers were hurt, leaving only three surviving of the original nine.
It is said that the battery opened before it had been intended--a
fault of over-zeal on the part of the Portuguese major in command.
Beresford’s purpose had been to wait till the other attacks, on the
Picurina and Pardaleras, were ready, before beginning to batter San
Cristobal. These attacks had met with less difficulty, the ground being
easier to dig, and on the evening of the 11th the trenches in front
of the Picurina were well advanced, and the battery of ten guns there
opened upon the fort with some, but not great, effect.