

  [367] This we learn from Marmont’s letter to Berthier dated May
  14, in which he says that the dispatch reached him only on May
  10, and that its contents were unexpected. (Marmont’s _Mémoires_,
  iv. p. 78.)

  [368] _Correspondance_, 17,591.

  [369] ‘Le désir que l’armée a manifesté depuis longtemps d’aller
  se reposer ne me laisse aucun doute qu’il serait dangereux
  d’attendre l’ennemi pour recevoir bataille ou pour la lui donner.’

  [370] All this, of course, is from the Great Memorandum of March
  30, which Berthier was to communicate to all the chiefs of the
  Peninsular armies.

But though Masséna’s death-warrant, as commander-in-chief was signed on
April 20, and may have been decided upon as early as April 16, there
were still three weeks during which he was to make his last stroke for
revenge, and to lose his last battle, for it was not till May 12th that
Marmont presented his _lettres de service_ and took over the command.

Wellington, meanwhile, convinced that he had nothing to fear for some
little time from the Army of Portugal and its commander, left Villar
Formoso on the morning of April 15th, reached Sabugal that night,
Castello Branco on the 17th, and Elvas by the noon of the 20th. This
was marvellous travelling, considering the mountain roads that had to
be traversed, but Wellington was a mighty horseman, and accompanied
by only a few well-mounted staff officers flew like the wind over
hill and dale. He remained only four days in Estremadura; during that
short time he surveyed Badajoz, and issued compendious directions for
the siege[371]; he drew up a plan of campaign for the united armies of
Beresford, Blake, and Castaños, and then, returning as rapidly as he
had come, retraced his route to the frontiers of Leon, and was back at
Alameda on the 29th, having been less than a fortnight absent from his
army. This rapidity of movement, as we have already seen, completely
puzzled Napoleon, who, on receiving the intelligence that Wellington
was over the Tagus on the 18th, thought that he had gone with a strong
force to establish himself in Estremadura, and sent orders for the Army
of Portugal to move at once towards the south[372], a movement which at
that moment could not have been executed for want of train, transport,
and provisions.

  [371] For all this see section xxvi. pp. 279-81, on Beresford’s
  campaign in Estremadura.

  [372] See above, p. 294.

During Wellington’s absence the command of the troops cantoned between
the Agueda and the Coa had been given over to Sir Brent Spencer, as
the senior division-commander present. Wellington did not think it
probable that Spencer would be much troubled by the enemy during his
short spell of responsibility, but left him directions that covered
every possible contingency. If, contrary to all expectation, Masséna
should make an effort to relieve Almeida within the fortnight for which
the Commander-in-Chief intended to be absent[373], Spencer was directed
to make a careful estimate of the force of the enemy; if it were but
small the line of the Agueda might be held; if it were great--it was
conceivable that Bessières might succour Masséna--Spencer was to
concentrate, not in front of Almeida, nor across the road from Rodrigo
to that place, but in a defensive position to the south of it, parallel
to the French line of advance and threatening it in flank. Only Pack’s
Portuguese infantry brigade, and Barbaçena’s cavalry brigade of the
same nation, were to keep up the investment of Almeida till the last
possible moment. The designated position was that in front of Rendo,
Alfayates, and Aldea Velha, which Wellington took up himself later in
the same year, during a subsequent movement of the French to relieve
Ciudad Rodrigo. No leave to fight a battle was given to Spencer,
though it was given to Beresford when the latter was placed in a
similar responsible position. Instead, he was ordered to send constant
information to his absent chief, who gave him a tabular statement of
the mileage of his journey and the place at which he was to be heard
of each day[374]. Wellington intended to return with his own peculiar
swiftness on the first threatening news, and thought that he could
reckon on being back in time, if he was properly advised of the first
ominous movements of the enemy. He apparently calculated that, if
Masséna came on in great force, and found the British army massed in a
strong mountain position, upon the flank of the route that he must take
towards Almeida, he would be unlikely to attack it--Bussaco being an
unpleasant memory. If the Marshal began to manœuvre he would lose time,
and he himself would be back before the crisis came.