

  [354] 3/27th, 1/40th, and 97th Foot.




SECTION XXVI: CHAPTER II

FUENTES DE OÑORO: PRELIMINARY OPERATIONS.
APRIL 12ND-MAY 3RD, 1811


The Army of Portugal, sullenly retiring far within the frontiers of
Spain, had been lost to Wellington’s sight on April 8th, when it passed
the Agueda and fell back in diverging columns towards various towns
of the kingdom of Leon--Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora--where it went
into cantonments. Only Drouet with the two divisions of Conroux and
Claparéde remained in observation of the Allies, with his head quarters
at San Muñoz. The British general was well aware of the dilapidated
state in which the enemy had reached his base, and calculated that it
would take many weeks for Masséna to get his army into fighting trim
again. He considered that he might even hope to gain possession of
Almeida before the French would be in a position to attempt its relief,
though it could only fall by famine, since there were no heavy guns to
form a battering-train for its siege nearer than Oporto, Abrantes, or
Lisbon. He had already inspected the place, and saw that it had been
put in such a good state of defence by the governor, Brennier, that all
external traces of the great explosion of August 1810 had disappeared.
That the town within was still a mass of ruins, with nearly every house
cut off sheer at the first story, was of no military importance, when
the enceinte and the bomb-proofs were in good order.

There was a short moment during which Wellington had some hopes of
being able to lay hands on Ciudad Rodrigo as well as Almeida. He had
learnt that the Spanish fortress was almost as depleted of food as the
Portuguese, and that Masséna’s troops had consumed 200,000 rations from
its stores when they reached the frontier; he thought that the extra
garrison which Junot had thrown into it, before he passed onward, would
only serve to exhaust the magazines so much the earlier. Accordingly
he not only requested that active and enterprising partisan Julian
Sanchez, to beset the roads between Salamanca and Rodrigo, in order
that no provisions might get through, but made preparations to throw
some British light troops across the Agueda to co-operate with him,
when the approach of a convoy should be reported. With this object
he moved up the Light Division and Arentschildt’s brigade of cavalry
close to the Agueda and within a few miles of Rodrigo. Their head
quarters were at Gallegos, their outposts extended from the bridge of
Barba del Puerco on the north as far as El Bodon on the south. It was
intended that, when Don Julian signalled the approach of the French,
the Light Division should make a dash across the fords of the Agueda,
and endeavour to intercept the convoy. This plan failed on the 13th
of April, owing, as Wellington held, to the slowness of Sir William
Erskine[355], who was still in command of the division, though news had
just arrived--to the great satisfaction of all the battalions--that its
old general, Craufurd, was daily expected at Lisbon on his way to the
front.