

  [361] The very interesting dispatch in which Wellington’s
  forecast is stated is that to Castaños of April 15, written
  in French. ‘En pensant à ce qu’ils doivent faire dans leurs
  circonstances actuelles, je trouve que (1) ou ils feront
  l’invasion de la Galice avec le corps de Bessières, pendant que
  Masséna donnera du repos à ses troupes, dans les cantonnements
  occupés jusqu’à présent par Bessières: (2) ou ils se joindront,
  pour tomber sur mon corps sur la frontière de la Castille--ce qui
  n’est pas très vraisemblable: (3) ou ils ne feront rien jusqu’à
  ce que les troupes de Masséna soyent reposées et remises en état,
  quand ils rassembleront une grande armée dans l’Estrémadure.’
  _Dispatches_, vii. p. 470.

  [362] Bessières to Berthier, from Valladolid, June 6, 1811.

  [363] It is possible that there is some diplomatic intention
  in the stress laid by Wellington on the likelihood of a French
  invasion of Galicia. He was writing to Castaños, and it was his
  object to get that general to stir up the Galicians. Hence,
  perhaps, he exaggerated a possibility which was not so strong as
  he stated.

If it be asked what were Napoleon’s views as to the proper scheme for
the French marshals to adopt, under the circumstances that existed on
April 15, we must not look (of course) to orders issued about that
time, when he was still working on data three weeks old. As late
as March 30th he had been sending instructions to Soult and other
commanders on the hypothesis that Masséna’s head quarters were at
Coimbra, and that Oporto was very possibly in French hands![364] On
April 9 he was telling the Prince of Essling to devote his energy to
the armament of Almeida, and to place himself so as to cover both that
place and Ciudad Rodrigo[365]--orders exquisitely inapplicable when
Almeida was already blockaded by Wellington, and Masséna’s troops had
just crawled past Ciudad Rodrigo, in a state of hopeless dilapidation,
on their retreat to Salamanca. The next advice sent to the Army of
Portugal was almost equally inappropriate: having heard of Wellington’s
flying visit to Estremadura by intelligence dated April 18th (the trip
had begun upon the 15th), he jumped to the conclusion that the English
general must have taken many troops with him. On May 7th he wrote,
‘the translations from English newspapers herewith enclosed show that
Lord Wellington had crossed the Tagus on April 18th. So it seems that
on the side of Castile there can now be only half the English army
left. The events which must already have taken place on the side of
Almeida will have shown the generals that this is the case, and will
have enabled them to make the proper corresponding move (_de prendre le
parti convenable_), viz. to begin to move towards the Tagus[366].’ On
the day when this was written, Wellington, who had not taken a man to
Estremadura, had been back on the frontier of Leon since April 28, and
had, at the head of the whole of his original army, defeated Masséna
and Bessières at Fuentes de Oñoro, on May 5th. As always, the imperial
orders, founded on data that had long ceased to be correct, or had
never been correct at all, arrived too late to direct the course of the
campaign.