

  [355] Wellington to Beresford, April 14th: ‘Sir William Erskine
  did not send a detachment across the Agueda in time, as I
  had desired him, and the consequence is that the French got
  their convoy into Ciudad Rodrigo yesterday morning.... It is
  useless now to keep anybody on the other side of the Agueda.’
  _Dispatches_, vii. 467.

Rodrigo having been revictualled, Wellington abandoned all hope of
molesting it further; to have invested it would have been useless,
when he had no siege-train. But Almeida he intended to reduce at his
leisure, being of the opinion that it would be starved out before
Masséna was in a position to take the field to relieve it. Nothing
short of his whole army would suffice for that operation--if that even
were enough. And knowing that the troops had just reached Salamanca
in a demoralized and discontented condition, without shoes, without
train, almost without ammunition, and with the remnant of their cavalry
and artillery horses dying off at the rate of several hundreds a day,
Wellington doubted if his adversary would be able to come out of his
cantonments before the summer was far spent. At any rate, he calculated
that he had a good many weeks before him, in which he was not likely
to find the Army of Portugal a serious danger. Accordingly he resolved
to put his own host into cantonments also, in such a position as to
block the road to Almeida, and to give it a well-earned rest while
that fortress was being starved out. He had, as we observed in a
previous chapter, no intention of assuming the offensive against the
French in Leon till he had organized his line of communication with
his new base at Coimbra, and established large intermediate dépôts
at Lamego, Celorico, and other conveniently placed localities. The
army was living from hand to mouth,--all the country about Almeida,
Guarda, and Sabugal having been thoroughly devastated,--on convoys
which were only struggling up at irregular intervals from the lower
Mondego. The horses especially were in very poor order, from want of
proper forage. ‘The regiments subsisted on the green corn, which was
dreadful to the inhabitants, and of little use to the horses, when they
had to work. There was nothing else, and we had to cut their rye....
How our army has been carried though this desolate abandoned country
is astonishing[356].’ Till there were dépôts and a regular service
established, it was impossible to concentrate the army, much less to
send it forward into Spain.

  [356] Tomkinson’s (16th Light Dragoons) _Diary_, April 10th-11th
  (p. 98).

Accordingly the allied troops were spread broadcast in the villages
between the Coa and the Agueda. The Light Division and two cavalry
regiments[357] were in front, holding the outposts facing Ciudad
Rodrigo, and in touch with Drouet’s corps, which lay along the Yeltes,
a stream that runs roughly parallel with the Agueda, at a distance
of from seven to fifteen miles to the north-east. The 5th Division
was in the villages around Fort Concepcion, in support of the Light
Division. The 6th Division, with Pack’s Portuguese, who had lately
come up from the Mondego, where they had been dropped during the
pursuit of Masséna[358], were blockading Almeida. The main body of the
army, the 1st, 3rd, and 7th Divisions, with Ashworth’s independent
Portuguese brigade[359], were cantoned in the valleys of the Dos Casas
and the Turon, tributaries of the Agueda, being distributed between
Nava de Aver, Fuentes de Oñoro, Pozo Bello, and other small places in
the neighbourhood. The cavalry, save that detached to the front, was
trying to keep its horses alive in the poor villages along the Coa,
from Castello Rodrigo to Alfayates[360]. The whole army, distributed
in a square of not more than twenty miles, was so placed that it could
concentrate at any point in one march. Wellington, even though he
judged Masséna unable to molest him, was determined not to be caught
with his troops in a state of dispersion.