

  [382] Masséna to Berthier, April 30, 1811, from Ciudad Rodrigo.
  The returns show that on May 1 twelve batteries had been left
  behind with no horses at all, in order that the five remaining
  might take the field with 425 horses.

Food at the base existed; when Masséna reached Salamanca he had
found there considerable accumulations, though not nearly so much as
he expected or required[383]. It was on this particular point that
he had started a lively dispute with Bessières the moment that he
reached Spain. The Duke of Istria had been for some months in charge
of the whole of Old Castile and Leon, and had come to look upon their
resources as so much his own private property that he greatly resented
the intrusion of 40,000 starving men into his governorship. Masséna
complained that he was fed with promises, and that when statistics of
food placed at his disposal were compared with what was actually handed
over, there was a lamentable discrepancy. He had been told that he
would find at Salamanca 10,000 _fanegas_ of wheat, and that 8,000 more
and 200,000 rations of biscuit for the garrison of Rodrigo would appear
in a few days; he stated that he could only discover 6,000 _fanegas_
and 39,000 rations of biscuit, and that the convoy sent to Rodrigo on
the 13th had only carried 20,000 rations at most. Bessières replied
that he was doing his best, that he had his own corps to feed, that the
arrival of the Army of Portugal was wholly unexpected--had he not been
told only a few weeks back, first that it was to stay at Coimbra, and
then that it was going off by a cross march to Plasencia and the Tagus?
For so Masséna had written from Guarda at the end of March. Moreover,
Old Castile was dreadfully exhausted, and the guerrilleros so active
that every convoy required an immense escort to guard it. All this was
perfectly true, yet it is probable that he might have done more if he
had chosen, and he presently received virulent rebukes from the Emperor
for lack of zeal.

  [383] Masséna to Berthier, April 17th, from Salamanca.

But when recriminatory letters were already passing between the two
marshals on the food question, Bessières began to receive additional
demands for military help. On April 20th Masséna wrote that he was
bound in honour to march to the relief of Almeida, that he would
have his infantry reorganized by the 26th, but that his cavalry and
artillery were in such a hopeless state that he was forced to make a
formal request for aid to the Army of the North. The Duke of Istria
replied that his troops were so scattered, and the guerrilleros so
active, that he doubted if he could give any help at all. On the 22nd,
however, he wrote that by making a great effort he could collect some
cavalry and guns, and would be at Salamanca on the 26th. But on the
27th nothing had arrived from the Army of the North at that city.
Masséna replied in high wrath: ‘Vos lettres sont inconcevables. Je
vous ai demandé de l’artillerie et des attelages, et encore plus
positivement de la cavalerie--vous avez sous différents prétextes
éludé ma demande. Toutes les troupes qui sont en Espagne sont de la
même famille. Vous êtes, jusqu’à ce qu’il y ait de nouveaux ordres,
chargé de la défense et de l’approvisionnement des places de Rodrigo et
d’Almeida,’ &c.