

  [389] Not to speak of the bridge of Sabugal, six miles above the
  Ponte Sequeiro and hopelessly out on the flank.

On May 2nd, as we have already mentioned, the whole French army
advanced from Ciudad Rodrigo, one column on the Marialva-Gallegos road,
the other on the southern or Carpio road. The Light Division, and the
four cavalry regiments accompanying it, began to retire, according
to their directions, not making more haste than was necessary, and
turning to bay occasionally to fight a small rearguard action. The
country-side was somewhat dangerous for a small ‘detaining force,’
being passable for cavalry in many directions and thickly wooded. It
had to be remembered that the enemy, using the cover of the woods, and
hiding himself behind the undulations of the ground, might easily break
through the screen of cavalry and light troops unless great care and
caution were shown. Fortunately the Light Division was well skilled in
keeping touch along the line, and in avoiding risks, and a whole day of
skirmishing in retreat led to no regrettable incidents. On the night
of the 2nd of May the covering force bivouacked behind Gallegos and
Espeja, both of which villages were occupied by the advanced guards of
the enemy.

On the 3rd Masséna resumed his advance, and drove in the Light
Division and the cavalry upon Wellington’s chosen position. They
retired skirmishing, till they came to the main body, when the four
cavalry regiments wheeled into line on the right rear of the village of
Fuentes de Oñoro, while the Light Division, crossing the bridge at that
place, placed itself in reserve on the heights, behind the front crest.
In the afternoon the whole French army became more or less visible from
the Allies’ position. It was now in three columns: the right column was
formed by the 2nd Corps, which had taken the route Gallegos-Alameda,
and displayed itself on the heights opposite Wellington’s left, facing
towards Fort Concepcion and San Pedro, with the deepest part of the
ravine of the Dos Casas in front of it. The centre column was formed by
the single division of the 8th Corps (Solignac), which posted itself to
the left of the 2nd, south of Alameda. The heaviest and most important
mass of the enemy, however, was on the left, where Montbrun’s cavalry,
which had been engaged all the morning in pushing back the British
horse, came up directly opposite Fuentes de Oñoro, and on finding
that village occupied in force by the Allies took ground to its left,
facing the squadrons which it had been pursuing, on the other side of
the Dos Casas. When the cavalry had wheeled aside, the front of the
infantry of the 6th Corps became visible on the high-road, division
behind division. The 9th Corps, still out of sight in the rear, was
behind the 6th, so that five of the eight infantry divisions forming
Masséna’s army were concentrated opposite Fuentes de Oñoro. The front
of the French did not extend for more than a short distance south of
that village, so that it looked as if Wellington was to be assailed
precisely in the strong position that he had selected.