

  [373] That he did not purpose to be longer away is shown by the
  fact that he was already at Portalegre, on his return journey
  from Elvas, when Spencer’s final warning that Masséna was on the
  move reached him. _Dispatches_, vii. 50.

  [374] See the three dispatches to Spencer on pp. 464-6, 473-4,
  and 475 of _Dispatches_, vii, dated respectively April 14, April
  16, and April 17, 1811.

As a matter of fact it was only towards the end of Spencer’s short
period of responsibility that matters began to grow interesting upon
the frontiers of Leon. There was, however, a slight alarm on the
15th-16th, just after Wellington’s departure. Masséna, not contented
with having passed a first convoy into Rodrigo on the 13th, had
followed it up with a second, which was escorted by Marchand’s division
of the 6th Corps--a unit which had seen more severe service during
March than any other part of the French army, yet was considered to
be in better order than its fellows. The same phenomenon, it will be
remembered, had been noted with Paget’s rearguard division during
Moore’s retreat to Corunna. Marchand was ordered, when he should
have lodged the convoy in Rodrigo, to make a reconnaissance toward
the Azava, and try to discover what was the force of the British in
that direction. He got into the fortress without hindrance, owing to
Erskine’s usual talent for bungling--on the approach of the convoy
the Light Division was concentrated at Molino de Flores, but Erskine
refused to send it over the fords, and watched Marchand defile into
the town. Some cavalry went across the Agueda, and cut off a flanking
party of three hundred French, who took shelter in a ruined village and
refused to surrender. Erskine sent no one to support the British horse,
and presently a French column came out of Rodrigo and released the
blockaded party. All this took place under the eyes of the disgusted
Light Division on the other side of the water[375] (April 16th).

  [375] For details see the _Journal_ of George Simmons of the 95th
  (_A British Rifleman_), pp. 164-5.

Some days later Marchand came out of Rodrigo with a regiment of
infantry and a squadron, to make the reconnaissance which he had been
directed to execute. At Marialva, five miles outside the fortress, he
ran into the pickets of the 95th and 52nd, and received such a warm
reception that he turned back at once, and sent the report to Masséna
that the British were established in strong force close above the
Agueda (April 22[376]). After this there were no further alarms at the
front till the 28th, the day on which Wellington returned from Elvas.
But Spencer’s account of the reconnaissance of the 22nd, which reached
Wellington at Portalegre on the 25th, undoubtedly contributed to hurry
the return journey of the Commander-in-Chief, for it was accompanied by
a report--which was perfectly correct--that information from the side
of Salamanca seemed to make it certain that Masséna was reconcentrating
his troops for a dash at Almeida, and that Bessières had been asked to
give help. The Salamanca secret correspondents (of whom the chief was
Doctor Curtis, the head of the Irish College in the University) had
always proved trustworthy, so that their reports could not be ignored,
and Wellington was glad that the French movement was reported at the
end, and not at the commencement, of his trip to Estremadura.