

The total force available for a general action on May 1st was 34,000
infantry, of which 23,000 were British, 1,850 cavalry, including the
312 Portuguese, and 1,250 artillery, sappers, &c. There were four
British and four Portuguese batteries, with 48 guns. This total does
not include the detachment blockading Almeida, which consisted of
Pack’s brigade and one British battalion. While only 8,000 weaker than
Masséna in infantry, it will be seen that Wellington’s army had hardly
more than a third of the number of his cavalry--1,850 to 4,500; in
guns there was a slight superiority--48 pieces to 38. In a mountain
position, such as that of Bussaco, the deficiency of cavalry would
have been of no importance. But the country-side between Almeida and
Rodrigo is mostly undulating plateau, practicable in most parts for
cavalry operations on a large scale. The only obstacles of importance
are the courses of the three small streams which cross the high-road,
the Azava, Dos Casas, and Turon, minor tributaries of the Agueda. All
three are insignificant brooks save after heavy rain, and though there
had been a downfall in the end of April, they were now going down and
resuming their usual proportions. Their waters were now a negligible
quantity, but in some parts of their course they flow in deep-cut
ravines, many feet below the general level of the plateau, and present
a serious hindrance to the movement of troops. This is especially the
case in their lower course; nearer the hills to the south, where they
rise, the ravines as well as the streams grow smaller, and can be
crossed anywhere.

The particular position which Wellington had selected as his
fighting-ground was the line of the Dos Casas, from the ruined Fort
Concepcion to the village of Fuentes de Oñoro. The ravine of the Dos
Casas is both wide and steep in the neighbourhood of the fort--perhaps
150 feet deep--but grows decidedly shallower towards Fuentes, and
above that place is no longer a notable feature in the country-side.
The stream itself is nowhere more than ten yards broad nor three feet
deep, so that, when its banks cease to be high and scarped, it can
be crossed anywhere by infantry, cavalry, or guns. Its valley above
Fuentes is partly arable, partly meadow-land in gentle grassy slopes,
much more like an English than a typical Spanish landscape. Standing
on the higher ground behind the village, the observer sees a marked
contrast between the rocky ravine down-stream, and the broad undulating
bottom to his right. The ridge, however, on which he is standing does
not entirely disappear to the south; it still remains as the watershed
between the little basin of the Dos Casas and that of its twin-stream
the Turon, which flows exactly parallel with it less than two miles to
the west. Up-stream the view is closed by woods surrounding the village
of Pozo Bello (or Posovelho as the neighbouring Portuguese call it) on
the right or further bank of the Dos Casas, and by the rounded hill
of Nava de Aver, below which the river is flanked on both sides by a
stretch of boggy ground, only to be crossed by some invisible paths.
There are five miles from Fort Concepcion to Fuentes de Oñoro village,
and this was Wellington’s original position, entirely covered in front
by a well-marked ravine. But the two further miles from Fuentes to Pozo
Bello, which he proceeded to take in for defence when the enemy showed
signs of turning his right, may be described as open ground, with no
protection on its flank save the morass by Nava de Aver, which could
obviously be turned by any enemy who chose to make a sufficiently wide
circuit, and might be crossed by infantry at some points, after careful
exploration of its depths.