

Fuentes de Oñoro itself stands on the western bank of the Dos Casas,
at the point where the heights begin to sink and the ravine ceases.
Its lower houses are almost level with the stream, but the village
slopes uphill to two points a little higher than the general summit
of the plateau, one of which is crowned by its church, the other by a
cross on a large rock. On the opposite side of the stream there are
no buildings but a chapel and a single farm-steading. Past these the
high-road from Ciudad Rodrigo ascends on a gentle slope, commanded for
some hundred yards by the heights on which the village stands, so that
any force advancing to attack Fuentes comes under fire early, and has
no cover whatever. The eligibility of the place as a post is much
increased by the fact that the houses are surrounded by numerous stone
walls, making crofts and gardens, which are of a height and strength
suitable for giving excellent cover to infantry in skirmishing order.
Nor can it easily be turned, since to the left it is protected by the
ravine of the Dos Casas, ever growing deeper down-stream, while on the
right the houses trend back for a long distance up the slopes, and
the stone walls continue their line for some distance. In short, it
is an admirable point on which to rest the flank of an army in battle
order, and Wellington had well marked its strength, and was serene and
content, so long as the French ranged their forces parallel to his own.
The trouble only came when, on the second day of battle, they extended
their southern wing to Pozo Bello, so that Fuentes became the right
centre instead of the right flank-guard of the allied army.

The general position behind the Dos Casas has only one serious defect:
it has in its rear, at a distance of some six or seven miles, the
ravine of the Coa, passable at only a limited number of points for
artillery and wheeled vehicles, though there are many more at which
infantry or cavalry can get across. Of bridges within a reasonable
distance from the position there are only those of (1) Ponte Sequeiro,
ten miles to the right rear; (2) of Castello Bom, six miles to the
direct rear of Fuentes village; and (3) of Almeida, eight miles to the
left rear[389]. If the army should be constrained by any misfortune
to retreat, its transport and artillery would have to pass over one
or more of these three defiles, of which the first is inconveniently
placed because it is too far off to the flank, while the third had
been broken by the French and only hastily repaired. It may be added
also that it was dangerously close to Almeida, though out of sight
of that fortress, and completely beyond the range of its cannon. But
to have sent baggage or guns across it might have appeared a little
hazardous. The only really convenient line of retreat from the Fuentes
position was that across the bridge of Castello Bom, a structure of no
great breadth, and liable to become congested or blocked in a moment
of hurry. It was only wheeled traffic, however, that might become
difficult; above and below the Castello Bom bridge are good fords for
infantry and cavalry at San Miguel and Algeirenos, besides numerous
other points where troops could get across at a pinch. Evidently,
however, if Wellington failed to hold his chosen position, he ran the
risk of losing some or all of his _impedimenta_, supposing that he
were vigorously pursued and compelled to retreat in haste. A caisson
overturned on the descent towards the bridge might force him to abandon
whole batteries, jammed in the narrow road. Of this danger he was
well aware, but judged it worth risking, in view of the importance of
holding the best possible position for covering the siege of Almeida.
No battle-ground that was ever chosen is destitute of some fault. And,
at the worst, the infantry and cavalry would not be endangered, since
the fords could not fail them, and the Coa (though its ravine is often
steep) is by no means a large river. But Wellington did not believe
that he could be beaten by the force which Masséna was able to bring
against him, and though he thought over orders for a retreat, was
strongly under the impression that he would never have to issue them.