

  [376] Wrongly dated April 20 by Sprünglin in his generally
  accurate diary (p. 477).

The fact was that Masséna was making a last desperate effort to save
the military reputation of which he was so proud, and to justify
himself to his master. If Almeida and Rodrigo were both to be lost,
as the final sequel to his retreat from Portugal, his whole year’s
command must be written down as a failure; if these early conquests of
1810 could be saved, he might yet claim to have added somewhat to the
French dominions in the Peninsula. His troops had not been a fortnight
in their cantonments before he was making preparations to reassemble
them for a last effort. In some respects that fortnight had made a
great difference in their condition: Salamanca and Valladolid, at the
moment of his arrival, were full of drafts of men, and accumulation of
stores, belonging to the Army of Portugal, which had been gathering
there for many months while the communications with that army were
cut. At one moment in the late winter, Thiébault, the governor of
Salamanca, had no less than 18,000 men of detachments belonging to
Masséna’s troops in his government[377]--partly convalescents, partly
small parties which had come up from the French dépôts to join their
regiments, and had been unable to do so. Though some of them had
ultimately gone forward with Foy and Gardanne, many still remained
to be absorbed. The numbers of ‘present under arms’ in the 2nd, 6th,
and 8th Corps went up at once, the mass of sick and exhausted men
which they discharged into hospital being replaced by the drafts and
convalescents. Masséna also took out of the 9th Corps the battalions
belonging to regiments of which the main bodies were already in the
old Army of Portugal, and sent them to join their comrades[378]. The
_cadres_ of one battalion in each regiment were then sent home to
France, and the other three raised to something like their original war
strength. This redistribution brought up the divisions of Reynier and
Loison to a figure which they had not known for many months, though
it depleted Drouet’s corps to a corresponding extent: his troops
now consisted of only eighteen battalions, or 10,000 infantry, all
consisting of fourth battalions belonging to regiments serving in
Andalusia. He had received orders that when the crisis on the frontiers
of Leon was over, he was to conduct these units to join their eagles
in Soult’s army. Drouet was anxious to get away from Masséna as soon
as possible, and would gladly have marched for Seville without delay;
but it was obvious that this was as yet impossible, and, as he was
technically under the command of the Marshal, he was compelled to play
his part in the ensuing campaign.

  [377] Thiébault’s _Mémoires_, vol. iv. p. 448.

  [378] The 6th Corps incorporated one battalion each of the 6th
  Léger, 25th Léger, and the 27th Ligne from Conroux’s division,
  and one each of the 39th, 59th, 69th, 76th from Claparéde’s. The
  2nd Corps got a battalion of the 17th Léger only, besides drafts.
  Solignac’s division, nominally 6,110 bayonets, was short of two
  battalions (from the 15th and 65th), or 850 men, left in garrison
  at Ciudad Rodrigo. In the same garrison had been left the whole
  Régiment de Prusse (500 men), besides drafts. The junction of the
  isolated battalions from Drouet’s corps took place on April 27.
  (Fririon, p. 198.)