

The net result of all the transferences of battalions and the picking
up of drafts was that on May 1, the 2nd Corps had in the ranks 1,200
more men than it had possessed on March 15, the 6th Corps 2,000 more,
Solignac’s division of the 8th Corps 800 more. On the other hand,
Clausel’s division of the last-named corps, originally composed almost
entirely of isolated ‘fourth battalions’ was practically ruined[379].
Masséna left it behind, when he mobilized the other divisions of the
old Army of Portugal for the May campaign. But the men available for
the field in the remaining divisions, including those of Drouet, now
amounted to 42,000 bayonets. Their ammunition had been replenished,
they had been reshod, though only to a small extent reclothed, and
they had received at the last moment several months’ arrears of pay.
Their morale still left much to be desired, for confidence in their
Commander-in-Chief had not been restored, and Ney was still regretted.
But a French army, however discontented, could always be trusted to
fight when duty called, and the Prince of Essling still hoped to redeem
his lost reputation.

  [379] It had sunk on May 1 from an original strength of 6,800 men
  to 3,073.

But the weak points in the Army of Portugal were the cavalry and
artillery. The greater part of the horses which had survived the
retreat from Santarem had only reached the plains of Leon to die. A
third of the troopers lacked horses altogether, the remainder had in
many cases mounts which must perish if asked to do another week’s work.
When the cavalry brigadiers of the 2nd and 6th Corps were directed
to send to the front all mounted men fit for service, Lamotte could
only show 319 sabres from a brigade which had counted 800 in March;
Pierre Soult (decidedly more fortunate) had 600 out of 900, though
one of his regiments (the 1st Hussars) could put only 103 men in the
saddle. Montbrun’s division of reserve dragoons, which had 2,400 sabres
a few weeks back, came to the front with 1,187. The most effective
cavalry unit in the army was the brigade of Fournier[380], belonging
to Drouet’s corps, which, not having shared in the winter campaign in
Portugal, could show 794 men in good state. Thus Masséna could bring
forward for the new campaign no more than 3,000 horsemen, and these not
in the best condition[381].

  [380] For strange doings of this eccentric brigadier at Salamanca
  during the winter, see Thiébault, vol. iv. pp. 435-7.

  [381] These figures, differing much from those supplied by Koch,
  are worked out from the return of May 1 in the Paris Archives
  Nationales. The total of cavalry mounted and available seems to
  have been 3,007, including Fournier. See tables in Appendix XIX.

With the artillery the case was even worse, for the class of horse had
been weaker, and the mortality proportionately greater. As we have
seen in a previous chapter, the batteries had for the most part just
succeeded in dragging back their guns to the Agueda, after destroying
nearly all their carts and caissons. It was doubtful whether for an
offensive campaign the whole army could now provide twenty guns with
the full complement of auxiliary vehicles, adequately horsed. Masséna,
in stating his difficulties to Berthier, went so far as to say that
each of the four corps could put about half a battery into the field
in proper order[382]. The state of the military train was quite as
bad--regimental and corps transport was reduced to such a state of
nullity, that when the army took the field it would have to be for a
few days at most, since, after loading the men with as many rations
as each could carry, the only extra supply was what could be drawn by
a few store carts found in Rodrigo and Salamanca. During the short
campaign that was imminent, the troops lived from hand to mouth, on
food daily brought up from the magazines of Rodrigo, after having been
compelled to eat the convoy that they had brought with them for the
supply of Almeida. There was nothing to be got from the country-side,
which was exhausted, by the constant passing to and fro of armies and
detachments, all the way from Salamanca to the frontier.