

Bessières, however, did not break his promise, as Masséna had for
a moment feared, he merely executed it a little late, and on the
smallest possible scale. He brought with him two small brigades of
cavalry, making between 1,600 and 1,700 sabres, that of Wathier (11th,
12th, 24th _Chasseurs à cheval_, and 5th Hussars), and that of Lepic,
which consisted of two squadrons each of the grenadiers, lancers, and
chasseurs of the Imperial Guard. He had also a horse artillery battery
of the Guard, and had brought thirty teams of gun-horses, which, when
distributed to the Army of Portugal, enabled it to put thirty-two
pieces and the corresponding caissons in the field. Masséna had asked
for Bessières’s cavalry and guns, but had not been at all anxious to
see his colleague in person appearing. ‘He would have done better,’
said the Prince to his staff, ‘to have sent me a few thousand men
more, and more food and ammunition, and to have stopped at his own
head quarters, instead of coming here to examine and criticize all my
movements[384].’ He got a cool reception, which did not prevent him
from following Masséna about during the whole campaign, volunteering
frequent advice, and expressing a polite curiosity at his colleague’s
smallest actions. Apparently he wanted to have credit for being present
at a victory--if one should occur--but was anxious to risk as few of
his own troops as possible, and not to take any responsibility. The
Emperor, three weeks later, wrote him a letter of bitter rebuke, saying
that he could well have brought up 10,000 men without disgarnishing any
important posts; an infantry division of the Guard and four batteries
might have been added to the 1,700 horse that he actually produced,
without leaving Valladolid, Burgos, or the frontier opposite Galicia
in any danger[385]. If the two marshals had collected some 55,000 men,
it is certain that Wellington would not have fought, and would have
allowed Almeida to be revictualled.

  [384] So Marbot, ii. 457. If Marbot’s talents as a _raconteur_
  make his authority doubtful, we may point out that Thiébault,
  the governor of Salamanca, tells much the same story in his
  _Mémoires_, iv. p. 478.

  [385] Berthier to Bessières, May 19, 1811.

Masséna had reached Ciudad Rodrigo on April 26th, his four corps
concentrated there by the 29th, and Bessières came up with his cavalry
on the 1st of May. The whole force assembled consisted of 42,000
infantry, 4,500 cavalry, and 38 guns, a total, counting the auxiliary
arms, of about 48,000 men[386]. On the 30th Marchand was sent out with
six squadrons and his own infantry to make a reconnaissance in force
of the allied lines. He found the Light Division still in position
at Gallegos, with outposts along the Azava, and withdrew to Rodrigo
after having stayed for some hours opposite the height of Marialva.
On the next day but one (May 2) the French army began to pour in
an interminable stream across the Agueda, by the bridge of Ciudad
Rodrigo, dividing into two columns when it had passed--the 2nd Corps
on the Marialva road, more to the north, the 8th and 9th Corps on the
Carpio road, more to the south. The 6th Corps, forming the reserve and
crossing late, also took the left-hand Carpio road. Each column was
preceded by its corps-cavalry.