

  [409] Leach (of the 95th), _Life of an Old Soldier_, p. 214.

  [410] By some error Napier says the _8th_ Corps, but the only
  division of that corps present (Solignac) was in reserve far off.

  [411] Napier, iii. 152.

  [412] See Brotherton’s Memoir, in Hamilton’s _History of the
  14th Light Dragoons_, pp. 84-5: ‘At Fuentes d’Oñoro we had a
  very fine fellow, Captain Knipe, killed through his gallant
  obstinacy, if I may so call it. We had, the night before, been
  discussing the best mode for cavalry to attack batteries in the
  open field. He maintained, contrary to us all, that they ought
  to be charged in front, instead of by gaining their flank and
  avoiding their fire. The experiment next day was fatal to him. He
  had the opportunity of charging a French battery, which he did by
  attacking immediately in front. Their discharge of round shot he
  got through with little loss, but they most rapidly reloaded with
  grape, and his party got a close and murderous discharge, which
  almost entirely destroyed it--he himself receiving a grape shot
  through the body.’ As Montbrun had not got up his guns during
  the first cavalry charges, this must have been during Craufurd’s
  fight.

  [413] Napier makes two serious errors--he represents Ramsay
  as having a whole battery, instead of two guns only: and he
  underrates the assistance given by the cavalry, which is detailed
  in Brotherton’s memoir, as well as in the regimental history of
  the Royals (p. 118).

A little to the left of the point where this happy escape took place
there was an episode of a less fortunate kind. The skirmishing line
of the 1st Division was extended along the foot of the slope on
which its brigades were arrayed. When the rolling mass composed of
the Light Division squares, their attendant cavalry, and the French
in hot pursuit, drew near to the position, the officer in charge of
the pickets of the Guards’ brigade (Lieutenant-Colonel Hill of the
3rd Guards) directed them to close up into solid order, for safety’s
sake: this they did, forming a small square. In this formation
they beat off the rather disorderly charge of the French horse;
but Colonel Hill then very unwisely extended them again, and thus
exposed them in the most dangerous order to a second charge of a
French regiment (13th _Chasseurs_) which came in from the side after
the main attack was over. The three companies were taken in flank,
rolled up, and very badly mauled, sixty or eighty men being killed or
wounded, and Hill himself with another officer and nineteen men being
taken prisoners[414]. The rest had time to club together and defend
themselves, till they were rescued by the charge of a squadron of the
Royals under Colonel Clifton and a troop of the 14th Light Dragoons,
which brought off most of the survivors. The total loss was about 100
men[415].

  [414] The account of this in Wellington’s dispatch is hopelessly
  obscure, because instead of writing ‘the pickets of the 1st
  Division under Lieut.-Col. Hill,’ he wrote by a slip of the pen
  ‘the _regiments_ of the 1st Division under Lieut.-Col. Hill.’
  Hill of course (being a regimental major though a titular
  Lieut.-Colonel, after the Guards system) did not command
  whole regiments, as Wellington’s words imply, but simply the
  skirmishing line of pickets. The facts are made quite clear
  by Stepney of the Coldstreams and Stothert’s diary (who calls
  them ‘the pickets of the Guards’), Grattan (who calls them ‘the
  advance,’ or ‘the light troops of the 1st Division’), and Hall’s
  unpublished diary, which gives the whole story in a nutshell:
  ‘The enemy made a dart at the pickets of the 1st Division, with
  the expectation of sweeping off the line before our cavalry could
  support them. They succeeded in part, by coming up unexpectedly,
  but when they were perceived the men, by collecting into knots
  (or ‘hiving’ as they called it) repulsed them with the bayonet.
  A troop of the 14th Light Dragoons and some of the Royals were
  ordered out to the skirmish and suffered some loss.’