

Masséna’s plan, when he had got his left wing out of the woods, soon
became clear. He was intending to break in with his cavalry between
the 7th Division and the rest of the army, while Marchand and Mermet
were to attack the new front of the 1st and 3rd Divisions, and the 9th
Corps, with Ferey’s division, was to smash in the projecting point
of Wellington’s position, by storming Fuentes village and the height
behind it. Reynier, as on the 3rd of May, was to demonstrate against
the allied left, but not to attack till success in the centre seemed
assured. From the course of the action it is evident that the Marshal’s
main intention was to beat Wellington by hard fighting, and to break up
his army--not merely to manœuvre him into a bad strategical position
and to cut his more available lines of communication, so as to force
him into a difficult and dangerous retreat. If the last had been
Masséna’s intention--as some authors suggest--the course of the battle
would have been different. But he made no attempt to send cavalry to
intercept the roads to Castello Bom, still less to detach infantry
against Wellington’s rear. Having turned his enemy’s flank, and forced
him to make a new front, he showed no further desire to manœuvre, but
proceeded to batter away at the troops in front of him, trusting that
numbers and impetus would secure him the victory.

The fight fell for some time into two absolutely distinct sections--an
attempt by Drouet’s and Ferey’s three divisions to carry Fuentes de
Oñoro village and break Wellington’s centre, and an attempt to cut up,
by the cavalry arm alone, the 7th Division and its attendant squadrons,
before they could be succoured and drawn back into Wellington’s new
line of defence. It was only after some time that these two combats
became joined, by an attempt--which was never pressed home--to attack
that part of the British position which lay to the right rear of
Fuentes de Oñoro.

The fighting west of Pozo Bello may be taken first, as it was a logical
continuation of the engagement in the early morning. Here Montbrun
had under his hand four cavalry brigades--those of Wathier, Fournier,
Cavrois, and Ornano--about 2,700 sabres, with Lepic’s 800 guard
cavalry as his reserve--though, as it turned out in the end, the use
of that reserve was to be denied him. In front of him were the two
battalions recently evicted from Pozo Bello, with the British cavalry
brigades of Slade and Arentschildt (about 1,400 sabres) and Bull’s
horse-artillery troop, which had drawn up to protect the retreat of the
routed battalions towards the main body of the 7th Division. General
Houston with that force (one British battalion, two foreign, and four
Portuguese battalions[405]) was engaged in taking up new ground, on the
slope which is separated from Pozo Bello by the shallow trough forming
the valley of the Dos Casas brook. Montbrun’s object was, of course,
to break the British horsemen, and then to fall upon and destroy the
shaken infantry which they were protecting, before they could cross
the valley. There resulted a very fierce and long-sustained cavalry
combat, infinitely creditable to the four British regiments, who had to
fight a detaining action against numbers about double their own. They
were bound to retire in the end--and indeed had no other intention--but
it was their duty to hold off the enemy till the infantry behind them
had got into order. This was done, though at great cost, the regiments
retiring by alternate squadrons, while the rear squadron at each change
of front charged, often winning a temporary and partial success over
the enemy in its immediate front, but always forced to give back as the
French reserve came up. ‘When we charged,’ wrote a participant in this
long combat, ‘they would often turn their horses, and our men shouted
in the pursuit--but go which way they might, we were but scattered
drops amid their host, and could not possibly arrest their progress.
We had again to go about and retire[406].’ The British cavalry, though
losing heavily, never got out of hand, and could be still used as
efficient units down to the end of this phase of the battle. Of their
total casualty list of 157 nearly all must have been lost in this
hard work; it is noticeable that only one officer and four men were
taken prisoners, a sufficient proof that there was no such rout as
French accounts describe--for a rout always implies a serious loss in
‘missing.’