

  [398] 85th and 2nd Caçadores.

  [399] 51st and 85th, the other regiments being foreign
  (_Chasseurs Britanniques_ and Brunswick Oels) or Portuguese.

  [400] Its position, from this point of view, might be compared to
  that of Pakenham and the 3rd Division at Salamanca.

The other preparation which Wellington made for a possible battle on
the 5th was to draw back the Light Division at dusk from the left wing
to its original position behind Fuentes village in reserve. He also
withdrew the numerous light companies which had formed the original
garrison of that place, and left there only two battalions, the 1/71st
and 1/79th, with the 2/24th to support them at the top of the hill.

The fighting on the 5th of May began very early. Just at daybreak the
extreme right flank of Wellington’s cavalry screen was attacked by the
outermost of the enemy’s turning columns, composed of two regiments
of Montbrun’s dragoons[401]. This took place under the hill of Nava
de Aver, where Julian Sanchez with his guerrilleros had been posted
on the 3rd, while two squadrons of the 14th Light Dragoons had been
moved up to his support on the night of the 4th. The guerrilleros
kept a bad look-out, and in the dusk of the morning were surprised
by the enemy--they drew off hastily to the south without making any
resistance. Not so the two British squadrons under Major Brotherton
of the 14th, who fought a running fight for two miles, showing front
repeatedly, till their flank was on each occasion turned by the vastly
superior numbers of the enemy. They were driven in at last upon Pozo
Bello, where lay two battalions of the 7th Division, whose extreme
right picket, placed in a wood, stopped the enemy’s pursuit by a
volley. The main body of the French cavalry seems to have started a
little later than the flanking force which assailed Nava de Aver, as
its leading regiments only attacked the British cavalry screen to
the right of that village some time after Brotherton’s squadrons had
begun to be driven in. Here the line of observation was furnished by a
squadron of the 16th Light Dragoons and another of the 1st Hussars of
the King’s German Legion, who drew together, and gallantly, but rather
rashly, attempted to stop the enemy’s advance at a defile between two
woods. The squadron of the 16th, charging into a mass of the enemy,
suffered heavily and had its commanding officer captured[402]. The
Germans then took their turn, but were also driven back with loss. The
broken troops had to fall back in all haste till, like Brotherton’s
detachment, they came in upon the flank of the village of Pozo Bello,
and formed up there. The French cavalry, extending over the slopes
when they were clear of the woods, appeared in overpowering numbers,
and showed an evident intention to turn the right flank of the British
force, which they were strong enough to do even when the whole twelve
squadrons of Wellington’s cavalry, falling back from various points of
the line which they had been observing, were concentrated on the flank
of the woods and enclosures of Pozo Bello.