

  [397] See his Orders for the day, in Appendix XIII.

After dusk had fallen the French army made the preliminary movements
required by the new plan. Montbrun’s cavalry rode out far to the south,
one brigade to the foot of the hill of Nava de Aver, the others to the
ground east of Pozo Bello. To this latter point Marchand’s and Mermet’s
infantry proceeded, with Solignac’s division following them. Drouet
brought the 9th Corps to the ground formerly occupied by the 6th Corps,
while Reynier drew in a little southward, leaving one division opposite
Fort Concepcion, but moving the other to the position in front of
Alameda lately occupied by Solignac. A large detachment of sappers
went out with Montbrun, to mend the paths across the morass which his
flanking brigade had to cross.

[Illustration: FUENTES DE OÑORO. Positions on the first day (May 3rd
1811).]

Wellington had not been unaware that the want of movement on Masséna’s
part during the 4th probably covered some design against his flanks,
and since his left flank was practically impregnable, he suspected that
his right might be in danger, a suspicion which was made into certainty
by reconnaissances which detected the French stirring among the marshy
woods. The whole of his cavalry was thrown out in this direction,
but the four regiments could only cover the ground inadequately, and
being scattered in squadrons along three miles of front were weak
everywhere. The most serious movement that he made was to detach the
7th Division as an outlying force to cover his right: two battalions
were put into the village of Pozo Bello[398] and the wood in front of
it; the remaining seven occupied a position on the slope to the west
of that little place. This was a somewhat dangerous expedient--the 7th
Division was the smallest and weakest unit in Wellington’s army--it
only contained two British battalions[399], and these were new-comers
just landed at Lisbon. It was thrown out two miles from the main
position, and on open ground not presenting any particular advantage
for defence--indeed, if the enemy should attack in strength, it
would be compelled to act as a mere detaining and observing rather
than a fighting force. For though it was well placed for foiling a
mere attempt to turn the Fuentes position by a small detachment and
a short lateral movement[400], yet if the enemy’s flanking manœuvre
were made by a large body and far afield, it was clear that the 7th
Division would have to retreat in haste towards the main position. This
being so, one wonders that Wellington did not select one of his best
divisions--the 3rd or the Light--for such a responsible post. But he
apparently did not foresee the whole plan of Masséna. ‘Imagining,’ he
writes in his dispatch describing the battle, ‘that the enemy would
endeavour to obtain possession of Fuentes de Oñoro and of the ground
occupied by the troops behind that village, by crossing the Dos Casas
at Pozo Velho, I moved the 7th Division under Major-General Houston to
the right, in order to protect, if possible, that passage.’ But Masséna
was set not only on attacking Pozo Bello, but on turning it, and taking
it in the rear by a wide sweep of his whole disposable cavalry force.
Over 20,000 men were on the move, and Houston had but 4,000 infantry,
with 1,400 horse to guard his flank.