




SECTION XXVI: CHAPTER III

THE BATTLE OF FUENTES DE OÑORO. MAY 5th, 1811


Masséna’s attempt to ‘take the bull by the horns’--for the phrase used
at Bussaco may well be repeated for the attack on Fuentes village--had
failed with loss. It was clear that he had hit upon a strong point in
Wellington’s well-hidden line, and he had paid dearly for his brutal
methods. It remained to be seen whether he might not also find, as at
Bussaco, some way of turning his adversary’s position by a wide flank
movement. Down-stream the ground looked very impracticable, and the
ravine of the Dos Casas seemed to grow more and more formidable as it
neared its junction with the Agueda. The Marshal therefore ordered
Montbrun to make reconnaissances in every direction towards the right,
on the side of Pozo Bello and Nava de Aver, and to report on the roads
and the character of the ground, as well as on the disposition of the
flank-guards of the enemy. The whole of the 4th of May was taken up
in this fashion--there being no shots fired save in Fuentes de Oñoro
itself, when Ferey’s troops in the morning exchanged a lively fusillade
across the brook with the British regiments occupying the main block
of the village. The firing died down before noon, neither side being
inclined to take the offensive[396].

  [396] Masséna, in his dispatch describing the battle, says that
  on the morning of the 4th the Allies made a serious attempt to
  turn Ferey out of the houses beyond the brook which he occupied.
  But we have no trace of any regular fighting in any of the
  British narratives; there was certainly some bickering across the
  brook, but apparently nothing more.

Montbrun’s reports came in during the afternoon, and were very
important. The enemy, he said, had no more than a screen of cavalry
pickets to the south of Fuentes, with a single detached battalion
in the village of Pozo Bello. The end of his line had been found at
Nava de Aver; it was composed only of the guerrilla band of Julian
Sanchez. There was nothing to prevent a frontal attack on Pozo Bello by
infantry, though the place was enclosed in woods and somewhat difficult
to approach. There was accessible ground between Pozo Bello and Nava
where cavalry might act, nor was the morass by the latter village, on
which the extreme right of the Allies rested, impassable.

On this report Masséna based his new scheme of operations[397]. He
resolved to turn Wellington’s right with three infantry divisions and
nearly the whole of his cavalry, while detaining him in his present
position by attacks more or less pressed home. The striking-force
was to be composed of Marchand’s and Mermet’s divisions of the 6th
Corps with Solignac’s division of the 8th Corps in support, and of
all the horsemen save the skeleton squadrons attached to the 2nd
and 6th Corps, viz. Montbrun’s division of dragoons and the cavalry
brigades of Fournier, Wathier, and Lepic, a mass of 17,000 infantry
and 3,500 sabres. Reynier, opposite Wellington’s left, was to make
demonstrations, which were to be turned into a serious attack only if
the Allies showed weakness in this direction. But in the centre there
was to be a vigorous onslaught launched against Fuentes de Oñoro, when
the turning movement was seen to be in progress to the south. For this,
not only Ferey’s division, already in position opposite the village,
was told off, but also Drouet’s two divisions of the 9th Corps. The
place was to be carried at all costs, while Wellington was busy on his
right, and a breach was thus to be made in the line of the Allies at
the same moment that their wing was turned. Fourteen thousand infantry
were concentrated opposite Fuentes for this purpose.