

Wellington was surprised at the strength of the turning force--its
numbers were far greater than he had foreseen, and he was forced
to take a new resolution and form a fresh battle-order. The most
important thing was to save the 7th Division from being cut off, and
to bring it back into line with the rest of the army. Accordingly
he directed a chosen unit--the Light Division, now once more under
the indomitable Craufurd, who had joined on the preceding night--to
advance from its position in reserve behind Fuentes, and to move
out along the slope of the low heights to the right, so as to come
into touch with Houston and the cavalry, and to help them to get
home. Meanwhile the rest of the centre of the army--the 1st and 3rd
Divisions and Ashworth’s Portuguese[403], formed a new line of battle,
_en potence_ to the original right flank of the British position. They
were drawn up along the dominating ground between the rocky hillocks
that overhang the village of Fuentes and the descent into the valley
of the Turon brook. This is the last of the high ground--to the right
of it (as has been before mentioned) the watershed between the Dos
Casas and the Turon ceases to be composed of a commanding ridge,
and sinks into gentle slopes[404]. Thus Fuentes de Oñoro became the
projecting point of a battle-order thrown back at right angles to the
original position--where the 5th and 6th Divisions still continued to
occupy their old post opposite Reynier. Formations _en potence_ are
proverbially dangerous, because of the liability of the angle to be
enfiladed and crushed by artillery fire. But in this case the danger
was less than usual, since Wellington for once in his life had more
guns than the French, and the lie of the plateau was such that the
lower parts of Fuentes village might be enfiladed, but not the ground
above it by the church and rocks, nor the plateau behind it, where the
ground occupied by the 3rd Division was out of sight of the French on
the lesser heights. Indeed, the holding of the houses in the bottom
was of comparatively little importance to Wellington, so long as he
kept his grip on the upper end of the straggling village. Here, on the
double-headed height crowned by the church and the rocks, was the real
pivot of the position.

  [403] 1st Division in four brigades on the right; then Ashworth;
  then the 3rd Division next to Fuentes village.

  [404] Along which the modern railway line is conducted from
  Villar Formoso to Ciudad Rodrigo. Fuentes de Oñoro station is
  a mile from the village, and only a few hundred yards from the
  Portuguese customs-station of Villar Formoso.

Wellington had ample time to move the 1st and 3rd Divisions with
Ashworth’s Portuguese into the new position--none of them had much
over a mile to march, since all had been concentrated behind Fuentes
when the alarm came. The enemy’s approach was slow, partly because his
infantry had to disentangle itself from the houses of Pozo Bello and
the surrounding wood, and to form in a fresh front, partly because his
cavalry became wholly absorbed in a running fight with the Light and
7th Divisions, and had no attention to spare for any other direction.