

  [408] The 51st lost 6 men; Brunswick Oels, 18; _Chasseurs
  Britanniques_, 58; 7th Portuguese, 8 men; 19th, 2 men--of these
  92 only 19 were prisoners, so that it is clear that the French
  cavalry never got in among them, or cut them up in the style
  described by Pelet, Fournier, Fririon, or Masséna himself.
  When a body of 4,000 infantry attacked by cavalry has only 90
  casualties, we know that no part of it can have been ridden over
  or seriously broken.

On the departure of the 7th Division all the peril and responsibility
now fell on Craufurd and the already much-tried cavalry, who had
to make their way back for a full mile along the open slope of the
hillside, to join their comrades in the new position south of Fuentes.
Montbrun, though he had failed in his attack on infantry in position,
thought that he ought to have better fortune against men retreating
over a rolling upland, so urged the pursuit with great energy. Craufurd
formed his men in battalion squares, save a few companies of the rifles
and Caçadores, whom he threw into thickets and enclosures to the right
and left, where he thought them safe against horsemen. The main body
retreated in a line of squares, with the cavalry and the battery of
horse artillery in the intervals. Whenever the French came forward, the
guns played upon them, and the British cavalry charged by squadrons
to check the onslaught. So beautifully was the retreat managed, that
Montbrun never got a chance to charge the infantry at advantage.
‘The steadiness and regularity with which the troops performed their
movement, the whole time exposed to a cannonade, and followed across
a plain by a numerous cavalry, ready to pounce on the squares if the
least disorder should be detected, was acknowledged by hundreds of
unprejudiced spectators (who witnessed it from the heights) to have
been a masterpiece of military evolution. ‘We sustained a very trifling
loss from the cannonade[409],’ writes one Light Division officer.
Another (Napier himself) in more stirring phrases tells how ‘many times
Montbrun threatened to charge Craufurd’s squares, but always found them
too dangerous to meddle with. They appeared but as specks, with close
behind them 5,000 [read 3,500] horsemen, trampling, bounding, shouting
for the word to charge. Fifteen guns were up with the French cavalry,
the eighth corps[410] was in order of battle behind them, the woods on
their right were filled with Loison’s skirmishers, and if that general,
pivoting upon Fuentes, had come forth with the 6th Corps, while Drouet
assailed the village and the cavalry made a general charge, the loose
crowd of non-combatants and broken troops would have been violently
dashed against the 1st Division, to intercept its fire and break its
ranks, and the battle might have been lost[411].’ But Montbrun knew as
well as Craufurd that intact infantry of good quality cannot be broken
when it is securely formed in square, and any attempt to molest the
Light Division by artillery fire was checked by the self-sacrificing
efforts of the British cavalry and guns, who fought their best to keep
off the enemy. Bull’s guns were incessantly unlimbering and firing
a few rounds in the intervals of the squares, and then retreating
rapidly to a new position. On the only occasion when a French battery
got close up it was charged in front, with desperate gallantry, by a
squadron of the 14th Light Dragoons, who suffered terribly, but won
the necessary minutes for the square to which it was neighbour to get
out of range[412]. At last the whole retiring force, horse and foot,
came into Wellington’s lines, with the French close in their rear,
and found safety with the 1st Division. Two incidents marked the last
moments of the retreat: at one point occurred an episode which Napier
has immortalized, with some inaccuracy of detail, in one of his most
brilliant ‘purple passages.’ Captain Norman Ramsay, with two guns of
Bull’s troop, had halted, not for the first time, for a shot or two at
the pursuing cavalry; lingering a moment too long, he found himself cut
off, just as he had limbered up, by a swarm of _chasseurs_, who rode
in from the flank. But he put his guns to the gallop, and, charging
himself in front of them with the mounted gunners, was cutting his way
through the French when he was brought off by friends. On one side a
squadron of the 14th Light Dragoons under Brotherton, on the other a
squadron of the Royals, had turned back when they saw the artillery in
danger. They fell upon the _chasseurs_ before Ramsay had suffered any
hurt, and saved him and his guns, which were brought into the lines of
the 1st Division amid loud cheers from all who had seen the affair[413].