

  [401] The accusation against Montbrun, made by Napier and several
  French writers, of having waited for two hours after dawn, and
  then of having suffered himself to be delayed for another hour
  by the pursuit of a mere Spanish irregular band, is clearly
  groundless. We have the diaries of two officers of the squadrons
  of the 14th (Major Brotherton and Cornet F. Hall) who prove
  that the attack was made in the dusk of early dawn. ‘Just at
  daybreak,’ says the former, ‘I requested Don Julian to show me
  where his pickets were placed. He pointed out to me what he
  said was one of them, but I observed to him that in the dusk of
  morning it looked too large for a picket. The sun rising rapidly
  dispelled the fog, and the illusion at the same time, for Don
  Julian’s picket proved to be a whole French regiment dismounted.
  They now mounted immediately and advanced against us.’ (See the
  Diary in Hamilton’s _History of the 14th Hussars_.)

  [402] Captain Belli, who had joined the regiment from England
  only the night before. A sergeant and six men were killed in
  trying to rescue him. See Tomkinson’s diary, p. 101. This officer
  of the 16th accuses Major Meyer of the Hussars of having lost
  the right moment for a charge by indecision. But the K.G.L.
  narratives (see Schwertfeger) show that Meyer fought hard, and
  was an enterprising officer.

Up to this moment, an hour after daybreak, only French cavalry had been
seen, but the infantry now joined in. The two divisions of Marchand and
Mermet had been moved in the night to a point opposite Pozo Bello: when
the skirmishing to the right of that place was growing hot, the leading
division, that of Marchand, charged in upon the wood in front of the
village, cleared out of it the skirmishers of the 85th regiment and
the 2nd Caçadores, and then stormed the village also, driving out of
it the two battalions, which vainly tried to maintain themselves there
against the crushing superiority of the attack. As they were emerging
from among the houses in great disorder, they were fallen upon and
ridden over by a French light cavalry regiment, which had pushed round
their flank unobserved. Both battalions suffered heavily: between them
they lost over 150 men, of whom 85 were killed and wounded and some
70 unwounded prisoners. It is marvellous that the two corps were not
entirely destroyed--but they were saved by a charge of two squadrons
of the German Hussars, and succeeded in forming up with promptness and
moving away in the direction of the main body of the 7th Division,
which was visible a mile to the west, on the opposite slope of the
bottom in which Pozo Bello lies.

The next hour was a very dangerous one: the French infantry divisions,
emerging from the captured village and the woods, began to form up in
heavy columns, threatening both to attack the Fuentes de Oñoro position
on its right flank, and to cut in between the isolated 7th Division and
the rest of the army. Montbrun’s cavalry, displaying regiment after
regiment, came on in hot pursuit of the troops that had escaped from
Pozo Bello and of the British squadrons that were covering them. They
were already outflanking the 7th Division on the right, by means of the
detachment which had come from Nava de Aver.