

  [405] 51st Foot, _Chasseurs Britanniques_, the incomplete
  battalion of Brunswick Oels (short of two companies detached),
  and the 7th and 19th Portuguese, commanded on this day by Doyle,
  colonel of the 19th.

  [406] Unpublished Diary of Hall of the 14th Light Dragoons.

After a running fight, the British cavalry was driven back on to the
7th Division, which (now joined by the two detached battalions) was
drawn up on the best position that Houston could select on the slope
above the valley: his centre was in a projecting angle among some rocks
which crop up in the generally bare hillside--his wings thrown back,
and partly covered by stone walls forming the boundaries of meadows.
The much-tried British squadrons, clearing off to the side, took
position on the left rear of the infantry, leaving the 7th Division
in face of the now rather confused mass of Montbrun’s horsemen, whose
order was none the better for the long and well-contested combat in
which they had been engaged. The French general made a serious attempt
to break into the 7th Division: while skirmishers demonstrated against
its front, and a light battery just sent forward by Masséna shelled its
centre, a brigade of dragoons turned its right wing and tried to roll
it up. This attack was foiled by the _Chasseurs Britanniques_, who,
drawn up behind a long stone wall, had apparently escaped Montbrun’s
notice; receiving a staggering volley at close range, just when they
supposed that they had come upon an unprotected flank, the advancing
squadrons fell back in confusion. Another charge, made against the
51st, was also beaten off by musketry[407]. The French then came to a
stand--it was clear that they wanted infantry if they were to get any
advantage over the 7th Division, which was now well settled down into
its position. But Marchand’s and Mermet’s battalions had not followed
Montbrun across the valley, but had begun to march straight against the
centre of Wellington’s new line, west of Fuentes de Oñoro.

  [407] See Journal of Wheeler of the 51st, pp. 13-14.

At this moment a new force came upon the scene; Craufurd and the
Light Division were at hand, marching along the higher slope of the
watershed between the Turon and the Dos Casas, in order to connect
with the 7th Division. But Craufurd had not come to form up and hold
the ground where Houston was already engaged. Wellington’s orders were
that the 7th Division should move to its rear, cross the Turon, and
prolong, to the west of that stream, the new line already formed by
the 1st and 3rd Divisions. It was to make this movement covered by
the Light Division and the cavalry, who were to hold the slope till
Houston was well on his way and out of danger. They were then to retire
behind the 1st Division. This was a dangerous task for Craufurd and
his men, but Wellington had selected them precisely because he knew
that they were to be trusted. While Montbrun was busy rearranging
his disordered brigades, Houston slipped down the reverse slope of
the hillside where he had been lying, crossed the Turon, and finally
drew up with one brigade (Sontag’s) on the well-marked heights west
of that stream, and the other (Doyle’s Portuguese) in the village of
Freneda, a mile further to the right. Thus Wellington had once more
an outlying flank-guard, covering the roads which lead to the Coa and
the Bridge of Castello Bom. With the exception of the two battalions
cut up at the opening of the fight, the 7th Division had suffered very
slightly--apparently the French cavalry had not harmed it, but their
attached battery had caused some casualties, which came in all to no
more than 90 men[408] out of the 3,800 in the seven battalions which
had not fought at Pozo Bello.