

  [393] The statement made by several French authors that Masséna
  did not order Ferey to attack Fuentes on the 3rd, and that Loison
  and Ferey acted without orders, is directly contradicted by the
  Marshal’s own dispatch, in which he takes all responsibility:
  ‘J’espérais enlever Fuentes et m’y maintenir; je le fis attaquer,
  et il fut bientôt occupé.’

In Fuentes village, however, there was a sharp conflict: the first
brigade of Ferey’s division charged across the easily fordable brook
under heavy fire, and got possession of some of the houses on the
lower slope. From these the French were dislodged by the charge of the
reserves of which Colonel Williams could dispose. The second brigade
was then thrown into action by Ferey, and, coming on to the British
while they were in the disorder caused by a charge among houses and
walls, beat them back, and pursued them up to the top of the village.
Here the light companies rallied, by the church and among the rocks,
but the enemy remained for a moment master of all that part of Fuentes
which lies on the slope and in the bottom by the brook. Wellington was
determined that the French should make no lodgement in his line, and
late in the afternoon sent three fresh battalions of the 1st Division
to clear the village. Cadogan with the 1/71st, supported by the 1/79th
and 2/24th, made a determined advance through the tangle of houses,
lanes, and walls, and at considerable cost drove Ferey’s men right over
the brook and up their own slope. Masséna then ordered the defeated
troops to be supported by four battalions from Marchand’s division,
and with this aid they once more advanced and got possession of the
chapel and the few other buildings on the east side of Dos Casas, but
could not make their way across the water again, or into the main body
of the village.

The combat only stopped with the fall of night, though the fusillade
across the brook was of course objectless, when neither side made
any further definite attack. It had cost the French 652 men--mostly
in Ferey’s division[394], of whom 3 officers and 164 men were
prisoners, taken when the village was re-stormed by Cadogan. The
Allies, being on the defensive, and under cover, save at the moment of
their counter-attack, only had 259 killed and hurt, of whom 48 were
Portuguese. Colonel Williams, the original commander of the village,
was severely wounded, but no other officer above the rank of captain
was hit[395].

  [394] But some in Marchand’s, which must have been fairly heavily
  engaged, judging from the casualty list of officers in Martinien.

  [395] For an excellent account of the first day’s fighting
  in Fuentes village, see the diary of ‘J. S.’ of the 71st in
  Constable’s _Memorials of the late War_, i. 87-9. The regiment
  charged right up the French slope after recovering the place, and
  was attacked ineffectually by cavalry. Marbot (ii. p. 459) has a
  story that the second attack of the French would have succeeded
  if the Hanoverian Legion, in its red coats, had not been fired
  into from the rear in mistake by the 66th Ligne, which took them
  for British.