

  It is this incident which General Fournier, who led the charge,
  transforms in his dispatch (in the _Archives de la Guerre_) into
  the breaking two squares of the Light Division and taking General
  Craufurd prisoner--a wild story. Fririon makes the charge capture
  ‘300 Hussars of the English Royal Guard!’ Both say that three
  battalions of the Guards laid down their arms.

  [415] Deducting the regiments in Fuentes de Oñoro (71st and 79th)
  the 1st Division lost about 400 men in the whole day, of whom
  probably 100 in this petty disaster.

This was only one of several partial attacks made by the French
cavalry against the front of Wellington’s new position[416]. Montbrun
seems to have thought that he could continue to press the Allies--not
recognizing that he had hitherto had to do with troops voluntarily
retiring, but had now run against a battle-line which intended to
stand. Indeed, he wished to try the effect of a general charge against
the front of the 1st Division, and with that object sent orders to his
reserve, Lepic’s brigade of Guard cavalry, to come to the front, and
head an advance, which the rallied squadrons of his main body would
support. Lepic, however, refused to move, saying that personally he
was only too ready to attack, but that he had received specific orders
not to use his brigade save at the direct command of his immediate
superior, Marshal Bessières[417]. While the Marshal was being sought
(he was ultimately found, after much delay, behind Pozo Bello), the
moment which Montbrun supposed suitable for a charge passed away.

  [416] One was repelled by the 42nd, which met it in line.

  [417] Of this episode, only hinted at by Fririon, and not
  mentioned at all by Masséna in his official dispatch, we have
  a vivid description in Marbot, which might be doubted if it
  were not borne out by hints in Napier and Thiébault and by the
  direct statement of Marshal Jourdan in his memoirs. If Lepic had
  charged, it is hard to see what effect he could have produced,
  for all Peninsular experience went to prove that infantry in
  battle order on a good position could not be broken by cavalry,
  however daring. The 1st and 3rd Divisions were well established
  on their ground, with a steep slope below them, and could not
  have been moved. Lepic’s refusal to charge, however, always
  takes a prominent part in the description of Fuentes de Oñoro by
  French writers, not eye-witnesses, who are anxious to prove that
  Wellington ought to have lost the battle.

With this episode the advance of Montbrun’s cavalry ended, frittering
itself away on the edge of the new position of the Allies. Its total
effect had been to roll in the flanking force which Wellington had
thrown out, and to gain some three miles of ground. The loss of the
British had been appreciable, but can hardly be called severe--under
250 in the 7th Division, about 150 in the cavalry, and 200 in the 1st
Division. Montbrun’s squadrons on their side had 359 casualties, to
which may be added perhaps a hundred in Marchand’s division of the
6th Corps, which fought in the attack on Pozo Bello. The strategical
advantage obtained by forcing Wellington to throw back his right wing,
and to leave the roads towards Castello Bom exposed to the possibility
of flanking cavalry raids, was considerable. But it was less important
than it appeared, since the mere threatening of his communications was
useless, unless he could be forced or manœuvred out of his position;
and this was not to be done. He himself saw this clearly, writing in
his dispatch which describes the battle: ‘I had occupied Poço Velho
and that neighbourhood, in hopes that I should be able to maintain the
communication across the Coa by Sabugal, &c., as well as to provide for
the blockade of Almeida, which objects, as was now obvious, were become
incompatible with each other. I therefore abandoned that which was the
less important[418].’ He then proceeds to show how his new position
still covered the blockade of Almeida, and (by means of the troops
placed beyond the Turon) rendered it hard for the enemy to make any
real attempt towards Castello Bom--since this could not be done save by
an isolated detachment. Indeed, Masséna had still to beat the allied
army, and the preliminary operations now ended had done nothing more
than thrust it back into its fighting position.