

  [418] To Lord Liverpool, 8th May. _Dispatches_, vii. p. 531.

That, according to Masséna’s design, the second act of the battle
was to consist in a vigorous attempt to break Wellington’s new line,
is clear from his own dispatch. And the point to be pierced was the
projecting angle of its centre, in, and to the right of, Fuentes
village. Here the attack was to be concentric and enveloping, Ferey’s
division and the two divisions of the 9th Corps being intended to
storm the village, after which Marchand’s and Mermet’s divisions,
supported by Solignac’s, were to assail the heights to its south-west,
where Picton and Spencer were now in line. Six of the eight infantry
divisions of the French army were to attack on a front of not much over
a mile. This was a powerful combination, but the position which it
was to assail was also very strong. The village, with its barricaded
streets and its tiers of houses trending up the hill, was susceptible
of indefinite defence. The hillside above it and to its right was a
perfect fighting-ground--with the ravine in its front, fine artillery
emplacements along the sky-line, and a flat plateau behind, on which
the main line and the reserves could stand sheltered, till the moment
when they were required to deal with an infantry attack.

Masséna’s plan was to storm the village first, and then, when Ferey and
Drouet should have pushed through it, and have got a lodgement on the
plateau, to deliver the frontal attack with the other three divisions.
He did not intend Marchand and Mermet to move till the projecting
angle of Wellington’s line was turned and broken in by the success of
the other attack. For to send forward these two divisions of the 6th
Corps for an assault on the fine position opposite them, while it was
held by intact troops with their flanks properly covered, would have
been to invite a repetition of Bussaco. The plateau was held by a
perfectly adequate force, the four brigades of the 1st Division (minus
three battalions detached to hold Fuentes de Oñoro[419]), Ashworth’s
Portuguese brigade, and the whole 3rd Division, over 13,000 men, on
a short front, while the Light Division had now returned to take its
place in reserve. Wellington had these troops drawn up in a double
line, the 1st Division next the Turon, Ashworth’s brigade in the
centre, and the 3rd Division above Fuentes, whose defence it was to
feed, if necessary, by detaching battalions from its second line, which
was formed by Mackinnon’s brigade. Owing to the numerical inferiority
of the French artillery, Wellington had also been able to concentrate
a larger number of guns (six batteries) on the critical point of
the battlefield than his enemy could bring against him, so that the
‘artillery preparation,’ to maul his line before a general attack, was
bound to fail. The French guns were overpowered in the contest.

  [419] 2/24th and 1/79th from Nightingale’s brigade, and the
  1/71st from Howard’s, in all 1,850 bayonets, leaving the
  remainder of the 1st Division with 5,700 bayonets, the 3rd
  Division with 5,400, and Ashworth with 2,500 as the main line
  holding the plateau, with 3,700 of Craufurd’s Light Division in
  reserve.