

  [423] Grattan of the 88th; see his _Adventures_, &c., pp. 66-7.

This part of the British army, the second or reserve line of the 3rd
Division--whose front line was nearer the edge of the position, facing
Marchand--was composed of Mackinnon’s brigade, the 1/45th, 74th, and
1/88th. On these troops devolved the responsibility of stopping the
gap, by recovering the church and the head of the village. The moment
for their action had evidently come. Mackinnon sent for leave to charge
to Wellington by Sir Edward Pakenham, who galloped back in a few
minutes, for he had found his chief only a few yards away, watching
for the crisis. ‘He says you may go--come along[424],’ was the prompt
reply, and Mackinnon moved down with the 74th and 88th in column
of sections, left in front, leaving the 45th in reserve on his old
position.

  [424] This again from Grattan, who tells how his colonel, Wallace
  of Bussaco fame, said that he would rather have to retake Fuentes
  than to cover a retreat to the Coa.

There was a fearful clash by the church at the mouth of the village
street, between the 88th, the leading British regiment, and the 4th
battalion of the 9th Léger at the head of Conroux’s column. They met
front to front, both in column, and are said to have fought with
the bayonet for some moments--the rarest thing in war; it was only
in a street combat like this that such a chance could happen. After
a sharp bicker the French battalion gave way and turned back. At the
same moment the 74th charged down another lane which led into the
village, and all the broken remnants of the Highland regiments and the
light companies cheered and advanced among the lanes and houses. The
enemy yielded at every point, seeing their main column beaten back,
and the advance of the British line swept the whole village as far as
the brook: some of the pursuers, going too far, were killed even on
its further side. It was impossible to maintain the houses near the
water, which were too much exposed to the fire of the French artillery
on the opposite bank. But the 74th and 88th made a firm lodgement in
the middle and upper parts of the village, and were not molested by
any further attempt on the part of Drouet to expel them, though his
guns made their position sufficiently uncomfortable. The commander of
the 9th Corps contented himself with bringing forward his last intact
battalions to the front, to cover the routed masses, while they were
getting into order again to the rear of their original position.

The attempt to storm Fuentes had failed with loss, and by about two
o’clock the decisive fighting was over. The 9th Corps had lost 835 men
in the street-fighting, Ferey’s division at least 400 more[425]. On
the part of the defenders, the 71st and 79th, the original garrison of
the village, had 458 casualties, including 119 prisoners taken at the
moment of the first storm--this was a loss of 30 per cent., as they
had 1,419 officers and men on the field. Cameron, the colonel of the
79th, was shot from a house during the last victorious charge. The
74th and 88th, who finally recovered Fuentes by their decisive charge,
lost only 116 men in doing so. The 2/24th, with the light companies
and Caçadores who had formed the earlier reinforcements, seem to have
had about 160 casualties, but it is impossible to separate the losses
of the light companies in the village from those of the battalions
to which they belonged, who were drawn up in the main position and
suffered certain casualties there. On the whole the defenders of
Fuentes seem to have lost about 800 men, its assailants about 1,300,
out of the 4,000 and the 7,000 men whom they respectively engaged
within it: such is the value of the defensive, even when the fighting
comes to close quarters among houses and enclosures.