

Masséna’s account of his reasons for refusing to commit himself to
the decisive attack runs as follows in his dispatch to the Emperor:
‘The English general had united in his centre very large forces and
much artillery. I wished to try to pierce his centre, and to drive
the English army towards the lower Coa. The spirit of the troops was
admirable; but I had to assure myself, before making this vigorous
blow, as to the state of my ammunition, for during the course of
this campaign I had seen myself checked repeatedly by insurmountable
difficulties. It resulted from the report which the officer commanding
the artillery submitted to me, that there only remained in the reserve
park four cartridges per man, which might give thirty shots, counting
what was still in the men’s cartridge-boxes. I did not think myself in
a situation to recommence the attack with such a meagre supply, and
decided to send all the empty caissons back to Rodrigo, in order to
bring up more ammunition. Meanwhile I took the necessary measures to
preserve the advantage already gained over the enemy[429].’

  [429] Masséna to Napoleon, Fuentes de Oñoro, May 7: the main
  battle-report.

It is clear that we have not here the whole of the Marshal’s motives
explained. Granting that the reserve of cartridges had run low, the
troops with which he had to deliver the decisive blow were precisely
those who had still plenty of ammunition. Mermet’s[430] and Solignac’s
divisions had not fired a shot; Marchand’s had only been engaged for a
few minutes in Pozo Bello, with the two battalions of the 7th Division
which it had evicted from that village. It is true that Ferey’s,
Claparéde’s, and Conroux’s troops, which had made the successive
attacks on Fuentes, must have been not only exhausted in morale but
very short of ammunition by this moment. But why had not the attack by
the three intact divisions been made before the troops to their right
had been completely used up? Clearly because Masséna refused to deliver
the frontal assault till the flanking movement had been successful, and
Wellington’s left-centre had been driven from the village. There were
several hours about noon during which the troops of Marchand, Mermet,
and Solignac remained halted in front of the allied line, while furious
fighting was going on in Fuentes. If the Marshal did not let them
loose upon the enemy during that long space of time, it was because he
thought the attack hopeless. The explanation appears clearly enough in
the narrative of his aide-de-camp Pelet: ‘The Marshal came to the front
when this sort of defile had become already impregnable; a _tiraillade_
was already established; he threw himself off his horse, and,
accompanied only by myself, walked several times up and down the front
of the line, to look for a point where he could break in. But the whole
position seemed equally strong; the fire of the enemy upon Fuentes, and
the reinforcements which he had sent into the village, drew in that
direction the bulk of the French divisions. Everything had come to turn
upon the _affaire de poste_ in that direction. It was necessary to
force the village and the ravine at its back, where all the ground was
in favour of the enemy. The day slipped by in vain attacks[431].’