

  [436] Only 9 hurt in the 43rd, 21 in the 52nd, 13 in the Rifles,
  24 in the two Caçador battalions. And many of these were
  undoubtedly lost in skirmishing, not in the retreat in squares.

On the morning after the battle, dawn showed the two armies still
holding their positions of the preceding night. Masséna had not drawn
back, and the line of his pickets was still covering all the ground
taken from the British on the 5th. The divisions were encamped close
behind, Marchand’s, Mermet’s, and Solignac’s in the edge of the wood
on the near side of Pozo Bello, Ferey’s, Conroux’s, and Claparéde’s on
the heights facing Fuentes de Oñoro, Reynier’s far away to the right.
Nor had Wellington moved a man; but from several hours before daylight
his troops had been employed in entrenching the new front that they
had taken up. This was wellnigh the only occasion during the whole
Peninsular War when Wellington used field-fortification on a large
scale. A trench with the earth thrown outward was constructed from near
Fuentes de Oñoro down to the banks of the Turon--a distance of over a
mile. There was special protection for the six batteries of artillery
distributed down the front, and a great _abattis_ blocking the ravine
of the Turon. The village of Villar Formoso on that stream, somewhat to
the rear of the line, and that of Freneda, on the extreme right, where
the 7th Division lay, had also been put in a state of defence.

Masséna, having failed when the enemy was maintaining a hastily assumed
position, had no intention of attacking it when it was entrenched.
In his dispatch of the 7th he writes: ‘The enemy has passed the
night after the battle in fortifying the crest of the plateau which
he occupies. There are five large works, much artillery is visible,
and trenches for the firing line. He has put up _épaulements_ in the
ravines and behind the rocks; he has barricaded the upper part of
Fuentes de Oñoro village, and Villaformosa; thus he has called to his
aid all the resources of fortifications against an attack that must
be made by main force.’ The idea of relieving Almeida had vanished
from the Marshal’s mind--as is sufficiently marked by the fact that
he ordered the great convoy at Gallegos, which had been collected for
throwing into the fortress, to be distributed for the daily necessities
of the army, which would otherwise have had to be fed by provisions
sent forward from Ciudad Rodrigo. In his report of the battle he states
that his intention is now to withdraw the garrison of Almeida, if he
can manage it, and to have the place blown up. There is no prospect of
dislodging the allied army by a second general engagement; but, by
manœuvring, an opportunity of bringing off Brennier and his men may be
secured. The primary object of the campaign is therefore abandoned; but
the new secondary object of saving the garrison of Almeida may possibly
be secured. In this, as we shall see, the Marshal was to succeed, owing
to the culpable negligence of some of Wellington’s subordinates. The
main purpose of the expedition of the Army of Portugal had been foiled;
after the battle the idea of retaining Almeida, as a foothold beyond
the frontier, was given up.