

It must not be supposed that Masséna waited for the arrival of
Marchand’s and Mermet’s infantry in front of the position before
commencing his attack. The troops opposite Fuentes had been ordered
to storm the village when Montbrun’s operations had begun to develop
successfully, but ‘sans rien hasarder[420],’ i. e. they were not to
move if the attempt to turn the British right failed. But when the
cavalry were seen sweeping the hillsides beyond Pozo Bello, and driving
the enemy before them, the attack on Fuentes was begun by Ferey’s
division, which was already in possession of the few houses on the
east side of the Dos Casas brook. The assault commenced at about two
hours after dawn, when the combat was already in full progress to the
south, by a brisk attack which drove the defenders of the village (the
71st and 79th) out of its lower portion. Two companies of the latter
regiment, barricaded in some buildings near the water, were completely
surrounded and forced to surrender, after all their officers had been
wounded. Ninety-four men were taken prisoners. The remainder of this
Highland battalion and of its countrymen of the 71st rallied in the
upper end of the village, and when joined by the regiment in reserve
(the 2/24th) came forward again, and drove the French into the lower
houses by the river. The fight came to a standstill for a moment,
Ferey’s division (which had already suffered so severely on the 3rd)
being now a spent force so far as initiative went.

  [420] Masséna’s dispatch, see Appendix, no. XIII. Drouet is
  therefore wrongly blamed by French critics who say that he
  attacked an hour or two late--he had to wait to see the turning
  movement in successful progress.

But Drouet, who had been told to give Ferey his best support, then fed
the fight with three _bataillons d’élite_, composed of the eighteen
grenadier companies of his two divisions[421]. These picked troops, who
were mistaken for men of the Imperial Guard by their opponents because
of their bearskins and tall plumes, came on with great courage, and
cleared all the middle slopes of the village, driving the garrison up
to the summit of the double-headed hill, near the church and the rocks.
The fighting was very deadly to both sides, but more so to the French,
who had to dislodge an obstinate foe from barricaded houses and lines
of stone walls. It ended in the establishment of the attacking force on
the brink of the summit, but further the grenadiers could not go--the
head of the village and the plateau above it was still maintained by
the 71st, 79th, and 24th, and Wellington began to feed the defending
force by drafting into the upper end of Fuentes, one after another, the
light companies of several brigades of the 1st and 3rd Divisions--the
same detachments who had defended the village upon May 3--in succession
those of Löwe’s German brigade, of Howard’s brigade, of Ashworth’s and
Power’s Portuguese, were sent to the critical point. The whole of the
6th Caçadores followed.