

  [430] Save the few voltigeur companies from Mermet sent down to
  skirmish with the 95th rifles in the ravine of the Turon, as
  mentioned just above.

  [431] Pelet, _Appendice sur la Guerre d’Espagne_, p. 341.

If Masséna did not move his main body at noon, when the British were
waging a doubtful contest in Fuentes, it would have been idle to strike
after two o’clock, when the attack on the village had utterly failed.
The fact was that he had staked everything on the capture of Fuentes,
and had seen at an early hour that he dared not send forward Marchand,
Mermet, and Solignac, till the village should have been taken and
Wellington’s flank turned. But though three divisions had been used up
one after another against that strong post, they had failed to master
it. The game was up; for to deliver the front attack when the flank
attack had failed would have been hopeless. The only chance that
the Marshal had of success was to make the two attacks simultaneous:
but he had such a respect for Wellington’s main position that he would
not assail it till it was turned. It never was turned, and so he
never engaged the three divisions that were so long facing it. As a
subsidiary reason for his refusal to strike home, we must undoubtedly
add the fact that he had discovered that he was too weak in guns to
make any proper artillery preparation for an attack on the British
centre. In the course of a long duel his twenty-four pieces had been
overpowered by the thirty-six which Wellington had placed over against
them. They were badly mauled, and largely out of action, by the moment
that the fighting in Fuentes village was over. If the infantry had
advanced, it would have been shot to pieces by the victorious British
artillery, before it could reach the crest of the strong position where
the Anglo-Portuguese battalions lay ranged behind the sky-line.

[Illustration: FUENTES DE OÑORO. May 5th 1811.]

On the northern flank of the British position, where the 5th Division,
about Fort Concepcion, and the 6th Division in front of San Pedro,
watched Reynier’s corps across the steep ravine of the Dos Casas,
nothing of importance happened throughout the day. The opposing
forces were almost equal, each about 10,000 strong, and Reynier had
been ordered to make no more than ‘a general demonstration all along
his line, to support the attack of the main army.’ It was true that
he was also directed to make a parallel movement along the river,
if Wellington should draw in towards Fuentes de Oñoro the troops
immediately opposed to him[432]. But this was never done: Wellington
kept the 5th and 6th Divisions almost in their original positions
throughout the day. A regiment from the latter (the 53rd)[433] was
moved to the edge of the plateau at the north end of Fuentes village,
to keep back any attempt to turn the place on that side--but such an
attempt was not made, and the rest of the division kept its original
place opposite Reynier. The ‘demonstration’ which that general had
been ordered to make was duly carried out, but amounted to nothing
more than the sending of the 31st Léger and two guns from Heudelet’s
division to skirmish, at the edge of the ravine, with the light troops
of the 5th Division on the other side[434]. Some more of the French
regiments deployed, but never came within gunshot. The figures of the
losses on the two sides show how little serious was the engagement:
the 31st Léger lost 4 officers and 48 men killed or wounded; the
light companies of the British 3/1st, 1/9th, 2/30th, and 2/44th, and
of the Portuguese 8th Caçadores lost 27 men. The 6th Division had no
losses at all in its British brigades, and only four men in the 12th
Portuguese line. Reynier has been blamed by some French critics for
not pushing forward a pronounced attack, but it is hard to see how
he could have done more. He was ordered to demonstrate only, not to
commit himself to a real action, unless the British should withdraw
from his front and go towards Fuentes. And as Wellington kept 10,000
men in his front all day, covered by a difficult ravine, he would only
have lost lives, and gained nothing, by engaging. The two divisions
opposite him were numerically as strong as himself, and lay in a most
formidable position. An attack would have been beaten off, while if he
had manœuvred towards Fuentes to join Drouet, the 5th Division could
have crossed the ravine and taken him in the rear. Such a movement
would also have exposed the convoy intended for Almeida, which lay at
Gallegos, to Reynier’s left rear.