

  [421] British narratives persistently state that infantry of the
  Imperial Guard fought in Fuentes village. But it is absolutely
  certain that there were none of those troops with Masséna’s army.
  The explanation lies in the fact that the grenadier company in
  a French regiment wore bearskins, and that a mass of grenadier
  companies therefore could easily be mistaken for Guards. All 71st
  and 79th diaries speak of fighting with ‘the Imperial Guards’ for
  this reason.

But the progress of the attack had been so far encouraging that at this
moment--about noon--Drouet resolved to finish the affair by putting in
heavy supports from Conroux’s and Claparéde’s divisions for a final
blow[422], which should heave the French line up on to the plateau,
clear the allied troops out of the last few houses of the village, and
definitively break Wellington’s line at its projecting point. Eight
or ten fresh battalions charged across the brook in column, through
the narrow streets encumbered by dead and wounded, and, ascending the
slope, drove their enemies out of the church and the rocks beside
it. This was the critical moment of the day--the only one at which
Wellington lost possession of the whole of the advanced post which so
perfectly defended his centre.

  [422] Masséna’s dispatch speaks only of Claparéde’s division
  as being put in, but as Martinien’s lists show, Conroux must
  have been still more heavily engaged, for his division lost 31
  officers killed and wounded, Claparéde’s only 25. Moreover, it
  was one of Conroux’s battalions (9th Léger) with which the 88th
  were engaged mainly, and this battalion alone lost 8 officers.
  About three battalions of each division remained in reserve and
  had few or no casualties, viz. the 64th, 88th, 95th, 96th, 100th,
  103rd of the Line.

‘Such a series of attacks,’ writes an eye-witness[423], ‘constantly
supported by fresh troops, required exertions more than human to
withstand: every effort had been made to maintain the post, but
efforts, however great, have their limits. Our soldiers had now been
engaged in this unequal contest for upwards of eight hours; the heat
was excessive, and their ammunition was nearly expended. The town
presented a shocking sight: our Highlanders lay dead in heaps, while
the other regiments, though less remarkable in dress, were scarcely so
in the number of their slain. The French grenadiers, with their immense
caps and gaudy plumes, lay in piles of ten and twenty together--some
dead, others wounded, with barely strength sufficient to move, their
exhausted state and the weight of their cumbrous accoutrements making
it impossible for them to crawl out of the dreadful fire of grape and
round shot which the enemy poured into the town. The Highlanders had
been driven to the churchyard at the very top of the village, and were
fighting with the French grenadiers across the graves and tombstones.
The 9th French Light Infantry (the leading battalion of Conroux’s
division) had penetrated as far as the church, and were preparing to
debouch upon the rear of our centre.’