

  [425] It is unfortunately impossible to disentangle the losses
  of the various battalions of the 9th Corps, as there is no
  regimental return, but only a corps return of its losses
  available. But some aid is given by Martinien’s invaluable _Liste
  des officiers tués et blessés pendant les Guerres de l’Empire_,
  which shows that the battalions that suffered most were the
  4/9th Léger with 8 officers hurt out of 21 present, the 4/63rd
  Ligne with 7 out of 19, the 4/24th Ligne and 4/28th Léger, each
  with 6 out of 17, and the 4/16th Léger with 6 out of 16. These,
  clearly, were the units that were most engaged. Some belonged to
  Conroux’s, some to Claparéde’s division.

Masséna had evidently considered the capture of the village of Fuentes
as the necessary preliminary for a general attack upon Wellington’s
line. While Ferey and Drouet had been making their last efforts,
Marchand’s and Mermet’s divisions had been halted before the position
of Picton’s and Ashworth’s troops, while Montbrun’s cavalry was facing
the 1st Division. Solignac was visible more to the rear, in front of
Pozo Bello, acting as general reserve. The twenty-four guns belonging
to these units[426] were all brought to the front, and cannonaded
so much of the British line as was visible, doing some little harm.
But they were gradually overpowered by the six batteries[427] which
Wellington had brought up to his front, and finally ceased to fire. The
infantry columns of Marchand and Mermet also suffered appreciably from
the shot and shell, for they were well within range, though too far
off for infantry fire to tell upon them[428]. It is clear that Masséna
refused to attack the front of the 3rd and 1st Divisions till their
flank should be turned on the Fuentes side, and since that necessary
preliminary was never accomplished, the frontal assault was never
delivered, though three divisions stood ready to make it. The only
move on this side, during the hours after noon, was that on the extreme
left of the French line some voltigeurs, apparently from Mermet’s
division, were sent down into the ravine of the Turon, and tried to
push up it, as if to turn the right flank of the Guards brigade. They
were, however, soon stopped by five companies of the 95th Rifles, whom
Craufurd had left to block the passage up this low-lying part of the
British position; no serious attempt was made to reinforce the attack,
which soon died down into a mere _tiraillade_.

  [426] Six guns of the cavalry, fourteen of the 6th Corps, four of
  the 8th Corps.

  [427] Bull’s horse artillery troop, Thompson’s and Lawson’s
  companies, and three Portuguese batteries, those of Sequeira,
  Rosado, and Preto.

  [428] Fririon notes that they suffered more than was necessary
  from being in dense masses (p. 207). These two divisions had on
  the 3rd and 5th May 14 officers killed and 38 wounded, according
  to Martinien’s lists. As the total loss of the corps on both
  days was 59 officers and nearly 900 men, and we have to allow
  for Ferey’s loss of 400 men in Fuentes village, it seems that
  Marchand and Mermet must have lost at least as many more.