

Fuentes de Oñoro has been called the most hazardous of all Wellington’s
fights, and he has often been censured for fighting at all. Success
is not always the best criterion of a general’s dispositions, and in
this case the fact that Masséna was foiled is not enough to vindicate
all his adversary’s arrangements. But when the case against Wellington
is stated by critics like Napier, Fririon, or Pelet, it is necessary
to set forth his defence, which seems an adequate one. Napier blames
his old chief for accepting battle. ‘A mistaken notion of Masséna’s
sufferings during the late retreat induced Wellington to undertake two
operations at the same time[437], which was above his strength, and
this error might have been his ruin, for Bessières, who only brought
1,500 cavalry and six guns to the battle of Fuentes Oñoro, might have
brought 10,000 men and sixteen guns.’ He erred in sending out Houston’s
division to Pozo Bello, and so extending his line to an unwieldy
length, across ground which, beyond Fuentes, was suitable for cavalry
and lacked defensive strength. By engaging the 7th and Light Divisions
on this _terrain_ he gave the enemy ‘great advantages, which Napoleon
would have made fatal.’ He took up a position which would have allowed
Masséna to detach some of his numerous squadrons round his right flank,
by the Sabugal and Sequeiro bridges, to destroy his magazines at Guarda
and Celorico, break his communication, and cut up the transport in
the rear of the allied army. But, says Napier, ‘with an overwhelming
cavalry on suitable ground, the Prince of Essling merely indicated, as
it were, the English general’s errors, and stopped short when he should
have sprung forward.’

  [437] The blockade of Almeida and the siege of Badajoz by
  Beresford.

To this it may be answered, firstly, that Wellington would not have
fought, if Bessières had brought 10,000 men instead of the two cavalry
brigades which actually accompanied him. He states in his dispatch to
Lord Liverpool of May 1st that he is prepared to abandon the blockade
of Almeida ‘if the enemy have such a superiority of force as to render
the result of contest for that point doubtful.’ He also states that he
is aware that Masséna might be reinforced by detachments of the troops
under Bessières, which would include some of the Imperial Guard. On
May 2nd[438] his intelligence through Spanish sources was sufficiently
good to enable him to know that very little of the Army of the North
had actually moved. If one or both of the Guard infantry divisions
had marched for the frontier a week before the campaign began, it is
perfectly certain that he must have heard of it, for such a force would
have taken long to advance from Valladolid to Ciudad Rodrigo, or still
longer from Burgos to Ciudad Rodrigo. There were secret agents at
Salamanca and most of the other towns of the Douro valley, who would
certainly have taken care that such a piece of information should reach
the hands of Wellington. He fought because he was aware that the force
opposed to him practically consisted of the Army of Portugal alone.
It will be remembered that, before his short visit to the Alemtejo
in April, he gave Sir Brent Spencer elaborate directions as to the
position which he was to take up, in case the French should come in
overwhelming force to relieve Almeida during his own absence. Spencer
was directed to leave the road open, and to draw back to a defensive
position covering the allied lines of communication[439]. And this no
doubt is the policy which Wellington would have adopted, if Bessières
had brought up the infantry of the Imperial Guard to Masséna’s help.
Of this the best proof is that he actually followed this plan in
September, at the time of the El Bodon fighting, when Dorsenne,
Bessières’s successor, came up to the help of the Army of Portugal with
a large force.