

Masséna, in fact, had only lingered on the fighting-ground during
the 6th and 7th in order to organize his retreat. He had ordered the
great convoy of food, which had been brought up to Gallegos, to be
distributed among the corps, since there was no longer any hope of
throwing it into Almeida, and had sent back his artillery caissons
to Rodrigo to be refilled. They were not to return, as he intended
to pick them up during his retreat. But the main reason why the army
had remained near Fuentes for two days was that an effort had been
made to communicate with General Brennier by stealth, since force had
not availed. By offering a reward of 6,000 francs, the Marshal had
succeeded in finding three soldiers who volunteered to attempt to pass
through the British lines by night bearing a cipher dispatch. Chance
has preserved their names, Zaniboni, Lami, and Tillet. The first two
disguised themselves as Spanish peasants, but were both detected and
shot as spies. The third, a private in the 6th Léger, retained his
uniform and crawled for some miles down the bed of the Dos Casas ravine
in the dark, only emerging from it when he got some way beyond Fort
Concepcion. From thence he made his way to Almeida before dawn, by
creeping on all fours though fields of corn. The dispatch which he bore
to the governor directed him to evacuate the place and escape as best
he could; he was recommended to try a northerly line, and to make for
the bridge of Barba del Puerco, where Reynier’s corps was to be placed
from the 8th onward. By taking this route he would avoid the main body
of the allied army, as there seemed to be nothing but cavalry vedettes
north of Fort Concepcion. Brennier was instructed to acknowledge the
receipt of the message, by firing three heavy salvos at five minutes’
intervals from his heaviest guns at 10 o’clock at night. This he did,
and it was their sound which enabled Masséna to retreat during the
dark hours which followed, with a knowledge that his orders had been
received and that the garrison would try to escape. During the next
day (May 8th) the 6th and 9th Corps recrossed the Azava and retired to
Ciudad Rodrigo. Reynier with the 2nd Corps, moving later, and taking a
separate route, marched by the bridge of Barba del Puerco, further down
the Agueda, and placed himself at San Felices, just beyond the stream.

Wellington, on seeing the French fall back to their point of starting,
thought that Almeida and its garrison were now his own--and so they
should have been if his subordinates had acted with common ability. He
pushed forward his advanced posts to the Azava and the Agueda in face
of the retiring enemy, but sent back the whole 6th Division to relieve
Pack’s Portuguese in the task of blockading Almeida. General Campbell
took over the command from Pack on the 10th, and disposed his three
brigades round the place in what he considered a satisfactory and
scientific fashion. It appears, however, that he cantoned them, for
convenience sake, much too far out, and neglected the usual precaution
of pushing pickets close up to the walls every night, to watch the
garrison during the dark hours. The regiments were placed in villages
three or four miles from the town, and the connecting screen of pickets
between them was thin. Pack’s Portuguese were moved by Campbell to
Cinco Villas, four miles north-west of Almeida. Of Burne’s brigade the
2nd regiment was nearest Almeida, on the road that goes out towards
the north, the 36th at Malpartida close by. The other British brigade
(Hulse’s) was facing the south side of the fortress at a considerable
distance; the Portuguese of the division (Madden’s brigade) were at or
near Junca on the east front.