

  [451] See Foy’s _Vie Militaire_, p. 114, and Appendix no. 49.

  [452] See pp. 295-6 above.

His successor, Marmont, was a far younger man, aged only thirty-six,
and promoted to his marshalship so late as 1809. He was one of
Napoleon’s earliest followers, and had seen his first service under
him as lieutenant of artillery at Toulon. Having fought all through
the Italian campaign of 1796-7, he had followed his chief to Egypt,
and had been one of the few officers selected to accompany him in his
surreptitious return to France in 1799. He had served in the campaigns
of Marengo, Austerlitz, and Wagram, but not in the Prusso-Russian War
of 1806-7, during which he had been acting as Governor of Dalmatia. It
was his good service both as general and organizer in that province
which had won him his Illyrian title of ‘Duke of Ragusa.’ Personally
Marmont was the exact antithesis of his predecessor in command: he
was no rough and unscrupulous adventurer, but a well-educated and
cultured gentleman, whose ancestors had served the old monarchy in the
army and the law. Of all the marshals, he and St. Cyr are the only
two whose writings give the impression of real literary ability. His
autobiography displays his character in all its strength and weakness;
it shows him brilliant, active, ingenious, and plausible, but absurdly
vain and self-satisfied. The Spanish chapters of it form one of the
best and most convincing indictments of Napoleon’s policy in the
Peninsula, and he supports every deduction by original documents in
the true historical method. But he is such a whole-hearted admirer of
himself and his achievements that he can never realize his own faults
and failures. Nothing that he ever did was wrong--even the loss of the
battle of Salamanca, entirely his own work, can be shifted on to the
shoulders of his subordinates. And he has no sympathy and admiration
for any other person in the world. As a bitter critic remarked at
the time of the publication of his bulky memoirs, ‘Marmont is not
only autolatrous, but his autolatry is exclusive and intolerant. Many
conceited men are not incapable of recognizing merit in others; they
can adjust themselves to their equals and respect them. Marmont gets
irritated and angry whenever he runs against another man of parts. He
is a self-lover who has become a general misanthrope; the iconoclast of
the reputations of all other notable persons.’

But Marmont’s jealousy was reserved for those who were important
enough to be considered as rivals. To his subordinates and inferiors
he was kindly and considerate in a patronizing sort of manner. The
diarists who served under him speak with amusement rather than anger
of his grand airs, his elaborate parade and pomp, and the ostentatious
splendour of his field equipage[453]. He was clearly not disliked as
Masséna had been, for he took care of his men as well as of himself,
and was not considered a hard master[454].

  [453] ‘Son tapis chargé de pâtés et d’autres pièces froides très
  belles, servis sur des plats d’argent, était entouré d’assiettes,
  de gobelets, de couverts du même métal. On dîna debout--ce
  qui ne suffit pas pour donner à ce repas de luxe un caractère
  suffisamment militaire.’ Thiébault, iv. p. 514.