

  [438] _Dispatches_, vii. 515.

  [439] See p. 298 above.

Napier’s second criticism is of more validity. The placing of the
7th Division at Pozo Bello did extend the front of the army into
indefensible ground. But, as has already been pointed out, Wellington’s
intention was not to fight with the 7th Division in such a position,
if the enemy made a wide flanking movement with a very large force.
Houston’s battalions and their cavalry supports were to guard against
any attempt to turn Fuentes de Oñoro by a mere detachment, operating
on a short circle. For this the force sufficed: that, though it was
assailed by three infantry divisions and 3,000 cavalry, it came off
with a loss of only 400 men, and assumed the new position allotted to
it in due course, is surely a testimony to the fundamental soundness
of Wellington’s tactics. Flanking detachments must withdraw if
hopelessly outnumbered; but that is no reason for saying that such
detachments must never be made. Montbrun’s cavalry sought every
possible opportunity to act against the 7th and Light Divisions, but
had no success save in the one case where they caught two battalions
in scattered fragments evacuating a village--even there, owing to the
splendid succour afforded by the British cavalry, they did not destroy
the unlucky troops, but only cut up 150 of them. The moral is the old
one, that cavalry unsupported is helpless against a steady force of all
arms, even when it is in movement over open ground. Inferior though the
British horsemen were in number, they gave an invaluable support to the
infantry, which was never seriously incommoded during its retreat.

But, it is urged[440], the Light and 7th Divisions might have been in
great peril if Marchand’s and Mermet’s infantry had followed Montbrun’s
cavalry with all speed, and pursued the retiring British, instead
of drawing up in front of Wellington’s left centre, to the south of
Fuentes village. Masséna seems to contradict the possibility of this in
his dispatch, where he says that ‘the 1st and 2nd Divisions of the 6th
Corps followed the movement of the cavalry _as much as it was possible
for infantry in column to do_,’ and again: ‘This superb movement [of
the cavalry] was stopped; and _before our infantry could arrive_ the
enemy had the time to cover the crest of his plateau with several lines
of English infantry and a formidable force of artillery[441].’ It seems
probable that there was actually not time for Marchand and Mermet,
coming out by narrow swampy paths from the woods of Pozo Bello[442],
and forced to get into order in the open ere they could move on, to
catch up Craufurd and Houston before they were safe in their appointed
positions. Moreover, if they had hurried after Montbrun they would have
been making a flank march across the front of Wellington’s new line,
and exposing themselves to the possibility of a ruinous counter-stroke,
like that delivered at Salamanca a year later.

