

Brennier was determined to do his very best to carry out the dangerous
task which had been set him. Not only would he carry off his garrison,
but he would leave Almeida a wreck behind him. The 8th and 9th of May
were employed in driving mines into the whole of the enceinte, and in
disabling as much of the artillery as was possible in the time. Some
of the pieces were merely spiked, others had their bores choked also;
many were disabled by the ingenious plan of firing several pairs of
guns simultaneously, with the muzzles of some placed at right angles
to those of the others, so that while half the shots flew outwards,
the other half struck and disabled the guns against which they were
aimed. The besiegers had detected that there was something odd in these
salvos, but thought that they were signals to Masséna--as indeed the
firing on the night of the 7th had actually been.

At about 11.30 on the night of the 10th, the French came out of the
north gate of Almeida in two columns, one formed of the battalion of
the 82nd Line, the other of the provisional battalion, artillery, and
sappers who formed the larger half of the garrison, which numbered
something over 1,300 men. The two columns, which marched close
together, parallel with each other, struck the cordon of the blockading
line near the point where the pickets of the 1st Portuguese, belonging
to Pack’s brigade, joined with those of the 2nd Queen’s of Burne’s.
Rushing violently on, they pierced the line, with nothing more than
a splutter of musketry from the few Portuguese sentries immediately
opposed to them, who were trampled down or driven off. Five minutes
after, a tremendous series of explosions from Almeida startled the
whole of the blockading force: the mines left behind by Brennier had
worked, and the greater part of the eastern and northern fronts of
the place had been blown up. On the south side something had gone
wrong with the fuses, and little damage was done: but the fortress was
effectively ruined.

Brennier should have been caught if the officers entrusted with the
blockade had shown ordinary wisdom, for he was plunging into the midst
of 6,000 men, and, if Wellington’s orders had been properly carried
out, he could never have reached his destination. The main blame for
his successful evasion seems to rest on the shoulders of Colonel
Iremonger of the Queen’s regiment, and General Erskine. The former, who
was nearest of all the blockading battalions to the point of Brennier’s
exit, merely put his men under arms, and sent out patrols both towards
Almeida and to right and left. They came back after long delay,
reporting that the town seemed to have been evacuated, and that the
French had apparently got off to the north and were out of sight. Even
at dawn Colonel Iremonger had made no movement, yet his battalion of
all the division had the best chance of pursuing the enemy. Erskine’s
responsibility is still heavier: he had been directed by a written
order, on the afternoon of the 10th, to extend the line of the 4th
Division as far as the bridge of Barba del Puerco, and in particular
to send the 4th regiment under Colonel Bevan to the rocky defile which
overhangs that bridge.[444] Having, apparently, received the dispatch
at four o’clock, he detained it (unopened according to some accounts)
till long after dusk, when he forwarded directions to the 4th regiment
to move to Barba del Puerco. Colonel Bevan, not receiving the order
till late at night, took upon himself the responsibility of ordering
that the battalion should only move at daybreak. Wherefore there were
no troops holding the defile at the critical moment.