

  [444] Wellington says (to Lord Liverpool, May 15): ‘Sir W.
  Erskine was dining with Sir Brent Spencer at head quarters, and
  received his orders about 4 o’clock. He says that he sent them
  off forthwith to the 4th regiment, which was stationed between
  Aldea de Obispo and Barba del Puerco.... The 4th regiment, it is
  said, did not receive their orders before midnight, and, though
  they had only 2½ miles to march, missed the road, and did not
  arrive at Barba del Puerco till after the French.’ (_Dispatches_,
  vii. 566.) Tomkinson’s contemporary comment on this is (pp. 102-3
  of his diary): ‘The order reached Sir W. Erskine’s quarters
  about 2 p.m.: he put it in his pocket, and did not dispatch the
  letter to Colonel Bevan before midnight, and to cover himself,
  when required to explain by Lord Wellington, said that the 4th
  unfortunately missed its way, which was _not_ the case.’ Many
  years later (1836) in his _Conversations with Lord Stanhope_
  (which see, p. 89) Wellington said that he believed Bevan had
  his orders ‘about four or five in the afternoon, but the people
  about him said “Oh! you need not march till daybreak,” and so by
  his fault the French got to Barba del Puerco.’ Napier (_History_,
  iii. p. 156) says plainly that ‘Erskine sent no order to the 4th
  regiment.’ Colonel Bevan always maintained that he got nothing
  from Erskine till nearly midnight.

For the first few miles of his retreat Brennier was followed only by
General Pack, who had caught up eighty men of the main picket of the
1st Portuguese, and hurried after the retreating columns, after sending
word to Campbell at Malpartida of the enemy’s general direction. Pack
kept up a running fire for several hours, and took many stragglers and
all the French baggage; but, by the orders of their commander, the
retreating columns did not wait to beat off the teasing force which
pursued them, or even fire a shot in return. Towards daybreak Pack
found himself near Villa de Ciervo, with only a major and eleven men
left in his company, but still close on the heels of the French. In
this village there was a troop of the 1st Royals, watching the line of
the Agueda; they turned out on hearing the firing, demonstrated against
the flying enemy, and detained him for a few useful minutes; but fifty
dragoons could do nothing against two battalion columns. However, with
the growing light, more British troops were seen hurrying up. General
Campbell, on getting Pack’s message, had come on rapidly with the 36th
regiment from Malpartida, and was within a mile of Brennier, when the
latter turned down to the defile which leads to the bridge of Barba
del Puerco. At the same time the 4th, so unhappily absent up to this
moment, were perceived approaching from the south, parallel with the
course of the Agueda, while a squadron of Barbaçena’s dragoons and some
Portuguese infantry were visible in a north-westerly direction. If
Brennier had allowed himself to be detained for half an hour longer, at
any moment in his retreat, he would have been a lost man. But, as it
was, his leading column was nearing the bridge before the British got
within touch of him.