

  [446] Colonel Iremonger to Campbell, printed in _History of the
  2nd Regt._, vol. iii. p. 190.

  [447] Wellington to Lord Liverpool, vii. p. 566.

Wellington summed up the affair in a confidential letter to his
brother[448] with the bitter words: ‘I begin to be of the opinion that
there is nothing so stupid as “a gallant officer.” They (the blockading
force) had about 13,000 men[449] to watch 1,400, and on the night of
the 10th, to the infinite surprise of the enemy, they allowed the
garrison to slip through their fingers and escape.... There they were,
sleeping in their spurs even, but the French got off.’ The two officers
who bore the brunt of their chief’s wrath were not--as might have been
expected--Erskine and Iremonger, but Cochrane and Bevan. The former,
for his ill-advised attempt to cross the bridge, got a withering rebuke
in a general order. The latter found that his statement that Erskine’s
dispatch did not reach him till midnight was disbelieved: threatened
with being brought before a court of inquiry, he committed suicide at
Portalegre, while the army was on its march to the south a few weeks
later. Public opinion in the army held that he had been sacrificed
to the hierarchical theory that a general must be believed before a
lieutenant-colonel[450].

  [448] _Supplementary Dispatches_, vii. p. 123.

  [449] Counting the 4th Division, which was hardly, however, part
  of the ‘blockading force.’

  [450] For statements showing that every one believed Erskine
  to be the responsible person see Stepney, p. 105: ‘instead of
  promulgating the orders the general, it is said, put them in
  his pocket and forgot them.’ George Simmons (p. 174): ‘Bevan
  was too late owing to Sir W. Erskine, by accident, not sending
  him an order in time.’ Charles Napier (_Diary_, p. 173), ‘It is
  said that Sir Wm. Erskine is to blame, and next to him General
  Campbell.’

It will have been noted that Brennier’s report of his hazardous
exploit, for which Napoleon very deservedly promoted him to the rank
of general of division, was sent in, not to Masséna but to Marmont.
The Prince of Essling had ceased to command the Army of Portugal a few
hours before the explosion at Almeida. It will be remembered that the
Emperor had made up his mind to supersede the old Marshal on April 20,
and had entrusted the dispatch to General Foy, who (travelling with his
usual headlong speed) reached Ciudad Rodrigo on the afternoon of May
10th. Marmont, who declares that he had no idea that he was to take
over any charge greater than that of the 6th Corps, had reached Rodrigo
two days before, and had reported his arrival to Masséna when the
latter entered the fortress on May 8th. When Foy delivered the fatal
dispatch to his old chief, the latter vented himself in loud outbursts
of wrath, and declared that he had been maligned to the Emperor[451].
He accused Foy of having given an ill account of his late campaign to
their master, and so of having caused his fall. And he added insult to
injury by pointing out that the envelope of the dispatch was torn, and
insinuating that the bearer had picked it open, in order to read its
contents on his journey. Aghast at these accusations, which seem to
have been no more than the angry inspirations of the moment, Foy wrote
a long letter of remonstrance and self-justification to the Marshal,
but got no satisfaction thereby. Masséna’s own character was such that
it was natural for him to suspect double dealing and dishonourable
conduct on the part of others. The reasons which probably brought
about his recall at this particular moment have been explained in an
earlier chapter[452]. They were the Emperor’s verdict on the campaign
of Portugal. His lieutenant had failed and had lost the confidence of
his army, therefore he must be recalled. Masséna had done far more than
any other general could have accomplished, and he had, in effect, been
sent to essay the impossible. His master far more than himself was
responsible for the failure; but this the Emperor could not, or perhaps
would not, see. The recall was now necessary, for the old Marshal’s
bolt was shot, and it was clear that after Fuentes de Oñoro he could
not have got any more good work out of his army.