  [440] Both by Napier, iii. 152, and by Fririon, p. 207.

  [441] See his dispatch in the Appendix to Belmas, i. p. 539.

  [442] Moreover, Marchand’s leading brigade, that of Maucune, must
  have been in great disorder, after having driven the British
  advanced guard out of the woods and the village, and would need
  time to re-form.

Apparently then, on Masséna’s own showing, the advance of Montbrun was
too rapid for the infantry to join him, and if so, the dismal picture
drawn by Napier of the cavalry and the Light Division overwhelmed by a
combination of Montbrun and Marchand, and hurled in disorder against
the 1st Division in its position on the plateau, must be overdrawn. It
is rash to criticize Wellington as a tactician, when (as in this case)
he was moving troops under his own eye, on ground where calculations
of time and pace were simple. If, from his commanding position on the
edge of the plateau, he had judged that the French infantry were close
enough to Montbrun to give him effective support, he certainly would
not have sent out Craufurd to succour Houston, but would have allowed
the latter to make the best retreat that he could towards the Turon and
Freneda. But Wellington evidently judged that the 7th Division could
be brought off without too much risk, and he knew that Craufurd and
his veterans could be trusted even in the most delicate situations. No
amount of cavalry could harm them, and if the French infantry were far
enough away, the operation would be in reality much less hazardous than
it looked.

When once the Light and 7th Divisions had got to their appointed
places in the new line, it is hard to see that Masséna could have
done anything against Wellington’s front, which was well established
on a commanding ground, with a steep slope in front, and a superior
artillery ranged along the crest. The Marshal himself, as we have
seen, after inspecting the new position in person, thought that
Fuentes village was the crucial point, and had turned three divisions
against it. Undoubtedly, if he could have taken it, the position of
the Allies would have been much altered for the worse. But it was a
very strong post--as is sufficiently shown by the fact that 4,000
men held it against nearly double numbers for six or seven hours.
Indeed, its importance may be compared with that of Hougoumont in
the battle of Waterloo--it forced the attacking party to use up a
disproportionate number of men against an outwork, whose occupation was
absolutely necessary as a preliminary for the general attack which was
contemplated. The infantry of the French left could not assail the 1st
and 3rd Divisions with any reasonable prospect of success till Fuentes
was carried, and, as it was never carried, the attack could not be
delivered.

As to Napier’s suggestion that Masséna might have used some of his
superabundant cavalry for a raid against the Sequeiro and Sabugal
bridges, and the communications of the allied army, it is clear that
the move was feasible, but there is no reason to suppose that it
would have been effective. The moment that the force--say a couple
of brigades--got to the Coa it would have been in the narrow and
difficult roads of the mountains--liable to be stopped by the breaking
of the first bridge, or the barricading of the road by the first bands
of Ordenança that it ran against. Cavalry raids to the rear may be
effective in the plains, but in a country like northern Portugal they
are of very doubtful expediency. The military historian will remember
how fruitless in the end were all the brilliant expeditions of J. E.
B. Stuart and Morgan in the American Civil War; though they did much
damage to trains and convoys, they had practically no effect on the
general results of the campaign. Moreover, any expedition to places so
remote as Celorico or Guarda would have taken many days, and Masséna
had no time to waste; considerations of supply pressed him to make a
speedy end to the campaign. On the whole, Napier’s criticism seems
unconvincing on this point.