

As to Pelet’s and Fririon’s and Delagrave’s carpings at Wellington,
they seem to be based on a radical ignorance of the force which he
had at his disposal. He may be proved as rash or as timid as the
critic pleases, if it is presupposed that he had 50,000 men, as some
French writers assert, or horsemen superior in numbers to his enemy,
as others have the face to set forth[443]. If the allied army had
possessed an adequate cavalry, or two infantry divisions more than
it actually contained, we may be sure that the fight would have taken
a very different aspect. It was the balance of numbers which forced
Wellington to assume a purely defensive position. The critic who urges
that Masséna might have left the 2nd and 9th Corps alone in front of
the allied position, and have marched with 15,000 men of the 6th and
8th Corps on Castello Bom, taking Freneda on the way, is perhaps the
most unreasonable of all--for he would have had the Marshal divide
his forces into two groups separated from each other by many miles,
with nothing to close the gap. This would surely have led to prompt
disaster. It is clear that Wellington could have overwhelmed the
containing force, or have crushed the turning force, at his choice.
This plan ignores the serious chance of a counter-attack on the part
of the British general--a possibility which does indeed seem to have
escaped the imaginations of many a French general down to the day of
Salamanca. It was deeply rooted in their minds that he was a fighter on
the defensive; they had yet to learn that when the chance was given him
he could be as formidable on the offensive.

  [443] Pelet thinks that ‘l’excessive supériorité du général
  anglais lui donnait le moyen de tout entreprendre. Il s’est
  montré, dans cette campagne, et même ailleurs, fort étranger à la
  stratégie comme à la tactique.’ He concludes that Wellington with
  his superior numbers should have attacked the French centre or
  Reynier! He was ‘plus fort des deux cinquièmes que les Français.’
  (_Appendice sur la Guerre d’Espagne_, pp. 340-2.) Fririon states
  as an incontestable fact that the French cavalry was inferior
  to the English in numbers (_Journal historique de la Campagne
  de Portugal_, p. 207). Marbot, on the other hand, thinks that
  Wellington was over rash in fighting at all on such a position
  (_Mémoires_, ii. 460), coming to much the same conclusion as
  Napier. Belmas’s arguments, like those of Pelet, are all vitiated
  by his giving Wellington 45,000 men--9,000 more than he actually
  possessed. Delagrave thinks, like Pelet, that Wellington showed
  ‘timidity which passed into cowardice.’ Yet he allows that
  Masséna had 41,000 infantry and cavalry, without counting gunners
  or sappers, and Wellington only 40,000 (p. 239).




SECTION XXVI: CHAPTER IV

BRENNIER’S ESCAPE FROM ALMEIDA. MAY, 1811


The 6th of May went by without any sign of movement on the part of
the French. Wellington watched with anxiety for the indications of
an extension of the enemy’s front to north or south. But not even
a cavalry picket was shown to the right of Nava de Aver, or to the
left of Fort Concepcion; reconnaissance on the flank showed that the
French remained concentrated in their old positions. It was clearly
improbable that Masséna was about to risk another frontal attack: and
if, as was more likely, he was intending to try some other way of
reaching Almeida than that which runs through Fuentes de Oñoro, it was
odd that he should not start upon it at once. On the 8th, however,
it became obvious that the enemy considered himself beaten, and was
already retreating; at dawn it was found that the 6th and 9th Corps
had disappeared from in front of Fuentes de Oñoro and the entrenched
position to its right. Only part of the 2nd Corps was still keeping
its ground in front of Alameda. The columns of Drouet and Loison
were detected by exploring officers in the woods towards Espeja and
Gallegos; Reynier was acting as a covering force to protect their
withdrawal, and would have vanished at once if he had been attacked in
force.