

General Campbell had ordered the 36th to throw off their packs and run,
when he saw how close the French were to safety, and the regiment,
followed by the 4th, which came up a minute later, struck the second
French column just as it was descending to the bridge. Fired upon and
charged on the steep road, the battalion broke, and many men, trying
to find short cuts down the precipitous hillside, lost their footing,
and fell down the rocks. There were some broken necks and many broken
limbs, while other fugitives fell into the river and were drowned.
Meanwhile a heavy fire was opened on the pursuers from the opposite
bank. Reynier, who (as he had been ordered) kept a good watch on the
bridge from San Felices, had sent down three battalions of the 31st
Léger and some guns to receive the flying garrison. They had lined the
bank, and were ready to defend the defile. Colonel Cochrane, of the
36th, without Campbell’s orders, took upon himself to try to force a
passage through the covering force, and led a mixed mass of his own
regiment and the 4th across the bridge, and up the opposite slope. They
were repulsed with loss by the 31st Léger; the casualties in this rash
enterprise were the only ones suffered by the British that morning, and
amounted to eighteen killed and wounded, and an officer and sixteen men
taken prisoners. Pack’s Portuguese had lost some fifteen men when their
picket line was forced at midnight, so that the total casualties of the
Allies were about fifty.

Brennier’s columns had of course suffered far more--but it was a
scandal that a single man had escaped. He states his loss in his report
to Marmont at 360 men out of 1,300, of whom over 200 were prisoners and
150 killed or wounded. The _commandant de place_ of Almeida and twelve
other officers were taken. Reynier says that when General Campbell
had withdrawn his troops from the water’s edge, and up the cliff, out
of the range of the French cannon, he sent a party across the bridge
to bring in the wounded, and that they found quite a heap of men with
broken limbs at the foot of the precipice, whom they dragged out from
among the dead and brought back with them. There were some few English
and Portuguese in this ghastly pile, who had lost their footing in
reckless pursuit of the flying enemy and had fallen with them[445].

  [445] Marbot’s well-known narrative of this disaster (ii. 473)
  errs in exaggerating the numbers, but Reynier’s dispatch shows
  that there was a solid foundation for what might otherwise have
  appeared a rather lurid picture.

Wellington gave it as his opinion that the escape of the garrison
of Almeida was ‘the most disgraceful military event’ that had yet
occurred to the British army in the Peninsula, and it is easy to
understand his wrath. Campbell had been warned that Brennier might
very probably attempt to escape; Erskine had been told to guard the
defile of Barba del Puerco. The former kept his troops too far back
from the place, and so disposed them that there was nothing directly
behind the cordon of pickets, at the point where Brennier broke out,
save the main-guard of the 1st Portuguese. He also watched the south
and west sides of Almeida with unnecessary numbers--for it was unlikely
that the governor would choose either of those points for his sortie.
But he clearly did his best to pursue when the alarm came, and was
the first to appear at Barba del Puerco with the 36th. The colonel
of the 2nd regiment was much more to blame than his chief, since he
was close to the original point where the French appeared, but merely
collected his battalion at its head quarters and made no attempt to
pursue. In his exculpatory letter to General Campbell he ‘thinks that
he has explained everything satisfactorily[446],’ but he clearly does
not show that he made an adequate attempt to face the situation, which
demanded a rapid pursuit. An extraordinary chance happened to another
regiment of the 6th Division: Colonel Douglas, with the 8th Portuguese,
was at Junca, some way to the east of Almeida. He started off at the
first alarm, and with proper military instinct marched for Barba del
Puerco. Having good guides he reached the bridge before daybreak, but
could see nothing of Brennier (who was still some miles away near Villa
de Ciervo). Finding the defile all quiet, and no French visible save
Reynier’s cavalry picket on the other side of the water, he concluded
that he had come upon the wrong track, and turned back across the Dos
Casas to look for the garrison elsewhere[447]. If he had been a trifle
less prompt, he would have found Brennier running into his arms. This
was sheer bad luck. But clearly the main blame lay with Erskine, who
kept an important order back for six or seven hours, and was the person
directly responsible for the fact that the bridge of Barba del Puerco
was not watched, according to the precise direction issued by the
Commander-in-Chief.