

In early May Soult, under-valuing Beresford’s fighting force, thought
that 25,000 men would suffice to sweep him behind the Guadiana, even
when he had the help of Castaños and Ballasteros. The force was
collected in the following fashion: Latour-Maubourg at Constantina had
8,000 men, who had just been rejoined by Maransin’s column, thus the
5th Corps was once more concentrated and complete (with the exception
of five battalions in Badajoz, and one or two more which Soult was
bringing up from Seville). When all came in, the corps amounted to
10,000 men of all arms. The remaining part of the expedition was
made up by requisitioning from Victor’s 1st Corps and the lines
before Cadiz four battalions and two regiments of cavalry[463], and
from Sebastiani’s 4th Corps four battalions and three regiments
of cavalry[464]. Of the independent division under Godinot, which
garrisoned the kingdom of Cordova, Soult took nearly the whole--nine
battalions and two regiments of cavalry[465]. The borrowed troops were
divided into two large brigades (one might better have been called
a small division) under Generals Godinot and Werlé[466], and three
provisional brigades of cavalry. They took five batteries (thirty guns)
with them, to add to the eighteen guns of Latour-Maubourg, and some
companies of sappers and train. The total force available came to just
under 25,000 men, unequally divided in numbers between the 5th Corps
and the Andalusian reserves. The cavalry was very strong in proportion,
about 4,400 sabres[467].

  [463] viz. 16th Léger (3 batts.), _grenadiers réunis_ (1 batt.),
  4th and 14th Dragoons. The 2nd Hussars and 26th Dragoons were
  already with Latour-Maubourg, never having returned to the 1st
  Corps since January. The _grenadiers réunis_ were formed of the
  six grenadier companies of the 45th, 63rd, and 95th of the Line.

  [464] viz. 58th Ligne (3 batts.), one battalion of _grenadiers
  réunis_ (Poles), 1st Lancers of the Vistula, 20th Dragoons, and
  27th _Chasseurs_.

  [465] viz. 12th Léger, 51st and 55th Line (3 batts. each), 17th
  and 27th Dragoons.

  [466] Godinot had the 16th Léger and 51st Line, Werlé the 55th,
  58th Line, and 12th Léger. The two grenadier battalions made a
  general reserve of 1,000 men.

  [467] N.B.--For further details as to the composition of Soult’s
  army see Appendix XVI.

It will be noted that Soult had (as in January) refrained from
adopting the general plan which Napoleon favoured, that of abandoning
all Andalusia save Seville and the Cadiz Lines, and leaving only a
corps of observation at Granada. It is true that the Duke of Dalmatia
took very little from Victor, and left the 1st Corps almost intact
in the lines, but Sebastiani’s 4th Corps was also left only slightly
diminished, and was expected to hold down all eastern Andalusia,
instead of being requisitioned for 10,000 men and reduced to a flying
column as the Emperor would have wished. The unit that had been most
heavily drawn upon was the garrison of the kingdom of Cordova, and
the result of this was that (as in January) very few troops could be
detailed for the defence of Seville, since nearly all that had been
in its neighbourhood were summoned off to Estremadura. The great city
which formed Soult’s base was once more left inadequately defended by
dépôts and drafts, and _Juramentados_ of doubtful fidelity. The Marshal
had lately raised some companies of so-called Swiss[468], deserters of
all nations, and these were also utilized. But the total left under
General Daricau was dangerously small. So keenly was this realized
that the governor was directed to retire within the great fortified
enclosure of the Carthusian convent (_La Cartuja_) if pressed, and all
the military stores had been placed in this immense building, which had
been surrounded with a bastioned enceinte, and armed with cannon, so as
to form a sort of citadel. The Castle of the Inquisition at Cordova in
a similar fashion had been fortified, and converted into a work that
could be held against any irregular force, and similar precautions had
been taken at Jaen, Andujar, Ronda, Alcala Real, and Niebla, to provide
centres of resistance against possible assaults by guerrilleros.
Probably, however, Napoleon was right, and if the minor places and
eastern Andalusia had been evacuated, Soult might have brought 10,000
more infantry against Beresford, in which case the latter would never
have dared to fight him, and must have retired behind the Guadiana.
There would have been no battle of Albuera--but on the other hand all
the evacuated districts would have flared up into insurrection, and it
is difficult to see how Soult could have reconquered them, since he was
to be for several months tied up in operations against the British,
from which he could not have withdrawn a man.