

  [457] But, for reasons unknown, the 17th Léger, from the original
  division of Heudelet, changed places with the 26th Line from
  Loison’s old division, and went into the new 6th Division.

The cavalry units were in a far worse state than those of the infantry.
Already at Fuentes most of the regiments had shown only two squadrons
for want of horses, and had left behind them in their cantonments
dismounted men in vast numbers. Marmont, seeing it was impossible to
find chargers for them in Spain, was forced to send them all back on
foot to Bayonne, to draw horses from the interior of France. In June
he could put only 2,500 mounted men in the field. The artillery in a
similar fashion was hopelessly short of teams: it could produce only
36 guns (six batteries) properly horsed, though Masséna had started
from Santarem in March with more than 100. Marmont says that the army
returns showed that Masséna had entered Portugal in 1810 with 4,200
artillery horses--of these only 1,400 survived the retreat, and of them
in May only 400 were fit for service[458]. As to the train, it had
vanished altogether, so far as horses and waggons went; the Marshal
says that precisely four waggons were fully horsed and ready for work
when he took over the command. But rest, the return to a land where
food was to be got with ease and regularity, and the opening up of the
dépôts of Salamanca and Valladolid, where uniforms, boots, and pay had
been accumulating, soon did wonders for the army, under the Marshal’s
careful and judicious supervision. By June he was able to take the
field with an army that was restored in morale, and fit for good
service.

  [458] Marmont to Berthier, May 14, from Salamanca.




SECTION XXVI: CHAPTER V

THE BATTLE OF ALBUERA. MAY 16TH, 1811


Soult, it will be remembered, had quitted Estremadura, and handed over
the charge of the troops left therein to Mortier, on March 14th. He
received the news of Beresford’s irruption into the province and of
the combat of Campo Mayor on March 30th, so that from the beginning of
April onward he was aware that it would be incumbent on him to support
the 5th Corps and to relieve Badajoz within a few weeks. That he was
not forced to march back from Seville to the north at once was due to
the breaking of the Jerumenha bridges, which (as we have seen) delayed
Beresford’s advance and the investment of Badajoz for many days. But
by the end of April the danger had grown pressing: Latour-Maubourg
had been thrust out of Estremadura, and (deceived by the movements
of Colborne) reported that the Allies were about to invade Andalusia
also. He had fallen back to Constantina, well within the limits of
that kingdom, and not over forty miles from Seville. Nothing definite
had been heard of Badajoz and its garrison, since the communications
between that fortress and the south had been cut by Beresford’s cavalry
on April 10th. Though its governor, Phillipon, was known to be a man
of resource, and though provisions and military stores (the leavings
of Imaz) were abundant, yet the garrison was small for such a large
place, and Soult was not aware how far the damaged fortifications had
been repaired since his departure. It was clear that he must strike at
Beresford without delay, or the news that Badajoz had been attacked and
captured might come to hand some black morning.