

The Emperor, in the dispatch which explained to Marmont his duties,
had bidden him drop the organization into corps on which the Army
of Portugal had been hitherto formed, and send home the superfluous
corps-commanders, and any other generals whose absence he desired more
than their presence. Such advice squared with the Duke of Ragusa’s own
ideas, for he disliked to have about him officers who were too high in
rank and seniority to be his humble assistants. Junot and Loison went
back to France at once, and with them nearly all the old divisional
generals: Marmont worked the army with promoted brigadiers. We hear
for the future nothing more of many familiar names--Marchand, Merle,
Mermet, Heudelet, &c. Of the old divisional commanders only Clausel and
Solignac remained. The rest of the new divisions, into which the old
corps were redistributed, were given to men who had entered Portugal
in 1810 at the head of brigades only--Ferey, Brennier, Sarrut, Foy,
Maucune. Reynier stopped a few months more with the army and went off
in July, there being no place for him in the new system. Of the old
superior officers only Montbrun, commanding all the cavalry, remained
with Marmont till the end of the campaign of 1811--there was no one who
could be substituted for him in command of that arm.

In the reorganization of the army the old regimental association in
brigades and divisions were mainly adhered to. The two senior divisions
of the 6th Corps (Marchand’s and Mermet’s original commands) simply
became the 1st and 2nd Divisions of the Army of Portugal, under Foy
and Clausel. The two divisions of the 2nd Corps (late Merle’s and
Heudelet’s) became the 4th and 3rd Divisions of the new organization,
under Sarrut and Ferey[457]. The 8th Corps and Loison’s original
division of the 6th Corps were amalgamated, and made into the 5th and
6th Divisions (Maucune and Brennier). A few small abnormal units, such
as the Légion du Midi and the Hanoverian Legion, horse and foot, were
disbanded, and ceased to exist. All the isolated fourth battalions
of the old 8th Corps had gone down to skeleton units of 200 or 300
strong--their rank and file were drafted into other regiments, their
cadres sent home to France to recruit. In each Line regiment Marmont
reduced the number of field battalions to three or two, and, having
filled them up to a strength of 700 men each, sent back the cadres and
the small remainder of rank and file from the junior battalions to
their dépôts. A fortnight after Fuentes there were not more than 28,000
infantry with the eagles in the Army of Portugal, but there was a great
mass of convalescents in the base hospitals, and of newly arrived
drafts in the governments of Leon and Old Castile, whom Marmont strove,
not at first with great success, to draw to himself and embody in
their regiments. It was hard to get them forward, when every officer
commanding a small post in the rear detained drafts to strengthen his
garrison, and when the Governors of Salamanca and Valladolid wanted to
keep as many recovered convalescents with them as they could retain,
because their governments were undermanned.