

The Marshal’s situation, therefore, on May 1st was not unlike what
it had been at the end of the preceding December, when by the
Emperor’s orders he had been directed to make his first irruption into
Estremadura. He must once more collect from the 70,000 men of the
1st, 4th, and 5th Corps a force sufficient to beat whatever number
of troops the Allies had placed in that province. The task would
clearly be more difficult than it had been in January, for, instead
of 16,000 or 20,000 Spaniards, there were now in Estremadura some
20,000 Anglo-Portuguese, besides the 8,000 men of whom Ballasteros and
Castaños could dispose. Moreover, there was Blake to be taken into
consideration; but the Marshal--badly informed as to the movements of
that general and his corps--thought that he was still so far from the
rest of the Allies that he would not be able to join Beresford for
battle, if the attack upon the latter was pressed with great swiftness
and decision. The only favourable feature in the situation was that
Badajoz was now in French hands, and could not be used (as in February)
for a general rallying-place for the Allies. Campo Mayor and Olivenza
would be of little or no use to Beresford, and, if he made Elvas his
_point d’appui_, he must first evacuate all that lay on the south bank
of the Guadiana. The only alternative for the British general would be
to concentrate and fight at some point where he could cover the siege
of Badajoz. This was the probable course for him to adopt, and Soult
had to calculate the force that he would require in order to make
victory reasonably certain. He fixed it at about 25,000 men--too low
an estimate, as it turned out. It is interesting to note that at the
very moment when Soult was ordering his concentration at Seville, a
dispatch was on the way to him from Napoleon at Paris, dictating the
course which he ought to pursue under the exact circumstances which had
now arisen. ‘Wellington,’ wrote the Emperor on March 30th, ‘has only
32,000 British troops: he cannot make a detachment of more than 8,000
or 9,000 of them, with 5,000 or 6,000 Portuguese added. It is necessary
to keep permanently about Badajoz the value of 15,000 men of all arms,
in good state and of the best regiments, so that at the least movement
of the English on this side the Duke of Dalmatia, taking with him 8,000
or 10,000 men, should be able to concentrate in Estremadura a total of
from 25,000 to 30,000 men. If this exceptional crisis arises, only a
corps of observation must be left on the side of Granada, and it must
be placed under the orders of the Duke of Belluno (Victor). The Duke
of Dalmatia must keep in correspondence, via Madrid, with the Army
of Portugal and the Army of the Centre. The King ought always to keep
a division of 6,000 men between the Tagus and Badajoz, ready to unite
with the Duke of Dalmatia, if it becomes necessary to resist a movement
of the English against Andalusia. But to arrive at this result it is
necessary that the country-side should be entirely disgarrisoned, that
all hospitals and magazines should be concentrated in Seville, and that
Cadiz, Seville, and Badajoz should be the only points to guard, with a
corps of observation at Granada. In this case the Duke of Belluno would
take command of the troops at Seville and Granada, as well as of the
force besieging Cadiz, and the Duke of Dalmatia would only have charge
of the army opposed to the English. Counting the division from the Army
of the Centre, he can easily unite 30,000 to 35,000 men.... In this
case he would be able to resist even 30,000 English, if Lord Wellington
marched against him with his entire army. But this supposition can
never be realized; because, if it happened, the Prince of Essling
(Masséna) would be able to march on Lisbon, and the English would find
themselves cut off from that place, and between two fires[459].’