

  [473] This brigade, which appears for the Albuera campaign, was
  composed of the 5th Line (2 batts.) from the garrison of Elvas,
  joined by the 5th Caçadores, a detached light battalion which
  had been serving with the cavalry south of the Tagus since last
  November (see vol. iii. p. 557). This temporary brigade must not
  be confused with other units headed by Collins before and after.

About 15,000 men were already in line at Albuera when Soult’s intention
at last became perfectly clear: his _chasseurs_ and hussars vigorously
attacked Long’s horsemen at Santa Marta, and began to drive them along
the _chaussée_. Long made no stand, though, having three British
and two Portuguese regiments (Otway) besides some 600 of Castaños’s
cavalry, he was in considerable strength. ‘He was driven rather faster
than one could have wished, and retiring precipitately crossed the
Albuera stream, and gave up the whole right bank to the enemy. This
haste is a bad thing, because the woods there mask all the enemy’s
movements,’ wrote D’Urban in his diary. Beresford was so vexed with him
that he that night assigned to the command of the cavalry of the whole
allied army General Lumley, who was Long’s senior, leaving the latter
in nominal command of the British horse alone. Lumley, though then in
charge of an infantry brigade in the 2nd Division, was an old light
dragoon, and showed himself next day well able to manage a mass of
mounted men[474].

  [474] In a private letter to Sir H. Taylor, D’Urban uses even
  stronger language: ‘Our cavalry instead of retiring leisurely,
  had fallen back (indeed I may say _fled_) rapidly before the
  advanced guard of the enemy. The left bank of the Albuera was
  given up without the slightest attempt at dispute. This error on
  the part of the officer commanding the cavalry was so completely
  of a piece with his conduct upon more than one previous occasion,
  that it became imperatively necessary to relieve him.’ (D’Urban
  MSS.)

No enemy, save Briche’s light cavalry, came up during the 15th--Soult’s
infantry were far behind, and bivouacked that night at Santa Marta.
Beresford was therefore able to complete his concentration at leisure.
Blake’s army was directed to march up in the afternoon from Almendral,
only five miles away; Cole and the Spanish brigade of Carlos de España,
Castaños’s only infantry force, were directed to break up from the
Badajoz lines and march at 2 a.m. to Albuera. The Spaniards, for some
unknown reason, were very late; Blake only arrived at 11 p.m., and
his troops, encamping in the dark, could not take up the position
assigned to them till daylight. However, he had arrived, which was the
main thing, bringing with him the three infantry divisions of Zayas,
Ballasteros, and Lardizabal, and 1,000 horse under Loy, but only one
battery. Cole reported that he would be on the ground soon after dawn,
but that Kemmis was cut off from him by the rise of the river, so that
he could only bring two brigades instead of three. Orders were also
sent to Madden to close up with his Portuguese horse--but he could not
be found, having most unaccountably crossed the Guadiana to Montijo
with the bulk of his brigade, an eccentric and unjustifiable movement.
Two of his squadrons, however, were met, and sent to join Otway that
night.