

The position of Albuera is not a strong or a well-marked one, yet it
is far the best that can be discovered across the Seville _chaussée_
for many miles south of Badajoz. It consists of a long rolling line of
low hills, extending for several miles along the brook which takes its
name from the village. This stream is in spring an insignificant thread
of water, fordable anywhere by infantry or cavalry, and allowing even
guns and waggons to pass at many points, though there are occasionally
long stretches of bank with an almost precipitous drop of ten or twelve
feet, which would stop anything on wheels. The ground on the south-east
or French bank slopes up in a very gentle rise, and is covered in many
places with groves of olives, which make it impossible to take any
general view of the country-side, or to get more than vague and partial
notions as to any movements of troops that may be going on in it. On
the north-west or English bank the rolling heights are completely bare
of trees; except at the village of Albuera there is neither house,
wall, nor bush upon them--nothing taller than a few withered shrubs
three feet high[475].

  [475] This account of the Albuera position was written on the
  spot, and involved a good deal of walking on a blazing April day.
  See note at end of the chapter.

The so-called heights of Albuera are simply an undulation along the
bank of the stream, which rises very slightly above the level of the
plateau that stretches from the position to the descent into the
valley of the Guadiana, thirteen miles away. This ridge or undulation
extends in either direction as far as the eye can reach, with varying
altitude, sometimes only 60 feet, sometimes perhaps 150 feet above the
water’s edge. There are therefore many ‘dips’ on the summit of the
position. The main battle-spot was on the two slopes of one of these
dips, where, between two of the higher knolls of the ridge, there is
a depression perhaps a third of a mile in width. The back-descent of
the heights, to the north-west, in the direction of Badajoz, is even
gentler than that towards the Albuera stream. The ‘ravine of the Arroyo
river,’ marked in Napier’s and other maps, is an absurd exaggeration.
There is simply a slightly curved ‘bottom,’ where a lush growth of
grass along a certain line may indicate the course of a rivulet in
very wet weather. This line has no marked banks, and is as much like
a high-road as a ravine: it would not, even after rain, present any
obstacle to infantry or cavalry moving in mass[476], and it is a
mistake to make it take any prominent part in the history of the battle.

  [476] Either Napier never saw the ground of Albuera (as Beresford
  suggests in the _Strictures on Napier’s History_, p. 207) or else
  he had forgotten it. The only good plan available was D’Urban’s,
  and this Napier used (a copy of it is among his portfolio of maps
  in the Bodleian Library), memory or hypothesis exaggerating into
  hills and ravines the very gentle ups and downs shown on the map.