

  [468] I cannot find any proper account of these ‘compagnies
  helvétiques’ who were not part of the organized Swiss troops
  in French service. But they are several times mentioned in
  narratives of 1811. See for example Lapéne, p. 238. Presumably
  they were in King Joseph’s service.

But having taken another decision, and resolved to surrender nothing,
the Marshal had only gathered 12,000 men to reinforce the 5th Corps.
They required many days to concentrate, and it was only on May 8th that
he reviewed them in their new provisional brigading at Seville, and
delivered an allocution in which he announced to them that they were
destined to save Badajoz and drive the British from Estremadura, and
that the force would march at midnight on the 10th[469]. This threat
did not escape the Spanish patriots in the city, who passed the news on
so swiftly that Ballasteros was able to forward it to Beresford by the
afternoon of the 12th.

  [469] For details of the allocution to the officers ‘rangés en
  cercle,’ see Lapéne, p. 145.

Having once started, Soult hoped to surprise his enemy by the swiftness
of his movements. The head of the column which marched at 12 p.m. on
the night of the 9th-10th was at Santa Olalla, more than thirty miles
away, on the 11th. The pace had to slacken in crossing the Sierra
Morena, but on the 12th head quarters were at Monasterio (fifteen miles
further on) from which Ballasteros’s scouts withdrew. Latour-Maubourg
and the 5th Corps, far away to the right, had advanced at the same time
from Cazalla and Constantina, and driven Castaños’s advanced posts from
Guadalcanal and then from Llerena. On the 13th the two French forces
joined at Fuente Cantos, and their leading cavalry squadrons reached
Los Santos, from which the 13th Light Dragoons retired. As Wellington
had directed, nearly a month before, in his Elvas memorandum, the
Spaniards made no attempt to check the advance: their cavalry withdrew
as the French pushed forward; their infantry were prepared to fall back
on the rendezvous at Albuera.

From the 13th the British cavalry as well as the Spanish were in
touch with Soult; General Long had been lying about Villafranca and
Los Santos till that day, with three British and four Portuguese
regiments[470]. He retired to Fuente del Maestre, and then to Santa
Marta, contenting himself with reporting the successive advances of
the French to Beresford, who was apparently not over well contented
with his operations on this and the two following days, and thought
that he might have gone back more slowly, and have compelled the
leading squadrons of the enemy to deploy and lose time. At Fuente del
Maestre the allied cavalry split itself up, Madden with two Portuguese
regiments covering the roads to Almendralejo and Solana, while Long and
the main body stayed on the high-road to Badajoz via Santa Marta and
Albuera[471].

  [470] I cannot exactly make out on what day Madden’s weak cavalry
  brigade (4 squadrons 5th and 8th Portuguese) joined Beresford.
  It was not with him at Campo Mayor on March 25th, but was up by
  April 10. Probably it joined before April 1st, as it had been at
  Elvas since the battle of the Gebora.