

  [471] For these movements the best authority is Long’s journal,
  on pp. 109-11 of C. B. Long’s _Vindication_ of his relative.

Having such long warning of his adversary’s movements, Beresford was
able to carry out the concentration of his fighting force at leisure.
There was still some uncertainty as to which road the enemy might
choose, three[472] being open to him when his advance had reached
Los Santos, viz. (1) the obvious central and shortest route by
Albuera-Badajoz, (2) the eastern route Solana-Talavera Real-Badajoz,
(3) the western route Almendral-Valverde-Badajoz. The former was rather
circuitous, its main advantage to the French being that it was all
across open flat country, where their superior cavalry would have had
excellent ground; but the Albuera route was not perceptibly inferior
in this respect, as subsequent operations showed. To take the third or
western road, that by Almendral-Valverde (though this is not so long
as that by Solana) would have forced Soult to execute a flank march
across Beresford’s front, and (what probably weighed more with the
French Marshal) would have fixed the decisive spot, where the fate
of the campaign would be settled, nearer to the point towards which
Blake’s army was known to be marching: and Soult still hoped to fight
his battle in that general’s absence.

  [472] D’Urban in his narrative points out seven, but four of
  these were practically impossible.

On the 13th of May Beresford marched out from his lines in front of
Badajoz to Valverde, a point convenient for occupying a position
across two of the possible roads, and not very remote from the third
and least likely one. He took with him the 2nd Division and Hamilton’s
Portuguese, with three batteries. The rest of the army remained before
Badajoz, covering the removal of artillery and stores, but ready to
come up at any moment. On the same afternoon he had a conference with
General Blake, who rode over from Barcarrota. On the following day
Soult’s movement seemed to be growing much slower--the heads of his
columns only reached Fuente del Maestre and Villafranca. The fact, duly
reported to Beresford, that part of the French army had reached the
latter place, which is off the main _chaussée_ to the right, seemed to
make it possible that Soult was, after all, going to move by Talavera
Real. Beresford waited for a more precise indication of his adversary’s
final route, and sent pressing orders to Madden to cover with his
scouts all the open country between Talavera Real and Almendralejo.
Blake on this day, finding that his cavalry could discover no signs
of the French in his front, to the west of the great _chaussée_, drew
in from Barcarrota to Almendral, as he promised to do when he met
Beresford at Valverde on the 12th.

It being perfectly clear by this time that the French were not about
to take the western route, Beresford on the 15th marched the 2nd
Division and Hamilton’s Portuguese to Albuera, where they were joined
by more troops from in front of Badajoz, Alten’s German brigade, and
a provisional brigade of Portuguese under Colonel Collins[473]. Only
the 4th Division and the Spanish brigade belonging to Castaños, lately
arrived from Merida, now remained in front of the fortress--all on the
south bank save Kemmis’s brigade of the first-named unit. The last of
the stores were moved on this day from the trenches to Elvas, and the
flying bridge opposite the mouth of the Caya was taken up. This last
proved a mistake--it was intended that Kemmis should join the army by
using a ford below Badajoz, which had been practicable for the last ten
days; but on the night of the 15th-16th the water rose, and the brigade
was forced to march round by the next passage, that at Jerumenha, which
involved a circuit of thirty miles, and made it late for the battle.
Only three companies, which chanced to be on the south bank of the
Guadiana when the freshet came down, were able to march off with Cole
and the rest of the division, when the order came.