

  [454] Parquin, who served for some time in his escort squadron,
  calls him ‘très aimé pour les soins qu’il prenait du soldat’
  (_Mémoires_, p. 298), and rather admires him for having nothing
  but silver plate with him when on campaign.

The military capacity of this clever, vain, ostentatious young marshal
has often been undervalued. He was an excellent strategist, who could
grasp and face a situation with firmness and rapidity. He could form
a good plan of campaign, and manœuvre his troops skilfully, as was
sufficiently shown in his movements in June 1811 and July 1812. As an
organizer he cannot be too highly praised: the way in which he refitted
the Army of Portugal within a month of Fuentes, and made it efficient
for a long and difficult march across central Spain, was deserving
of the highest approval. His weak point was in tactical execution.
When he had got his army to the striking point, he was seized with
irresolution, which contrasted strangely with the skill and decision
which he had shown up to that moment. In personal courage he was the
equal of any of his colleagues--but he could not keep a clear head
on a battle morning. Foy, who served under him during the whole of
his command in Spain, sums him up as follows in his diary: ‘Bold and
enterprising till the moment of danger, he suddenly becomes cold and
apathetic when the armies are in presence. In discussion he will not
face the difficulty, but tries to evade it. He is a good, estimable,
and respectable man, but he himself (and many others) have been
entirely deceived as to the value of his talents. He was never born
to be the general of an army. His face expresses too faithfully the
hesitation of his mind. He asks advice too often, too publicly, and of
too many persons. A witty friend said to me in 1806: “Marmont is like
Mont Cenis: in good weather his brow is high and imposing, in times
of storm the clouds wrap it completely round[455].” ... Yet so mobile
is his imagination that, when the crisis is over, he forgets all his
indecision and mental anguish, he effaces from his memory past facts,
and turns to his profit and glory all that has happened, even events
that were unfortunate and disgraceful[456].’

  [455] Foy’s _Vie Militaire_, p. 171.

  [456] Ibid., p. 177, note (1).

Marmont had commanded an army corps with credit; he had even conducted
a little campaign of his own against the Austrians on the Dalmatian
frontier, in 1809, so as to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion. But
he was very far from being fit to contend with Wellington, who was
as good a strategist as himself and a practical tactician of a very
different class of merit. He lacked both the imperturbable coolness and
the iron resolution of his opponent--and the first time that they met
in serious combat he was ‘found out,’ and dashed to destruction.

Meanwhile Marmont’s first seven weeks of command were infinitely
creditable to him. He reorganized the Army of Portugal with a rapidity
that disarranged Wellington’s calculations, and he led it to the
strategical point where it was needed, with great swiftness and
skill--as we shall presently see.