

  [477] _Strictures on Napier’s History_, vol. iii. pp. 233-4.

Beresford’s line was drawn up as follows: on the extreme left, to
the north-east of Albuera, were Hamilton’s Portuguese division, with
Collins’s brigade in support, amounting to eleven strong battalions
in two lines. Beyond them, to guard the flank, were Otway’s weak
Portuguese cavalry brigade and the two stray squadrons of Madden’s. The
whole made only 800 sabres.

The centre was formed of William Stewart’s English division, the
2nd, comprising the three brigades of Colborne, Hoghton, and
Abercrombie[478], ten battalions. In front of them Alten’s two German
battalions occupied Albuera village. The 2nd Division was drawn up
across the high-road, on the reverse slope of the heights; Beresford
had learned from Wellington to hide his men till the actual moment of
conflict, and, as he says with some pride, not a man of Stewart’s or
Hamilton’s divisions was visible, and the only troops under the enemy’s
eye were Otway’s cavalry and the two German battalions in Albuera.

  [478] Who took over Lumley’s brigade when the latter was promoted
  to command the cavalry that morning.

In the rear of Stewart, as general reserve, was Cole’s division from
the siege of Badajoz, which had marched at 2 o’clock a.m. according
to orders and reached the field at 6.30 in the morning. There was
some error in ‘logistics’ here, for Cole ought to have been earlier
on the field. He had fifteen miles to cover, and should have been
started sooner, for preference on the preceding evening, so as to
allow his men time to rest and cook on reaching the position. Having
marched till dawn they then had to lie down in formation, and eat as
best they might, for the French were on the move not very long after
they came up. The division, as already mentioned, consisted only of
Myers’s fusilier brigade (1 and 2/7th Royal Fusiliers and 1/23rd Royal
Welsh Fusiliers) and Harvey’s Portuguese brigade (11th, 23rd, and 1st
battalion Lusitanian Legion). Kemmis with the other British brigade,
save three companies which had followed Myers, was making a fruitless
march against time, round by Jerumenha. With Cole there had also come
up Castaños’s sole contribution of infantry--the weak brigade of Carlos
de España, three battalions with 1,700 bayonets[479].

  [479] The remainder of Murillo’s division of 3,000 men, which
  formed the infantry of the 5th Army, was at Merida, save one
  battalion in garrison at Olivenza.

The right wing of Beresford’s position, the part of it which he thought
least likely to be attacked, was held by Blake’s 12,000 men. Having
encamped anyhow on the hillside, when they arrived at midnight, they
had to be collected and rearranged with much loss of time after
morning broke. Indeed, they had formed their line only about an hour
before the battle began. The three infantry divisions of Lardizabal,
Ballasteros, and Zayas were arranged in succession from left to right,
each with one brigade in first and one in second line. The 1,100
horse of Loy were out on the extreme right, corresponding to Otway’s
Portuguese on the extreme left. Of the rest of the allied cavalry, De
Grey’s 700 heavy dragoons and 600 horse of Castaños’s Estremaduran
force, under Penne Villemur, were in reserve near Cole’s 4th Division.
The 13th Light Dragoons, separated from the other two British
regiments, were watching the course of the Albuera from the bridge
upwards, in front of Blake’s line.