

There is no ravine or ‘dead ground’ of any kind anywhere on either the
French or the English side of the Albuera. The slopes are so gentle
that any spot can be seen from any other. But the French side is
wooded, so that movements of troops are hard to follow, while the other
bank is absolutely bare. There is, however, a ‘sky-line’ on the English
heights, between the dip where the main battle took place and Albuera
village. An observer standing on the point where Soult formed his front
of battle cannot get a view of the English line near the village--to
do so he must ride sideways down towards the water, to look along the
trough of the depression. Hence Soult during the battle cannot have
seen a good deal of what was going on behind the allied front line, but
Beresford, on the sky-line above the north-eastern edge of the dip,
could make out all Soult’s dispositions when the battle smoke did not
hinder him.

Albuera is a big well-built village, with a disproportionately high
church tower. It stands on a knoll of its own, in front of the main
line of the ridge, to which it serves as an outwork, as Hougoumont
did to Wellington’s position at Waterloo. It is well away from the
river bank, perhaps 150 or 200 yards from it; the bridge which brings
the Seville _chaussée_ across the stream is not exactly opposite the
village, but decidedly to the south-east of it.

The Albuera stream is formed by two minor brooks, the Nogales and the
Chicapierna, which meet a little south of the village. Between them
is a low wooded hill, which conceals from an observer on the British
heights the upper course of the Nogales, and part of the woods beyond,
in which the French formed their order of battle. It was behind this
long low knoll that Soult hid his main attacking column. But the
elevation itself is insignificant, and much less effective than the
more distant woods in covering his movement.

Beresford drew up his army on the hypothesis that Soult’s aim would be
to pierce his centre, by capturing Albuera village, and storming the
heights beyond, over which the high-road passes. Years after the battle
had become a matter of history he still maintained[477] that this would
have been his adversary’s best policy, since the place where the road
crosses the position is the lowest and weakest part of the heights, and
a blow piercing the centre of a hostile army is always more effective
than the mere tactical success of turning one of his flanks, which
still leaves everything to be decided by hard fighting, if the attacked
party throws back his threatened wing, and stands to defend himself in
the new position. The ground on the allied right wing he held, on the
other hand, to be higher and stronger: and even if the French got upon
the crest of the heights, the range gave, by reason of its successive
dips, several positions on which a new line could well be formed. I
leave these considerations to the critic, and am not fully convinced by
them.