

  [485] I published Major Brooke’s diary in _Blackwood_ for 1908,
  with an account of his almost miraculous subsequent escape from
  Seville, under the title of ‘A Prisoner of Albuera.’

  [486] See _History of the 66th Regiment_ in Cannon’s Series.

But not all the victorious horsemen were so inhumane; 479 prisoners,
many wounded, were driven off to the French lines. The brigade lost
five of its six colours; and the four guns of Cleeves’s battery, which
had accompanied it, were captured. Only one howitzer, however, was
dragged off by the victors--the other three were left behind for want
of horses. The 2/31st, somewhat to the left rear of its comrades, had
time to form square, and beat off without difficulty the rush of the
remnant of the lancers who got so far as its position. Marking too late
the awful catastrophe on his left, General Lumley sent two squadrons
of the 4th Dragoons to fall upon the flank and rear of the Poles--but
they were intercepted by a French hussar regiment which Latour-Maubourg
sent out to cover the retreat of the lancers, and were beaten
back with the loss of both their squadron leaders wounded and taken
prisoners[487].

  [487] Napier is quite wrong in saying that this small diversion
  was successful, iii. 167. The prisoners were Captains Phillips
  and Spedding.

[Illustration: ALBUERA. Nº 1 (About 10 a.m.)

NOTE.--The front line of the French attacking force is not correctly
represented. It consisted of a column of four battalions in the centre,
flanked by two deployed battalions, and with battalions in column
placed outside the two deployed battalions on either side (see p. 380).
In the French reserve there should be only two, not three, battalions
of Grenadiers. The right flank of Zayas’s line is two battalions too
long.]

It may be remarked that the loss of the victorious cavalry was very
heavy, though not out of proportion to their success. The lancers lost
130 men out of 580--the hussars who charged in support of them 70 out
of 300. It was a curious evidence of the headlong nature of their
charge that some scores of the Poles, after passing by and failing to
break the square of the 2/31st, actually rode down the rear of Zayas’s
Spanish line, sweeping aside that general and his staff, and coming
into collision soon after with Beresford and his--the Marshal actually
parried a lance-thrust, and cast the man who dealt it from his saddle,
and his aides-de-camp had to fight for their lives.

At this moment the head of Hoghton’s brigade was just coming up from
the rear--and its leading regiment opening fire on the scattered
lancers shot a great many men of the rear rank of Zayas’s Spaniards
in the back. Notwithstanding this, and to their eternal credit,
the Spaniards did not break, and continued their frontal contest
with Girard’s division, which had not slackened for a moment during
Colborne’s disastrous fight[488].

  [488] The writer of the _Strictures on Napier’s History_, vol.
  iii, gives as an eye-witness the following anecdote: ‘As a
  Spanish soldier in the ranks close to the Marshal was looking
  to the rear, a Spanish-Irish officer in that service cried to
  him, “To-day is not the day to fly, when you are fighting as the
  comrades of the British.” The poor fellow replied, “No, señor,
  mas los Ingleses nos tiraron por atrás.”’ The Spanish never at
  any moment fired into the British, as Napier asserts. The mistake
  was remedied by Beresford’s aide-de-camp Arbuthnot, who rode, at
  great risk, along the front of the 29th, and stopped their fire.