

  [511] He outrode his own estimate, since according to a letter to
  Charles Stuart (_Dispatches_, vii. 572) he had intended not to
  reach Elvas till the 21st, ‘unless I see reason on the road to go
  a little quicker.’

  [512] Memorandum for Spencer, dated May 15th, the night before
  Wellington’s departure. _Dispatches_, vii. p. 567.

  [513] To Spencer, May 24. _Dispatches_, vii. p. 602.

Just before starting on his ride from Villar Formoso to Elvas
Wellington received Beresford’s dispatches of May 12, which informed
him that Soult (as had been expected) was on the march from Seville
to relieve Badajoz, and that, according to the instructions that had
been given, the allied army of Estremadura would fight him, if he were
not too strong to be meddled with. It was the news that battle was
impending which made the Commander-in-Chief quicken his pace to fifty
miles a day, in hopes that he might be in time to take charge of the
troops in person. He galloped ahead, and on the morning of the 19th
heard, between Niza and Elvas, that there had been a pitched battle
on the 16th, and that Soult had been repulsed. The details met him
at Elvas, where Arbuthnot, Beresford’s aide-de-camp, handed him the
Albuera dispatch. He read it through, and struck out some paragraphs
before sending it on to the Ministry at home. The reason for these
erasures was that he considered that Beresford’s tone was a little too
desponding, and that he had laid too much stress on the terrible loss
of the British troops, and too little on the complete check to Soult’s
designs[514]. He wrote to the Marshal to hearten him up, to tell him
that the result achieved had been worth the cost. ‘You could not be
successful in such an action without a large loss, and we must make up
our mind to affairs of this kind sometimes--or give up the game[515].’

  [514] This is mentioned by Wellington himself (Stanhope’s
  _Conversations_, p. 90): ‘He could not stand the slaughter
  about him and the vast responsibility: the letter was quite in
  a desponding tone. It was brought me by Arbuthnot while I was
  at dinner at Elvas, and I said, “This won’t do: write me down a
  victory.” So the dispatch was altered accordingly.’

  [515] Wellington to Beresford, May 19, 4.30 p.m.

With the military situation that he found in existence on May 19th
Wellington professed himself satisfied. Hamilton’s Portuguese division
had reinvested Badajoz on the preceding day. Soult was in full retreat,
with the allied cavalry in pursuit of him. It was uncertain whether he
would fall back on Seville or halt at the line of the Sierra Morena;
but at any rate his bolt was shot: he could give no trouble for some
weeks, and would only become dangerous if he strengthened his army by
calling up Sebastiani and Victor, and evacuating the Cadiz Lines and
Granada. This Wellington rightly believed that he would not think of
doing. He would rather cry for aid to his neighbours, and it would take
a long time for reinforcements to reach him from the Army of Portugal
or from Madrid. There was a month in hand, and Badajoz must be captured
if possible within that space.