

  [537] Lamare, p. 179.

  [538] Lapéne, p. 212. Cf. Lamare, p. 203.

It was at noon on June 10th that Wellington made up his mind that the
siege must be abandoned. Calling together the divisional commanders,
and the senior officers of artillery and engineers, he gave them a
short address. It had been proved, he said, that it was impossible to
storm San Cristobal without sapping up to the crest of the glacis,
which was a practically impossible task on the bare rock. There was
now a breach in the Castle, but it was too remote from the parallel,
and the route to it was commanded both by the guns on the flank of San
Cristobal and those on the lunette of San Roque and other parts of the
southern enceinte. It was known that it had been elaborately retrenched
behind, by ditches and palisades. But these were not his sole or the
main reasons for stopping the siege. He had news that Marmont and the
9th Corps would both join Soult in a few days: and the allied army must
not be caught in the trenches, and forced to fight superior numbers in
an unfavourable position. It would be possible to stop five days more
and to continue the battering for that time, but on the 15th the French
armies might be concentrated and a general action forced upon him.
This he would not risk, but had decided to order the whole siege-train
to be withdrawn into Elvas at once, while the army would keep up the
blockade of Badajoz till the enemy drew near, and would then retire
beyond the Guadiana at its leisure, and take up a position on the
Portuguese frontier which he had already chosen. As soon as it was dark
the guns should be withdrawn from the batteries, and the sending of
stores, tools, &c., back to Elvas must commence. He would have risked a
couple of days more battering if he had thought it likely to lead to a
storm. But it was his opinion that there was no prospect of immediate
success against the place, and he was therefore resolved to give up the
siege even before he was actually forced to do so. Rumour adds that
he muttered more or less to himself that ‘next time he would be his
own engineer[539].’ But he did not speak publicly in censure of the
mistakes of Fletcher and his colleagues: the men who had planned and
built the Lines of Torres Vedras were not to be disgraced lightly, even
if they had failed in their last task.

  [539] See Burgoyne’s _Diary_, i. p. 135: ‘There is an account
  current that his Lordship says if he undertakes another siege
  he will be his own engineer. Whatever faults were committed
  at Badajoz I suspect he was not aware of them, and I think it
  very doubtful whether he even knows them now. It appears to me
  probable that he _did_ say so, by the mystery affected about
  _our_ [the engineer] head quarters respecting the siege.’
  Burgoyne, an engineer with his feelings hurt, under-values
  Wellington’s intelligence.

The approaching concentration of the French armies had been very
carefully watched by Wellington, who was in constant touch with
Spencer, and had been keeping a most vigilant eye on all his reports.
He had also been helped by several intercepted dispatches, taken on the
way between the Armies of Portugal and Andalusia, and by reports from
the guerrillero chiefs of Castile and his own secret correspondents
in Salamanca. Marmont had been much more rapid in his movements, and
had shown more willingness to help a colleague in distress, than was
usual among the French commanders in Spain. He was new to command, and
very zealous; it is certain that a year later, when he had gained more
experience of co-operation with Soult, he would not come so fast and so
eagerly to his aid.