

  [525] 30 brass 24-pounders, 4 16-pounders, 4 ten-inch howitzers,
  8 eight-inch ditto, according to Dickson’s letter of May 29.
  See his papers, ed. Leslie, p. 394. I follow him rather than
  Jones’s _Sieges of the Peninsula_, where they differ, as he is
  absolutely contemporary authority, and was the officer in charge
  of everything.

On May 29th the siege work began, by the opening up of the old trenches
opposite the Pardaleras fort, which the French had filled in on the day
of Albuera. This was merely done to draw the attention of the garrison
away from the real points of attack, for there was no intention of
approaching the place from the south. It would have been better for the
Allies had this been a genuine operation, and if the Castle and San
Cristobal attacks had been false! It attracted, as was intended, much
notice from the garrison.

On the night of the 30th the serious work began. On the Castle side
1,600 men from the 3rd Division commenced at dusk a long trench, on
the same ground that had been dug over during the first siege, and
three zigzag approaches to it from the rear. This trench, the first
parallel, was no less than 800 yards from the Castle. The attention of
the enemy was so much drawn to other points, and the soil was so soft,
that by daybreak there had been formed a trench 1,100 yards long, with
a parapet three feet high, and a depth of three feet in the ground:
the approaches were also well advanced. On San Cristobal, at the other
attack, everything went very differently. The ground chosen for the
first parallel was, owing to the exigencies of the contour of the hill,
only 400 yards from the fort. The working parties were discovered
at once, and a heavy fire was directed on them, not only from San
Cristobal, but from the Castle, across the river. It was found that
there was no soil to dig in--what little once existed had been used in
building the old trenches of the first siege, and the French governor,
during his days of respite, May 15-18, had ingeniously ordered that all
this earth should be carted away, and thrown down the steep towards
the river. All that could be done was to place a row of gabions along
the intended line of trench, and to begin to bring up earth from below
to stuff them. At daylight there was not more than two feet of earth
thrown up along the more important points in the parallel, where it
was intended that three batteries should be placed. The enemy’s fire
soon knocked over the gabions, and the working parties had to be
withdrawn from a great part of the front. Practically nothing had been
accomplished, and there had been many casualties.

Things continued to go on in the same fashion during the succeeding
days. The parallel opposite the Castle was easily completed with
little loss; a great battery for twenty guns was thrown up in the
middle of it, and received its pieces, sixteen brass 24-pounders and
four howitzers, on the night of the 2nd-3rd. No attempt was made to
begin a second parallel nearer the Castle, from which it could be
battered at short range. On the other hand the San Cristobal attack
encountered heart-rending difficulties from the want of soil; the
screen of gabions was knocked about, the two batteries opposite the
fort made little progress, and the only thing completed was a third
battery, at the extreme edge of the hill, which was far enough away
to escape destruction, but also too far away (1,200 yards) to do much
damage. It seemed so hopeless to work on the bare rock that Wellington
ordered £400 worth of wool-packs to be bought in Elvas, and when these
were brought up on June 2 they proved impermeable to shot, and a solid
start could be made for the parapets of the batteries. But the enemy
kept dropping shells, from mortars in the Castle, among the working
parties, with great accuracy, and the casualties were many. On June 2nd
two small batteries, for five and eight guns respectively, had at last
been erected about 450 yards from the fort, and a third behind them, in
support, for four more guns, which were to shoot over the parallel.