

The net result of these last three days of bombardment on the Castle
side was still unsatisfactory. The ship-guns had at last brought down
a good deal of earth and rubble, which was lying in a heap at the foot
of the battered wall. But on each of the mornings of the 8th and 9th it
was found that the French had, during the dark hours, scarped the front
of the breach, and thrown aside so much of the débris that there was
still a perpendicular face of six or seven feet high, between the top
of the heap of broken earth and masonry and the bottom of the seam of
broken wall. This work had been carried out by the garrison under great
difficulties, for the British batteries had been throwing grape against
the foot of the breach all night, for the purpose of preventing any
such activity. But the French, trusting to the cover of the darkness,
had continued to work on manfully, and, though some men were hit, the
task had on each night been more or less carried out. On the 9th the
engineers came to the conclusion that they dared not advise any attempt
to storm on this side, considering the enormous distance--600 yards
from the wall--at which the columns of attack would have to start, even
if they debouched from the part of the parallel which was nearest to
the Castle. There was also the bed of the Rivillas to cross, and the
guns from that part of the Castle which was uninjured, and from the
flank of San Cristobal, would cut up the stormers by enfilading fire.
The engineers reluctantly concluded that nothing could be done against
the Castle till San Cristobal had fallen, or till a second parallel had
been pushed forward much nearer to the place. This was a confession
that all their original plans had been erroneous, and that the immense
store of shot and shell lavished on the Castle breach had been wasted.

All therefore depended on the result of a second attempt to storm San
Cristobal. Here there were now two breaches, a large and a small one;
the parapets were completely knocked to pieces, and the fort looked
a mere battered heap; its fire had been nearly silenced--so much so
that not a single casualty occurred in the trench before it during
the last twelve hours of bombardment. Nevertheless the breaches were
not very practicable, for here (as at the Castle) the garrison had,
by hard work during the nights, cleared away great part of the débris
below the breach; they could not be prevented from doing so, because
the besiegers’ batteries were so far away that they were unable to
command the dead ground in the bottom of the ditch. On each morning
the battered parapet was found to have been replaced with sandbags and
wool-packs, and the breach itself stopped with _chevaux de frise_.
These were swept away again by continual battering, both on the 8th and
the 9th, but the gallant garrison began to replace them on each evening
the moment that dusk fell. Nor could this be prevented, because,
contrary to all the rules of siegecraft, the besiegers had not sapped
up close enough to the walls to enable them to prevent repairs from
being carried out. General Phillipon had doubled the garrison of the
fort, which now consisted of two companies instead of the one that had
held it on the 6th. The men were furnished with three muskets each, and
a great store of grenades, fire-balls, and live shell, prepared for
throwing by hand, had been sent up into the work.