

  [535] French observers in the fort noted one attempt made by men
  of their own nationality, from the _Chasseurs Britanniques_.
  A young officer, calling ‘Je monte, suivez-moi,’ got to the
  top of the ladder with two or three of his soldiers, ran some
  feet forward up the lip of the breach, and was then bayoneted.
  This must have been Lieutenant Dufief of the _C.B._, the only
  officer of the corps returned as hurt in the storm. See Lapéne’s
  _Campagne de 1810-11 dans le Midi de l’Espagne_, p. 210.

  [536] The losses were, according to the report:--

                            Killed.        Wounded.        Missing.
                        Officers. Men.  Officers. Men.  Officers. Men.  Total.
  51st                      1      23       2      31      --      --  =   57
  85th                      1       7       1      10       1      --  =   20
  _Chasseurs Britanniques_ --       8       1      13      --       2  =   24
  Brunswick Oels           --       1       1       5      --      --  =    7
  17th Portuguese           2      10       1      16       1      --  =   30
  Engineers                 1      --      --      --      --      --  =    1
                                                                          ---
                           Total, 54 killed, 81 wounded, and 4 missing  = 139

The losses suffered, one man in three, and the time for which the
stormers persisted in the attempt, some fifty minutes, prove that there
was no want of courage shown on this disastrous night. The fact seems
to be that, as on the 6th, the breach was not really practicable, that
an attack could hardly succeed when the column had to cross 400 yards
of exposed ground before reaching the fort, and that a storm should
never have been tried, when the besieger had not sapped up to the edge
of the ditch and placed himself in a position to command it. It may be
mentioned that such a ditch as this, hewn in the live rock and very
deep, was particularly hard to deal with. Its edges could not become
abraded, and it was easy for the defenders to shovel away the débris
that fell into it, because the bottom was solid and hard, and the
masonry that had been knocked down lay on it, instead of sinking into
its floor.

On the morning of the 10th the fire against the Castle was continued
with vigour, but on San Cristobal there was a six hours’ truce, which
was asked and granted, in order that the many wounded scattered along
the slope below the fort might be gathered in. The French, being able
to work unmolested at repairs during the cessation of fire, had every
reason for giving a polite and humane answer to the request made by the
besiegers.

Everything seemed now to depend on the attack against the Castle, since
that on the other side of the river had come to such a disastrous
conclusion. The fire of the newly arrived iron ship-guns was still
very effective, and the breach looked larger and less steep. In fact
French accounts state that it was now for the first time thoroughly
practicable--but it was 800 yards from the British parallel, and the
artillery on the neighbouring bastions and even on the Castle itself
was still intact. Phillipon was in no wise freed from care by the
successful repulse of the two attempts to storm San Cristobal. He had
just had to reduce his troops to half-rations, and even on this scale
there were only ten days more of food in the place: no provisions
had been got in since Beresford’s first siege began in April. The
garrison, though its losses in killed and wounded had not been great,
had many sick, and the strain of being constantly under arms expecting
an assault was beginning to be felt. There was no news from outside,
save that brought by two or three deserters from the foreign corps in
the British 7th Division, who reported that Soult was still in the
Sierra Morena[537], and that they had heard nothing of the approach
of a relieving army, though there was a rumour that Victor was going
to raise the siege of Cadiz in order to join his chief. Phillipon was
forced to contemplate the double possibility of his provisions running
short and of a successful assault on the Castle front. Wherefore he
resolved that preparations should be made to bring off the garrison by
a sally, if the worst came to the worst. If no relief came, or if the
walls were forced, the whole available body of his men were to cross
the river to the Cristobal side under cover of the night, and to dash
at the lines of the besiegers, in order to cut their way through by the
road to Montijo and Merida. But this was not to be tried before the day
of absolute necessity should arrive: the council of war called by the
governor decided that the topic of evasion need not be broached for
five days more[538]. Before those five days had expired they were out
of danger and sure of relief.