

On June 5 affairs went on much in the same style: the breaching of the
Castle was an absolute failure: ‘the practice was extremely good, but
the bank of earth at the breach still remained perpendicular[528].’ It
was discovered, however, that the French were so far alarmed at the
results of the battering that they were constructing elaborate inner
retrenchments behind the breach. On Cristobal the prospects looked more
promising; so much of the wall as was visible over the edge of the
ditch along the attacked front was demolished for a distance of many
yards. With another day’s fire it was decided that the breach would be
practicable[529].

  [528] Jones, _Sieges of the Peninsula_, i. p. 57.

  [529] This decision was the result of the report of an engineer
  officer, Lieutenant Forster, who crept up to the edge of the
  ditch during the night of the 5th-6th, and saw much rubble
  therein.

Accordingly the batteries on both sides of the river thundered away
for the whole day on the 6th, the Castle attack with fourteen guns out
of its original twenty, the Cristobal attack with seventeen remaining
out of twenty-three. On the former front the results were somewhat
more satisfactory than those of the three first days of battering: the
seam in the castle wall appearing much wider, and the accumulation of
rubbish at its foot beginning to look appreciable. Observers in the
trenches held that a single man, climbing unhindered, might get up
to the top, but of course there was a great difference between such
a scrambling place and a ‘practicable breach.’ Nothing, at any rate,
could yet be done on this side in the way of assault. There were, it
must be remembered, 800 yards of open ground between the parallel from
which a storming-column must start and the foot of the damaged wall,
not to speak of the muddy bed of the Rivillas brook, which had to be
forded in order to reach the Castle hill.

The San Cristobal breach, on the other hand, was judged ripe for
assault, though the condition of its lower part was not accurately
known. According to French accounts it was probably practicable at
dusk, but the moment that night fell sixty men went down into the
ditch, and began clearing away the débris with such energy that there
was a sheer seven-foot drop once more, at midnight, between the bottom
of the excavation and the lip of the battered wall above it. The
garrison also stuffed up the breach with _chevaux de frise_, and carts
turned upside down and jammed together, while the sappers in the fort
prepared a quantity of fourteen-inch bombs, to be thrown by hand into
the ditch when an assault should be made. It is probable that the delay
of over four hours between dark (7.30) and midnight, when the storm
came, just sufficed to provide defences strong enough to render the
attack hopeless. The governor of the fort, Captain Chauvin of the 88th
Line, deserves all credit for his admirable activity and resource.

The arrangement of the assault fell to General Houston, whose division
was to deliver it. The regiments from which volunteers were picked
were the 1/51st, 2/85th, and 17th Portuguese. The forlorn hope of
twenty-five men was conducted by the engineer, Lieutenant Forster, who
had explored the ditch on the preceding night, and led by Lieutenant
Dyas of the 51st. The main body of the assaulting column was composed
of 155 grenadiers, led by Major Mackintosh of the 85th; they were
divided into two companies; the leading company carried ten ladders,
for use in case it should be found that the ditch was cleared and the
ascent to the breach steep. Detachments from the guards of the trenches
were to move out, and cut the communication between San Cristobal
and the works near the bridge-head, from which reinforcements might
come[530].