

At half-past nine in the morning of June 3rd the batteries on both
fronts began to play on their chosen objectives. The fire was at first
wild, owing to the eccentric behaviour of the old seventeenth-century
brass guns, every one of which had its tricks and deficiencies. As
the gunners began to learn and humour them, some effect began to be
produced, especially on the Castle. Here great flakes of masonry
began to fall in the evening, but it was noticed that behind the
stone facing there was a core of clay-slate, the natural soil of the
Castle hill, which remained perpendicular when the masonry crumbled.
On San Cristobal, the south-east front of the fort, the one selected
for breaching, was somewhat damaged, and the guns nearly silenced by
evening. But the besiegers’ artillery had already begun to fall off
in strength: only one piece had been disabled by the French, but four
others had gone out of action owing to their own faults, ‘unbushing,’
‘muzzle drooping,’ or carriages shaken to pieces by recoil. The second
day of fire (June 4th) was hardly more satisfactory in its results:
against the Castle the guns made better practice so far as accurate
hitting the mark went, but the balls seemed to have no effect: the core
of soil behind the breached masonry remained nearly as perpendicular as
on the preceding evening. ‘Eight-inch shells fired against it would not
penetrate it,’ wrote the disgusted Alexander Dickson, ‘but absolutely
dropped back, and burst below among the rubbish[526].’ Meanwhile one
more gun in this attack was disabled by the French fire, two by ‘muzzle
drooping,’ and three howitzer carriages were so shaken that they had
to be withdrawn for repairs. Only thirteen guns out of the original
twenty were firing at sunset, and ‘the failure of the old brass pieces
was becoming so alarming that an interval of seven to eight minutes
was ordered between each round, to give the metal time to cool[527].’
A new battery was constructed at the right end of the parallel, near
the river, at a point somewhat nearer to the Castle than the original
battery, in the hope that fire from a distance shorter by a hundred
yards might have better effect, and five guns were moved into it under
cover of the night.

  [526] _Dickson Papers_, ed. Leslie, p. 405.

  [527] Jones, _Sieges of the Peninsula_, i. p. 54.

On San Cristobal the second day’s fire was a little better in results,
the flank of the fort which was selected for breaching having its
parapet knocked to pieces, and much debris having fallen into the
ditch. But unknown to the besiegers, whose view could not command the
bottom of the ditch, the French removed most of the stones and rubbish
during the night, so that the accumulation at the bottom, on which the
practicability of the future breach depended, was much smaller than
was supposed by the British engineers. Two more guns and two howitzers
in this attack were out of action by the evening--all owing to their
own defects, not to the fire from the fort. The batteries were much
incommoded by an enfilading fire across the river from the Castle,
where some guns had been placed on a high ‘cavalier’ to bear on the
slopes below Cristobal.