

Long before Soult’s Llerena dispatch came to hand, Marmont had
already begun to move some of his divisions towards the Tagus, as a
precautionary measure, in case his offer should be accepted. But it was
apparently the news of Albuera which made him resolve to betake himself
to Estremadura with every available man, and not Soult’s appeal, which
only reached him after he had started. He was anxious to hand over the
charge of the whole frontier of Leon, and of the fortress of Ciudad
Rodrigo, to Bessières. But the Duke of Istria protested in the most
vehement style against having this responsibility thrust upon him.
Until he had learnt of the Albuera check, he kept preaching to Mortier
on the text that Soult was well able to take care of himself, and ought
to draw rather on Drouet and Madrid for reinforcements than on the Army
of Portugal. Marmont might move a division to Baños and Bejar, and two
more to Plasencia, but this was all that honour and prudence demanded.
The main body of his troops ought to be left in or near Salamanca,
to observe the British force in front of Ciudad Rodrigo. The Army of
the North could not spare a man to relieve Marmont’s troops on the
Douro and the Tormes, if they marched away; what with the Galicians,
the Cantabrian bands of Longa and Porlier, and the guerrilleros, it
had so much upon its hands that it could not find one brigade to
occupy Salamanca. The Army of Portugal was so much in need of rest and
reinforcement that it would perish by the way, or never reach Badajoz,
if its commander persisted in carrying out his quixotic plan, &c.

All these arguments were hollow: Bessières disliked Soult, and not only
would not stir a finger himself to aid him, but wished to discourage
Marmont from doing so. When the news of Albuera came, he made shift to
protect the frontiers of Leon, despite of all his previous allegations.
His estimate of the impossibility of the march to Badajoz was
absolutely falsified: the Army of Portugal accomplished it in fifteen
days without any appreciable loss in men or material. Marmont deserves,
as he himself remarks[544], great credit for his move, which was made
contrary to his colleague’s advice, and without any orders from Paris.
For Napoleon’s dispatches, based, as usual, on facts three weeks or a
month old, were coming in at this time with notes as to the resting
and reorganization of the army, and spoke of a battle near Ciudad
Rodrigo, to keep Wellington from besieging that place, as the next task
which would probably fall to the Duke of Ragusa[545]. Marmont had as
directions nothing but a vague precept to ‘act for the general interest
of the Imperial armies in Spain’ and to keep an eye on Andalusia, where
the progress of affairs would be better known to him than it could be
in Paris[546]. These directions he most certainly carried out, but on
his own responsibility, and without any detailed instructions from his
master. Indeed, his dispatch of May 31st, in which he informed the
Emperor that he was about to march for the Tagus, brought down on him
a scolding from Berthier for moving with only thirty-six pieces of
artillery, and for not having sent back to Bayonne a mass of men of the
train, who were to pick up horses there[547]. If Marmont had waited
to procure more teams from the rear, he would never have joined Soult
in time to raise the siege of Badajoz. It was the quickness of his
movement which forced the Allies to abandon that enterprise.