

The 7th Division delivered its second assault on the night of the 9th,
three hours earlier than on the previous occasion, and only ninety
minutes after dark had fallen. This moment had been chosen in order
that the French might have less time to do repairs. But nine o’clock
was still too late an hour; rough preparations to receive the stormers
had already been made when they arrived. The French narratives state
that an assault by daylight in the late afternoon would have been much
more likely to succeed[532]. But this idea, though it had been mooted
in the English camp, was rejected because of the distance which the
attacking column would have to advance, fully visible in the open,
under fire, and uphill. Once more the fact that the parallel was too
far from the fort had become all important as a hindrance; on the San
Cristobal heights approaches could not be driven any nearer, for want
of earth to dig in. This had been known from the first, and should have
been held sufficient reason for not attacking at all upon this stony
height.

  [532] Lamare, p. 193.

General Houston told off for the assault a force twice as great as
that which had been sent forward on the 6th, 400 men instead of 180,
and (a precaution neglected on the previous occasion) 100 picked
shots were told off to line the outer edge of the ditch and keep up a
fire against the enemy lining the breach. The assaulting column was
guided by Lieutenant Hunt, R.E., and commanded by Major McGeechy of
the 17th Portuguese[533]. The volunteers forming it were taken from
all the regiments of Sontag’s brigade, the 51st, 85th, _Chasseurs
Britanniques_, and Brunswick Oels, and also from the 17th Portuguese.
There being now two breaches, the column was to divide into two halves,
one making for that in the salient angle, the other for that in the
curtain. The former carried six ladders, the latter ten[534].

  [533] The forlorn hope was _again_ led by Dyas of the 51st.

  [534] For details see Houston’s orders on pp. 77-9 of Jones’s
  vol. i.

The men were paraded in the ravine behind the parallel, and came out
into the open at 9 o’clock. They were seen at once, and came under
a rapid fire of musketry as they breasted the slope. The guiding
engineer, Hunt, and the commander of the column, McGeechy, were both
killed before the ditch was reached, with many others. But the forlorn
hope sprang down and made for the breaches, followed a moment later by
the supports. It appears that, as on June 6th, there was found to be
a gap between the top of the rubble in the ditch and the lips of both
breaches, six or seven feet high. The ladders were therefore brought
forward, and many of them were reared; but the musketry fire knocked
over nearly every man who tried to ascend them, and the few who got
a footing in the breach were met and bayoneted by the garrison, who
showed splendid courage, running down the slope of the breach and
charging any small knot of men who struggled on from the ladders[535].
Meanwhile the mass in the ditch, who could not press forward to the
breach-foot, were pelted with stones, hand-grenades, bags of powder,
and fire-balls. Finally, after nearly an hour of unavailing effort,
all the ladders were broken or thrown down, the assailants had lost 5
officers and 49 men killed, and 8 officers and 77 men wounded, and the
column recoiled to the trenches[536]. The breaches and glacis were so
strewn with their wounded that the artillery dared not fire to cover
the retreat, and the French, descending into the ditch, took up to
the fort two wounded officers as prisoners, removed the ladders, and
threw aside much of the débris, so that the breach-foot was completely
cleared.