

  [530] Details of the orders for the assault may he found on pp.
  62-3 of Jones’s _Sieges_, vol. i.

[Illustration: FORT SAN CRISTOBAL FROM THE SOUTH BANK OF THE GUADIANA]

At midnight the stormers broke out of the trenches, and ran, as fast as
was possible in the obscurity, up the 400 yards of bare hillside which
separated them from the fort. They suffered no great loss in the
early moments of their rush, for though the garrison detected them at
once, and plied them both with grape and with musketry, the darkness
was a good protection. The forlorn hope crossed the counterscarp with
no difficulty--it was only four feet deep in front of the breach-and
leaped down into the ditch. There they came to a stand at once, for
there were seven feet of sheer ascent from the hole in which they stood
to the lowest point of the lip of the breach, and they saw that the gap
itself had been stopped with the carts, _chevaux de frise_ and other
obstacles. Their officers called them off, and they were retiring with
little loss, when the main body of the storming party came leaping
down into the ditch. Getting news that the breach was impracticable,
the officers in command of the two grenadier companies made a gallant
but ill-judged series of attempts to escalade the unbreached parts
of the scarp with the ten ladders that their men carried. The ascent
being twenty feet high everywhere, and the ladders only fifteen feet
long, it was bound to fail. But, refusing to be discomfited by a first
failure, the stormers carried the ladders round to several other points
of the ditch, looking in vain for a place where the walls might prove
lower. The French garrison plied them incessantly with musketry, and
kept rolling down among them the live shells that had been prepared
for the occasion. At last the losses had grown so great that the
wearied assailants, after spending nearly an hour in the ditch, had
to withdraw. Out of 180 men employed there were no less than 12 dead
and about 80 wounded[531], a sufficient testimony to the obstinacy of
the assault. How hopeless it was may be judged from the fact that the
French had only 1 man killed and 5 wounded. Everything seems to have
been miscalculated in this unhappy affair--especially the number of the
stormers--180 men of all ranks were wholly inadequate for the assault.

  [531] 51st Regiment: 3 killed, an officer and 35 men wounded, 3
  missing = 42.

  85th Regiment: 2 officers and 6 men wounded = 8.

  17th Portuguese: 9 killed, 2 officers and 26 men wounded = 37.

  _Chasseurs Britanniques_ and Brunswick Oels: 7 wounded.

  Engineers: 1 officer mortally wounded. Jones says (i. 65) 12
  killed and 90 wounded, but D’Urban gives the number stated above,
  and the figures of the returns bear him out.

The failure against San Cristobal convinced Wellington’s engineers
that it was useless to try force till the works had been more severely
battered, and three further days of artillery work were put in, before
a second storm was tried. The old guns from Elvas continued to disable
themselves, and on the 9th only thirteen were in proper order on the
Cristobal attack. Things would have been still worse opposite the
Castle if six good iron ship-guns from Lisbon had not come up on the
7th. These were put into a new battery on the extreme right, and worked
very well. But, including them, there were only twenty pieces playing
on the Castle breach on the 8th and 9th. Of the original forty-six guns
and howitzers only twenty-seven survived!