

The Duke of Ragusa had conducted the Army of Portugal back to Salamanca
on May 15th, and had (as has been already related[540]) spent the
next fortnight in breaking up the old corps into six new divisions
of infantry and five brigades of cavalry. The regiments had all sent
back to France the cadres of their 3rd battalions and their 3rd and
4th squadrons. The infantry battalions had been completed up to about
700 men each: and the six divisions had by May 25th about 28,000 men
present with the colours[541], besides sick and detachments, who were
very numerous[542]. There were only 2,500 cavalry fit for service,
and six batteries of artillery; great drafts of horses were promised
from France, by which it was hoped that the former would ere long be
able to show 5,000 sabres, and the latter to put 60 guns in the field.
Meanwhile there were not more than 33,000 men of all arms fit to march.

  [540] See pp. 361-2.

  [541] These figures, given by Marmont in his _Mémoires_, iv. pp.
  40-1, are borne out by the official states.

  [542] Bessières writes to Berthier on May 23 that he has 4,000
  men of the Army of Portugal, convalescents and drafts, in his
  government, who could be sent forward if there were officers to
  take charge of them. In reality the figures were even greater.
  There were also some 4,000 sick in the hospitals of the army at
  Salamanca, &c.

Soult, before starting on his Albuera campaign, had written to Masséna
(whose deposition was unknown to him) to state that if he failed in his
attempt to deliver Badajoz at the head of his own expeditionary force,
he might have to ask for aid from the Army of Portugal. This letter was
delivered to Marmont on May 14th, when he had just assumed command.
He replied (May 16) that he recognized the importance of Badajoz,
and would move all or a part of his army southward if it were really
required. Soult received the dispatch from the hands of his colleague’s
aide-de-camp Fabvier at Llerena on May 27th, and was overjoyed at
its contents. He wrote to acknowledge the offer in terms of effusive
politeness, and begged Marmont to march not with a detachment but
with his whole army.[543] Though he was expecting to be joined by
Drouet and the 9th Corps within ten days, he was doubtful whether that
reinforcement would make him strong enough to face Wellington. But,
with 30,000 men of the Army of Portugal placed in the valley of the
Guadiana, there would be a force amply sufficient to sweep the Allies
back into Portugal. On hearing that Marmont had started, he would
extend his troops toward Merida, where the head of his colleague’s
column, coming by Truxillo and Almaraz, would probably appear.

  [543] Soult to Marmont, May 27th, printed in Marmont’s
  _Mémoires_, iv. 93-5. It contains much rhodomontade on the
  ‘successful’ action of Albuera, to which Marmont appends a
  caustic note, ‘Excellente plaisanterie que de représenter comme
  une victoire une bataille offensive dont le but n’a pas été
  atteint!’