

  [556] See p. 437.

  [557] Napier says that Spencer on his southern march ‘detached
  a division and his cavalry to Coria as flankers’ (iii. 312). I
  think this statement that the British flank-guard was pushed
  forward into Spain is an error, caused by the similarity of names
  between the Spanish Coria and Caria in Portugal, between Sabugal
  and Castello Branco. For it is certain that Anson’s cavalry
  brigade were at Caria June 3rd-9th, and then went on to Castello
  Branco and Villa Velha, while Slade’s cavalry were from the
  7th to the 15th between Alfayates and Castello Branco. See the
  regimental histories.

  [558] See Leach, p. 221.

  [559] Napier’s statement (iii. p. 312) that ‘the Light Division
  did not leave a single straggler behind’ is contradicted by the
  note of Leach of the 95th (p. 221) that ‘on June 11 many hundreds
  of men were left by the wayside quite exhausted by the intense
  heat, which compelled us to make frequent halts by day and to
  proceed by night.’ Tomkinson also notes that the Light Division
  lost men, who fell dead from sunstroke while marching up the
  steep ascent to Niza on June 13th (p. 106). He says that the
  Light Division men were so willing that they marched on till the
  last possible moment, and reeled over to die.

On the 13th the head of the infantry column was at Niza, only twenty
miles from Portalegre, and fifty from Badajoz, while its rear had
passed Castello Branco and was nearing the Tagus. Wellington was
therefore able to contemplate the situation with serenity. Spencer’s
whole force would be able to join him long before Marmont could unite
with Soult. He ordered that each of the divisions, as it reached
Portalegre, should take several days’ rest before moving on to Campo
Mayor and Elvas.

The French army meanwhile had endured a much longer and more fatiguing
march. The head of Reynier’s column, moving by Fuente Roble, Baños,
and Bejar across the chain of the Sierra de Gata, reached Plasencia
on the 9th and Almaraz on the 11th. Marmont and the smaller column
which had demonstrated against Spencer fell into the rear of the main
body at Malpartida near Plasencia on the 14th[560]. The passage of the
Tagus at Almaraz took longer than had been expected, because pontoons
which had been ordered down from Madrid had failed to appear, and the
whole army had to be ferried over by driblets on the flying-bridge
already existing there. But though strung out over fifty miles of road
by this mischance, the Army of Portugal at least got the advanced
squadrons of its light cavalry to Truxillo on the 14th[561] and to
Merida on the 17th. The head of the infantry column was a day’s march
behind, and reached Merida on the 18th, with the main body trailing
down the mountain road from Truxillo behind it. Soult’s advanced guard
was already in possession of the town and bridge of Merida, and the
junction of the Armies of Andalusia and Portugal was secured.