




SECTION XXVII: CHAPTER II

WELLINGTON ON THE CAYA. JUNE-JULY 1811


On the morning of June 17th the five divisions of the Anglo-Portuguese
army which had hitherto remained on the south bank of the Guadiana
crossed that river, and retired to the positions along the line Elvas,
Campo Mayor, Ouguella, which Wellington had already selected for them.
The water was low, and the bulk of the troops used the fords between
Jerumenha and Badajoz[564] which are practicable during the summer
months, except after days of exceptional rain[565]. Head quarters
were moved back to the country-house known as the Quinta de São João,
near São Vicente, a spot equidistant from Elvas and Campo Mayor. The
7th Division, from the north side of Badajoz, made a corresponding
movement, and fell back into the same general line. Spencer’s column
from the Beira was now all across the Tagus, save Slade’s cavalry and
the 5th Division, and its head was resting at Portalegre, to which
its rear was rapidly coming up. As there are only two marches between
Portalegre and Elvas, it was clear that the two sections of the allied
army were certain of their junction. For since on the 18th Marmont’s
column-head had only reached Merida, and Soult’s was at Almendralejo,
it would take some days for the two French armies to draw together, and
concert further operations on the northern side of Badajoz.

  [564] I follow Scovell, as an eye-witness, when he says that the
  bulk of the infantry crossed by the fords. Napier says they went
  over the flying-bridge below Badajoz (iii. p. 313). But Moyle
  Sherer (p. 167) says that the 2nd Division forded the Guadiana,
  and Vere’s _Marches of the 4th Division_ (p. 17) says the same of
  Cole’s brigades.

  [565] ‘The principal ford is by Porta de Coito, but there are
  five or six between that spot and Badajoz.’ Scovell’s diary, June
  17.

But there was one section of the allied forces which Wellington was
anxious not to withdraw across the Guadiana, but to send on another
quest, and all his future movements depended on the march of this
corps. The moment that Soult began to advance from Llerena on the
14th, and to edge off in the direction of Merida and Marmont, he had
left the western roads into Andalusia uncovered. Except a trifling
detachment at Guadalcanal, there was now no force protecting Seville
on that side. From the day that he got the news of the Marshal’s
northerly march, Wellington began to press General Blake to return at
once into his old haunts in the Condado de Niebla, passing round the
left rear of the enemy, and to begin to threaten Seville. There was
now nothing to prevent him from doing so, and it was well known that
the Andalusian capital was left to a scanty garrison, largely composed
of convalescents and untrustworthy _Juramentados_. As long as Soult
lay at Llerena, he could easily throw a column to the flank to succour
Seville; but when he had moved on, this was no longer in his power. As
early as June 10 Wellington had written to Castaños[566] that Soult
would ultimately move on Merida, and that Blake would then be able to
slip into Andalusia either by the route of Xeres de los Caballeros
and Fregenal, or if he preferred a safer though longer road, by that
hugging the Portuguese frontier, following which he would emerge into
Spain by Mertola. He could not be stopped on either route, and his
appearance before Seville would bring back Soult in haste from Badajoz,
and cure him of any desire to cross the Guadiana or to besiege Elvas.
On June 12th Wellington ordered his commissaries to prepare rations
at Mertola for the benefit of the Spaniards, who would probably be
in their usual state of semi-starvation, and wrote to Blake to urge
him to march at once[567]. The Captain-General consented to move, but
asked for more food; he was told in reply that he should be fed from
Jerumenha to Mertola while he was on Portuguese soil, but must rely
on his own exertions while he was in Spain. On the morning of the
17th Blake crossed the Guadiana at Jerumenha with Loy’s 1,000 horse,
the 10,000 infantry of Zayas and Ballasteros, and two batteries, and
started to march down-stream for his destination. He was quite out of
touch with the enemy, and so well protected by the Guadiana and the
mountains that it was certain that his movement would be unobserved.
Marching fast, he reached Mertola on June 22nd, and Castillejos, across
the Andalusian frontier, on the 24th. Thus Wellington was serenely
confident, when the enemy came up against his front, that he had
thrown a bomb behind them, whose explosion would cause no small stir,
and infallibly draw back a large section of the Army of Andalusia to
defend Seville. Without these troops Soult would be in no condition to
attack him[568], even with Marmont’s aid. The crisis between Elvas and
Badajoz, therefore, could only last for a few days.