

  [566] _Dispatches_, vii, last two pages of the volume.

  [567] _Dispatches_, viii. pp. 3-4, 19, 20.

  [568] See for his confidence in the combination his dispatch to
  Lord Liverpool of June 27. (_Dispatches_, viii. p. 57.)

Meanwhile it had to be faced, and from the 22nd to the 29th of June
Wellington might have found himself engaged in a general action on any
day of the week. Soult and Marmont had met at Merida on the 18th--the
day after Wellington’s army had crossed the Guadiana. The elder marshal
had overwhelmed the younger with compliments--it was the first time,
he said, that the Army of Portugal had done anything for the Army of
the South; with a colleague who was unselfish and enterprising, he
felt himself able to undertake any task[569]. It was settled that
the combined armies should march against the Albuera positions next
morning, in three columns. Marmont and his six divisions would move
along the bank of the Guadiana by the road running through Lobon and
Talavera Real: the main body of the Andalusian forces would take the
route Almendralejo-Solana-Albuera. One division detached by Soult
(it was the ten battalions of Conroux, the undistributed fraction of
Drouet’s 9th Corps) was to turn the British line by a flanking movement
through Almendral to Valverde. Thus just 60,000 men were put in motion,
Marmont having brought about 32,000 of all arms, while Soult, including
Drouet, had about 28,000. Expecting an action, for Wellington was known
to have been at Albuera on the 16th, and his departure was unsuspected,
the three columns advanced cautiously, and ready to deploy. But no
enemy was found, and by the evening of the 19th it was known that the
Anglo-Portuguese were all behind the Guadiana. At dusk the head of
Marmont’s light cavalry got in touch with the garrison of Badajoz,
and learnt that the last of the Allies had disappeared from in front
of its walls on the 16th. Phillipon was justified of his long and
obstinate defence: on the very day before his half-rations would have
given out, and at the moment when he was thinking seriously of blowing
up his works, and making a dash to get away, the expected succours had
appeared.

  [569] ‘Il était dans l’ivresse de la joie et de la
  reconnaissance,’ says Marmont (_Mémoires_, iv. p. 45). Soult’s
  letters to Berthier give Marmont a handsome testimonial.

On the 20th Marmont entered Badajoz in triumph, amid the blare of
military music, and a few hours later Soult arrived and exchanged
felicitations with him and with the trusty governor. The two main
columns of each of their armies converged on the fortress, but
Briche’s light cavalry and the divisions of Conroux and Godinot went
to Olivenza, to see if by chance the Allies were holding that unlucky
and ill-protected town. It was found empty (June 21st), the small
Portuguese garrison having retired to Elvas on the 17th.

With 60,000 men in hand (or more, if the 3,500 bayonets of the Badajoz
garrison are counted) and with one bridge and many good fords at their
disposition, for the crossing of the Guadiana, the two marshals had the
power to thrust a general action upon their adversary--unless indeed
he should retire far beyond the Portuguese frontier, and so give them
the chance of laying siege to Elvas. It remained to be seen what was
his purpose, and on June 22nd a general reconnaissance on the further
bank of the Guadiana was carried out. On the left Godinot’s division
advanced from Olivenza to a point opposite Jerumenha, where, being
very visible from the further bank, it was furiously but ineffectively
cannonaded by the Portuguese garrison. Two dragoon regiments under
General Bron forded the river, but found no allied troops in this
direction. On the right, Montbrun, with two cavalry brigades of the
Army of Portugal, passed the Badajoz bridge, and marched on Campo
Mayor. After driving in a cavalry screen belonging to De Grey’s and
Madden’s regiments, he found himself feeling the front of a defensive
line, which he estimated at two division of infantry and 1,400 horse,
and could get no further forward[570]. He returned to report that
Wellington was showing fight.