

Wellington, with his usual clear perception, attributed this little
disaster to the fact that the two regiments engaged had both landed in
the Peninsula only a few weeks before, and were utterly unpractised in
outpost duty. The hussars ought to have retired skirmishing--it was
not their duty to try to fight five regiments of French. The light
dragoon pickets had clearly not kept touch with the detachments on
their flanks, or they would have heard of the advance of the enemy
in force, and would not have been surrounded before they were aware
that the French had got well round their rear. ‘This disagreeable
circumstance,’ he writes, ‘tends to show the difference between old and
new troops. The old regiments of cavalry, throughout all their service,
with all their losses put together, have not lost so many men as the
2nd Hussars and the 11th Light Dragoons in a few days. However, we must
make the new as good as the old[574].’ Wellington also blamed General
Long. ‘Let him attend to the directions he before received from Sir
Stapleton Cotton, to throw out only _small picquets of observation_
on the Caya and Guadiana. If he had had his whole brigade, instead of
one large picquet, on the Caya, he could not have prevented the enemy
from advancing.... This principle is well known and understood in the
army, and if it had not been acted upon invariably, we should have lost
all our cavalry long ago, in the way in which Captain Lutyens lost the
picquet of the 11th this morning[575].’

  [574] Wellington to Lord Liverpool, _Dispatches_, viii. p. 58.

  [575] Wellington to Erskine (then commanding the cavalry division
  to which the 11th belonged), June 22. _Dispatches_, viii. p. 40.

By the evening of the 22nd the two French marshals, as the result of
their wide-spreading reconnaissances, were fully aware that Wellington
lay in force from Campo Mayor to Elvas, and had no intention of
retiring. But they had not been able to make out the details of his
position, which lay across an undulating country wooded in many parts,
and not to be embraced in a single view from any commanding spot. As
a matter of fact their adversary had now got up all his troops; the
last division from the Beira came into touch with the main body on the
morning of the 23rd. Elaborate orders issued for the conduct of the
army in case the French should advance for battle, show what were the
intentions of Wellington[576].

  [576] They exist in the D’Urban papers, though not printed in the
  Wellington dispatches, and fall into three sections: What is to
  be done if the French attack (1) the left (near Campo Mayor); (2)
  the centre (along the Caya); (3) the right (by Elvas).

His front extended from Ouguella near the Gebora river almost to
Elvas, a distance of twelve miles. Ouguella was a little town with
mediaeval fortifications, susceptible of defence for some hours. It was
garrisoned by two companies of Portuguese from Elvas. Beyond it rises
the mountain of the Dos Hermanas, and there is no practicable route to
turn it, save by an immense détour in the direction of Albuquerque, so
that the flank was very secure. Between Ouguella and Campo Mayor lay
the 3rd and 7th Divisions under Picton. Campo Mayor had been repaired
since its recapture, and had received a Portuguese garrison; it had
some heavy guns (24-pounders) which would sweep the level ground in
front of it. West of this fortress lay the allied centre under Hill,
composed of the 2nd and 4th Divisions and Hamilton’s Portuguese,
extending from Campo Mayor to the Caya. Beyond that river in the
direction of Elvas, in a somewhat ‘refused’ position leaning backward
to the north-west, lay the three brigades of the 1st Division, under
Spencer, forming the right wing, and resting on the great fortress
as their flank-guard. This formed the front line. The reserves were
the Light Division on the Monte Reguingo in front of Arronches, ready
to support Picton, and the 5th and 6th Divisions, which were on the
Portalegre road, échelonned in advance from that place, behind Spencer,
and able to reinforce the right or centre. The cavalry was out in
front, Madden’s Portuguese on the left, Long’s brigade on the right,
with De Grey’s, Slade’s, and Anson’s regiments ready in reserve to
transfer themselves where they should be wanted[577]. The whole force
available was about 46,000 infantry, of which 29,000 were British,
5,000 cavalry, of which 1,400 belonged to the weak Portuguese brigades
of Madden, Otway, and Barbaçena, and 14 batteries with 80 pieces and
2,800 gunners. The gross total was 54,000, not including two regular
and two militia regiments of Portuguese forming the garrison of Elvas.
Thus the allied army, though still appreciably inferior in numbers to
the enemy, more especially in the cavalry arm, was strong enough to
take the defensive in a good position[578]. Every available regular
unit in Portugal had been gathered in by the 23rd, even Pack’s and
Barbaçena’s small Portuguese brigades, which had remained down to the
last possible moment in the Beira. The ground was most formidable
for defence, covered by three fortresses, and having in its front an
open plain which, though interspersed with occasional groves, was
sufficiently commanded by the heights on the British flanks to make
it impossible for any large body of troops to move across it in any
direction without being detected. Wellington had placed observation
parties at the many ‘Atalayas,’ the old Moorish watch-towers, which
line the Portuguese frontier, and had arranged for a system of
flag-signalling to convey news from one flank to the other. There were
also warnings to be given by gun-fire, from pieces detailed for that
purpose at Ouguella and Campo Mayor[579]. The cross-roads along the
rear of the position being good, and the Caya fordable in many places,
Wellington thought that he was certain of being able to transfer troops
with swiftness and security to any part of the line that might be
threatened. The only way in which the enemy could approach him unseen
would be by moving at night, and even so there would be ample warning,
since the cavalry pickets were out far in front of the line, and would
give notice betimes. Moreover, a night-march of some nine miles out
from Badajoz over unknown ground, towards an undiscovered position,
would have little temptation for the enemy. The danger of blundering
into a trap in the dark would be too great.