

  [550] Light Division diaries (Simmons) show these to be the
  correct days.

  [551] Wellington to Spencer, 2nd of June, _Dispatches_, vii. p.
  633.

The Marshal had concentrated one division (Foy’s[552]) and all his
cavalry at Salamanca on June 1st, while Reynier with two divisions,
followed at a day’s distance by three more, moved from Tamames for
the eastern pass, the Puerto de Baños. On the 3rd the Marshal and
the smaller column started from Salamanca on the Rodrigo road, for
the purpose of making a demonstration against Almeida, which was
intended to hold Spencer in his present position, while Reynier and
the main body of the French army should get two or three days’ start.
Marmont reached Rodrigo on the 5th, and sallied out from it, cavalry
in front, on the following morning. He was exposing himself to some
danger, since Spencer had four divisions within call, though his
cavalry was weak--only two British and two Portuguese regiments[553].
But, uncertain as to the strength of his enemy, Spencer gave way; the
Light Division and Slade’s cavalry being drawn back from the line
of the Azava, while the other three divisions marched for Sabugal
under the cover of this screen. The road to Almeida being thus left
unguarded, Pack, who was lying there with his Portuguese brigade,
blew up such part of the enceinte as remained intact after Brennier’s
explosion, and retired westward. For this both he and Spencer were
blamed by Wellington, who said that they should have waited till the
French actually made a move towards Almeida before destroying it. Its
subsequent repair was made much more difficult by the supplementary
damage needlessly carried out[554].

  [552] Marmont says only one division, and I follow him here,
  as the best authority, though Foy in his _Mémoires_ says two
  divisions.

  [553] Slade’s and Barbaçena’s brigades. The other British cavalry
  brigade (Anson’s) had marched for the south on June 1, and was at
  this moment at Caria, near Castello Branco.

  [554] Wellington was still more angry with Spencer for
  authorizing Pack to blow up the place, for the brigadier had
  very properly asked definite leave to do so from his immediate
  superior. Wellington argued that a proper reading of his
  dispatches would have showed Spencer that the destruction was
  only to be made in case Marmont actually marched on Almeida. See
  _Dispatches_, viii. p. 1.

Marmont’s force, 5,000 foot and 2,500 cavalry, advanced in pursuit of
Spencer by both the Gallegos and the Carpio roads. It was only on the
latter, however, that any serious skirmishing occurred. Montbrun’s
squadrons in overwhelming numbers pressed hard on the British cavalry
screen, composed on this front of the 1st Dragoons and a squadron of
the 14th Light Dragoons, under Slade. That brigadier, always, if his
subordinates are to be trusted, a little over-slow in movement, allowed
himself to be outflanked while executing a series of demonstrations
to cover the rear of the infantry, and only got off without serious
loss through the gallantry of a squadron of the Royals, who charged the
turning force at an opportune moment, and gained time for the rest of
the regiment to retire with some difficulty across the marsh of Nava de
Aver[555]. A dangerous movement was got over with the loss of only four
men killed and nine wounded.