

  [544] _Mémoires_, iv. [p]. 100.

  [545] See especially Berliner to Marmont of May 27.

  [546] Berthier to Marmont, 10th May, 1811.

  [547] Berthier to Marmont, June 17th.

Wellington had been from the first convinced that Marmont would
move southward on hearing of Soult’s check at Albuera. It was for
this reason that he made no scruple of depleting Spencer’s corps of
reinforcements for the army in Estremadura: not only detachments,
but probably the whole force would ere long have to be drawn to
join the main army. On May 24th, as has been already mentioned, he
ordered Howard’s British[548] and Ashworth’s Portuguese brigades to
move towards him via Sabugal, Castello Branco, and the bridge of
Villa Velha. Howard’s 1,500 men were to be taken away permanently
from the 1st Division and added to the second, replacing in it three
battalions which, owing to the carnage of Albuera, had to be sent home
to recruit[549]. By June 8th Howard had reached Talavera Real, near
Badajoz, and had formally been placed on the roll of the 2nd Division,
which then rose once more to 4,000 men.

  [548] Howard’s brigade consisted of the 1/50th, 1/71st, 1/92nd,
  and a rifle company of the 5/60th.

  [549] The battalions which went home were the 2/28th, 29th,
  2/48th, 2/39th.

In compliance with his chief’s general directions that, if the
French Army of Portugal turned southward, he himself was to make a
corresponding movement, Spencer moved the Light and 1st Divisions
from their cantonments towards Sabugal, on a rumour (which turned
out to be premature) that Marmont had already started on the 26th
of May. Learning that he had been misinformed, he brought them back
again to their old cantonments between the Azava and the Coa on the
27th[550]. On the next day there arrived detailed and certain news from
secret correspondents in Salamanca, to the effect that Marmont was
concentrating his troops in two bodies, one, under his own command,
at Salamanca itself, the other about Alba de Tormes and Tamames. The
natural deduction from this information was that one column would march
by the Puerto de Baños over the mountains to the Tagus, and the other
by Ciudad Rodrigo and the Puerto de Perales. Wellington, on receiving
the Spanish notes forwarded by Spencer, was delighted to find that
his forecast was almost certainly right. ‘You will see by my letter
yesterday,’ he wrote on June 2nd, ‘that I did not make a bad guess
at the enemy’s probable movement, as described in the letters from
our friends of the 28th, enclosed in yours of the 31st[551].’ His own
dispatch of June 1st, to which he refers, had already told Spencer that
the moment Marmont moved he was to bring up his right to Penamacor,
and his left to Sabugal, leaving only a screen in front of Ciudad
Rodrigo. But since it was not quite certain that the Marshal might not
be projecting a mere raid into the Beira, either by the Almeida or the
Sabugal road, no definite move was to be made till it was clear that
the French columns were heading for the passes. This caution against
over-hasty deductions kept Spencer very much in his original position
till June 4th, the day on which Marmont’s movements became clear.