

  [555] See Napier, iii. p. 312; Ainslie’s _History of the Royals_,
  pp. 120-1; Tomkinson, p. 105.

Spencer’s whole force had reached Alfayates by the night of the 6th,
retiring before a French column of not a third of its own strength.
On the next day he received from Colonel Waters, one of Wellington’s
great intelligence officers, news which cleared up the situation for
him. Waters, who came in from a tour in the Sierra de Gata, reported
that an immense French column was already passing the Puerto de Baños,
thirty miles to the east, and that the force in front of the British
did not apparently exceed the single division of infantry and the four
brigades of horse which had been already seen and noted. There was no
need therefore to retire towards the Zezere and the Estrada Nova, for
Marmont was not making a serious raid into Portugal, but only covering
the march of his main body by a demonstration. The truth of this
intelligence was soon verified, for the Marshal, instead of pressing
the British rear on the 7th, wheeled eastward, and went off by the Pass
of Perales, leaving Spencer entirely unmolested.

Wellington’s original orders thus became valid and practicable, and
Spencer was able to march his whole four divisions towards Badajoz
and the main army, with the certainty that he was moving parallel to
Marmont’s route, and that he could join his chief many days before
the French columns could unite with Soult. For the invaluable bridge
of Villa Velha now became of primary importance. It provided a good
passage over the Tagus, leading straight to Estremadura by a short
line, while the French, having no bridge lower down the river than
Almaraz, were compelled to make a much longer detour, and to spend
several days more than the British in transferring themselves to the
southern seat of war.

The head of Spencer’s marching column was now formed by Anson’s light
cavalry, who had moved (as it will be remembered) towards Castello
Branco before the rest of the army[556]. Then came the infantry
divisions, while Slade remained to cover the rear, and only marched
on when the main body had already crossed the Tagus[557]. The route
lay from Alfayates by Penamacor, São Miguel d’Arche, Castello Branco,
Villa Velha, Niza, and Portalegre. Anson crossed the Tagus at the
bridge of Villa Velha on June 11th, the Light Division on June 12th,
the 1st Division on the 14th-15th, Pack’s Portuguese and the 6th
Division on June 15th-16th. Slade’s cavalry, who had waited behind
near Castello Branco till it should be certain that no French were
showing in this direction, only came over the river on the 19th. All
this was rough marching, in hot weather, over bad roads, and the
troops suffered somewhat from sunstroke and from occasional lack of
water in the mountains. But the transport worked fairly well in spite
of all difficulties, and food only once failed to be distributed
regularly[558]. By dint of moving as far as was possible in the early
morning and the evening hours, the divisions made good time, and
the distances covered exceeded on several days twenty miles in the
twenty-four hours[559].