

  [570] The French reports show that Wellington was wrong in
  thinking (_Dispatches_, vol. viii, June 22) that the enemy got no
  glimpse of the British infantry. They apparently detected the 3rd
  and 7th Divisions.

In the centre, where Latour-Maubourg in person, with fourteen squadrons
of dragoons and Polish lancers, forded the Guadiana almost in front
of Elvas, there was hard fighting, ending in a petty disaster for the
allied outposts. Here the cavalry screen was formed on the right by the
2nd Hussars of the King’s German Legion, on the left by the 11th Light
Dragoons. The French column drove in the pickets of the hussars, who
resisted from the water’s edge onward with great obstinacy. Presently
the main body of this weak corps (only two squadrons strong[571])
came up, and with more courage than discretion charged the leading
French regiment, which they broke. But being outflanked by the enemy’s
reserves, they were surrounded on three sides, and had to cut their
way out with a loss of three officers wounded, two dead, and twenty
prisoners. The remains of the hussars rallied behind the Quinta de
Gremezia, where they were presently joined by the main body of the
11th Light Dragoons. The enemy pushed them no further, but turning
to the right swept along Wellington’s outpost line in the direction
of Badajoz. By so doing they found themselves in the rear of the
outlying picket of the 11th, formed by Captain Lutyens’s troop. This
little force had, by some mischance, not paid much attention to the
disturbance in front of the hussars, nor had any orders been sent to
them by their brigadier (Long) to bid them be cautious as to their
flank. Warned at the last moment by a German sergeant, Lutyens had
just collected his men, and was about to retire, when he saw a body of
cavalry, not on his flank but directly in his rear, cutting him off
from Elvas. Thinking that a bold dash was his only chance, he closed up
his men and charged the front French squadron, which he broke through.
But a second line was behind, and he and his whole party of sixty-four
sabres were ridden down and captured[572]. Only one wounded officer
(Lieutenant Binney) cut his way through and brought the news of the
mishap[573].

  [571] The remainder under Major von Busche was still at Cadiz.
  It will be remembered that it took a distinguished part in the
  battle of Barrosa.

  [572] The loss was 8 killed, 1 officer and 20 men wounded, 1
  officer and 35 men unwounded prisoners.

  [573] There are two good accounts of this skirmish near Quinta
  de Gremezia, one in a letter by Captain von Stolzenburg of the
  hussars (in Schwertfeger’s _History of the K.G.L._, ii. 247), the
  other by George Farmer, a trooper of the 11th Light Dragoons,
  whose little autobiography was published by Gleig in 1844, under
  the title of _The Light Dragoon_, see vol. i. pp. 92-7. Farmer
  says that the French dragoons in their rear were taken at first
  for Portuguese squadrons coming up from Elvas to reinforce the
  line.