

  [560] Foy’s _Mémoires_, ed. Girod de L’Ain, p. 146.

  [561] According to a report brought to Wellington by a British
  intelligence-officer in that direction, as early as the 13th. But
  this is probably an error of a day. _Dispatches_, viii. p. 37.

But meanwhile Wellington had retired from their neighbourhood. On the
afternoon of the 10th the orders had been issued for the withdrawing
of all the guns from the siege-batteries before Badajoz, and by the
next morning many of them were already _en route_ for Elvas. All
through the 11th and 12th convoys of ammunition, platforms, fascines,
wool-packs, &c., were being sent to the rear, and by the night of the
last-named day there was nothing left in the trenches or the camps
save a small daily store for the troops, who were kept to blockade the
fortress as long as was prudent. For it was well that the garrison
should be straitly shut in, and forced to consume as much of their
provisions as possible; Wellington knew that they were only rationed up
to the 20th, and there was a bare chance that Soult or Marmont might
be delayed by some unforeseen mishap. Nothing of the kind happened,
however, and on the 13th Soult began to stir. He had been joined by
Drouet’s long-expected corps on that morning; it had accomplished a
most circuitous march from Valladolid, by Madrid, Toledo, the pass
of Despeñaperros and Cordova, in which it had consumed more than a
month (May 11th-June 13th). All Drouet’s corps was composed of 4th
battalions of regiments belonging to the 1st or 5th Corps, and the
provisional brigade of cavalry which accompanied him consisted of 3rd
and 4th squadrons belonging to dragoon regiments of the Army of the
South. These were at once treated as drafts, and amalgamated with the
depleted units which had been so much cut up at Albuera. The 5th Corps
and the other regiments present with Soult had 4,000 men drafted into
their ranks[562], and once more became strong. There remained over one
provisional division, 5,000 strong, which consisted of 4th battalions
whose regiments were absent with Victor before Cadiz[563]. Drouet’s
arrival gave Soult a total force of some 28,000 men, which made him
still unable to face Wellington with his own unaided strength; but he
knew that he could count on Marmont’s approach with 30,000 more within
a week.

  [562] The regiments which received a battalion were the 40th,
  64th, 88th, 100th, 103rd, 21st and 28th Léger of the 5th Corps,
  and the 16th Léger. The cavalry regiments which received
  squadrons were the 4th, 14th, 26th Dragoons.

  [563] The 4th batts. of the 8th, 54th, 63rd, 24th, 45th, 94th,
  95th, and 96th Line, and the 9th and 27th Léger. There were also
  odd squadrons of the 1st, 2nd, and 9th Dragoons.

If he pressed in upon Badajoz before the junction took place, he
would risk the very real danger that Wellington might march against
him with every available man, and force him to another battle. He
therefore first sent cavalry along the highroads towards Villafranca
and Los Santos, and only when they reported that there was no British
infantry in front of them, moved up his main body to Villafranca and
Almendralejo (June 16th). Reconnaissances were pushed towards the
bridges of Merida and Medellin, where the Army of Portugal was to be
expected. As he kept very far from Wellington’s front, Soult’s march
was unmolested; the British general had concentrated the 4th and 2nd
Divisions and Hamilton’s Portuguese on the old Albuera position on the
14th of June, and could have brought up the 3rd and 7th and Ashworth’s
Portuguese to join them in a few hours. But he was not going to take
offensive action, and since Soult kept well away from him, he waited
till he had news that the two French armies would get in touch at
Merida on the 17th, and retired with his whole army beyond the Guadiana
on that day.