

Meanwhile the Allies could not tell what might be the intentions of
the enemy. Seeing the enormous advantage that a victory would bring
the French, and remembering the way in which they had stripped all
Spain of troops in order to produce the army which now lay opposite
him, Wellington thought that he was to be attacked, and continued for
some days to perfect his preparations. The period of intent waiting
was from the 23rd to the 28th of June, during which nothing was to
be made out concerning the main purpose of the French. Petty cavalry
reconnaissances in the direction of the Albuquerque and Montijo roads,
much moving about of small columns between Olivenza and Badajoz, were
observed--but no certain deductions could be drawn from them. ‘No
judging what he means yet: meanwhile everything is ready for him,’
wrote D’Urban, Beresford’s chief of the staff, in his diary on June
25th. As a matter of fact, the small movements hitherto observed were
merely matters of foraging and exploration, and had no occult meaning.
On the 27th, however, there was something definite to be learnt;
on the morning of that day Godinot’s division blew up the walls of
Olivenza, and marched to Valverde. This disappearance of the French
left wing _might_ have meant that all the columns were being drawn in
for an attack in the centre; but it might also mean that Soult was
about to send back troops to Seville. That the latter was the true
interpretation was shown on the 28th, when Godinot definitely marched
not towards Badajoz, but southward along the _chaussée_ leading to
Andalusia by Los Santos and Monasterio. It was certain that, if
Soult was sending away men from the front, he could not be intending
to attack, since every man would be required, if a dash at the
Anglo-Portuguese lines was in contemplation. When Wellington had news
from the peasantry of Godinot’s southward march on the 29th June, he
could see that the die had been cast, and that he need no longer look
for an attack upon his lines. He was soon afterwards informed that two
divisions were gone southward, not merely one; but for some time he
could get no certitude of the departure of the second division, though
it was perfectly true that this unit (Conroux’s ten battalions of
Drouet’s old corps) had departed almost immediately after Godinot.

What had happened was that on June 24th, the fourth day after the entry
of the two Marshals into Badajoz, Soult had informed Marmont that he
had such bad news from Andalusia that he must return at once to Seville
with some of his troops. It was not so much Blake’s diversion which
was working[583]--the French had learnt of his start on the 24th,
but did not know that he had reached the Condado de Niebla--as the
tidings of the spread of the insurrection in the Ronda mountains, and
of threatening movements by Freire’s Army of Murcia against the 4th
Corps. The force in Eastern Andalusia had lent so much to Soult’s field
army[584], and so much more to garrison the province of Cordova[585],
that it was much under strength. There were only 9,000 men, or less,
left in the kingdom of Granada, and the Murcian army was 14,000
strong. Marmont refused to take Soult’s fears seriously, being (as
he himself tells us[586]) convinced by this time that his colleague
was wanting to throw all the responsibility of keeping Badajoz safe
and ‘containing’ Wellington on the Army of Portugal. He replied that
unless Soult promised to leave him the whole of the 5th Corps, and all
Latour-Maubourg’s cavalry, he should order his troops to march for
Truxillo and Almaraz, and throw the charge of Badajoz on the Army of
the South, which might keep it if it could.