

But Wellington had for the present no further designs against the
fortress which had cost him so much useless labour. The moment that
Marmont’s departure was announced to him, he too dispersed his army
into cantonments. The banks of the Caya and Guadiana were notorious
for their fever, and the troops were already beginning to suffer
from it. On the 18th of July orders were issued for the 3rd and 6th
Divisions to march for Castello Branco, the 7th for Niza, the 1st and
5th for Portalegre, the 4th for Estremos and then for Pedrogão, the
Light Division for Castello de Vide and Montalvão. Only the 2nd and
Hamilton’s Portuguese remained in the neighbourhood of Elvas--the
former at Villa Viçosa, the latter at Fronteira and Souzel, a little
further to the north-west[589]. Hill retained charge of these two
divisions, which formed the Anglo-Portuguese Army of the South for the
next twelve months. His allowance of cavalry consisted of Barbaçena’s
and Otway’s Portuguese brigades, and Long’s and De Grey’s British
brigades, which are for the future spoken of as the ‘second cavalry
division’ of the allied army. Its command was given not to Lumley, who
had used the troops so effectively during the late campaign, for he had
just gone on sick leave to England. It went to Sir William Erskine,
of whom Wellington could find no more to say, when proposing him to
Beresford for this post, than that he would at any rate do better than
Long, and that, if very blind, ‘which is against him at the head of
cavalry,’ he was at any rate very cautious[590]. The fact was that
Erskine had given grave dissatisfaction at Sabugal and elsewhere, and
that the Commander-in-Chief wished to shunt him on to some new line,
where he would have less responsibility. Yet the experiment of trusting
him with two cavalry brigades was a risky one!

  [589] Elaborate marching arrangements, and timing for all these
  destinations, are found in D’Urban’s diary under July 18.

  [590] _Dispatches_, vii. p. 503.

There was more reorganization carried out in the allied army during
the months of June, July, and August 1811 than at any other period
of Wellington’s command. Owing to the arrival of more cavalry
regiments,[591] there were by September 1st six cavalry brigades in
existence instead of three, and they contained thirteen regiments
instead of the original seven which had served in 1810 and the
early months of 1811. Wellington’s mounted strength had been almost
doubled--though most of the corps arrived too late to be available when
the French were showing such a preponderant cavalry force on the Caya
in June. But in the next campaign Wellington was to be, for the first
time since his arrival in the Peninsula, possessed of an adequate
proportion of mounted men.

  [591] The new arrivals were (see Atkinson’s ‘British Army in
  the Peninsula’ in _English Historical Review_ for 1907): 2nd
  Hussars K.G.L. (15th April), 11th Light Dragoons (by June 1),
  12th Light Dragoons (by July 1), 9th Light Dragoons (by August
  1), 3rd Dragoons and 4th Dragoon Guards (before September 1).
  The brigading became--1st Division (Stapleton Cotton): Slade’s
  brigade, 1st Royals and 12th Light Dragoons; Anson’s brigade,
  14th and 16th Light Dragoons; Alten’s brigade, 11th Light
  Dragoons, 1st Hussars K.G.L.; Le Marchant’s brigade, 3rd Dragoons
  and 4th Dragoon Guards. 2nd Division (Erskine): Long’s brigade,
  2nd Hussars K.G.L., 9th and 13th Light Dragoons; De Grey’s
  brigade, 3rd Dragoon Guards, 4th Dragoons.