

  [594] This was done by an Imperial decree issued on December 13th
  through Berthier.




SECTION XXVII: CHAPTER III

EVENTS IN THE NORTH OF SPAIN DURING THE CONCENTRATION ON THE CAYA.
DORSENNE AND THE GALICIANS. JUNE-AUGUST 1811


It is often forgotten by English writers that while the armies of
Wellington, Soult, and Marmont faced each other near Badajoz in
June-July 1811, only in the end to depart in different directions
without a battle, there was a second and minor crisis going on in the
north, which had important consequences. Wellington had designedly
brought it about, because without it the French would have had much
larger forces disposable for action against Portugal, and might have
given much trouble by demonstrating against the Beira frontier.

When Marmont and Sir Brent Spencer, moving in parallel columns,
transferred themselves in ten days from the banks of the Agueda
and the Tormes to those of the Guadiana, the north-eastern angle
of Portugal was almost stripped of troops. There remained only the
militia divisions of Silveira[595] north of the Douro, in the province
of Tras-os-Montes, and of Wilson and Trant south of the Douro, in
front of Guarda and Celorico. The whole did not amount to 12,000 men,
of inferior quality. Fortunately the French Army of Portugal had
gone southward _en masse_. Marmont had left nothing behind him save
the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo and a great dépôt of convalescents,
dismounted dragoons, and other odds and ends, at Salamanca. From them
there was nothing to be feared.

  [595] Silveira had only one infantry regiment of regulars (no.
  24) and two squadrons of regular dragoons, as also two batteries
  of old artillery. Wilson had one squadron of regular dragoons.

But behind Salamanca lay Bessières’s Army of the North. The Duke of
Istria had, very unwillingly, pledged himself to Marmont to take over
the supervision of the frontiers of Leon, when the Army of Portugal
marched for Badajoz. He had declared, when asked for help in May,
that he had not a man to spare after providing for the duty already
incumbent on him of holding down all Old Castile, Asturias, and
Santander. As the Emperor kept assuring him, by angry dispatches from
Paris, this was an exaggeration[596]. It was in his power to collect
a small field army of 12,000 or 15,000 men, without giving up any
essential point in his extensive sphere of operations; and in July
he did so, much against his inclination, and suffered no harm by so
doing. If such a force had been set to threaten northern Portugal
during the concentration on the Caya, Wellington would have felt most
uncomfortable. But occupation was found for Bessières from another
quarter, and this was part of the British commander’s general scheme
for the defence of the Peninsula. With the consent of General Castaños,
since he could only suggest and not command any operations to be
undertaken by Spanish troops, Wellington had provided for an attack
on the flank of Bessières by a force of which we have heard nothing
for many months--the Army of Galicia[597]. If threatened on the Esla
and the Orbigo, Bessières would be able to spare no attention for the
Agueda.