

  [580] These two noteworthy dispatches are accessible in the
  Appendix to vol. i of Belmas, to those who have not time to visit
  the Paris Archives.

If Soult wanted another signal victory of the type of Albuera he had
only to march nine miles towards Campo Mayor, on the day after he wrote
this dispatch to Berthier. The temptation was surely great, since
the defeat of Wellington’s army would have shaken to its foundations
the whole defence of the Peninsula. To assemble the force now lying
by Badajoz, Andalusia and Leon had been stripped of all disposable
troops, and left exposed to the raids of the Spanish Armies of Galicia
and Murcia, and to the omnipresent guerrilleros, who had already cut
communications in every direction. If Wellington could be beaten, the
concentration was justified; if he were left unmolested nothing had
been gained, save the reprovisioning of Badajoz--and the game might go
on for ever. Battle was now offered to the Marshals if they chose to
accept it--the reconnaissance of June 22nd proved that the Allies
had taken up a position and were standing on it.

[Illustration: ESTREMADURA]

But neither Soult nor Marmont would advance. The cause of their
reluctance to engage was undoubtedly a moral one. As Napier very truly
remarks in a typical sentence[581], ‘Marmont’s army was conscious of
its recent defeats at Bussaco, at Sabugal, at Fuentes de Oñoro; the
horrid field of Albuera was fresh; the fierce blood there spilt still
reeked in the nostrils of Soult’s soldiers.’ The generals, no less than
the rank and file, felt a qualm at the idea of attacking Wellington in
a position which he had taken up with deliberation, and where he showed
himself serenely expectant of their attack. They were aware that an
attempt to dislodge him would be rendered very tiresome by the fact
that Elvas and Campo Mayor protected his line. They over-valued his
forces by the number of Blake’s army, which, till the 24th June, they
wrongly supposed to be still with him. So contenting themselves with
dictating pompous dispatches concerning the importance of the relief of
Badajoz--which was indeed a notable advantage--they went each upon his
separate way. Instead of attempting to inflict a defeat on Wellington,
the Marshals did no more than patch up a scheme by which they thought
he might be contained and held in check for the present. In short, the
offensive spirit was gone: the French armies in Spain found themselves
thrown upon the defensive; and so things were to remain for the rest
of the Peninsular War. The offensive, though it was hardly realized as
yet, had passed to Wellington[582].

  [581] vol. iii. p. 316.

  [582] Napier (iii. p. 317) suggests that since the stores of
  Elvas had run low, and its ammunition reserve in especial had
  been much depleted by the expenditure of shot and shell before
  Badajoz, the place was in such a dangerous condition that ‘Soult
  (had he known this state of affairs) might have passed the
  Guadiana by the fords, and by means of his pontoons from Badajoz,
  might have overpowered the Allies’ right, invested Elvas, and
  covered his army by lines, unless indeed the English general,
  anticipating the attempt, defeated him between the Caya and
  Elvas. This might not have been easy in an open country, which
  offered every advantage to the overwhelming cavalry and artillery
  of the French.’ With all humility, I must express my doubts
  as to the wisdom or practicability of this course. An army of
  60,000 men, with another of 54,000 in its front, cannot, surely,
  venture to form the siege of a first-class fortress unless it has
  previously beaten the covering army in a general action. Napier
  suggests that Soult should push back Wellington’s right and
  surround Elvas. But the attempt _must_ have brought on a general
  action, close under the walls of Elvas, in which the Allies would
  have had every advantage of position.