

  [604] The brigade (119th, 122nd Line) lost fourteen officers on
  June 23rd, which would argue total casualties of about 300 at the
  usual rate. But the Spaniards say that they took many prisoners
  and give the total French loss at 450.

Santocildes, seeing that Cabrera had now nothing in front of him at
La Baneza, called up his division to Astorga, and uniting it with the
troops of Taboada and Castañon marched against Bonnet on July 2nd. The
French general, after trying to defend for some time the bridge of
the Orbigo, found himself so outnumbered that he must retreat towards
Leon. But before he had been driven back so far, first Serras from
Benavente, and then Bessières himself, with Dumoustier’s division
from Valladolid, came up to join him. The French, now 13,000 strong,
advanced to seek a general action (July 18). Santocildes, showing great
prudence, refused to fight in the plain, hastily abandoned Astorga and
the banks of the Orbigo, and withdrew into the mountains south-west
of Astorga, where he took post at Torienzo. The enemy did not pursue,
and only a party of light cavalry entered Astorga, which it abandoned
next day. For Bessières had received intelligence that his head
quarters at Valladolid, which was almost ungarrisoned in the absence
of Dumoustier’s division, had been attacked by the _partidas_ of the
southern sierras (July 15). At the same time General Dorsenne reported
from Burgos that Mina had crossed into his government, deserting his
more usual haunts in Navarre, and had united with Longa and Porlier.
They had a large force and had cut the communications with Santander.
On returning to Valladolid with the Guard division, Bessières found
waiting there on July 25 his letters of recall to Paris. The Emperor
had deposed him, partly in consequence of complaints as to his
intractability made by King Joseph, partly because he was dissatisfied
at the hopeless tone of his dispatches, in which (to his master’s
discontent) he kept setting forth the thesis that the war in Spain
was being conducted on a wrong system, and that the Army of the North
was helpless[605]. His post was given to General Dorsenne, a man of
inferior ability, though his operations prove him not to have been such
a conceited imbecile as his jealous subordinate Thiébault alleges[606].
Indeed, his record in the north compares not unfavourably with that of
Bessières, and he was decidedly more ready to aid his neighbours than
the Duke of Istria--which was the main thing necessary among French
generals in Spain.

  [605] See especially his dispatch to Berthier of June 6: ‘On fait
  illusion à l’Empereur--tout le monde connaît le mode vicieux de
  nos opérations, &c.’--it is most free-spoken.

  [606] For Thiébault’s character of Dorsenne see his _Mémoires_
  vol. iv. pp. 401-2.

On the departure of Bessières for Valladolid, his subordinates Bonnet
and Serras had halted behind the Orbigo, holding La Baneza as their
advanced point. Santocildes, who showed as much enterprise as prudence
during his short tenure of command, learning that there were now only
6,000 or 7,000 men in front of him, came down again from his mountains
on July 28th with all his three divisions, and advanced against them:
they were forced, after some slight skirmishing, to abandon La Baneza
and the line of the Orbigo, and to fall back on Leon. Santocildes
advanced to the Esla, and roving detachments sent out from his front
pushed forward as far into Old Castile as Sahagun and Palencia. The
_partidas_ got possession of the whole country-side, and the French
garrisons of Zamora, Toro, Benavente, and Salamanca were completely
cut off from their communication with Dorsenne’s head quarters at
Valladolid. There was equal trouble in the provinces of Burgos and
Santander, where Longa and Porlier long held occupied the Guard
division of General Roguet, evading him when necessary, and always
returning to give trouble when he had passed by.