

As to the infantry, the 1st Division (as we have already seen[592])
had given a brigade to the 2nd to repair the losses of Albuera.
The 2nd Division had taken over Howard’s brigade from the 1st, and
had consolidated the remains of Colborne’s and Hoghton’s shattered
regiments from two brigades into one. The 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th
Divisions were comparatively little altered, getting, between them all,
only two more battalions on balance, after replacing certain old ones
by newly arrived units[593]. But the 7th Division, hitherto containing
only one British brigade (Sontag’s) was provided with a second one, by
taking in Alten’s light infantry battalions, which had fought so well
at Albuera.

  [592] See p. 435.

  [593] To go into details, the 1st Division not only gave over
  Howard’s brigade (50th, 71st, 92nd) to Hill, but sent home the
  7th Line battalion of the K.G.L., whose rank and file were
  drafted into the three senior Line battalions of that corps. From
  the 2nd Division the 2/28th, 29th, 2/39th, 2/48th went home, and
  the 1/48th was transferred to the 4th Division: but the 1/28th
  and 1/39th came out to Portugal and joined. The 3rd Division
  got one new battalion (77th) in July. In the 4th Division the
  1/7th and 2/7th were amalgamated, but the number of battalions
  was kept as before by the transference of the 1/48th from the
  2nd Division. The 6th Division got one new unit, the 2/32nd.
  The 7th Division took over Alten’s K.G.L. light battalions, and
  received the 68th, but sent home the 85th, after it had been only
  seven months in the Peninsula. Wellington refused to keep this
  regiment, which on its return to England went through a series of
  court-martials, testifying to grave internal faults.

The net result of all this change was that, when Wellington once more
divided his army into a northern and a southern force in August, the
latter (now under Hill) amounted to about 9,000 bayonets and nearly
4,000 sabres. This detachment having four cavalry brigades (five
British and four Portuguese regiments) was able to ‘contain’ its normal
adversary in Estremadura, Drouet’s 9th Corps, which had about the same
number of cavalry and two or three thousand more infantry. Hill’s
regular task was to cover Elvas and to keep Drouet in check, without
committing himself to any large offensive operations, for which his
force was manifestly inadequate.

But the Anglo-Portuguese northern corps, or main army, was now far
stronger than it had ever been before, amounting to some 46,000 men,
including 5,000 cavalry. It now became for the first time decidedly
superior in numbers to its special opponent, the French Army of
Portugal, which even after receiving its drafts and convalescents in
the autumn did not amount to quite 40,000 men, and was very weak in
cavalry, of which it did not possess more than 3,000. Clearly, then,
for the future Marmont could not possibly take the offensive against
Wellington with his own forces, and would have to depend for help on
the Army of the North, if matters came to a crisis. He would be lucky
if he were able to ‘contain’ the Anglo-Portuguese, and certainly
could not think of doing more, unless he were able to get prompt
reinforcements from Bessières--or, after that Marshal’s departure, from
his successor, Dorsenne. Indeed, the Army of Portugal was so clearly
inadequate to discharge the function of protecting the whole Spanish
frontier from the Guadiana to the Douro, that the Emperor, though in
October he once more proposed to Marmont an invasion of Portugal, was
ultimately forced to make over to it 16,000 men from the Army of the
North, the divisions of Souham and Bonnet[594]. But of this more in
its own place. It must suffice here to say that the net results of the
spring and summer campaigns of 1811 was to leave the French decidedly
on the defensive all along the Portuguese border, and to transfer
to Wellington the opportunity of trying the offensive. It was to be
five months, however, before he succeeded in taking it up--his autumn
operations of 1811 were tentative, and led to no definite results. From
July to December there was much manœuvring, but little change came of
it.