

  [583] Soult’s dispatch of June 24 says that he has just heard
  that Blake has gone off southward.

  [584] Four battalions, two cavalry regiments, and a battery had
  been lent for the field army.

  [585] Of the four regiments garrisoning that region three (12th
  Léger, 51st, 55th) had joined the Albuera army. Sebastiani had to
  lend several battalions to take their place.

  [586] See _Mémoires_, iv. p. 47.

Soult was forced to assent to this demand, and took away only Godinot’s
and Conroux’s provisional divisions, and three regiments of cavalry.
The 5th Corps, now placed under Drouet[587], and six dragoon regiments,
were left behind on the Guadiana, to enable Marmont to maintain a
safe defensive against Wellington. They made up some 15,000 men,
which, with the 32,000 of the Army of Portugal, provided a force quite
insufficient to attack the Allies, yet large enough to prevent a siege
of Badajoz. For no general, least of all the cautious commander of
the Anglo-Portuguese army, would undertake to besiege a fortress of
the first class, situated on two sides of a broad river, with 54,000
men, when a covering force of 47,000 men was supporting it in the near
vicinity.

  [587] i. e. two infantry divisions, and Briche’s light cavalry,
  14,000 men, since the drafts had come under Drouet.

Meanwhile, for a fortnight after Soult had departed from Badajoz for
Seville on June 28th, Marmont and Drouet on one side of the Guadiana,
and Wellington on the other, stood observing each other, and waiting
each for some move on the part of his adversary. The British general
knew that the French in his front were no longer strong enough to
attack him on his positions around the Caya. But he must keep his army
concentrated, since, if he made detachments in any direction, Marmont
might yet make a dash at Elvas; and that place, though it had been
much improved of late[588], during the weeks when an attack on it
seemed probable, still left something to be desired, especially in the
quality of the guns on its walls--our old acquaintances of the siege
of Badajoz, and their brethren. As long as Marmont and Drouet remained
massed near Badajoz the allied army could not disperse.

  [588] When a siege seemed probable General Leite demolished a
  number of houses and trees too close to the walls, improved the
  works by clearing the ditch and strengthening parapets, and did
  his best to draw in all available provisions. This last was hard,
  when so large a friendly army was close at hand, eating up the
  country-side.

On the other hand, the French generals were compelled to keep together
for a time, in order to superintend the victualling of Badajoz,
whose magazines were absolutely empty at the moment of its relief.
If they had drawn back into cantonments, and scattered their men,
Wellington might have thrown a light corps and cavalry across the
Guadiana, and have established once more a blockade of the fortress.
Accordingly, from the 28th of June to the 15th of July the Army of
Portugal and the 5th Corps remained concentrated in the quadrilateral
Badajoz-Merida-Almendralejo-Almendral, sweeping the country-side for
provisions. Each regiment was ordered to deposit in the magazines of
Badajoz a prescribed number of _fanegas_ of wheat or maize, making
in all six months’ rations for a garrison of 4,000 men. North of the
Guadiana the French cavalry ranged about the region around Montijo and
Torre del Fresno, where they were in constant touch with Wellington’s
exploring squadrons sent out from Campo Mayor and Ouguella: but no
serious collisions occurred. At last, on July 15th it was reported that
Badajoz was fully provisioned, and Marmont informed Drouet that he
was about to disperse his army in cantonments reaching as far as the
Tagus, since northern Estremadura was wholly exhausted. He would keep
a division at Truxillo, half-way between Merida and the Tagus, and the
rest of his army could be brought back at the shortest notice, if the
Anglo-Portuguese should make a forward move. Drouet, after changing the
garrison of Badajoz for new battalions of the same regiments which had
endured the two sieges of May and June, and confiding its charge once
more to the trusty Phillipon, drew back the 5th Corps to Zafra, Los
Santos, and Merida, leaving Briche’s light cavalry at Santa Marta to
keep the communication with Badajoz open. The Marshal and the general
calculated that if Wellington should once more come forward, they could
join again at Merida in six or seven days to ‘contain’ him. He could
do nothing against Badajoz in the short time that would elapse before
their concentration.