

On taking over charge of the whole kingdom of Leon from Marmont,
Bessières came to the conclusion that he must draw in troops towards
the south, lest he should be caught in a position in which he had no
disposable central mass towards the Douro. Consequently on the 6th of
June he sent orders to Bonnet to evacuate the Asturias and fall back by
the pass of Pajares to Leon, in order to place himself in closer touch
with Serras.[602] On the 14th, therefore, Bonnet left Oviedo and came
over the mountains with three of his regiments, while the fourth went
eastward parallel to the coast, in the direction of Santander, picking
up in its retreat all the small garrisons which had been left to
dominate the Asturian ports, and to prevent communication between Longa
and Porlier and the English cruisers. By the 17th Bonnet lay at Leon
with 6,000 men: he was just in time to support the scattered front line
formed by Serras’s division against the attack which Wellington had
planned. For Santocildes and the Army of Galicia had advanced against
Astorga, quite without his knowledge, two days before he marched south
from Oviedo.

  [602] See Bessières to Berthier of June 6th, from Valladolid.

The disposable force of the Spaniards consisted, after the weakest and
least serviceable regiments had been told off for garrison duty at
Corunna, Ferrol, Vigo, and other fortified places, of about 15,000 men.
Santocildes brought his reserve from Lugo and the division of General
Taboada, nearly 7,000 men and 600 horse, to Villafranca in the Vierzo,
from which he advanced down the passes to Astorga on June 12th. A
second division of 2,500 men under General Cabrera came forward at the
same time from Puebla de Senabria, as far as the edge of the mountains
above the Rio Tuerto, and demonstrated against La Baneza, the half-way
post between Astorga and Benavente. The left wing, composed of Losada’s
Asturians, was wanting: it had followed Bonnet when he began to retreat
and had occupied Oviedo. Losada remained there himself, but sent one
brigade to join the main army by a circuitous route[603], since the
direct way by the pass of Pajares and Leon was blocked by Bonnet. This
brigade under Castañon did not get to the front till June 23rd.

  [603] I cannot discover which of the passes west of Pajares
  Castañon used. They are all difficult.

On the 19th of June Santocildes found Astorga evacuated; the small
garrison of 400 men had blown up part of the city walls, and absconded
on that same morning. They fell back on Bonnet at Leon. Meanwhile
Serras started to march northward from Benavente with 2,000 men, to
‘contain’ Santocildes, while Bonnet sent forward two regiments under
his brigadier, Valletaux, to assist Serras. But their forces never met:
the column from Benavente got engaged with Cabrera’s division near La
Baneza, and could not push further forward. That from Leon found most
of Taboada’s division placed across its path near Benavides, behind
the river Orbigo, nine miles in front of Astorga (June 23). Valletaux,
despising his enemy, crossed the stream and attacked, though the
balance of numbers was against him. When the engagement had been for
some hours in progress, Castañon, with the brigade just arriving from
Asturias, came down on his flank. The French were beaten: Valletaux
fell, and his brigade lost over 300 men[604] in the combat, which the
Spaniards name from the village of Cogorderos and the French from
that of Quintanilla de Valle. The defeated force fell back beyond the
Orbigo, and was succoured by Bonnet, with the rest of his troops from
Leon. Meanwhile Serras retired towards Benavente, and called loudly for
help to his chief, Bessières.