

  [596] See especially Berthier to Bessières, of May 19, from
  Rambouillet.

  [597] See especially Wellington to General Walker (British
  attaché with the Army of Galicia), _Dispatches_, vii. p. 648,
  where the siege of Astorga and the troubling of Bonnet in
  Asturias are the operations recommended. Castaños was still
  titular Captain-General in Galicia as well as in Estremadura.

At this time the Army of the North was not so strong in numbers as it
became a few weeks later, when Napoleon’s ‘divisions of Reserve’ began
to cross the Pyrenees. In June 1811 it consisted of only four infantry
divisions, those of Generals Bonnet, Serras, Roguet, and Dumoustier,
and of two brigades of cavalry under Wathier and Lepic. Bonnet’s
division had been holding the central region of the Asturias and the
city of Oviedo since it had conquered them in January 1810. In addition
it had occupied a string of ports from Gijon to Santander, in order
to keep off the English cruisers from their communication with the
guerrilleros of the Cantabrian hills. Bonnet had a strong force, four
full regiments of infantry, making 8,000 men, yet could never complete
the conquest of the Asturias. Wherever he struck with a strong force he
could penetrate, but any move far from his base at Oviedo brought down
the enemy upon some of his isolated posts, which he had then to rescue
by a swift return. His enemies were on the left hand the relics of the
old Spanish Army of Asturias, now under General Losada, who hung about
the mountains on the Galician frontier--on the right the great partisan
chiefs Porlier and Longa, whose beat was in the sierras above Santander.

On the left of Bonnet lay Bessières’s second division, that of Serras,
which had originally been assigned to the Army of Portugal in 1810, but
had remained behind to watch the Galician Spaniards. Its head quarters
were at Benavente; it held Astorga as an advanced post, and Leon as a
flank-guard. From the latter place it communicated with Bonnet through
the pass of Pajares. This was an enormous front for a division of 6,000
men to occupy, and that, too, one not composed of picked troops, but of
miscellaneous units. For Serras had two Italian regiments (32nd Léger,
113th Line[598]) and two Polish and two Swiss battalions, so that much
the larger half of his men were auxiliary troops and not native French.

  [598] The 113th were a new Tuscan regiment, raised in 1809, which
  had been practically destroyed in Catalonia, and sent home to
  recruit. The 32nd Léger was Genoese.

On the other hand, there was nothing left to be desired in the two
divisions of Roguet and Dumoustier, which held the central position
in Bessières’s cantonments: they were all troops of the Young Guard,
eleven regiments of _tirailleurs_, _chasseurs_, and _voltigeurs_;
attached to them were three composite regiments of guard cavalry and
a proportion of artillery--the whole made up of 15,000 men of the
best quality. Dumoustier’s division was cantoned within the provinces
of Valladolid and Palencia, Roguet’s within that of Burgos. On the
south they had no enemies save the guerrilleros of the Guadarama and
the Avila and Soria sierras, tiresome and elusive but not formidable
foes. On the north, in the Liebana and the Cantabrian hills, Longa and
Porlier were much more troublesome and dangerous. Their bands were
well armed, and organized on the principles of a regular army, yet
had not lost the power of rapid movement which was the true strength
of the _partida_ system. The sierras in which they operated were,
including their foot-hills, some fifty miles broad, a chaos of passes
and ravines. Countless expeditions against them had led to no final
result. Like the holy men of old, when persecuted in one region they
merely fled to another. If the flying columns and petty garrisons
were withdrawn for a moment, they would be at the gates of Burgos or
Santander within two days, and the high-roads Burgos-Vittoria and
Burgos-Valladolid, the main arteries of communication with France,
would be cut.