

There was soon to be a fifth division in Bessières’s army, but it
had not yet arrived from France--that of Souham, which formed (along
with the divisions of Caffarelli and Reille) the great reinforcement
poured by Napoleon into northern Spain during the late summer of
1811. But in June it was only beginning to march up from Marseilles,
Turin, and Spezia, the distant garrisons from which it was to be
drawn[599]. Before it arrived in Spain Bessières had ceased to command
the Army of the North, and Dorsenne had taken his place. Hence (though
Wellington was not aware of the fact) the months of June and July were
exceptionally favourable for a move against the French flank in this
direction.

  [599] For details of its movements see Napoleon’s
  _Correspondance_, 17,784, June 8th, 1811.

In addition to his four infantry divisions, Bessières possessed
Wathier’s brigade of light cavalry, and Lepic’s brigade of guard
cavalry, together with some unbrigaded units such as the 130th of
the Line (the fixed garrison of Santander)[600], the battalion of
Neuchâtel, which he had moved forward to Salamanca, a number of
squadrons of _gendarmes_, and a quantity of drafts for the Armies of
Portugal and the Centre, which had been stopped on their way south
in a surreptitious fashion, by various post-commanders who wanted to
strengthen their depleted detachments. In the autumn Marmont succeeded
in extracting no less than 4,000 of his own men from the territories
of the Army of the North, not without much friction with the local
officers who wished to detain them[601].

  [600] This was a newly created regiment, formed out of a number
  of provisional battalions, which had been doing garrison duty in
  Biscay for the last year.

  [601] Bessières grossly underrated his own force in a letter to
  Berthier of June 6th, in which he stated the whole at only 44,000
  men.

The whole force between the borders of Navarre and those of Portugal
was in June and July not less than 60,000 men, even before the three
divisions of Souham, Reille, and Caffarelli came up from France. On
the other hand, they had an enormous area to keep down, not less than
a fifth of the whole surface of Spain. And if their regular enemies,
the Armies of Galicia and Asturias, were weak, they had among the
irregulars opposed to them the boldest and the most obstinate of
all the guerrillero chiefs. Any serious move against a section of
Bessières’s long line would cause disturbance over the whole of his
viceroyalty, since to collect a serious force he would have to cut down
the garrisons of many localities below danger-point.

It was on this fact that Wellington relied when he obtained Castaños’s
leave to set the Spanish Army of Galicia in motion. It was fortunately
led at this moment by an active and enterprising chief, Santocildes,
the hero of the defence of Astorga in 1810, who lent himself eagerly
to the plan, though his army was not in good order. The cadres left
behind in the north, when del Parque moved into Estremadura in the
winter of 1809-10, were the worst and weakest of the old Army of
Galicia, and though they had been filled up with local recruits, till
the whole force had a nominal strength of 21,000 men, the organization
was bad, and the want of well-trained and capable regimental officers
very noticeable. The Junta of Galicia had spent more energy in 1810
on quarrels with the Captain-General Mahy than on the equipment of
its army. Its weakest point was that it possessed only 600 regular
cavalry--a defect that must be fatal if it left the mountains to
descend into the plains of Leon. It was for this reason that Wellington
advised Santocildes to form the siege of Astorga, to harass Bonnet in
the Asturias, but not to quit the skirts of the friendly sierras.