

  [613] His troops had plundered the Portuguese peasantry freely
  during their rapid march, and actually came to skirmishing with
  the local Ordenança. For anecdotes by an eye-witness, Schepeler,
  see his book, i. p. 304.

  [614] For which see Schepeler, p. 307. On a false alarm the
  troops began to embark on the transports without orders, and in
  great disarray. Blake, according to Schepeler, made a ridiculous
  spectacle of himself, by wading a long way through shallow water
  to get out to a small boat. There were no French within many
  miles.

Blake’s Niebla expedition had been conducted with the greatest timidity
and incompetence. Yet it had served Wellington’s purpose much as he
had intended, since it drew off 11,000 French troops into a remote
corner of Andalusia for some weeks. It is true that Soult’s original
withdrawal from the Guadiana was not caused by this diversion, but
it had forced him to send away on a wild-goose chase troops urgently
needed elsewhere. For if Conroux and Godinot had not marched to Niebla
and Ayamonte, they would have gone straight to Granada, to reinforce
the 4th Corps, which was, throughout the month of July, in considerable
danger from the Murcians. It was not till August had begun that
Soult was able to come to its aid, with the divisions which had been
distracted to the far west by Blake’s expedition.

Of Freire’s Army of Murcia we have heard nothing since the unhappy rout
of Baza (November 3, 1810). After that shock it had kept quiet for
many a day, and only dared to move when, in April 1811, Soult began to
make heavy requisitions on the 4th Corps, in order to form the army
that marched for Albuera. Further drafts had been called westward in
the end of May, so that Leval, who succeeded Sebastiani as commander
of the corps about this time, was left with numbers quite inadequate
to hold down the broad kingdoms of Jaen and Granada. This, of course,
gave Freire the chance of accomplishing something useful: and, leaving
the frontiers of Murcia, he began to press forward against the French
posts. He had at this time a force of three infantry divisions, under
La Cuadra, Sanz, and Creagh, and two weak cavalry divisions under
Osorio and Ladrón. The whole amounted, after making deductions for the
garrison of Cartagena (2,000 men) to nearly 12,000 bayonets and 1,500
sabres[615]. In May Freire began to push forward cautiously, with his
cavalry and two divisions on the high-road Lorca-Baza-Granada, and a
smaller force, consisting of La Cuadra’s division, on the side road
which leads, by Huescar and Pozoalcon, to the valley of the upper
Guadalquivir and the kingdom of Jaen. His progress was so slow that the
French were able to withdraw at their leisure before him, without any
loss. Leval was so weak that he made no attempt to stand, and evacuated
in succession the coast lands about Almeria, as far as Motril, the
highlands east of Granada, including the towns of Baza and Guadix,
and the upper valley of the Guadalquivir. La Cuadra’s advanced posts
penetrated as far as Ubeda, and bickered with the garrisons of Baeza,
Linares, and Jaen. Officers sent out from the main column raised the
mountaineers of the Sierra Nevada, and bands of insurgents began to cut
the communications between Granada and Malaga. At the head of these
irregulars was the turbulent Conde de Montijo, of whom we last heard
when he got into trouble for conspiring against the supreme Junta[616].
He is now found more usefully employed, giving trouble to the enemy
instead of to his own Government.