

  [620] Schepeler (p. 460) mentions that during his short halt
  on the frontier of Murcia, Soult court-martialled and shot a
  French _émigré_ officer in the Spanish service captured on the
  9th--Charles Cléry, the son of the faithful servant of Louis
  XVI, who was so long with his master in the Temple prison. As he
  had been out of France for many years, first in the Austrian and
  then in the Spanish army, this was a cruel stretch of the idea of
  treason.




SECTION XXVIII

OPERATIONS IN EASTERN SPAIN DURING THE SPRING, SUMMER, AND AUTUMN OF
1811




CHAPTER I

FIGUERAS AND TARRAGONA. APRIL-MAY 1811


In the earlier chapter of this volume, which took the affairs of
Catalonia and Aragon down to the month of March, we left Suchet
making vigorous preparation for the siege of Tarragona, within whose
walls his master had promised him that he should ‘find his marshal’s
baton.’ While munitions and food for this great enterprise were being
collected, the unemployed troops of the Army of Aragon were occupied
in scouring the mountains on the side of New Castile and Valencia,
always driving the _partidas_ before them, but never able to bring
about their capture or destruction. Meanwhile, Macdonald with the
active part of the French Army of Catalonia, about 17,000 strong, lay
in and about Lerida, ‘containing’ the main Spanish force, which had
now passed under the control of the new Captain-General, the active
but incapable Campoverde. Based on Tarragona, and with his divisions
spread out in front of it, this officer bickered with Macdonald
continually, but had achieved nothing substantial since his subordinate
Sarsfield cut up Eugenio’s Italians at the combat of Valls, long weeks
before[621]. His ambitious attempt to surprise Barcelona had failed
with loss on March 19th, because it was based on supposed treachery
within the walls, which did not really exist. Further to the north, in
the Ampurdam and on the Pyrenean frontier, Baraguay d’Hilliers with the
rest of the 7th Corps, some 18,000 men, had to furnish the garrisons
of Rosas, Figueras, Gerona and other smaller places, and to contend
with the miqueletes of Manso, Rovira, Martinez, and other chiefs.
There were practically no Spanish regular troops in this direction,
almost the whole of the old regiments having been withdrawn southward
to face Macdonald, and to defend Tarragona and the surrounding region
of central Catalonia. Nevertheless Baraguay d’Hilliers, as we shall
see, had no small task thrown upon his hands. In this province the
irregulars were at their best, having in the miquelete system an
organization which made them far more formidable than the _partidas_ of
central or northern Spain.

  [621] See above, page 243.

On March 10th Napoleon, who had marked with approval all Suchet’s
earlier operations, while he was thoroughly dissatisfied with
Macdonald, resolved to cut up the old 7th Corps or Army of Catalonia,
by making over nearly half of its force to the Army of Aragon. A decree
declared that the three provinces of Lerida, Tarragona, and Tortosa
were transferred to the charge of Suchet, with so much of the province
of Barcelona as lay east of the pass of Ordal and the course of the
upper Llobregat. Along with the provinces went the troops stationed in
them, viz. the French division of Frère, the Italian division of Pino,
and the Neapolitan division now commanded by Compère, together with the
cavalry and artillery attached to them. Macdonald’s charge was cut down
to the region of Barcelona and the lands north of it. The 7th Corps,
or troops of his command, sank from over 40,000 to about 25,000 men.
The 3rd Corps rose from 26,000 to 43,000 men. With this augmented force
Suchet was told both to hold down his old realm in Aragon, and to take
Tarragona, furnishing not only a siege army but a covering force as
well. Macdonald was no longer to be the shield of Suchet’s operations,
as during the siege of Tortosa, but was to occupy himself on a separate
and minor system of operations--the Imperial orders directed him to
occupy Cardona, Berga, and Urgel, the centres of resistance in upper
Catalonia, and to take the rocky stronghold of Montserrat.