

  [619] There is a good account of this obscure campaign by
  Schepeler, an eye-witness, in his _Spanische Monarchie_, pp.
  558-62, and a longer one in Arteche, vol. x.

The Murcian army was thus divided into two masses, neither of which
covered the main road to the capital of the province, and Soult,
standing triumphant at Velez Rubio with his 12,000 men united, might
have marched on Murcia had he chosen. But the way was long--some
seventy miles--and the intervening country rough and thinly peopled.
The Marshal resolved not to pursue Freire, but to devote himself to the
hunting down of the insurgents of Granada and the southern mountains,
while the main hostile army was out of action. When, therefore, Blake
returned from Valencia to pay a hasty visit to his scattered army,
he found it shaken in morale, and weaker by 4,000 men than when he
had left it, but not destroyed. Of the two disjointed sections, one
descended in haste from the northern mountains, the other came in
marching parallel with the coast; they met at Alcantarilla in front of
the city of Murcia, on August 14th, and began to fortify a position
there. But the French had turned back; Soult contented himself with
reoccupying Baza with a permanent garrison, and did not cross the
Murcian frontier. Hence Blake was able, a few weeks later, to take
off to the north not only his own two divisions, but part of Freire’s
troops, for service against Suchet on the side of Valencia. It was a
lucky chance for him that the invasion of Valencia from the side of
Aragon only began upon September 16, more than a month after Soult had
returned into Andalusia. If it had come earlier, there would have been
no succours available for the oft-defeated and never very efficient
‘2nd Army’, as the Valencian corps was now called.

Soult had not gone in person further than Velez Rubio, though his light
cavalry had pursued the flying Spaniards many miles further, as far as
the pass of Lumbreras. On August 14th he turned back[620], and broke
up his army into several columns, who were to hunt down the insurgents
of the Sierra Nevada and the Alpujarras. The main body returned to
Granada, a flanking column occupied Almeria, another swept the valley
of the upper Guadalquivir. There was much plunder and a good deal of
reckless shooting of inhabitants--for the French were exasperated at
the rising which had taken place in districts that had seemed for the
last eighteen months to be pacified. But the crushing of the insurgents
turned out to be a long business--indeed eastern and southern Andalusia
were never so thoroughly under Soult’s control as they had been in 1810
and the early months of 1811. The Count of Montijo lurked persistently
in the mountains, and gained several small successes over General
Godinot, who was in main charge of the hunt. On August 21st he captured
two whole companies of Poles near Motril, and a few days later checked
a column of 1,500 men under Colonel Remond. He himself ultimately got
off to join the Murcian army, but the local guerrilleros continued the
strife, which was to blaze up again into a formidable conflagration
when a new Spanish regular force came upon the scene. This was the
division of Ballasteros, who, as has been already mentioned, abandoned
his old haunts by the Rio Tinto and the lower Guadiana, to land on
September 4th at Algesiras with 3,000 men. Calling in the serranos of
the Ronda mountains to his aid, he captured many small places, and
forced Soult to turn Godinot’s troops against him. Thus the insurgents
further east got a momentary respite, and Soult’s unending troubles
took a new turn. But the autumn and winter warfare in the extreme south
of Andalusia must be narrated in another place. Suffice it to say here
that Soult was never in the later months of 1811 so free from trouble
as to find it easy to send any serious aid to Drouet and the 5th
Corps, whose duty it was to check and contain Hill’s Anglo-Portuguese
divisions in Estremadura.