

Meanwhile, it was necessary to transfer Macdonald’s own person from
Lerida, where lay the troops that he had to surrender, to Barcelona,
which was to be for the future the centre of his activity. So dangerous
was the passage that he had to be given an escort of no less than
7,000 infantry and 700 horse. Taking the way of Manresa, he started
from Lerida on March 30th and cut his way through the Spanish forces
which stretched across his path. The regular division of Sarsfield,
supported by the _somatenes_ of central Catalonia, gave him much
trouble: though they failed to hold Manresa, which the French stormed
and wantonly burnt, they hung on to the flanks of the marching column,
repeatedly attacked its rearguard, and cut off or slew in three days
of continuous fighting some 600 men. After reaching the Llobregat at
Sabadel, Macdonald went on to the neighbouring Barcelona, while his
escort fought its way back to Lerida by the road of Igualada, and
joined Suchet on April 9th.

Having now got the whole of his new army under his own hand, Suchet
was able to prepare all his arrangements for the march on Tarragona.
Ample provision had first to be made for the defence of Aragon in his
rear, where the enemies were numerous if not powerful--Mina on the side
of Navarre, Villa Campa and Carbajal in the mountains of the south,
and the Army of Valencia beyond the lower course of the Ebro. He set
aside three battalions and a cavalry regiment to watch Mina[622], and
two battalions each for garrisons at Saragossa and Calatayud[623];
he placed a brigade under Paris at Daroca[624], and another under
Abbé at Teruel[625] to watch the southern insurgents. To keep off the
Valencians he left a regiment at Morella and Alcañiz[626], another in
garrison at Tortosa[627], and 1,600 men disposed in small forts along
the lower Ebro from La Rapita at its mouth to Caspe[628]. Musnier was
given charge of all the troops on the right bank of the Ebro, and had
orders to unite Abbé’s and Paris’s brigades and evacuate the southern
hill-country if the Valencians made a serious advance against Tortosa.

  [622] One battalion each of the 44th and 115th Ligne and 1st of
  the Vistula, and the Italian _Dragons de Napoléon_.

  [623] At Saragossa one battalion each of the 5th Léger and 117th
  Ligne; at Calatayud two battalions of 14th Ligne.

  [624] Two battalions of the 44th, two of the 2nd of the Vistula.

  [625] Three battalions of the 114th and two of the 121st, with
  two squadrons of cuirassiers.

  [626] Two battalions of the 115th Ligne.

  [627] Two battalions of the 121st Ligne.

  [628] One battalion of the 115th, one of the 3rd of the Vistula,
  and apparently some of the Neapolitans.

This left Suchet twenty-nine battalions for the expeditionary corps
with which he was about to march against Tarragona--of which nineteen
were French, two Polish, and eight Italian. They amounted to just
under 15,000 bayonets. Since the three divisions of the Army of Aragon
had all been thinned down by the numerous detachments left behind,
he amalgamated what remained of them with the French and the Italian
brigades left to him by Macdonald, to make up three provisional
divisions for the field, under Habert, Harispe, and Frère. The first
had one French and two Italian brigades (fourteen battalions), the
others two brigades each (six and nine battalions respectively).
There was a cavalry brigade of 1,400 men under Boussard, and a large
provision of artillery and engineers for the siege (2,000 men of the
former, 750 of the latter arm). Counting the auxiliary services the
army had about 20,000 men--no great figure for the task before it, for
Tarragona was strong and Campoverde had some 12,000 or 15,000 regular
troops at his disposition--the three divisions of Sarsfield, Eroles,
and Courten--besides such aid as the miqueletes might give. And this
last resource was not to be despised; though they were not always
forthcoming when they were most required, yet they were not usually
found wanting. They could never be caught, owing to their knowledge of
their own hills, and they were never discouraged.