

  [612] _History of the Peninsular War_, iii. p. 186.




SECTION XXVII: CHAPTER IV

SOULT’S TROUBLES IN ANDALUSIA. JULY-SEPTEMBER 1811


After his departure from the Guadiana on June 28th, Soult found
himself plunged into a new series of troubles, which were to continue
all through the summer and autumn. Just as he was about to set out
for Seville with two cavalry regiments as escort, following in the
wake of Godinot’s and Conroux’s infantry, he received the unwelcome
news that Blake, of whose march he had been aware since the 24th,
had crossed the lower Guadiana near Mertola on June 23[613], and had
invaded the Condado de Niebla with nearly 12,000 men. If Blake had
struck straight at Seville there can be little doubt that he would have
taken it, for General Daricau, the governor, hastened, on the first
news of the approach of an enemy, to shut himself up in the fortified
Cartuja Convent, with his scanty garrison of convalescents, drafts,
and _Juramentados_. He had not the least hope of maintaining the large
and turbulent city under control. But no one appeared to molest him,
except some cavalry, who were easily driven off by cannon-shot. Blake,
apparently disliking to present himself in the open plain of the
Guadalquivir, had not marched on Seville, but sat down on June 30 to
besiege the castle of Niebla, the capital of the region which he had
invaded. It was the only French garrison left in western Andalusia,
and was held by a battalion of 600 ‘Swiss’ in King Joseph’s service--a
miscellaneous corps formed of deserters of all races from the Spanish
and British armies, under a Colonel Fritzhardt. Blake lay for five
days before the mediaeval castle with the division of Zayas, while
Ballasteros, with the rest of the army, took a position to cover him
against French troops coming from Estremadura, who (as was rightly
suspected) were not long in appearing. The siege failed because Blake
had brought no artillery with him--on account of the bad mountain roads
he had sent his guns round from Mertola by Ayamonte, and they had not
come up. An attempt to take the castle by escalade failed, and the
Spanish general was sitting helplessly before its walls on July 2nd,
when the news came that the French were upon him. Soult, hearing on
his way southward of Blake’s raid, had turned both Conroux and Godinot
against the invaders, and had continued his own route to Seville with
no more than the cavalry and one infantry regiment. While Godinot
marched on Niebla by Cala and Aracena, Conroux tried to cut in between
Blake and the sea by a circuitous route by Fregenal, through the worst
of the mountains, aiming at the ports of Huelva and Moguer. It was
hoped that the Spaniards might be caught between the two divisions--but
the quarry was too shy. Blake departed at the first alarm, and embarked
at Ayamonte with Zayas’s division; Ballasteros, marching away into the
hills which he knew so well, evaded Conroux, and passed for a time
northward into the Sierra de Aroche. The cavalry under Penne Villemur
did not abscond by water, but returned along the Portuguese frontier
to Estremadura, where it joined the skeleton army of Castaños, which
still consisted of no more than six or eight battalions under Morillo
and Carlos de España, some 3,000 or 4,000 men at most. Wellington had
sent it back to Villa Viçosa during the operations around the Caya,
declining to use it in the fighting-line till it should be reorganized.
Blake, whose embarkation at Ayamonte on July 8th had been accompanied
by circumstances of disgraceful panic[614], returned to Cadiz with
7,000 men. Ballasteros followed him thither six weeks later, having
descended from the hills and embarked at the mouth of the Guadiana at
the end of August.