

  [610] This general is not to be confused with Roguet, the Guard
  commander, though they were operating in regions close to each
  other, and often get mixed in contemporary narratives.

But since Dorsenne started for his expedition against Astorga, the
problem of getting food into Rodrigo had been complicated by the
appearance of Wellington’s army on the Coa and the Agueda. On August
12th the head quarters of the Anglo-Portuguese army had been moved up
from the south to Fuente Guinaldo, in the immediate neighbourhood of
the blockaded fortress, and already on August 8th the garrison had
detected British outposts--from the Light Division--in their immediate
neighbourhood. Now, since Marmont and the Army of Portugal were still
in the valley of the Tagus, and all Leon was still in the charge of
the Army of the North, Dorsenne found himself responsible for the
revictualling, indeed for the relief from blockade, of a fortress which
might be beset by 40,000 men. It was absolutely necessary for him to
return from the border of Galicia, and to concert matters with Marmont
for a common movement against Wellington. For the field force of the
Army of the North, which had just driven Abadia into the hills, was not
over 28,000 strong, and obviously could not succour Rodrigo by its own
unaided strength.

Returning to Valladolid early in September, with the two Guard
divisions, and leaving Bonnet once more to observe the Galicians,
Dorsenne opened _pourparlers_ with Marmont for a general concentration
against Wellington. Of this effort we must speak in its due place.

Meanwhile matters settled down in the northern field of operations.
Bonnet was too weak to move, or to think of reoccupying his old post
in the Asturias. Abadia’s army was much reduced in numbers, both by
privations and by desertion: the last days of the late campaign, spent
in the desolate Val de Orres, had been particularly trying to the
troops. An English observer who saw them at Ponferrada described them
as ‘in even worse condition than might be expected--half the soldiers
without trousers, and wearing only capotes--while the clothing of
the rest shows great need for improvement. They are a fine body of
men, standing well, though deeply marked by privation, and as badly
trained as equipped. The best corps can only manœuvre singly, not
attempting movements of the line; the Toledo battalion broke down in
attempting to change front _en échelon_. The cavalry are on a level
with the infantry, move with wide gaps between squadrons, and cannot
go accurately through the sword exercise. The horses might each be a
Rosinante--the artillery as badly manned as horsed[611].’ The numbers
were terribly low: it was doubtful whether the whole field force could
produce 10,000 men, and they had started on the June campaign with
15,000.

  [611] From the _Memoirs of Sir Howard Douglas_, British
  commissioner with Abadia’s army, pp. 122-3.

Dilapidated, however, as the Army of Galicia might be at the end of its
operations, it had done well, having kept the French Army of the North
‘contained’ for the many weeks during which Wellington was absent on
the Guadiana. Bessières and Dorsenne had accomplished nothing positive
during that time; and the territory held down by the invaders in
September was less than it had been in June by the whole extent of
the Asturias. It is absurd of Napier to state that ‘Galicia with its
lordly Junta, its regular army, fortified towns, numerous population,
and constant supplies from England, had less weight in the contest
than the 5,000 Portuguese militia conducted by Trant and Wilson[612].’
The province, so far from being of no weight in the contest, did
Wellington most useful service. The two diversions carried out by
Santocildes, which twice compelled the Army of the North to mass all
its available field troops on the Orbigo, were operations of the most
profitable sort, and since the Galician always retired in time, led
to no disasters of the kind that too often happened when a Peninsular
general was overdaring. But while paying his just due to Santocildes,
we must praise even more the unwearied activity of the chiefs of the
Cantabrian bands and the guerrilleros of Old Castile and Leon. It was
Longa and Porlier, and Julian Sanchez, who, with forces that were never
very great in numbers, paralysed by their ubiquity and their unceasing
enterprise the greater part of Bessières’s and Dorsenne’s troops. If
they had not been in existence, the French might have found men enough
to conquer Galicia, or to attack north-eastern Portugal in force. This
was true throughout the whole of 1810 and 1811, and was a governing
fact in the history of the Peninsular War. Even though the Emperor
pushed 30,000 fresh infantry (the divisions of Souham, Reille, and
Caffarelli) into northern Spain in July and August 1811, he was never
able to make the communication between Bayonne and Madrid absolutely
safe, or to call any region subdued which was not held down by a
garrison altogether out of proportion to its population.