

  [618] This provisional division of 9th Corps troops (see p. 445)
  had already sent off some of its battalions to join Victor before
  Cadiz, since the units belonged to the 1st Corps.

Nothing could have served Soult better than the chance that the army
against which he was marching was destitute for the moment of its new
Commander-in-Chief, and left in charge of a substitute who shirked
responsibility. From August 3rd, when the Albuera divisions joined
Freire, down to the 7th, when the reinforcements reached Granada, the
small French force in that city had been in a most dangerous position.
But nothing whatever had happened during the critical days: the
Spaniards had remained quiescent behind the ravine of Gor. Picking up
the small part of the garrison of Granada that could be spared to join
his field force, Soult marched against the enemy on the 8th of August,
and was in front of their position on the 9th, with 6,000 infantry and
1,500 horse. Seeing the enormous strength of the ground, he contented
himself with making noisy artillery demonstrations against Freire’s
line, and waited for the arrival of Godinot, who with 4,000 bayonets
and 600 sabres was due to appear in the rear of the Murcians on the
10th, if all had gone well with him.

As a matter of fact Godinot had marched against La Cuadra on the
7th from Baeza, by the way of Jodar. The Spanish general, who was
outnumbered, abandoned his post at Pozoalcon on the 8th and fell back
towards Huescar, nearer the frontier of Murcia, without fighting.
Godinot, therefore, found nothing to prevent him from falling on the
rear of the main hostile force, and marched on Baza. His approach
was reported to Freire, who detached against him Joseph O’Donnell’s
division of 4,000 men, and ordered La Cuadra to hasten to its aid,
and to join in covering the flank of the army. O’Donnell took post at
the fords of the Guardal river, in front of Zujar, and stood on the
defensive, hoping to be joined by La Cuadra during the course of the
day. The latter, however, had gone off too far to the east for it to be
possible for him to return in time, and O’Donnell was badly beaten by
Godinot on the afternoon of the 9th, and lost a third of his men--423
killed and wounded, and 1,000 dispersed or prisoners.

By continuing his march for another eight miles, after beating
O’Donnell, Godinot might have seized Baza and cut off Freire from his
retreat on Murcia. But his men were tired, and it was reported to
him that a new Spanish force--La Cuadra, coming up over late in the
day--was approaching. Wherefore he halted, and only sent out cavalry
to search for Soult’s flank, and to reconnoitre Baza. But Freire,
on hearing that O’Donnell was crushed, and his own rear threatened,
silently evacuated his strong position in the night, and marched
through Baza and across Godinot’s front with all his host. He got away,
but Soult, detecting his retreat at dawn, bade Latour-Maubourg pursue
him with all speed at the head of his horsemen. The Spanish rearguard
was caught up at Las Vertientes, ten miles beyond Baza. Freire ordered
his cavalry, under Osorio and Loy, to face about and protect the march
of the infantry. But a charge of Pierre Soult, who led the French
advance brigade, broke the Spanish horse, who fled in all directions,
uncovering the infantry. The latter took to the hills--one column
consisting of the divisions of Sanz and O’Donnell went off southward,
and escaped without much loss by Oria and Albox. The other, containing
the divisions of Creagh and Lardizabal, turned north, plunged into
the Murcian hills, and made its way by Maria to Caravaca. La Cuadra,
making a separate retreat in a parallel direction, also arrived at
the last-named place[619]. Such was their haste that one column made
thirty-six miles in the day on the 10th, the other twenty-seven.
Stragglers were many.