

Unfortunately for the Spaniards, Santocildes was at this moment
superseded by General Abadia, whom Castaños had sent to take general
command of the ‘6th Army’. He was in every way inferior to his junior
and predecessor, being neither so alert nor so cautious, and having
a craze for unnecessary innovation in matters of detail, which might
have been harmless in time of peace, but was vexatious when carried out
during a campaign. Wellington had at first conceived great expectations
from his intelligence[607], but soon became entirely disappointed with
him.

  [607] See _Dispatches_, vii. p. 648, for an account of
  Abadia’s good intentions, and viii. p. 128, for Wellington’s
  disappointment at their non-fulfilment.

Just before Abadia replaced Santocildes, the position of Dorsenne was
wonderfully improved by the arrival on the Ebro of the division of
Souham, 7,000 strong, which had been promised to him in June, and had
been marching up from Marseilles for five weeks. The commander of the
Army of the North at once turned over the province of Burgos to Souham,
and moved forward from it the greater part of the Guard division of
Roguet, which thus became free for operations in the open field.
Caffarelli’s and Reille’s divisions were now also present in Biscay and
Navarre, so that the available strength of the French in northern Spain
was higher than it had been since the summer of 1810, and Dorsenne
thought that his rear was adequately covered. He therefore marched with
the two divisions of the Young Guard and his two cavalry brigades, to
link his operations with those of Bonnet on the Esla. Dorsenne started
from Valladolid on August 9th, marching in two columns, Dumoustier’s
division by Mayorga and Valencia de Don Juan, Roguet’s by Villalpando
and Benavente, so as to converge on La Baneza. Bonnet, strengthened by
some reinforcements, advanced at the same time from Leon against the
bridges of the Orbigo and Astorga, and Dorsenne, with a small reserve,
followed by the road Valladolid-Valderas. It was evidently intended
that Roguet’s division should turn the Spanish right, and drive the
whole army northward, and away from Galicia, while it was attacked in
front by Bonnet and Dumoustier.

Fortunately for his army, which was now about to be attacked by nearly
30,000 men, Abadia listened to the advice of Santocildes, and withdrew
hastily to the hills when, on August 17th, his outposts were attacked.
Cabrera’s division retired on its old post of Puebla de Senabria, and
got into communication with Silveira’s Portuguese, who had come up
to Braganza. Castañon and the Conde de Belveder[608] (who had just
relieved Taboada in command of the 2nd Division) were drawn back to
the two passes above Astorga, those of Manzanal and Fuencebadon.
Dorsenne, dividing his troops, attacked both, and carried them, not
without severe fighting, on July 27th. The Spanish detachment in the
Manzanal pass was badly cut up: that before Fuencebadon suffered
less. The French lost General Corsin. Behind the passes there are two
lines of retreat into Galicia, the northern and more obvious is the
great _chaussée_ to Corunna, via Villafranca and Lugo, which Sir John
Moore followed in January 1809. The southern and more rugged is that
by Ponferrada, Domingo Flores, and the Val de Orres to Orense, which
La Romana took in that same historic retreat. This last road was now
chosen by Abadia, for two reasons: the first was that by taking it he
placed himself upon the flank of Dorsenne’s advance against the heart
of Galicia, and forced the enemy either to turn against him, and follow
him into a remote and desolate country, or (if he pressed on) to expose
his communication with Astorga and Leon. The second reason was that he
knew that Dorsenne had come lightly equipped, intending rather to drive
his army out of the Astorga region than to conquer the whole province
of Galicia; the French would not, therefore, be able to feed on the
desolate route between Ponferrada and Orense, and would probably turn
back, content with having cleared the plains of Leon.