

  [608] Our old acquaintance of Gamonal and Tamames.

This argument was correct. Dorsenne went no further on the great
_chaussée_ than Villafranca, which he sacked on August 29th, and then
turned on his heel, refusing to press deeper into Galicia, or to
pursue Abadia’s army. He marched back to Astorga on the 30th-31st,
burning every village of the Vierzo on his way, and descended into the
plains of Leon. Abadia followed cautiously, reoccupied Villafranca and
Ponferrada, and pushed his outposts forward again to the edge of the
mountains. It was found that the French were repairing Astorga, which
they once more garrisoned, and held as an outpost till the next year.
The ground occupied by the Army of Galicia was exactly the same on the
10th of September as it had been on the 10th of June, save that all
Asturias was still clear of invaders. It was not till the late autumn
that Bonnet once more made his appearance in that oft-invaded province.

The reasons of Dorsenne’s sudden retreat from the borders of Galicia
were many and various. It must not be supposed that his expedition
had been taken in hand with the object of conquering that province,
as Napier seems to suggest[609]. Such a task would have required much
longer preparation than he had been able to make: he had neither
collected the stores and munitions that would have been required for
so great an enterprise, nor made the necessary dispositions for the
protection of the vast space behind him. When he marched against
Abadia, he left nothing between the Ebro and the border of Portugal
save Souham’s newly arrived division and a few of Serras’s battalions
scattered in small garrisons at Leon, Benavente, Valladolid, &c. His
movement of advance had been made to chase the Army of Galicia out of
the plains, where it had been showing itself so persistently since
June, and to relieve the pressure which it had brought upon Bonnet and
Serras. There was no purpose of conquest underlying his march, only
a desire to scour the valleys of the Orbigo and the Esla of tiresome
intruders. The Spaniards were wholly mistaken in supposing that he
retired from Villafranca because Abadia had shown a disposition to make
a long resistance, or because the Junta had called out the _alarmas_,
or general _levée en masse_ of the province, raised on the principle
of the Portuguese Ordenança. He could have gone on further if that had
been his intention--but he had no such desire.

  [609] ‘Galicia was helpless, and Dorsenne would have taken Coruña
  and Ferrol if the arrival of Wellington on the Coa had not
  alarmed him,’ iii. p. 330. This statement shows a misconception
  of the situation.

Not only were his munitions exhausted, but all the news behind him was
unsatisfactory. Though the reinforcements from France had arrived on
the Ebro, Old Castile was in the most disturbed condition. There had
been a notable disaster at Santander on August 14th-15th, when Porlier,
by a sudden concentration, had stormed the town, dispersing General
Rouget’s[610] garrison, and had then swept away most of the minor posts
around it; only Torrelavega had succeeded in beating off his assault.
But when reinforcements came flocking in, the Spaniards had retired to
the hills with 300 prisoners, and were threatening other points. The
gates of Palencia and Valladolid had been insulted by _partidas_, who
showed themselves boldly in sight of the walls, and established a loose
blockade, which could only be pierced by the movement of considerable
columns. But the most pressing point was Ciudad Rodrigo: Julian Sanchez
had cut its communications with Salamanca, and had defeated small
bodies of 300 or 400 men which had been sent to reopen them. A much
larger force had to be detailed to throw provisions into the place
in July, but by the end of August stores were again running low, and
General Reynaud, the governor, whenever he could pass an emissary
through the lines of the _partidas_, kept asking for help of all kinds.