

  [615] See table of the Army of Murcia (3rd Army) on June 1st, in
  Appendix XVII.

  [616] See vol. iii. pp. 4 and 104.

Cautious though Freire had been, his advance had shaken the hold of
the 4th Corps on eastern Andalusia. Leval reported to Soult that, with
the 3,000 or 4,000 troops whom he had concentrated at Granada, he was
quite helpless, and was wellnigh blockaded on every side. It was only
with difficulty that he could keep in touch with the Polish division,
which lay in and about Malaga, or with the garrisons of Jaen and
Cordova on the other side. He could only collect a force sufficient to
attack Freire by abandoning all his outlying posts, and permission to
do so had not been granted him. He must be reinforced, or allowed to
concentrate his scattered troops and strike at the enemy’s main body.

A few days later the state of affairs in eastern Andalusia became still
more threatening. Blake, after embarking at Ayamonte on July 8th, had
two days later returned to Cadiz with the two Albuera divisions of
Zayas and Lardizabal. He stayed only a fortnight in the island city,
and got leave from the Regency to join the Army of Murcia. In order
that he might dispose of all the forces in that direction, he asked
and obtained the control of the Valencian army also, and was made
Captain-General of that province as well as of Murcia and Aragon. Blake
landed at Almeria on July 31st with the same troops that he had brought
back from the west--about 7,000 foot and 500 horse. From thence he led
them to join Freire’s army near Baza, and left them there, while he
himself (taking Zayas and some other officers with him) made a hasty
visit to Valencia, to receive over the command from the Marquis del
Palacio[617], and to see what measures were necessary with regard to
the threatening movements of Suchet on the side of Aragon.

  [617] The Marquis had only taken over charge of Valencia from
  Charles O’Donnell a few weeks before.

The two divisions under Lardizabal and Joseph O’Donnell (vice Zayas)
had joined Freire on August 3rd, and a force of 15,000 infantry and
nearly 2,000 horse was thus concentrated near Baza. But Freire, being
now only the interim commander, refused to take any responsibility,
and remained apathetically watching the small French force in Granada,
which was (for the moment) absolutely at his mercy. He posted the army
in a very strong position near Gor, twelve miles in front of Baza and
forty miles from Granada. It was covered in front by the ravine of one
of the tributaries of the Guardal river, and could only be turned on
the flanks by a very wide movement in difficult ground. La Cuadra’s
division remained at Pozoalcon, some thirty miles away from the main
body, observing the kingdom of Jaen and vexing its garrisons by small
incursions.

Soult had returned to Seville after the expulsion of Blake from western
Andalusia, but with no intention of staying there for long, since it
was clearly necessary to re-establish the lost prestige of the French
arms on the side of Granada, and to reoccupy the ground which Leval had
been forced to give up. But he had judged that there was no desperate
hurry, since Freire had shown himself such a sluggish adversary: and
though he had already directed Godinot’s provisional division to march
on Jaen in the last days of July, he himself was still at Seville when
he received the unexpected news of Blake’s disembarkation at Almeria on
the 31st of that month. Since the Army of Murcia was thus reinforced,
the danger to Leval at Granada had become imminent, and it was clearly
necessary to rescue him at once. Accordingly the Marshal, setting out
from Seville on August 3rd with four regiments of Latour-Maubourg’s
cavalry and part of Conroux’s infantry division[618], arrived at
Granada by forced marches on the 7th. Godinot was at the same time
directed to move from Jaen and Baeza against La Cuadra, to drive
him off from Pozoalcon, and then to fall upon the flank and rear of
Freire’s strong position near Baza.