

Suchet weighed the petition of his colleague with care, but refused to
assent to it. His decision was highly approved by the Emperor when he
came to know of it, and the reasons which he gave for his answer seem
convincing. It would take, as he calculated, twenty-five days to move a
division, or a couple of divisions, from Lerida to Figueras across the
hostile country-side of Catalonia; and since the disaster was already
eleven days old when the news came to hand, there must be over a month
of delay between the moment when the Spaniards had taken the fortress
and that at which the Army of Aragon could intervene. In that month the
fate of affairs in the Ampurdam would have been already decided. The
succours for the garrison of northern Catalonia must come from France,
not from Aragon. Figueras lies only twenty miles from the French
frontier[630], and Baraguay d’Hilliers could be helped far more readily
from Perpignan, Toulouse, or Narbonne than from Lerida. National Guards
and dépôt troops could be hurried to his aid in a few days. As to
Campoverde, he would be called home at once by a blow delivered against
Tarragona, his capital and chief arsenal. He must infallibly hurry
back to defend it, at the head of his field army, and Macdonald and
Baraguay d’Hilliers would then have nothing but the miqueletes opposed
to them. If the 7th Corps, with the reinforcements from France which
it must infallibly receive, could not deal with Rovira, Manso and the
rest, it was time to abandon the Peninsular War! The crisis, whichever
way its results might lean, was bound to have come and passed before
the Army of Aragon could be of any use. It would almost certainly have
ended in a check for the Spaniards, since the Emperor could pour as
many men into the Ampurdam as he pleased. At the worst Figueras would
be beleaguered so soon as the reinforcements arrived from France, and
all the best of the Spaniards in northern Catalonia would be shut up in
the place and kept out of mischief. It was entirely to the advantage of
the Imperial arms that the enemy should lock up his men in garrisons,
for they were much more troublesome when acting as partisans in the
mountains[631].

  [630] As Suchet remarks (ii. p. 17) the Emperor at Paris could
  have the news of the fall of Figueras on April 15th or 16th,
  while he himself only got it on April 21st.

  [631] For all these arguments and others see Suchet’s _Mémoires_,
  ii. pp. 5-18.

Accordingly, on April 24th, Suchet, having sent a direct refusal to
Macdonald’s petition, came up to Lerida, and on the 28th Harispe’s
and Frère’s divisions started off for Tarragona by the shortest
road, that through Momblanch. At the same time Habert with the siege
artillery moved out from Tortosa for the same destination along the
coast-road by the Col de Balaguer and Cambrils. On May 2 both columns
were near Tarragona, having met with very little opposition by the
way, for Campoverde, with the larger part of his field army, had gone
off a fortnight before to the north, with the intention of succouring
Figueras, and the rest of his regulars had retired into Tarragona to
form its garrison.