

  [633] Vacani, iii. p. 25, says that the best part of the
  garrison had been out on an expedition in the hills all the
  day, seeking for the bands who were said to be threatening the
  French frontier. They returned late at night tired out, and slept
  the sleep of the weary, while recruits and convalescents were
  furnishing the few guards considered necessary in such a strong
  place. A picket of Neapolitans who were in charge of the main
  gate were captured without resistance, being attacked, to their
  surprise, from the inside of the fortress.

  [634] Napier suggests (iii. 222) that Peyri might have tried to
  assail San Fernando before the enemy was properly settled down
  into it. This seems a most doubtful criticism: he had only 650
  men of drafts with him; neither he nor they knew the topography
  of the fortress; it was pitch dark; the strength of the enemy
  was unknown. The garrison had succumbed in a few minutes despite
  of all its advantages of position. To attack would have been
  foolhardy.

The place, however, was now fully garrisoned. Rovira had thrown into
it, during the week when free entry was possible, miqueletes to the
number of some 3,000, making a brigadier named Martinez, one of his
most trusted lieutenants, the governor. On the 16th a reinforcement of
regular troops arrived--part of the division of Baron Eroles, which had
the most northern cantonments among the units of Campoverde’s field
army. Eroles had marched from Martorel by Olot, and had captured on
his way the small French garrisons of that place and of Castelfollit,
making 548 prisoners. Campoverde sent messages to say that he would
arrive himself with larger forces in a few days. Having thrown
Courten’s division into Tarragona, he would bring up the rest of his
available troops--Sarsfield’s division and the remainder of that of
Eroles, with all the miqueletes that he could collect. Meanwhile the
local _somatenes_ of central Catalonia pressed in close upon Gerona and
Hostalrich, and kept Baraguay d’Hilliers in a state of great anxiety,
for he feared that they might capture these places, whose garrisons had
been depleted to make up his small field force.

The opportunity offered to the Spaniard was not one that was likely
to last for long, since Napoleon, on hearing of the fall of Figueras,
had issued orders for the concentration of some 14,000 troops from
Southern France, a division under General Plauzonne from Languedoc and
Provence, and five or six odd battalions more[635]. When these should
arrive, in the end of April or the first days of May, the French in
northern Catalonia would be too strong to fear any further disasters.
But meanwhile Macdonald and Baraguay d’Hilliers had a fortnight of
doubt and danger before them. The former proposed to march himself to
Figueras, with what troops he could spare from Barcelona, but since
its garrison was only about 6,000 strong, and the place was large and
turbulent, it was clear that he could bring little with him. It was for
this reason that he wrote to Suchet in such anxiety on April 16th, and
begged for the loan of one or two divisions from the Army of Aragon.
Till he got his answer, he did not himself move forth. Hence d’Hilliers
alone had to bear the brunt of the trouble.