

Before dealing with the long and bitterly contested struggle at
Tarragona, it is necessary to explain how Figueras had come into
the hands of the Spaniards. This place was a new and well-designed
eighteenth-century fortress, built sixty years back by Ferdinand VI, to
supplement the defences of the Catalonian frontier. Thus it had not the
weaknesses of old-fashioned strongholds like Gerona or Lerida, where
the scheme of the fortifications dated back to the Middle Ages. Close
to the high-road from Perpignan to Barcelona, and only twenty miles
from the frontier, stands an isolated hill with a flat top, at whose
foot lay the original village or small town of Figueras. Ferdinand
VI had fortified this hilltop so as to form a circular bastioned
enceinte, and thus created a most formidable citadel, which he named
after himself San Fernando. It dominated the little town below, and
the whole of the surrounding plain of the Ampurdam. The slopes below
the wall are steep, even precipitous in some places, and there is only
one road leading up into the place by curves and zigzags, though there
are several posterns at other points. San Fernando had been one of
the fortresses which Napoleon seized by treachery in 1808--a French
detachment, ostensibly marching through the town towards Barcelona, had
fallen upon and evicted the Spanish garrison[632]. Since then it had
formed the most important base for operations in northern Catalonia,
and had been the magazine from which the sieges of Rosas and Gerona
had been fed. A long possession of three years had made the Imperial
generals careless, and the garrison had gradually dwindled down to
a provisional battalion of 600 or 700 men, mainly composed at this
moment of drafts for the Italian and Neapolitan divisions of Pino and
Compère, detained on their way to the front, according to the usual
system. The governor was a Brigadier-General Guillot, who seems to have
been a negligent and easy-going officer. The rocky fortress was so
strong that it never entered into his head that his restless neighbours
the miqueletes might try a blow at it. It was a mere chance that on
the day when the assault was delivered a marching battalion of Italian
drafts, escorting General Peyri, who was coming up to take command of
Pino’s late division, happened to be billeted in the town below--next
day they would have been gone.

  [632] See vol. i. p. 37.

It was clearly Guillot’s carelessness, and the small numbers of his
garrison, which inspired the miquelete chiefs with the idea of making
an attack by surprise on this almost impregnable citadel. Rovira, the
most active of them, got into communication with three young Catalans
who passed as _Afrancesados_ and were employed by the commissary
Bouclier, who had charge of the magazines. One, Juan Marquez, was his
servant, the other two, Pedro and Ginés Pons, were under-storekeepers.
All three were mere boys, the oldest not twenty-one years of age.
Marquez got wax impressions of various keys belonging to his master,
including those of the store-vaults and of a postern gate leading into
them from the foot of the ramparts, and made false keys from them. It
was determined that a picked band of miqueletes should attempt to force
their way into the place through the postern on the midnight of April
9th-10th. Rovira sent the details of his scheme to Campoverde, who,
despite of his late fiasco at Barcelona, was delighted with the plan,
and offered to come up with his field army to the north if the attempt
should succeed.