

  [635] See Napoleon, _Correspondance_, xxii. no. 17,644.
  Plauzonne’s regiments were the 3rd Léger, 11th and 79th Line, and
  four battalions of the 67th Line and one of the 16th Léger also
  crossed the frontier.

There is no doubt that Campoverde had a fair chance of achieving
a considerable if temporary success; but he threw it away by his
slowness and want of skill. Though aware of the capture of Figueras
on April 12th, he did not start from Tarragona till the 20th, nor
reach Vich in northern Catalonia till the 27th. He had then with him
6,000 infantry, mostly of Sarsfield’s division, and 800 horse. Rovira
drew near to co-operate, with those of the miqueletes of the Ampurdam
who had not already thrown themselves into the fortress. The force
collected ought to have sufficed to break through the thin blockading
cordon which Baraguay d’Hilliers had thrown round the fortress, if it
had been properly handled. But Campoverde was no general. On May 3rd
the relieving army approached the place, the miqueletes demonstrated
against the northern part of the French lines, while Sarsfield broke
through at a point on the opposite side, near the town, and got into
communication with Eroles, who came down with 2,000 men to join him.
They fell together upon the French regiment (the 3rd Léger) on this
front, which took refuge in the barricaded town and defended itself
there for some time. According to all the Spanish narratives the three
battalions in Figueras presently offered to surrender, and wasted
time in negotiations, while Baraguay d’Hilliers was collecting the
main body of his forces in a solid mass. Screened by an olive wood in
his march, the French general suddenly fell on Sarsfield’s flank and
rear, while he was intent on the enemy in the town alone; a charge of
dragoons cut up two of the Spanish regiments, and the rest gave way in
disorder, Sarsfield falling back towards the plain, and Eroles retiring
into the fortress. The reserve of Campoverde and the miqueletes were
never seriously engaged. If they had been used as they should have
been, the fight might have gone otherwise than it did, for counting
the garrison of San Fernando and the irregulars, the Spaniards had a
considerable superiority of numbers. They lost over 1,000 men, the
French about 400[636]. During the time while the blockading line was
broken, Sarsfield had introduced into San Fernando some artillerymen
(much needed for the vast number of guns in the place), and part of
a convoy which he was conducting, but the greater portion of it,
including a great drove of sheep, was captured by the enemy at the
moment of the rout.

  [636] So the French narratives. Martinien’s lists show three
  officers killed and thirteen wounded on May 3 before Figueras.
  The regiments which suffered most were the 3rd and 23rd Léger,
  each with one officer killed and four wounded.

If Campoverde and his army had been given no other task save the
relief of Figueras, it is probable that this combat would have been
but the commencement of a long series of operations. But he received,
immediately after his check, the news that Suchet had marched from
Lerida on April 28th, and had appeared in front of Tarragona on May
3rd. The capital of Catalonia was even more important than Figueras,
and it was necessary to hasten to its aid, for no regular troops had
been left in the southern part of the principality, save the single
division of Courten, which had hastened to shut itself up in the
city. Accordingly Sarsfield was directed to take 2,000 infantry and
the whole cavalry of the army, and to march by the inland to threaten
Suchet’s rear, and his communications with Lerida, while Campoverde
himself came down to the coast with 4,000 men, embarked at Mataro,
the nearest port in Spanish hands, and sailed for Tarragona, where he
arrived in safety, to strengthen the garrison. Eroles came out of San
Fernando with a few hundreds of his own troops, before the blockade
was fully re-established, and joined Rovira in the neighbouring
mountains, leaving the defence of the fortress to Martinez with five
regular battalions[637] and 3,000 miqueletes. Eroles and Rovira were
the only force left to observe Baraguay d’Hilliers, and since they
had only a few thousand men, mostly irregulars, they were able to do
little to help the place. For the besieging force was strengthened
in May by the arrival of Plauzonne’s division from France, while
Macdonald came up from Barcelona with a few battalions, and took over
the command from Baraguay d’Hilliers. By the end of the month he had
over 15,000 men, and had begun to shut in the fortress on its height
by an elaborate system of contravallations, which he compares in his
memoirs to Caesar’s lines around Alesia. Martinez made a most obstinate
and praiseworthy defence--of which more hereafter--and the siege of
Figueras dragged on for many months, till long after the more important
operations around Tarragona had come to an end. But after Campoverde’s
departure for the south there was never any hope that it could be
relieved: all that its defenders accomplished was to detain and
immobilize the whole 7th Corps, which, when it had garrisoned Barcelona
and Gerona, and supplied the blockading force for San Fernando, had not
a man disposable for work in other quarters. Thus Suchet had to carry
out his operations against Tarragona without any external assistance,
whereas, if Figueras had never been lost, he might have counted on
much incidental help from his colleague Macdonald. This much was
accomplished by the daring exploit of April 10th: if Campoverde had
been capable of utilizing the chance that it gave him, its results
might have been far more important.