

The miquelete chiefs conducted their enterprise with considerable
skill. On the 7th of April Rovira collected some 2,000 men at the
foot of the Pyrenees, north of Olot, and threatened to make a descent
into the French valleys beyond, in order to distract the attention
of the enemy. On the 9th he counter-marched for Figueras, and at
dusk got within nine miles of it. At one in the morning his forlorn
hope, 700 men under two captains named Casas and Llovera, came up
under the ramparts, found their confederates waiting for them at the
postern, and were admitted by means of the false keys. They burst up
out of the vaults, and caught the garrison mostly asleep[633]--the
governor was captured in his bed, the main-guard at the great gate was
surprised, and the few men who came straggling out of the barracks
to make resistance were overpowered in detail. Only thirty-five men
were killed or wounded on the part of the French, not so many on the
Spanish side, and in an hour or less the place was won. The captors
promptly admitted their friends from without, and ere dawn over 2,000
Catalans were manning the walls of the fortress. The material captured
was immense--16,000 muskets, several hundred cannon, a great store of
boots and clothing, four months’ provisions for a garrison of 2,000
men, and 400,000 francs in the military chest. General Peyri, with the
Italian _bataillon de marche_ which was sleeping in the town below, was
unable to do anything--there had been very little firing, and when some
fugitives ran down from San Fernando, it was to tell him that the place
was completely mastered by the enemy. He put his troops under arms, and
drew off at daylight to Bascara, half-way to Gerona, with his 650 men,
after having sent off the bad news both to Baraguay d’Hilliers on one
side and to the governor of Perpignan on the other[634]. The former
sent him out a battalion and a squadron, and told him to return towards
Figueras and to place himself in observation in front of it till he
was succoured. All the disposable troops in northern Catalonia should
join him within two days. Peyri therefore reoccupied Figueras town,
and barricaded himself in it with 1,500 men--being quite unable to do
more; he had to watch the Catalans introducing reinforcements into San
Fernando without being able to molest them. Baraguay d’Hilliers did
not come to his succour for some days, being unable to leave Gerona
till he had called in some dangerously exposed outlying posts, and had
strengthened Rosas, which was threatened by some English frigates, who
showed signs of throwing a landing-party ashore to besiege it. He then
came up with 2,000 men to join Peyri, while a more considerable force
arrived from Perpignan under General Quesnel, who had charge of the
Pyrenean frontier, and appeared with three line battalions, and two
more of National Guards of the Gers and Haute-Garonne. Having 6,500
infantry and 500 cavalry concentrated, d’Hilliers was able to throw a
cordon of troops round San Fernando and to commence its blockade on
April 17th.