

  [639] Apparently there was in 1811 no road of this sort, up
  the steep slope above the railway station of to-day; the
  main _chaussée_ from Valencia entered the upper city at its
  north-western end, and there was no good road for carriages
  up the south-western point, as there is now (the so-called
  Despeñaperros).

  [640] Long since built over. The line of the old fortifications
  of the upper city is now marked by a broad promenade, the Rambla
  de San Juan.

Notwithstanding the great strength of the high-lying upper city, it
had been furnished with a second line of defence, outside its old
Roman walls. Low down the hillside five forts, connected by a wall
and covered way, protected its whole eastern front from the edge of
the heights as far as the sea. The Barcelona road, crawling along the
water’s edge, enters the place between two of these forts, and goes
to the Lower, after sending a steep bypath up to a gate in the Upper,
city[641].

  [641] It is a stiff climb up a very steep ascent to enter the
  upper city by its ‘Barcelona Gate.’

On the west and north-west the high-lying fortress commands all the
surrounding country-side. But to the due north there is a lofty hill
about 800 yards from the walls, called Monte Olivo. This dominates the
lower town, since it is 200 feet high, or more, though it is itself
dominated by the upper town. An enemy in possession of it has every
advantage for attacking the north front of the lower town. Wherefore,
during the course of the last two years, the summit of the hill
had been entrenched, and a very large hornwork, the Fuerte Olivo,
constructed upon it. This was a narrow fort, following the shape of
the crest of the hill, with a length of 400 yards, and embrasures
for forty-seven guns. Its outer front was protected by a ditch hewn
in the solid rock: its rear was only slightly closed with a low wall
crowned by palisades, so as to leave it exposed to the fire of the
upper city, if by any chance the enemy should get possession of it.
Such an extensive work required a garrison of over 1,000 men--a heavy
proportion of the 6,500 which formed the total force of the Spaniards
at the commencement of the siege.

When Suchet arrived in front of Tarragona, and had driven the Spaniards
within their works (May 3rd-4th), his chief engineer and artillery
officers, Rogniat and Vallée, had to conduct a long and careful
survey of the fortifications opposed to them. They concluded that
the northern front of the city was practically impregnable, from its
precipitous contours, and that the eastern front, though a little
less rocky, was equally ineligible, because of the trouble which
would be required to transport guns first across the high ground to
the north-east, and then down to the seashore. The south front, being
all along the water’s edge, was inaccessible. There remained only the
western front, that formed by the lower city, where the defences lay
in the plain of the Francoli, and had no dominance over the ground
in front of them. There was an additional advantage for the besieger
here, in that the soil was partly river sand, partly the well-broken-up
loam of suburban market gardens, and in all cases very easy to dig.
But if they were to attack the west front, the engineers required the
General-in-Chief to accomplish two preliminary operations for them.
He must take Fort Olivo, which commanded with its flanking fires much
of the ground on which they intended to work, and he must drive away
from the northern side of the harbour the Anglo-Spanish squadron which
lay there, since its heavy guns would enfilade all works started for
the purpose of approaching the western front of Tarragona in the
neighbourhood of the mouth of the Francoli.