

It was arranged that the army should march on Tarragona by two separate
routes; while the divisions of Frère and Harispe started from Lerida
by the road of Momblanch, the third division, that of Habert, was to
move from a separate base--Tortosa, where had been collected the heavy
artillery and the munitions of the siege. The guns which had taken
Tortosa were still lying there, with all the artillery reserve, and it
was to escort them that Habert was detailed to take the southern route
along the sea-coast by the Col de Balaguer. From this direction too
were to come the provisions of the army, which had been brought down
by water from Saragossa and Mequinenza while the Ebro was in flood,
and deposited at Mora--the nearest point on the river to Tarragona.
This division of forces was perhaps necessary, but appeared dangerous;
if Campoverde, when the French commenced their movements, had thrown
himself with all disposable forces upon the weak division of
Habert--only six battalions--and had wrecked the battering-train, there
could have been no siege of Tarragona for many a month to come.

But before the two columns had started from Lerida and Tortosa, and
while part of Harispe’s division was out on a final cattle-hunt up the
valley of the Noguera, before the Commander-in-Chief had even come up
to the front to join his army, a message arrived from the north which
might well have stopped the whole expedition. On April 21st Suchet,
still at Saragossa, received the astounding news that the Spaniards
had captured Figueras, the bulwark of northern Catalonia, and the most
important place (with the exception of Barcelona) which belonged to
the French in the whole principality. The disaster had happened on
the night of the 9th-10th, and the news of it had been brought by a
spy paid by Macdonald, across the territory occupied by the Spanish
army: otherwise it would have taken still longer to travel, by the
circuitous route through France, which was the only way by which news
from Upper Catalonia could reach Aragon[629]. Macdonald and Maurice
Mathieu, the governor of Barcelona, who added his supplications to
those of the Marshal, begged Suchet to abandon for the moment the
projected siege of Tarragona, and to march to their aid with every man
that he could spare. For they must collect as large a force as possible
to recover Figueras, and a field army could not be got together from
the much-reduced 7th Corps, which had to find a garrison of 6,000
men for Barcelona, and similar, if smaller, detachments for Gerona,
Rosas, Hostalrich, Mont Louis, Palamos, and other smaller places.
If Campoverde should march northward, with the bulk of his regular
divisions, to succour Figueras, there would be little or nothing to
oppose to him.

  [629] Down to this winter Suchet could only communicate with
  France up the Ebro and sent messengers via Tudela and Pampeluna,
  but he had just opened a somewhat shorter route for himself via
  Jaca and Oleron, which saved three days. Even so, communications
  were intolerably slow. See Suchet’s _Mémoires_, ii. p. 9.