

  [642] The regiments that landed with Campoverde seem to have been
  the 2nd of Savoia (2 battalions), Voluntarios de Gerona, and two
  of the Andalusian regiments which had formed the core of Reding’s
  old Granadan division, which marched to Catalonia in 1808, viz.
  Iliberia and Santa Fé, the first three battalions strong, the
  other with two.

About this time the French artillery and engineer commanders reported
to their chief that it would be at least ten days before they were in
a position to begin a serious attack against the western front of the
city, and Suchet resolved that the enforced delay should be utilized
for an attack on Fort Olivo, whose capture would sooner or later be a
necessity, if the main operations against the city were to prosper.

Accordingly, while the approaches against the west front went steadily
on, a separate offensive advance against the Olivo was prepared.
Between the 22nd and the 28th of May trenches were pushed towards the
fort, and batteries containing thirteen guns erected to bear upon
it. Their fire had effected serious damage on the parapets and the
artillery of the fort by the 29th, yet the engineers reported that they
could not fill the ditch, which was dug in the solid rock, and could
not promise to make accessible breaches beyond it. But they reported
that the rear face of the work, which the French artillery could not
reach, was very weak, the low wall and palisade closing the gorge
being no more than nine feet high. There was also a gap in the front
protection caused by the entry, into the right end of the fort, of an
aqueduct which carried water down into Tarragona. This structure made a
sort of bridge across the ditch; it had not been cut, but only closed
with palisades, which were being rapidly demolished by the French
cannonade[643].

  [643] This discovery was the work of the Italian engineer officer
  Vacani, whose work on the campaign of the Italian troops of
  Napoleon in Spain is one of the most valuable of our original
  sources. See his vol. v. pp. 175-6. He was with the assaulting
  column.

On the night of the 29th Suchet made the rather rash venture of trying
to escalade Fort Olivo at the two weak points. One column was to turn
the work under cover of the darkness, and to endeavour to break in at
the gorge in its rear. The other was to try the imperfect breach in the
right front, by crossing the aqueduct, though it was only seven feet
broad, if it should be found that the ditch was impassable. Meanwhile
a general demonstration was to be made by scattered _tirailleurs_
against the whole face of the Olivo, so as to distract the attention of
the enemy, and the batteries down by the Francoli were to bombard the
lower city with the same purpose. Both attacks were successful--more
by luck than by their deserts, for the plan was most hazardous. The
column which had gone round to the rear of the fort ran in upon a
Spanish regiment[644] which was coming up the hill to relieve the
garrison. The two forces hustled against each other in the dark, and
became hopelessly mingled in a close combat just outside the postern
gate of the gorge. The garrison was unable to fire upon their enemies,
because they were intermixed among their friends, and, when the fight
surged against the postern and the palisades, the French succeeded in
entering the gorge, some by scrambling up the low and weak defences,
others by bursting in at the gate along with the Spanish reinforcements
with whom they were engaged. They might have been checked, for the
defenders were fighting fiercely, if the other attack had not also
succeeded. But at the right front of the fort, where the second assault
was made, though many of the forlorn hope fell into the ditch, a
desperate charge took the storming-party across the seven-foot gangway
of the aqueduct, and over the shattered palisades that blocked it. The
garrison could tell by the noise of the musketry that the enemy had
entered both in front and in rear, and were stricken by despair[645].
But the greater part of them clubbed together and continued a desperate
resistance, which was only subdued when Suchet sent in all his reserves
and the trench-guards to back the stormers. They were then beset on all
sides, and finally overwhelmed.