

This being the programme laid down, Suchet took up his positions round
the fortress--Harispe’s division had charge of the main part of the
northern front, its French brigade (Salme) occupying the ground in
front of Fort Olivo, while its two Italian brigades stretched eastward
along the distant heights, curving round so as to cut the Barcelona
road along the sea-coast with their extreme detachment. Frère’s
division had the central part of the lines, and lay on both sides of
the course of the Francoli river, its main force, however, being on the
left bank. Habert’s division, which had just come up from Tortosa, was
placed near the mouth of the river, and facing towards the port; it
formed the right wing of the army, and covered the siege-park, which
was established at the village of Canonge, about a mile and a half from
the walls of Tarragona. The magazines and hospitals were fixed at the
large town of Reus, nine miles to the rear, under a considerable guard;
for though the road from thence to the French lines ran over the gentle
undulations of the coast plain, yet there was always danger that bands
of miqueletes might descend from the hills for some daring enterprise.
Several of the intermediate villages were fortified, to serve as
half-way refuges for convoys and small parties on the move.

Some days were lost to the French in completing the survey of
Tarragona, in settling down the troops into their permanent camps, and
in bringing up from the rear, along the Tortosa road, the remainder of
the battering-train and its munitions. It was not till May 8th that
serious operations began. Suchet’s first object was to drive away from
the northern end of the harbour the English and Spanish ships, whose
fire swept the ground about the mouth of the Francoli, across which his
siege-works were to be constructed. With this object a large fort was
constructed on the shore, in which very heavy guns, fatal to shipping,
were to be placed. Commodore Codrington, who was lying in the harbour
with a small squadron of two 74’s and two frigates, assisted by several
Spanish gunboats, bombarded the fort incessantly, but what he destroyed
in the day the French rebuilt with additions every night, and on May
13th the fort was sufficiently completed to receive its armament of
24-pounders. The ship-guns were unable to cope with them, and the
vessels of the Allies during the rest of the siege were compelled to
keep to the south end of the port, and could only vex the besieger’s
subsequent trench-building by a distant and ineffective fire. On the
16th a first parallel, directed against the most advanced Spanish work,
Fort Francoli, was begun in the low ground beside the new fort.

Before this check to the squadron had been completed a great change in
the situation was made by the arrival of Campoverde on May 10, with
4,000 regular troops brought by sea from Mataro--fractions of the
divisions of Eroles and Sarsfield, though neither of these generals
had come in person[642]. The garrison being strengthened up to 10,000
men, and raised in morale by the reinforcement, became very bold and
enterprising. Sorties began almost at once: Harispe’s division having
seized on the 13th May two slight outlying entrenchments below Fort
Olivo, three battalions sallied out on the 14th and made a desperate
attempt to retake them. It failed, but on the 18th an equally vigorous
sortie was made against the fort beyond the Francoli, and the first
parallel near it, by about 2,000 men, who drove in the trench-guards
and destroyed a section of the works, but were finally thrust back
into the lower city by the arrival of reinforcements led by General
Habert. How hot the fighting had been here is shown by the fact that
Suchet’s dispatch owns to a loss of over 150 men, with three officers
killed and eleven wounded. The sallying force lost 218, a figure which
Suchet enlarges in his report to 250 killed and 600 wounded. On the
20th the Spaniards made a third sally, on a different front, far to
the north-east, across the high ground north of the Barcelona road,
and tried to break through the line of blockade kept up by Harispe’s
Italian brigades. This was on a smaller scale, and had no luck; it
was apparently intended to open up communication with Sarsfield, who
(marching by circuitous ways across central Catalonia) had reached
Valls and Alcover, only ten miles from Tarragona, on the upper
Francoli, with 1,200 men. This trifling force was to be the nucleus
of an ‘army of relief’ which was to be collected from all quarters
to threaten Suchet’s rear. Sarsfield made his appearance known to
his chief in Tarragona by lighting beacons on the mountain tops.
Learning that the Spanish force was insignificant, Suchet detached
two battalions and some cuirassiers to drive Sarsfield further away
from Alcover, and did so with small loss, forcing him to retire to the
mountains above Valls.