

  [637] The regulars left in San Fernando were two battalions of
  Voluntarios de Valencia, one of Ultonia, and two of Antequera.




SECTION XXVIII: CHAPTER II

THE SIEGE AND FALL OF TARRAGONA. MAY-JUNE 1811


Suchet had marched, as has been already mentioned, from Lerida, with
Harispe’s division, on April 28th, Frère’s division following. On the
29th the head of the column reached Momblanch, where half a battalion
was left behind in a fortified post, to keep open the Lerida road.
On May 2nd the large manufacturing town of Reus, only ten miles from
Tarragona, was occupied: on May 3rd the French advanced guard, Salme’s
brigade, approached the city, and drove in the Catalan advanced posts
as far as the river Francoli. But the siege could not begin till
Habert’s force, escorting the battering-train, should come up from
Tortosa; and this all-important column was much delayed. Its road ran
along the seaside from the Col de Balaguer onward, and Codrington’s
squadron of English frigates and gunboats accompanied it all the way,
vexing and delaying it, by bombarding it whenever it was forced to come
within gunshot of the beach. This was practically all the opposition
that Suchet met with: a few miqueletes had shown themselves in the
hills between Reus and Momblanch, but they were too weak to fight.
Campoverde had carried off the best both of regulars and irregulars to
the relief of Figueras, and Courten, who had barely 4,500 men in his
division[638], had wisely shut himself up in Tarragona, where every man
was wanted: for the enceinte was very long, and the sedentary garrison
consisted of only five or six battalions. The troops inside the walls
did not amount, when the siege began, to 7,000 men: hence came the
weakness shown in the early days; it was not till Campoverde’s army
came back from the north (May 10) that an adequate defensive force was
in existence for such a large fortress.

  [638] The composition of the divisions of the Army of Catalonia
  was shifting, and hard to follow, but (as far as I can make out)
  Courten’s division consisted of three battalions of Granada,
  two each of Almanza, Almeria, and America, while the sedentary
  garrison contained four or five battalions of the new Catalan
  ‘Sections’ or ‘local line,’ besides a battalion of Voluntarios de
  Tarragona.

Tarragona, though some of its fortifications were not skilfully
planned, was a very strong place. The nucleus of the works was the
circuit of the old Celtiberian town of Tarraco, which afterwards became
the capital of Roman Spain. This forms the upper city in modern times.
It is built on an inclined plane, of which the eastern end (530 feet
above sea-level), where the cathedral lies, is the higher side, and
the slope goes downhill, and westward: the southern face, that towards
the sea, is absolutely precipitous, the northern one hardly less so.
Large fragments of the Cyclopean walls built by the Celtiberians, or
perhaps by the Carthaginians, are visible along the crest on both of
these sides. On the west, the lowest part of the old town, a line of
modern fortifications divided the upper town from the lower; there
was a sharp drop along this line: in most places it is very steep,
and the road of to-day goes up the hillside in zigzags, to avoid the
break-neck climb[639]. Below the fortifications of the upper city,
and divided from them by a broad belt of ground free of houses[640],
lay the port-town or lower city, clustering around the harbour, which
is an excellent roadstead shut in by a mole 1,400 feet long, which
runs out from the south-west corner of the place. The lower city was
enclosed on its northern and western sides by a front of six bastions;
its southern side, facing the port and the open sea, had not, and did
not need, any great protection; it could only have been endangered by
an enemy whose strength was on the water, and who could bring a fleet
into action. There was a sort of citadel in the port-town, a work named
the Fuerte Real, which lies on an isolated mound inside the north-west
angle of the walls. About 400 yards west of the most projecting bastion
of the place the river Francoli flows into the sea, at the western
end of the harbour. In the angle between the river and the port was an
outlying work, Fort Francoli, destined to keep besiegers away from the
shipping, which they might easily bombard from this point, if it were
not occupied. This fort was connected with the lower town by a covered
way protected by a long entrenchment containing two lunettes.