

On the morning after the assault the spirit of the Spaniards was so
little broken that a sortie was made with the purpose of retaking
the Olivo, the survivors of the two regiments which had lost it
volunteering to head the attack. Campoverde thought that the French
might be caught before they had made new defences to protect the weak
rear face of the fort, but they had built up the entry of the gorge
with sandbags, and the assault--led by Colonel O’Ronan, a Spanish-Irish
officer--was beaten off with loss, though a few daring men not only
reached the gorge, but scrambled in through its broken palisades to die
inside the work. All the guns of the upper city were then turned upon
the Olivo, and reduced its rear to a shapeless mass of earth. But this
did not seriously harm the French, who burrowed into its interior and
made themselves strong there. They only wanted to be masters of the
hill because it flanked their projected approaches in the low ground,
and did not intend to use it as their base for any further active
operations.

After the Olivo disaster Campoverde held a council of war (May 30th),
and announced to his officers that the means by which Tarragona
could be saved was the collecting of a great army of succour to fall
upon Suchet’s rear. He was himself about to depart, in order to take
command of it; Sarsfield’s and Eroles’s small detachments, all of
which he would collect, must form its nucleus. The _somatenes_ of all
central Catalonia should be called in, and the province of Valencia
had promised to lend him a whole division of regulars. So saying,
he departed by sea along with his staff and a number of the richer
inhabitants of the city (May 31st). General Caro, who had hitherto
acted as governor, was sent to hurry up the Valencians, and the
command of the place was made over to an officer newly arrived from
Cadiz, General Juan Senen Contreras[647], who by no means liked the
task assigned to him. The garrison was still 8,000 strong, for just
after the fall of the Olivo two battalions of regulars arrived from
Valencia[648]--the first-fruits of the succours promised from that
province--and a draft of 400 recruits landed from Majorca. It seems
to have been a mistake of Campoverde to come to Tarragona at all--his
presence would have been much more valuable in the interior, where a
supreme commander was much wanted, and while he was shut up in the
fortress (from May 10th to May 31st) little had been done outside. The
Junta of Catalonia, now sitting at Montserrat, had been issuing many
proclamations, but had not accomplished much in the way of gathering in
the _somatenes_.

  [647] See his pamphlet on the defence of Tarragona and his own
  responsibilities, printed in the 3rd volume of _Mémoires sur la
  Guerre d’Espagne_.

  [648] Apparently 3rd battalion of Cazadores de Valencia, and 1st
  battalion of the _First_ regiment of Savoia. This last must be
  carefully distinguished from the 1st battalion of the _Second_
  regiment of Savoia, which belonged to the Catalan army, and had
  already been brought into Tarragona on May 10th by Campoverde.
  See the history of the two in the Conde de Clonard’s colossal
  work on the regimental histories of the Spanish line.