

  [649] Suchet in his memoirs conceals the fact that the fort was
  already abandoned when his troops entered (ii. p. 72). But the
  evidence of Contreras, Schepeler, and other Spanish authorities
  is clear and unanimous.

The Spanish engineers had assured Contreras that the low-lying Fort
Francoli would be untenable under the fire of the neighbouring bastion
of San Carlos, the battery on the Mole on the other side of the
harbour, and the heavy guns of the men-of-war. A fierce fire was opened
against it from all these quarters, but proved insufficient to stop
the French from burrowing into the ruins of the fort, connecting it
with their trenches, and finally building in its right front a heavy
battery, which bore along the line of the entrenchment and enfiladed
the Prince lunette. This work faced northward, and exposed only a weak
flank to the attack. Fort Francoli having ceased to be an obstacle,
the besiegers could now throw out a second parallel from the first,
which they had constructed in front of the bastion of Orleans. Five
new batteries were placed in it, some bearing on Orleans, some on San
Carlos, and one having the special task of beating down the Prince
lunette. The Spanish guns in the lower city answered with a fierce
fire which caused much damage and took many lives, but the work,
nevertheless, went on unceasingly. On June 16th all the new batteries
were ready to commence their work.

Contreras had been much chagrined by the complete failure of the best
efforts of his artillery to hold back the advance of the enemy, and
reports that the morale of the troops was disagreeably affected by
the arrival of the Valencian division of Miranda on June 14th and its
prompt departure, after staying less than two days in the place. The
garrison had looked upon it as a seasonable reinforcement, and were
dashed in spirits when it made no stay with them. It seems to have been
a complete mistake to have brought these 4,000 men to Tarragona at all:
they should have been landed at once in Villanueva de Sitjes to join
the army of succour.

Nevertheless the governor did his best to delay the progress of the
French attack, and when his artillery proved ineffective, sent out
two strong sorties on the 11th and 14th, which did some damage to the
trenches[650] but were driven back in the end, as was inevitable. On
the 16th all the new French batteries were ready, as well as that in
Fort Francoli, and the bombardment began. The advanced batteries were
within 120 yards of the bastions which they were attacking, and had a
tremendous effect. By evening there was the commencement of a breach
in the left face of the Orleans bastion, and several other parts of
the enceinte were badly damaged, as was also the Prince lunette. This
had not been effected without grave loss: one French battery had been
silenced, a reserve magazine had been blown up, and the loss in men
among the artillery had been very heavy. Nevertheless the assailants
had the superiority in the cannonade, and were well satisfied. After
dark the columns of stormers carried the Prince lunette by assault,
one of the parties having slipped round its flank by descending on
to the beach, where a few yards at the water’s edge had been left
unfortified. The battalion of the regiment of Almanza which held the
work was practically exterminated. Thus the Spaniards lost the last of
the outer protections of Tarragona, and the captured lunette became the
emplacement of one more battery destined to play upon the bastion of
San Carlos (June 17).