

  [651] It seems to have arrived about June 20, in time for the
  storm on the 21st.

  [652] See his memoirs, p. 273, and Arteche, x. 274.

  [653] See especially Schepeler (i. 438). Arteche (x. 317) grants
  that he had not the iron resolution of Alvarez, the governor of
  Gerona, but thinks that he did his honest best, and this I think
  can hardly be denied. His own narrative is simple and modest, but
  does not conceal the fact that he was from the first downhearted,
  and feared the worst. Napier (iii. 240) calls him vacillating and
  deceitful. There is some foundation for the former charge (see p.
  513 below), but the latter seems unjustifiable. The only evidence
  brought to justify the accusation can be explained away (see
  Codrington’s letters in the appendix to Napier, vol. iii).

While Campoverde hesitated, Suchet took the lower city of Tarragona
by a vigorous effort. At seven o’clock on the evening of the 21st the
assault was delivered by five storming-columns, composed of the massed
grenadier and _voltigeur_ companies of all his French regiments, 1,500
strong, and supported by a brigade under General Montmarie, There were
now two good breaches in the bastions of San Carlos and Orleans, the
curtain between them had also been much injured, and even the Fuerte
Real, the inner stronghold behind the Orleans bastion, had been damaged
by shot and shell which passed over the outer works. Contreras had sent
down into the lower city 6,000 out of the 8,000 men who were still at
his disposition, and had handed over the charge of them to Sarsfield,
the officer who had the best reputation in the whole of Catalonia. But
by an ill-chance there was actually no one in command when the assault
was delivered. Campoverde’s dispatch recalling Sarsfield to the field
army had come to hand that morning, and Contreras, thinking himself
bound to obey it, sent Sarsfield a passport to leave the city, and
designated General Velasco to take his place. Sarsfield, whose courage
cannot be impeached, but whose judgement was evidently at fault on
this afternoon, left at once, embarking on board a boat in the harbour
at three o’clock, without going to see Contreras or waiting for the
arrival of the officer who was to supersede him. He merely sent for the
senior colonel in the lower city, handed over the command to him, and
put out to sea at a moment’s notice. Four hours later, when the storm
took place, Contreras was not aware that Sarsfield had yet departed,
and Velasco, coming down to take charge of the troops, found himself
in the middle of the fighting before he had reached the walls, or
discovered the manner in which their garrison was distributed. There
was clearly something wrong here--apparently Sarsfield and Contreras
were not on good terms, and the former acted with small regard for the
welfare of the service[654].

  [654] Toreno (ii. p. 544) makes out that the fault was with
  Contreras, and Napier, who used far more violent language, says
  that he ‘acted a shameful part.... The assault was momentarily
  expected, yet he ordered Sarsfield to embark immediately,
  averring that he had Campoverde’s peremptory commands. Sarsfield
  remonstrated vainly, saying that the troops would be left to
  an inefficient subordinate, but was compelled to embark, and
  Velasco, coming a few hours later, found only the dead bodies of
  his garrison. Contreras then assured Codrington and the Junta
  that Sarsfield had gone without orders, and betrayed his post!’
  There is much misrepresentation in this: (1) Contreras _had_
  Campoverde’s command to send him Sarsfield without delay. (2)
  He passed the order on to Sarsfield, but did not know that the
  latter had gone off, without waiting a moment, after sending him
  a note to say that Don José Carlos, the senior colonel in the
  lower city, was incompetent to take command. Naturally Contreras
  thought that Sarsfield would have waited to see Velasco and hand
  over the troops to him. (3) Therefore Contreras was correct in
  saying to the Junta that Sarsfield departed ‘sin conocimiento
  mío,’ though he had sent him a passport to leave the town. See
  Arteche, ix. 288-9.