

  [655] The troops were the 2/47th, a detachment of the 3/95th, and
  some light companies lent by the governor of Gibraltar, 1,147
  in all, counting the gunners. See Graham’s dispatches to Lord
  Liverpool and to Colonel Skerret of June 14th, 1811.

The British officers, military and naval, spent the afternoon in going
round the city. They agreed with Contreras that the wall was weak and
likely to be breached without much difficulty. This being so, was it
consistent with Graham’s directions to land the troops? The sortie
might fail, and the garrison, Spanish and English, might be driven back
into the town and captured. A defence of the breach might also fail,
and in that case it would be almost impossible to get off the troops by
sea, since if Skerret’s own single boat had had the greatest difficulty
in coming ashore in the surf, it was certain that many boats, hastily
manned and crammed with soldiers, and escaping under the fire of the
pursuing French, would come to grief on a large scale. Skerret and
Codrington, after much consultation, resolved that they dared not bring
the British troops ashore, for they could not guarantee that the men
could be taken away again. They therefore refused both of Contreras’s
alternative offers. Just at this moment Baron Eroles arrived from
Campoverde, with an appeal to Skerret to land at Villanueva de Sitjes
and join the ‘army of succour.’ With Codrington’s approval the colonel
consented to do so[656], and set sail northward early in the morning
of the 28th. It cannot be disputed that this whole business was most
unhappy in its results. That a British force should appear in the
roadstead for 36 hours, and then depart without landing a man, appeared
to the garrison of Tarragona to prove that their own condition was
hopeless. If there had been a reasonable hope of defending the town
successfully, as they argued, the British would have come ashore. Their
departure caused deep discouragement, and Contreras was no doubt right
in stating that next after Campoverde’s conduct that of Skerret was
the most active cause of the demoralization which the garrison showed
on the next day. It would have been far better that the expedition
should never have appeared. Yet it is hard to blame Skerret or his
adviser, Codrington. They had Graham’s orders that the men were not
to be placed in a position where they might have to capitulate, and
it could not be disputed that Tarragona on June 27th was such a
position[657]. It would have been better not to tie Skerret’s hands by
any conditions, and to leave him free to act as he thought best for
the interest of Great Britain and Spain. The addition of 1,100 steady
infantry to the force defending the breaches might very possibly have
wrecked Suchet’s assault; even if their effort had failed, the loss
of two battalions would have been a lesser shock to British prestige
in eastern Spain than their withdrawal into ignominious safety at the
moment of danger.