

  [650] The first was a big affair, 3,000 men under Sarsfield
  taking part in it, but oddly enough it is not mentioned by Suchet
  or Belmas.

It was clear that the crisis was now at hand: the French were now
lodged close under the walls of the city, and had already damaged its
enceinte. But to storm it would be a costly business, and Contreras
showed no signs of slackening in his energy, though his letters to
Campoverde and his narrative of the siege both show that he thought
very badly of his position. It was clear that both sides must now
utilize their last resources: Suchet had already ordered up from beyond
the Ebro the brigade of Abbé, which had hitherto been observing the
Valencians, in order that its 3,600 men might compensate him for the
heavy losses that he had suffered[651]. Contreras began to call on
the Captain-General very hotly for help; at his departure Campoverde
had promised that the army of succour should be pressing Suchet’s
rear within seven days, and now seventeen had elapsed and no signs
of its approach were to be seen. He complained bitterly that many
of his officers were failing him; even colonels had gone off by sea
to Villanueva de Sitjes pretending sickness, or absconding without
even that excuse[652]. Naturally the spirit of the rank and file had
suffered from this desertion. There is good contemporary Spanish
authority for the notion that Contreras himself contributed somewhat
to the discouragement, by exhibiting too openly his failing hope, and
stating that Tarragona must fall in a fortnight if the field army did
not save it[653]. But so far as practical precautions went he did his
duty, strengthened the damaged places in the walls as best he could,
and devoted much energy to seeing that the troops were properly paid
and fed, and that the breaches were mined, and protected to the rear by
cuttings and traverses. Very different was the conduct of Campoverde,
who showed that he was absolutely unfit for command by his miserable
conduct during the critical weeks. After having been joined by
Miranda’s Valencian division on June 16th he had 11,000 regular troops
under his hand, a force insufficient to meet Suchet in the open field,
but quite large enough to give the French grave trouble--indeed to make
the continuance of the siege impossible if it were properly handled.
But to bring effective pressure upon the enemy it was necessary to
come up close to him, and Campoverde for many days tried a policy
which was bound to fail. He kept far away, cut Suchet’s communication
by placing himself at Momblanch, and sent Eroles and other officers
to molest the French detachments on the Lower Ebro and to cut off the
convoys coming up from Tortosa and Lerida. Apparently he hoped that
these distant diversions would cause Suchet to draw off great part of
his army from the siege, in order to succour his outlying posts. But
the French general did nothing of the kind, and took no notice of the
loss of convoys, or the danger to remote dépôts; he stuck tight to the
siege, and at this very time, by calling up Abbé’s brigade from the
south to Tarragona, he had deliberately risked even more than before on
the side of Valencia. Between the 16th and the 24th June, the critical
days in the siege, Campoverde and his 11,000 men had no effect whatever
on the course of operations. Yet he kept sending messages to Contreras
promising him prompt assistance, and on the 20th bade him dispatch
Sarsfield out of the city, to assume command of his old division in
the fighting which was just about to begin. That fighting never took
place--to the Captain-General’s eternal disgrace--for at the last
moment he flinched from placing himself within engaging distance of
Suchet. It seems clear that his true policy was to push much closer to
the enemy’s lines, so as to force the French to come out against him,
and then either to let them attack him in some strong position in the
hills to the north-east of Tarragona, where their cavalry would have
been useless, or else to avoid an engagement by a timely retreat when
Suchet should have been drawn well away from the fortress. In either
case he would have compelled his adversary to draw so many men away
from the siege that it could not have proceeded. For it would have been
useless for Suchet to march against him with less than 7,000 or 8,000
men, and the total of the besieging army had dwindled down to 16,000 by
this time, while Abbé’s reserve brigade had not yet come up. Probably,
as Napier suggests, a blow at the French magazines and hospitals at
Reus, only ten miles from Tarragona, would have forced Suchet to draw
off two divisions for a fight, and Campoverde need not have accepted
it, unless he had found himself some practically impregnable position.
But to skulk in the hills many miles away and send detachments against
outlying French posts could have no effect.