

Campoverde, however, had now formed the conclusion that he was still
too weak to attack Suchet. He wrote orders to Contreras to send him
out of the city his two best regiments, Iliberia and Almeria, and
General Velasco to command them. He made a desperate appeal to the
_somatenes_ to rally to his colours, which had little effect, for
his reputation was now gone, and he was suspected of timidity or
even of treason. Finally he got news that there was a small British
expeditionary force in Catalan waters, and sent his lieutenant Eroles
to sea, to look for it, and to invite it to land at Villanueva and
join him. In a week or so he would have 20,000 men, as he supposed,
and would then try something desperate. Meanwhile, unjustly suspecting
Contreras of cowardice, he sent secret letters into Tarragona to the
brigadier-generals of the garrison, bidding them depose and confine the
governor if he showed signs of capitulating. Disgusted at this move,
the generals showed the epistles to Contreras, who was driven still
deeper into despair by seeing that the Captain-General distrusted him,
regarded his views as to the danger of the city as exaggerated, and
was evidently deferring succour for an indefinite period. Nevertheless
he concealed his knowledge of the plan for his deposition, and
prepared, under protest, to send the regiment of Almeria off by sea;
to dispatch Iliberia also he refused, saying that his garrison was
already insufficient. But rough weather on the 27th prevented the
regiment from embarking from the dangerous Milagro roadstead, which was
unapproachable by boats during an east wind.

Suchet, freed from a dire responsibility by the disappearance of the
army of succour on the night of the 24th, resolved to hurry matters,
lest it should presently come forward again in greater strength. On the
following day the siege troops pushed forward by zigzag approaches to
within 150 yards of the wall of the upper city, and commenced a second
parallel in front of the curtain between San Juan and San Pablo. This
was done under a hot and effective fire which cost many lives; the
completion of the projected batteries, and more especially the hauling
of their cannon up steep slopes and among ruins, took more time than
the engineer officers had calculated to be necessary. It was not till
the morning of the 28th that the twenty-two heavy guns destined for the
breaching had been got into place, and that the fire was opened.

These three days, the 25th-26th-27th of June, were a time of agony for
the unfortunate Contreras, who was distracted from his primary duty of
preparing to receive the assault by having to deal with Campoverde’s
plot for deposing him, and other problems. The most important of these
was the arrival in the roadstead on the 26th of a flotilla, which
brought not only some small reinforcements from Valencia and Murcia,
but about 1,100 British infantry[655] and a half-company of artillery
under Colonel Skerret. This little force had been sent by General
Graham from Cadiz at the desire of the Regency, which was seeking in
all quarters for help for Tarragona. Colonel Skerret had Graham’s
orders to do everything that could be done for the place, short of
placing his detachment in any position where it was exposed to serious
danger of having to capitulate, i. e. he was forbidden to land it if
he should think Tarragona untenable, unless he judged himself able to
bring off the troops by sea in the moment of disaster. On the morning
of his arrival the weather was so rough that no boat could get in to
the shore, and communication with Contreras was opened up by a sailor
who swam ashore with a letter. The governor thus found himself offered
the aid of the British force if he would guarantee that it would be
able to escape should the town fall--a most hampering condition. In the
evening, the surf having somewhat abated, Colonel Skerret came ashore,
and was joined next morning by an engineer and an artillery officer,
as also by General Charles Doyle, and by Codrington, the commander of
the British squadron off the Catalonian coast. They conferred with
Contreras, who told them that he feared the town was untenable, and
that he intended, when the walls should be breached, not to make a
prolonged defence, but to sally out of the Barcelona gate, and to try
to cut his way to join Campoverde. He thought that the sortie must
succeed, since the French would be intent on a storm on the western
side of the fortress, and would never expect an attack to be delivered
at the same moment from its eastern side. He therefore invited Skerret
to land his 1,200 men and take part in the enterprise. But if he
preferred to join him in withstanding the approaching storm by the
French, he might choose whatever point he liked in the enceinte, and
defend it. It is clear that at this moment the governor was himself
hesitating between the two alternatives, and that it relieved his mind
to throw the responsibility of choice on Skerret.