

On June 3rd Campoverde reached Igualada, and established his head
quarters there, but found only 3,000 men assembled under Sarsfield.
He sent that general off to Tarragona, to act as second in command to
Contreras, and took over charge of his few battalions; by calling in
Eroles, and hunting up deserters and detachments, he had collected in a
fortnight 5,280 regular infantry and 1,183 cavalry--all that there were
of mounted men in Catalonia. The whole was much too small a force to
justify him in attacking Suchet in his lines--even when the _somatenes_
should come in to join him. All depended on the expected succours
from Valencia, and they were slow in arriving. Charles O’Donnell,
the newly appointed Captain-General of that province, had made up a
scheme for drawing off Suchet by attacking his garrisons in southern
Aragon, and had gone off early in May with his main force against
Teruel. This scheme had no effect whatever; Suchet had fixed his teeth
into Tarragona, and was not to be distracted by any demonstrations
against his more distant detachments. Campoverde grew so desperate that
he offered to give over supreme command to O’Donnell, if the latter
would come into Catalonia with his whole disposable force, and begin
by attacking Mora, Suchet’s great dépôt on the Ebro. The Valencian
Captain-General, though he refused to take this responsibility, finally
agreed to send a division of regulars under General Miranda by sea
to join the Catalans. This force, about 4,000 strong, appeared at
Tarragona on June 14th, and came ashore, but was immediately afterwards
reshipped by Campoverde’s orders, and transferred to Villanueva de
Sitjes, where it landed, and marched inland to Igualada to join the
‘army of succour,’ which by its arrival was raised to nearly 11,000
regular troops.

While Campoverde was slowly beating up his reinforcements, Tarragona
was already in grave danger. The formal attack on the lower city began
on the night of June 1st, when Vallée and Rogniat, the commanders of
the French artillery and engineers, declared that they had everything
ready. The front selected for attack was the two south-westerly
bastions, those called San Carlos and Orleans, but as a preliminary
task it was necessary to drive the Spaniards out of the subsidiary and
external defence formed by the outlying Fort Francoli, at the mouth
of the river, and by the long entrenchment which joined it to the
city, with the lunette of the Prince, a very small work, inserted in
its midst. For Fort Francoli had a position which would enable it to
enfilade the French trenches when they should draw near to the enceinte
of the city.

On the night of June 1st the French threw up their first parallel at a
distance of only a little over 300 yards from the bastion of Orleans:
it was connected with the entrenchments beyond the Francoli by a zigzag
trench. On the second night the parallel was completed for a length of
600 yards, and three batteries begun in it--one directed against the
lunette of the Prince and the line joining it to Fort Francoli, the
other two against the bastion of Orleans and the adjacent curtain. On
June 3rd the besiegers began to work forward by a flying sap towards
the fort, and by the 7th had pushed their front trench to within twenty
yards of the work. On that same day the artillery began to play against
it, not only from the new batteries, but from the old ones beyond the
river, which had previously been directed against the fleet. The fort
was weakly built, and a practicable breach was made in its left face
before the bombardment had been twelve hours in progress. Serious
damage had also been done to the long entrenchment connecting Fort
Francoli with the lower city. Contreras, rightly regarding the work as
untenable, ordered its serviceable guns to be removed the moment after
dusk set in, and bade its commander, Colonel Roten, to draw off the
garrison, two battalions of the regiment of Almanza. They withdrew at
8.30, and an hour and a half later three French columns charged out of
the trenches and seized the fort[649]. They were surprised to meet with
no resistance, not having detected the withdrawal of the Spaniards.
Finding themselves unopposed, they tried to push along the entrenchment
from the fort towards the town, but were stopped, with some loss, by
the guns of the Prince lunette.