

At seven o’clock Suchet let loose the stormers, who were led by the
Italian General Palombini, while, to distract the attention of the
garrison to other points, he ordered a general bombardment of the
northern front, and showed a column on the side of Fort Olivo. The
assault was immediately successful at both the critical points: the
forlorn hope on the side of the Orleans bastion, starting from its
ditch, went up the breach like a whirlwind, losing somewhat from the
musketry fire of the defenders but not from their cannon, for all had
been silenced. The Spaniards were cleared out so quickly from the
bastion that they had not time to fire two mines, which would have
blown up the breach and the storming-column if they had worked. They
rallied for a few minutes at the gorge, but were driven from it by the
French reserve, who poured into the town. At the San Carlos breach
matters went almost as rapidly: the first attacking column was checked,
but when the second supported it, the united mass carried the breach
and burst into the town; a retrenchment and a row of palisades erected
behind the breach were crossed in face of a half-hearted defence. All
the columns having penetrated within the walls, those who turned to
the left attacked the Fuerte Real, the weak and somewhat damaged work
which served as citadel to the lower city: it was carried by assault
without any great difficulty, partly because its earthen ramp had been
somewhat damaged by the bombardment, and could be climbed at some
points, but more because the garrison defended themselves very badly,
and gave way when they saw that the streets on their flanks and behind
them were inundated by the enemy. The other section of the stormers,
inclining to their right, moved towards the mole and the large
magazines at its base, where they met General Velasco, who had only
arrived at the moment that the assault began, with the Spanish reserve.
There was fierce fighting here for a moment, but, turned by a column
which had passed around their flank by the quay at the water’s edge,
Velasco’s men broke like the rest. The whole of the garrison rushed
up the slope, towards the one gate which leads into the upper city,
and finally entered it under cover of a heavy fire kept up from the
neighbouring ramparts. Contreras reports that some of the pursuers came
on so fiercely that they were shot down while actually battering at the
closed gate.

The losses of the two parties were about equal in numbers--Contreras
reports that he found no more than 500 and odd men missing when the
battalions from the lower city were reassembled; Suchet gives 120
killed and 362 wounded as his total loss. The casualties on both sides
would have been heavier if the garrison had fought better--but it is
clear that, when the breaches were once gained, no serious attempt was
made to defend the Fuerte Real, the retrenchments, or the barricaded
houses of the lower city. Only Velasco’s reserve battalions made any
fight in the streets; the rest fled early. The French might perhaps
have made more captures--they only took 200 wounded prisoners--if they
had not turned at once to plundering the houses and magazines. But
they fell into great disorder; many of the unfortunate inhabitants of
the quarter about the port were not only stripped of their goods but
murdered, and a great number of dwellings were wantonly set on fire.
Eighty guns were captured on the walls of the lower city, and a great
quantity of food and stores in the dépôts along the quay. But the
soldiers destroyed more than was saved--especially in the wine stores.