

Not the least disastrous result of this unhappy affair was that the
harbour was now closed to the Spaniards. The English men-of-war and the
native merchant vessels which had hitherto sheltered under the west end
of the mole had to put out to sea. The traders went off to Villanueva,
Minorca, or Valencia, but Codrington’s squadron sought the bare
roadstead off Milagro Point, under the precipitous southern face of the
upper city. Here there were no quays, and when the sea was rough it was
impossible to land. But in ordinary weather boats could communicate
freely with the shore, and Tarragona was not yet deprived of its access
to the water, though that access had become difficult and dangerous.
Suchet proceeded to make it more so on the 23rd, when he erected a
battery, near the base of the mole, to play on the roadstead. Landing,
however, was made rather exciting than dangerous by these guns, which
never did much harm.

On the morning after the storm of the lower city the French engineers
began to make surveys for the attack on the inner line of defence of
Tarragona. Its strength lay in its commanding position, and in the fact
that along many parts of its short front the ground just below it was
too steep and too rocky to allow of approaches being constructed on it.
Its weakness was that the wall was weak and old--a seventeenth-century
work built only to resist the cannon of that day. There was no ditch or
other outer defence, unless a hedge of prickly aloes counted as such.
The front was composed of four bastions; counting from north to south
they were named San Pablo, San Juan (at whose left side lay the only
gate), Jesus, and Cervantes. The last named overhung the precipitous
cliff looking down to the sea above Milagro Point. The French engineers
reported in favour of making the attack on the curtain wall between San
Juan and San Pablo, the ground here being less steep than elsewhere,
and showing soil which could be dug into; there was also some cover
to be found, in half-ruined houses along the road up to the gate.
Moreover the other, or southern section of the wall, was not only on
a steeper ascent, but might be exposed to high-trajectory fire from
the ships in the roadstead below. The first parallel, therefore, was
thrown up opposite San Juan and San Pablo, with a communication to the
rear covered by the buildings and gardens along the road, and three
batteries were planned in it, and commenced on June 24th. A fourth
battery, down in the plain outside the city, was to co-operate by a
flanking fire uphill.

This day saw Campoverde’s first and last demonstration in favour of
the garrison. It was a miserable affair. Driven to do something by
Contreras’s appeals, and by the openly displayed discontent of his own
army, he at last drew in close to the French lines. On the 23rd his
army marched from Momblanch to Villarodona, fifteen miles north-east
of Tarragona. On the next day it was divided into two columns; the
first (composed of Miranda’s Valencian division) marched over the
hills, with orders to fall upon the encampments of Harispe’s Italian
brigades on the north-east side of the French lines. The second, or
Catalan division, under Sarsfield, with which went the Captain-General
himself, marched by another road more to the east, and was to come into
line on Miranda’s left. Meanwhile Contreras was to make a sally out
of the eastern side of Tarragona with 4,000 men of the garrison, and
to attack Harispe’s rear when he saw his front engaged with the ‘army
of succour.’ Both Campoverde’s columns reached the points designated
for them, Miranda getting unopposed to Pallaresos, and the second
division to Cattlar, three miles further east. Suchet, warned by his
outlying cavalry, concentrated Harispe’s and part of Frère’s divisions
in the rear of his lines to the French left of Fort Olivo, leaving
Habert, Abbé, and the rest of Frère’s troops to hold the lower city
and the trenches. His line, composed of some 8,000 men including all
his cavalry, was plainly visible both to the Spaniards outside and
those within the city, and Contreras formed his sallying column ready
to rush down when the first cannon-shot should be heard. But Miranda,
on finding himself in touch with the enemy, sent back messages to the
effect that he was not sure of his route, that the French seemed very
strong, and that he dared not advance. Instead of depriving him of
his command, and then bringing up the second column to the help of
the first, Campoverde, after some hesitation, gave him leave to draw
back, and both divisions retired that night to Vendrils, ten miles
to the rear, in the eastern hills. Not a shot had been fired, and
Contreras, whose men had been waiting under arms the whole afternoon,
had to draw them back into the city without having seen a single man
of the relieving army, which, though only four miles away, was hidden
from him by the intervening hills. So ended a day of great peril for
Suchet, who with 11,000 men in front of him, and 4,000 more ready to
attack his rear, might well have suffered a disaster, or at least have
proved unable to prevent the junction of the two hostile forces. For
the Spaniards were not bound to descend and attack him in the plain,
but might have manœuvred along the hills and forced him to take the
offensive in unfavourable ground, under pain of seeing them break his
blockading line. Codrington summed up the situation by writing to his
chief, Pellew, that ‘the Marquis [Campoverde] blamed Generals Miranda
and Caro, while the latter retorted the accusation, and I am inclined
to think by giving full credit to what each says of the other, neither
will suffer ignominy beyond that to which his conduct has entitled
him.’ For Tarragona, as Contreras was truly repeating in every dispatch
that he sent out, was in imminent danger, and if the army of succour
did not give it _immediate_ help might fall at any moment. The city, as
a matter of fact, was taken only four days later.