

  [658] Codrington, looking on from his ship, says that the storm
  succeeded ‘almost immediately,’ and that ‘from the rapidity with
  which they [the French] entered, I fear they met with but little
  opposition.’ (_Life_, i. 227.) This is borne out by Contreras’s
  narrative.

  [659] For details of this sally see Codrington’s letter of July
  29 in his _Life_, i. p. 228.

[Illustration: TARRAGONA]

While this ineffective attempt at a sally was in progress, the
street-fighting in the city above was still going on. Isolated bodies
of the Spaniards made a most desperate resistance: Colonel Gonzales,
the brother of Campoverde, attempted to hold out in the cathedral with
300 men, but was killed with all followers after a brave resistance.
The fact that many small parties defended themselves for a time in
barricaded private houses gave the French an excuse for something that
almost amounted to the systematic massacre of non-combatants. All
the larger dwellings were broken open, whether shots had been fired
from their windows or no, and a great proportion of their inhabitants
murdered. Of the 4,000 corpses which littered the streets of
Tarragona more than half were those of civilians, and according to
the Spanish official report 450 women and children were among the
slain[660]. As one Spanish authority bitterly remarks, the victorious
stormers generally gave quarter to any man wearing a uniform, and
let off their fury on priests and unarmed citizens. Plunder was even
more general than murder, and there was the inevitable accompaniment
of drunkenness and rape. Knowing what happened at Badajoz in April
1812, it is not for the British historian to dilate with too great
moral indignation on the doings of Suchet’s soldiery. Suffice it to
say that all the atrocities afterwards seen at Badajoz were suffered
by the unhappy people of Tarragona, and that the actual slaughter of
non-combatants was much greater--about 100 inhabitants are believed
to have been murdered at Badajoz, more than 2,000 in the Catalonian
city. Spanish authorities state that the Poles and Italians behaved
decidedly worse than the native French. The officers made some attempt
to check the orgie, but (like the British at Badajoz) they failed: riot
and slaughter went on all night, and it was not till the next day that
order was restored. One of the most dreadful incidents of the storm was
that many individuals, both soldiers and civilians, tried to escape to
the Milagro roadstead by climbing down the precipitous south front of
the city, and, losing their footing, were dashed to pieces or mortally
maimed on the beach below.

  [660] Those who like to sup on horrors may read the original
  document in Arteche’s Appendix X to his tenth volume, pp. 546-8.

The garrison, owing to the last-received reinforcements, was over
10,000 strong at the moment of the storm; as Suchet accounts for
more than 8,000 prisoners[661], the actual loss at the storm cannot
have been much over 2,000 men. But to the 10,000 Spaniards killed or
captured on June 28th we must add the losses of the garrison during the
earlier operations. It seems that the Army of Catalonia lost in all
14,000 or 15,000 men in this disastrous siege. A certain amount of the
wounded, however, had been sent off from time to time on English ships
to Majorca and other safe destinations, and survived to fight another
day. The French casualties during the siege amounted to 924 killed
and 3,372 wounded--a total of 4,296. This was a very heavy proportion
out of the 22,000 men[662] who were from first to last engaged in the
operations; and if the sick, who are not included in Suchet’s report
along with the wounded, are deducted from the survivors, it is clear
that the army must have been reduced to a dangerously low figure by
June 28th, and that the Spanish authorities[663] who estimate the total
loss of their enemies at 6,000 cannot be far out.