

  [670] See Vacani, v. p. 313. It will be remembered that when
  Masséna was in a similar position at Genoa in 1800, be refused to
  dismiss his Austrian prisoners, and allowed many hundreds of them
  to die of starvation. Martinez was more merciful.

The expectation that Martinez would hoist the white flag within a few
days of the release of the prisoners was entirely falsified. He held
out, suffering terrible privations, for another month; he was aware
that Tarragona had fallen, that Campoverde’s army had gone to pieces,
and that he had no hope of succour. But he rightly considered that
it was his duty to detain the 7th Corps before his walls to the last
possible moment. Meanwhile he kept up the spirits of his garrison as
best he could, by assuring them that it was well within their power to
break out through the adversary’s lines by a general sortie, when the
last rations should have been issued. By August 16th this moment had
arrived: the Spaniards had eaten not only the few horses in the place,
but the dogs and rats[671]: only three days’ half-rations were left.
The plan for the evasion was well designed: in the afternoon Rovira,
who had returned with empty hands from Cadiz, showed himself on the
hills nearest to Figueras with some 2,000 _somatenes_--all that could
be collected; he made roving demonstrations against the north side of
the French circumvallation, in the hope of drawing the reserves in
that direction, but allowed himself to be driven away without serious
resistance. After dark, however, Martinez sallied from the fortress
on the opposite side--the south-west--in the direction of the sea,
hoping to find the line thin on that front. He had brought with him
every man who could march, and dashed at the circumvallation in one
broad column. The hostile pickets and outposts were rolled in, but the
Spaniards were brought up against an impassable _abattis_, while two
batteries on each side began playing against the flanks of the mass.
After vainly trying to break through for some minutes, they recoiled
into the fortress, leaving 400 dead and wounded behind them.

  [671] ‘Hasta los insectos más inmundos’ as Martinez wrote to the
  Catalan Junta.

Next morning (August 17th) General Baraguay d’Hilliers, judging
that the enemy must now be thoroughly disheartened, sent in a
_parlementaire_ to propose capitulation. Martinez, aware that his last
bolt was shot, agreed to surrender on the third day, that following the
issue of the last half-ration in his stores. The garrison crawled out
and laid down its arms on the 19th: it mustered something over 2,000
men still able to stand, and there were another 1,000 in the hospitals.
From first to last some 1,500 more had perished during the four months
and nine days that the siege had lasted. The French had suffered almost
as heavily--4,000 men had died in the lines since March, many more from
fever and dysentery than from shot and shell. Macdonald sought eagerly
among the prisoners for the three young Catalans who had let their
compatriots into San Fernando. The two brothers Pons had escaped with
Eroles in June[672], but the third, Juan Marquez, was found, and hanged
on a high gallows on the ravelin of the fortress.