

  [656] That this represents pretty accurately what happened is, I
  think, clear from the comparison of Codrington’s very full letter
  to General Graham (see his _Life_, i. 225), Skerret’s report
  to Graham and the Regency (printed in Arteche, ix. pp. 544-5),
  and Contreras’s own narrative of the siege. This version, as it
  will be seen, differs from that of Napier, who is much harder
  on Skerret than he deserves--though the colonel was an unlucky
  officer and distrusted by his subordinates (see e. g. Sir Harry
  Smith’s autobiography, i. pp. 118-19).

  [657] The critical phrase of Graham’s instructions to Skerret
  was: ‘You will before landing your detachment state to the
  governor that you must have at all times free and open
  communication with his Majesty’s ships of war: and in the event
  of the place being under the necessity of surrendering, that you
  are at liberty to withdraw the troops on board the said ships
  previous to the capitulation.’ The orders are dated June 14.

Contreras spent the few hours that remained to him after Skerret’s
departure in hesitation between the idea of cutting his way out of
Tarragona along the eastern road, and that of defending the town to the
last possible moment. He finally resolved that he would hold the walls
for one day only, and would evacuate the city on the night of the 28th,
if the French had made any impression during the first twenty-four
hours of the bombardment. The main body of the garrison, divided into
three columns, was to make its exit from the Rosario gate, while 1,400
men remained to hold the walls as long as they could, with orders to
save themselves if possible and follow the rest when the enemy should
break in. Officers and men alike were informed of this, and had their
destined positions in the sortie explained to them. It seems likely
that the knowledge that they were intended to abscond in a few hours
made the troops less obstinate in their defence when the assault
came. But meanwhile Contreras made proper preparation for holding
back the enemy till the destined time of departure. He told off his
best regiments to the exposed front, and constructed a second line of
defence behind it, by barricading and loopholing the houses of the
Rambla, the broad street above the enceinte, and by blocking the narrow
lanes which lead up to it with barrels filled with stones, so that from
wall to wall there was a continuous inner fortification. But all this
was a temporary arrangement--the garrison was to hold out till night
only, and then escape by a great sortie.

Unfortunately the sortie was never made--for Suchet pushed matters
so fast that the bombardment and the assault were all over in twelve
hours. The twenty-two guns in the breaching batteries opened at dawn,
and soon began to damage the weak old walls in the most effective
style. The French had originally intended to make two breaches, one to
the left in the curtain near the San Pablo bastion, the other to the
right nearer the bastion of San Juan. But finding the latter hard to
complete owing to the misdirection of one of his batteries, Suchet had
the whole force of the battering turned on to the spot nearer to San
Pablo, which he regarded as most favourable for his purpose. By four
o’clock in the afternoon there was a breach over 30 feet broad at this
point, all the guns in the adjacent flanks of the two bastions had been
silenced, and nearly all those along the whole front. The explosion of
a powder magazine had completely wrecked the Cervantes bastion at the
other end of the Spanish line. Notwithstanding that the musketry fire
of the garrison was still unsubdued, and that the breach was not very
wide, Suchet determined to risk all, by assaulting the place in the
later hours of the long summer afternoon. Three columns, each composed
of 400 men of the _compagnies d’élite_ of various regiments, were
sent forward into the advanced trenches: 1,200 men more under General
Habert crept up to the shelter of the front houses of the lower city.
A separate force of five battalions under General Montmarie marched
outside the walls, and placed itself in the low ground facing the
Rosario gate, but out of gunshot. This column was to advance towards
that gate if the assault succeeded, and was to be admitted by the
stormers, if they won their way into the north-west angle of the upper
city, just behind the breach, from which the gate was not far distant.