

With the fall of Montserrat ended Suchet’s Catalan campaign. He had
subdued all that part of the principality which had been made over
to him, when Napoleon broke up the old 7th Corps and assigned the
districts of Lerida, Tortosa, and Tarragona to the Army of Aragon.
He had now before him the long-projected invasion of Valencia, and
intended to take it in hand, so soon as the brigades escorting the
Tarragona prisoners should have returned to Saragossa, and the southern
regions of Aragon should have been cleared of the insurgents, who had
flocked down into them from the hills when Abbé’s brigade had been
withdrawn to the north in June. For during the siege of Tarragona
Villacampa had invested Teruel, in which a French battalion was shut
up, Duran had attacked Calatayud, though without success, and a
partisan named Campillo had raided as far as Cariñena, only thirty
miles from Saragossa. During the month of August, when Suchet was
able to dispose of the troops set free from Catalonia, flying columns
under Harispe, Compère, and Peyri scoured all southern Aragon. Teruel
was relieved, and Villacampa and his lieutenants were driven back
into their old fastnesses in the sierras of Albaracin and Molina, the
remotest recesses of the rugged land where Aragon and New Castile meet.
But the Valencian expedition could not be taken in hand before the
month of September had begun.

Meanwhile the siege of Figueras had lingered on for a month longer
than Macdonald and Suchet had expected. The brigadier Martinez, with
his five small regular battalions[669] and his 3,000 miqueletes, had
made a most admirable defence. No assistance, not even any prospect
of assistance, had been before them since Campoverde’s defeat on May
3rd. The whole field army of Catalonia had been drawn away to defend
or relieve Tarragona, and Martinez had no friends near him save the
_somatenes_ of the Ampurdam and the Pyrenean valleys, who were willing,
but weak and disorganized. Their most popular chief, the fighting
priest Rovira, had gone off to Cadiz to ask for succour, but found
there that Tarragona was rightly considered a far more important
place to save, and that there was no hope for Figueras. All that the
_somatenes_ could do was to molest Macdonald’s convoys and foraging
parties. May, June, and July wore slowly away, and Martinez was still
holding out, with a garrison reduced to half-rations. Yet he was doing
good service, since he was detaining in front of him the whole of the
disposable troops of the 7th Corps, not to speak of some battalions
of National Guards from the southern departments of France. No help
from Macdonald could come to Suchet during the whole of the siege of
Tarragona, or the subsequent operations about Montserrat. Instead it
was Suchet who was forced to help Macdonald, by clearing his rear by
the march to Vich.

  [669] One of Ultonia, two of Antequera, 1st and 2nd of the
  Voluntarios de Valencia.

The Duke of Tarentum had completed a great circumvallation around
the rocky fortress of San Fernando, and had pushed forward batteries
to within 500 yards of its walls, but he never attempted to breach
them, or to storm the place. It is hard to make out why he made no
such endeavour, for though the place is high lying and difficult of
approach, it is not more so than the upper city of Tarragona, with
which Suchet was dealing in such a prompt and drastic fashion. But
from March to August Figueras was blockaded rather than besieged.
Macdonald’s proceedings are all the more difficult to understand
because his army was suffering severely from the heat during June and
July--the National Guards and the newly arrived battalions from the
interior of France were thinned by malarial fevers, and by pestilence
bred by long tarrying in unsanitary camps. Probably we must ascribe his
refusal to open trenches and proceed to battering-work and assault, to
his memory of what had happened at Gerona. The 7th Corps had an evil
tradition of the repeated failures to storm that city, and of the loss
of life which had accompanied them. Figueras, it was clear, must fall
sooner or later from starvation; there was no chance that it could
be relieved; was it worth while to waste good soldiers in taking by
force a place that must yield in a week or two for want of provisions?
Macdonald evidently under-estimated the obstinacy of the defenders and
the amount of their stores, and may have regretted in July that he had
not started a regular siege in May. But it was now too late to begin
it, since surrender was inevitable within a few days, as he supposed.
Evidence of the distressed state of the garrison was forthcoming on
July 17th, when Martinez turned out of the fortress, without any
demand for exchange, 850 French and Italian prisoners who had been
confined in the bomb-proofs since the commencement of the siege; they
were in a half-starved condition, and reported that for some days they
had hardly received any food at all[670]. General Guillot and the
officers were not released--they were useful hostages, since their
lives were at the disposition of the governor, in case the French
should threaten to refuse quarter to irregulars, or make other harsh
demands when the inevitable surrender should draw nearer.