

  [667] Codrington says that he only embarked 2,400 men out of
  the 4,000 who had come to Catalonia. The cavalry had gone
  another way, and 600 or 800 men had deserted, some to join the
  _somatenes_, others to find their way home to Valencia as best
  they could.

Campoverde, after shipping off Miranda’s infantry at Arens de Mar, had
retired inland to Vich, where on the evening after the embarkation his
disastrous captain-generalship came to an end. For he found waiting
him there General Luis Lacy, sent by the Cadiz regency to relieve
him in command. The new chief was a stranger to Catalonia, and the
people would have preferred Eroles to lead them--indeed, a junta of
Catalan officers had already offered to put themselves under his
orders[668]. But Eroles, the most honourable of all the local leaders,
refused to commit an act of indiscipline, and Lacy was recognized as
Captain-General, while Campoverde absconded hastily by sea. Rejecting
all idea of evacuating the principality, Lacy drew back into the
mountains with the mere wreck of an army which had been handed over
to him--some 2,000 or 3,000 men--and established himself at Solsona,
where the Junta of Catalonia also took refuge. In this place and the
neighbouring hill-towns he began to reorganize his demoralized troops,
and to gather in recruits and deserters. But he was far too weak to do
anything for the long-enduring garrison of Figueras, which was still
holding out, though nearing its last gasp.

  [668] Apparently while the army was at Agramunt near Cervera,
  about July 4th. See Codrington’s correspondence in his _Life_,
  i. 236, and in Napier’s Appendix to vol. iii. p. 398. For
  testimonials to the honourable and patriotic conduct of Eroles
  throughout the campaign, see Codrington’s letters, _passim_.

Suchet, after failing to prevent the embarkation of the Valencian
division, had determined to spend some time in opening up free
communication between Barcelona and Macdonald’s army in front of
Figueras, as also between Barcelona and his own base of operations at
Lerida. He must set matters on a satisfactory footing in Catalonia,
before undertaking the great invasion of Valencia, which the Emperor
had assigned as his next task. The expedition towards Macdonald’s rear
was accomplished by Suchet himself with the divisions of Frère and
Harispe. One column (Palombini’s Italians) marched up the valley of
the Tenes river, by Monbuy and Codinas, the other and larger column
followed the Congost river. Neither met with opposition, and they
joined at the defile of Centelles above Vich. That town was occupied
on July 15th, and flying columns sent out from it to Ripol, Olot, and
Castelfollit. By means of these detachments Suchet got into touch
with Macdonald, who was found to be holding Figueras closely blocked,
and to be in no need of help, for though his army was sickly, yet
the besieged garrison was known to be in a desperate condition, and
its surrender was expected to occur at any moment. Determining that
Macdonald could shift for himself, and would be able to overrun all
northern Catalonia when his army was set free from the siege, Suchet
turned back from Vich, with the object of achieving his second aim, the
clearing of the road from Barcelona to Lerida. This great route was
safe for large detachments--indeed, Montmarie’s brigade had marched
along it almost unmolested ten days back. But it could not be used by
convoys or small parties, so long as the Spaniards were in possession
of the mountain of Montserrat, which overhangs it for many miles. This
lofty peak, the projecting angle of one of the chief Catalan sierras,
was the nearest point to Barcelona now in the hands of the patriots.
It was occupied at this moment by Eroles and some 1,500 miqueletes,
who continually made descents into the plain from their fastness. The
Montserrat is a fantastic pile of rock, whose highest point reaches
4,000 feet above the sea-level; it is mainly composed of red slate,
a geological formation which runs to precipices, and at first sight
the enormous bulk--its circumference is fifteen miles--looks almost
inaccessible. But several paths run up among its clefts, and on a
platform 3,000 feet up lies the sanctuary of Our Lady of Montserrat,
the oldest and formerly the richest sanctuary of Catalonia, with a
great Renaissance church and a large monastery. Most of the monks had
fled to Majorca with their treasure in 1808, and their empty home
served as the head quarters of the local miqueletes, and the magazine
of their munitions. For cargoes of arms and stores, run ashore on the
central Catalan coast, were generally forwarded to Montserrat for
distribution. The mountain was not regularly fortified, indeed it was
too large for fortification, but there were two batteries with ten guns
placed across the only practicable road which led up to the sanctuary
from the north, and the buildings themselves, far above, had been
loopholed and barricaded. Nothing save its own steepness protected a
minor path which climbs to the monastery from the village of Colbato.
Another from Monistrol, which lies in the plain to the north-west, had
been blasted away in places. The aspect of the peak was formidable, but
its strength was more apparent than real, when it was held by no more
than 1,500 irregular troops: for over and above the known paths there
were many places where lightly equipped men could scramble, over slopes
which were only precipitous in certain sections. When a very large
force delivered a concentric attack on the mountain, it was impossible
for the small garrison to block every possible point up which active
assailants might make their way.