

Suchet had brought up more than 10,000 men for the attack, including
a battalion or two borrowed from the garrison of Barcelona. Abbé’s
brigade was to make the main assault along the road: Montmarie’s
brigade, now returned from Lerida, was to menace the steep path from
Colbato to the summit; Harispe and Frère, lower down towards the plain,
watched the Igualada and Manresa roads, the Barcelona troops the road
to the south by Bruch. On July 25th the assault was delivered by Abbé’s
five battalions: they were scarcely opposed on the lower slopes, but
met with a fierce resistance at the first battery, near the chapel of
Saint Cecilia, 1,200 yards from the monastery. Here the column halted,
to throw out swarms of skirmishers over the precipitous hillside. Some
of them climbed high enough to bring an enfilading fire to bear on the
Spanish guns, and as their discharge began to slacken, the grenadier
companies charged up the road and captured them. The miqueletes fell
back on the second battery, which was presently captured in the same
fashion by the combination of a flanking fire and a frontal attack. The
Spanish gunners, the only regulars present, stood to their guns to the
last in the most gallant way, and were nearly all bayoneted. Abbé was
rearranging his column for an attack on the fortified monastery above,
when furious firing was heard to break out in its direction, and the
garrison were presently seen streaming down the hillside to the east. A
large body of the French skirmishers, thrown out for the first attack,
had found their way over the rocks to the back of the sanctuary, where
there are rough tracks leading to some hermitages which lie out far
from the main buildings. When some 300 men had collected behind the
monastery, they delivered an attack on it from the rear. The small
reserve placed in the buildings was panic-stricken by an attack from
this side--all the more so because they saw the rest of their comrades
recoiling from the batteries below, which had already been taken. They
fled, after making no great stand, and, joining the main body, rushed
down the precipitous ravines on the east front of the peak, where a
few perished by falls, but the majority got away safely over ground
where the victors could not follow. So fell Montserrat, with a loss
of only 200 men to the French and 400 to the Spaniards. The storming
of the holy mountain was a picturesque rather than a really difficult
achievement, but the blow inflicted on the Catalans was a very severe
one: Montserrat had been looked upon as impregnable, and the protection
of its patroness was supposed to have defended it for the three years
during which the French had been holding Barcelona, which lies so close
to its foot. The Spaniards had now no post left on the great road from
Barcelona to Lerida, and Suchet disposed part of his army to hold this
line, Palombini’s Italian brigade being left on Montserrat, while
Frère’s division lay at Igualada, and two cavalry and one infantry
regiments held Cervera and its neighbourhood (the ‘Llano de Urgel’ or
flat land of western Catalonia) as far as the gates of Lerida. Abbé’s
brigade went off southward, to join Musnier’s division (to which it
belonged) on the lower Ebro.