

  [661] See table XX in Appendix.

  [662] See table XX in Appendix.

  [663] e. g. see Schepeler, i. 343, and Arteche, x. 314.

But the effect produced was worth the effort which had been made:
nearly two-thirds of the regular troops of the Army of Catalonia had
been destroyed. The great fortress, which for three years had been
the base of the Spanish resistance, had been taken; there was now no
considerable place left in the hands of the patriots--Solsona, Berga,
Cardona, Seo de Urgel, and the other towns which they still retained
were of small importance. They had lost their one fortified harbour,
and for the future their communication by sea with Valencia, the
Balearic Isles, and the British fleet, could only be conducted hastily
and, as it were, surreptitiously; for any port, to which their forces
in the inland might descend for a moment, was always liable to be
attacked and seized by a French flying column. How nearly the spirit of
resistance was crushed in the principality by the stunning blow which
Suchet had inflicted will be shown in our next chapter.

Meanwhile, having reorganized his troops, and determined that the upper
town of Tarragona should be fortified and garrisoned, but the harbour
town dismantled and abandoned, the French commander was at liberty to
proceed further with his scheme for the conquest of eastern Spain. But
there was bound to be some preliminary delay before he could deliver
his great blow against Valencia. One brigade had to be told off to
escort the 8,000 Spanish prisoners to Saragossa; another had to return
to the south to deal with the insurgents of Aragon, who had been left
comparatively unmolested while Abbé was drawn off to the siege. Suchet
himself--soon to be a marshal, for the Emperor carried out his promise
that ‘he should find his baton within the walls of Tarragona’--marched
with some 7,000 or 8,000 men, all that was left disposable, to open up
communications with Barcelona. Before his departure he had a curious
interview with Contreras: the wounded general, brought before him
on a stretcher, was reproached with having violated the laws of war
by persisting in the defence of an untenable town when capitulation
had been his bounden duty! The Spaniard made the proper answer, that
any commander who surrenders before he is obliged is a traitor and a
coward. Thereupon Suchet changed his tone, and offered him tempting
conditions if he would take service under King Joseph. This proposal
being answered as it deserved, Contreras was sent as a prisoner to the
castle of Bouillon, from which he escaped after a captivity of fifteen
months in October 1812[664].

  [664] Interesting details of his perilous escape, in company with
  a French royalist officer, Bouvet de Lozier, and of his final
  arrival in England, may be found in his _Narrative_, written in
  1813.




SECTION XXVIII: CHAPTER III

THE FALL OF FIGUERAS AND THE AUTUMN CAMPAIGN IN CATALONIA. JULY-OCTOBER
1811