


The news of the fall of Tarragona, brought by the fugitive General
Velasco, came as a thunderclap to Campoverde and his ‘army of
succour.’ While the Captain-General had been hesitating, marching
and countermarching, and sending about for further reinforcements,
the great city entrusted to him had fallen. It was impossible for
the simplest soldier in his ranks to fail to see that the whole
responsibility for its loss lay with Campoverde, and from that moment
his authority ceased, and officers and men alike began to clamour
for his resignation. His former popularity in Catalonia had, most
deservedly, vanished. The newly raised recruits began to melt away
from their colours; the _somatenes_ refused to serve one whom they
regarded as a coward, if not as a traitor. On the news that a French
column had started from Tarragona to attack him, Campoverde abandoned
his head quarters at Vendrils, and fled inland to Cervera, where he at
last thought himself safe for the moment. His departure exposed the
dépôt at Villanueva de Sitjes, where his sea-borne stores were lying,
and the French seized it on the 30th, making prize of many ships not
ready for sailing, and capturing 800 Tarragona wounded in the hospital.
Skerret’s 1,200 British were lying off the place in their transports,
just preparing to land and to join Campoverde, as he had desired.
Finding that disembarkation was impossible, and that the Catalan army
had disappeared, Skerret took his expedition back to Cadiz, after a
most humiliating experience.

Meanwhile there was high debate at Cervera. The Valencian general,
Miranda, demanded that Campoverde should at once dismiss him and his
division, and permit them to return home by sea. They had been lent by
Charles O’Donnell for the one purpose of the relief of Tarragona; and
that operation being now impossible, for the best of reasons, Miranda
claimed leave to depart. He was naturally anxious to serve no longer
under such a miserable chief as Campoverde--though his own behaviour
on June 24th gave him no right to complain. It was hard to see how
his request could be refused, yet many of the chiefs of the Catalan
army thought that the departure of the Valencian division implied the
end of all formal war in the principality. The proposal to remove not
only the Valencians but all the regular troops was raised: Campoverde,
feeling his authority gone, and willing to throw all responsibility on
his lieutenants, called a council of war on July 1st. By a majority
of four to three general officers, the meeting decided in favour of
abandoning Catalonia altogether. Sarsfield, the fighting-man of the
army, gave a furious negative, and Campoverde himself made a more
timid objection to the move[665]. But the retreat to Valencia being
once voted, the Captain-General was only too glad to fall in with the
project, and to be quit of the duties which he had so ill discharged.
All the regulars were to sail when a convenient exit to the sea could
be found--at the moment of the council of war Suchet was on the move in
the neighbourhood of Barcelona, and the small ports usually available
were blocked. It was a miserable resolve, when Figueras was still
holding out, when the inland was still intact, and when Suchet had been
obliged to disperse his troops, and could obviously make no general
move for some weeks. Fortunately difficulties cropped up to prevent the
evacuation. The British commodore, Codrington, when asked to prepare
transports and convoy, replied ‘that although he would strain any
point to restore to General O’Donnell and to Valencia the troops so
liberally furnished by that kingdom, he would not embark the Marquis
of Campoverde, or any of the troops belonging to Catalonia, which it
was his duty to assist in defending, instead of depriving it of that
protection which it had[666].’ Eroles, Manso, and other local Catalan
officers sent in equally strong protests; they would be glad to be rid
of the Captain-General, but it would be treason to withdraw the whole
regular army, and to leave the principality to be defended by the
miqueletes alone. The spirit of the people would be brought low, and
resistance would die down when they knew that they were abandoned for
ever by the army.