

  [665] For the wording of the votes see the précis of the council
  of war in the Appendix to Arteche, vol. x. pp. 550-2. Caro, San
  Juan, Velasco, and Carrasquedo voted for embarkation: Sarsfield,
  Santa Cruz, and Campoverde for holding on in Catalonia. Miranda
  would not vote, ‘not considering himself as belonging to the
  Catalan army,’ but was in favour of the evacuation. Eroles was
  absent.

  [666] Letter of Codrington, in his _Life_, i. p. 235.

Meanwhile Suchet had spent the days while the Spaniards were debating
in opening up the communications between his own army and Barcelona,
which had so long been out of touch. He marched with the greater part
of the divisions of Harispe and Frère, as has already been mentioned,
to Villafranca and Villanueva de Sitjes, where he left the bulk of his
troops, then by the pass of Ordal to Barcelona itself. Here General
Maurice Mathieu was in a very isolated position, for since Macdonald
had taken off all the disposable troops to the siege of Figueras,
the city had been entirely cut off from him, the _somatenes_ having
intercepted the road, while English cruisers maintained a fairly
effective blockade on the side of the sea. Suchet concerted with the
governor a plan for opening up communication with Macdonald, and
occupying the port of Mataro, north of Barcelona, where the Spaniards
still had an access to the sea. He determined to bring up Harispe and
Frère, and went back to pick them up. This he did, and returned with
them to Barcelona on July 9th, while an expedition sent out by Maurice
Mathieu seized Mataro.

But meanwhile Campoverde, reflecting that if the little ports between
Tarragona and Barcelona were blocked to him, there still remained
those between Barcelona and Rosas, had made a rapid march through
the inland, and had arrived at Arens de Mar, north of Mataro, before
Suchet returned to Barcelona. The bulk of Miranda’s division was
safely shipped off on July 9th by Codrington, and transported to
Valencia[667]. But the cavalry, refusing to abandon their horses, had
turned westward, under a Colonel Gasca, and to the number of some
900 saved themselves by a most extraordinary march. Striking across
northern Aragon, and dodging between the French garrisons, they reached
the Upper Ebro near Tudela, where they forded the great river by the
aid of guides lent them by the great guerrillero Mina. Once on the
south bank, they executed another equally dangerous march, evading
many French detachments, and rejoined Charles O’Donnell in the end of
August, having travelled in six weeks no less than 740 miles, through
the heart of a region which was supposed to be in military occupation
by the enemy. Their loss was only four officers and fifty-three men,
though 213 horses had perished in the mountains. This achievement
sufficiently shows the superficial nature of Suchet’s occupation of
Aragon: he could not prevent so large a body as 900 men from crossing
it twice from end to end.