

At five o’clock the three storming-columns burst out from three
separate points of the trenches and raced for the breach, which they
reached by no means simultaneously, for two of them were somewhat
hindered by the aloe hedge below the wall, which had not been entirely
broken down by the bombardment. They received a tremendous musketry
fire from the whole front, but only three guns in the left side of
the San Juan bastion plied them with grape: the rest of the Spanish
artillery had been dismounted or disabled. Contreras had filled the
breach with the remains of the two battalions of Provincial Grenadiers
of Castile, a corps which had been serving with credit in Catalonia
since the autumn of 1808; in support was the regiment of Almeria, also
reckoned a good unit. The important retrenchment in the Rambla was held
by the regiment of Almanza; of the rest of his force there was a less
proportion along the front of attack, and a greater proportion placed
on the unassailed south and north flanks of the city than was wise.
Troops should have been heaped unsparingly upon the breach.

The first French column that reached its destination came on in
some disorder, got half-way up the crumbling débris on the breach,
and recoiled under the musketry fire from its crest. But when the
others arrived, and General Habert and a crowd of other officers put
themselves at the head of the mass, and led a second assault, it was
successful. The stormers rolled over the summit of the breach and
trampled down the Provincial Grenadiers. The regiment of Almeria, which
had been placed behind in column, with orders to charge the enemy with
the bayonet the moment that he broke through, gave way--according to
Contreras--without carrying out his command. The main body of the
French then swept down into the street behind the breach, but some
turned to their left to try to open the Rosario gate to Montmarie,
and others made to their right and swept the ramparts as far as the
Cervantes bastion. The Spaniards had rallied at the retrenchments along
the line of the Rambla, and made here a better defence than on the far
more tenable walls. The assault had succeeded in half an hour[658]--the
street-fighting which followed was prolonged and bitter. But when the
French reserves arrived and entered the upper city, the barricaded
street was passed, the Rosario gate was burst open, so that Montmarie’s
column got in upon the Spanish flank, and the resistance went to
pieces. Contreras, manfully trying to bring up a battalion of Savoia,
his last intact regiment, for a charge, was bayoneted and taken
prisoner. One of the divisional generals, Courten, bethinking himself
of the proposed sortie that was to have taken place that evening, led
out a disorderly remnant of 3,000 men by the Barcelona gate, and tried
to escape along the seashore. They had not got far when they ran into
one of Harispe’s Italian brigades and some squadrons of _chasseurs
à cheval_, which had been set to watch this obvious bolt-hole. When
checked, some of the demoralized troops tried to turn back towards the
city, others dispersed and strove to get away across the hills, some
hundreds stripped, and endeavoured to swim out to the British ships,
which were lying in the Milagro roadstead[659]. A fair number of these
were saved by the boats of the _Blake_ and her consorts, which ran
inshore to pick them up. But many more were cut down by the French
cavalry on the beach, and it was some time before the excited riders
would give quarter, and accepted the surrender of Courten and the
survivors. General Velasco, the second-in-command in the city, had the
luck to escape across the mountains almost alone, and brought the bad
news to Campoverde.