

  [697] 11th Light Dragoons and 1st Hussars K.G.L.

  [698] 3rd Dragoon Guards and 4th Dragoons. Properly belonging to
  Erskine’s cavalry division in the Alemtejo, but borrowed.

  [699] 1st Royals and 12th Light Dragoons.

  [700] 14th and 16th Light Dragoons.

It should be noted that about this time Wellington, for the first time
since 1810, obtained the assistance of a Spanish force on the Beira
frontier. General Castaños, busy in reorganizing the ruined Army of
Estremadura, sent Carlos de España with the cadres of several infantry
regiments to the frontier of Leon, to fill them up with recruits from
the province of Salamanca. The rest of his troops, under Morillo
and Penne Villemur[701], were kept in Estremadura and continued to
co-operate with Hill. But Carlos de España fixed himself at Ledesma,
where he joined hands with the great partisan Julian Sanchez, and
soon collected some 3,000 men, who though useless for action, being
raw and not properly furnished with uniforms or arms, yet served to
hold a position in front of the lower Agueda, and gave much trouble to
Thiébault, the governor of Salamanca, by their sallies and incursions
into his district.

  [701] For whose actions see section xxix. p. 597.

For some weeks after the arrival of the army on the Beira frontier
there was little stirring. The fact that Ciudad Rodrigo had been
cut off from communication with Salamanca did not at first provoke
the French to action, for the place was in no immediate danger of
starvation. A large convoy had been thrown into the place only two
days before the blockade was formed, and it was known that the allied
army had no siege-train in its company. Throughout the month of August
Dorsenne was much more troubled by the operations of the Galicians than
by Wellington’s demonstration, while Marmont, knowing that Rodrigo was
provisioned up to October[702], saw no reason for moving till it should
be drawing nearer to the end of its resources. It was only about the
middle of September that he got tardy news that there was a siege-train
making its way up from Oporto, and that the British divisions behind
the Agueda were making gabions and fascines. He then was stimulated
to activity, and concerted a junction with Dorsenne without further
delay--of which more hereafter. In August he found full occupation in
the organization of the provinces of New Castile, which the Emperor had
handed over to him, and was more worried by the difficulty of raising
taxes and collecting magazines, and by incessant wrangles with King
Joseph’s officials, than by military difficulties[703]. All that he did
was to move his head quarters to the neighbourhood of Plasencia[704],
and to shift some of the brigades cantoned along the Tagus to the
north of that river, in view of the fact that a march to relieve and
revictual Ciudad Rodrigo would ultimately become necessary. Foy’s
division was kept, however, at Truxillo--far to the south--till the
middle of September, in order that touch might not be lost with Drouet
and the Army of Andalusia. The Marshal, very rightly, scouted the idea,
which some of his subordinates had formed, that Wellington’s appearance
on the Beira frontier might portend a dash at Salamanca[705]. To gain
some further knowledge of the disposition of the Anglo-Portuguese he
sent out several cavalry reconnaissances from Plasencia towards the
Sierra de Gata. They found British outposts all along the passes, and
could not get forward, though one party succeeded in capturing a picket
of the 11th Light Dragoons at San Martin de Trebejos, near the Puerto
de Perales, on August 14th.