

  [672] They both became officers in the Catalan army, and
  survived for many years after the war; the elder died, a retired
  brigadier-general, in the year 1850. See Arteche, x. 480. Vacani
  and Napier err in saying that he was hanged with Marquez, who was
  his cousin.

Thus ended in disaster the story of Figueras. But both the capture
of the place and its defence form a most honourable page in the
history of the war. Rovira’s enterprise in seizing it and Martinez’s
obstinacy in maintaining it, long after all hope was gone, were equally
praiseworthy. Though nothing came of the exploit in the end, they had
immobilized the whole French 7th Corps for the entire summer of 1811,
and had prevented Macdonald from giving a single battalion to help
Suchet’s attack on Tarragona. If Campoverde had possessed the most
ordinary capacity or resolution, he might have turned the opportunity
given him by the _somatene_ chiefs to such good account as to wreck all
the campaign planned by Napoleon for the subjection of Catalonia.
Better management on May 3rd might have led to the defeat of Baraguay
d’Hilliers, and if he had been driven off from Figueras, and isolated
from Macdonald, who was then far away at Barcelona, Suchet would have
had to march to the help of his comrades, and the siege of Tarragona
could never have begun. We are brought back to the point which has
already so often confronted us--Campoverde’s miserable inefficiency was
the final cause of all the disasters of 1811 in the principality of
which he was the Captain-General.

[Illustration: CATALONIA]

Two such blows as the fall of Tarragona and the recapture of Figueras
seemed to render inevitable the final subjection of Catalonia. It is
with astonishment that we find that its obstinate people maintained
their resistance for two years more, and were found still defending
themselves when the war came to an end with the abdication of Napoleon
in 1814. The new Captain-General, Lacy, was a man harsh and unpopular,
but he had at least the merit of energy. His army was a mere wreck,
but he issued orders for a general levy of all men between 18 and 40
to fill the depleted cadres of the few surviving regular battalions,
and despite the ill-will of the Junta--who wished to lean more on the
miqueletes, and distrusted the old army--he gradually collected a new
force. Early in August, as if in bravado, he burst into France on the
side of Puigcerda, and executed a destructive raid along the valleys of
Cerdagne. If he was not strong enough to help Figueras, or to oppose
Suchet, he was at least determined to do all the harm that he could
to the enemy. This incursion threw Napoleon into a fit of rage, and,
forgetting his own orders to Suchet which prescribed the invasion of
Valencia as the next decisive move in the war, he wrote him an angry
dispatch on August 22nd[673], in which he told the newly appointed
Marshal that he ought to have left a strong French division at Vich,
and to have marched with his main body against the Catalonian inland,
aiming at Cardona and Urgel and the other unsubdued places. ‘He should
have profited by the panic into which the Spaniards had been thrown,
and might have terminated the war in the province, while by making
his retrogression to Saragossa he has given the enemy the chance of
rallying on all sides.’ It is sufficient answer to this accusation to
say that, if the Marshal had thrown all his available troops into the
Catalan mountains, he would have become involved in a series of endless
marches and counter-marches after an intangible enemy, which would have
prevented him from carrying out in the autumn his great and successful
attack on Valencia. The strength of the Catalan resistance did not
lie in the possession of Cardona or Urgel or any other old-fashioned
stronghold, but in the determination of its people not to lay down
their arms. There is no probability that the war could have been
‘terminated’ in the way that the Emperor hoped.