

  [673] _Correspondance_, vol. xxii, no. 18,066.

By September Lacy had reorganized the remnants of the old Army
of Catalonia into three weak divisions under Eroles, Milans, and
Sarsfield, each containing only four or five battalions. Every one
of the new units represented many lost corps--the single regiment of
Baza included all the remnants of the Granadan division, which Reding
had brought to Catalonia in 1809 fourteen thousand strong. The new
Cazadores de Cataluña raised by the well-known miquelete-chief Manso
were formed from the _cadres_ of six old Catalonian tercios[674]--it
was the same with the regiments bearing the local names of Manresa,
Mataro, and Ausona. The cavalry, consisting of the few hundred
Catalonian horse who had but joined in Gasca’s retreat to Valencia,
amounted to five squadrons of hussars and cuirassiers. The whole,
including garrisons, may have made up 8,000 men--all that was left
of the 25,000 organized troops which had formed the ‘1st Army’ on
December 1st, 1810. But there still remained an Army of Catalonia, and
as Macdonald and Maurice Mathieu and Decaen were to find, the Catalans
were still ready to fight.

  [674] An interesting study of the reorganization of the Catalan
  army in August-September 1811 is given in Estalella’s _El
  Batallon de Hostalrich_ (Madrid, 1909), an account of the
  fortunes of Manso’s new _Cazadores de Cataluña_ in 1811-14.

When the enemy was under the delusion that with the fall of Montserrat
and Figueras the back of the resistance of the Principality had been
broken, Lacy began to take the offensive. On September 11-12, aided by
English ships, he drove the French out of the Medas Islands, at the
mouth of the Ter, and built on the largest of them a fort which gave
him a secure point of communication with the Mediterranean Squadron.
But this was a side-issue: in October he accomplished something far
more important. Descending on the line of garrisons by which the
French kept open the road from Barcelona to Lerida, he took 200 men
at Igualada on October 4, captured a large convoy near Cervera three
days later, and on October 11 took that town with 645 prisoners, and
the neighbouring Belpuig with 150 more on October 14. The chain of
forts was broken, and to the intense joy of all Catalonia the French
dismantled the monastery of Montserrat and evacuated the Holy Mountain.
Half of Suchet’s work in the summer had been undone. A few days later
Macdonald was recalled to Paris (October 28); he was the third marshal
whose reputation got no profit from his Catalonian campaign--his
failure was as bad as that of Augereau, and he had not even got the
small credit that St. Cyr won in battle. The command of the 7th Corps
fell to General Decaen.




SECTION XXIX

WELLINGTON’S AUTUMN CAMPAIGN OF 1811




CHAPTER I

WELLINGTON’S BLOCKADE OF CIUDAD RODRIGO. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1811


When Marmont, before the end of the second week of July, had taken his
departure from the valley of the Guadiana, and had begun to disperse
his army in cantonments on both sides of the Tagus, Wellington was
able to review his own situation at leisure, and to think out a new
plan of operations. The Army of Portugal had settled down in a central
position, from which it could transfer itself with equal facility
to reinforce the 5th Corps in Estremadura, if the Allies should
make another move against Badajoz, or the troops of Dorsenne in the
kingdom of Leon, if any attempt were made to strike at Ciudad Rodrigo
and Salamanca. Marmont had placed one division (Foy’s) and a cavalry
brigade at Truxillo, to keep up the communication across the mountains
with the 5th Corps. He had established his own head quarters at
Navalmoral, near Almaraz, and had three divisions[675] in his immediate
neighbourhood along the Tagus. The remaining two, which completed his
army, were placed, one at Plasencia, the other in the province of
Avila[676], somewhat more to the north, so as to command the passes
into the kingdom of Leon, by which the army would have to move to join
the Army of the North, supposing that Wellington took the offensive on
the Agueda and the Tormes. In this position the Marshal remained, in an
expectant attitude, for some ten weeks. The period of repose was very
grateful to him, since he had taken his army to the relief of Badajoz
in haste, before it was fully reorganized, and was anxiously expecting
the arrival of the drafts and convalescents whom he had left behind
him, and--what was still more important--a great supply of remounts
to strengthen his depleted cavalry, and of gun teams to bring his
batteries up to the total of eighty pieces, which had been prescribed
by the Emperor as his proper complement. He was aware that orders had
been issued from Paris that the Army of the North was to make over
to him 500 artillery horses, and that nearly a thousand cavalry were
coming from Bayonne, whither the 3rd and 4th squadrons of each of his
dragoon regiments had been sent back in May to pick up new chargers.
General Vandermaesen, as he was informed by a dispatch from Berthier
dated July 10th, was to be at Burgos by August 15th, with 850 remounted
dragoons, 1,100 artillery horses, and 6,000 drafts and recruits for the
infantry. But, as so often happened in Spain, this great reinforcement
had not turned up even by the middle of September; for though the
troops had started from Bayonne, great numbers of them were detained on
the way, not only by Dorsenne, but by mere post-commanders and chiefs
of small garrisons, who presumed to lay hands on them because they
thought themselves threatened by some movement of the Navarrese or
Cantabrian guerrilleros[677]. Vandermaesen got to Burgos, but could not
collect more than half of the column which he was directed to take to
the Army of Portugal, and so did not start. The divisions in the field
received no appreciable reinforcements till September was far advanced.
Meanwhile Marmont used the troops which lay immediately round his head
quarters to construct an important group of permanent fortifications
about Almaraz, the chief passage of the Tagus. The flying-bridge there
was replaced by a strong bridge of boats, protected at each end by
a closed work, partly in stone, partly in earth; the one was called
Fort Ragusa, the other Fort Napoleon. In addition, the defile in the
mountains, by which the road descends on to Almaraz, was protected by
a third structure called Fort Mirabete, from the neighbouring village.
This group of works gave the French a stronger hold on the central
Tagus than they had ever possessed before, and the permanent bridge
was invaluable, since it permitted troops to go south or north at a
much greater rate than had been possible when, as hitherto, they had to
be ferried over on a mere pontoon worked with ropes. Orders came from
Paris that a similar passage, protected by a fortified post, was to be
established at Alcantara, sixty miles further down the river, where
the broken Roman bridge[678] invited repair. But this was quite beyond
Marmont’s power--the position was far too near the Portuguese border
to be maintained save by a large garrison, which would have required
revictualling at frequent intervals, for the neighbouring region,
always desolate, was now absolutely depeopled. When Wellington had
large bodies of troops at Castello Branco and Portalegre, while there
was no solid force of the Army of Portugal nearer than Navalmoral, it
would have been too risky to expose a detachment at Alcantara. The
ruined remains of the mediaeval fortress there, which had been knocked
to pieces in the old War of the Spanish Succession, could not have been
patched up so as to resist artillery of the lightest sort.