

  [696] Mr. Fortescue sends me the subjoined note on Spencer from
  a suppressed letter of Wellington to Pole at Apsley House, not
  to be found in any of the editions of the _Dispatches_. ‘The
  person who is now here as second in command is very unfit for
  his situation. He is a good executive officer, but has no mind,
  and is incapable of forming any opinions of his own. He is the
  centre of all the vulgar and foolish opinions of the day. Thus
  you are aware that, from former experiences, I cannot depend
  upon him for a moment, for anything. He gives his opinion upon
  every subject, changes it with the wind, and if any misfortune
  occurs, or the act recommended by him is disapproved of, there is
  no effort to be looked for from him.’ This verdict does not much
  differ, save in strength of expression, from the opinion of minor
  contemporaries, such as Tomkinson and Stepney, e. g. ‘Sir Brent
  Spencer, a zealous gallant officer, had no great military genius.
  He was anxious and fidgety when there was nothing to do, but once
  under fire looked like a philosopher solving a problem--perfectly
  cool and self-possessed.’ (Stepney’s _Leaves from a Diary of an
  Officer of the Guards_, p. 80.) See also in Stepney for notes as
  to Spencer’s resentment at his supersession by Graham. This has
  value, as the diarist was a favourite of the general, who had
  offered to make him his aide-de-camp.

Not far off from the 1st Division was the 4th, under Cole, at Pedrogão,
twenty miles north-east from Castello Branco. The 5th Division,
meanwhile, lay at Perales, Payo, and Navas Frias watching the passes
of the Sierra de Gata, in case Marmont’s division at Plasencia should
make an unexpected forward movement towards Leon by the shortest route.
The 7th Division was at Villar Mayor near Sabugal and Fuente Guinaldo.
Lastly, the 6th Division, more to the left and forming the northernmost
section of the army, was cantoned between the Coa and the lower
Agueda, from Nava de Aver as far as the bridge of Barba del Puerco.
Of the cavalry, Alten’s brigade[697] was covering the Light and 3rd
Divisions in front of Ciudad Rodrigo, while the others, De Grey’s[698],
Slade’s[699], and Anson’s[700] were watching the frontier eastward
from Castello Branco, with observing parties in the passes but the main
bodies placed some way to the rear. The head quarters of the second
brigade was at Soita near Sabugal, that of the last-named at Idanha
Nova. These cantonments, it will be observed, were somewhat scattered,
there being no less than eighty miles between Barba del Puerco in the
north and Penamacor in the south, but Wellington calculated that he
would always have long notice of any concentration of the enemy in his
front, and three marches would suffice to unite the army on its centre,
between Fuente Guinaldo and Alfayates, or four to concentrate it on a
wing, if the French (a thing not very probable) should show signs of
operating either south of the Sierra de Gata or on the lower Agueda.