

Even from the first, however, Wellington was disposed to believe that
no great results would follow from a move against Ciudad Rodrigo. ‘I
am tempted to try this enterprise,’ he wrote to Lord Liverpool before
he had begun his march, ‘but I beg your Lordship to observe that I may
be obliged to abandon it. When the relative force of the two armies
will be so nearly balanced as in this, and particularly in an operation
in the Peninsula of Spain, it is impossible for me to foresee all the
events which may lead to this result. But the arrival of reinforcements
to the enemy, or further information, which may show them to be
stronger than I now imagine, or a falling off in the strength of our
army owing to sickness, would necessarily oblige me to abandon the
enterprise[692].’ Later comments are in the same cautious tone: on
August 9 Wellington thinks it ‘more than ever doubtful whether he will
be in a situation to undertake the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo’--but the
movement may afford an opportunity of striking an advantageous blow,
and cause the enemy, at least, to draw off troops from corners of the
Peninsula where they are badly wanted.

  [692] _Dispatches_, vii. 119, July 18th.

Long before the army began to move towards the Agueda and the frontiers
of Leon, Wellington had given the preliminary order[693] which
committed him to the project of attacking Rodrigo. He had at last
received from England the heavy battering-train of siege artillery,
which would have been invaluable in May for the breaching of Badajoz.
It was on shipboard in Lisbon harbour. He directed it to be taken round
by sea to Oporto, sent up the Douro in boats as far as Lamego--where
lay the limit of river navigation--and then to be sent forward by
detachments to Trancoso, in the northern Beira, where he intended
to establish his base dépôt. Nearly 400 pairs of draught bullocks
and about 900 country carts were to be collected at Lamego for the
transport. The charge of the whole operation was given to Alexander
Dickson, whose energetic management of the very inefficient siege
artillery at Badajoz had inspired Wellington with a strong belief in
his resourcefulness, and his power of getting the largest possible
amount of work out of the Portuguese, military and civilians alike.

  [693] It is contained in the ‘Memorandum for Colonels Frampton
  and Fletcher’ of 19th July, dated the day after the dispatch to
  Lord Liverpool which sets forth the whole project.

Dickson started at once for Oporto, where he found two companies of
British artillery[694] which had been sent from Lisbon, and picked up
somewhat later 300 Portuguese gunners, who were also placed at his
disposition. With their aid he began shipping up to Lamego the guns and
ammunition from the transports. So long as the transport was by water,
matters went slowly but easily, but the land voyage from Lamego onwards
turned out a heart-rending business, from the badness of the roads and
the difficulty of collecting cattle for draught. Dickson prevailed upon
Wellington in the end to make Villa da Ponte, rather than Trancoso,
his central dépôt--the town in the hills proving less convenient than
the large village fifteen miles further north. All through August and
September material was accumulating at Villa da Ponte, but it was
never sent forward, because, as the campaign worked out, no regular
siege of Ciudad Rodrigo ever became possible. Wellington would not
show his battering-train until it was certain that he could turn it to
good use, and kept it hidden far to the rear of his fighting-line. It
was only gradually that part of it began to be moved up to Almeida,
ostensibly to serve for the re-armament of that fortress, where the
damage done by the two explosions carried out by Brennier and Pack had
been repaired. It was not to be till December that the guns landed at
Oporto in August were employed. But all through the autumn Wellington’s
movements were greatly influenced by the fact that he had now a large
and efficient siege-train ready, in a position from which it could be
sent forward the moment that a fair opportunity should offer itself.
It was the existence of Dickson’s park at Villa da Ponte, as much, or
more, than any other factor in the situation, that kept Wellington on
the frontiers of Leon watching for his chance. It would seem that his
caution was justified--the French never quite realized that he was
ready to attack Rodrigo in the most effective style, when they should
give him the opportunity that he lacked, by dispersing their armies in
a way which rendered rapid concentration impossible.