

  [675] These divisions were those of Maucune, Sarrut, and Ferey.

  [676] Clausel’s division in the province of Avila, Brennier at
  Plasencia.

  [677] For an interesting account of the experiences of an officer
  sent to scrape together drafts and convalescents despite of the
  petty governors, see the diary of Sprünglin, pp. 484-5. He had
  special difficulties with Thiébault, the Governor of Salamanca.

  [678] Correspondence from Berthier printed in Marmont’s
  _Autobiography_, iv. p. 122.

Marmont had the greatest difficulty in maintaining his army in the
region which it now occupied. The western part of the kingdom of New
Castile was (as Wellington had found in the Talavera campaign) almost
incapable of feeding a large force. The Vera of Plasencia was the only
district which sufficed for itself even in time of peace. Normally
food would have been drawn from the direction of Toledo, Aranjuez, and
Madrid. But this district was in the occupation of the Army of the
Centre, and King Joseph protested in the most lively fashion at being
expected to furnish all the supplies for Marmont’s force, over which he
was denied control, and with which he seems to have felt himself little
concerned[679]. New Castile barely sufficed for his own needs, and when
an Imperial decree proclaimed that the districts of Toledo, Avila, and
Talavera were removed from his sphere of command and placed at the
disposition of the Army of Portugal, he considered that his brother
had broken the pledges which had been made to him during his short
visit to Paris, for in this bargain it had been stipulated[680] that
armies entering his sphere of activity came under his command. Before
evacuating the ceded districts, he withdrew all the movable stores
and munitions; Marmont declares that at Toledo the royal officials
sold all the corn in the magazines to private persons, just before the
arrival of his own commissaries, and handed over empty vaults to the
new-comers[681].

  [679] See Joseph to Marmont in the correspondence of the latter,
  iv. pp. 150-6.

  [680] See above, p. 219.

  [681] Marmont’s _Mémoires_, iv. p. 58.

Even with the resources of the provinces of Avila and Toledo at its
disposition, the Army of Portugal only lived from hand to mouth, and
was unable to accumulate magazines of any importance. The transport
of the food-stuffs was the great problem; the army had practically
no vehicles left--as Marmont observed in one of his dispatches to
Berthier, he had received over from Masséna about ten waggons only--all
the rest that had belonged to the three corps that had marched into
Portugal had been left behind on the mountain roads between Santarem
and Sabugal in March[682]. Country carts might have been requisitioned
in the valley of the Tagus at an early stage of the war, but by 1811
they had entirely disappeared, along with the oxen that had drawn them.
The population had mostly vanished, and the fraction that remained
was in a condition of abject misery from Talavera as far as the
Portuguese border. Marmont calls the country from Almaraz to Merida
‘a horrible wilderness[683].’ He calculated that the whole of the
Avila-Plasencia-Talavera region could barely feed 15,000 men, and that
the rest of his army only subsisted by drawing on the comparatively
intact Toledo district.