

  [682] Intercepted dispatch from Marmont to Berthier of August
  5th, printed in _Supplementary Wellington Dispatches_, xiii. p.
  690.

  [683] _Mémoires_, iv. p. 55.

Of all this trouble on the part of his immediate adversary Wellington
was aware, through intercepted dispatches, as well as through the
reports sent in to him by the Spaniards. And the facts that Marmont
had been forced to disperse his army into cantonments extending from
Truxillo to Avila, and had no magazines of any size, formed important
data in his calculations. It would clearly take many days to assemble
the whole Army of Portugal--whether it were required on the Guadiana or
on the Tormes. At the same time Marmont, by his march in June to join
Soult, had shown himself a general of energy and decision, and it must
be taken for granted that, if there was good reason for him to move, he
would do so, as quickly as the difficulties of supply would permit him.
His force, which Wellington very accurately calculated at about 30,000
infantry and 3,500 horse, or some 36,000 men of all arms[684], was the
central fact in all future operations. Clearly it would be moved south
or north whenever necessary.

  [684] See Wellington to Lord Liverpool, _Dispatches_, vii. p. 115.

As to Soult, he had now so much on his hands in Andalusia that he was
not to be feared for the present. It was known that he had left nothing
in Estremadura save the 5th Corps, now under Drouet, and five or six
regiments of dragoons. The troops drawn from Cordova and Granada had
been taken back to Andalusia. But two divisions were hunting Blake and
Ballasteros in the Condado de Niebla. The disposable remainder must be
very small. Soult therefore might be neglected as an enemy capable of
taking the offensive. If, however, the Anglo-Portuguese army were to
invade Andalusia, an operation which some of Wellington’s subordinates
had suggested to him as a possibility[685], the Duke of Dalmatia would
certainly raise the siege of Cadiz, probably abandon Granada, and march
against the Allies with a force which, including the 5th Corps, would
be 60,000 strong. Wherefore offensive action in this quarter could not
be thought of[686], all the more so because Marmont, if nothing was
left opposite him on the Tagus, might come down by Merida, threaten
Elvas and Abrantes, and perhaps take the Allies in the rear after they
had crossed the Sierra Morena.

  [685] D’Urban in his diary often harps upon this project.

  [686] ‘We should meet in Andalusia the whole force which lately
  obliged us to raise the siege of Badajoz, with the addition to
  it of the force which was left before Cadiz.... An attempt to
  relieve Cadiz would certainly not succeed.’ _Dispatches_, vii. p.
  118.

Nor was the idea of renewing the siege of Badajoz, during Soult’s
absence, tempting. The place could certainly be beset; but in ten
days or so Marmont and the 12,000 men of the 5th Corps would have
united to relieve it, and their joint force would be nearly equal in
total numbers to the Anglo-Portuguese and superior to them in cavalry.
‘Any success which we might derive from a general action, to which I
might bring the Army of Portugal and the 5th Corps, would not be very
decisive; on the other hand the loss which we would sustain by the
heat of the weather, and by the length of the marches which we should
be obliged to make would be very great[687].’ But the main objection
to a renewal of the siege of Badajoz was not the prospect of a pitched
battle, but the impossibility of sitting down to a leaguer in the
valley of the Guadiana at a time when it was known to be absolutely
pestilential. Already on the Caya the army had begun to suffer from
the well-known Guadiana fever, and its spread had only been stopped by
moving the troops back to the healthy towns in the highlands.