

  [694] Bredin’s and Glubb’s, which had long been lying at Lisbon
  without horses, and had taken no part in the field operations of
  1810 and 1811. Holcombe’s battery was soon afterwards substituted
  for Glubb’s. See Dickson’s _Diary_ (ed. Leslie) for months of
  August-October 1811.

The march of the seven divisions which were destined for service on
the Agueda and the Azava began in the first week of August. The Light
Division and Arentschildt’s cavalry, moving up from Castello Branco,
were at Sabugal on the 8th and occupied Martiago, beyond the Agueda
and close to Rodrigo, on the 10th. On the following day Wellington in
person led a reconnaissance right up to the walls of the fortress, and
drove in all the French outposts. The blockade was then established
by the Light Division on the left bank of the Agueda, and the 3rd
Division on the right, the head quarters of the former being at Carpio,
those of the latter at Martiago. The road north-eastward to Salamanca
was only cut by means of cavalry posts and Julian Sanchez’s guerrilla
bands, and the infantry did not approach within some miles of Rodrigo.
Wellington’s purpose was merely to prevent the entry of provisions into
the place: he had no intention of drawing close up to it and opening
a siege, till he should have learnt that his battering-train should
have reached Trancoso: and it would obviously be a matter of many weeks
before the guns got up from Oporto. It might perhaps be argued that it
would have been better not to demonstrate at all against Rodrigo, or
to call the attention of Marmont and Dorsenne in this direction, till
there was some possibility of opening siege-operations. For to famish
the garrison must infallibly lead to a concentration of the enemy at
Salamanca for its relief, and draw together a large army. Marmont was
less dangerous in his scattered cantonments about the Tagus than with
his forces massed on the Tormes. And there was little hope of reducing
Rodrigo by famine alone; clearly the enemy would mass and fight, rather
than allow it to fall unaided[695].

  [695] Wellington saw this clearly enough; he writes to Lord
  Liverpool on August 27: ‘If we cannot maintain this blockade,
  the enemy must bring 50,000 men to raise it, and then they can
  undertake nothing else this year, for they must still continue to
  watch Rodrigo, and we shall so far save the cause. Meanwhile if
  they offer me a favourable opportunity of bringing any of them to
  action, I shall take it.’ _Dispatches_, viii. p. 232.

Meanwhile Wellington moved his head quarters to Fuente Guinaldo,
sixteen miles south of Ciudad Rodrigo, on August 12th, and kept them
there till September 24th. The divisions not engaged in the blockade
were cantoned at various points to the rear. The first division lay
about Penamacor: it was no longer commanded by Spencer, who had so
long led it. He had gone home, ostensibly on sick leave, really
because he was annoyed that General Graham had recently been ordered
up from Cadiz, and was for the future to take charge of the whole left
wing of the army whenever the Commander-in-Chief was absent. This
responsibility had hitherto fallen to Spencer, and Wellington was not
alone in thinking that he had not discharged it over well[696]. The
arrival of Graham (August 8th) was welcomed by all ranks, and for the
future he assumed charge, nominally of the 1st Division, really of all
the troops in the north which were not actually under the master’s eye.
At any rate Graham could never be accused of dullness of apprehension
or indecision, the two charges habitually made against Spencer by
Wellington himself, no less than by many diarists of the time.