

  [687] From the same letter to Lord Liverpool, _Dispatches_, vii.
  118.

Wellington therefore ruled out of the list of possible operations any
movement to the south of the Tagus. There remained only the chance of
making another attempt on Ciudad Rodrigo, and from the end of July
onward this was the project which was engrossing his attention. To
make a move in this direction would certainly draw Marmont from the
Tagus, and cause him to unite with the Army of the North for the relief
of the fortress. But Wellington thought that he would prefer this
combination among his enemies to the other one, which would ensue if he
were to make his stroke in Estremadura. He gave three reasons to Lord
Liverpool for the preference[688]: the first was that in a campaign on
the frontiers of Leon he would have the assistance of all the militia
of northern Portugal for subsidiary operations. The second was that
the ground would be much more in his favour--he would have behind him
not the broad plains of the Alemtejo, but the rugged spurs of the
Serra da Estrella, where strong positions abounded, and where the
numerous French cavalry would be as useless as they had proved during
the campaign of Bussaco in the preceding year. The third advantage was
that to draw Marmont into Leon separated him from Soult by the whole
breadth of central Spain, and disconnected the operations of the two
main French forces. For the Army of the North was a less formidable
body than the Army of Andalusia, because it was scattered over an even
greater extent of territory. Nor were its distractions less than those
of Soult: the Galicians and Asturians, Longa, Porlier, and Mina, and
all the guerrilleros of Old Castile, were in existence to keep this
French force constantly harassed. In their way they were more effective
as irritants than Blake, Ballasteros, and the Murcians had proved to be
in the south.

  [688] See the all-important dispatch of July 18, in which these
  three points are set forth. _Dispatches_, vii. 118.

Wellington was not at this moment, the end of July, aware that the Army
of the North was about to receive reinforcements, which would make
it far more formidable in the autumn. He could not yet know that the
divisions of Souham, Reille, and Caffarelli were about to be thrown
across the Pyrenees, and that the first of them would be in the front
line during the operations of September. Even by August he was only
aware in a vague fashion[689] that more French troops were expected at
Vittoria from Bayonne, and supposed them to be about 10,000 or 11,000
strong[690], while they were really three full divisions of over 30,000
men. By the end of the month he was better informed--but by that time
his operations had begun, and it was too late to make a change[691].

  [689] _Dispatches_, vii. 184: ‘I should imagine that the reports
  have some foundation.’ August 9th.

  [690] _Dispatches_, vii. p. 194. August 14th.

  [691] By August 21st he has heard that the 5th Léger and other
  new regiments from the interior of France are over the Pyrenees.
  _Dispatches_, vii. p. 215.