

Wathier’s insignificant engagement on the lower Azava may be dealt
with first. About eight in the morning the pickets of the 14th Light
Dragoons detected a strong column of cavalry coming out of Rodrigo,
and were forced to retire from Carpio and other posts beyond the
stream. The enemy could be counted from the hills above, and it was
noted that they left six squadrons beside Carpio in reserve, and were
advancing with eight more. These crossed the river and felt their way
cautiously towards the heights. They were coming straight against the
front of the 6th Division, and Graham sent out the light companies of
Hulse’s brigade to line the wood which covered the position which he
was holding. The two British cavalry regiments (14th and 16th Light
Dragoons) gave back to the edge of the wood also, and formed up close
to their infantry supports. Misliking the look of the long belt of
trees which hid all from him, Wathier halted four squadrons more on the
flat ground just beyond the Azava, and moved the other four towards
Graham’s unseen line. This advanced guard consisted of the Lancers
of Berg and the 26th _Chasseurs_. When they were feeling their way
up the slope their leading squadron was charged and driven back by a
squadron of the 14th. The main body, however, picked up the beaten unit
and advanced again: when they had got close to the wood, the light
companies of the 11th, 61st, and 53rd fired a volley into them, and
while they stood staggered by the unexpected salute four squadrons
of the 14th and 16th charged them, broke them, and chased them for
two miles down to and across the Azava[720]. The French reserve left
close to that stream retired at once, covering the broken squadrons.
The French lost one officer and ten men killed, and five officers
and thirty-two men taken, mostly wounded. The British loss was very
small--an officer and ten men wounded and one man missing.

  [720] This was the first time on which the British cavalry fought
  lancers (at Albuera it was only infantry which were charged by
  the Poles). Tomkinson of the 14th reports (_Diary_, p. 115):
  ‘They looked well and formidable till they were broken and closed
  with by our men, and then their lances were an encumbrance....
  Many caught in the appointments of other men, and pulled them to
  the ground.’

Wathier stayed in line at Carpio, without making a further advance,
till evening, and reported that the English were in position with all
arms beyond the Azava, and not inclined to give way. This was important
news, for, if there were infantry so far north, it was clear that
Wellington had not yet concentrated his army on the Fuente Guinaldo
line.

Montbrun’s reconnaissance, along the Fuente Guinaldo road, turned
out a much more lively and important affair. He started out with a
heavy column consisting of two brigades of his own dragoons and two
of light cavalry[721], which came into touch with the vedettes of
Alten’s brigade almost the moment that it had crossed the Agueda,
for the British outposts lay within two miles of Rodrigo. Driving
straight before him, Montbrun pierced the screen, and pressing up the
slope found himself in the middle of the scattered fractions of the
3rd Division, which Wellington had only just begun to draw together
when he saw that the reconnaissance was being made by no less than
2,500 horse. There was not time to concentrate, because the posts of
Picton’s battalions were too close to the enemy, and the position was
unsatisfactory. Graham, who had surveyed it a few weeks before, remarks
in his diary that it was ‘by no means favourable--extensive, yet very
narrow, and the right thrown back across the plain towards the ford by
Pastores, where there is little advantage of ground but a bank and a
little water-run[722].’