

  [718] According to Marmont (_Mémoires_, iv. p. 63) only one
  division, Thiébault’s, actually entered the town.

Wellington was so far right in his judgement of the enemy’s designs,
that it was true that Marmont had come forward without any definite
intention of forcing on a fight, or of advancing far into Portugal. His
subsequent offensive move, however, was provoked by his discovery that
the allied army was quite close to him, but wholly unconcentrated. On
the morning of the 25th it occurred to the Marshal that it would be
desirable to find out by reconnaissance whether Wellington had been
making any provision for a regular siege of Ciudad Rodrigo--whether he
had been collecting fascines and gabions in the neighbouring villages,
or had brought up heavy artillery close to his blockading line[719].
If this should turn out to be the case, the knowledge of it would have
a serious effect on all the future movements of the Army of Portugal.
For a siege is a different thing from a blockade, and, if Rodrigo were
in danger of actual leaguer, his own army would have to canton itself
in regions less remote from the Portuguese frontier than those which it
had hitherto occupied.

  [719] This reason for his great reconnaissances of September 25th
  is the only one given by Marmont (_Mémoires_, iv. p. 63).

Dorsenne was persuaded to assist the Army of Portugal in a great
reconnaissance, which was to push back Wellington’s cavalry screen
and see what lay behind it. In the morning of September 25th the two
cavalry brigades of the Army of the North went out on the Carpio-Espeja
roads to sweep the line of the Azava, with Wathier in command. At
the same time Montbrun took the bulk of the cavalry of Marmont, two
brigades of dragoons and two of light horse, and advanced along the
southern road, that which runs from Ciudad Rodrigo past El Bodon
towards Fuente Guinaldo. Only one infantry division, that of Thiébault,
the weakest in the two armies, was put under arms to support the
cavalry, and even these 4,000 men did not leave the immediate vicinity
of Ciudad Rodrigo--they merely crossed the Agueda and halted. The two
reconnaissances brought on two separate engagements, at a distance of
ten miles from each other, of which one had no importance, immediate
or ulterior, while the other led to sharp fighting and revealed to the
French the weakness of Wellington’s position. The cavalry screen of
the allied army was formed as follows: Madden’s Portuguese division
lay along the line of the lower Agueda, which was not threatened this
day. Anson’s brigade held the line of the Azava, and lay across the
Carpio road. Alten’s brigade was strung out along the low hills from
south of Carpio to the upper Agueda near Pastores, and had one of its
squadrons detached with the Light Division beyond that river, in front
of Martiago. Slade’s and De Grey’s brigades were far to the rear,
behind Fuente Guinaldo, in Villar de Toro and other villages along the
Coa river, and only came up to the front after midday on the 25th.