

  [727] Arentschildt’s gunners did not suffer so much as might
  have been expected, and Wellington was inaccurate when, in his
  dispatch, he says that they were cut down at their guns. The
  Portuguese returns show that they lost only one man killed and
  four wounded.

The French at last gave up their frontal attacks; it is said that when
the trumpets blew for one more advance, the Allies saw the regiment at
the head of the column refuse to move forward. Montbrun thereupon tried
a move which he might well have made half an hour earlier; he began to
extend his hitherto concentrated brigades, and thrust one of them into
the gap between the hill that he could not force and the village of El
Bodon.

Wellington then gave back; Picton and the two battalions in El Bodon
had by this time evacuated it, and were, as ordered, on their way to
the rear. The still more compromised detachment in Pastores had also
got away, and was making for Fuente Guinaldo by a very circuitous
road: it forded the Agueda, went ten miles on its further side, where
no French were as yet visible, and then recrossed again near Robleda,
joining the 4th Division at dusk.

The second period of the combat of El Bodon--to give its usual name
to the engagement--was less bloody than the first, but quite as
exciting. Wellington’s order of retreat was that the two batteries
of Arentschildt with a cavalry escort went first, then the 21st
Portuguese, which had remained in reserve all through the earlier
fighting, then the 5th and 77th in a single square[728], and lastly two
squadrons of the German hussars, which remained on the position till
the last moment. This column, retreating along the high-road, had in
front of it, and ultimately caught up, the other fractions of the 3rd
Division, Picton’s two battalions which had come in from the right, and
the 94th, 2/83rd, and 9th Portuguese, which had fallen into the road
from the left. But in the first hour of the retreat these detachments
had not yet been overtaken.

  [728] They only made up 1,000 bayonets between them, and the
  77th, only 450 strong, would have made a very small square by
  itself.

Montbrun pressed on fiercely, the moment that he saw that the hill so
long held against him had been abandoned, and beset the retreating
column on all sides as it marched along the flat. The hussars in the
rear were driven in by overwhelming numbers, and had to retire to the
neighbourhood of the 21st Portuguese. This left the square composed
of the 5th and 77th exposed to the full force of the enemy. Montbrun
caused it to be charged on three sides at once; but the British
infantry showed no disorder, reserved their fire till the enemy was
within thirty paces, and then executed such a regular and effective
series of volleys that the dragoons were beaten off with loss, and
could not close at any point. The German squadrons then turned back and
charged them as they retired in disorder.

This repulse checked the French for half an hour, but presently they
were up again, not only hovering round the two squares, that of the
5th and 77th and that of the 21st Portuguese, which brought up the
rear, but riding all down the side of the division, which now formed
one long column of march. But they dared not charge again: Montbrun
merely brought up his horse-artillery battery, and plied the enemy
with fire from several successive positions. It was not ineffective,
but the allied infantry refused to be troubled with it, and continued
to march as hard as they could along the high-road. ‘For six miles
across a perfect flat,’ writes an eye-witness, ‘without the slightest
protection from any incident of ground, without their artillery, and
almost without cavalry (for what were five squadrons against twenty
or thirty?) did the 3rd Division continue its march. During the whole
time the French cavalry never quitted them: six guns were taking the
division in flank and rear, pouring in a shower of round shot, grape,
and canister. This was a trying and pitiable situation for troops to
be placed in, but it in no way shook their courage or confidence: so
far from being dispirited or cast down the men were cheerful and gay.
The soldiers of my own corps, the 88th, told their officers that if the
French would only charge, every officer should have a _nate_ horse to
ride upon. General Picton conducted himself with his usual coolness.
He rode on the left flank of the column, and repeatedly cautioned the
different battalions to mind their quarter-distance and the “tellings
off.” We had at last got close to the entrenched camp at Fuente
Guinaldo when Montbrun, impatient that we should escape from his grasp,
ordered his troopers to bring up their right shoulders and incline
towards our marching column. The movement was not exactly bringing his
squadrons into line, but the next thing to it, and they were within
half pistol-shot of us. Picton took off his hat, and holding it over
his eyes as a shade from the sun, looked sternly but anxiously at the
French. The clatter of the horses and the clanking of the sabres was
so great, when the right squadrons moved up, that many thought it the
preliminary to a general charge. Some mounted officer called out, “Had
we not better form square?” “No,” replied Picton, “it is only a ruse to
frighten us, and it _won’t do_.”[729]’