

  [721] That of Lamotte (1st and 3rd Hussars, 15th and 22nd
  _Chasseurs_) and that of Fournier (7th, 13th, 20th _Chasseurs_).

  [722] Graham’s diary, in his _Life_ by Delavoye, p. 577.

At the moment when Montbrun broke through the cavalry screen, Picton’s
infantry was strung out on a front of six miles--the 74th and three
companies of the 5/60th were at Pastores, near the Agueda, the
remainder of Wallace’s[723] brigade (the 1/45th and 1/88th) was three
miles south-west of Pastores in the village of El Bodon. Colville’s
brigade and the Portuguese were equally split up--the 1/5th and 77th,
with the 21st Portuguese in support, being on high ground across the
road from Rodrigo to Fuente Guinaldo, in the centre, while the left
section of the front of the division (94th, 2/83rd and 9th Portuguese)
was on lower ground, two miles west of Colville, in the direction of
Campillo. Alten’s cavalry brigade, having sent a squadron of the 11th
Light Dragoons to watch Craufurd’s front, beyond the Agueda, and having
strong pickets out to right and left, had only 500 sabres left as its
main body. These five weak squadrons (three of the 1st Hussars K.G.L.,
two of the 11th Light Dragoons) were across the high-road, near the
5th and 77th, and with them the two Portuguese batteries under Major
Arentschildt which formed the divisional artillery of Picton.

  [723] Wallace of the 88th was commanding the brigade vice
  Mackinnon, on sick leave in England.

Marmont, on discovering the scattered position of the Allies, could
hardly believe that they had nothing more in his front than what he
saw--four groups of two or three battalions each, with huge gaps
between them. He suspected that Wellington must have reserves close
behind, not thinking it likely that he would have kept infantry so
close to Ciudad Rodrigo unless he were in force to resist an attack.
He accordingly resolved not to send for his infantry from the rear and
engage in a serious action, but to direct Montbrun to drive in one
section of the hostile front with his heavy column of cavalry, and so
to discover the exact strength and position of the Allies[724]. It
was lucky for Wellington that the Marshal limited his ambitions to
this modest scheme. Montbrun resolved to break in the allied centre,
across the high-road, and advanced up it, leaving on his left the two
fractions of Wallace’s brigade in Pastores and El Bodon. If he could
pierce the centre, this wing would be in a disastrous plight, being
cut off from its line of retreat and its power of rejoining Wellington
at Fuente Guinaldo. Accordingly the whole of the French horse came up
against the position across the road, where Colville’s two battalions
and Arentschildt’s batteries blocked the way, while Alten’s five
squadrons were covering their flank. The contest was of an abnormal
sort, 2,500 horse with one battery attacking a smaller force of all
arms--1,000 infantry, 500 sabres, and two batteries[725].