

  [716] Thiébault (_Mémoires_, iv. p. 510) gives the total at
  48,000 infantry and nearly 4,000 cavalry. I imagine the real
  total to have been a little larger, about 58,000 in all. By the
  returns of the summer of 1811 the two guard-infantry divisions
  had 15,000 men, Serras’s (Thiébault’s) 4,000 men, Souham’s nearly
  8,000.

Meanwhile it remained to be seen whether the French, with the large
force that they had collected, would content themselves with throwing a
new convoy into Ciudad Rodrigo, a thing that could not be prevented, or
whether they intended to press the allied army hard, and to endeavour
to bring it to action--in which case the retreat into the hills would
become necessary. On the morning of the 23rd Wellington, perfectly
informed as to the position of the enemy, and fairly well able to
estimate their numbers, wrote to Charles Stuart, ‘the French have not
yet appeared, but I think they will before evening. I shall have my
hands very full of business for the next three or four days[717].’ They
were to be fuller than was convenient, and partly by his own fault.

  [717] Wellington to Charles Stuart, from Fuente Guinaldo,
  September 23rd. _Dispatches_, viii. p. 299.

On learning that Marmont and Dorsenne were at San Muñoz with over
50,000 men, Wellington, if he had practised his accustomed caution,
would have concentrated on Fuente Guinaldo, withdrawing the two
divisions which lay close into Ciudad Rodrigo, the Light Division at
Martiago, the 3rd Division on the heights by El Bodon and Pastores.
It would have been sufficient to leave a cavalry screen as close to
the blockaded fortress as was practicable. But for once he showed an
unwonted tendency to take dangerous risks. He did not wish to fall back
unless he were pressed, and he thought it extremely probable that the
enemy had no further design than to revictual Rodrigo. Refusing to give
up valuable ground unless he were forced to do so, he left Craufurd and
Picton in their advanced positions all through the 23rd and 24th of
September. He did not call Graham and the 1st and 6th Divisions in from
the left, where their present position on the Azava covered the road
to Almeida and the valuable accumulation of artillery stores at Villa
da Ponte. Nor did he bring up the 7th Division to his head quarters at
Fuente Guinaldo, where he lay for these two days with the 4th Division
alone.

The cavalry at the head of the French column appeared in the plain
beyond Ciudad Rodrigo on the 23rd, as Wellington had expected, and
communicated with the place. It was in no way hindered, as the British
cavalry fell back beyond the Agueda by order, and left the Salamanca
road open. On the 24th a very large force was up--observers on the
heights of Pastores saw a great mass of cavalry in the plain below
them, and four divisions of infantry, one of which was made out by
telescopes to belong to the Imperial Guard, from its high plumes and
bearskins[718]. It was presently discovered that an even larger mass
was close behind, encamped on the Guadapero stream, beyond the low
hills which lie east of Ciudad Rodrigo. But on this day the enemy,
though he had some 4,000 cavalry in his front line, made no attempt to
push forward either against Picton or against Craufurd. This quiescence
on his adversary’s part evidently made Wellington conclude that he
need fear nothing, that the French had come merely to revictual their
garrison, not to take the offensive against the allied army. He left
his divisions in the scattered posts which they were occupying, with
sixteen miles between Graham on the left and Craufurd on the right.
And he neglected the fact that his concentration point at Fuente
Guinaldo was only fifteen miles from Ciudad Rodrigo, where the leading
section of the French army, over 20,000 strong as he had seen, was
already encamped. If it should march suddenly forward on the 25th, the
3rd Division was only five miles from its outposts, on the heights of
Pastores and El Bodon, and there was no other division save the 4th
placed directly to cover Fuente Guinaldo. If the flank divisions were
called in on an alarm, Graham was fifteen miles from Fuente Guinaldo,
Craufurd eleven, on the other side of a river with few fords. And
by the time that they could concentrate, the French van might be
supported by the large reserves which were known to be lying behind
Ciudad Rodrigo. It is one of the best-known axioms of war that the
concentration point of a scattered army must not be within one short
march of the base from which the opponent can strike.