

  [732] Marmont, in his _Mémoires_, iv. p. 65, says that he sent
  for Thiébault’s division when Montbrun was checked, but ‘l’ordre,
  envoyé lentement, fut exécuté plus lentement encore,’ and
  Thiébault only appeared at nightfall. The general himself gives
  the explanation (_Mémoires_, iv): the French right (i. e. the
  wing towards Carpio) seeming to be menaced, ‘they sent me off to
  a point where no enemy was to be found.’

Wellington’s position at Fuente Guinaldo was therefore very hazardous.
When night fell on the 25th he had only assembled in the half-finished
entrenchments the 3rd and 4th Divisions, Pack’s independent Portuguese
brigade, and the cavalry of Alten, De Grey, and Slade, or about
15,000 men. He had sent orders to the other fractions of his army to
concentrate there, but it was certain that some, and possible that
others, of them would not get up on the morning of the 26th. The
concentration orders had gone out too late. Graham was directed to
unite the 1st and 6th Divisions and McMahon’s Portuguese at Nava de
Aver, abandoning the lower Azava to a rearguard composed of Anson’s
cavalry. He was, as he wrote to his brother-in-law Cathcart, ‘amazingly
relieved’ to have permission to draw in towards the centre[733]; but
the orders came late and did not go far enough--at Nava de Aver, which
he reached at noon on the 26th, he had 13,000 men collected, but he was
still twelve miles from Fuente Guinaldo, and the road to that point by
Puebla de Azava was not out of reach of molestation by the French. It
was only in the afternoon that he received a second dispatch, telling
him not to move on Fuente Guinaldo, but to get behind the Villar Mayor
stream, and march by a circuitous route, through Villar Mayor and
Bismula, to join the main army at a point more to the rear[734]. The
Commander-in-Chief had resolved to evacuate Fuente Guinaldo.

  [733] Graham to Cathcart, in his _Life_ by Delavoye, p. 598.

  [734] Graham’s diary, ibid., August 26.

Thus, by his own fault, Wellington was short of two divisions and a
brigade from his left, in the perilous afternoon hours of the 26th.
And on his right also he was weak, owing to the fact that he had
deliberately left Craufurd upon the Vadillo, beyond the Azava, till the
25th. At the moment when the combat of El Bodon began, tardy directions
were sent to Craufurd to move the Light Division to join the army, by
the ford of Carros, near Robleda, high up the Azava. For it was no
longer possible for him to use the easy passage by the ford of Zamorra,
close under Pastores, since the French had gained possession of it when
they thrust the 3rd Division southward. Craufurd, leaving only cavalry
pickets along the Vadillo river, retreated that night to Cespedosa, a
few miles south of his former post at Martiago. But he refused to make
a night march to the ford of Carros, because the road was rough and
difficult, and he thought it likely that his column might get astray
and that some or all of his baggage might be lost[735]. Very possibly
he was right, but the result of his not starting from Cespedosa till
the dawn of the 26th was that, all through the long morning hours and
early afternoon of that day, he was not in line at Fuente Guinaldo,
where his chief wished to have him. He only got there, after a
fatiguing march of 16 miles along the upper Agueda and over the ford
of Carros, at four o’clock, when dusk was drawing near[736]. Meanwhile
Marmont had been, for all the day, in a position to attack Wellington
with very superior numbers.