

  [729] Memoirs of Grattan of the 88th, pp. 116-17.

Montbrun’s bolt, indeed, was shot. For by this time troops were coming
out from Fuente Guinaldo to cover the retreating division, De Grey’s
heavy dragoons, who had just come up from the Coa, at the head of them.
The French horse slackened their pace, and finally drew off. Half an
hour later the retreating column had taken up its destined position in
the half-completed entrenched camp where the 4th Division was awaiting
it.

This long straggling fight cost the Allies only 149 casualties. The
cavalry had lost 70 men[730] in their long fight to hold the hill,
which they so long guarded, on the flank. Of the infantry the 1/5th
and 77th had lost 42 men, not by the sabres of the cavalry whom they
had driven off so serenely, but by the artillery fire which followed.
The other eight infantry battalions of the 3rd Division, British and
Portuguese, had lost only 34 men in all, mostly, it is to be presumed,
by the cannonade during the retreat. The Portuguese gunners had only 5
men hurt--a light loss considering that the enemy’s dragoons had been
among their pieces for five minutes.

  [730] 1st Hussars K.G.L. 5 killed, 2 officers and 32 men wounded,
  5 men missing; 11th Light Dragoons 8 killed, 2 officers and 14
  men wounded.

Montbrun’s loss is nowhere accurately stated, but was probably about
200 at the least. Thirteen officers had been hit in the four brigades
engaged, and though cavalry was more heavily officered in proportion to
its numbers than infantry, we can hardly suppose that where 13 officers
fell less than 190 rank and file were killed or wounded[731].

  [731] According to Martinien’s invaluable lists, the 25th
  Dragoons lost 3 officers, the 22nd _Chasseurs_ 4, the 6th and
  15th Dragoons 2 each, the 8th and 10th Dragoons 1 each.

Wellington was lucky to have paid no greater price for his rash
maintenance of a position so dangerously close to the walls of Ciudad
Rodrigo. If Marmont had brought up infantry close behind his great
cavalry force, the 3rd Division would have suffered far more; it
might even have been destroyed. But there was, as we have seen, only
one French infantry division under arms on the morning of the 25th,
that of Thiébault. Three more were encamped beyond Rodrigo, the rest
were still some miles to the rear, halting by the Guadapero river.
Marmont sent for Thiébault, when he had discovered the position and the
weakness of Picton’s scattered brigades. But, luckily for the British,
Dorsenne had also dispatched orders to this division, which formed part
of his own Army of the North. He had been alarmed at the strength of
the Allies on the Azava, which Wathier had discovered, and had told
Thiébault to march to his right and support the cavalry on the Carpio
road. When Masséna’s aide-de-camp arrived, to hurry up this infantry,
it was found to have gone off some miles to the north-west; and though
promptly recalled it did not reach the ground in front of Fuente
Guinaldo till late in the evening. Deprived of Thiébault’s battalions
by this chance--one of the many results of a divided command--Marmont
summoned up the three divisions which lay on the other side of Rodrigo.
Not having been warned for service on this day, they took some time
to get under arms, and more to file over the narrow bridge over the
Agueda. They only reached and joined the Marshal and Montbrun a short
time before Thiébault arrived. Thus all day Marmont had no infantry
in hand, with which to support his cavalry[732]. But at nightfall he
had 20,000 bayonets at the front, and the five rear divisions, left
hitherto on the Guadapero, were also coming up, and had reached and
passed the Agueda. There would be nearly 60,000 men at the front by
noon on the 26th.