

  [715] Brigades of Pack and MacMahon, with the other five brigades
  incorporated in the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th Divisions, and two
  weak cavalry brigades under Madden. See tables in Appendix XX.

Meanwhile Wellington did not intend to retire on Guinaldo, much less
on the Rendo-Alfayates position, unless he were forced to do so. He
thought it likely that Marmont and Dorsenne would content themselves
with relieving Rodrigo, and would push no further. Wherefore he
directed that Picton and Craufurd, the generals in command of the
two blockading divisions, should leave the Salamanca road open, when
the French appeared in strength, but should not give back from the
immediate neighbourhood of the fortress unless they were attacked in
force. Craufurd might get behind the Vadillo, a torrent which falls
into the Agueda five miles above Rodrigo. Picton was to occupy the
isolated plateau on which lie the villages of El Bodon and Pastores,
five or six miles south of Rodrigo. Here they were to stand, and
to see what the enemy intended to do; probably they would have to
retreat no further. This disposition, which was founded on a false
psychological estimate of the character of Marmont, was to lead
to trouble. The Marshal was more enterprising than Wellington had
calculated, and (as affairs turned out) it would have been safer to
concentrate the whole army on the Fuente Guinaldo position the moment
that the Armies of Portugal and the North appeared in front of Ciudad
Rodrigo.




SECTION XXIX: CHAPTER II

EL BODON AND ALDEA DA PONTE. SEPTEMBER 1811


The long-threatened advance of the French for the relief of Ciudad
Rodrigo began at last on September 22nd, when Marmont brought all
the infantry of the Army of Portugal, save the single division of
Foy, across the Sierra de Gata, and appeared with his vanguard at
Tamames, the little town on the Leonese side of the mountains where
del Parque had beaten Marchand in 1809. Foy alone had been left in New
Castile, with orders to demonstrate from his base at Plasencia against
Wellington’s posts between Castello Branco and Sabugal, where (as it
will be remembered) the 5th Division was lying, placed on this side
for the express purpose of warding off any attempt to strike at the
communications of the allied army.

On the day that Marmont with five divisions of infantry and Montbrun’s
cavalry began to debouch from Tamames, his colleague Dorsenne had
brought forward the disposable portion of the Army of the North to
San Muñoz, a long march in front of Salamanca, and was in easy touch
with the Army of Portugal. Dorsenne had concentrated four divisions of
infantry--the two of the Imperial Guard under Roguet and Dumoustier,
Souham’s newly arrived battalions, and the division so long commanded
by Serras, but now under General Thiébault, the governor of Salamanca,
which had been lying about the Esla and the Orbigo ever since 1809. He
had also with him two brigades of cavalry, Lepic’s 800 sabres of the
Imperial Guard, and Wathier’s _chasseurs_. The two armies joined on the
23rd, and showed a formidable total, larger than that which Masséna had
collected for the battle of Fuentes de Oñoro. For Marmont had brought
25,000 foot and over 2,500 horse, and Dorsenne a slightly larger
contingent, about 27,000 infantry and 2,000 sabres[716]. This heavy
force of 58,000 men, if artillery be reckoned in, was, as Wellington
had always foreseen, more than the Anglo-Portuguese army could face.
For including the division south of the Sierra de Gata, which was
protecting the southern communications of the army, Wellington had
with him as we have seen no more than 2,200 British and 900 Portuguese
cavalry, about 25,000 British and 16,000 Portuguese infantry, or a
total strength (including artillery, &c.) of about 46,000 officers and
men of all arms. The risk of fighting in the open plain in front of
Ciudad Rodrigo would clearly be too great, though by a retreat into
the Portuguese mountains it would be possible to find a position which
should compensate for the numerical deficiency of the allied army.
If the French should press forward, it would clearly be necessary to
retire on to better battle-ground, and Wellington’s ready eye had found
two successive positions, as we have already stated, the one at Fuente
Guinaldo on the foot-hills, the other between Rendo and Aldea Velha, in
front of Sabugal, well within the mountains.