

  [724] ‘Comme la position des Anglais était très dominante, je
  ne pouvais juger quelles forces ils avaient en arrière: il
  était possible que ses premières troupes fussent soutenues par
  d’autres. Ne voulant pas risquer un engagement sérieux, en les
  faisant attaquer par la seule division d’infanterie qui fût à
  portée [Thiébault], je pris le parti de n’employer à l’attaque
  que de la cavalerie et de l’artillerie. Si l’ennemi était en
  force, elle en serait quitte pour se retirer.’ (_Mémoires_, iv.
  p. 64.)

  [725] Not counting the 21st Portuguese, which came up later, and
  was not engaged in the actual combat.

It was most important to Wellington that the detachment across the road
should not be driven in, and he gave orders that it was to hold its
ground to the last possible minute, in order to allow the battalions in
Pastores and El Bodon time to escape from their compromised position,
and to fall into the line of retreat behind the detaining force. His
command was well obeyed, and a most gallant struggle was kept up for
more than an hour, under the Commander-in-Chief’s own eyes.

Montbrun came on with three columns abreast, each formed of a brigade,
while a fourth brigade formed his reserve. His left column tried to
turn the right of Alten’s cavalry, his centre column attacked its
front, his right column, supported by a horse-artillery battery,
moved up against the Portuguese guns and their infantry supports.
There was fierce fighting all along the line: the allied horse, aided
by the steep slope in their favour, made a wonderful fight against
the superior numbers of the enemy, who had to attack in each point
on a narrow front, since only parts of the hillside were open ground
suitable for cavalry movements. Each time that the leading French
squadron neared the crest it was charged and thrown back. The 11th and
one squadron of the Germans dealt with the flank attack, the rest of
the legionary hussars with that in the centre. The defence was most
desperate, consisting in a long series of partial charges, in which one
or more of the defending squadrons beat back the head of the hostile
advance, and then retired under cover of the others. Montbrun, having
six or seven regiments with him, was always able to launch a new attack
up the hillside the moment that the last had been foiled. The colonel
of the German hussars wrote that from first to last the enemy came
on nearly forty times, yet never was allowed to reach the crest: the
individual squadrons of his regiment and of the 11th had charged eight
or nine times each[726].

  [726] The best account of this fine skirmish, carefully
  constructed from original authorities, is in Schwertfeger’s
  _History of the German Legion_, i. 337-9.

Meanwhile, to the right of the plateau which the cavalry defended so
gallantly, the third French cavalry column had attacked the Portuguese
batteries whose fire was sweeping down the road. A dragoon brigade,
though suffering heavily from the grape poured into it as the range
grew close, succeeded in making its way to the guns, and burst in among
them, capturing four pieces; the artillerymen had held their ground
to the last, and earned Wellington’s praise for their steadiness.
But the pieces were not lost; close in support of them was the first
battalion of the 5th regiment under Major Ridge, who, when the hostile
horsemen halted for a moment around the captured guns, attacked them
without hesitation in line. The battalion advanced firing, and with
three volleys broke the dragoons, who were blown with their charge and
in much disorder. They recoiled down the hill in complete rout, and
the Portuguese gunners were able to get their pieces in action again
and resume their very effective fire[727]. This was a rare example of
a successful attack on cavalry by infantry in line: it could not have
been tried against intact squadrons, for there was no flank-support for
the 5th, and an enemy in good order would have turned the battalion
and cut it up from the side. But Ridge saw that the French were in
complete disarray, and unfit for the moment to manœuvre, wherefore he
was justified in trying the dangerous-looking movement which had such
complete success.