

Wathier halted facing Aldea da Ponte, till Thiébault came up and
assumed the command, being senior to the cavalry general. Seeing that
the village was worth having, Thiébault resolved to attack it, and
drove out the light companies of the Fusilier brigade by an advance
of the three battalions of the 34th Léger, one of which cleared the
village while the other two turned it on each flank. Wellington,
observing that the enemy had only a single division on the ground,
refused to allow Aldea da Ponte to be so lightly lost, and sent against
the French the whole Fusilier brigade in line, flanked by a Portuguese
regiment in column. This advance forced Thiébault’s first brigade back
from the village, and thrust it northward some way upon the road.
Here the French rallied upon their second brigade, and formed up with
Wathier’s horse in support. Wellington would not push them further, and
contented himself with having recovered Aldea da Ponte and the junction
of the roads[740].

  [740] Thiébault, in his elaborate account of the skirmish
  (_Mémoires_, iv. pp. 522-5), says that he did not lose
  Aldea da Ponte, but I prefer to take Wellington’s definite
  statement that he did, supported by those of Vere (the
  Assistant-Quartermaster-General of the 4th Division) and Lord
  Londonderry--both eye-witnesses.

At dusk, however, Montbrun and Souham came up and joined Thiébault,
with the column which had followed the Furcalhos road. Souham
determined to try again the attack in which Thiébault had been
checked, and assailed Aldea da Ponte just as the light was failing.
The Fusiliers were driven out of the village, and Wellington refused
to reinforce them, or to allow them to make a second counter-attack,
because he did not wish to get entangled in heavy fighting in the
dark, or to expend many lives upon keeping a place which was outside
his line, and formed no essential part of it. There had been much
skirmishing all through the afternoon between Slade’s two cavalry
regiments and Wathier’s _chasseurs_, in which neither party had any
appreciable losses, nor gained any marked advantage.

The Anglo-Portuguese casualties in this rearguard action were just
100, of which 71 were in the Fusilier brigade, 13 in the Portuguese
battalions which had covered its flank, and 10 in Slade’s cavalry.
Thiébault says that he lost 150 men, a very probable estimate[741];
he adds that the British lost 500, and that he was engaged against
17,000 allied troops--which, considering that he fought no one save the
three battalions of the Fusilier brigade, one regiment of Portuguese,
and Slade’s horse--3,300 sabres and bayonets--seems sufficiently
astounding. It may serve as a fair example of his method of dealing
with figures.

  [741] Thirty killed and 120 wounded. Martinien’s lists show 7
  casualties among officers of Thiébault’s regiments (3 in the
  34th Léger, 3 in the regiment of Neuchâtel, 1 in the 4th of the
  Vistula). This at the average rate of 20 or 22 officers per
  man seems just right. By a tiresome misprint Thiébault speaks
  of himself as commanding the 31st Léger in many places. It was
  really the 34th. The 31st was in the Army of Portugal, not in
  that of the North.