

  [744] Thiébault’s feelings were much hurt at the skirmish being
  called a ‘scuffle.’ ‘Il se permit de dire que mon combat de la
  veille était une échauffourée. Je ne rappelle le mot que pour
  peindre l’arrogance d’un de ces hommes à qui leur titre de
  Maréchal défendait d’admettre aucun mérite en dehors d’eux-mêmes’
  (_Mémoires_, iv. 528).

After retiring to Ciudad Rodrigo Marmont and Dorsenne parted company
on October 1st, and each dispersed his troops into cantonments. The
Army of Portugal recrossed the Sierra de Gata, and was distributed
by divisions in the same regions of New Castile that it had occupied
in September. On returning to his head quarters at Talavera, Marmont
received the report of Foy, commanding the only section of his army
which had not taken part in the recent campaign. That general had been
ordered to demonstrate from Plasencia against Wellington’s rear during
the revictualling of Ciudad Rodrigo. With six battalions and a regiment
of light cavalry, about 2,800 men, he had taken the direction of the
pass of Perales. He reached Moraleja at the foot of the mountains, near
Coria, on September 27th, the day of the combat of Aldea da Ponte.
Next morning he started to ascend the Sierra, and his advanced guard
got to Payo on the 29th. There it was discovered that Marmont and
Dorsenne had abandoned the offensive, and started on their retreat for
Ciudad Rodrigo on the 28th, so that no French troops were anywhere in
the neighbourhood, while Wellington’s whole army was near Alfayates,
only fifteen miles away. Fearing to be discovered and overwhelmed, Foy
returned to Plasencia by forced marches: his demonstration had been
some days too late to be of any use. If he had appeared in the Perales
pass on the 25th, while the 5th Division was still holding Payo,
Wellington would have had to keep that force detached to protect his
flank, and could not have withdrawn it to join the rest of his army on
the Alfayates-Rendo position. But Foy came up only when the campaign
was over, and his movements had no effect whatever.

The best commentary on this five days of manœuvring between El Bodon
and Alfayates is that of the war-tried veteran Graham. ‘It was very
pretty--but spun rather fine. Had the enemy behaved with common spirit
on the 26th, we should not have got away so easily from Guinaldo. I
should have preferred, after it was ascertained that the enemy’s force
(54,000 infantry and 6,000 horse) was too formidable to be attacked
beyond the Agueda, drawing back our infantry to the ultimate position
(Aldea Velha, Alfayates, Rendo) which could have been made infinitely
stronger during the interval. There would have been no risk whatever,
nor any appearance to the troops of retreat. The enemy, as you can see,
might have amused us before Fuente Guinaldo, and, by a night march
from Ciudad Rodrigo, have massed at San Felices, and so have crossed
the river in force by the plain of Fuentes de Oñoro. Then, pushing on
rapidly by Nava de Aver, he would have tumbled us back in confusion.
I thought this would have been his course, from his superiority in
cavalry and artillery--all that country is like Newmarket Heath for
galloping across. However, all is well that ends well[745]!’