

  [745] Graham to Cathcart, in Delavoye’s _Life of Lord Lynedoch_,
  p. 599.

The fact is that Wellington on the 25th made one of his rare slips.
He judged that Marmont would not advance beyond Ciudad Rodrigo, and
so left his troops dispersed along a vast front. When, contrary to
his expectation, his enemy fell upon the 3rd Division, and pushed it
back to Fuente Guinaldo, the chosen concentration point of the Allied
army, he was for twenty-four hours in the gravest danger. For if
Marmont had struck hard again at noon on the 26th, there was no mass
of troops collected to oppose him. Craufurd and Graham would have been
driven off sideways on eccentric lines of retreat, and the 3rd and 4th
Divisions must surely have suffered considerable loss in the hasty
retreat to Alfayates which would have been forced upon them. For on the
26th Marmont would not have been handicapped, as he was on the 25th,
by having no infantry at the front to assist his numerous and daring
cavalry. It may be added that, if the army had failed to concentrate at
Alfayates, Almeida would have been in danger, and what was still more
important, Dickson’s great siege-train at Villa da Ponte would have
been exposed--unless indeed Graham, driven away from his proper line of
movement, might have moved westward and covered it. But speculations as
to the merely possible are fruitless.




SECTION XXIX: CHAPTER III

THE END OF WELLINGTON’S CAMPAIGNS OF 1811. ARROYO DOS MOLINOS.
SEPTEMBER 1811


The moment that he had satisfied himself that the French were all in
full retreat, and were clearly about to disperse to their old garrisons
and cantonments, Wellington also broke up the army which had been
lying on the Alfayates-Rendo position. On the 29th September Graham
received orders to retire with the 1st and 6th Divisions to regular
winter quarters in the interior of Beira, about Guarda, Celorico, and
Freixadas. The 7th Division was sent southward to Penamacor. But the
3rd, 4th, and Light Divisions returned to the frontier of Spain, to
establish the same sort of distant blockade (or rather observation) of
Ciudad Rodrigo, which they had been keeping up in August and September.
The Light Division once more crossed the Agueda, and occupied its
old position at Martiago and Zamorra. The 4th Division watched the
Agueda from Gallegos to Barba del Puerco[746]; the 3rd Division, in
reserve behind the other two, was cantoned at Aldea da Ponte and Fuente
Guinaldo. The three light cavalry brigades of Anson, Alten, and Slade
took in turns the charge of covering the front of the Light and 4th
Divisions along the Agueda; the two brigades not on duty were kept
twenty miles to the rear, about Freixadas, Goveias, and Castel Mendo.
De Grey’s heavy dragoons and the head quarters of the cavalry division
were close behind, at Alverca. Soon after the line of observation along
the Agueda had been taken up, Wellington found it possible to send
cavalry pickets forward to Tenebron and Santi Espiritus, on the other
side of the Agueda, so as to block the road between Ciudad Rodrigo and
Salamanca. But these were mere posts occupied by half a troop--there
was no intention of risking any serious force in such advanced
positions. Meanwhile a more effective hindrance to communication
between Rodrigo and Salamanca was provided. Julian Sanchez and his
guerrilleros were pushed forward to their old haunts along the Yeltes,
and overran the whole country-side. Carlos de España’s Spanish infantry
brigade also recrossed the Agueda, and took up a forward position
facing Ledesma.