

Dorsenne meanwhile executed a similar dispersion of his army. He left
at Salamanca only Thiébault’s division, strengthened by some light
cavalry, and one brigade of Souham’s[748]. The other troops that he
had taken to Ciudad Rodrigo in September were sent back to Valladolid,
Benavente, Palencia, and other posts in the valley of the Douro. The
Army of the North ceased to threaten either Portugal or Galicia:
but there was one task that it had to execute in order to replace
itself in the position that it had held in the summer. Napoleon had
protested at the time against the evacuation of the central Asturias
and Oviedo by Bonnet’s division, and had ordered that this region
should be reoccupied as soon as was possible. The troops told off for
its invasion were the same which had held it during the last twelve
months, the division of Bonnet. To support their movement through the
pass of Pajares, Dorsenne took to Leon one of his two divisions of
the Guard, placing the other at Valladolid. Thiébault’s and Souham’s
divisions alone were left in front line, facing towards Portugal and
Galicia. Bonnet’s expedition against the Asturias was executed with
complete success; indeed it met with hardly any opposition. General
Losada, who had occupied Oviedo after its evacuation, with the 1st
Division of the Army of Galicia, judged himself too weak to fight. He
abandoned the pass of Pajares after a mere skirmish, and made hardly a
greater effort to defend the passage of the Nalon, withdrawing westward
towards Galicia as the French advanced. Bonnet occupied Oviedo on the
6th of November without any fighting, and its port of Gijon on the
7th. Finding that Losada had retreated behind the Narcea, he sent a
brigade under Colonel Gauthier to pursue him. This column reached
Tineo on November 12th, but soon had to retire, for the Spaniards
had scattered themselves in small bands among the mountains, and had
turned back to attack Gauthier’s line of communication with Oviedo,
as well as that between Oviedo and the pass of Pajares. Bonnet found
that to maintain himself in the central Asturias was all that was in
his power. He could not at the same time provide garrisons for Oviedo,
Gijon, and the neighbouring places, and also put in the field a force
strong enough to menace Galicia. In fact his fine division of 8,000
men was practically immobilized in the district that it had seized. It
is more than doubtful whether the Emperor was wise to direct that the
central Asturias should be once more occupied. He deprived the Army of
the North of one of its five fighting divisions, and left the force
holding Leon and Old Castile too weak to restrain Wellington, when it
had at the same time to contain the Army of Galicia and to hunt all
the Spanish irregular forces. Julian Sanchez in the plains of Leon,
and Porlier and Longa in the mountains of Cantabria, were enemies
whom it was impossible to neglect. If left alone they executed feats
of great daring--it will be remembered that the former had surprised
and captured Santander in August[749], and though his ventures in
the autumn were less fortunate, they kept many hostile columns busy.
Sanchez, on October 15th, executed a very ingenious _coup de main_.
The garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo possessed a herd of cattle, which was
habitually sent under guard to graze a mile or two from the ramparts.
Watching his opportunity, on a day when the governor, Renaud, was
inspecting the beasts, he swooped down on him, and carried him off with
his escort and his cattle, though they were barely out of cannon-shot
of the fortress. Thiébault, who commanded in the province of Salamanca,
had great difficulty in getting into Ciudad Rodrigo General Barrié,
whom he chose as Renaud’s successor (November 1st, 1811).