

  [748] Afterwards replaced by one brigade of Dumoustier’s division
  of the Imperial Guard.

  [749] See p. 472.

Between the Tagus, therefore, and the Bay of Biscay matters had
come once more to a deadlock after the short campaign of September
24th-29th, 1811. For the following three months neither the Allies nor
the French made any serious movement, with the exception of Bonnet’s
invasion of the central Asturias. The main armies on both sides were
dispersed. Wellington, with his troops distributed into cantonments,
was waiting his opportunity for another and more effective blow at
Ciudad Rodrigo; Dorsenne was striving to put down the guerrilleros,
by hunting them ineffectually with many small columns--a task which
he found more difficult now that he was deprived of Bonnet’s powerful
division. Marmont, with his troops dispersed from Plasencia to Toledo,
was practically waiting on Wellington’s movements, and showed no
signs of wishing to take the offensive. His quiescence was not in
the least affected by an Imperial dispatch sent from Compiègne on
September 18th, which reached him shortly after his return to the
valley of the Tagus[750]. In this document a most ambitious plan of
operations was proposed to him. Berthier explained that the Emperor
took it for granted that Ciudad Rodrigo would have been revictualled
for three months before October 1st, and that the Army of Portugal
would have received the cavalry drafts which General Vandermaesen was
bringing from the north[751]. When these had arrived Marmont would have
41,000 men present with the colours. Let him march with this force
into Estremadura, pick up Drouet and the 5th Corps, which should
be placed under his orders, and lay siege to Elvas. Soult should be
asked to find him 3,000 cavalry, and he would have a force of 57,000
men, which would be more than Wellington would be able to face. For
if the English general hurried to save Elvas, a course which he was
almost bound to take, he would probably leave two divisions in front
of Almeida to ‘contain’ Dorsenne and the Army of the North. Though he
would pick up instead the corps of Hill, which had so long been lying
in the Alemtejo, yet he would still have no more than 45,000 men of
all nations, even including Castaños’s Spanish levies. This would not
be enough to cope with 57,000 French: if Wellington fought he would
be beaten; if he did not, he would lose Elvas, the most important
fortress of Portugal. ‘This is the only movement, M. le Maréchal,
which can bring back honour to our arms, free us from the defensive
attitude in which we lie, strike terror into the English, and take us
a step forward to the end of the war.... The prospect of capturing a
great fortress under the eyes of the English army, of conquering a
province of Portugal which covers our Army of the South, of uniting to
your forces 25,000 men of that army [the 5th Corps and the cavalry]
should serve you as incentives for glory and success.’ Berthier then
grants that it is just possible that Wellington may refuse to march
to the relief of Elvas, and reply to the menace against that fortress
by invading Leon and falling upon Dorsenne, who would be too weak to
face him. If he does this, the Army of the North may retire first to
Salamanca, then to Valladolid, then even to Burgos. At the latter
point, having called in all its detachments, it would be 50,000 strong,
and able to ‘contain’ the allied forces, even if Wellington had brought
forward every available man. But Marmont might take it for granted that
his adversary would do nothing of the kind: he would hurry south to
save Elvas and cover his base at Lisbon. If he left no troops behind
him on the Coa, Dorsenne should dispatch 15,000 men of the Army of the
North to Estremadura, and bring up the force before Elvas to a total of
62,000 men, a number which Wellington could not possibly resist. Elvas
must infallibly fall. Only one caution was added to this scheme of
campaign: Marmont must be sure that Wellington had not a siege-train
at Almeida, or any other place near Ciudad Rodrigo. For if he were to
answer the French movement on Elvas by laying formal siege to Rodrigo,
Dorsenne would not be strong enough to prevent him from taking it, and
the Army of Portugal would have to turn back to the rescue from its
distant position in the Alemtejo.