

  [738] Thiébault, _Mémoires_, iv. p. 66.

There is an amusing picture of Marmont’s hesitation drawn by General
Thiébault in his clever but malicious autobiography. In this a very
different rôle is attributed to the commander of the Army of the
North: ‘At nine o’clock the Marshal and General Dorsenne rode to the
front with their glittering staffs. The troops were put under arms
at once. But the great men descended from their horses and got out
telescopes, with which they began to study the English position. “Yes,”
began the Marshal, determined to see that which was not visible, as
he peered through the large glass balanced on the shoulder of one of
his aides-de-camp, “Yes, my information was correct. The right of
the English line is flanked by an inaccessible declivity.” General
Dorsenne and I had excellent telescopes, but we could not see any such
precipice. Dorsenne told the Marshal as much. Taking no notice of his
remark, Marmont continued, “The whole camp is protected by closed
redoubts.” Dorsenne, after exchanging some words with me, replied
that he could only make out a few points at which earthworks had been
thrown up. The Marshal, ignoring the observations of his interlocutor,
went on, “And, just as I have been told, these closed redoubts are
armed with heavy guns of position forwarded from Almeida. Nothing can
be done[739].” He forthwith adjourned his reconnoitring, and invited
the generals to a heavy and sumptuous meal, served on silver plate in
front of the line. After the feast Montbrun remarked, “The English
position is impregnable--the thing that proves it so is that Wellington
is offering us battle upon it. We shall never make an end of him by
running at him head down; that would have no good result.” Marmont soon
after delivered his decision that Rodrigo, having been relieved, and
the position of the English being too strong, he intended to advance no
further, and should retire next day.’

  [739] Marmont, _Mémoires_, iv. pp. 513-14.

If Thiébault’s report of Montbrun’s words and Marmont’s attitude be
correct, it is clear that Wellington had by mere ‘bluffing’ brought
the enemy to a standstill. He was using the reputation for caution
which he had gained in his former campaigns as a moral weapon. The
syllogism, ‘Wellington never fights save when he has his army in hand,
and has found a good position; he offers to fight now; therefore he
feels himself safe against any attack,’ seemed a legitimate logical
process to Marmont and Montbrun. So the English general had hoped; but
he did not know how entirely successful his demonstration had been;
and thought that the reconnaissance followed by a halt, which he had
observed in the morning, meant that the enemy was going to bring up
his last reserves before attacking. The rear divisions of the Army
of Portugal were seen to arrive in the French lines when the day was
far spent. Wellington supposed that Marmont had been waiting for
them, and would use them for a great combined attack on the 27th. He
had no intention of awaiting it, even though the Light Division had
reached him, and instead of ordering the other absent units of his army
to close in upon Fuente Guinaldo, sent orders to them all to place
themselves in the second position, nine miles to the rear, which he had
chosen as his real battle-ground.