

  [746] There were changes in detail in November, for which see
  Vere’s _Marches of the 4th Division_, p. 21.

Thus the posture of affairs on the frontiers of Leon was restored to
the same aspect that it had displayed in the early autumn. It was clear
that when Ciudad Rodrigo again needed to be revictualled, it ought
to be necessary for the French to make another great effort, and to
concentrate once more an army of 50,000 men. Marmont had thrown a great
convoy into the place, but his calculations as to the time that these
stores would suffice to feed the garrison had been wrecked, by the fact
that his own army and that of Dorsenne had lived on the magazines of
Rodrigo for five days, and had consumed more than 200,000 rations. It
had been intended that the convoy should feed Rodrigo for six months,
but only two months’ food remained for its garrison of 2,000 men after
this enormous deduction had been made. Meanwhile Wellington thought
that there was nothing to be accomplished in the north for some time.
His ultimate design was to make a serious blow at Ciudad Rodrigo,
when he should learn that the disposition of the armies of Dorsenne
and Marmont rendered such a blow practicable. As long as they lay so
close together as to make their rapid concentration possible, he did
not intend to press matters. But two indispensable preliminaries for
the regular leaguer of Rodrigo were being perfected. Dickson’s great
siege-train was being completed at Villa da Ponte, and the repairs
to the walls of Almeida were at last finished. It was Wellington’s
intention to transfer the siege-train to Almeida when that fortress
was absolutely secure against an attack. Placed there, it would be in
a position to move up against Rodrigo in two days, when the time for
action should come. But it was not till November was far spent that
the order to move forward reached Dickson; meanwhile the roads between
Villa da Ponte, Pinhel, and Almeida were put in good order, by a corvée
levied on the local peasantry[747].

  [747] For all this see Dickson’s _Diary_, edited by Major Leslie,
  R.A., pp. 478-501. The order to start the first section of the
  siege-train for Almeida was only given on November 14. (Dickson,
  p. 505.)

The dispositions of the enemy remained the all-important factor in the
situation, and for the next two months Wellington was scrutinizing them
with the greatest care. The Army of Portugal, after it had recrossed
the Sierra de Gata, had been distributed by divisions in much the
same cantonments that it had occupied in September, save that no
force was sent to the distant southern post of Truxillo, to keep up
communications with Drouet in Estremadura. Foy’s division, which had
held that town during the early autumn, was reduced to such a state
of dilapidation, by its late march in the mountains, that Marmont
sent it to rest at Toledo, in comfortable cantonments. He replaced
it at Plasencia, its later base, by the troops of Brennier. The 2nd
Division (Clausel) occupied Avila and its province; the remaining three
divisions (Ferey, Maucune, Sarrut) settled down at Almaraz, Talavera,
Bejar, Oropesa, and the intermediate places. Montbrun’s heavy cavalry
remained near head quarters at Talavera; the light cavalry was placed
with Brennier, along the line of the Alagon, to watch the frontier of
central Portugal.