

Next morning Wellington’s line was drawn back into the position in
which he had determined to fight, with the French column at Aldea da
Ponte lying two miles in his front, on the lower ground. This position,
which was about seven miles long, was covered on either flank by the
ravine of the Coa, which here makes a deep hook or curve, with the town
of Sabugal at its point. The right wing was formed of the 5th Division,
holding the village of Aldea Velha on a steep hill by the source of
the Coa. The right-centre, which projected somewhat, was composed of
the 4th and Light Divisions ranged in front of the town of Alfayates,
close by the convent of Sacaparte[742]. From that point westward the
line was taken up by Pack’s and McMahon’s Portuguese brigades on each
side of the village of Nave. Finally, the left consisted of the 1st
and 6th Divisions under Graham, reaching from near Rendo as far as the
bridge of Rapoulla. This wing was covered in front by the ravine of a
torrent flowing into the Coa. The central reserve was formed of the 3rd
and 7th Divisions with De Grey’s and Slade’s dragoons, drawn up behind
Alfayates. Alten’s light cavalry brigade was with the Light Division,
its pickets thrown out on the Furcalhos road; Anson’s brigade was
placed in front of Nave and Bismula, with its advanced vedettes
watching the French in Aldea da Ponte. The position was well marked,
high-lying, and masked by woods and ravines. Its only fault was that
the Coa ran round its rear, with only two bridges, those of Sabugal
and Rapoulla da Coa, though there were at least six or seven fords in
addition, and the stream was low, and passable almost everywhere for
infantry. A defeat, however, would probably have meant much loss of
artillery and impedimenta, though Wellington had sent great part of
his baggage over the Coa, and detached all his Portuguese horse and
the Portuguese brigade of the 6th Division to cover its retreat. No
position is perfect, but Wellington did not think he could possibly be
evicted from this one, which was as strong as Bussaco and not nearly
so long. ‘He wished to be attacked, being confident of success,’ wrote
Graham three days later[743].

  [742] Note the curious misprint in the first line of p. 307 of
  _Wellington Dispatches_, vol. viii, of Light _Dragoons_ for
  Light _Division_. Unless the misprint is noticed, the reader
  will ask why Wellington has omitted Craufurd in describing
  his order of battle. Napier, I know not why, has altogether
  neglected to explain the distribution of the British army, in the
  short paragraph of vol. iii. p. 342 which describes this day’s
  operations.

  [743] Graham to Cathcart, October 1, in Delavoye’s _Life of Lord
  Lynedoch_, p. 598.

But his adversaries would not oblige him. After coming up to Aldea da
Ponte, and rebuking Thiébault and Souham for engaging in a profitless
skirmish on the preceding day[744], Marmont took a long survey of the
position of the allied army, and refused to advance any further. The
reasons which he had given for not attacking at Fuente Guinaldo on the
26th, when he still had a good chance of accomplishing great things,
were doubly valid on the 28th. After reasserting to Dorsenne and the
other generals that Wellington’s army was concentrated (which was now
quite true) and that his position was far too strong to be meddled
with, and adding that, even if there were a successful action, he
could not pursue Wellington into the mountains for want of food, he
gave his final orders for retreat. The main body of the army, which
had not come further forward than Fuente Guinaldo, began to retire
that same night towards Ciudad Rodrigo. The two infantry divisions at
Aldea da Ponte and the cavalry of Montbrun and Wathier brought up and
covered the rear. By the morning of the 29th the crisis was over, and
Wellington was dictating orders for the breaking up of his army and its
distribution into cantonments.