

  [735] For notes on this point see the life of Craufurd by his
  grandson, Rev. Alex. Craufurd, pp. 184-5. Wellington was vexed
  that the Light Division had not done the night march, and,
  according to Larpent’s _Journal_ (p. 85) observed to Craufurd,
  with some asperity, ‘I am glad to see you safe.’ The answer was,
  ‘Oh! I was in no danger, I assure you.’ ‘But I was, from your
  conduct,’ answered Wellington. Upon which Craufurd observed,
  ‘He’s d----d crusty to-day.’

  [736] The account of the march of the Light Division on this day
  is quite satisfactory. I have Sir John Bell’s note that the idea
  that Craufurd thought for a moment of retreating by the Pass
  of Perales, because he feared being intercepted at Robleda, is
  ‘nonsense.’

It has often been remarked, especially by French critics, that Craufurd
and his men were in grave danger on the afternoon of the 25th and the
morning of the 26th, since if Marmont had sent out a heavy column on
the right bank of the Agueda, to push the Light Division, it would not
have been able to use the ford near Robleda, and must have fallen
back into the rough country at the sources of the Agueda, where it
might have been overtaken, and have suffered heavily for want of a
road that would have served for its baggage. The danger has been
exaggerated: though the baggage might very probably have been lost,
there was nothing to prevent the troops from taking to the hill-paths,
and getting to Payo or the passes of Gata by some circuitous route. All
that a hot pursuit could have done would have been to make Craufurd
unable to reach Fuente Guinaldo, as he actually did, upon the 26th.
This would, no doubt, have been something of an advantage to the
French. But Marmont would have lost the services of the force sent
in pursuit, which would have had to be very strong, since no mere
detachment would have been able to venture near the Light Division, on
pain of being brought to action and defeated[737].

  [737] Marmont (_Mémoires_, iv. p. 65) is very sure that he
  could have ‘isolated, turned, and enveloped’ Craufurd, and have
  destroyed him. But it is hard to see that he could really have
  done more than drive him on to an eccentric line of retreat.

It seems that Marmont’s quiescence in front of the half-occupied camp
of Fuente Guinaldo, during the perilous hours of the morning and noon
of September 26th, was caused by a reluctance to tackle Wellington
when he had taken up a position and was offering battle. He writes in
his _Mémoires_ that, ‘as the day wore on, I had 40,000 men assembled,
within cannon-shot of the English front. But the enemy was known to
have collected if not all, at any rate a very great part of his force,
and was in an entrenched position. Much tempted to take advantage
of the union of the Armies of Portugal and the North, and to make a
stroke for victory, I passed the day in studying the English position.
Attacks made without careful preparation during the recent campaigns
[i. e. Bussaco and Fuentes de Oñoro] had succeeded so badly that I was
deterred from inconsiderate action. Moreover General Dorsenne, who
was only under my command accidentally and by his own consent, had no
wish for a battle, and this rendered the enterprise more delicate.
Then, too, if we tried our luck and were successful, we were not in a
condition to make profit of a successful engagement, by pursuing the
English into Portugal if they were beaten. So finally I gave up the
idea of forcing on a fight[738].’