

The force at Fuente Guinaldo decamped after dusk, leaving the Light
Division and the 1st Hussars K.G.L. to keep up the bivouac fires
along the whole line till midnight. Marching in two columns, one by
the direct road by Casillas de Flores and Furcalhos, the other by a
secondary path through Aldea da Ponte, the whole reached the positions
in front of Alfayates where Wellington was ready to make his real
stand. On the morning of the 27th the main body was joined by the 5th
Division, which came down from Payo in the Sierra de Gata, having
found no enemy threatening the passes in that direction. The 7th
Division also arrived from Albergaria. Meanwhile Graham, with the 1st
and 6th Divisions and McMahon’s Portuguese, had arrived at Bismula
and Rendo, and so was at last in close touch with the main body. The
whole of Wellington’s 45,000 men were concentrated, and, well knowing
the strength of the position which he had now reached, his mind was
tranquil. The front was hidden by a strong cavalry screen, Alten’s
brigade covering the right, De Grey’s and Slade’s the centre, and
Anson’s the left, where Graham’s divisions lay.

Marmont was so far from guessing that his adversary would abandon
the position of Fuente Guinaldo, that he had ordered his own army
to retreat towards Rodrigo, at the very moment that the Allies were
absconding from his front. During the early hours of the night of the
26th-27th, the two adversaries were marching away from each other!
But at midnight Thiébault, who was in charge of the rearguard, noted
that the fires in Wellington’s lines seemed few and flickering, and
that his sentries had got out of touch with those of the British. A
reconnaissance soon showed him that there was nothing left in his
front. Prompt information was sent to Marmont, and the Marshal had to
reconsider his position. He determined to follow up the retreating
enemy, not with the fixed intention of bringing him to action, but
rather that he might be ready to take advantage of any unforeseen
chance that might occur. But the pursuit could not be rapid or
effective, for during the night the bulk of the Army of Portugal had
been marching back towards Ciudad Rodrigo. Montbrun’s and Wathier’s
cavalry were still at the front, but only two infantry divisions, those
of Souham and Thiébault, both belonging to the Army of the North. The
Marshal dared not press his enemy too hard, lest Wellington should turn
upon him, and find that only 11,000 infantry were up on the French
side. While the countermarch of the other seven divisions was in
progress, the vanguard must not commit itself unsupported to a general
action.

Accordingly Wellington’s retreat was not seriously incommoded.
Montbrun, followed by Souham’s division, took the road by Casillas de
Flores and Furcalhos: Wathier, with Thiébault’s infantry in support,
that by Aldea da Ponte. Montbrun ran about noon, against the Light
and 5th Divisions and Alten’s horse, drawn up in position in front
of Alfayates, and considered them too strongly placed to be meddled
with. Wathier, on the western road, was stopped in front of Aldea da
Ponte by the pickets of the 4th Division and of Slade’s dragoons. This
village lay outside the intended line of battle of the allied army, but
so close in front of it that Wellington had resolved not to let it go
till he was pushed by a strong force, since it was the meeting-place of
several roads and well placed for observation.