

  [756] To be exact, Wellington’s Return of November 22, the day
  after Napoleon dictated this dispatch, was:--

  British. Present, 38,311; Detached, 3,917; sick (present and
  absent), 16,000.

  Portuguese. Present, 24,391; Detached, 2,087; sick (present and
  absent), 6,000.

  [757] Memorandum, dated 28th December, 1811, at Freneda.
  (_Dispatches_, viii. pp. 518-19.)

  [758] Note in Correspondence, Appendix of vol. iv of _Mémoires_,
  p. 259.

We have now taken the operations of Wellington and his chief
adversaries, Marmont and Dorsenne, down to the winter of 1811. But
there still remains to be told the story of the autumn months in the
secondary fields of operations in southern Spain. The doings of Soult
in Andalusia have been followed no further than July and August, when,
returning from the relief of Badajoz, he freed Seville from the menaces
of Blake, and forced the Murcian army to take refuge with undignified
haste within the boundaries of its own province[759]. Nor has anything
been said about the operations of Hill in Estremadura, where he lay
opposite Drouet and the French 5th Corps from August to December. With
these subsidiary affairs we now have to deal.

  [759] See pp. 474-82 above.

Soult’s victorious campaign on the border of Murcia, and the flight
of Freire’s army homewards, had reaffirmed the French domination in
eastern Andalusia, to the extent that the large towns and the main
lines of communication were again safe. But the Alpujarras were still
in arms, and Ballasteros was giving much trouble from his new base in
the extreme south. Excited by his presence, the Serranos of the Sierra
de Ronda spread their incursions on every side, as far as Osuna and
Marbella, in spite of all the efforts of Godinot, who had been told
off to crush them. The strength of Ballasteros’s position was that he
had behind him two secure places of refuge--the old Spanish lines in
front of Gibraltar, with the great fortress behind them, and, thirty
miles away, the newly-repaired stronghold of Tarifa, which had been
held since the late winter by a detachment of the British garrison of
Gibraltar. Avoiding serious combats, and confining his ambition to the
surprise of small posts and the cutting off of detachments, Ballasteros
made himself such a nuisance to the French that Soult at last prepared
a great combined scheme for surrounding him. Godinot’s force, operating
from the north, was to work in unison with two other columns under
Generals Barrois and Sémelé, sent out by Victor from the lines in front
of Cadiz. The concentric advance only succeeded in driving Ballasteros
southward, not in trapping him. He evacuated San Roque and Algesiras,
and went under the protection of the cannon of Gibraltar, from which
secure position he defied the enemy (October 14th-15th). For a moment
10,000 French lay before the English fortress, but they had not come
prepared for a siege, and soon departed when their provisions failed.
Godinot then made a dash at the much weaker walls of Tarifa, but was
caught on the march along the seaside road--the only one that cannon
could take--by a squadron of British warships, which did him so much
damage that he drew off inland without even reaching his objective
(October 18).