

  [771] 4th and 10th Line (2 batts. each) from Hamilton’s division,
  6th and 18th Line (2 batts. each) and 6th Caçadores from
  Ashworth’s Brigade.

  [772] This was the brigade composed of the remnant of Colborne’s
  and Hoghton’s old regiments, viz. Buffs, 1/57th, 2/31st, 2/66th.

  [773] The remainder of Hamilton’s division, 2nd and 14th Line,
  and the 5th and 8th Cavalry.

The essential part of Hill’s scheme was that Girard should be attacked
and brought to action before he was aware that there was anything in
his front save the Spaniards whom he had just hunted out of Caçeres.
If he were to discover that there was a large Anglo-Portuguese force
in his front, he would probably retire by forced marches upon Merida.
It was therefore necessary to concentrate the striking force with
suddenness, and to move it with the greatest possible speed. On October
22nd the three infantry and one cavalry brigades were collected at
Portalegre. On the 23rd they made a tremendous march, thirty miles
across the steep Sierra de San Mamed to the Spanish fortress of
Albuquerque. Here Hill received news from Castaños that Girard was
still at Caçeres, and had sent out flying parties to Arroyo del Puerco
and other places, sweeping the country-side for food. The allied column
at Albuquerque was as near Merida as the enemy, and had every chance of
intercepting him if he continued quiescent. Morillo and Penne Villemur
had moved to Aliseda, twenty miles from Albuquerque, and could join
the British force next day. On the 24th Hill advanced to Aliseda and
Casa de Santillana, and picked up the Spaniards. Next morning Penne
Villemur’s horse drove the French outposts out of Arroyo del Puerco.
When Girard’s cavalry screen had been driven in, Hill’s whole column
made a night march to Malpartida, only eight miles from Caçeres, but
learnt, after some delays, on the morning of the 26th that Girard had
left Caçeres on the preceding afternoon by the Torremocha road, making
a leisurely journey towards Merida. He had just received vague rumours
that there was an Anglo-Portuguese force coming from Portugal, and
thought it well to draw near to his base. Thus Hill’s precautions had
not been altogether successful. Girard’s departure was tiresome to
Hill, as the night-march to Malpartida had taken the allied columns too
far to the north, and the enemy was now between them and his own base.
But if it was too late to intercept him, there was still time to pursue
and overtake him, unless he should chance to quicken his pace. Before
dawn on the morning of the 27th Hill turned his face southward, and
marched on Torremocha; but when he had reached the pass of Trasquillon
he was informed by the peasantry that Girard had left Torremocha,
marching for Arroyo dos Molinos on the other side of the Sierra de
Montanches. The General called on his troops to make a final effort--if
Girard halted at Arroyo dos Molinos it was possible to cut him off by
continuing the long march. The men responded well to the appeal, and
by nightfall on the 27th the two British brigades were at Alcuescar,
five miles south-west of the camp of the French, and the Portuguese
and Spaniards close behind at Don Antonio. Girard had only gone twelve
miles that day--the Allies no less than twenty-eight, in abominable
weather, across two rough mountain ranges. It is astonishing that the
French general had not made more haste, and still more so that, with
three cavalry regiments for reconnoitring, he had not hit upon the
track of the Allies. Bron was evidently a poor director of cavalry--his
1,000 men should have sufficed to sweep the whole country-side. But it
is said that Girard was convinced that Hill had gone to Caçeres, and
would listen to no warnings[774].