

  [765] For copious details see the _Life of Morillo_, by Don
  Antonio Villa, pp. 47-55 (Madrid, 1910).

The removal of Foy’s division from Truxillo in September, when Marmont
drew him in to co-operate in the relief of Ciudad Rodrigo, had serious
consequences in Estremadura. It will be remembered that, when the
campaign of El Bodon was over, the Army of Portugal did not send back
any detachment to reoccupy Truxillo--the connecting-point between the
Armies of Portugal and of the South. The responsibility for keeping
touch was thrown on to Drouet, who had already quite enough ground
to cover with his 14,000 men. But he was forced to send a strong
detachment northward from Merida, or his communication with Marmont
would have been wholly intercepted by Morillo’s habitual raids.
Accordingly Girard’s division of the 5th Corps was moved up to occupy
the front between the Guadiana and the Tagus, leaving the whole stretch
from the Guadiana southward to the Sierra Morena held by only one
division, that of Claparéde[766], and two cavalry brigades.

  [766] At the breaking up of the 9th Corps in June, Claparéde took
  over Gazan’s old division in the 5th Corps, and Conroux that of
  Ruffin in the 1st Corps. But the 9th Corps battalions were not
  all redistributed into their regiments till Conroux came back
  from Soult’s campaign against the Murcians in August.

Wellington, seeing the weakness of Drouet, and knowing that Soult had
crushed the Murcian army in August, and therefore could find some
reinforcements for Estremadura if he should please, was for some time
under the belief that Hill would see new troops brought up against him
from the south[767]. He reiterated his old orders: ‘If you only had
cavalry, you certainly have infantry in sufficient numbers to beat the
5th Corps out of Estremadura. But your cavalry is not sufficiently
strong. I think, however, that you are able to prevent the 5th Corps
from doing anything, even though Soult should add to it another
division.... You must proceed with great caution, and endeavour to have
the best intelligence of the force Soult brings with him.... Canton
your troops (as soon as you find the enemy are serious in their advance
upon Badajoz) nearly on the ground which we occupied with the army
in the end of June and the beginning of July [the Caya position]....
If you should find Soult collects in too great force for you, retire
upon Portalegre, and thence, if necessary, upon Gavião and Abrantes.
It appears to me, however, scarcely possible for Soult to bring such
a force as to be able to attack you at Campo Mayor, or to cut your
communications at the same time both with Elvas and with Portalegre....
If Soult should bring a large army into Estremadura, with the view
to enable the Army of Portugal to co-operate in the invasion of
Valencia, I shall reinforce your corps with some infantry and nearly
all my cavalry--and I think we shall soon have back again the Army of
Portugal. If Soult comes only to throw provisions into Badajoz, I am
afraid we cannot prevent it under existing circumstances[768].’