

  [753] This may be found printed in Belmas, vol. i. Appendix, pp.
  588-90.

But meanwhile Napoleon’s mind had swerved away from the scheme for an
attack on Elvas and the Alemtejo, which had been formulated in the
Compiègne dispatch of September 18th. Just a month later Berthier
writes, by his orders, from Amsterdam, to lay down a wholly new plan.
This dispatch of October 18th contains the germ of the great central
error which was to make possible Wellington’s sudden offensive move of
the following midwinter, and the capture of Ciudad Rodrigo--the exploit
which was to be the turning-point of the whole Peninsular War. Suchet
had now started upon his long-projected march on Valencia, with which
we shall deal in its proper place. He had made a good commencement, but
had been brought to a stand before the walls of Saguntum. The Spaniards
had begun to reinforce their eastern armies, and the Emperor realized
that Suchet needed support. Therefore the army of Wellington ceased for
a moment to be the central point on which his attention was fixed. ‘Le
principal objet aujourd’hui est Valence,’ writes Berthier in obedience
to his master’s changed opinion. And he thereupon instructs Marmont
that the Army of the Centre will have to stretch itself eastward to
Cuenca, to support Suchet, and that in consequence the Army of Portugal
will have to ‘facilitate the task of the King of Spain,’ i. e. spare
troops to occupy those parts of New Castile from which Joseph must
withdraw men for the expedition to the Valencian border. This was but
the beginning of the scheme, which was to end by distracting a great
body of Marmont’s host to the shore of the Mediterranean, out of call
of their commander. As we shall see, the Duke of Ragusa was finally
ordered to make such a huge detachment to aid Suchet, that Wellington
at last got his opportunity to strike, when the Army of Portugal was so
lowered in numbers that it could not hope to restrain him. The first
hint came in the above-cited orders of October 18th; in the second
crucial dispatch, that of November 21st[754], Marmont is told not only
that he will have to ‘facilitate the task’ of King Joseph, but that
he must select a body of 12,000 men to march at once on Valencia, and
set aside 3,000 more to keep up the line of communication with the
expeditionary force. ‘We are informed,’ continues Berthier, ‘that
the English army has 20,000 sick[755], and barely 20,000 able-bodied
men with the colours, so that they cannot possibly try any offensive
enterprise.’

  [754] Printed in Appendix to Marmont’s _Mémoires_, vol. iv. pp.
  257-8.

  [755] The sick have grown from 18,000 to 20,000 since the day
  before, which is the date of a less important dispatch, in which
  Marmont had been warned to set aside 6,000 men only for the
  Valencian expedition, because Wellington is absolutely unable to
  strike a blow.

This is a typical result of the endeavour to conduct the Peninsular
War from Paris as head quarters. On the wholly false hypothesis that
Wellington’s army is reduced to a skeleton, and can do nothing, the
Emperor orders his lieutenant to detach a third of the Army of Portugal
beyond the reach of recall. But the English, though indeed there were
many sick, had not 20,000 but exactly 38,311 men with the colours at
that moment, not to speak of 24,391 Portuguese, of whom the Emperor (as
usual) took no account in his calculations[756]. Wellington had been
patiently waiting for months for the moment when the Army of Portugal
should no longer be able to ‘contain’ him. The Emperor was obliging
enough to provide the opportunity in December 1811, and when Montbrun
had marched with two divisions of foot and one of horse to the other
side of the Peninsula, Wellington struck, suddenly and successfully.
‘The movements of Marmont’s army towards Toledo, to aid Suchet as is
supposed, have induced us to make preparations for the siege of Ciudad
Rodrigo,’ wrote Wellington on the 28th of that month[757]. On the 9th
of January, 1812, the place was invested; on the 19th it fell; and then
followed in rapid succession all the triumphs of 1812. There were other
circumstances, to be mentioned in their due place, which facilitated
Wellington’s advance: but the departure of Montbrun’s 15,000 men for
Valencia, by the Emperor’s direct command, was the main governing fact.
It is impossible to deny assent to Marmont’s bitter criticism on the
orders that kept coming to him during the autumn and early winter of
1811. ‘Napoleon was at this period living in a non-existent world,
created by his own imagination. He built structures in the air, he
took his desires for realities, and gave orders as if ignorant of
the true state of affairs, as if the actual facts had been purposely
hidden from him[758].’ It was no use to tell him that magazines were
non-existent, that numbers were low, that roads were impracticable,
that communications were intercepted, that he had undervalued the
enemy’s forces; he continued, with all serenity, to ignore tiresome
hindrances, and to issue orders grounded on data many weeks old, often
on data which had never been true at any moment, but which it suited
him to believe. And so the catastrophe of 1812 came nearer.