

Within a few minutes of the first alarm the 71st and 92nd, at the
head of Howard’s brigade, burst into the little town, drove out the
battalion that was holding it, and captured the whole of Girard’s
baggage and many prisoners. General Bron was taken in the doorway of
the house which he had been occupying, just as he was about to mount.
Hurrying out on the other side of the place, the advancing British
found Dombrouski’s brigade hastily forming up for the march. Girard had
ordered an instant retreat along the Merida road. The formation of his
troops was soon disordered by the fire of the advancing 71st, followed
by that of three guns of Arriaga’s battery, which galloped out to the
town end and opened on the nearest regiment. The column, however,
started off, and had gone a little way, when it discovered the allied
cavalry advancing along the Merida road to meet it, Penne Villemur in
front, Long in support. Girard, seeing this road blocked, bade his
_chasseurs_ and dragoons hold off the British and Spanish horse at
all costs, and turned the infantry column towards the Truxillo road,
which skirts the precipitous foot of the Sierra de Montanches. His
cavalry became engaged in a confused fight, first with Penne Villemur’s
Spaniards and then with the 9th Light Dragoons and the 2nd Hussars of
the King’s German Legion. Being outnumbered, they were soon broken,
many were taken, and the rest scattered and tried to get off in small
parties.

The infantry, making the best speed that it could, but closely pursued
by Howard’s regiments and the Spanish brigade in their rear, finally
reached the spot where the Truxillo road turns the corner of the
sierra, a mile and a half outside Arroyo dos Molinos. By this time
the rain had ceased, and the mists dispersing showed the Frenchmen
Wilson’s brigade marching hard to cut them off, and less than half a
mile away. Both parties started to run, and the three light companies
of the 28th, 34th, and 39th, who were well ahead of their regiments,
reached the road just as the leading French battalion was pushing
across their front. Only 200 men were up, but Blakeney (commanding the
28th company) saw that if the hostile column were closely attacked in
flank, even by a small body, its progress would be stopped, and a few
minutes’ delay would bring down both Wilson’s and Howard’s brigades
upon it. Accordingly he led in person the charge of some scores of the
men nearest him against the throat of the French column[776]; they were
not exterminated (as might have been expected), for Girard, who was
present at the spot, told his men not to stop to fight, but to escape
by leaving the road and dashing uphill along the rocks of the sierra
above. He himself with the leading companies got clear, hitting on
a place where the side of the precipice was not too steep to climb,
though the officers had to turn loose their horses before they could
start on the scramble. The main body of the column was less lucky. An
absolutely impassable line of cliffs was above them, and after reaching
its foot a thousand men, in two or three disorderly masses, had to halt
and lay down their arms to the eager pursuers from both the British
brigades, who were converging upon them. A few got away by incredibly
dangerous climbing, and joined Girard on top of the sierra. Meanwhile
Morillo’s Spanish infantry had taken an easier path up the heights, far
to the left, and started in pursuit of the remnants of the French. They
kept up the chase for eight leagues, and took or slew many stragglers.
But Girard, Dombrouski, and four or five hundred men, bearing with them
the eagles of the 34th and 40th, escaped eastward, and, after much
wandering in the mountains, crossed the Guadiana at Orellana, beyond
Medellin, and got back to join Drouet. Other small parties and many of
the cavalry straggled in later, but Girard’s force had practically
been destroyed. Nearly 1,300 prisoners had been taken, including
General Bron, commanding the cavalry, the Prince of Aremberg, colonel
of the 27th _Chasseurs_,[777] the _chef d’état major_ of the 5th Corps,
and more than thirty other officers. In addition the French lost their
three guns and a contribution of 5,000 dollars levied on Caçeres a few
days before. Hill’s loss was insignificant--seven men killed and seven
officers and fifty-seven men wounded. Penne Villemur’s Spaniards, who
had behaved with excellent spirit, had about thirty casualties.