

Meanwhile Ballasteros, slipping out from under the cover of Gibraltar
the moment that his enemy was gone, followed Sémelé’s column, which
was returning to the Cadiz lines by a separate route, and surprised it
at Bornos (November 5). The French (1,500 men of the 16th Léger) cut
their way through the enemy with the loss of only 100 men[760]; but a
_Juramentado_ battalion which was accompanying them threw up the butts
of its muskets and surrendered _en masse_ or dispersed, and a howitzer
was captured.

  [760] Martinien’s invaluable lists show only three officers
  wounded in the 16th.

Soult was incensed at the failure of his great combined movement, and
laid the blame on Godinot, who after a stormy interview with his chief
at Seville committed suicide. The chase of Ballasteros began again,
with a new set of hunters; but, as we shall see in a later chapter, was
destined to prove fruitless. Nor did a serious attempt to beleaguer
Tarifa with a heavy siege-train come to any good. But its siege, though
commenced in the last days of the old year 1811, belongs rather to the
campaign of 1812, and will be dealt with in the next volume of this
work.

There remains only to be considered the state of affairs in
Estremadura, where we left Hill with his two divisions, facing Drouet
and the 5th Corps, in July. Their forces were not unequal[761], and
each had been given by his commander a defensive rather than an
offensive rôle. Soult had directed Drouet to see that Badajoz was not
molested, to keep up communication, via Truxillo, with the Armies of
Portugal and the Centre, and to risk nothing. If the Allies detached
more troops into the Alemtejo, he was to make no attempt to face
superior numbers, but to call without delay for help to his neighbours,
and to retire on Merida or on Monasterio as seemed more suitable at the
moment. But it was judged unlikely that Wellington would be able to
make any serious detachment southward, so long as he was ‘contained’
by the Army of Portugal, which lay in the valley of the Tagus, ready
to move towards Ciudad Rodrigo on the one hand, or Badajoz on the
other, as necessity might dictate. Meanwhile here, as everywhere else
in western Spain, the French had completely abandoned the offensive,
and their plans contemplated the parrying of Wellington’s strokes,
rather than the delivery of any blows of their own. The scheme for an
attack on the Alemtejo, which Napoleon had suggested to Marmont[762],
was never within any measurable distance of being put into practical
operation. By this time the only part of the Peninsula in which the
Imperial armies retained an offensive posture was the east coast.
Suchet had started on that Valencian expedition which was to have such
brilliant success in itself, but was to indirectly destroy the French
hold on Spain, by calling away troops from opposite Wellington at the
critical moment in the midwinter of 1811-12.

  [761] For Hill’s force at this time see Appendix XXIII. He had
  5,800 British infantry, 7,400 Portuguese infantry, 1,800 British
  cavalry (including Le Marchant’s brigade at Castello Branco), 650
  Portuguese cavalry, and about 600 artillery, &c., about 16,000 in
  all. Drouet had the 9th Corps, now about 14,000 strong (it had
  been recruited by the return to the ranks of the convalescents of
  the 4,000 Albuera wounded), and six regiments of cavalry from the
  Army of the South, bringing up his force to much the same figure.