

  [750] It may be found in Belmas, Appendix to vol. i. pp. 585-8.
  Marmont, for reasons not hard to divine, does not print it among
  the many documents containing his correspondence with the Emperor
  which appear in the Appendix to his Book XV. (_Mémoires_, vol.
  iv.)

  [751] See p. 546 above.

This last caution was, in effect, a fatal block to the whole plan. For
Marmont, during the El Bodon campaign, had heard of the existence of
Wellington’s siege-park at Villa da Ponte. And he had also found in
the cantonments of the 3rd and 4th Divisions a stock of gabions and
fascines, whose preparation could only mean that the British had been
contemplating regular siege operations at some future date. The wood
and wickerwork had been burned[752], but there was nothing to prevent
Wellington from replacing it at short notice.

  [752] The destruction of these stores is mentioned in Marmont’s
  _Mémoires_, iv. p. 68.

Yet even if Marmont had not been aware of the existence of Dickson’s
guns, the plan proposed to him was not so tempting at a second as at a
first glance. He was well aware that such parts of it as depended on
the loyal co-operation of his colleagues might not work out easily.
Would not Soult find some excuse for refusing to send the 3,000 cavalry
from Andalusia? Could Dorsenne be trusted to dispatch 15,000 men to the
Alemtejo, if he discovered that Wellington had left no serious force on
the Coa? And even if he did show such an unwonted self-abnegation as to
detach two of his divisions to such a distant destination, would they
get up in time for the crisis? For if Wellington marched promptly with
his whole army, by Alfayates, Castello Branco, and the bridge of Villa
Velha, he would be at Elvas many days before Dorsenne’s detachment,
which would have to take the circuitous route by Bejar, the bridge of
Almaraz, Truxillo, Merida, and Badajoz. Supposing that the whole allied
army came down from the north, and picked up Hill and Castaños, it
would consist of well over 60,000 men, and the Army of Portugal when
joined by Girard’s corps would only make 57,000 men if Soult sent his
cavalry, or 54,000 if (as was more likely) he found some excuse for
refusing his co-operation. Could 54,000 men lay siege to a first-class
fortress, and at the same time provide a covering force strong enough
to fend off 64,000 of the Allies? If they tried to do so, would not
the covering force be beaten in all probability? And it was probable
that Wellington would come to save Elvas with every available man, for
he knew that Dorsenne was not able to make any serious irruption into
northern Portugal. The Army of the North could not collect more than
27,000 men for field operations (as the late campaign had shown) and
such a force, destitute of stores and acting at short notice, would not
get far into the wilderness of the devastated Beira, much less threaten
Lisbon.

These arguments, in all probability, must have occurred to Marmont,
but we have no proof that he used them. In his reply to Berthier,
written at Talavera on October 21st[753], he takes another line--he
reports that the difficulties of supply are so great that he has, after
returning from the relief of Ciudad Rodrigo, dispersed his army from
Plasencia to Toledo. He is beginning to collect great central magazines
at Navalmoral, near Almaraz, which will serve for his army when next
it is massed either for offensive or defensive purposes. Meanwhile,
till the magazines are formed, he asks for the Emperor’s leave to wait
with his troops in their present positions. Wellington, he thinks, can
do nothing serious for want of numbers, and the dispersion of his army
into cantonments has been caused by the difficulty of feeding his men
in the highlands, from which he has just retired. If, nevertheless, he
tries some forward movement into Estremadura, the Army of Portugal is
well placed for falling on him in the valley of the Guadiana. As for
offensive plans, nothing can be done till magazines are formed, but he
hopes to submit a scheme of his own to the Emperor when leave has been
granted.