

  [762] See above, pp. 587-8.

Hill’s orders from Wellington corresponded very closely to Drouet’s
orders from Soult. That is to say, Hill was to content himself with
‘containing’ the French force opposite him; to see that Elvas and Campo
Mayor were covered, to make no attempt on Badajoz, and to apply for aid
to his chief in the event of an increase of the hostile force on the
Guadiana. The summing up of the situation, in the original dispatch
which Wellington wrote to Hill when he left for the north, is simply
that the force in Estremadura must pair off against Drouet. ‘My wish
is that you should observe the movements of the 5th Corps. If the 5th
Corps should move off to cross the Tagus at Almaraz, you will then
march to cross the Tagus at Villa Velha, and proceed on by Castello
Branco to join this [the main] army.... If the 5th Corps should,
instead of crossing the Tagus, manœuvre upon you in Alemtejo, I request
you to move upon Portalegre, and there either stand their attack or
not, as you may think proper, according to your notion of their force
as compared with your own. If you cannot stand their attack, you will
retire by Gavião towards Abrantes, and thence across the Zezere, taking
the line of the Tagus, with Santarem on your right[763].’ It being
possible, though not likely, that Marmont might make an advance against
the central Portuguese frontier north of the Tagus, from the Zarza la
Mayor and Coria district, Hill was directed to keep one British and one
Portuguese brigade in the direction of Castello Branco, as a nucleus
on which troops coming from north and south might concentrate, for
serious opposition to an invasion. This precautionary move was made in
August, and the detachment remained north of the Tagus till September,
when Foy’s removal from Truxillo, and Marmont’s march to the relief of
Ciudad Rodrigo, showed that there was no longer any possible danger
in this direction[764]. Meanwhile the main body of the allied force
in Estremadura lay about Portalegre, Villa Viçosa, and Santa Olalla,
waiting for developments of the enemy’s plans which never came about.
For Drouet kept very quiet, generally with his head quarters at Zafra,
and a strong detachment at Merida, as anxiously expectant of Hill’s
movements as Hill was of his.

  [763] Wellington to Hill, August 8th. (_Dispatches_, viii. pp.
  180-2.)

  [764] See for the recall the dispatch of October 4.
  (_Dispatches_, viii. p. 321.)

All this time the space to the north of Hill’s cantonments was occupied
by the small remains of the Spanish Army of Estremadura, still under
Castaños. Since the Captain-General had sent off Carlos de España to
the borders of Leon, he remained with the rest of his troops in the
hilly region between the Guadiana and the Tagus, with his head quarters
at Valencia de Alcantara, and part of his infantry in Albuquerque,
which fortress he was engaged in repairing. His advance lay at Caçeres,
observing the French garrison in Truxillo, with which it often
bickered. But Castaños occasionally sent a flying column out under
Morillo or Penne Villemur to beat up the cantonments of the 5th Corps
south of the Tagus. They ranged as far as La Serena and the Sierra del
Pedroso, and on one occasion got even to Benalcazar on the very border
of Andalusia, whose garrison Morillo surprised and captured[765]. Such
raids were profitable for distracting the enemy, and gave Drouet much
trouble. But as Castaños’s whole force did not amount to much more
than 600 horse and 3,000 foot, the menace was not a serious one. In
the thinly peopled region of northern Estremadura it was impossible to
get recruits to fill the old cadres, and the army did not grow as the
commander had hoped. The regiments remained mere skeletons.