

  [774] Hill in his dispatch says that the peasantry gave Girard
  no news of his approach. But in Blakeney’s interesting narrative
  of this campaign there is a story told that two _Afrancesados_
  warned the Frenchman of Hill’s approach, and that he refused to
  credit them. This was told to Blakeney by his prisoner, Colonel
  the Prince of Aremberg, commanding the 27th _Chasseurs_. See
  Blakeney, p. 236.

At half-past two o’clock on the morning of the 28th the weather was
still tempestuous, as it had been for the last twenty-four hours, and
Hill, covered by the driving rain, marched in the dark on Arroyo dos
Molinos, and covered the five miles which separated his comfortless
bivouac from the French head quarters without meeting a single hostile
vedette. He was able to arrange his force within half a mile of the
little town undiscovered, and to make his provisions for blocking
all the three roads by which Girard might escape. Arroyo dos Molinos
lies under the shoulder of the precipitous Sierra de Montanches,
with no track going directly northwards from it, but with country
roads to Truxillo, Medellin, and Merida diverging north-eastward,
south-eastward, and south-south-westward. Hill directed Wilson’s
brigade, supported by three Portuguese battalions, to march round the
town on its southward side, and block the Truxillo road, while the rest
of the infantry should attack the enemy in front, and the cavalry,
both English and Spanish, should form a central column which should
seize the Merida and Medellin roads and prevent the escape of Girard
southward.

Not a Frenchman was seen till Howard’s brigade, leading the advance of
the main body, ran upon a picket half a mile outside Arroyo, the men
huddling together under trees with their faces away from the driving
rain and the approaching enemy. Most of them were captured, but some
escaped to warn Girard, who till this moment had no knowledge that a
British column was within striking distance of him. As it chanced, the
French general had been preparing to start early, and Remond’s brigades
(the 64th and 88th of the line), escorted by one cavalry regiment, had
marched an hour before on the Merida road, and were now three miles
away. Girard had not, therefore, even his whole force assembled, but
only the six battalions of Dombrouski’s brigade (34th and 40th of the
line[775]), two cavalry regiments and half a battery with him--not
more than 4,000 men--while 10,000 of the Allies were converging upon
him from three separate quarters. At the moment when the first shots
were heard on the Alcuescar road, his infantry was just getting ready
to march, his baggage and a rearguard of one battalion were still in
the street of Arroyo dos Molinos, many of his horsemen had not yet
saddled up, and he himself was breakfasting in the Alcaide’s house.

  [775] The regiments, which were incomplete in July (see Appendix
  XVIII), had been joined before October by the battalion which
  each had contributed to the garrison of Badajoz.