

  [767] See Wellington to Hill, October 4 and October 10.
  (_Dispatches_, viii. pp. 321, and 332-3.)

  [768] Wellington to Hill, from Freneda, October 16.
  (_Dispatches_, viii. pp. 333-4.)

Soult, however, neither came in person to Estremadura with a large
force, nor even drafted another division into the province to succour
Drouet, who got no reinforcements during the autumn. He was at this
time wrapped up in the internal affairs of Andalusia, and had no
intention of sending troops away, unless there was urgent necessity
for it. Hill, therefore, seeing that the 5th Corps had received no
succours, and remained spread out on the long front from the Tagus
to the Sierra Morena, while its two divisions were not in supporting
distance of each other, asked for leave to make a blow at Girard,
whose position was decidedly dangerous, because of his remoteness
from Drouet’s main body (October 15). Wellington saw the opportunity
and gave instant consent: ‘I should approve of adopting the measure,
which should be effectual, and should drive Girard from Caçeres over
the Guadiana, if you think you can do it without risking the safety
of Campo Mayor and Ouguella. It appears to me you are too strong for
Girard in every way, if the other division of the 5th Corps has not
crossed the Guadiana[769].’

  [769] Same to same, October 17, acknowledging Hill’s proposal
  made in a letter of October 15.

Circumstances were at this moment very much in Hill’s favour, for
Girard, seeking new regions to plunder for food, and angered by the
raids of Castaños’s detachments on the road from Merida to Truxillo,
had just marched to drive the Spaniards back. Sweeping them before
him, he had advanced as far as Caçeres, fifty miles from his base at
Merida, and was raising contributions there. He had with him his own
division of twelve battalions, a provisional brigade of cavalry under
General Bron[770], and one battery--in all about 5,000 foot and nearly
1,000 horse. Hill could concentrate against him a much larger force,
while still leaving something in front of Drouet, who (as he had taken
pains to discover) was cantoned about Zafra with the rest of his
corps--Claparéde’s division, and the bulk of the cavalry. He was not in
a position to accomplish anything against Campo Mayor or Elvas, for his
troops were scattered over the country-side, and he showed no signs of
any intention to move.

  [770] Apparently 20th Dragoons, 27th _Chasseurs_, 10th Hussars.

On October 20th Hill wrote to Castaños to say that he relied on the
help of Morillo’s infantry and Villemur’s cavalry for a blow at Girard.
He himself would bring up Howard’s and Wilson’s (late Abercrombie’s)
brigades of the 2nd Division, nine battalions of Portuguese[771] and
Long’s cavalry brigade. The column would consist of 3,000 British
and 4,000 Portuguese infantry, 900 horse and two batteries. To this
Castaños could add about 2,000 infantry and 600 horse, so that a
striking force of 10,000 men would be collected. Meanwhile there would
be left in Portugal, to make a front against Drouet, if he should
move, the remaining brigade (Byng’s) of the 2nd Division[772], four
battalions and two cavalry regiments of Portuguese[773], and a British
cavalry brigade under Le Marchant recently arrived from home, which lay
at Castello Branco, but could be called south if required.