

  [776] Blakeney’s account of his own exploit (pp. 228-9 of his
  book) is borne out by Hill’s recommendation of him, though he is
  not mentioned in the formal dispatch of October 30.

  [777] This Rheinbund prince had been in great favour with
  Napoleon, and married Stephanie Tascher, niece of the Empress
  Josephine. He had raised the 27th _Chasseurs_ at his own cost.

After the fighting was over, Hill directed Long’s cavalry, with the
Portuguese regiments, who had not been engaged, to march on Merida,
supporting them with Howard’s brigade when it had rested. It was
hoped that Remond’s column, which had escaped the disaster of Arroyo
dos Molinos by its early march, might be caught up. But the French
brigadier had a long enough start to render this impossible: warned by
fugitive cavalry of the fate of his chief, he marched through Merida
without halting, and retired towards Drouet by way of Almendralejo.

Hill, after following his vanguard to Merida on the 29th and stopping
there two days, returned by Wellington’s orders to his old cantonments
at Portalegre, which he reached on November 3rd.

‘It would have been useless,’ wrote Wellington, ‘for him to push on his
operations beyond the Guadiana--for Drouet would simply have retired
before him,--and equally so to remain at Merida.’ By this somewhat
cryptic phrase the British commander-in-chief meant that if he had
chosen to direct Hill, after his success at Arroyo dos Molinos, to
march against Drouet’s main body, there can be no doubt that he might
have driven it into the Sierra Morena. This would have caused Soult to
come to its aid with all the available troops that could be collected
in Andalusia. The reason why no such orders were issued was that the
British general did not wish to provoke Soult to concentrate. Hill
could do nothing against the Army of the South if it came against
him in force. But if it continued disseminated through all the four
kingdoms of Andalusia, as it was at present, with one mass of troops
opposite Cadiz, another at Granada, and the small available field force
busily engaged in hunting Ballasteros, it was not to be feared. As to
the uselessness of stopping at Merida, Wellington meant that Hill,
if posted there, would have been liable to be cut off from Elvas if
Soult should come up in haste from Andalusia to reinforce Drouet--as
was extremely likely. Wellington was contented with having broken up a
French division, and cut the communication between the Armies of the
South and of Portugal for a time. For when Girard was driven out of
the space between the Tagus and the Guadiana, Soult could no longer
communicate with Marmont.

Napoleon recalled Girard in disgrace, which he well deserved for his
reckless want of caution: his maltreated division was given to General
Barrois. But he was afterwards pardoned, and survived to die, still a
general of division, doing good service at the battle of Ligny.

In the first moment of alarm, after hearing of Girard’s disaster,
Soult had expected to be pressed, had sent 4,000 infantry to reinforce
Drouet, and had begun to collect other troops at Seville. But finding
that Hill had no further intention of striking at the 5th Corps, and
that Badajoz was not even threatened, he reverted to his earlier plans,
left Estremadura alone, and continued to hunt Ballasteros, and to make
preparation for his next important move--the siege of Tarifa. Drouet,
for his part, having recovered from the dismay into which Girard’s
defeat had thrown him, once more began to move his troops northward
with caution. On December 5th he reoccupied Almendralejo, on the 18th
he pushed Dombrouski with a brigade to Merida, and once more opened
up communication with the Army of Portugal by way of Truxillo. But
the road was not to be long open. Just before the year 1811 was out
(December 27th) Hill was sent forth a second time against the 5th
Corps, with far more serious intentions than in October, for this
expedition was part of Wellington’s preliminary movements for the siege
of Ciudad Rodrigo. It will be dealt with in its proper place.