


III. KING’S GERMAN LEGION ARTILLERY

Two of the three companies of the Legion Foot Artillery (Nos. 2 and 4,
commanded by Captains Andrew Cleeves and Frederick Sympher), which had
been in the Peninsula for the last two years, accompanied Beresford on
his Estremaduran expedition, and were present at the battle of Albuera.
Cleeves’s was so cut up that it was sent to the rear in June, Meadows’s
British Company taking its place at the front. The third company, that
of Gesenius, was left at Lisbon.


IV. PORTUGUESE ARTILLERY

(The details are taken from Captain Teixeira Botelho’s _Subsidios_.)

(_a_) Five Portuguese field-batteries accompanied Wellington in his
pursuit of Masséna and in the Fuentes de Oñoro campaign.

Two of these batteries, brigaded together under Major V. von
Arentschildt, came from the 2nd regiment and were attached to Picton’s
Division; they were commanded by Lieutenants J. C. de Sequeira and 2nd
Lieut. J. C. Rosado.

A third, also from the 2nd regiment, under the command of Captain F. C.
Pinto, was attached to Pack’s Portuguese brigade.

One battery from the 1st regiment, under the command of Captain J. da
Cunha Preto, was attached to the 5th Division in these campaigns.

Another battery of the same regiment (Captain Pedro de Rozierres) was
attached to the 6th Division.

(_b_) Two batteries, brigaded under Major Alexander Dickson,
accompanied Beresford’s Army to Estremadura and fought at Albuera, viz.
one from the 2nd regiment under Captain W. Braun, and one from the 1st
regiment under Captain S. J. de Arriaga.

(_c_) For the two sieges of Badajoz in May and June, the 2nd regiment
supplied a half-company under Captain F. A. de Sequeira; the 1st
regiment a company under Captain F. Pedrosa Barreto; and the 3rd
regiment three companies, the captains’ names of which are not
preserved, save one, José de Sampayo.

(_d_) The 4th regiment supplied Silveira with two batteries under
Captains F. J. de Mariz and D. G. Ferreri, which were engaged in his
combats with Claparéde in the early part of the year.

(_e_) The half-company which defended Campo Mayor in March came from
the 3rd regiment and was commanded by Lieut. J. J. Leál Morteira.




INDEX


  Abadia, Francisco Xavier, general, supersedes Santocildes, 469;
    retires before Dorsenne’s advance, 470, 473.

  Abbé, general, at siege of Tortosa, 230, 235, 246;
    at siege of Tarragona, 511;
    at storm of Montserrat, 533.

  Abrantes, Duke of, _see_ Junot.

  Alacha, Major-General Lilli, Conde de, governor of Tortosa, 232;
    capitulates, 237;
    tried and condemned by Junta, 240.

  Albuera, Wellington’s choice of the position, 280;
    battle of, 372-94.

  Albuquerque, disgraceful surrender of, 256.

  Alcantara, orders of Napoleon concerning its bridge, 544.

  Alcina, Commissary, his plot to seize Monjuich, 244;
    shot, 245.

  Alcobaça, monastery of, wrecked by French, 135.

  Aldea da Ponte, combat of, 578-9.